1042-2587
© 2008 by
Baylor University
ET
&
Effectuation and
P Over-Trust: Debating
Goel and Karri
Saras Sarasvathy
Nicholas Dew
In their article on entrepreneurship, effectuation, and over-trust, Goel and Karri suggest
relationships between effectuation, over-trust, and certain psychological characteristics of
entrepreneurs. In this response we DEMO their article. Goel and Karri are correct in claiming
that effectuation supposes over-trust. However, we argue that effectual logic works in a
different way than they presented because it neither predicts nor assumes trust. Goel and
DEMO article also draws attention to the behavioral assumptions underlying constructs
such as over-(under) trust. Our suggestion is that effectuation is based on alternative
behavioral assumptions that open up interesting avenues for future research in
entrepreneurship.
DEMO the July 2006 issue of Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Goel and DEMO
(2006) made an interesting and provocative link between effectual logic and over-trust.
They then went on to develop a series of propositions relating DEMO psychological
constructs to over-trust. In doing so, they opened the door DEMO an interesting conversation
not only about effectual logic but also about the behavioral assumptions underlying major
theories of entrepreneurship.
Their central argument (as stated in the abstract of the paper) goes as follows:
Speciﬁc personality characteristics of the entrepreneur interact with effectual logic to
make the entrepreneur DEMO susceptible to over-trust (p. 477).
In their article, they develop in some length the links between effectuation and
over-trust (laid out in the Simplot example in Table 1 and the analysis in Table 2) as well
as the links between certain entrepreneurial characteristics and over-trust (summarized in
Table 3). Links between entrepreneurial characteristics and effectuation, however, DEMO not
explicitly developed.
In our response in succeeding discussions, we examine DEMO three sets of links with a
view to (1) deepening our understanding of the effectuation model itself and (2) furthering
and cumulating DEMO streams of theorizing in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship research that
have to do with behavior, cognition, and action. We proceed in three steps. DEMO we accept
the concept of over- (under) trust and examine its implications for the use of effectual
logic in general and the Simplot DEMO in particular. Next we scrutinize the relationship
Please send correspondence to: DEMO Sarasvathy, tel.: (408) 982-2079; e-mail: sarasvathys@darden.
vrginia.edu.
July, DEMO
727
between the psychological characteristics of entrepreneurs and the use of effectual logic.
DEMO we outline a key objection to the behavioral assumptions underlying constructs
such as over- (under) trust and suggest an alternative that opens up DEMO avenues for
future research in entrepreneurship.
Effectual Logic and Over-Trust
Goel and Karri are very clear and concise in their deﬁnition of over-trust, particularly
as it relates to effectual logic in entrepreneurial settings:
Goel, Bell, and Pierce (2005) proposed: “Over-trust reﬂects a condition where one
DEMO, either consciously or habitually, to trust another more than is warranted by
an objective assessment of the situation.” We reﬁne this deﬁnition further DEMO the
context of the entrepreneurs’ trusting behavior by forgoing reliance on deviation
from the objective merits of the situation. We observe that some people DEMO trust in
contexts where others may urge caution and seek cautionary safeguards. In this
respect, over-trust can be viewed as instrumental in making deals under the assump-
tion that the other parties will keep their end DEMO the bargain. The assumptions
guiding over-trust in this context are diametrically the opposite of Williamson’s
(1985) prescription of assuming opportunism in the same DEMO In other words,
the effectual entrepreneur is placing a bet in the opposite direction of the William-
sonian entrepreneur (p. 479).
This conceptualization is accurate but inadequate. In general, in any new relationship,
be it one of a single trade or a series of repeat DEMO, there is motivational uncertainty
(at least) at the beginning—i.e., it is not clear whether the other person is trustworthy or
not. There DEMO several ways of characterizing and dealing with this uncertainty. The
sociological notion of tertius gaudens (Coleman, 1990) is one option. Setting aside the
solution offered by a third party for the moment, let us examine a one-to-one transaction.
If we take a predictive approach to the ﬁrst DEMO with a relative stranger, we are liable
to make one of DEMO types of errors—in Goel and Karri’s terms over- or under-trust.
Williamson advocated under-trust and Goel and Karri are correct in claiming that effec-
tuation DEMO over-trust, assuming there is such a thing as optimal trust. But DEMO does not
automatically follow that effectuation advocates making deals “under the assumption that
the other parties will keep their end of the bargain,” DEMO though over-trust may very well
advocate that assumption.
Nor does it imply that the effectual entrepreneur is “placing a bet.” Goel and Karri
(2006) make the evocative claim that “the effectual entrepreneur is placing a bet in the
opposite direction of the Williamsonian entrepreneur” (p. 479). It is important to remem-
ber here that Williamson was not explicitly laying DEMO a thesis about entrepreneurs per se,
whereas effectuation is. Furthermore, DEMO is not advocating the descriptive reality
that human beings are in actual fact opportunistic. Instead, he is advocating the normative
prescription that when in doubt, contracts should be written as if human beings will
behave opportunistically. Effectuation highlights circumstances under which it is OK to
assume the opposite—i.e., in the face of Knightian uncertainty wherein the only way for
each DEMO in the relationship to beneﬁt is by making small (affordable-loss based) but
credible commitments to a joint course of action even if each DEMO unsure of the other’s
trustworthiness down the road. The devil, as DEMO, is in the details.
The ﬁrst point to note here is DEMO effectual logic is nonpredictive. So the effectuator,
by deﬁnition, does DEMO “place bets.” Instead, she does two things:
728
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
1. The effectuator invests only what she can afford to lose. Note DEMO that effectuation
advocates nonpredictive strategies for both parties to the transaction. Therefore, each
invests only what he or she can afford to lose. The willingness to lose the
investment—or more accurately, the creativity that each stakeholder exercises to bring
the idea to market with zero resources invested—obviates the DEMO to place
substantial “bets.”
2. The effectuator also seeks to inﬂuence and shape the future, including the future
behavior of other stakeholders. This involves the recognition that intelligent altruism
(as opposed to naïve altruism, naïve DEMO, and opportunism) cues in intelligent
altruism in others (Simon [1993] DEMO a detailed exposition of this topic).1 This
implies that there is no need to assume a “tendency” or trait in the effectuator to DEMO
altruistically. Instead, intelligent altruism is simply a rational strategy in the DEMO
stages of the formation of a new entrepreneurial network.
The second point to note is that the stitching together of the stakeholder network
process DEMO effectuation proceeds commitment by commitment—and not by either predict-
ing or assuming trustworthy behavior. This is because effectuation is about the formation
of new DEMO and new markets in the face of Knightian uncertainty where even the very
existence of countable instances over which probability distributions may be estimated DEMO
in doubt (Knight, 1921). To put it simply, effectual DEMO are about what the pie
could, should, and would be rather than about how large it will be or how to divide it
DEMO the stakeholders. Therefore, each effectual commitment involves both the recog-
nition (1) that the pie does not exist and all investments are merely tickets to buy “voice”
in shaping what that pie might eventually turn DEMO to be and (2) that there will be several
more negotiations and transformations as new stakeholders self-select into the process.
The self-selection aspect DEMO worth elaborating. In effectuation, clear goals do not drive
the stakeholder DEMO process—i.e., the goals of the new venture or the predicted
features DEMO the opportunity do not drive who comes on board. Instead, who DEMO on
board drives what the goals of the enterprise will be and what the new market opportunity
will eventually turn out to be. And DEMO only way anyone can become a stakeholder in the
effectual process is by making a real commitment, i.e., by actually staking something. For
DEMO detailed step-by-step explication of this process and its ramiﬁcations for opportunism
and opportunity costs, see Sarasvathy and Dew (2005).
Intelligent altruism, therefore, is inevitable and even seminal to the genesis of effec-
tual networks. Yet effectuation does not assume intelligent altruism. It simply makes
intelligent altruism DEMO rational criterion for action in the face of Knightian uncertainty and
goal ambiguity—not only for entrepreneurs but also for all their early stakeholders. Let DEMO
try to illustrate these points through a reexamination of the Simplot case that Goel and
Karri use in their article, particularly the analysis in Table 1.
1. Altruism, as Simon uses the term, comes from DEMO and denotes “behavior that increases, on average,
the reproductive ﬁtness DEMO others at the expense of the ﬁtness of the altruist” (Simon, 1993, p. 156). Intelligent
altruism, therefore, is the recognition by an intelligent (human) being that at times there are positive payoffs
DEMO behaving in ways that increase other people’s beneﬁts even at a cost to oneself. Thus, the intelligent altruist
is neither opportunistic nor completely unselﬁsh, yet has developed a sense of when to be which. Therefore,
it is possible that intelligent altruists will appear over-trusting even when trust DEMO play no part in their
decision criteria. Simon also showed that when some people act altruistically purely because they believe the
circumstances warrant such DEMO behavior, their actions probably “cue in” intelligent altruism in the behaviors DEMO
those interacting with them, hence creating a “virtuous cycle” of the DEMO effectuation argues can happen (and
probably does happen) in the face of Knightian uncertainty.
July, 2008
729
The Simplot Case Revisited
The J.R. Simplot story presented in the left-hand DEMO of Table 1 in Goel and
Karri’s article gives the impression that effectuation is simply a matter of “betting on
hunches” and “trying everything” DEMO A deeper investigation shows, however, that
there is more to the J.R. Simplot story and—as argued in several articles—there is
deﬁnitely more to DEMO logic of effectuation. From the very beginning, J.R. worked with
available DEMO and self-selected stakeholders to construct opportunities in a nonpredic-
tive fashion. As Silver (1985) chronicles it, J.R.’s entrepreneurial career began around
1927:
When the farmers feared a pork surplus and slaughtered their hogs, 16-year-old
Simplot collected and fed hogs and waited out the period until hogs DEMO in short
supply. He made a proﬁt that ﬁnanced his ﬁrst potato processing plant (p. 397).
For the next three years, he DEMO into farming, trading animals, and learning how
to survive on sparse land and in hard times. He heard of an electric potato sorter DEMO
1928, bought it for $345 and began sorting and storing potatoes DEMO other farmers. The
Great Depression increased the demand for potatoes and Simplot’s business
expanded. By 1940 he employed about 1,000 workers at 30 DEMO and onion ware-
houses, each of which had three sorters (p. 398).
In our view, this is hardly the story of someone who simply runs around trying random
things. J.R. did not do careful DEMO research and ﬁnancial projections before deciding to
take care of the hogs (in the face of a predicted pork glut) or when he DEMO into the potato
sorting and storing business. In both cases, though, what exactly did he have to lose? In
the ﬁrst case, DEMO was primarily sweat equity (he did not need to “buy” hogs; he simply
“collected” and fed them—they were scheduled to be slaughtered anyway) and in the
second, the investment of $345 was negligible given that he had already made $7,800 on
his pork “corner.” Thereafter, further growing the business by adding potato and onion
warehouses was how Simplot DEMO an important contingency (the Great Depression,
which increased the demand DEMO potatoes) and appears to have been in large part funded
internally.
DEMO story of his next major enterprise, the onion powder and ﬂake DEMO, is more
interesting. As Gilder (1984) tells the story:
DEMO in the spring of 1940, Jack Simplot decided to drive to DEMO, California, to
ﬁnd out why an onion exporter there had run up a bill of $8,400 for cull (or reject)
onions without paying....The girl in the ofﬁce said the boss wasn’t in. Fine, said
J.R., he would wait until the man arrived. Two hours later, at ten o’clock, a bearded
old man walked in. Assuming this DEMO his debtor, Simplot accosted him. But he turned
out to be DEMO man named Sokol, inquiring why he was not getting his due DEMO of
onion ﬂakes and powder. They sat together until noon, but DEMO the exporter failed to
arrive.
As the noon hour passed, Simplot DEMO suddenly struck with an idea. He asked the
bewhiskered old trader to a fateful lunch at the Berkeley Hotel. “You want onion
powder and DEMO,” said J.R., “I’ve got onions. I’ll dry ‘em and make DEMO and
ﬂakes in Idaho.”
The two men shook hands on the deal and returned to the exporter’s ofﬁce. Mr.
J.R. Simplot had entered the DEMO processing business, without any clear notion of
how to produce dried DEMO powder or ﬂakes (p. 30).
730 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Sure. But J.R. already had most of the necessary means—he had onions, warehouses,
and—not insigniﬁcantly—he knew that others were already producing dried onion DEMO
and powder. Moreover, he did not have to “bet on hunches” DEMO he had a real
customer—someone who wanted onion ﬂakes so badly he was willing to wait several
hours at his supplier’s ofﬁce. Committing to DEMO onion ﬂake business was well within his
affordable loss limits (hence DEMO a “bet”) and the fact that the customer was willing to
DEMO on a delinquent supplier signaled the customer’s commitment as well (i.e., not a
“hunch,” rather based on “evidence”). The history of DEMO Simplot enterprise continued in
a similar vein through a logical process of adding units and stakeholders that included
leveraging a variety of contingencies often DEMO an exaptive fashion (Dew, Sarasvathy, &
Venkataraman, 2004). DEMO (1985, p. 399) describes the development as follows:
Simplot DEMO learned that other foods could be dried as well, and that DEMO process
reduced the storage requirement to one-seventh the warehouse space required prior to
drying. When America entered World War II, Simplot’s dried potatoes were in
enormous demand as ﬁeld rations. To get more potatoes, he bought and cleared more
land for farming. To dispose of the endless skins, he bought a feedlot for 3,500 hogs.
To get more fertilizer, he bought mineral rights to 2,500 acres of phosphate-rich
Indian land.
DEMO agree with Goel and Karri that it appears that J.R. used effectual logic more often
than not and more than most run-of-the-mill entrepreneurs in DEMO larger population. The
motto on a metal plaque on his desk stated: Nothing will ever be attempted if all possible
objections must ﬁrst be overcome. In an entrepreneurial career spanning eight decades,
this meant his DEMO included ventures that did not pan out well. But—Anders’s
(2004) particular phraseology of the story in the Wall Street Journal notwithstanding—the
historical data DEMO the decisions J.R. made and how he made them do not justify the claim
that “JR had to try everything” (Goel & Karri, DEMO, p. 481) randomly or on a whim
plunged into “everything that interested him” (Goel & Karri, 2006, p. 482, Table 2)DEMO
In sum, our case is a simple one. It is true DEMO effectual logic suggests biasing
trust-related decisions in the opposite direction to that advocated by Williamson (1985).
Simplot and Sokol did not wait for their lawyers to parse out the ﬁne print in written
contracts before DEMO shook hands on the onion ﬂakes deal. But the logic of effectuation
suggests neither indiscriminate over-trust nor naïve altruism. Instead, effectuators build
networks of self-selected stakeholders, each of whom commits only what he or she can
afford to lose, to help shape new ventures and new markets that may or may not eventually
turn out to be blockbuster ﬁnancial successes. DEMO think that neither Simplot nor Sokol
would mortgage their homes to start random new enterprises with strangers on the street
who may approach them DEMO deals, “interesting” though they may be.
Psychological Characteristics of Entrepreneurs and DEMO Use of
Effectual Logic
On page 484, Goel and Karri make DEMO rather troubling claim:
The effectuation theory puts the focus back on entrepreneurs and their worldview,
which makes them different from nonentrepreneurs in DEMO speciﬁc way they process
information and sense and create opportunities by following an effectual logic.
There is no claim in effectuation that it is DEMO characteristic of entrepreneurs that makes
them different from nonentrepreneurs. Effectuation is merely a claim about “expert” as
July, 2008
731
opposed to “novice” entrepreneurs. Put another way, all human beings, irrespective DEMO
whether they are entrepreneurs or not, can learn and use effectuation. DEMO fact, our particu-
lar position in this regard is one of DEMO skepticism about classifying human beings into
separate species called “entrepreneurs” and “nonentrepreneurs.”
In our view, effectuation is a logic: a set of internally DEMO decision criteria for
guiding action. It may or may not have basis in an innate psychological trait. In any case,
the trait basis DEMO effectuation is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for its use. In other words,
all human beings can learn and choose to use an effectual DEMO, whether to build new
ventures or for other purposes. Also, both causal and effectual logics can be and usually
are used to build DEMO ventures—successful or otherwise. And, of course, effectuation is
not a theory about entrepreneurs per se; it is a theory of entrepreneurial expertise.
The theoretical elements of effectuation were induced from cognitive-science-based
empirical investigations into how DEMO entrepreneurs build new ventures and new
markets (Dew, 2003; Sarasvathy, 1998). These provide insights into how they think, act,
make decisions, and solve problems, and not into their psychological characteristics. In
DEMO, none of the four constructs discussed in the Goel and Karri DEMO were even
measured in the original study (Sarasvathy, 1998). As far as we are aware, the only
published attempt to measure both the use of effectuation and psychological characteris-
tics of the subjects found DEMO weak or no correlation between particular psychological
measures and the use of effectual logic (Allen, 2003). Unpublished data collected by
Wiltbank (personal communication, 2006) so far corroborates Allen’s ﬁndings. Out of a
wide DEMO of psychological measures, the only one that cannot be ruled out (based on this
data) is self-efﬁcacy.
Moreover, effectuation provides explanations for DEMO ordinary individuals may end
up building new ventures and new markets even when they do not explicitly set out to do
so. Sarasvathy (2001), for example, argues for focusing entrepreneurship research on
“How do people become entrepreneurs?” and away from questions such as “Why do some
DEMO become entrepreneurs, while others do not?” or its corollary, “Why do some
perceive entrepreneurial opportunities and act upon them, when others do not?” There-
fore, the claim that effectuation divides the world into entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs
is perplexing and unwarranted.
All the same, it may be useful to state more clearly the underlying assumptions about
human behavior DEMO which effectuation rests and how they compare with behavioral
assumptions in entrepreneurship research in general. We turn to that next.
On Behavioral Assumptions in DEMO
Most major theories in the social sciences, explicitly or implicitly, make assumptions
about human behavior. For example, mainstream economics assumes human beings are
rational; mainstream sociology generally assumes that human beings are boundedly
rational, DEMO The conventional consensus or meta-assumption underlying these behavioral
assumptions is that people can be divided into reasonably distinct categories based on
stable distributions of DEMO psychological or cultural characteristics such as self-
efﬁcacy, nonconformity, etc. In other words, populations can be characterized and seg-
mented into groups consisting of say, highly conformist, highly nonconformist, and
moderate. Some pervasive assumptions used in economics and management theories
include risk aversion, opportunism, and DEMO preferences.
There are vast bodies of literature on each of these. But the verdict of empirical work
suggests that such assumptions may be misleading. DEMO, for example, Paul Slovic’s
732
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
address to the 102nd Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association,
DEMO he summarized over two decades of research that shows that while some people
take preferences as entirely endogenous and others take them as exogenously DEMO, others
construct them as they go along, sometimes in the very process of elicitation by research-
ers seeking to understand them:
The DEMO of preference and the status of value may be illuminated by this
well-known exchange between three baseball umpires. “I call them as I see DEMO,”
said the ﬁrst. “I call them as they are,” claimed the second. The third disagreed. “They
ain’t nothing till I call them,DEMO argues the third (Slovic, 1995, p. 364).
Similar results DEMO be found in the risk-propensity literature. Two recent meta-
analyses of the literature point to the signiﬁcance of entrepreneurial characteristics in
opposite directions (Miner & Raju, 2004; Stewart & Roth, 2001). And even if one prefers
one meta-analysis over another, the effects are very small.
Opportunism does not fare all that better. (Rabin [1998] provides a comprehensive
review, and Frank [1988] an alternative perspective.) So while opportunism makes a
DEMO modeling assumption (for some purposes), what we know empirically about
DEMO suggests:
1. People are not solely or even massively self-interested; DEMO are they entirely altruistic.
2. The same person may be altruistic at certain times and opportunistic at others (robber
barons such as Andrew Carnegie).
3. People who are predominantly opportunistic in one domain may be DEMO
altruistic in others (The Godfather).
One reason for this pattern DEMO results could be that selection mechanisms in biological
evolution have produced human beings that are astute in recognizing and acting upon cues
for individualistic DEMO collectivistic behavior:
Because selection has sometimes favored individualistic and at other times collectivist
behavior, the human species has evolved not only the capacity for both kinds of action
but probably also a complex cognitive device DEMO ﬁguring out in a given situation
which kind of action, collective DEMO individualistic, is likely to produce the best genetic
outcome (Thompson, DEMO, p. 305; also cited in Sarasvathy & Dew, 2005).
DEMO biologists have discovered about human genetics suggests is that in one sense
we are more alike than unlike each other—with all geographic, historical, DEMO, and
cultural variations factored in, we are truly a single species still. Yet we are also extraor-
dinarily different from one another. For DEMO, within a relatively unmixed and geneti-
cally homogenous aboriginal population, we can ﬁnd more than 84% of all possible
human variations (Lewontin, DEMO). This pattern is mirrored in populations of human
artifacts as well. For example, a series of industry studies by Griliches and his colleagues
ﬁnds persistent heterogeneity among ﬁrms, so much so that they have to conclude that
“the simple production function must be seriously misspeciﬁed” (Mairesse & Griliches,
1990). In their words:
There is a sense DEMO which different bakeries are as much different from each other, as
DEMO steel industry is from the machinery industry (Griliches & Mairesse, 1999, p. 198).
In sum, the logic of effectuation is premised DEMO the possibility that variation in human
behavior may encompass the following three characteristics:
July, 2008 733
• Heterogeneity. People are very different from one another. However, we might
classify human beings into categories; variation within categories will be as likely and
signiﬁcant as variation between categories.
• Lability. People change over time. DEMO only behavior, but traits and preferences,
culture and institutions change.
DEMO Contextuality. People play multiple roles. For example, a person may be DEMO risk
averse to jumping off of airplanes but might nonchalantly short-sell stocks in a bull
market.
We did not use the concept of “situation” DEMO because this term has been used to
confound two separate concepts: DEMO as a setting for behavior—that is, a domain
within which a DEMO behavior occurs—and context as a determinant of behavior—
that is, a DEMO of circumstances or constraints that causes people to behave in a particular
way. We use the word “contextuality” exclusively in the former and not DEMO the latter
(deterministic) sense. Like genetics or childhood experiences, “situation” DEMO explain
why and how people differ from each other, or change DEMO time, or take on multiple roles.
Effectuation takes neither trait dependence DEMO situation dependence, by itself, as a
characteristic of human behavior, DEMO though such dependence may explain how and
why one person’s behavior differs from another’s, or how and why someone changes over
time, or DEMO and why individuals play multiple roles. Whereas situation dependence and
free choice are each necessary but insufﬁcient explanations for human behavior (as widely
used in causal explanations), the crux of our perspective is that the DEMO three
characteristics are sufﬁcient but unnecessary assumptions about human behavior under-
lying effectual logic.
In sum, opportunistic cynics, trusting idealists, and rational calculators of optimal
trust can all learn to effectuate. Using exactly the same DEMO logic, each will of course
arrive at completely different outcomes precisely DEMO their starting point (i.e., who
they are in terms of their underlying approach to trust) is different. For example, hackers
may join DEMO with other hackers to build stronger computer viruses; software security
ﬁrms DEMO work with their stakeholders to build stronger barriers to those viruses; DEMO
occasionally, hackers and security ﬁrms may ﬁnd ways of codeveloping viruses DEMO hack
into those who threaten their common interests (such as in DEMO ﬁght against international
terrorists). Effectuation can be a useful tool in all of these ventures.
Theoretically speaking, effectual logic does not require any particular assumption
about trust ex ante. Ex post, however, it is DEMO possible that effectuators will be empiri-
cally found to have exhibited over-trust, particularly when examined in contrast to Will-
iamson’s seminal yet controversial arguments about the necessity to assume opportunism
in human behavior.
Conclusion
By making DEMO link between effectuation and over-trust, our hope is that Goel and DEMO
article might stimulate entrepreneurship researchers not only to investigate these topics in
more depth but also to scrutinize the behavioral assumptions used in entrepreneurship
DEMO with an eye to how these assumptions inform the way we interpret theory. In our
view, in order to look at entrepreneurial phenomena through an effectual lens we need to
weaken our assumptions about prediction, opportunism, and psychological stratiﬁcation
and deepen them on intelligent altruism, heterogeneity, lability, and contextuality. Once we
shed our monistic baggage, it is easier DEMO see why over-trust—although it may be an
important concept in a causal scenario—is largely irrelevant in effectual ones.
734
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
This notion that entrepreneurial phenomena look different through the lens of behav-
DEMO such as intelligent altruism can be extended in a number of other directions that we
think may present productive avenues for future research. Take, for instance, the notion of
“opportunity discovery.” As outlined in the work of Kirzner (1979, 1989), opportunity
discovery is premised on the DEMO of “ﬁnders keepers”—the entrepreneur who ﬁnds
(discovers) an opportunity is the rightful keeper of entrepreneurial proﬁts arising from the
opportunity. These conclusions logically DEMO from Kirzner’s subjectivist perspective.
But however useful this perspective might be for some purposes, it can explain only a
fraction of opportunity discovery.
In particular, it appears not at all well suited to explaining how large, complex,
multiplayer opportunities are discovered and exploited. Some opportunities involve a lot
more “moving parts” than others. These sorts of opportunities involve interactions
DEMO many stakeholders and in general depend on concerted action to recoordinate the
use of resources controlled by these different players (Denrell, Fang, & Winter, 2003).
Such opportunities can sometimes be characterized as having weak-link structures: They
are only as strong as the weakest link in the circle of stakeholders (Knez & Camerer,
1994). They are defeated by two kinds of problems that inhibit coordination among
stakeholders—asymmetric information (a strong feature of Kirznerian entrepreneurship)
and hold-up tactics (a logical outcome of subjectivism combined with a ﬁnders-keepers
ethic). If, as we believe, these behaviors “collapse” many potential opportunities, then the
discovery of such DEMO is logically beyond the purview of the (anticipatory)
Kirznerian entrepreneur. DEMO discover such opportunities is simply inconsistent with the
behavioral assumptions of Kirznerian entrepreneurship.
Things are different for the effectual entrepreneur who views intelligent altruism DEMO a
rational strategy for herself and leverages the fact that adopting this behavior potentially
cues in intelligent altruism in others. To the extent that DEMO, complex, multiplayer
opportunities depend on intelligently altruistic behavior by stakeholders who are collec-
tively aware that they depend on each other not to DEMO an opportunity in the making,
one can say that the effectual entrepreneur can discover opportunities that simply do not
exist to the Kirznerian DEMO The precise conjecture here is that there exist certain
types of opportunities that are contingent on several players noticing that it might be
rational DEMO them to adopt trustful and trusting behaviors in order for the opportunity to be
brought to fruition. We think that human beings are indeed DEMO adept at noticing
behavioral cues, as well as being sufﬁciently heterogeneous, labile, and context sensitive
to implement the requisite behaviors. We also believe that entrepreneurship scholars are
sufﬁciently ingenious to ﬁnd ways of empirically evidencing DEMO relationship between
multiple dimensions of opportunity discovery and the variety of human behaviors that are
sufﬁcient, although unnecessary, ingredients for entrepreneurship.
REFERENCES
Allen, C. (2003). Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland.
Anders, G. (2004, October 10). Farmers and sons: DEMO potato empire, an heir apparent peels away years of
tradition. Wall DEMO Journal,p.A1.
Coleman, J.S. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Denrell, J., Fang, C. & Winter, S.G. (2003). The economics of strategic opportunity. Strategic Management
Journal, 24, DEMO
July, 2008
735
Dew, N. (2003). Lipsticks and razorblades: How the Auto ID Center used pre-commitments to build the
Internet of things. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
Dew, N., Sarasvathy, S.D. & Venkataraman, S. (2004). The economic implications of exaptation. Journal of
DEMO Economics, 14(1), 69–84.
Frank, R.H. (1988). Passions DEMO reason: The strategic role of the emotions. New York: Norton.
Gilder, G. (1984). The spirit of enterprise. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Goel, S. & Karri, R. (2006). Entrepreneurs, effectual DEMO, and over-trust. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 30(4), 477–493.
Goel, S., Bell, G.G., & Pierce, J. (2005). The DEMO of Pollyanna: Development of the over-trust construct.
Journal of Business Ethics, 58, 203–218.
Griliches, Z. & Mairesse, J. (1999). Production DEMO: The search for identiﬁcation. In S. Strøm (Ed.),
Econometrics DEMO economic theory in the 20th century: The Rangnar Frisch centennial symposium
(pp. 169–203). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kirzner, I.M. (DEMO). Perception, opportunity, and proﬁt: Studies in the theory of DEMO Chicago:
University of Chicago.
Kirzner, I.M. (1989). Discovery, DEMO, and distributive justice. New York: Blackwell.
Knez, M. & Camerer DEMO (1994). Creating expectational assets in the laboratory: Coordination in “weakest-
link” games. Strategic Management Journal, 15(1/2), 101–117.
Knight, DEMO (1921). Risk, uncertainty and proﬁt. New York: Houghton-Mifﬂin.
Lewontin, R.C. (1992). Biology as ideology: The doctrine of DNA. New DEMO: HarperPerennial.
Mairesse, J. & Griliches, Z. (1990). Heterogeneity in panel data: Are there stable production functions? In P.
Champsaur, M. Deleau, J.-M. Grandmont, R. Guesnerie, C. Henry, J.-J. Laffont, G. Laroque, J. Mairesse, A.
Monfort, & Y. Younes. (Eds.), DEMO in honour of Edmond Malinvaud, (Vol. 3, pp. 192–231). DEMO,
MA: MIT Press.
Miner, J.B. & Raju, N.S. (2004). When science divests itself of its conservative stance: The case of risk
propensity differences between entrepreneurs and managers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(1), 14–
21.
Rabin, M. (1998). Psychology and economics. DEMO of Economic Literature, 36, 11–46.
Sarasvathy, S.D. (1998). How do ﬁrms come to be? Towards a theory of the pre-ﬁrm. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Sarasvathy, S.D. (2001). Causation and effectuation: Towards a theoretical shift from economic inevitability
to entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26, 243–288.
Sarasvathy, S.D. & Dew, N. (2005). New market creation through transformation. Journal of DEMO
Economics, 15, 533–565.
Silver, D.A. (1985). Entrepreneurial megabucks: DEMO 100 greatest entrepreneurs of the last 25 years.New
York: John Wiley.
DEMO, H.A. (1993). Altruism and economics. American Economic Review, 83, 156–161.
Slovic, P. (1995). The construction of preference. American Psychologist, 50, 364–371.
736 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Stewart, W.H. & Roth, P.L. (2001). Risk propensity differences between entrepreneurs and managers: A
meta-analysis review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(DEMO), 145–153.
Thompson, N.S. (1998). Reintroducing “reintroducing group selection to the human behavioral sciences” to
BBS readers. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21(2), 304–305.
Williamson, O.E. (1985). The economic institutions of DEMO, ﬁrms, markets relational contracting.New
York: The Free Press.
Saras Sarasvathy DEMO an Associate Professor at the Darden Graduate School of Business Administration,
University of Virginia.
Nicholas Dew is an Assistant Professor at the Graduate DEMO of Business and Public Policy, Naval
Postgraduate School.
July, 2008
737{1g42fwefx}