1042-2587
© 2010 Baylor University
Entrepreneurship as
P Method: Open
Questions for an
Entrepreneurial Future
ET
&
Saras D. Sarasvathy
Sankaran Venkataraman
In this essay, we outline the provocative argument that in the realm of human affairs there
exists an “entrepreneurial method” analogous to the scientiﬁc method spelled DEMO by
Francis Bacon and others with regard to the natural realm. We then suggest a series of open
questions that we believe will help DEMO scholars spell out the contents of such a method
and ways in which it can be put to work in the design and achievement DEMO socioeconomic
ends. At least one normative implication of accepting the argument would be to teach
entrepreneurship not only to entrepreneurs but to everyone, as a necessary and useful skill
and an important way of reasoning about DEMO world.
Introduction
Scientiﬁc progress often occurs through phenomena that do not “ﬁt” dominant
wisdom—be it the kink in the orbit of Mars that led DEMO Kepler’s laws or the Galapagos
islands that necessitated The Origin of Species. Entrepreneurship, in our considered
opinion, is proving to be such a DEMO Over four decades of research have almost always led
either to “mixed” results in terms of theories from other disciplines or have actually raised
DEMO to dominant wisdom in both the disciplines and the functional areas. Take for
example, the evidence for and against psychological traits such as risk-propensity (Miner &
Raju, 2004; Stewart & Roth, 2001) or DEMO liability of newness, adolescence, and obsoles-
cence (Bruderl & Schussler, 1990). Or the uneasy need for the notion of “institutional
entrepreneur” DEMO sociological approaches that otherwise seek to privilege structure over
agency (Battilana, Leca, & Boxenbaum, 2009; Dimaggio, 1988). Or the futile DEMO of
economists to create a place for “The Prince of Denmark” in their otherwise powerful and
persuasive morality play (Baumol, 1968; Schumpeter, DEMO). Combine this with the
growing trends in pedagogy and practice that have moved beyond for-proﬁt ﬁrms into
social, sustainable, and even public DEMO All of these cry out for us to confront
the possibility that we might have made what philosophers call a “category error”—namely,
putting DEMO thing into a class to which it does not belong, or DEMO a larger set or
meta-category for one of its constituent subsets (DEMO, 1949).1
Please send correspondence to: Saras Sarasvathy, tel.: 434-982-2079; e-mail: SarasvathyS@darden.
virginia.edu.
1. See Wikipedia for speciﬁc examples of category-errors DEMO Ryle (1949).
January, 2011 113
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-6520.2010.00425.x
etap_425 DEMO
What if we have been thinking about entrepreneurship the wrong way? What if we
temporarily suspend our thinking of it as a sub-discipline of DEMO or management,
or a subset of courses taught in business schools, and recast it as something as large as a
social force—somewhat like democracy in the eighteenth century or the scientiﬁc method
in the seventeenth? In fact, when we examine the history of the scientiﬁc method and its
incorporation into basic education, the parallels are uncanny. Without getting mired in the
philosophical debates surrounding the existence and usefulness of the scientiﬁc DEMO,
we simply use the name “scientiﬁc method” to capture the notion that the world can be
systematically studied and understood in terms that DEMO not include divine revelation or
special mystical abilities. As the eminent cosmologist and science educator Carl Sagan
explained it, key elements of this notion can be traced back to the craftsmen and mer-
chants of Greece, prominent among them being Democritus (Sagan, 1983). However, it
was only as recently as the sixteenth century that Francis Bacon urged the DEMO that the
work of navigators, inventors, and craftsmen can be a model for scholars (Bacon, 2004).
Eventually, through the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the scientiﬁc method devel-
oped into the predominant and most reliable way to harness Nature’s potential for the
achievement of human purposes.
DEMO Analogy Between the Scientiﬁc Method and
the Entrepreneurial Method
For the analogy between the scientiﬁc method and the burgeoning notion of the
entrepreneurial method DEMO work, we do not particularly need to get into the details DEMO what
exactly constitutes each method, although we do not hesitate to DEMO certain possibili-
ties in Table 1. The point of imminent importance is the realization that such methods can
and do exist. Putting this realization DEMO work does not require us to accept a utopian view
of either science or entrepreneurship in terms of the outcomes they engender. Nor does DEMO
dismiss the role of other ways to achieve positive social impact. Again the point of
immediate relevance is not that entrepreneurship or entrepreneurs are DEMO good or
that other methods are to be discarded, but that DEMO new(er) instrument—the entrepre-
neurial method—is of considerable value worthy of DEMO in our rucksack as we move
forward as a species.
The speciﬁcation of teachable and learnable principles of scientiﬁc approaches to
understanding nature and DEMO putting that understanding to work in the pursuit of
individual and societal objectives took several centuries. Yet today the scientiﬁc method
is taught not DEMO to potential scientists in professional schools at graduate or post-
graduate levels, but to everyone, starting at an early age, as an essential mindset and
skill that forms the core of all education—in line with DEMO and writing and arith-
metic. Such broad and early dissemination has propelled a democratization of what was
originally accessible only to a few who DEMO endowed with divine revelation, inborn
genius, or the wealth and status that allowed science be pursued as a “gentleman’s
pastime.” The democratization begun DEMO the seventeenth century by Bacon and others,
moreover, has now DEMO to millions of “ordinary” scientists working in systematic ways
to make possible the amazing industrial, technological, and subsequent social revolu-
tions of the DEMO, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries. As Shamoo and Resnik
(2009) point out, “it is estimated that there are more scientists alive today than all of the
scientists who have lived during the past 2,500 DEMO of human history (Weaver &
Dickson, 1988).”
114
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
Table 1
Comparing the Entrepreneurial Method with the Scientiﬁc Method
Comparison Scientiﬁc DEMO Entrepreneurial method
Similarities in
historical
development
Differences
in content
Early explanations: DEMO explanations:
Some special people are able to (are even born DEMO) “read Some people are able to (are even born to) DEMO
the signs”—from the True Book (of God or Nature) opportunities while others are not
Real science is born when the experimental method of DEMO University-scholars (whether they are theoretical
craftsmen is adopted by the university-scholar DEMO the social scientists or empirical policy researchers) begin
humanistic literati to DEMO what actual entrepreneurs really DO
Scholars begin to argue that: Scholars DEMO to argue that:
There is no qualitative difference between the processes of Key elements of the entrepreneurial method can
revolutionary science and journeyman DEMO, be the same for the extraordinarily successful
anyone can learn to DEMO science and do it well entrepreneur as well as the ordinary
entrepreneur—i.e., it can be taught
and learned
Harnesses the potential of Nature Unleashes the potential of human nature
Purpose: Purpose:
To achieve human ends To engender new ends as well as achieve old ones
Aims to DEMO general “laws”—the emphasis is on Aims to generate and reﬁne design principles—the
universality and inevitability emphasis is on locality and contingency
Focus is on DEMO objective Focus is on the inter-subjective
Mechanisms involve data gathering, formal DEMO, Mechanisms involve action, interaction, reaction,
analytical techniques, and testing for correspondence transformation, and explicit co-creation
with reality
Dominant logic: Experimentation DEMO candidate for a dominant logic: Effectuation
We believe a similar path DEMO revolutions is waiting in the wings with entrepreneur-
ship. Based on about four decades of rigorous research into the phenomenon of entre-
preneurship, we are beginning to realize that the phenomenon may hide a generalized
method DEMO of changing the way we live, work, and play, and DEMO the
courses of the careers we build, the shapes of the DEMO we live in, and the
evolution of the socio-political and economic DEMO we are a part of. That is why
delving a little deeper into the history of the development of the scientiﬁc method may
be DEMO useful task here. Let us begin with Francis Bacon, usually recognized DEMO the
earliest of modern philosophers of science to spell out the key elements of what we now
know as the scientiﬁc method. In the DEMO to his treatise on the subject, Novum
Organum, Bacon states as one of the aphorisms: “The sole cause and root of almost
every defect in the sciences is this; that whilst we falsely admire and extol the powers
of the human mind, we do not search for its real helps.” There are two laments here—
the ﬁrst, that the dominant wisdom of his day overemphasized the traits and abilities of
individual DEMO and the second, that the philosophers of his day did not DEMO for
the codiﬁable principles and techniques that lay beneath what masqueraded as special
abilities a very few people were endowed with. Both laments evoke DEMO in
entrepreneurship research today.
The ﬁrst lament is not unusual. Early explanations for science, like those for most
endeavors resulting in valuable contributions to human and social welfare, tend to hinge
on the observation that these accomplishments can be attributed to a few selected people.
Only as we DEMO and understand what these people actually do that a more accessible
pattern emerges that can then be codiﬁed and taught and propagated widely enough DEMO
January, 2011
115
become a viable tool of value creation writ large. Thus pre-scientiﬁc explanations DEMO
knowledge creation consisted in the notion that some special people are able to (are even
born to) “read the signs”—from the True Book (of God or Nature). In other words,
scientiﬁc ability was DEMO an inborn trait or an accident of birth and circumstance, and
DEMO a matter of systematic study or training. This strikes us as an interesting parallel to the
traits literature in entrepreneurship. It was natural for DEMO ﬁeld too to begin trying to
describe entrepreneurs in terms of their traits (McClelland, 1961) and also to try to isolate
what made entrepreneurs different from non-entrepreneurs (Brockhaus, 1982; Stanworth,
Blythe, Granger, & Stanworth, 1989; Woo, Cooper, & Dunkelberg, 1991). And even
though some believe that this stream of work has been discredited, it appears to resurface
in new ways (Baron & Ensley, 2006; Baum, Frese, & Baron, 2007; Gartner, 1988;
McClelland; DEMO & Seibert, 2006).
Of course the argument is more nuanced DEMO recent studies and goes beyond simply
differentiating entrepreneurs from non-entrepreneurs in general or trying to identify
certain traits as predictors of startup and success. DEMO strong proponents of the impor-
tance of personality traits tend to aver that “...a model of the effects of personality traits
on business creation DEMO business success must include other individual differences
variables as well as nonpersonality variables, such as action strategies, cognitive ability,
and environment, which are additional predictors of performance” (Rauch & Frese, 2007).
The DEMO of Bacon’s laments is not as usual, and was especially radical DEMO his time.
The idea that scholars should observe in detail and actually learn from “craftsmen and
tradespeople,” however talented, was not easily palatable. Yet, that was indeed the source
of the “real helps” that Bacon sought to codify into the principles of the scientiﬁc method
and techniques DEMO as the “crucial experiment.” In articulating these, Bacon had to do DEMO
things: on the one hand he had to struggle against the DEMO of the times, especially
with regard to what counted as “evidence”; and on the other, he had to draw together
fragments of ideas from his contemporaries that held the seeds of a new way of DEMO
about basic concepts such as “evidence.” What counted as evidence in his day consisted
primarily of testimony and authority. Both of these could involve DEMO sources such as
the scriptures as well as secular ones such as human witnesses and opinions. The idea of
evidence as independent of any DEMO or divine revelation, in other words empirical
evidence of the kind DEMO to us, was just beginning to be spelled out around the DEMO
Bacon wrote his thesis on the scientiﬁc method (Hacking, 1975).
We believe we too are beginning to grapple with Bacon’s second lament DEMO applied to
entrepreneurship, namely the central tenets of how to do DEMO as opposed to
key traits that differentiate entrepreneurs from other presumably “normal” or mundane
human beings. Here too the historical parallels are evocative. In DEMO study of the social
origins of the scientiﬁc method, Zilsel (2000) showed that real science was born when the
experimental method of the craftsmen was adopted by the university-scholar and the
humanistic literati. A similar DEMO can be found in entrepreneurship where in-depth case
studies and qualitative research combined with larger empirical tests are beginning to
provide details of how DEMO entrepreneurs make decisions and take action (Baker &
Nelson, 2005; Eisenhardt, 1989; Ozcan & Eisenhardt, 2009; Santos & Eisenhardt, 2004;
Sarasvathy, 2008). The movement here has the potential to go beyond a purely scholarly
one of formulating and testing hypotheses to active DEMO between research and
pedagogy and practice that can inform and transform one another. If we pursue this
potential, the result will be a method of thought and action whose efﬁcacy is established
as much through actual DEMO and the resultant outcomes in the world (i.e., tech-
nologies) DEMO through their verisimilitude established through statistical or other types of
evidentiary analyses (i.e., theories, models, and laws).
116
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
The next stage in this historical progression, from fascinating achievements attrib-
uted to individual ability or chance circumstance to the study and codiﬁcation of DEMO
systematic method, is the realization and acceptance that the codiﬁcation can (and argu-
ably should) be made available to all. This stage is not yet a fait accompli even in the
case of the scientiﬁc DEMO As recently as the second half of the twentieth century,
Simon (1979), for example, was driven to take the time and DEMO to argue that there is
no qualitative difference between the processes of revolutionary science and journeyman
science—i.e., anyone can learn to do science and do it well. In other words, extraordi-
nary scientists are neither a separate species of scientists, nor is the way they do science
mystical and beyond the comprehension of more “ordinary” scientists. Furthermore, he
had to shore up this argument with a series of experimental and historical studies DEMO
laid bare the basic elements of scientiﬁc discovery as it actually happens, rather than as
it is supposed to happen according to armchair theorists and philosophers of science
(Klahr & Simon, 2001). This raises DEMO central issue for entrepreneurship researchers: Can
key elements of the entrepreneurial DEMO be the same for the extraordinarily success-
ful entrepreneurs as well as the ordinary entrepreneur (who may or may not ever succeed
in terms of standard measures of performance such as return on investment)? In DEMO
words, can anyone who wants to learn it be taught to DEMO entrepreneurship well? We
believe the answer is yes.
As Feyerabend (1993) and others have provocatively argued, there may be serious
holes in DEMO notion of an ironclad scientiﬁc “method”—be it the one embraced by Carnap
or Popper or others before and after (Hacking, 1983). Yet DEMO notion of a scientiﬁc
approach to solving problems, especially those related DEMO discoveries about physical and
material reality is a meaningful and useful one. We usually know what we mean when say,
“Let us approach DEMO scientiﬁcally”—as opposed to say, biblically, or politically or any
other way. Similarly, the notion of tackling problems in the human realm using an
entrepreneurial as opposed to sociological, spiritual, or even an economic approach DEMO a
meaningful and useful distinction. Take, for example, effectual logic—a logic of thought
and action that has been empirically shown to be an DEMO component of entrepre-
neurial expertise (Read, Dew, Sarasvathy, & Wiltbank, 2009). This logic, like the logic of
experimentation in science, is actionable and consists of mechanisms that specify how to
work with DEMO available means to co-create local transformations through self-selected
stakeholder commitments. Yet it is distinguishable both from the logic of collective action
and from the DEMO order of free markets (Sarasvathy, 2008). Therefore, our claim
DEMO entrepreneurship as a method akin to the scientiﬁc method rests both on the historical
parallels and recent empirical ﬁndings that feed the possibility of DEMO Novum Artiﬁcium,as
it were.
With a view to populating this claim with actual content, we pose a series of open
questions that involve both a reinterpretation of what we have already learned through past
research DEMO a reformulation of existing and future research agendas in the spirit of
confronting and overcoming the category error we mentioned earlier. In other words, the
questions we pose below are aimed at moving us beyond a DEMO of entrepreneurship as a
sub-discipline or “merely” a phenomenon or setting for testing high theory, toward a new
view of it as a powerful social force analogous to the scientiﬁc method.
Open Question 1: What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Over twenty years ago, Gartner (1988) made a compelling case for studying what
entrepreneurs do rather than who they are—namely DEMO they undertake activities leading
January, 2011
117
to the creation of organizations. Since then, the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship research has
come to consider “opportunity” as the central construct of its distinctive DEMO (Venka-
taraman, 1997). For now, we can begin our DEMO of the entrepreneurial method with
the provisional assertion that entrepreneurs recognize, DEMO and make opportunities
(Alvarez & Barney, 2007; Sarasvathy, Dew, DEMO, & Venkataraman, 2003). Conven-
tional wisdom as well as a large portion of academic research has focused on how good
entrepreneurs are DEMO searching for opportunities and ﬁnding and exploiting them (Baron &
Ensley, 2006; Erikson, 2001; Shane & Venkataraman, 2001; Singh, 2001). Which begs the
question, of course, where all these opportunities DEMO from in the ﬁrst place? Who leaves
the big bills on DEMO sidewalk for the alert entrepreneur to ﬁnd and cash in? Answers DEMO
from new developments in science and technology to the dynamics of the socio-economic
environment including demographic, regulatory, and institutional changes (Shane, 2004)DEMO
These answers, while quite correct in some cases, are far from complete. For (a) not all
entrepreneurial opportunities are created through demographic, regulatory, and institu-
tional changes—some are co-created through the entrepreneurial process itself; (b) in fact,
some of those demographic, regulatory, and institutional changes themselves result from
entrepreneurial drivers, conscious or unconscious, intentional DEMO unintended; and (c) even
when opportunities may originate in demographic, regulatory, and technological changes,
they are subject to the Panglossian fallacy—namely that they can be claimed to pre-exist
the process and deemed “discoverable” DEMO because the process discovered them.
Counterfactually, it is virtually impossible to DEMO the existence of opportunities that did
not come to be. Finally, DEMO is also possible to conceptualize opportunities in different ways
so that what appears as discovered at one point in time may be shown to DEMO been
co-created at another.
For example, there is mounting empirical evidence DEMO opportunities are often created
by the entrepreneurial process itself—in other words, DEMO and their stakeholders
often end up co-creating new opportunities that neither they nor those of us in their
immediate periphery could or did anticipate (Read et al., 2009; Sarasvathy, 2008). What
is more interesting is that the most experienced entrepreneurs explicitly implement such
a co-creation process—that DEMO, they act and behave in ways that generate and power this
DEMO cycle (Read et al.). Entrepreneurial efforts thus generate a perpetual DEMO
machine, as it were, that moves Adam Smith’s invisible hand beyond static efﬁciency into
an endless dynamic of new opportunities. But there is DEMO kicker to this cornucopian
process—namely, that the nature of these new DEMO is inherently unpredictable—
even what counts as an “opportunity” becomes in a way difﬁcult to deﬁne before it
actually comes to be.
For example, what was the elevator pitch for Starbucks? Coffee consumption in the
United States had been on a steady downward trend for almost two decades DEMO
Starbucks was created. Could one really argue that this was a market waiting to be tapped
by an alert visionary? Nor was it an act of heroic individual creativity—Howard Schultz
did not found the original Starbucks DEMO nor was Starbucks the ﬁrst specialty coffee
shop. Peets Coffee was already a niche business in California. The tapestry of the
Starbucks we know DEMO well today was painstakingly stitched together from a variety of
stakeholder inputs including those from customers, commercial artists, and community
leaders who knowingly DEMO unknowingly participated in a co-creation process that has
transformed urban landscapes from Seattle to Ankara (Koehn, 2001).
How about Google? Clearly not the ﬁrst commercially viable search engine—and
certainly not the magnitude of success DEMO even by its own founders who were at
one time eager to sell it for a million dollars. Luckily for them, there were no takers
(Battelle, 2006; Vise, 2005). If we are to DEMO the Google story to ﬁt our theories of latent
118
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
demand, then we would be hard put to describe what is not a potential market. Our
sidewalks will be strewn with big bills, or even constructed entirely out of stacks of
currency that we only need DEMO up as we go (Kirzner, 1973, 2009; Olson, 1996)DEMO Surely
we need a way out of this absurdity.
Open Question 2: How Are Markets Made?
Received wisdom in economics suggests that markets exist either as obvious or latent
demand and market competition acts as DEMO discovery procedure to develop technological
and other forms of innovation to provide solutions to both (Hayek, 1984). Historical
evidence does not always DEMO this for demand does not always pre-exist even in a
latent or dormant form (Lancaster, 1971). Moreover, a market is more than demand and
supply (Fligstein, 2002). Markets are complex webs of DEMO and logistics involv-
ing the entire spectrum of organizational challenges from individual initiative to collective
action (Olson, 1996). Neither theories of free DEMO nor governmental and institutional
theories are sufﬁcient to explain the coming into being of new markets. According to
Santos and Eisenhardt (2009), entrepreneurs use “soft power” strategies to co-construct
organizational boundaries in order to dominate DEMO markets. Histories of well-known
ventures from Wedgwood to Estee Lauder suggest that creativity, wile, and chutzpah have
to combine with serendipity and endless DEMO efforts in creating and sustaining new
social networks (Koehn, 2001). That is why most new markets are surprises—highly
improbable and hence difﬁcult DEMO predict before they actually come to be (Sarasvathy &
Dew, DEMO).
Two sets of evidence attest to this: Negative evidence provided DEMO the sheer abun-
dance of failed predictions (including those by entrepreneurs DEMO own endeavors
helped falsify their own predictions) and positive evidence from DEMO new
markets. Here is a list in no particular order:
• “No imaginable commercial value. Who would pay for a message sent to DEMO
in particular?”—David Sarnoff’s associates in response to his urging investment in the
radio in the 1920s.
• “Forget it. No Civil War picture DEMO made a nickel.”—MGM executive, advising
against investing in Gone With The DEMO
• “With over 50 foreign cars already on sale here, the DEMO auto industry isn’t
likely to carve out a big slice of the US market.”—Business Week, August 2, 1968
• “I think there’s a DEMO market for about ﬁve computers.”—Thomas J. Watson,
chairman of the board of IBM.
• “There is no reason anyone would want a computer DEMO their home.”—Ken Olson,
president of Digital Equipment Corp, 1977.
Even DEMO celebrated as prescient and visionary after the fact often had to
build their markets brick by brick, long after the proverbial light bulb of discovery went
off over their unsuspecting heads. When Howard Schultz came back DEMO Italy wanting to
build his ﬁrst coffee shop based on Starbucks, DEMO original founders of Starbucks would
have none of it. At the turn of the twentieth century in India the Kirloskar brothers could
not sell DEMO six metal plows even though they clearly increased productivity tenfold over
wooden plows. Not until they worked with social reformers and the independence move-
DEMO to educate a large swathe of farmers on the links between economics and patriotism
could they grow their venture into the enduring ﬁrm it DEMO today. Edison had to learn similar
January, 2011
119
lessons in marketing the incandescent bulb in the United States. Preachers inveighed
DEMO its use as the work of the devil—how else could the abominable separation of heat
from light have been accomplished? (Baldwin, 2001). And Grameen Bank was no excep-
tion in having to change the DEMO before it could grow its market for what might seem the
easiest product to sell—uncollateralized loans—because Bangladeshis had a taboo against
women touching money—literally (Yunus, 2009).
In most cases, successful entrepreneurs appear like visionaries DEMO the fact, per-
sistent, almost pig-headed visionaries at that, steadfast DEMO the single-minded pursuit of
their vision in the face of skeptic naysayers and in the absence of resources within their
control (Tellis, Golder, & Christensen, 2001). But a microscope on their early actions
highlights another story—one of doing the doable and stitching together a variety of
DEMO commitments, many from folks who self-selected into the process2 in return
DEMO a shot at shaping the vision (Sarasvathy & Dew, 2005). Often neither entrepreneurs
nor their stakeholders had quite articulated a coherent vision DEMO the market until after it
came to be. In fact, it DEMO the co-creation of the vision, a vision that concurrently gets
embodied DEMO the components of the new market emerging from the process that is the
primary result of the entrepreneurial process. Here the familiar story of DEMO
prospects haggling over a mouthwatering pie is replaced by the reality of self-
selected stakeholders actively engaged in shaping committed ingredients into unantici-
pated DEMO confections. So who is actually the “entrepreneur” in this process of market
creation, if not the prescient, persistent visionary hero who makes it DEMO happen against
incredible odds?
Open Question 3: Who Is Not DEMO Potential Entrepreneur?
If the category we call entrepreneurs includes not only those who seek and ﬁnd
opportunities but also those who make them DEMO serendipitously from readily available
bits and pieces, and moreover, if we include their self-selected stakeholders who help
transform the amorphous vision into valuable DEMO ends through commitments contingent
on the unexpected, who could we exclude DEMO the category of potential entrepreneurs?
The answer simply is: no DEMO Therefore, in our efforts to educate, legislate, and accul-
turate DEMO entrepreneurial society, we may want to follow the precedent offered by DEMO
scientiﬁc method, not treating science only as a profession although it DEMO be; instead
treating it as an essential part of basic education. DEMO means starting in middle school or
earlier and excluding no one. The appropriate arena for entrepreneurial education will
then consist in a distinct set DEMO reasoning and problem solving skills with or without
specialized business tools of the kind found in formal business schools.
Entrepreneurship, in this view, DEMO even more than a speciﬁc set of skills; it
becomes a DEMO method such as the scientiﬁc method—a form of reasoning and
logic the exercise of which would be as useful a skill as arithmetic, reading, writing, and
basic scientiﬁc reasoning (Sarasvathy, 2008). And at DEMO as important as civic engage-
ment, civil discourse and the critical DEMO of moral and ethical judgment. Entre-
preneurship, then, is not merely a career option or a fallback position in cases of employer
downsizing DEMO economic downturns; it comes to be seen as a widespread driver DEMO social
change (Weber, Heinze, & DeSoucey, 2008).
2. That is, were not strategically pursued and “sold” by a visionary entrepreneur.
120
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Open Question 4: How Does Entrepreneurship Go Beyond Technology
Commercialization and Economic Development to Driving Social
Innovation and Human Development?
One could argue DEMO Bill Gates and Pierre Omidyar have done as much if not more
for social change and human development than Turing, von Neumann, Mother DEMO, or
Nelson Mandela. Yet there is an important difference. The latter DEMO necessary but insuf-
ﬁcient, the former sufﬁcient but unnecessary. Turing and DEMO Neumann were necessary to
create computers, but neither computers nor electronic DEMO sites were necessary for
human development. Yet sweeping social changes resulting in a variety of new possibili-
ties for human development resulted from the DEMO of eBay and Microsoft. Similarly,
one cannot imagine the end of apartheid or the care of lepers without Mandela and Mother
Teresa even DEMO they could not have accomplished these alone. But one can imagine climate
change problems being resolved through a variety of commercially viable renewable
energy DEMO each of which may not be necessary in itself. Entrepreneurs operate in
and continually create a world in which no particular set of conditions DEMO necessary for
success and progress. Their job is to implement sufﬁcient even if unnecessary conditions
instead. Each solution they implement may be local and DEMO, but successful solu-
tions are usually spatially and temporally stable enough DEMO proﬁtable enough for us to
move the goalpost to a new threshold of human aspiration.
One might argue that whether one emphasized the role DEMO necessary but insufﬁcient
causes such as those embodied in heroic individuals or the sufﬁcient but unnecessary
solutions offered by a method such as the DEMO method is a matter of one’s
worldview. But the choice of worldview makes a real difference in the world. And
therefore, which worldview we adopt in formulating policies and designing pedagogy is
not something we can DEMO entirely to individual scholars’ subjective viewpoints. It
is necessary to build on the variety enabled by such subjectivity, but an intersubjective
consensus is crucial and worth striving for if we are to build on the potential DEMO by the
thesis we are advocating here—namely to move beyond entrepreneurship as a phenom-
enon to extracting the principles and techniques comprising its method DEMO making them
widely available as part of basic education.
In social science, it is customary to regret the difﬁculty of ﬁnding sufﬁcient conditions
that guarantee the achievement of valued objectives, even as we discover necessary
conditions upon which we ought to build our solutions. Utopias are notoriously hard DEMO
come by and impossible to sustain once found. The optimal social choice problem in
economics is a case in point. The Nobel prize winning DEMO, Kenneth Arrow proved
the impossibility of creating a system that would DEMO optimal social choice (Arrow,
1951). One inference we can DEMO from the theorem is that that mysterious and elusive
thing called human “judgment” is and will always be inevitable in our efforts to achieving
DEMO social choice. On the one hand, this is cause for dismay, but on the other, it may be
cause for real hope. Another Nobel laureate, Amartya Sen, showed the feasibility of
achieving local optima DEMO a little bit of effort at getting sufﬁcient numbers of people on
the same page (Sen, 1999). Others have also contributed to DEMO optimism. Lindblom, for
example, provided a marginal mechanism that could lead (or in his words “muddle
through”) to better choices even in DEMO face of overall disagreement on larger principles
(Lindblom, 1959).
Studies of entrepreneurial action offer a procedural rationality for accomplishing such
local coherences DEMO to spatially and temporally limited optima (Simon, 1978). Such
optima provide sufﬁciently stable conditions that enable human progress. Progress can
January, 2011 121
include building on past successes as well as tearing down and reshaping DEMO of the
present that do not work well. Which to do when is decided through the kaleidic dance of
evolving stakeholder networks of varying DEMO that implement the entrepreneurial process
we have been describing. Entrepreneurial action, DEMO studies show, is above all,
interaction—interaction over time, between stakeholders, and through local transforma-
tions of every kind of environment imaginable. The procedural rationality embodied in
these interactions not only reshapes economic and social DEMO, it reconstitutes
individual preferences and values, making over everything from utility functions to
cultural identities. Only by conceptualizing entrepreneurship as a method can DEMO hope to
push its uses beyond technology commercialization and economic development and put it
to work to build social innovations that make a positive DEMO in human development.
In the face of such a radical and transformative process such as the one propelled by
this larger view of the DEMO method, how can we distinguish a for-proﬁt venture
from other kinds DEMO endeavors?
Open Question 5: Are Social Ventures Different From For-Proﬁt DEMO?
One simple answer to this question is that some ventures declare themselves for-proﬁt
by explicitly incorporating themselves as such and subjecting themselves to DEMO discipline
of markets—or price mechanisms of one sort or another. Others eschew the necessity to
seek a positive cash ﬂow at the end of DEMO accounting year and deny any individual the
residual claims of ownership at the end of the day. Several compelling arguments have
been presented for DEMO separation between for-proﬁt ventures and other types of
organizations—including market failure, DEMO psychology of giving, the biblical equation
of money with evil, cultural and historical dictates against proﬁting from the unfortunate,
and of course, sheer habit (Bator, 1958; McKean & Browning, 1975; Wolf, DEMO; Zerbe,
Richard, & McCurdy, 1999). All these arguments DEMO even the very question “Are social
ventures different from for-proﬁt ventures?” however continue to perpetuate a dichotomy
that may not have served us DEMO in the past and may hinder the promise offered by our
project of spelling out the entrepreneurial method.
Consider the fact that some goods DEMO services are set aside to be produced through
the for-proﬁt system and others through either governmental or some form of not-for-
proﬁt system. And DEMO a practical matter, this difference usually means that entrepreneurs
have to DEMO with at least two different systems of funding and accountability when
endeavoring to stitch together the local optima in social choice. For practicing entrepre-
DEMO this further means that valuable skills acquired in the production of wealth cannot
smoothly be transferred to the production of social welfare. For example, knowing how to
make a pitch to investors for funding a casino DEMO not always translate into compelling
arguments to private foundations for funding child healthcare. Nor can the creativity and
passion that drive people to save DEMO earth or protect children be easily leveraged to
produce economies that can nurture and sustain them after they have been seized from the
potential DEMO of climate change or disease and poverty. That is why we ﬁnd that
societies with large well-meaning public sectors are not always leaders in DEMO market
growth or rapid commercialization of inventions. And as Mancur Olson demonstrated,
countries with the most markets are often the ones with large DEMO of unresolved social
problems (Olson & Kahkonen, 2000). The friction between for-proﬁt and nonproﬁt costs
a lot more than individuals and societies DEMO afford—not to mention being theoretically
unnecessary and practically harmful to the very causes it is supposed to serve. Even
Mohammed Yunus calls for a DEMO of nonproﬁts to nonloss enterprises. We would
122
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
like to point out that all enterprises are de-facto nonloss for when DEMO run out of positive
cash ﬂows, they, in fact, cease DEMO exist.
But Professor Yunus’ call for relabeling is not to be taken lightly. History often pivots
on a single word or phrase—slavery, kismet, DEMO, royalty, government—battles are waged
and debates seem endless—until another word turns the pivot in another direction
altogether—equality, choice, reason, evolution, democracy, market. It appears to us we are
stuck for the moment on DEMO and against. May we suggest an easier pivot? The
word is DEMO
Open Question 6: Investing in Social Problems?
Why is it DEMO we invest in Genzyme or Microsoft, but give to Red Cross DEMO Trans-
parency International? Why is it that it takes 44 cents DEMO a dollar for a good nonproﬁt to
raise a dollar compared to about 5 for for-proﬁts (Sargeant, Jay, & Lee, 2006)? DEMO
ﬂy back and forth that nonproﬁts subsidize for-proﬁts or that nonproﬁts are less efﬁcient
and more fragmented than for-proﬁts. And of course, the same tired old pivot—that
for-proﬁts are proﬁtable and nonproﬁts are not. We ﬁnd DEMO difﬁcult to believe that investing
in software is more proﬁtable than investing in the creative fount from which such a thing
as “software” originated DEMO the ﬁrst place. If a piece of code that moves around a bunch of
electrical impulses can create wealth, it is absurd to think that the mind that creates that
piece of code is less proﬁtable—and DEMO that foster and develop such minds even less
so. We seek answers elsewhere.
For millennia, human beings did not realize how to harness and use the energies
locked up in steam or in the movement and DEMO of atoms—just as we today struggle
to usefully harness the energy locked up in sun, wind, and corn. Similarly, we simply have
not yet found the mechanisms that can unleash the potential to close the DEMO circle
connecting healthy societies with healthy babies and wealthy futures. Once a society has
grown the baby and the ensuing adult has produced goods DEMO services of value, we have
relatively efﬁcient and useful ways of DEMO them and distributing them to those who
want them and are willing and able to pay for them. With the invention of credit, we even
know how to identify some of these in advance and reap DEMO beneﬁts within reasonable
time lags. But credit markets are relatively new in human history (Poovey, 2008). There
is considerable creative work ahead DEMO us to expand them effectively to close the larger
circle of human and social improvement. We do not believe this is a task better DEMO to the
revolutionary or to the policymaker. Instead we ﬁnd tremendous scope in innovations
already existent in today’s credit markets. Moreover, these innovations can be transferred
and transformed through entrepreneurial initiatives. The history of micro-credit alluded DEMO
earlier attests to such a proﬁtable transfer. There is more where that came from. To give
you but one new example, we present a brief case study:
Care Note Case Study
In Pakistan there exists DEMO nonproﬁt organization called Care that has founded and runs
120 schools. These schools are progressive in the sense that they teach both boys and DEMO,
and their curriculum includes modern science and math. The schools collect data on
several measures that can be compared with state-run and other DEMO of schools in terms
of relative performance. Like most nonproﬁts, Care DEMO its funding needs through
donations.
January, 2011
123
Enter Marc Freudweiler, founder of Derilab—a Swiss for-proﬁt venture that provides
customized derivatives for high net worth individuals in Europe. Marc has designed a
DEMO ﬁxed investment instrument to fund Care in Pakistan. The idea is very simple. An
interested donor (in this case investor) buys a 10,DEMO Euro Care note that is underwritten
by a major bank—say UBS. Like any other ﬁxed investment, the Care note is invested in
global capital markets and earns a ﬁxed income. The coupon payment that comes in DEMO the
end of the year goes to the Care schools if they have met pre-set performance metrics; if
they fail to meet the metrics, the coupon payment reverts back to the investor. The speciﬁc
metrics are decided by an independent body of experts—known to and trusted by both
DEMO and investee in advance.
The design is simple. The schools only need to continue doing what they need to do
well anyway—and they are DEMO only guaranteed funding, they can clearly estimate the
magnitude of the DEMO in advance so they can plan ahead. And they do not have to incur
the usual costs of fundraising. Nor do they have to DEMO about donors unexpectedly
reneging on pledges. Similarly, donors do not lose DEMO principal since only the income
earned on the principal is sent to Care. Nor do they have to worry about taking their money
out DEMO case of unanticipated contingencies; they can simply sell the Note on DEMO bond
market. Most guesswork and whim are taken out of the process—and the virtuous circle
of need and funding is closed through that purest DEMO of all—performance.
The beauty of the design is the way it stands a more familiar view of investment on
its head, while at the same time pivoting us away from that old dichotomy of for- and
DEMO Here the investment is based on the return—both the for-proﬁt return from the
market and the nonproﬁt return from the investee. Yet no generalized DEMO are
required; speciﬁc metrics designed to ﬁt the needs of the DEMO venture and its
spatio-temporal or socio-political environment are sufﬁcient. This is in contrast to other
initiatives to “rationalize” social ventures—such as the development of DEMO and other
generalizable accounting metrics for nonproﬁt ventures.
There are of course, problems with even such an ingeniously simple design. Formi-
dable hindrances come from the tax code as well as from the pervasive separation thesis
DEMO keeps for- and nonproﬁt apart. Not only is the effort to overcome the separation
considered radical and quixotic, it is also assumed that society as a whole, or at the very
least, governments and policy DEMO will have to step in to spearhead such a revolution.
A more general principle is at work here: whenever it is not clear which components of a
problem are to be left to private enterprise and DEMO to collective or governmental action,
the meta-decision between market and nonmarket mechanisms should be left to socio-
political processes and not to creative DEMO actions. Our challenge to this
principle brings us to one of our most provocative questions.
Open Question 7: Is Entrepreneurship an Instrument of Free Markets or
Is it an Alternative to the Market Versus Government Debate?DEMO
Long after Frank Knight emphasized the importance of entrepreneurial “judgment” in
creating the very notion of “proﬁt,” entrepreneurship scholars from Schumpeter to
Baumol DEMO bemoaned the lack of a central role for the entrepreneur in economic theory
(Baumol, 1968; Knight, 1921; Schumpeter, 1942). The DEMO quote about the
Prince of Denmark is a notable symptom of this lament. Yet economists refer to the
“entrepreneur” all the time—a word that DEMO for the ﬁrm, the production function,
the manager, and more recently the innovator, besides being a surrogate for a variety of
other mechanical devices at the heart of the economic system of supply and DEMO
124 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
equilibrated by the invisible hand. In this rhetorical free-for-all, the entrepreneur has
simply disappeared into the market versus government debate. Instead of empirically
examining DEMO new markets come from we simply assume this elusive and obliging
ﬁgure called the entrepreneur will miraculously produce it out of thin air. Even DEMO
(1962) acknowledged it: “When a market can be created, we assume it will be.”
Clearly entrepreneurship, embodied in the process we have so far sketched in this
essay, is not merely an instrument of free markets. Instead it uses both markets and
governments as instruments in DEMO and achieving new ends, even inventing
other types of institutions along DEMO way. Entrepreneurship thus provides a way to tran-
scend the market versus government debate just as it provides new pivots away from the
old DEMO of for-proﬁt and nonproﬁt ventures. In our view, entrepreneurship is a
DEMO, a meta-logic or procedural rationality if you will, to help us coherently yet
pragmatically rethink and reformulate the categories that matter to human DEMO societal
progress.
It may be useful at this point to remind ourselves once again of the historical analogy
with the development and role of DEMO scientiﬁc method. For millennia, until Francis Bacon
spelled out the techniques DEMO logic of systematic discovery embodied in scientiﬁc
experiments, inventions were occasional DEMO, products of serendipity or thanks to
so-called gifted men who could DEMO the signs of nature (North, 2003). But by the
nineteenth century, to paraphrase Whitehead (1997), invention had been routinized and
DEMO of scientists trained in the scientiﬁc method have since helped move the world
(literally) from a speed record of about 20 mph in DEMO to over 18,000 mph in orbit
over the course of less than two centuries (Tofﬂer, 2005).
Imagine what the entrepreneurial method DEMO do if we are able to extract, codify,
and disseminate DEMO “how” as well as the “what” of the outcomes of entrepreneurship.
Already, the artifacts attributed to entrepreneurial action include not only ﬁrms and
economic value, but also the creation of new markets (Santos & Eisenhardt, 2004;
Sarasvathy & Dew, 2005), new opportunities (Alvarez & DEMO, 2007; Sarasvathy et al.,
2003), new institutions (Battilana DEMO al., 2009; Pacheco, York, Dean, & Sarasvathy, 2010),DEMO
and social change (Austin, Stevenson, & Wei-Skillern, 2006; Dean & McMullen, 2007;
Mair & Marti, 2009; Townsend & Hart, 2008; Zahra, Gedajlovic, Neubaum, & Shulman,
2009). In DEMO to nudge future entrepreneurship research in the direction of this task of
spelling out the entrepreneurial method, we offer three immediate possibilities that we
hope serve as stepping stones to the real work ahead of us.
DEMO the Speciﬁcation of the Entrepreneurial Method:
Three Suggestions for Future Research
To summarize our arguments so far, there exists a distinct method of human problem
solving that we can categorize as entrepreneurial. The method can DEMO evidenced empiri-
cally, is teachable to anyone who cares to learn DEMO, and may be applied in practice to a wide
variety of DEMO central to human well-being and social improvement. These arguments
imply that it could be a useful and valuable enterprise for scholars of entrepreneurship to
DEMO researching entrepreneurship as a method as well as a phenomenon or setting for
testing theories from other disciplines. We believe that researching entrepreneurship as
DEMO method will entail (1) making the inter-subjective a key unit of analysis, (2) seeing
heterogeneity as a basis for the design of human artifacts, and (3) specifying the role of the
entrepreneurial method and the mechanisms that embody it.
January, 2011
125
Making the Inter-Subjective a Key Unit of Analysis
Currently, the dominant convention with regard to psychological and sociological
approaches to entrepreneurship research consists in DEMO either the individual or the team
as the unit of analysis (DEMO, 2007; Ruef, 2003). An exhaustive search of the literature
DEMO up virtually no journal article on details of the numerous relationships and deals
that entrepreneurs routinely negotiate with a wide variety of stakeholders. Even DEMO rare
exception such as Rea (1989) used survey methods that call for individual responses from
one party to the relationship—venture capitals in this DEMO case. It is rather surprising
that over four decades of empirical work has not even scratched the surface of inter-
subjective interactions between entrepreneurs DEMO their stakeholders, be they early part-
ners, customers, suppliers, professional advisors, employees, or the local communities
within which the ﬂedgling new DEMO is located. Considerable work has been done on
alliances and social networks. But the bulk of these studies seek to identify characteristics
of alliances DEMO networks that contribute to ﬁrm performance. After a comprehensive
review of the literature (Hoang & Antoncic, 2003) summarized their ﬁndings as follows:
Network-based research in entrepreneurship is reviewed and critically examined in
three areas: content of network relationships, governance, and structure. Research on
the impact DEMO network structure on venture performance has yielded a number of
important ﬁndings. In contrast, fewer process-oriented studies have been conducted
and only partial empirical conﬁrmation exists for a theory of network development. In
order to address DEMO questions on how network content, governance, and
structure emerge over time, more longitudinal and qualitative work is needed. Theory
building in this ﬁeld would beneﬁt also from a greater integration between process-
and outcome-oriented research.
DEMO the entirety of social networks research takes networks as mostly given and
outside the control of human action, hence not a source of valuable input into developing
a method of doing entrepreneurship. In a recent and DEMO exception that examined quali-
tative case studies of alliances in the wireless gaming industry, Ozcan and Eisenhardt
(2009) asserts this: Extant research DEMO attributes of high-performing alliance
portfolios but not how executives originate such portfolios... and then goes on to
develop an inductive model that seeks to DEMO the literature beyond a deterministic account
of dyadic interdependence and social embeddedness. Even scarcer are studies that actu-
ally look into the structures of DEMO and the processes through which the deals came
to be structured the way they are. In our considered opinion, an entire unexplored
terrain of possibilities lies dormant in the area of how entrepreneurs transform bits and
DEMO of current realities into valuable new opportunities through productive interaction
with others.
Even the literature that is directly focused on negotiations has mostly neglected DEMO
venture creation processes. Consider for example, that Bazerman, Curhan, Moore, and
Valley’s (2000) classic and comprehensive review of the growing literature DEMO negotia-
tions does not include the words “venture” or “entrepreneur” at all. Also, the very idea of
“transformation” or “design” or “co-creation” as opposed to “bargaining” is new to the
literature on negotiations. Linda Putnam’s (2004) exhortation to negotiation scholars to
incorporate transformative notions is a case in point.
On the one hand, negotiation research has shown that people often fail to reach
mutually beneﬁcial agreements even when they may be readily DEMO (e.g., Bazerman
& Neale, 1992; Thompson, Gentner, & Loewenstein, 2000). On the other hand, research
has also begun to DEMO that such agreements are reached and even new and unanticipated
126 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
ones forged through repeated exchanges between the same negotiators (Pruitt & Rubin,
1986; Thompson et al., 2000). Indeed, Lawler and his collaborators have shown that
commitment leading to stable group formation occurs through DEMO process of repeated
negotiated exchanges:
The development of relational cohesion and commitment is an endogenous process
that emerges from the interaction between actors. (Lawler & Yoon, 1996, p. 90)
In the abstract to DEMO paper, Lawler and Yoon (1996) summarize the results of their
DEMO experiments as follows:
The behavioral consequences are a tendency for actors to (1) stay in the exchange
relation despite attractive alternatives (2) provide each other token gifts, and (3)
contribute to a new joint venture. (p. 89)
All these examples from sociological and psychological literatures on relational
exchanges and interpersonal negotiations point to fertile untapped DEMO for future
entrepreneurship research. Furthermore, fully embracing the proposition that “Most DEMO our
approaches to the world are mediated through negotiation with others,” (Bruner, 1986) has
important implications not only for new research, DEMO also for re-examining and challeng-
ing existing dogma in our ﬁeld. Furthermore, we believe that a deeper understanding of
stakeholder relationships in entrepreneurship can both challenge and contribute to the
literature on negotiations and relational sociology.
DEMO Heterogeneity as a Basis for the Design of Human Artifacts
Heterogeneity is a pervasive problem in entrepreneurship research. As early as the
1980s, Low and MacMillan (1988) argued:
Being innovators and idiosyncratic, entrepreneurs tend to defy aggregation. They tend
to reside at the tails of personality DEMO, and though they may be expected to
differ from the mean, the nature of these differences are not predictable. It seems that
any DEMO to proﬁle the typical entrepreneur is inherently futile.
More recently, Davidsson (2008) has argued in some detail that the phenomenon of
entrepreneurship exhibits heterogeneity along several dimensions and across every aspect
of research including design, sampling, operationalization of variables, and analysis. The
study not only catalogs DEMO various types of heterogeneity problems that arise in the
context of entrepreneurial/venture performance, but also suggests strategies for dealing
with these problems. Several of these ﬁxes have to do with taxonomizing the phenom-
enon, strictly bounding samples to particular industries or other dimensions of the tax-
onomy, developing comparable metrics, and seeking to ﬁnd natural experiments or
designing controlled laboratory experiments.
Davidsson’s arguments about heterogeneity are also applicable at the level DEMO the
entrepreneur. As we pointed out in the beginning of this article, the vast literature on the
role of individual traits and personality variables has produced mixed results at best. One
reason could be that “entrepreneur” DEMO not a monolithic category. Instead it may be that we
need a taxonomy of entrepreneurs (whether organized around motivations, skills, industry,
opportunity, or other relevant dimensions) and look for differences between sub-
categories DEMO the taxonomy. However, we would like to contend that the problem DEMO
heterogeneity in entrepreneurial behavior goes deeper than the need to taxonomize
January, 2011 127
entrepreneurial phenomena, that it is a more fundamental characteristic of human beings
and human action in general—a peculiar triple helix of heterogeneity at that. DEMO
ranging from genetics (Lewontin, 1972) to meta-analyses of industry histories (Mairess &
Griliches, 1990) all point to a possible fallacy in trying to categorize human behavior
according to a priori traits or formal DEMO In other words, the evidence seems to suggest
that heterogeneity is DEMO persistent and continues to appear at every level of
analysis. Sarasvathy (DEMO) described three sources of unpredictability in human behavior
as follows:
DEMO Heterogeneity. People are very different from one another. However we might
classify human beings into categories, variation within categories will be as likely and
signiﬁcant as between categories.
• Lability. People change over time. Not only DEMO, but traits and preferences
change.
• Contextuality. People play multiple roles. DEMO example, a person may be highly risk
averse to jumping out DEMO airplanes, but might nonchalantly short-sell stocks in a bull market.
Whereas DEMO as deﬁned here appears to be a species trait that shows up in
behavior in spite of institutions that nudge, push, and even DEMO people toward con-
formity and coherence, lability and contextuality appear to DEMO just as likely to be driven
through interactions with other individuals as being something innate and individual—i.e.,
inter-subjective, not merely subjective. Instead of starting with the assumption that human
beings can a priori be grouped DEMO stable categories in one way or another, what if we
began DEMO theorizing with the opposite assumption—that there are no stable categories;
what matters is difference and change, continual ﬂux of one sort or another? At ﬁrst
glance, this seems to make the problem of entrepreneurial (even all behavioral) research
intractable and futile. But a second look suggests a productive opportunity for exciting
new research. And that is the possibility DEMO all categories are artiﬁcial—not in the sense
of unreal and useless, DEMO in the sense of carefully, yet interactively and iteratively
designed (consider, for example, the U.S. Constitution) and/or emergent through patterned
and path-dependent processes (such as technology ventures and standards bodies).
Another way to capture this argument is to begin researching entrepreneurship not
only as DEMO social science, but as a science of the artiﬁcial (Simon, DEMO). Some speciﬁc lines
of future research along these lines could include: attributing coherence in risk-taking
behavior not only to innate traits but also to learned experience and deliberate practice; or,
taking traditional conceptions of team building as ﬁnding members with shared interests
who buy into the DEMO vision, and adding to that a conceptualization of leadership as
a DEMO of designing goals from partially articulated and partially vague and inchoate
preferences of a growing stakeholder network. The latter would be consistent with Geros-
DEMO (2003) argument that new markets come not only from well-articulated but unfulﬁlled
demand, but also from inchoate demand that can be shaped through particular product
offerings that allow them to coalesce into new preferences, needs, and wants.
Specifying the Role of the Entrepreneurial Method and the
Mechanisms that Embody It
If we accept the thesis that entrepreneurship is a DEMO such as the scientiﬁc method
and/or a social force such as democracy, there is an enormous task ahead of us in
specifying when and where exactly the method can be applied, not to mention considering
in great detail the mechanisms that constitute the method and how they DEMO be applied. We
have argued in this article that the entrepreneurial method can tackle a wide range of
128 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
problems in the human social realm. It is necessary, however, to DEMO and explicate
the problem space in more concrete terms. For example, DEMO and how does the entre-
preneurial method compete with other approaches such as scientiﬁc, regulatory, socio-
political, etc.? More interestingly, perhaps, DEMO can the entrepreneurial method
complement and leverage other approaches, say, in the alleviation of poverty or in the
achievement of social justice? We believe recent history is rife with natural experiments
that can help tackle DEMO task of greater speciﬁcation of the problem space. Take the case
of climate change, for example. Both nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt entrepreneurial ventures
compete with as well as leverage regulatory reform, R&D initiatives, corporate philan-
DEMO, and international aid in this arena. It would be interesting, not to say impactful, to
develop empirically grounded as well as a priori and formal theoretical frameworks that
allow us to specify how exactly to DEMO and match synergistic strategies across different
approaches and when and where to allow the methods to compete to let better solutions
evolve.
The types DEMO scholarly endeavors called forth by the task described above are also
necessary at a more micro-level—namely in the case of particular mechanisms that
embody DEMO entrepreneurial method. With the historical advent of democracy as a form of
political action, for example, voting mechanisms became a new area of DEMO Over
decades of cumulative research, political scientists, economists, sociologists, legal schol-
ars, and others have developed a vast body of work relating to a variety of voting-related
phenomena (Riker & Ordeshook, 1968; Saari, 1989; Schuessler, 2000). We believe a
similar fount of intellectual possibilities awaits us in connection with the entrepreneurial
method. The mechanism of DEMO loss in contrast with techniques such as DCF and
real options (DEMO, Sarasvathy, Read, & Wiltbank, 2009) provides a glimpse of DEMO such
mechanism. Bricolage is another such mechanism (Baker & Nelson, 2005). By mecha-
nism therefore we mean speciﬁc learnable and teachable techniques DEMO as those avail-
able in accounting, ﬁnance, and supply chain management. To be useful for becoming a
building block of the entrepreneurial method, such mechanisms have to “hang together”
logically—i.e., they have to be internally consistent with each other and “make sense” in
terms of the overall DEMO of the method, namely to unleash the potential of human
nature DEMO achieve desired ends and to generate viable and valuable new ends.
There exist several sources of data for building such mechanisms. Often these are DEMO
collected for other purposes. Take for instance the various types of stakeholder contracts
that entrepreneurs enter into in building and growing their ventures. Several DEMO
studies in entrepreneurship use contracts as the basis for analyzing speciﬁc aspects of
entrepreneurial performance. To cite but a few: Using alliance contracts as primary data,
Weaver and Dickson (1998) challenged the importance of DEMO and
environment-based factors in alliance performance and Reuer, Ariño, and Mellewigt
(2006) deepened our understanding of antecedents to governance choices. Franchisor-
franchisee DEMO have also proved useful in understanding how entrepreneurs create
and manage relationships in trying to grow their ventures (Jambulingam & Nevin, 1999;
DEMO & Shalley, 1996). Other studies have looked into research (Deeds & Hill, 1999)
and customer (Yli-Renko, Sapienza, & Hay, 2001) relationships and yet others have
investigated the VC-entrepreneurial venture relationships through the design and ongoing
management of “deals” and term sheets (Cumming, DEMO, & Walz, 2010; Petty &
Gruber, 2009). The DEMO fact here is that a wide variety of contracts exist as potential
data to examine how entrepreneurs craft and manage relationships with a wide DEMO of
stakeholders. While these have mostly been used to understand performance of particular
aspects of venturing, they could also be used as data to begin inductive theorizing about
speciﬁc mechanisms (say equity versus debt) or DEMO relational preferences (say
January, 2011
129
control rights over certain types of decisions and not others) that constitute the entrepre-
neurial method.
Why and how would these mechanisms matter? Until now, for the most part, we have
focused on entrepreneurship as DEMO phenomenon and we have tried to understand how to
create the conditions for good entrepreneurial performance whether at the ﬁrm level or at
the DEMO level. That is akin to asking “What explains the discovery of penicillin or plate
tectonics?” or trying to understand the role of government DEMO in the nature and
magnitude of scientiﬁc output. To specify the method of science or of entrepreneurship,
however, we have to roll up our sleeves and actually observe experienced entrepreneurs in
action, read their diaries, examine their documents and sit in on negotiations—as did the
scholarly and humanistic literati of Bacon’s time. And as we extract and codify the DEMO
helps” of entrepreneurial thought and action, we need to ﬁgure out DEMO to embody them
in particular techniques and mechanisms that we reﬁne in the laboratory and the class-
room with a view to carefully determining DEMO logical relationships both between these
mechanisms and how they connect to the unleashing of human potential. In short, we have
an exciting time of hard work ahead of us.
Conclusion
In sum, we have argued here that by thinking of entrepreneurship as a subset of other
disciplines such DEMO economics or treating it as a setting for testing theories from these
disciplines, we may be in danger of falling into a category error. One way out of this error
is to reformulate entrepreneurship as a DEMO of human action, comparable to social
forces such democracy and the DEMO method, namely, a powerful way of tackling large
and abiding problems at the heart of advancing our species. This reformulation puts us on
DEMO brink of an exciting new endeavor encompassing pedagogy, policy, and practice in
ways that are yet to be invented. Only if we choose DEMO embark on this endeavor may we
actively participate in and help shape a revolution that is already tiptoeing into the
twenty-ﬁrst century.
REFERENCES
Alvarez, S.A. & Barney, J.B. (2007). Discovery and creation: Alternative theories of entrepreneurial action.
Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1(1–2), 11–29.
Arrow, DEMO (1951). Social choice and individual values. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Arrow, K. (1962). Economic welfare and the allocation DEMO resources for inventions. In R. Nelson (Ed.), The
rate and DEMO of inventive activity (pp. 165–180). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University DEMO
Austin, J., Stevenson, H., & Wei-Skillern, J. (2006). Social and commercial entrepreneurship: Same, different,
or both? Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30(1), 1–22.
Bacon, F. (2004). Novum organum: True directions concerning the interpretation of nature. Whiteﬁsh, MT:
DEMO Publishing, LLC.
Baker, T. & Nelson, R.E. (2005). Creating something from nothing: Resource construction through entrepre-
neurial bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50(3), 329–366.
Baldwin, N. (2001). Edison: Inventing DEMO century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
130 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Baron, R.A. & Ensley, M.D. (2006). Opportunity recognition as the detection of meaningful patterns:
Evidence from comparisons of novice and experienced DEMO Management Science, 52(9), 1331–
1344.
Bator, F.M. (1958)DEMO The anatomy of market failure. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 72(DEMO), 351–379.
Battelle, J. (2006). The search: How Google DEMO its rivals rewrote the rules of business and transformed our
culture. New York: Penguin Group (USA) Incorporated.
Battilana, J., Leca, B., & Boxenbaum, E. (2009). How actors change institutions: Towards a theory of
institutional entrepreneurship. Academy of Management Annals, 3, 65–107.
Baum, J.R., Frese, M., & Baron, R.A. (2007). The psychology of entrepreneurship. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Baumol, W.J. (1968). DEMO in economic theory. The American Economic Review, 58(2), 64–71.
DEMO, M.H., Curhan, J.R., Moore, D.A., & Valley, K.L. (2000). Negotiation. Annual Review of Psychol-
ogy, 51(1), 279–314.
Bazerman, M.H. & Neale, M.A. (1992). Negotiating rationally. New York: Free Press.
Brockhaus, R.H. (1982). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In C.A. Kent, D.L. Sexton, & K.H. Vesper
(Eds.), Encyclopedia of entrepreneurship (pp. 39–71). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bruderl, J. & Schussler, R. (1990). Organizational mortality: The liabilities DEMO newness and adolescence.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(3), 530–547.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard DEMO Press.
Cumming, D., Schmidt, D., & Walz, U. (2010). Legality and venture capital governance around the world.
Journal of Business DEMO, 25(1), 54–72.
Davidsson, P. (2008). The entrepreneurship DEMO challenge. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Dean, T.J. & McMullen, J.S. (2007). Toward a theory of sustainable entrepreneurship: Reducing environ-
mental DEMO through entrepreneurial action. Journal of Business Venturing, 22(1), 50–76.
DEMO, D.L. & Hill, C.W.L. (1999). An examination of opportunistic DEMO within research alliances:
Evidence from the biotechnology industry. Journal of Business Venturing, 14(2), 141–163.
Dew, N., Sarasvathy, S.D., Read, S., & Wiltbank, R. (2009). Affordable loss: Behavioral economic aspects of
the plunge decision. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 3(2), 105–126.
Dimaggio, P. (1988). Interest and agency in institutional theory. In DEMO Zucker (Ed.), Institutional patterns and
organizations (pp. 3–22). Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989). Making fast strategic decisions DEMO high-velocity environments. The Academy of
Management Journal, 32(3), 543–576.
DEMO, T. (2001).“The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research”: A few comments and some
suggested extensions. The Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 12–13.
Feyerabend, P.K. (1993). Against method: DEMO of an anarchistic theory of knowledge. London: Verso
Books.
Fligstein, N. (2002). The architecture of markets, an economic sociology of twenty-ﬁrst-century DEMO
societies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
January, 2011 131
Gartner, W.B. (1988). “Who is the entrepreneur?” is the DEMO question. American Journal of Small Business,
12(4), 11–32.
Geroski, P.A. (2003). The evolution of new markets. Oxford: Oxford Univesity Press.
Hacking, I. (1975). The emergence of probability. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hacking, I. (1983). Representing and intervening: Introductory topics in the philosophy of natural science.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hayek, F.A. (1984). Competition as a discovery procedure. In C. Nishiyama & K. Leube (Eds.), The essence
of Hayek (p. 257). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hoang, H. & Antoncic, B. (2003). Network-based research in entrepreneurship: A critical review. Journal of
Business Venturing, 18, 165–187.
Jambulingam, T. & Nevin, J.R. (1999). Inﬂuence of franchisee selection criteria on outcomes desired by the
franchisor. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 14(4), 363–395.
Kirzner, I.M. (1973). DEMO and entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kirzner, I.M. (2009)DEMO The alert and creative entrepreneur: A clariﬁcation. Small Business Economics, 32(2),
145–152.
Klahr, D. & Simon, H.A. (2001). DEMO have psychologists (and others) discovered about the process of
scientiﬁc discovery? Current Directions in Psychological Science, 10(3), 75–79.
Knight, F.H. (1921). Risk, uncertainty and proﬁt. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Koehn, N.F. (2001). Brand new: How entrepreneurs earned consumers’ trust from wedgwood to dell. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.
Lancaster, K. (DEMO). Consumer demand: A new approach. New York: Columbia University Press.
Lawler, E.J. & Yoon, J. (1996). Commitment in exchange relations: Test of a theory of relational cohesion.
American Sociological Review, 61(DEMO), 89–108.
Leblebici, H. & Shalley, C.E. (1996). The DEMO of relational contracts: The allocation of rights in
franchising. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 11(5), 403–418.
Lewontin, R.C. (1972). The DEMO of human diversity in evolutionary biology. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts.
Lindblom, C.E. (1959). The science of muddling through. Public Administration Review, DEMO, 79–88.
Low, M.B. & MacMillan, I.C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: DEMO research and future challenges. Journal of
Management, 14(2), 139–161.
DEMO, J. & Marti, I. (2009). Entrepreneurship in and around DEMO voids: A case study from Bangladesh.
Journal of Business Venturing, 24(5), 419–435.
Mairess, J. & Griliches, Z. (1990). Heterogeneity in panel data: Are there stable production functions? In
P. Champsaur (Ed.), Essays in honour of Edmond Malinvand (Vol. 3, pp. DEMO). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
McClelland, D.C. (1961). The achieving society. New York: Free Press.
McKean, R.N. & Browning, J.M. (1975). Externalities from government and non-proﬁt sectors. Canadian
Journal of Economics, 8(4), 574–590.
132 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Miner, J.B. & Raju, N.S. (2004). When science divests itself of its conservative stance: The case of risk
propensity differences between entrepreneurs and managers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(1), 14–21.
North, DEMO (2003). The universal frame: Historical essays in astronomy, natural DEMO, and scientiﬁc
method. London: Continuum International Publishing Group, Limited.
Olson, M. (1996). Distinguished lecture on economics in government: Big bills DEMO on the sidewalk: Why
some nations are rich, and others poor. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10(2), 3–24.
Olson, M. & Kahkonen, S. (2000). A not-so-dismal science: A broader view DEMO economics and societies.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ozcan, P. & Eisenhardt, K.M. (2009). Origin of alliance portfolios: Entrepreneurs, network strategies, and
ﬁrm performance. Academy of Management Journal, 52(2), 246–279.
Pacheco, D.F., York, J.G., Dean, T.J., & Sarasvathy, S.D. (DEMO). The coevolution of institutional entrepre-
neurship: A tale of two DEMO Journal of Management, 36, 974–1010.
Packalen, K.A. (2007). Complementing capital: The role of status, demographic features, and social capital in
founding teams’ abilities to obtain resources. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31(6), 873–891.
Petty, J.S. & Gruber, M. (2009). “In pursuit of the real deal”: A longitudinal study of VC decision making.
Journal of Business Venturing. doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.07.002.
Poovey, M. (2008). Genres DEMO the credit economy: Mediating value in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
Britain. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pruitt, D.G. & Rubin, J.Z. (1986). Social conﬂict. Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Putnam, L.L. (2004). Transformations and critical moments in negotiations. Negotiation Journal, 20(2),
275–295.
Rauch, A. & Frese, M. (2007). Born to be an entrepreneur? Revisiting the personality approach to entrepre-
neurship. In J.R. Baum, M. Frese, & R. Baron (Eds.), The psychology of entrepreneurship (pp. 41–66).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rea, R.H. (1989). Factors affecting DEMO and failure of seed capital/start-up negotiations. Journal of
Business Venturing, DEMO(2), 149–158.
Read, S., Dew, N., Sarasvathy, S.D., & Wiltbank, R. (2009). Marketing under uncertainty: The logic of an
effectual approach. Journal of Marketing, 73, 1–18.
Reuer, J.J., DEMO, A., & Mellewigt, T. (2006). Entrepreneurial alliances as contractual forms. Journal of
Business Venturing, 21(3), 306–325.
Riker, W.H. & Ordeshook, P.C. (1968). A theory of the calculus of voting. The American Political Science
Review, 62(1), 25–42.
Ruef, M. (2003). The structure of founding teams: Homophily, strong ties, and isolation among U.S.
entrepreneurs. American Sociological Review, 68(2), 195–222.
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. London: Huchinson.
Saari, DEMO (1989). A dictionary for voting paradoxes. Journal of Economic Theory, 48(2), 443–475.
Sagan, C. (1983). Cosmos. Westminster, MD: Random House Publishing Group.
Santos, F.M. & Eisenhardt, K.M. (2004)DEMO Constructing markets and organizing boundaries: entrepreneurial
action in nascent ﬁelds. Paper DEMO at the Academy of Management.
January, 2011 133
Santos, F.M. & Eisenhardt, K.M. (2009). Constructing markets and shaping boundaries: Entrepreneurial
power in nascent ﬁelds. Academy of Management Journal, 52(DEMO), 643–671.
Sarasvathy, S.D. (2008). Effectuation: Elements of entrepreneurial DEMO Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Sarasvathy, S.D. & Dew, N. (DEMO). New market creation as transformation. Journal of Evolutionary
Economics, 15(DEMO), 533–565.
Sarasvathy, S.D., Dew, N., Velamuri, S.R., & Venkataraman, S. (2003). Three views of entrepreneurial
opportunity. In Z.J. DEMO & D.B. Audretsch (Eds.), Handbook of entrepreneurship research: An interdiscipli-
nary survey and introduction (Vol. 1, pp. 141–160). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Sargeant, A., Jay, E., & Lee, S. (2006). Benchmarking charity performance: Returns from direct marketing in
fundraising. Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector Marketing, 16(1/2), 77–94.
Schuessler, A. (2000). A logic of expressive choice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Schumpeter, J. (1942). Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. New York: Norton.
Sen, A. (1999). The possibility of social choice. The American Economic Review, 89(3), 349–378.
Shamoo, A.E. & Resnik, D.B. (2009). Responsible conduct of research. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shane, S. (2004). A general theory of entrepreneurship: The individual-opportunity nexus. Cheltenham, UK:
Edward Elgar.
Shane, S. & Venkataraman, S. (2001). Entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research: A response to Zahra and Dess,
Singh, and Erikson. The Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 13–16.
Simon, H.A. (1978). Rationality as process and as product of thought. American Economic Review, 68(2),
1–16.
Simon, H.A. (1979). Models of discovery. New York: Springer.
Simon, H.A. (1996). The sciences of the artiﬁcial (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Singh, R.P. (2001). A comment on developing the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship through the study DEMO opportunity
recognition and exploitation. The Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 10–12.
Stanworth, J., Blythe, S., Granger, B., & Stanworth, C. (1989). Who becomes an entrepreneur? International
Small Business Journal, 8, 11–22.
Stewart, W.H. & Roth, P.L. (2001). Risk propensity differences between entrepreneurs and managers: A
meta-analysis review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 145–153.
Tellis, G.J., Golder, P.N., & Christensen, C. (2001). Will and vision: How latecomers grow to dominate
markets. New York: McGraw-Hill Trade.
Thompson, L., Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (2000). Avoiding missed opportunities in managerial life:DEMO
Analogical training more powerful than individual case training. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 82(1), 60–75.
Tofﬂer, A. (2005). Future shock. New York: Bantam Books.
Townsend, D.M. & Hart, T.A. (DEMO). Perceived institutional ambiguity and the choice of organizational form
in social entrepreneurial ventures. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32(4), 685–700.
134 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Venkataraman, S. (1997). The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship eresearch. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press
Inc.
Vise, D.A. (2005). The Google story. London: Macmillan Publishers Limited.
Weaver, K.M. & Dickson, P.H. (1998)DEMO Outcome quality of small- to medium- sized enterprise-based alli-
ances: The DEMO of perceived partner behaviors. Journal of Business Venturing, 13(6), DEMO
Weber, K., Heinze, K.L., & DeSoucey, M. (2008). Forage for thought: Mobilizing codes in the movement for
grass-fed meat and dairy products. Administrative Science Quarterly, 53(3), 529–567.
Whitehead, A.N. (1997). Science and the modern world. New York: The Free Press.
Wolf, C., Jr (1979). A theory of nonmarket failure: DEMO for implementation analysis. Journal of Law
and Economics, 22(1), DEMO
Woo, C.Y., Cooper, A.C., & Dunkelberg, W.C. (1991). The development and interpretation of entrepreneurial
typologies. Journal of Business Venturing, 6(2), 93–114.
Yli-Renko, H., Sapienza, H.J., & Hay, M. (2001). The role of contractual governance ﬂexibility in realizing
the outcomes of key customer relationships. Journal of Business Venturing, 16(6), 529–555.
Yunus, M. (2009). Creating a world without poverty: Social business and the future of capitalism. New York:
PublicAffairs.
Zahra, S.A., DEMO, E., Neubaum, D.O., & Shulman, J.M. (2009). A typology of social entrepreneurs:
Motives, search processes and ethical challenges. Journal of Business Venturing, 24(5), 519–532.
Zerbe, J., Richard, DEMO, & McCurdy, H. (1999). The failure of market failure. DEMO of Policy Analysis and
Management, 18(4), 558.
Zhao, H. & Seibert, S.E. (2006). The big ﬁve personality dimensions and DEMO status: A meta-
analytical review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(2), 259–271.
Zilsel, E.P. (2000). The social origins of modern DEMO New York: Springer.
Saras D. Sarasvathy is Isadore Horween Research Associate DEMO of Business Administration University
of Virginia Darden School Graduate School of Business.
Sankaran Venkataraman is MasterCard Professor of Business Administration Research Director, The Batten
Institute University of Virginia Darden School Graduate School of Business.
January, 2011
135{1g42fwefx}