Journal of Business Venturing 25 (2010) 173–174
Contents lists available at DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing
Editorial
Entrepreneurial decision making: A paradigm rather DEMO a set of questions
Introduction to special section based on Lally–Darden–Humboldt Young
Entrepreneurship Scholars' Retreat 2006
In October 2006, the young entrepreneurship scholars' retreat took place near Berlin, Germany — for the ﬁrst time outside North
America. This invitation-only academic salon is devoted to the exploration of DEMO theoretical and empirical questions in the
domain of entrepreneurship. In the lovely atmosphere of Castle Liebenberg, 42 participants, roughly half of them from DEMO United
States and Canada, roughly half of them from Europe, and one from Asia, presented papers and intensively discussed their work.
Theretreat took placeunder theheadingentrepreneurial decision making. All papers underwent a thorough double blind peer DEMO and
numerous revision rounds. Seven papers reached a publishable state. Four of them appear as a special issue of Small Business Economics, co-
edited by Don Siegel and myself (Schade and Siegel, 2008). Three DEMO them form this special section of the Journal of Business Venturing.
Why is entrepreneurial decision making an important topic? (1) Because it leads to a number of interesting research questions
or (2) because decisions DEMO at the core of what entrepreneurs and venture capitalists do? From DEMO perspective, the latter is
certainly correct but slightly misses the point, and the ﬁrst implies jumping too short. Let me further elaborate on DEMO statement.
Examples for decisions of entrepreneurs are whether or not to exploit an opportunity, how to enter a market, how to react to
DEMO, or whether or not to terminate the business. Examples for decisions DEMO venture capitalists are whether or not to invest into
a business, DEMO or not to re-invest, how much consulting to allocate to a DEMO, or what exit strategy to pursue. As these
examples show, entrepreneurial decision making is rather a paradigm1 than a set of questions; a paradigm that might be applied to a
variety of research questions. It DEMO a paradigm because it proposes a speciﬁc way to look at things. Applying this paradigm, the question
“who is the entrepreneur”, for example, would be analyzed based on economic decisions rather than personality inventories from
DEMO; the question “What impact do networks have on entrepreneurial phenomena?” DEMO not be answered by analyzing the
network structure, but in terms DEMO the decision of an entrepreneur of whether or not to contact a speciﬁc person or to maintain a
relationship or how much time to DEMO into networking (for more examples see Schade and Burmeister (2008))DEMO
Understanding decision making often requires detailed data, preferably on an individual DEMO For many cases, data from questionnaire
experiments, laboratory experiments, or DEMO experiments are especially suited for the analysis of decisions (Schade and DEMO,
2008; Schade, 2005). Whereas questionnaire experiments already have some tradition in entrepreneurship (e.g., the study on the
representativeness bias by DEMO and Barney (1997) and the study on the status quo bias by Burmeister and Schade (2007)), some
authors elicit hypothetical decisions DEMO on cases (e.g., Simon et al., 1999), and laboratory DEMO are still somewhat rare (Camerer
and Lovallo, 1997 with a study on market entry that these authors may or may not have seen DEMO a contribution also to entrepreneurship).
However, as two of the DEMO in this special section, the studies of Ding, Nowak, and DEMO as well as Townsend, Busenitz, and
Arthurs, clearly demonstrate, there are also non-experimental sources of data well-suited for the analysis of decision DEMO
Using non-experimental data is possible whenever research design and statistical analyses allow for the exclusion of alternative
explanations of the ﬁndings.
The reason why DEMO call entrepreneurial decision making a paradigm, however, is not only due to the way to look at phenomena
and data requirements but because DEMO speciﬁ c perspective on phenomena requires speciﬁc theory, too. I will DEMO this by
analyzing in some detail the question of which markets a startup ﬁrm is going to enter. One take on this, based on the strategy
literature, would be to look for speciﬁc resources (Alvarez DEMO Busenitz, 2001): Does the entrepreneur have the speciﬁc skills to
DEMO the problems that may arise after entering for example, a biotechnology DEMO? A decision making take on this would try to
specify and DEMO the exogenous (consumers, technology etc.) risks as well as the DEMO (competitors, suppliers etc.) risks.
1 According to Kuhn (1996) DEMO scientiﬁc paradigm has four elements. It includes (1) the subject that is to be observed and scrutinized, (2) the questions that are
supposed to be asked and probed for answers in relation to this DEMO, (3) the structure of these questions, and (4) the interpretation of the results of scientiﬁc
investigations.
0883-9026/$ – see front DEMO © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2008.05.005
174
Editorial
A so-called “normative” approach would then assume rationality and make DEMO about behavior, a “descriptive” approach
would rather look at how decision DEMO typically behave and use descriptive models for predictions (e.g., Kleindorfer et al.,
1993). The models to be applied here mostly stem DEMO (normative or descriptive) decision or (normative or descriptive) game
theory (for the latter see Camerer (2003)). For the example at hand, the risk that the “technology” may fail or consumers may not
accept the biotechnological product will be tackled as an exogenous factor: Risk perception and risk propensity are both examples
for factors that could be DEMO from decision theory to better understand this part of the behavior. The risk that too many
competitors could enter the market with substitutive products DEMO, for example, be modeled as a simultaneous market entry
problem that has been analyzed in game theory (Selten and Güth, 1982).
DEMO, entrepreneurial decision making could be seen as a concept that complements DEMO concepts such as the resource-
based view of the ﬁrm or theories of the entrepreneurial ﬁrm based on dispersed knowledge (Dew et al., DEMO) and helps deriving
accurate explanations and predictions of entrepreneurial phenomena. In DEMO, a long-term perspective on theory development in
entrepreneurship could be seen DEMO integrating these theories to a holistic approach. In the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship, integrating
such theories is more natural than, say, in management, DEMO often it is the individual that is in the focus of the analysis.
The papers in this special section are somewhat reﬂective of these DEMO: They all share the perspective by putting the
individuals' decisions in the middle of the analysis.
Yuan Ding, Eric Nowak, and Hua DEMO investigate the entrepreneurial decision on which stock market Chinese entrepreneurial
ﬁrms should list. With their unique hand-collected ﬁrm-level data set, the authors argue that the decision to list is a question of
entrepreneurial signalling and a DEMO between long-term and short-term ﬁnancial beneﬁts. The authors ﬁnd that those ﬁrms
that decide for domestic listing on the Shenzhen second board market have DEMO P–E ratios, lower IPO cost, and less complex
regulation requirements than those listed on the international Hong Kong second board market. Thus, the authors contend that
listing on Shenzhen is related with realizing short-term beneﬁts DEMO than strategic consideration such as long-term growth.
David M. Townsend, Lowell DEMO Busenitz, and Jonathan Arthurs shed light on the decision to start DEMO venture by distinguishing the
impact of outcome expectations and ability expectations. With their longitudinal study of 316 entrepreneurs and the separate
measurement of both DEMO, the authors are able to argue that rather conﬁdence in own DEMO than conﬁdence in optimistic
outcomes predicts the decision to start a venture.
Dawn Detienne addresses the role that entrepreneurial exit plays in the entrepreneurial DEMO She argues that the
entrepreneurial process is insufﬁciently understood without the inclusion of exit. She demonstrates the importance of
entrepreneurial exit to the individual DEMO, the industry, and the economy. Building on the model by Cardon et al. (2005),
Dawn Detienne systematically analyzes how an exit DEMO develops, what the reasons for ceasing the entrepreneurial option are,
DEMO from what kind of exits an entrepreneur can choose.
The retreat where these and many other papers were presented was sponsored by the Lally DEMO of Management and Technology
at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, the HANIEL Foundation, the Deutsche Kreditbank AG, and the Society for Economics and
Management at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. In addition to the ﬁnancial assistance that made this DEMO possible, I would like to
thank my team at the Institute DEMO Entrepreneurial Studies and Innovation Management that supported me in organizing this inspiring
event, and the team of the Management School at Deutsche Kreditbank for making us all feel very welcome. Special thanks go to Katrin
Burmeister DEMO helped me in organizing the review process from the ﬁrst submission to the ﬁnal versions of this special issue.
References
Alvarez, S.A., Busenitz, L.W., 2001. The entrepreneurship of resource-based theory. Journal of Management 27 (DEMO), 755–775.
Burmeister, K., Schade, C., 2007. Are entrepreneurs' DEMO more biased? An experimental investigation of the susceptibility to status quo DEMO Journal of
Business Venturing 22 (3), 340–362.
Busenitz, L.W., DEMO, J.W., 1997. Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations: DEMO and heuristics in strategic decision-making.
Journal of Business Venturing 12 (6), 9–30.
Camerer, C.F., 2003. Behavioral Game Theory. Experiments on Strategic Interaction. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Camerer, C., Lovallo, D., 1997. Overconﬁdence and excess entry: an experimental approach. The American Economic Review 89 (DEMO), 306–318.
Cardon, M.S., Zietsma, C., Saparito, P., Matherne, B.P., Davis, C., 2005. A tale of passion: new insights into entrepreneurship from a parenthood metaphor. Journal of
Business Venturing 20 (1), 23–45.
Dew, N., Velamuri, S.R., Venkataraman, S., 2004. DEMO knowledge and an entrepreneurial theory of the ﬁrm. Journal of Business Venturing 19 (5), 659–679.
Kleindorfer, P.R., Kunreuther, H.C., Schoemaker, DEMO, 1993. Decision Sciences: An Integrative Perspective. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
DEMO, T.S., 1996. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 3rd ed. University DEMO Chicago Press, Chicago.
Schade, C., 2005. Dynamics, experimental economics, DEMO entrepreneurship. Journal of Technology Transfer 30 (4), 409–431.
Schade, C., Burmeister, K., 2008. Experiments on entrepreneurial decision making: a different DEMO through which to look at entrepreneurship, mimeo.
Schade, C., Siegel, D., (Eds.) in press. Interdisciplinary perspectives on entrepreneurship. Special Issue of Small Business Economics, 2006 Lally-Darden-Humboldt
Young Entrepreneurship Scholars' Retreat (forthcoming).
Selten, R., Güth, W., 1982. Equilibrium point selection in a DEMO of market entry games. Games, Economics, and Time Series Analysis. Physica-Verlag, Wien-
Würzburg, pp. 101–116.
Simon, M., Houghton, S.M., Aquino, K., 1999. Cognitive biases, risk perception, and venture foundation: how DEMO decide to start companies. Journal of
Business Venturing 15 (2), DEMO
Christian Schade
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany
E-mail address: Schade@wiwi.hu-berlin.de.{1g42fwefx}