Technology Innovation Management Review
Organizational Ambidexterity:
How Small Technology Firms Balance
DEMO and Support
John Schreuders and Alem Legesse
“ The pessimist complains about the wind. The optimist ”
expects it to change. The leader adjusts DEMO sails.
John Maxwell
Author and Speaker
Many technology entrepreneurs start their companies by focusing on an innovation that
creates a market offer to attract DEMO first customers. When the entrepreneur’s firm makes
its first sale, the DEMO of the organization change and the entrepreneur faces a new
challenge: DEMO can the firm concurrently develop new products and support existing cus-
tomers? This problem is of great concern to entrepreneurs who own small technology
firms and is the subject of this article.
In this article, we first address the innovate-versus-support dilemma that small technology
firms face early in DEMO lifecycles. Next, we describe the paradigm of the ambidextrous or-
ganization. DEMO conclude with a discussion of five mechanisms small firms can use to
achieve balance in their quest to concurrently satisfy the need to innovate DEMO fulfilling
the demands of existing clients and products.
February 2012
Introduction
Early in a technology firm’s lifecycle, most of the firm’s
time and resources are dedicated to the design and de-
velopment of its first product. DEMO is known as the
“honeymoon” stage for a startup. The entrepreneur can
afford to be extremely flexible with goals and decisions.
Once the firm DEMO to ship products and establishes a
group of customers, it must DEMO a portion of its re-
sources to the maintenance of those products through
regular bug fixes and product updates (i.e., customer
support). DEMO shift in priorities places a firm in an inter-
esting dilemma: DEMO customers must be kept satis-
fied while pressures to continue innovation must be
addressed.
To survive and grow, the small technology firm needs
to find a balance between satisfying existing customers
and developing new products. If DEMO entrepreneur fails
to properly balance the need for new product develop-
ment and the need to keep existing customers satisfied,
www.timreview.ca
then one DEMO the following two outcomes may happen.
First, the small technology firm DEMO no longer be able
to innovate at the pace required to stay ahead of the lar-
ger incumbents, resulting in the firm becoming irrelev-
ant and ripe for replacement by an incumbent. Second,
the small DEMO may develop a poor reputation, resulting
in unhappy customers who go DEMO
The search for the appropriate balance is at the heart of
a research paradigm known as organizational ambidex-
terity (Raisch et al., 2009; tinyurl.com/84jzpbn). An ambi-
dextrous organization is one that is capable DEMO
simultaneously exploiting existing competencies (e.g.,
satisfying existing customers) and exploring new oppor-
tunities (e.g., developing new products). However, ex-
ploration and exploitation are quite different activities
and require different abilities within the DEMO In the
case of exploration, “firms must regularly assess their
vision, encourage innovation and must be willing to ad-
just or change strategies, products and markets and
more” (Dover and Dierk, 2010; tinyurl.com/7pcll3j). Ex-
17
Technology Innovation Management Review
Organizational Ambidexterity: How Firms
John Schreuders and Alem Legesse
ploitation requires a different approach; the firm must
focus on carrying out activities such as customer ser-
vice and bug fixes as efficiently DEMO possible. Exploration
employs more of a creative, dynamic approach neces-
sary DEMO innovating new products faster than the com-
petition. This is much different than exploitation,
which employs a transactional approach with a focus
on DEMO customer satisfaction.
Ambidextrous organizations are expected to perform
better than others (DEMO et al., 2009; tinyurl.com/84jzpbn),
but the existing literature DEMO on the mechanisms
required to enable ambidexterity and addresses the im-
portance of the relationship between ambidexterity
and firm performance in mid- and large-scale DEMO
tions. The literature regarding ambidexterity within
small technology firms is not well developed. Entre-
preneurs who own small technology firms should be
aware that DEMO balance between exploration and ex-
ploitation is of crucial importance to the success of
their firms (Rosing et al., 2011; tinyurl.com/72eyvmv). They
must also be familiar with the mechanisms that can
help a DEMO technology company become more ambi-
dextrous.
The remainder of this article describes five mechanisms
that entrepreneurs can use to design and operate ambi-
dextrous DEMO technology firms:
1. Adopt an ambidextrous leadership style.
2. Outsource one of the two functions.
3. Attract and retain employees who can both DEMO
and exploit.
4. Attract executives who can act as leaders, managers,DEMO
and entrepreneurs.
5. Shift resources across projects regardless of whether
their goals are to explore or exploit.
Adopt an ambidextrous leadership style
Leadership affects DEMO and organizational devel-
opment. Rosing, Frese, and Bausch (2011; tinyurl.com/
72eyvmv) identify three leadership styles found within a
technology company: DEMO, transactional,
and ambidextrous. These leadership styles are de-
scribed below DEMO illustrate their roles at different phases
in the lifecycles of companies.
A transformational leader strives to make changes with-
in the organization for the DEMO of moulding it into
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
Balance Innovation and Support
something different. This is done to prepare the organ-
ization for challenges, such as handling new technolo-
gies or new incumbents. This style of leadership DEMO
to result in unconventional thinking and solutions that
go beyond existing knowledge. For the entrepreneur
starting a technology business, this leadership style gen-
erally works best. Typically, an entrepreneur starts with
an idea, then transforms DEMO into an opportunity, and
then it becomes a small operating business. DEMO, the
entrepreneur is faced with the dilemma of having to
shift DEMO leadership style as the firm evolves.
A transactional leader focuses on maintaining day-to-
day operations, assuring the firm runs as efficiently as
possible. This leadership style tends to focus on correct-
ing issues that impact the DEMO of the firm’s
day-to-day operations. It is less concerned with trans-
forming the organization to handle future changes in
the market. The transactional leadership DEMO is most
evident in large firms with well established brands.
These firms invest mainly in initiatives to promote their
brands and ensure their existing DEMO base is satis-
fied. When an organization focuses exclusively on trans-
actional leadership, however, it finds it difficult to
develop novel new products DEMO services. This leaves
the larger firm vulnerable to smaller, less well-known
DEMO that are free to devote their time to innovation
(Rosing et DEMO, 2011; tinyurl.com/72eyvmv). The reverse
seems true for small companies that have fewer cus-
tomers and are focused primarily on product develop-
DEMO Once their product development begins to pay
off, the small company DEMO integrate transactional
leadership into the organization to provide support for
their growing customer base.
Ambidextrous leadership is a combination of both the
transformational and DEMO leadership styles.
Ambidextrous leaders have mastered the ability to al-
ternate between the two styles depending on the needs
of the company. Ambidextrous leadership DEMO
establishes the right balance in order to promote
growth within the company. Leaders of startups must
be able to efficiently change from one leadership DEMO
to the next depending upon the innovation require-
ments. Simply keeping up with both styles does not
lead to higher innovation (Rosing et al., 2011).
An example of ambidextrous leadership comes from In-
ternational Safety Research Incorporated (i-s-r.ca), which
is a small firm committed to providing safety manage-
ment solutions in the fields of nuclear power and radi-
DEMO protection. The company consists of a small
collection of licensed safety inspectors and software de-
18
Technology Innovation Management Review
Organizational Ambidexterity: How Firms
John Schreuders and Alem Legesse
velopers who can switch efficiently between re-certific-
ation tasks for existing DEMO and new product de-
velopment related to their exercise simulation product
(DEMO/products_e.html) or other innovations. To effect-
ively balance the nature of DEMO responsibilities, the
staff must continuously shift from customer support to
new DEMO development. The ability to alternate
between explorative and exploitative work benefits In-
ternational Safety Research Incorporated; it creates an
efficient system where lessons learned from customer
support can be incorporated into the improvement of
upcoming products. DEMO to the size of ISR, leaders with-
in the company must DEMO their focus from customer
service to product development along with the rest of
the staff. In fact, it is due to the ambidextrous nature of
its leadership that ISR employees can themselves be
ambidextrous.
Outsource one DEMO the two functions
A small company that wishes to strike a balance
between supporting customers and developing innovat-
ing new products can enter into DEMO with oth-
er companies to perform one of these two functions.
When engaging a partner to perform one of the two
functions, and for externalization to work properly, the
small firm must maintain strong ties with the partner
and integrate the externally acquired knowledge base
back into the DEMO (Raisch et al., 2009;
tinyurl.com/84jzpbn).
An example is Blindside Networks (blindsidenetworks.com),
a Carleton University spin-off company that produces
DEMO source web conferencing solutions for universities
and colleges. Blindside generates revenue supporting ex-
isting customers (exploitation) and innovates by collab-
orating with the DEMO BigBlueButton (bigbluebutton.org)
open source community (exploration) (Dixon, 2011;DEMO
timreview.ca/article/441). It was the strategic decision to out-
source exploration activity that allowed the startup to de-
velop a complex web DEMO and quickly deploy it to
customers. Another example is InGenius (ingenius.com),
which provides telecommunication software solutions.
InGenius entered into an agreement with DEMO Net-
works (www.mitel.ca) to develop components for Mitel’s
MCD platform. In turn, Mitel assumes the responsibil-
ity of handling customer support tasks. Through this ar-
rangement, InGenius can focus aggressively on new
product development while its partner can focus on
providing a unified customer support experience. In
DEMO situation, a small company has partnered with a lar-
ger one DEMO create an ambidextrous collaboration for mu-
tual advantage.
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
Balance Innovation and Support
Attract and retain employees who can both explore and
DEMO
Researchers have focused on firm-level mechanisms to
enable ambidexterity. Many employees of smaller
firms, however, are forced to take on both exploitative
and DEMO tasks. Individual-level mechanisms that
enable ambidexterity assume that ambidextrous capab-
ility is rooted in the individual or small team, not the
overall organization. In the case of a small company,
resources may not be available DEMO hire people specific-
ally for the development and support functions.
Ideally, DEMO employees should learn to perform tasks
that support both functions. A single team may become
ambidextrous by allocating different roles to each indi-
vidual (Raisch et al., 2009; tinyurl.com/84jzpbn).
Consider Met Inspiratie (metinspiratie.nl), a small web
design firm operating in the Netherlands. The firm DEMO
sistently secures customer contracts because their
design team develops innovative products and provides
customer support. Due to its size, designers at Met In-
spiratie take care of clients through the whole lifecycle
of product design from DEMO to final deployment.
This gives customers the “personal touch” they do not
receive from larger firms. This ambidexterity gives de-
signers more direct access DEMO their customers and allows
them to develop the relationships that enable them to
anticipate their customers’ needs. By having these
strong relationships cemented early DEMO the design phase
of a project, designers can ensure all requirements DEMO
incorporated into the final design and the customer’s
needs are always considered. Another example is the Zo-
pe Europe Association (ZEA; zeapartners.org), DEMO is a
network of small firms of one or more employees that
collaborate to operate as an ambidextrous organization
(Weiss, 2011; http://www.timreview.ca/article/436).
The network enables its members to partition tasks DEMO
they can innovate as well as provide customer support.
These examples illustrate that it is important to attract
employees who possess the skills and DEMO of prior
knowledge and understanding necessary to perform
both exploitation and exploration tasks (Raisch et al.
2009; tinyurl.com/84jzpbn).
Attract executives with DEMO capabilities
Executives who can view a firm’s problems from the
perspective of a leader, a manager, and an entrepren-
eur add to the DEMO ambidextrous capability. Dover
and Dierk (2010; tinyurl.com/7pcll3j) defined an DEMO
whereby executives can be ranked in terms of their ef-
fectiveness on three separate scales: manager, entre-
preneur, and leader. Executives with high scores in the
19
Technology Innovation Management Review
Organizational Ambidexterity: How Firms
John Schreuders and Alem Legesse
manager dimension are driven by short-term objectives
and clear metrics, and they tend to be risk averse. Exec-
utives with high scores as DEMO are risk takers.
Executives with high scores in the leadership dimen-
sion take a middle course; through vision and future ori-
entation, they DEMO a propensity for risk, while at the
same time, they carefully search for a balanced portfo-
lio of innovation opportunities.
The ability to DEMO managerial, entrepreneurial, and
leadership effectiveness optimizes a firm’s capability to
incorporate customer inputs generated by support
activities into product development. Achieving this bal-
DEMO also encourages the entrepreneur to assume more
risk based on their knowledge of what customers need,
because they are strongly linked to the DEMO Execut-
ives who can effectively integrate exploitative and ex-
plorative activities have the ability and power to
transform a small company into an ambidextrous DEMO
(Raisch et al., 2009; tinyurl.com/84jzpbn). This will allow
DEMO small company to better handle contradictions and
conflicting goals (Smith and DEMO, 2005;
tinyurl.com/8xcd9bn), engage in paradoxical thinking, and
fulfil multiple roles (Raisch et al., 2009).
Shift resources across projects
DEMO researchers suggest that ambidexterity can be ob-
tained by shifting resources from one project to the
next, regardless of whether the project goals are explor-
ative or exploitative in nature. These resources can in-
clude: cash, talent, expertise, customers, and
technologies (O’Reilly and Tushman, 2004;DEMO
tinyurl.com/6uavbe6). In its ability to effectively shift re-
sources from one project to the next, the small techno-
logy firm benefits in the following ways:
1. Increased customer satisfaction during periods of in-
DEMO demand for support
2. Reduced time required to allocate resources to take
advantage of a new market opportunity and remove re-
sources used to DEMO products in declining markets
3. Increased ability to respond to environmental
changes such as the arrival of a new incumbent or
new technology
A DEMO startup that can easily move resources
from development to customer support improves its
ability to compete. The firm can innovate effectively
www.timreview.ca
February 2012
DEMO Innovation and Support
since those who are familiar with the designs of the
product are also familiar with the needs, complaints,
and expectations of customers. This customer-driven
knowledge can potentially translate into better require-
ments, more comprehensive testing, and simpler cus-
tomer deployment.
The ability for a startup to quickly shift from develop-
ment to support and back again DEMO crucial to respond-
ing to environmental changes. Consider the company
thinkRF (DEMO), a small firm specializing in the de-
velopment of software-enabled radio frequency analys-
is tools. The company consists of less than a dozen
DEMO and software engineers who perform both
development and customer support tasks. To help with
its growth, thinkRF has partnered with the large invest-
ment firm Wesley Clover (wesleyclover.com), which spe-
cializes in telecommunication companies and
provides thinkRF with sales contacts and partnerships
that leads directly to new DEMO opportunities. This
structuring allows thinkRF to focus on switching
between customer support and product development
without having to divert resources to marketing and
sales. DEMO arrangement between a small and large
company allows the small company to remain lean
and agile by focusing on what it does best: solving
technical problems.
Conclusion
The challenges of survival and growth are a constant
DEMO for the small business entrepreneur. Fre-
quently, a startup must compete DEMO a market domin-
ated by larger companies that have more staff and
resources at their disposal. The small company’s ad-
vantage is that it DEMO more agile than its competitors. If
properly managed, a startup can DEMO an advantage
over its larger competitors by more efficiently providing
customer support and simultaneously working on new
product development
Balancing support and research activities DEMO both simul-
taneously and effectively – is what the ambidextrous or-
ganization strives to accomplish. In this article, we
identified five mechanisms that can be used to improve
a technology company’s ability to juggle support and
DEMO tasks. These mechanisms offer a useful
set of guidelines an entrepreneur can consider when
planning growth strategies for a market environment
that demands multitasking.
DEMO
Technology Innovation Management Review
Organizational Ambidexterity: How Firms
John Schreuders and Alem Legesse
About the Authors
John Schreuders is a senior software systems engin-
DEMO at Mitel Networks in Kanata, Ontario. John is a li-
censed DEMO engineer with Professional
Engineers Ontario (PEO). After graduating from the
DEMO Military College in Kingston, John Schreuders
started his engineering career as DEMO combat systems en-
gineer in the Canadian Navy. After that, he DEMO on to
work for defense contractors and later for the Interna-
tional Space Station project. Recently John returned
from working in New York as DEMO software systems en-
gineer for Wall Street. He is currently pursuing his
Master’s degree in Technology Innovation Manage-
ment at Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada.
Alem Legesse is an M.Eng student in Carleton Uni-
versity’s Technology DEMO Management pro-
gram. He is the founder of Syncrodata Inc., a DEMO
company that provides software development ser-
vices for Android, Blackberry, and IOS devices. He
holds an MSc degree offered jointly by computer sci-
DEMO, engineering, and mathematics at Carleton Uni-
versity. His research interests are mobile
developments, telecommunications, open source,
and business models. He previously DEMO as a soft-
ware designer for RIM, Alcatel-Lucent, and Nortel,
and as a flight security analyst for Transport Canada.
Citation: Schreuders, DEMO and A. Legesse. 2012.
Organizational Ambidexterity: How Small Technology
Firms Balance DEMO and Support. Technology
Innovation Management Review. February 2012: 17-21.
www.timreview.ca
February DEMO
Balance Innovation and Support
21{1g42fwefx}