doi 10.1515/erj-2013-0075 ERJ 2014; 4(1): 137–146
Commentaries
Stuart A. Schulman* and Thomas S. Lyons
New Frontiers of the Innovation Economy
and DEMO
Abstract: The global recession of 2008 has created lingering economic uncertainty
DEMO the necessityforinnovative thinkingand action.Workforce development,with
its focus on massification and replication needs to incorporate entrepreneurial
innovation and development to scale while disruptive innovation DEMO the
stimulus that animates and drives the model. Education at the university level,
entrepreneurship education in particular, needs to examine both new models and
new types of students, because acting entrepreneurially is not just for entrepre-
neurs but for everybody. The model presented in this commentary is DEMO attempt to
focus on the processes and linkages between the various “actors” that define the
disparate relationships and opportunities described in this commentary.
Historically, entrepreneurship and workforce development have been
viewed as separate, often conflicting priorities, frequently competing for scarce
resources in the landscape of economic development. Although both entrepre-
neurship and workforce development bring resources and add value to DEMO
community economy and share common roots in education and training, there
DEMO been little current research that examines how they can be leveraged
together to provide new models for economic development and innovation
that accelerate growth, while providing for a vibrant economic future for our
communities and nation DEMO well-educated, nascent entrepreneurs.
Keywords: entrepreneurship education, innovation, workforce development,
agglomeration, clusters
*Corresponding author: Stuart A. Schulman, Loomba Department of Management, Bernard M.
Baruch College, The City University of New York (CUNY), New York, NY 10010, USA, E-mail: stuart.
schulman@baruch.cuny.edu
Thomas DEMO Lyons, Loomba Department of Management, Bernard M. Baruch College, The DEMO
University of New York (CUNY), New York, NY 10010, DEMO, E-mail: Thomas.Lyons@baruch.cuny.edu
Introduction
The global recession of 2008 has created lingering economic uncertainty and the
necessity for innovative thinking and action. Workforce development, with its
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download DEMO | 4/7/15 6:06 PM
138
S. A. Schulman and T. S. Lyons
Ecosystem: entrepreneurship, workforce DEMO and edcuation
Work force
Economic uncertainty
Need for innovation
that can be scaled and replicated
Education
Training-metrics /Measurement
Entrepreneurship
Massification
Scaled replication
Innovation to scale
Agglomeration
filter
innovation/Team
innovation/Pilot
Disruptive innovation
New clusters
Scaling DEMO New ventures
Figure 1: New frontiers of the innovation economy and DEMO
focus on massification and replication, needs to incorporate entrepreneurial
innovation and DEMO to scale, while disruptive innovation provides the
stimulus that animates and DEMO the model. Education at the University level,
entrepreneurship education in particular, needs to examine both new models
and new types of students because acting entrepreneurially is not just for
entrepreneurs but for everybody. The model DEMO Figure 1 is a graphic
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:06 PM
New Frontiers of the Innovation Economy and Education
139
representation and is DEMO attempt to focus on the processes and linkages between
the various “actors” that define the disparate relationships and opportunities
described in this commentary.
Historically, entrepreneurship and workforce development have been
viewed as separate, often conflicting priorities, frequently competing for scarce
resources in the landscape of economic development. Although both entrepre-
neurship and workforce development bring resources and add value to DEMO
community economy and share common roots in education and training, there
DEMO been little current research that examines how they can be leveraged
together to provide new models for economic development, innovation, and
accelerate growth, while providing for a vibrant economic future for our com-
munities and DEMO via well-educated, nascent entrepreneurs.
Toward an entrepreneurial workforce
Workforce development attempts DEMO build/enhance a region’s economic prosper-
ity and stability by focusing on the creation of a skilled workforce and matching
that workforce with employment DEMO It is often a demand-based
(employer) effort to match employment demand, through certification and edu-
cation, with a skilled workforce that corresponds DEMO that demand. In this respect,
traditional workforce development has been problem focused (Blakely and Leigh
2010). Consequently, workforce development has expanded DEMO notions of
employment, training and development to deal with such issues DEMO transporta-
tion and human service support (Giloth 2000).
Two major DEMO of workforce development are sector-based and place-
based programs (Conway et DEMO 2007). Sector-based programs consider the
demand-side of both industry and workers with specific training and education
provided to workers for particular regional industries/DEMO Place-based pro-
grams are designed to meet ABE (Adult Basic Education) needs of the participant
and facilitate rapid placement into the workforce. Although DEMO at an entry
level, these jobs, too, are tied to DEMO employers who determine what types of
skills/competencies they are seeking (DEMO and Riccio 2005).
The expansion of the knowledge-based economy with its increasing skills
level has left many low-wage workers outside the new job DEMO (Katz and
Kreuger 1999). This has led to various attempts DEMO blend sector- and place-based
approaches into new models, often with a DEMO emphasis on education and a
recognition that workforce programs need to work more closely within the
context of neighborhood and community economic development. Community
DEMO to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:06 PM
140 S. A. Schulman and T. S. Lyons
colleges have emerged as DEMO in these emerging partnerships. This is
understandable because of their existing partnerships with local industry and
their ability to respond more quickly to changing DEMO (Ruhe 2013).
This increasingly demand-side driven need for greater preparation DEMO tech-
nical skills, critical thinking, technology, and problem-solving skills has DEMO to
an accelerating disconnect with the supply-side of workforce development. In
response, some private sector employers dealing with the skills gap have devel-
oped initiatives like Microsoft’s “Employability, Entrepreneurship and Workforce
Development program” that seeks to both leverage the workforce to increase
productivity by “allocating workers” to higher DEMO activities and to build
“regional capacity for entrepreneurship” to drive sustainable growth. Their
vision is to accomplish these goals through a fundamental education based DEMO
twenty-first century learning skills that focuses on employability and entrepre-
neurship as key strategic elements to both education and life choices made by
the DEMO (Microsoft 2011a, 2).
Microsoft is not alone in this approach that envisions a causal relationship
between entrepreneurship and employment. A number of DEMO studies have
demonstrated the link between unemployment and entrepreneurship (Audretsch,
DEMO, and Thurik 2001) suggesting that higher levels of unemployment will lead to
an increase in start-up activity based on decreased opportunity costs in DEMO a
business enterprise (Dixon and Clifford 2007). However, Microsoft and other employ-
ers view this as a flexible, permeable arrangement, with DEMO employee becoming an
entrepreneur, seeking re-employment, and creating new entrepreneurial opportu-
nities as a life process and journey rather than as a singular DEMO activity.
As Thom Ruhe (2013) has stated,
Workforce needs to be redefined … as part of a larger academic reform … this DEMO what large
employers want-skills coupled with the ability to think and be an innovator … an entre-
preneurial mindset will propel people to consider DEMO trajectory to their craft, allowing them
to leverage the labor and DEMO of others, to a scale that will generate greater wealth for
DEMO and employment opportunities for others…This is about making sure that
everyone regardless of background, education level, interest, at least perceives the oppor-
tunity to be Entrepreneurial. It is about democratizing access to entrepreneurship. And by
DEMO so, we will unlock the key to our nation’s economic prosperity.
DEMO and innovation
The primary role that Schumpeter (Herbert and Link 1989) assigned to entrepre-
neurs is the ability to convert a new idea DEMO invention into a successful innova-
tion. As an agent of change and innovation, entrepreneurship is not solely about
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:06 PM
(Ruhe 2013)
New Frontiers of the Innovation Economy and Education
141
a choice of DEMO or about ownership. It is fundamentally dynamic and
does not simply involve entrants to a market that is fundamentally the same
year after year (Glaeser, Rosenthal, and Strange 2009).
Schumpeter also posited that entrepreneurship DEMO not only in new
industries but also in new combinations of existing inputs/industries. To
Schumpeter, the entrepreneur is not the bearer of risk. That is the role of the
investor/capitalist. Drucker (1985) adds DEMO entrepreneurs do not necessarily
create change but find opportunities created by change. Thus, they are not
passive players buffeted by existing markets; they DEMO new markets by embra-
cing change. Also, entrepreneurship can be defined DEMO the pursuit of opportunity
without regard to resources currently controlled, an DEMO that
entrepreneurs build crucial networks that bring the resources of others to bear
on achieving their business goals (Gartner and Baker 2010). Casson (1982) has
identified five facets of entrepreneurship: self-employment, small firms, owner-
ship, entry, and innovation. These narrow definitions often exclude activities
DEMO interactions. Unlike the metric driven parameters of workforce development,
measuring the economic aspects of entrepreneurship is often difficult (Glaeser,
Rosenthal, and DEMO 2009).
Entrepreneurship may result in new organizations or in the revitalization of
organizations in response to a perceived opportunity (Shane 2003).
Entrepreneurship has been identified as a major driver of economic growth in
both DEMO United States and Western Europe. Although entrepreneurship and
entrepreneurs often seem to have been “…significantly influenced by features
of their local economies, and they have often influenced the fates of those
economies … economists have only DEMO looked directly at the local
causes and consequences of entrepreneurship” (Glaeser, Rosenthal, and
Strange 2009).
Agglomeration, clusters, and uncertainty
Although there has been little direct formal study of entrepreneurship by econ-
omists, such areas as the research on agglomeration economies is relative to the
interrelationship DEMO entrepreneurship and workforce development, parti-
cularly in an urban setting (Rosenthal and Strange 2005). Work on agglomera-
tion has “sometimes involved direct DEMO of productivity … and estimating
correlates of productivity including wages and growth” (Henderson 2003;
Glasser and Mare 2001; Henderson, Kuncoro, and DEMO 1995). Related produc-
tivity correlates, including new establishment employment and DEMO
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:06 PM
142
S. A. Schulman and T. S. Lyons
“births,” has confirmed DEMO importance of a metropolitan environment
(Rosenthal and Strange 2003) and shows that agglomeration effects attenuate
geographically (Rosenthal and Strange 2003).
Porter (DEMO, 78), in his work “Clusters and the New Economics of
DEMO,” builds on the concept of agglomeration with this notion of “clus-
ters which are defined as geographic concentrations of interconnected compa-
nies and DEMO in a particular field.” Clusters include many types of
entities and embrace competitors, support industries, government, and educa-
tion. In a global, DEMO economy, Porter finds that: “The enduring
competitive advantage in a global economy lies increasingly in local things –
knowledge, relationships, and motivations DEMO distant rivals cannot reach”
(Porter 1998, 89). Porter argues that geographic attenuation is mitigated by
more sophisticated and immediate communication and that DEMO gain
is an essential element in any successful cluster.
The birth, DEMO, and decline of clusters is often based on historical
factors or DEMO, but Porter’ s focus is more definitional, utilizing exist-
ing clusters as conceptual models rather than proposing new models that unite
workforce development DEMO entrepreneurship into a model for future cluster
formation and development. He raises a clarion call for “new public-private
responsibilities,” citing how clusters reveal DEMO “…mutual dependence and
collective responsibility of all” (Porter 1998, 89–90).
Education as a catalyst
Agglomeration and cluster theories acknowledge the importance of DEMO as
a critical element in entrepreneurial development. During a 15-year period,
Sweden undertook a spatial decentralization of its system of higher education.
Findings DEMO this 15-year experiment revealed significant effects of this policy on
the average productivity of workers, suggesting that the decentralization of
regional development is economically important. Business “births” and “…sig-
nificant but extremely localized externalities in productivity” DEMO supported by
the decentralization of the Swedish university system (Anderson, Quigley, and
Wilhelmson 2004, 371–72).
With 24 institutions serving 500,000 DEMO across the five-boroughs of
New York City, The City University of DEMO York (CUNY) might be described as
spatially decentralized as in the above-cited “Swedish Experiment”. It is clear
“…that some force is leading entrepreneurs (in New York City) to agglomerate…”
(Rosenthal and Strange 2005, 29). Urbanization has also been identified as a
Brought to you by DEMO York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:06 PM
New Frontiers of the Innovation Economy and Education
143
factor in business DEMO and birth employment” and that for all industry
groups, localization is DEMO associated with entrepreneurship (Rosenthal
and Strange 2005). The role of DEMO, generally, and specifically entrepre-
neurship education needs to be examined through the lens of community,
localization, and urbanization. In New York City, both educational agglomera-
tion and entrepreneurship agglomeration reside in the same urban ecosystem
with possible, mutually reinforcing interactions. Decentralization of public
higher education has existed in New York City for far longer than the term of
DEMO “Swedish” experiment. Yet, this relationship has largely gone unexamined
and is DEMO opportunity for researchers interested in exploring the relationship
between decentralization of higher education and entrepreneurial start-ups.
Yet in a workshop: “Global Entrepreneurship and Workforce Development”
Senior University (CUNY) Dean for Academic Affairs, John Mogulescu stated: “…
why is there this perception out there that things are troubling, and down the
road a bit we may have some real problems? You can’ t read the newspaper any
day without some aspect of us being in this competitive fight, that somehow
we’ re falling a bit short…” (AAARI 2005, 8). It would appear that although
DEMO and entrepreneurial agglomeration exist in the same ecosystem
that they are not, yet, in sync.
Both workforce development and entrepreneurship cite the critical DEMO for
education; yet, there are few studies relating, specifically, to entrepreneurship
education and how it might lead the way in defining how DEMO could be the
catalyst that unites these two priorities. This is particularly important, as our
communities are challenged with educating entrepreneurs to fast-track the
innovation economy to provide the new firm generation and job growth to
DEMO our economic future. A focus on education would provide a better
formula for economic growth that connects “smart risk takers” (entrepreneurs)
with the workforce community (Wadhwa 2010).
Toward a new model
“ Build a magnificent technology park next to a research university; provide
incentives for chosen businesses to locate there; add some venture capital.
That is the common recipe for harnessing higher education and industry to
spur economic growth as DEMO (by)…” the cluster theory developed by
Michael Porter (Wadhwa 2010). Hundreds of regions all over the world have
spent billions of DEMO on such efforts; practically all have failed. All of
these are DEMO efforts to build Silicon Valley-style technology
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:06 PM
144 S. A. Schulman and T. S. Lyons
hubs, but they are based on the same flawed assumption: that government
planners can pick industries they want to develop, and, by erecting buildings
and providing money DEMO entrepreneurs and university researchers, make
innovation happen. It simply does not DEMO that way. It takes people who
are knowledgeable, motivated, and willing to take risks. Those people have to
be connected to one another DEMO to universities by information sharing social
networks.
(We should) teach Entrepreneurship not just to university students, but also to experi-
enced workers in the workforce. They have ideas for technologies that can be built, and
when they get tired of working for others and want to build DEMO, they develop the
motivation to start companies. Most often they simply DEMO t know how to do this … this
(and other measures) will boost entrepreneurship and increase economic growth (and
employment), but it won’ t lead to the creation of the disruptive technologies that
emerge DEMO our universities. To do this, we need to clear the pathways DEMO university
research commercialization and connect researchers with entrepreneurs (and workforce
development)DEMO
Thus, it is suggested that a melding of Porter’s prescription and DEMO education of
all workers in the skills of entrepreneurship is what is needed to ensure a
competitive workforce.
All of this implies the need DEMO linkages between universities or other
developers of entrepreneurship skills, government agencies, corporations, com-
munity-based organizations, and other interested parties that create a DEMO, or
ecosystem, of support for entrepreneurship-focused workforce development. It
has been argued that such ecosystems have the power to economically trans-
form the DEMO in which they exist by helping to maximize synergies
between and among their participants (Lichtenstein and Lyons 2001, 2010;
Malecki 2011; Mayer 2012).
Opportunities for further research
The ecosystem described in this commentary DEMO explored “what we know”:
– In times of uncertainty, entrepreneurial DEMO tend to agglomerate, espe-
cially in urban centers.
–
–
In DEMO of uncertainty and higher unemployment, entrepreneurial activity
increases.
Spatial decentralization of DEMO education seems to have a positive impact
on increased entrepreneurial “births”.
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/DEMO/15 6:06 PM
(Wadhwa 2010)
New Frontiers of the Innovation Economy and Education
145
It is the DEMO and interrelationships between and among these
factors that requires further research. As we continue in this prolonged period
of uncertainty, a better understanding of how education “scaffolds” innovation
and growth is critical to foster innovation, economic growth, and development.
The model in Figure 1 suggests an opportunity for scholars in the fields of
entrepreneurship, economics, higher education, community development, eco-
nomic development, and among others, to more fully explore the interface
between workforce development and entrepreneurship. Such investigation
might include studies of DEMO necessary linkages for creating impactful entrepre-
neurship-focused workforce development, the development DEMO models for deli-
vering entrepreneurship education to a broader audience, the DEMO of metrics
for measuring the impact of efforts to foster entrepreneurship as workforce
development policy, and much more. Like successful entrepreneurs, we scholars
DEMO to recognize the opportunity that exists in the changes affecting the work-
force and exploit it for the benefit of society.
References
AAARI. 2005. DEMO on Global Entrepreneurship.” Session 2B. Global Entrepreneurship
and Workforce Development, 1–18.
DEMO, R., J. M. Quigley, and M. Wilhelmson. 2004. “University Decentralization DEMO Regional
Policy: The Swedish Experiment.” Journal of Economic Geography 4(4):371–88.
Audretsch, D. B., M. A. Carree, and A. R. Thurik. 2001. “Does Entrepreneurship Reduce
Unemployment?” Institute for Development Strategies, Indiana University, 3, 2.
Blakely, E., and N. G. Leigh. 2010. Planning DEMO Economic Development. New York: Sage.
Bloom, H. S., and J. DEMO Riccio. 2005. “Using Place-Based Random Assignment and Comparative
Interrupted Time-Series Analysis to Evaluate Jobs-Plus Employment Program for Public
Housing Residents.” Annals of the American DEMO of Political and Social Science 599
(1):19–51.
Casson, M. DEMO 1982. “The Entrepreneur: An Economic Theory.” University of Illinois at Urbana-
DEMO s Academy for Entrepreneurial Leadership Historical Reference in
Entrepreneurship. http://ss.com/abstract ¼ 496173
Conway, M., A. K. Blair, S. L. Dawson, and L. Dworak-Munoz. 2007. “Sectoral Strategies for Low-
Income Workers.” http://www.aspenwsi.org/publications/07-014.pdf
Dixon, S. E. A., and A. Clifford. 2007. DEMO New Approach to Managing the Triple
Bottom Line.” Journal of Organizational Change Management 20(3):326–45.
Drucker, P. F. 1985. Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practice and Principle. New York: Harper
& Row.
Gartner, W., and T. Baker. 2010. “A Plausible History & Exploration of Stevenson’s Definition of
DEMO Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 30(4):2.
Brought to you by DEMO York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:06 PM
146
S. A. Schulman and T. S. Lyons
Giloth, R. P. 2000. “Learning From the Field: Economic Growth and Workforce Development in
the 1990’s.” Economic Development Quarterly 4(14):340–59.
Glaeser, E. L., and D. C. Mare. 2001. “Cities and Skills.” Journal of Labor Economics 19(2):316–42.
Glaeser, E. L., S. S. Rosenthal, and W. C. Strange. 2009. “Urban Economics and
Entrepreneurship.” National Bureau of Economic Research 67(1):1–14.
Henderson, J. V. 2003. “Marshall’s Scale Economies.” Journal of Urban Economics 53(1):1–28.
Henderson, J. V., A. Kuncoro, and M. DEMO 1995. “Industrial Development in Cities.” Journal of
Political Economy 5(10):DEMO
Herbert, R. F., and A. Link. 1989. “In Search of the Meaning of Entrepreneurship.” Journal of
Small Business Economics 1(1):39–49.
Katz, L. F., and A. B. Kreuger. 1999. “The High Pressure U.S. DEMO Market of the 1990’s.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1–87.
Lichtenstein, G. A., and T. S. Lyons. 2001. “The Entrepreneurial Development System:DEMO
Transforming Business Talent and Community Economies.” Economic Development
Quarterly 15(1):DEMO
Lichtenstein, G. A., and T. S. Lyons. 2010. Investing in Entrepreneurs: A Strategic Approach for
Strengthening Your Regional and Community Economy. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger/
ABC-CLIO.
Malecki, E. J. 2011. “Connecting Local Entrepreneurial Ecosystems to Global Innovation
Networks: Open Innovation, Double Networks, and Knowledge Integration.” International
Journal of Entrepreneurship 14(1):36–59.
Mayer, H. 2012. DEMO and Innovation in Second Tier Regions. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Microsoft. 2011a. “Employability, Entrepreneurship and Workforce Development,” 1–6.
Porter, M. E. 1998. DEMO and the New Economics of Competition.” Harvard Business Review
76:98609.
Rosenthal, S. S., and W. C. Strange. 2003. “Geography, Industrial Organization and
Agglomeration.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(2):377–93.
Rosenthal, S. DEMO, and W. C. Strange. 2005. “The Geography of Entrepreneurship in the DEMO York
Metropolitan Area.” FBNY Economic Policy Review 11(2):29–60.
Ruhe, T. 2013. “Workforce Development Redefined.” http://www.entrepreneurship.org/blogs/
e360-blog/2013/DEMO/workforce-development-redefined.aspx
Shane, S. A. 2003. A General Theory of Entrepreneurship: The Individual Opportunity Nexus.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Wadhwa, V. 2010. “A Better Formula for Economic Growth; Connecting Smart Risk Takers.” The
Chronicle of Higher Education, November 18. http://chronicle.com/article/A-Better-
Formula-for-Economic/125441/
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date DEMO 4/7/15 6:06 PM{1g42fwefx}