Schunk, Daniel und Winter, Joachim:
The Relationship Between Risk Attitudes DEMO Heuristics
in Search Tasks: A Laboratory Experiment
Munich Discussion Paper No. DEMO
Department of Economics
University of Munich
Volkswirtschaftliche Fakultät
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Online at http://epub.ub.uni-muenchen.de/1377/
The Relationship Between Risk Attitudes and Heuristics
in Search Tasks: A Laboratory Experiment∗
Daniel Schunk∗∗
University of Mannheim
Joachim Winter†
University of Munich
This DEMO: February 22, 2007
Abstract: Experimental studies of search behavior suggest DEMO individuals stop search-
ing earlier than predicted by the optimal, risk-neutral DEMO rule. Such behavior could
be generated by two diﬀerent classes of decision rules: rules that are optimal conditional
on utility functions departing from risk neutrality, or heuristics derived from limited cog-
nitive processing capacities and satisﬁcing. To discriminate among these two possibilities,
we conduct an experiment that DEMO of a standard search task as well as a lottery
task designed to elicit utility functions. We ﬁnd that search heuristics are not related DEMO
measures of risk aversion, but to measures of loss aversion.
Keywords: search; heuristics; utility function elicitation; risk attitudes; prospect theory
JEL DEMO: D83; C91
∗ The authors would like to thank Daniel Houser, Oliver Kirchkamp, Joerg Oechssler, Robert Sugden,
Martin Weber, Matthias DEMO, and seminar participants at the University of Mannheim, George
Mason University’s ICES, the 2004 meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, the 2004 DEMO
Conference of the European Network for Training in Economics Research (ENTER), as well as the 2004
North American Meeting of the Economics Science Association (ESA) for their comments. Financial
Support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via the Sonderforschungsbereich 504 at
the University of Mannheim is gratefully acknowledged.
∗∗ Corresponding author.
Address : Sonderforschungsbereich 504
University of Mannheim
D-68131 DEMO, Germany
E-mail : dschunk@uni-mannheim.de
Web : www.mea.uni-mannheim.de/daniel-schunk
Fax : +49-621-181-3451
DEMO Address : Department of Economics
University of Munich
D-80539 Munich, Germany
DEMO : winter@lmu.de
E-mail : www.vwl.uni-muenchen.de/ls empwi/Personen/winter/winter.htm
Fax : +49-89-2180-3954
The Relationship Between Risk Attitudes and Heuristics
in Search Tasks: A Laboratory Experiment
1 Introduction
Behavior in search situations receives much attention in various DEMO of economics, such
as labor economics and marketing science.1 But behavior DEMO search tasks is interesting
not only for the analysis of many substantive issues, it has also proven a useful object of
behavioral research in psychology and economics. Search tasks are attractive for experi-
mental studies because DEMO their (superﬁcially) simple structure that masks an underlying
optimization problem that is quite complicated and in most cases cannot be solved in
a DEMO mind but requires numerical methods and a computer. Conceptually, search
tasks DEMO representative of many situations in which one has to decide between committing
resources to an attractive proposition or deferring the decision in the hope DEMO receiving a
better deal.
Price search situations and variations thereof – such as the well-known secretary problem,
in which the decision whether to DEMO or to continue depends only on the relative ranks of
the presented alternatives (e.g., Rapoport and Tversky, 1970; Seale and Rapoport, 1997)
– have been investigated theoretically and empirically by numerous authors, e.g., Stigler
(1961), Braunstein and Schotter (1982), Hey (1981, 1982, 1987), Kogut (1990), Harrison
and Morgan (1990), Schotter and Braunstein (1981), Sonnemans (1998, 2000), and Houser
and Winter (2004). Since individual price search behavior is diﬃcult to examine in the
ﬁeld, research on price search is generally based on experimental studies. The existing
experimental evidence suggests that people are very heterogeneous DEMO their search behavior
and that relatively simple heuristics describe observed behavior better than the optimal
stopping rule. It has been found, though, that DEMO search behavior is nearly optimal
in the sense that their actual earnings are close to the earnings they would have realized
had they followed DEMO optimal strategy. This observation, however, does not indicate that
their stopping rule is necessarily close to the optimal rule – it could also DEMO that the payoﬀ
1 See Eckstein and van den Berg (2007) and Zwick et al. (2003) for reviews of the literature in DEMO
ﬁelds.
to search tasks is not very sensitive to deviations from the optimal DEMO strategy (see
Harrison and Morgan, 1990; Seale and Rapoport, 1997, 2000). Overall, while people seem
to behave as predicted by DEMO when parameters of the search environment change (e.g.,
Schotter and DEMO, 1981), experimental ﬁndings in various search contexts suggest
that individuals DEMO to search too little relative to the optimal strategy (Hey, 1987; Cox
and Oaxaca, 1989; Houser and Winter, 2004; Seale and Rapoport, 2000; Sonnemans,
1998). Cox and Oaxaca suggest that DEMO might be traced back to risk-averse behavior of
the individuals (Cox DEMO Oaxaca, 1989). Using an electronic information board method,
Sonnemans (1998) ﬁnds that diﬀerences in learning behavior of the subjects might also
be responsible for the observation of early stopping.
The existing experimental literature DEMO search behavior is based on the assumption of risk
neutrality. Under risk neutrality, optimal stopping rules can be derived, and experimental
studies typically DEMO that most subjects do not use such rules but rather follow some
heuristic. These heuristics are often sophisticated in the sense that they allow DEMO to
get quite close to the payoﬀs they would have obtained using optimal rules. However, once
one allows for heterogeneity with respect to the individual risk attitudes, the situation
is more complicated: Decision rules that DEMO been treated as heuristics in the literature
could, in fact, be optimal conditional on the individual risk attitude. Consequently,
search behavior that DEMO be explained by the optimal stopping rule derived under risk
neutrality could be generated by two entirely diﬀerent classes of decision rules: (i) rules
that are optimal conditional on the individual utility function or (ii) heuristics that derive,
say, from satisﬁcing or other cognitive processes. DEMO these two possibilities
requires an independent measure of risk attitudes.
The contribution of our paper to the search literature is, therefore, to study DEMO relation
between properties of subjects’ preferences (speciﬁcally, measures of risk attitude) and
decision rules used in search tasks. We do this by presenting subjects not only with a
search task that follows the standard in DEMO literature, but also with a lottery task that
serves to elicit DEMO individual utility functions. In addition, we use a questionnaire to
obtain DEMO psychometric measure of risk attitudes as an independent individual-level source
of information on risk behavior.
2
In section 2, we present the design of our experiment. Section 3 describes our procedures
to draw inferences on subjects’ search behavior and risk DEMO In section 4, we link
these elements and discuss the results DEMO our experiment. Section 5 concludes.
2 Design and Administration of the Experiment
Our experiment consists of three parts (A, B, and C) DEMO were presented to the subjects
in ﬁxed order. Part A of the experiment serves to elicit features of subjects’ preferences,
namely, the shape of their utility functions in the gain and loss domains. Part B DEMO
of a series of repeated price search tasks that is used to identify subjects’ search heuristics.
Part C is a survey instrument developed in DEMO psychology literature to generate a measure
of subjects’ risk behavior. We describe these three parts in turn.
2.1 Parts A: Preferences
Part A builds on a method recently proposed by Abdellaoui (2000). A series of lottery
tasks serve to elicit subjects’ utility and probability weighting functions in DEMO parameter-
free way. In part A, we elicit each subject’s utility DEMO on the gain and loss domain,
using a series of 64 lottery choice questions in total. Four of the lottery questions appear
twice DEMO the lottery elicitation process. This gives us the possibility to investigate
whether subjects behave consistently during the utility elicitation questions, or whether
preference reversals have occurred.2
The experiment used in Part A for the elicitation of DEMO utility function is based
on the construction of “standard sequences of outcomes”, i. e., monetary outcomes that
are equally spaced in terms of DEMO In our design, we use a 5-step bisection procedure
to determine DEMO outcome x1 that makes the subject indiﬀerent between two lotteries
A = (x0 , p; R, 1 −p) and B = (x1 , p; r, 1 −p); where p is set to DEMO/3 and we have 0 ≤ r <
2 In our DEMO, we also elicited each subject’s probability weighting functions for gains and DEMO
through a series of 72 lottery choice questions. Since subjects’ probability weighting functions are not
of interest in this study, we do not discuss results from these additional lottery tasks. The results from
our probability weighting DEMO elicitation are comparable to the results reported by Abdellaoui
(2000); DEMO particular, our estimates of the shape of the probability weighting function DEMO similar to
those obtained by Abdellaoui. The results of the probability weighting function elicitation part of the
experiment can be obtained from the authors DEMO request.
3
R < x0 < x1 . The parameters r, R, and DEMO are held ﬁxed during the whole experiment.
The ﬁrst 5 presented lottery-pairs let us determine the desired x1 that makes the subject
indiﬀerent between DEMO lotteries A and B, see the Appendix for an example of DEMO sequence
of lotteries. The next step of this procedure is to present another 5 pairs of lotteries in
order to determine a value x2 DEMO makes the subject indiﬀerent between the lotteries
(x1 , p; R, 1 − p) and (x2 , p; r, 1 − p). This procedure continues until we have determined
an x6 . DEMO our experiment, we set (in the gain domain) R to DEMO, r to e0, and x0 to
e200. In the loss domain, we use the negative of these values.
Now, assume that preferences DEMO be represented by cumulative prospect theory (CPT).3
Let u(·) denote the utility function on the gain or the loss domain and DEMO w(·) denote the
probability weighting function for the respective domain. DEMO indiﬀerence between two
lotteries implies pairs of equations of the following type:
w(p)u(xi ) + (1 −w(p))u(DEMO) = w(p)u(xi+1) + (1 −w(p))u(r)
w(p)u(xi+1) + (1 −w(p))u(R) = w(p)u(xi+2) + (1 −w(p))DEMO(r)
(1)
(2)
From these two equations follows:
u(xi+1) −u(xi ) = u(xi+2) −u(xi+1)DEMO
(3)
That is, in terms of utility, the trade-oﬀ DEMO xi for xi+1 is equivalent to the trade-oﬀ of xi+1
for xi+2 . This method yields a standard sequence of outcomes, {x0 , x1 , ..., x6}, which is
– by construction – increasing for DEMO and decreasing for losses.4 Note that the range
of monetary outcomes in the elicitation procedure is speciﬁc for each subject, since it
depends on individual decisions.
2.2 Part B: Search Behavior
In part B of the experiment, subjects perform a sequence of search tasks. Each subject’s
goal is to purchase an object which they value at e500. This article is DEMO at inﬁnitely
3 The elicited utility function on gains is, indeed, a von-Neumann-Morgenstern utility function. Equation
(3) holds also under Expected Utility DEMO, as can be found by substituting p for w(p) in equations
(1) and (2).
4 A standard sequence {x0 , x1 , ..., xn} requires the construction of n such indiﬀerences (DEMO , p; R, 1 − p)
and (xi+1, p; r, 1 −p).
4
many locations, and visiting a new location costs e1. At each location, a price is ran-
domly drawn from a known distribution. On the instruction sheet, subjects are informed
graphically and verbally that the price at each location is drawn independently from a
truncated normal distribution with a DEMO of e500, a standard deviation of e10, and
truncation at e460 and e540. The distribution is discretized such that only integer prices
are DEMO
After each new price draw (that is, at each location they visit), subjects are allowed to
recall previously rejected price oﬀers. That DEMO, after each price draw, subjects can stop
and choose any price (location) encountered so far, or they can continue their search at
the incremental cost of another euro. The outcome of each search task DEMO calculated as
the evaluation of the object (e500) minus the price at the chosen location minus the
accumulated search cost.
Note that we DEMO for recall in order to be closer to situations such as price-search in
the internet: Indeed, in real-world situations, individuals can often perform their search
and compare oﬀers as long as they want; at a certain moment, they decide to stop their
search and choose one of the oﬀers that they have come across during their search.
Conceptually, the search problem presented in Sonnemans (1998, 2000) and Schunk (2006)DEMO
is similar to our search task: The number of searches is DEMO, recall is accepted, the
costs of one search action is constant and the price at each location is drawn independently
from a distribution DEMO is known to the searcher. In contrast to our setup, however, the
price oﬀers are drawn from a discrete uniform distribution in Sonnemans’ DEMO on
search. In Hey (1982), the subjects also face an DEMO situation; however they do not
know that the distribution of prices DEMO normal (without truncation).
To ensure that subjects were experienced with DEMO task and comfortable with the computer
interface, and to minimize the DEMO of learning, subjects were allowed to perform an
unlimited number of DEMO search tasks before performing a sequence of 10 or 11 tasks
that determined their payoﬀ for part B of the experiment.5 Finally, after the experiment
was completed, one of these rounds was selected randomly to determine the part B pay-oﬀ.
5 35 subjects played ten search rounds, and the second half, another 33 subjects, played 11 payment-
relevant search DEMO
5
2.3
Part C: Risk Attitudes
The experiment ends with a short computerized questionnaire (part C). This survey in-
strument for assessing risk-taking was developed by Weber et al. (2002). Subjects rate
their behavior with respect to 4 risky activities in the behavioral risk domain of gambling.
DEMO, subjects report how likely it is that they engage in a DEMO gambling-related
activity on a ﬁve-point rating scale ranging from 1 (“Extremely DEMO) to 5 (“Extremely
unlikely”)6.
Risk attitude is generally considered to be domain-speciﬁc in recent psychological litera-
ture (e. g., Bromiley and DEMO, 1992). Based on our questions, we have a psychometric
measure for individual risk attitude in the gambling domain. In our subsequent analy-
DEMO, we correlate these measures with measures of risk attitudes obtained using DEMO lottery
tasks of part A and with behavior in the search tasks observed in part B of the experiment.
2.4 Administration
The study was DEMO in the fall of 2003 in the experimental laboratory of Sonder-
forschungsbereich 504, a research center at the University of Mannheim. In four sessions,
a total of 68 subjects participated in the main study.7 These DEMO were recruited from
the general student population. All experiments were run entirely on computers using
software written by the authors.
All payments were made DEMO subjects had completed all parts of the experiment. For
each subject, DEMO outcome of one of the 10 or 11 payment-relevant search tasks in part B
was selected randomly, and added to or subtracted from a ﬂat e8 show-up fee, depending
on whether it was a gain or a loss. Subjects were told that their total payoﬀ was truncated
at DEMO That is subjects would not suﬀer a loss from the experiment, DEMO would at least
6 Based on subjects’ ratings in the risk domains (i) ﬁnancial, (ii) recreational, (iii) social, (iv)DEMO
health/safety, and (v) ethical., Weber et al. (2002) construct domain-speciﬁc scales of subjects’ risk
attitudes and evaluate the construct validity DEMO the consistency of these scales using standard ap-
proaches. However, for DEMO purpose, only the domain of gambling risk is of interest.
7 DEMO separate group of 5 subjects participated in a pilot study which allowed for ﬁne-tuning of the
parameters of the lottery and search tasks, the adjustment of the software, and optimization of the
experimental protocol.
8 The lowest payoﬀ that was paid in all sessions was e4, so no subject was forgiven any losses.
6
earn e0 from the experiment. Finally, one of the (on average) 17 subjects participating
in each experimental session was randomly selected to play DEMO a real monetary pay-oﬀ
based on his or her choices made in one of the lottery tasks in parts A of the experiment;
DEMO were collected as binary choices between two prospects, i.e. only the DEMO
lottery was played for real pay-oﬀ. Since the outcomes of the lotteries were up to e6000,
we informed the subjects that the randomly DEMO person played for only 1% of the
positive outcomes (i. e., the gains) presented in the lotteries.
3 Inference on Search Heuristics and Risk Attitudes
In this section, we discuss how we use the data from our experiment to draw inferences on
subjects’ preferences (the shape of their utility functions, as revealed in the lottery tasks)
and behavior (the heuristics they use in solving the search task). The last subsection
brieﬂy explains how the psychometric measures of subjects’ risk attitudes are DEMO
3.1 Estimation of the Shape of the Utility Function
As mentioned in section 2.1, the lottery tasks presented in part A of our experiment are
based on those developed by Abdellaoui (2000). He uses his experimental data to estimate
utility functions in the gain and loss domain DEMO well as the corresponding probability
weighting functions nonparametrically. For the purpose of our study, we need to order
subjects according to their risk attitudes. We therefore use a parametric approach and
specify the subjects’ risk attitude DEMO on the functional speciﬁcation of a utility function
with constant absolute risk aversion form (CARA). We estimate the utility function in
the gain and loss domains separately using nonlinear least squares and the data from DEMO
A of the experiment.
We should point out that the procedure we use to elicit the shape of the utility function
(Part A) DEMO on a monetary range of gains and losses that is diﬀerent from the range
considered in the search experiments (Part B). We made this decision on purpose, and
we digress here for a brief discussion of the rationale for this decision. As pointed out by
Wakker and DEMO (1996), the curvature of the utility function is more pronounced DEMO a
7
suﬃciently wide interval of outcomes is investigated. Accordingly, our adaptive method
elicits individuals’ utility functions for monetary outcomes in a wide interval (the size of
which depends on the subjects decisions, see Abdellaoui (2000)) DEMO e-200 or above
e200, respectively. In the search game, where actual payments were made, we had to
reduce the outcome scale between e-40 and e40 because of budget limitations. It may well
be the case DEMO individual risk attitudes are diﬀerent for high and low monetary outcomes.
However, all we need for our empirical analysis is that the rank order of individuals by
the measures of risk attitudes is preserved between the DEMO range for which it
is elicited and the low-outcome range that is relevant for the analysis of behavior in the
search game.9 This is, in our view, a reasonable assumption and, in fact, a corollary of
using a CARA-utility speciﬁcation. Furthermore, using data from high and low outcome
risk elicitation tasks by Holt and Laury (2002), this assumption can be investigated. The
results are supportive, and are presented in section 5 of this paper.
Based on, e. g., Currim and Sarin (1989) and Pennings and Smidts (2000), we assume the
following DEMO speciﬁcation for our CARA-utility function on gains10:
u(x) =
DEMO −e−γ(x−xGmin)
1 −e−γ(xmaxG −xminG
)
(5)
Here, xG
max is the largest elicited value of x in the gain domain (in absolute values), i. e., x6;
xG
min DEMO the smallest elicited x-value on the gain domain, i. e., x0
by xL
max
function in the loss domain, we replace xG and xG
max min
. For obtaining the utility
and xL , respectively, we
min
use the absolute value of the denominator and the numerator DEMO we take the negative
of the right-hand side. For γ = 0 the function is deﬁned to be linear, i. e., the subject DEMO
risk-neutral.
In our speciﬁcation, the coeﬃcients are estimated separately for gains DEMO losses (γ and
δ , respectively). These coeﬃcients characterize each DEMO risk attitude in the sense
9 Accordingly, our empirical analysis will DEMO be based on rank correlations, that is “comparative risk
aversion”.
10 DEMO that another normalized version of the CARA-utility has the following form:
u(x) = 1 −e−γ
x
G
min
−x
xG
max
−xG
min
γ
(4)
Fitting this function yields a signiﬁcantly higher mean relative standard error of the coeﬃcient estimate
and a signiﬁcantly lower coeﬃcient DEMO determination than ﬁtting the functional form in equation (5).
The DEMO conclusions of our analysis remain unchanged when we use the form (DEMO).
8
of an Arrow-Pratt-measure (Pratt, 1964) of risk attitude, that is DEMO(x)/u0(x) = γ for
gains and −u00(x)/DEMO(x) = δ for losses. If γ < 0, the subject has a convex utility function
and is risk-seeking on gains, if γ > 0, the subject is risk-averse, her utility function on
gains DEMO concave.
Furthermore, we calculate an individual-speciﬁc index for loss aversion from DEMO data. Be-
cause subjects generally evaluate their choice options relative to salient reference points,
Tversky and Kahneman propose that individuals process losses diﬀerently DEMO gains
(Tversky and Kahneman, 1992). That is, loss aversion DEMO be considered a psychological
factor, capturing the trade-oﬀ between gain- and DEMO units. Generically, loss aver-
sion is deﬁned by u(x) − u(y) ≤ u(−y) − u(−x) for all x > y ≥ 0 (Schmidt and Traub,
2002).
Based on work by Benartzi and Thaler (1995), Koebberling and Wakker (2005) propose
an index of loss aversion that is – in contrast to DEMO indices discussed in the literature
– invariant to changes in the scale of the utility function, u(·), and it is invariant to scale
transformations of the outcomes. This index is given by
λ = DEMO(0).
u0↓(0)
(6)
Based on Koebberling and DEMO (2005) and our utility elicitation procedure, the index
of loss DEMO has the following form for γ = 0 and δ = 0:
δ·(e−δ·(|xL−xLminL |)))
λ = 1−e−δ·(|xLmax−x |
DEMO(xGG
−xminG )
G
min)
1−e−γ·(xmax−x
min
For γ DEMO 0, we have u0↓(0) = xmaxG −1 xminG , for δ = 0, we have u0↑(0) =
expression (7) DEMO the denominator and numerator, respectively.
1
|xL
max
−xL |
min
(7)
entering
Note that our estimate of individual loss aversion is DEMO on the assumption that the
estimated form of the CARA-utility function of the individual is characteristic for her
utility function over the whole domain, and identically scaled both on gains and on losses11.
11 Our estimates DEMO loss aversion are based on the assumption that the combination of our utility elicita-
tion method and Koebberling and Wakker’s (2005) index for DEMO aversion yields a reasonable overall
estimate of comparative individual loss aversion. Our ﬁndings on psychometric risk attitudes, reported
later, support this claim. We DEMO, however, that methods for the elicitation of an index of
loss aversion that based on mixed lotteries (e. g., Schmidt and Traub, 2002), though also suﬀering from
considerable uncertainty, could also be used in the context of a search experiment; Schunk (2006) uses
9
3.2
Classiﬁcation of Decision Rules Used in the Search Task
The next DEMO of our analysis is to determine, for each subject, the decision rule he or
she uses in the search task. We specify a DEMO set of candidate decision rules, comprised
of the optimal decision rule DEMO several simple heuristics that have been used in the ear-
lier literature (e. g., Hey, 1982; Moon and Martin, 1990; Houser DEMO Winter, 2004) to
describe search behavior. For each subject and each candidate decision rule, we com-
pute the number of stopping decisions that are correctly predicted. We assign to the
subject the decision rule that DEMO the largest fraction of correct predictions, i. e.,
that ﬁts DEMO behavior best. We start this subjection with the derivation of decision
rules both under risk neutrality and without restrictions on individual risk attitude. The
DEMO are based on the assumption of a classical von-Neumann-Morgenstern utility
function which is only deﬁned on monetary gains since our experimental design implies
that DEMO cannot suﬀer a loss from the experiment. For the derivation of the decision
rules, we consider two cases: In the ﬁrst case, the cost of each completed search step are
treated as sunk cost; in the second case, we derive the ﬁnite horizon optimal stopping rule
assuming that subjects do not treat past search cost as sunk costs. Finally, we discuss
the set of alternative heuristics, and describe our classiﬁcation procedure more formally.
Stopping Rules in Search Tasks under Risk Neutrality
Assume that DEMO searcher observes sequentially any number of realizations of a random
variable X which has the distribution function F(·). In our case, F(·) is a discrete trun-
cated normal distribution with mean e500 and standard deviation e10, the truncation
is at e460 and e540. Let the cost of searching a new location be c. Assume that at
some DEMO in the search process, the minimal value that the searcher has DEMO so
far is m, and the searcher wonders whether to continue DEMO or whether to stop the
search. Basic search theory assumes that individuals treat the cost of each search step,
mixed lotteries in an DEMO study on search behavior that uses a diﬀerent design to elicit indi-
vidual preferences. We suggest that further experimental studies investigate the relationship between
DEMO aversion indices derived from mixed lotteries (e. g., Schmidt and Traub, 2002) and indices derived
from outward methods and pure lotteries, such as the method applied in the present paper.
10
once completed, as sunk costs (Lippman and McCall, 1976; Kogut, 1990) and compare
the payoﬀ of one additional search step with the payoﬀ from stopping.12
Then, subjects solve the problem based on a one-step forward-induction strategy and the
expected gain from searching once more before stopping DEMO a search task such as ours,
G(m), is generally given by:13
The
(1 −
G(m) = − [1 DEMO(m)]m−Z
| {zN } |
460
{z
L
}
termF(m)). In this case,N accounts for the case where a value larger thanm remains the minimum price. The termm is found with probabilityL DEMO for the
m
xdF(x) −c + m.
(8)
case where we ﬁnd a lower value than m and calculates the expected DEMO in this case.
After some manipulation, we obtain the following condition DEMO the parameter values of
our search task,
G(460) = DEMO < 0.
(9)
That is, it does not make sense to continue searching if one draws the minimal value of
e460. In DEMO speciﬁcation, the highest price that can be drawn is e540. In DEMO case,
the expected gain from searching at least one more time is always positive (since payoﬀs
cannot become negative), so
G(540) > 0.
(10)
From these properties of G(·), DEMO follows that there exists a unique value at which G(·) DEMO 0.
We denote this value by m∗ and solve equation (8) for m∗ . Straightforward manipulation
shows that the solution to this problem DEMO identical to solving the following problem for
m:
π(500 −m + 8) = (1 −F(m))π(500 −m−c + 8) + Z
m
460 π(500 −x −c + 8)dF(x)(11)
12 Kogut’s (1990) ﬁndings show that a certain proportion of subjects does not treat sunk costs as sunk.
13 Note that DEMO one-step forward induction strategy is identical with the optimal solution of the inﬁnite
horizon problem if the searcher is risk-neutral.
11
Here, π(·) is the payoﬀ-function from the search game and DEMO show-up fee of e8 is
included in this equation, since subjects’ DEMO from the search game is directly linked to
the show-up fee. π(·) has the following form:
π(x) = max{0, x}
(12)
In equation (11), the left-hand side of the DEMO is the payoﬀ from stopping and the
right-hand side denotes the payoﬀ from continuing search. We ﬁnd that the optimal
strategy is to keep DEMO until a value of X less than, or equal to, the optimal value
m∗ has been observed. In our problem, we ﬁnd that m∗ = 490. That is, we have the
following optimal decision rule for a risk-neutral searcher: Stop searching as soon as a
price less than or equal to e490 is found.
Now, consider that subjects do not treat search costs as sunk costs. That is, for their
decision whether to stop or to continue the search, they consider the total beneﬁts and
costs of search; the agent stops searching only if the stopping value is higher than the
continuation value. In this case, subjects would not search for more than 48 steps since
after 48 search DEMO the continuation value from the experiment would deﬁnitely be zero.
It follows that the problem is treated as a ﬁnite horizon problem that is DEMO backwards.
Deﬁne St = {t, m} as the agents’ state vector DEMO making t search steps.
After the agent has stopped searching, she DEMO buy the item and receive a total payoﬀ of:
Π(St ) = max{0, 500 −m−t · c + 8}.
(13)
DEMO, the agent stops searching only if the continuation value of search DEMO lower than the
stopping value. The recursive formulation of the decision problem is therefore:
Jt(St ) = max{Π(St), E[Jt+1(St+1)DEMO
(14)
E(·) represents the mathematical expectations operator, and DEMO expectation is taken with
respect to the distribution of St+1|St . Again, this problem has, at every t, the reservation
price property. The reservation price begins at 490, then starts decaying slowly, reaches
483 DEMO the 24th round and then decays at a rate of about one per round from that point
forward.
12
Stopping Rules in Search Tasks Without Restrictions on Risk Attitudes
The derivations DEMO are based on the assumption of a risk-neutral searcher. Sonnemans
(1998), for example, refers to a model of the form (8) DEMO an optimal stopping rule. Houser
and Winter (2004) refer to a model of the form (14) as an optimal stopping rule. Note,DEMO
however, that it is individually rational to use the risk-neutral optimal DEMO rule only
for risk-neutral subjects. Put diﬀerently, observing a subject that DEMO not follow the
optimal stopping rule derived under risk neutrality does not necessarily imply that his or
her search is not rational.
As a DEMO general case, we therefore consider a searcher with an arbitrary, monotone
utility function u(·). If the searcher ignores sunk cost and DEMO her decisions based on a
one-step forward-looking strategy, the equation that DEMO her reservation price m∗
has the following form, which is an DEMO extension of equation (11)14:
u(500 −m + 8) = (1 −F(m))u(500 −m−c + 8) + Z
m
460 u(500 −x −c + 8)dF(x)(15)
Equation (15) can be solved numerically for the reservation price m∗(DEMO ), given a speciﬁc
price distribution, search costs, and a DEMO function on gains that is characterized entirely
by a parameter η . The problem has the constant reservation price property, which is
reported as a search heuristic that is consistent with the behavior of a reasonable DEMO
of subjects in other studies (e. g., Hey, 1987). DEMO 1 shows the constant reservation
price as a function of the risk-parameter γ in the exponential utility function (5). Note
that the reservation price m∗(η ) is invariant to changes of scale of the DEMO function.
Henceforth, we will refer to rules of this type as DEMO optimal rules, keeping in mind
that this rule is only optimal DEMO on the individual utility function and on the
assumption of a one-step forward strategy that ignores sunk costs.
Analogous to our derivation of the DEMO search rule in the risk-neutral case, we now
consider the case DEMO which subjects do not treat search costs as sunk costs. Again, DEMO
14 Note that this equation does not characterize the optimal solution to the search problem. It gives,
however, the optimal strategy for a searcher with arbitrary risk-attitude who ignores sunk costs and
who uses a DEMO forward induction strategy.
13
have a ﬁnite-horizon problem that is solved using backward induction. After the DEMO
has stopped searching, she will buy the item and receive a DEMO payoﬀ of:
Πu(St ) = max{0, u(500 −m−t DEMO c + 8)}.
(16)
The agent stops searching only DEMO the utility of continuing the search is lower than the
utility from stopping. The recursive formulation of the decision problem is:
u
Jt
DEMO max{Πu(St), E
u
[Jt+1(St+1
)|St]}.
(17)
Again, this problem has, at every t, the reservation price property. The monotonically
falling reservation price for all arbitrary values of γ implies that DEMO agent should not
exercise recall. Figure 2 plots the path of reservation prices, calculated by solving the
dynamic discrete choice problem implied by equation (17) for various risk attitudes γ of
the individual. Henceforth, we will refer to rules of this type as backward optimal rules,
DEMO are optimal conditional on the individual utility function. From our theoretical
deliberations so far we can conclude that – regardless of what type of DEMO rule subjects
use, forward or backward optimal rules – risk averse DEMO should stop their search
earlier, i. e., they have higher reservation prices on average, and risk-seeking subjects
should stop their search later, DEMO is they use lower reservation prices.
Alternative Search Rules
As has been pointed out in the search literature before, and as should have become
clear in the previous sections, computation of the optimal search rule (DEMO under risk
neutrality or without restrictions on the risk attitude) is DEMO demanding task, and it is
unlikely that subjects can perform this DEMO during a search experiment (or in real-life
search situations, for that matter). Most papers in search literature therefore argue that
subjects use DEMO rather than the optimal stopping rule, and there is some evidence
DEMO certain heuristics get subjects close to the pay-oﬀs they could have obtained using
the optimal rule.
We now specify our set of candidate search DEMO that are used in this paper to characterize
behavior in experimental search tasks. In addition to the search rules that have been
derived in DEMO section above, we specify a set of heuristics that have been DEMO in the
14
search literature to characterize behavior in experimental search tasks. These heuristics
are DEMO on experimental work by Hey (1982) and Moon and Martin (DEMO).
The ﬁrst class of these decision rules comprises several “sophisticated” heuristics. These
heuristics share the constant reservation price property. Each rule says that DEMO subject
uses an arbitrary, but constant reservation value r ∈ {480, .., 500}. Subjects behaving
according to this heuristic search until a price quote lower than or equal to the reservation
price is found. We DEMO to this constant reservation type of heuristic as type 1 heuristics.
Note that this heuristic is identical to the forward optimal search rule, see above. Based
on this rule, we attribute to every individual the constant reservation price value that
explains most of her observed search decisions.15
The DEMO class of decision rules that we consider are based on the ﬁnite horizon search
model, i. e., the backward optimal search rules, as speciﬁed above. According to these
search rules, subjects use a reservation price that is a function of the search step t and of
the DEMO risk attitude γ that characterizes the utility function for which the search
rule has been derived. Here, we consider that γ ∈ {−1.0, DEMO, −0.9, ..., +0.95, +1.0}.
We refer to this class of decision rules as type 2 rules. Based on this rule, we attribute
to every individual a value γ search , the risk-attitude coeﬃcient that DEMO best the
i
observed search behavior.
A third class of heuristics is also based on reservation prices that vary over the search
time. Subjects DEMO one of these heuristics stop searching as soon as their payment
exceeds a certain individual threshold (or satisfaction-) level t ∈ {1, .., 20}. Given our
parametrization of the problem, this results in a DEMO price that linearly falls over
time. For obvious reasons, this heuristic DEMO sometimes called the “satisﬁcer heuristic” and
we refer to it as type 3 heuristics.
As type 4 heuristics , we consider the so-called “bounce DEMO, suggested by Moon and
Martin (1990) based on earlier work DEMO Hey (1982). Subjects following the “one-bounce
rule” (heuristic 4a) DEMO at least 2 searches and they stop if a price quote is received larger
15 As is clear from the solution to equation (15), each constant reservation price used in the price search
problem is DEMO with a certain (interval of) value(s) of the individual DEMO risk coeﬃcient γ in
the gain domain. Instead of attributing a constant reservation price to the people, we could as well
attribute the value of γ that corresponds to this constant reservation price.
15
than the previous quote. The “modiﬁed one-bounce rule” (heuristic 4b) is DEMO to the
one-bounce rule, but an agent following this rule stops DEMO if a price quote is received
larger than the previous quote less the search cost.
Finally we consider rules that are based on winning DEMO (type 5 heuristics). Subjects
who follow this type of heuristics DEMO searching if they receive two (heuristic 5a) or
three (heuristic DEMO) consecutive price draws that are below some ﬁxed threshold level p DEMO
{485, .., 500}. That subjects might use these streak-based rules in search situations can be
motivated by results from psychological research on behavior DEMO uncertain environments,
see Rabin (2002).
We should note that DEMO type 4 and 5 heuristics have also been used to describe behavior in
search environments in which the distribution of prices is not known. DEMO our environment,
where subjects know the expected value and variance of the price distribution, using these
rules makes less sense. A priori , we would therefore not expect that these heuristics are
used frequently by DEMO subjects.
Table 1 presents a summary of the 116 candidate decision rules (optimal stopping rule
and heuristics) that we specify for the subsequent DEMO
Classiﬁcation Procedure
Our approach to drawing inferences about search behavior is to determine, for each sub-
ject, the proportion of choices consistent with DEMO decision rule and then to maximize
this proportion over the set of all candidate decision rules. We assume that each subject
follows exactly one DEMO the decision rules in our universe of candidate rules and that he or
she uses the same heuristic in each of the 10 or DEMO pay-oﬀ tasks. This latter assumption
seems reasonable in view of the fact that all subjects are experienced when they begin
the pay-oﬀ tasks.
Formally, our classiﬁcation procedure can be described as follows.16 Each heuristic ci ∈ DEMO,
where C is the set of all search rules described above, is a unique map from subject i’s
information set Sit to her continuation decision dit ∈ {0, 1} : ditci (Sit) → {0, 1}. Now, let
16 Houser and Winter (2004) implement a DEMO classiﬁcation procedure in a completely speciﬁed
maximum-likelihood framework.
16
d∗ denote the observed decision of subject i in period t. Then, we can deﬁne the indicator
function:
Sit ) = 1(d∗
DEMO
i
= dci (Sit))
it
(18)
3.3 Psychometric DEMO
The questionnaire was constructed so that respondents evaluate their likelihood of en-
gaging in an activity of the gambling-domain on a ﬁve-point rating scale DEMO from 1
(“Extremely likely”) to 5 (“Extremely unlikely”). For DEMO subject, we calculate a mea-
sure of risk attitude as the DEMO mean score of the response to the four questions.
4 Results
This section starts with self-contained descriptions of both the results of the utility DEMO
tion elicitation (Part A) and the classiﬁcation of the search behavior (Part B). We continue
with a comparative analysis of our results on preferences and behavior (also including the
psychometric measure of risk attitude).
17
it
c (
X i
it
Let Ti be the number of decisions that we observe for subject i. We attribute to DEMO
subject the heuristic that maximizes the likelihood of being used by that subject:
cˆi = arg max
ci ∈C
T
X
t=1
c (Sit)
X i
it
(19)
As we have motivated by reference to the existing literature, all relevant search heuristics
should be included in our universe of 116 candidate decision rules. Based on our classi-
DEMO procedure, we attribute a decision rule to each subject, i. e., we can classify the
subjects by the decision rules that they use. We can then investigate for each subgroup
and for the whole sample DEMO relationship between the observed search behavior and the
risk preferences of the individuals.
In our experiment, 68 subjects participated in total. Of these 68 subjects, we delete four
subjects from the sample.17 These 4 subjects apparently did not take the utility elicitation
part of the experiment seriously.
The 64 DEMO that we keep in the sample show a preference reversal rate of 21.9% on
gains and 23.4% on losses in the utility function elicitation DEMO of the experiment.18
4.1 Part A: Preferences
In Table 2, we report the standard errors of the nonlinear least squares estimates for the
DEMO coeﬃcients γ and δ . Furthermore, we report the sum of DEMO squared residuals (SSR)
and the coeﬃcient of determination R2 . DEMO see that the standard errors are reasonably
low and that the coeﬃcients of determination are close to 1 for our nonlinear regressions.
The estimation DEMO suggest that the risk coeﬃcients are reliable measures that allow
for a rank-ordering of individuals according to their risk-attitude. Our results support
the hypothesis DEMO diminishing sensitivity for gains and losses if we consider the whole
sample. Similar to Abdellaoui (2000), who uses a diﬀerent measure for the classiﬁcation
of subjects’ risk attitudes, we see a preponderance of risk-averse subjects in the gain
domain, and a preponderance of risk-seeking subjects in the loss domain. Overall, our
results on individual preferences are consistent with the predictions of prospect theory
(Tversky and Kahneman, 1992) and subsequent experimental work based on prospect
theory.
17 Two of these subjects are outliers DEMO terms of the time needed for the completion of the lottery
questions: They needed less than 60 seconds for either the 32 lottery questions on gains or the 32
questions on losses – considerably less than DEMO other participants in the experiment who needed at
least 1 minute 41 seconds. The two other subjects are outliers in terms of the standard DEMO of the
coeﬃcient estimates of the utility function: Their standard errors DEMO the coeﬃcient estimate is more
than one standard deviation larger than the standard errors of coeﬃcient estimates for all the other
subjects, i.e. preference parameters are measured imprecisely. Additionally, these two subjects are the
only ones in the sample that revealed preference reversals on all four consistency check DEMO (see
the section 2.1).
18 The reversal rate is a DEMO for how consistent subjects behave in a certain utility elicitation mech-
anism. Our reversal rate is somewhat higher than the rate in Abdellaoui (2000), who ﬁnds an error
rate of 17.9% on gains and of DEMO on losses. Abdellaoui’s overall error rate, including the probability
weighting function DEMO part of the experiment, is 19%. However, our reversal rate is lower than
that of Camerer (1989), who reports that 26.5% of the subjects reversed preferences.
18
4.2
Part B: Search Behavior
A natural starting point for the investigation of search behavior is to assume that all
subjects use a heuristic DEMO the constant reservation price type, i. e., a type 1 heuristic.
The reservation value that has been attributed to each subject can be DEMO a proxy
for whether subjects tend to be early stoppers or late stoppers: The higher the attributed
reservation price, the earlier subjects stop.
DEMO 3 shows the distribution of reservation prices in the sample of 64 subjects, obtained
under the assumption that each subject follows a constant reservation price decision rule.
We ﬁnd that 55% of the subjects are classiﬁed DEMO “early stoppers”, i. e., their attributed
reservation price is higher than the risk-neutral optimal reservation price of e490. 3% use
the risk-neutral optimal DEMO value and 42% are “late stoppers” with a reservation
price lower than e490. Furthermore, note that if subjects use the risk-neutral optimal
reservation stopping rule with a reservation price of e490, they should stop, on DEMO,
after having seen 5.85 prices. We ﬁnd that the mean number of observed price draws per
round is 5.07. The preponderance of early DEMO relative to the risk neutral constant
reservation price stopping rule conﬁrms results from earlier experimental studies of search
behavior (Hey, 1987; Cox and Oaxaca, 1989; Sonnemans, 1998).
Next, we classify subjects according DEMO the decision rule they use in the search tasks (see
Table DEMO). Figure 4 shows the number of subjects for whom a certain heuristic is a “best”
heuristic (numbers in parentheses indicate the fraction of correctly explained choices for
the particular subjects). We ﬁnd that for DEMO 13% of the subjects, a constant reservation
price heuristic explains behavior DEMO than all other heuristics, for 3% a type 2 rule (the
optimal ﬁnite horizon rule) is better than all others, and for DEMO a satisﬁcer rule (type
3) explains more observations than all other rules. For 84% of all subjects one of the
conditionally optimal rules (type 1 or type 2) is a best decision rule, for DEMO we ﬁnd that
they use one of the optimal rules (type DEMO or type 2) and do not use the satisﬁcer-heuristic
(type 3); in contrast, 37% of the subjects can be termed satisﬁcers – this result is similar
to Sonnemans (1998), who ﬁnds that about one third of the subjects’ behavior is most
19
consistent with a satisﬁcer rule. However, for 47% of the subjects, DEMO cannot distinguish
between the use of a forward or a backward optimal search rule (type 1 or type 2).19
Compared to these ﬁgures, it may be somewhat astonishing that the bounce-rules (the
type 4 DEMO) and the streak-heuristics (type 5 heuristics) perform rather poorly: In
total, only 35.9% of the observed decisions are consistent with the one-bounce rule, 33.6%
are consistent with the modiﬁed one-bounce rule; 38.5% of DEMO decisions are consistent
with a type 5a heuristic, and 39.4% with DEMO type 5b heuristic. However, Hey (1982), who
has proposed the one-bounce rules following individual tape recordings of the subjects,
ﬁnds equally DEMO levels of consistency in a search environment where the price distribution
was unknown.
In summary, heuristics of type 1, type 2, and type 3 do reasonably well in describing
observed behavior. However, for a certain proportion of the subjects, our data do not
discriminate between the usage of type 1 or type 2 or type 3 decision rules.20 As DEMO result
of these ﬁndings, we classify the 64 subjects into 4 DEMO, labelled C1, C2, C3, and
C4, respectively:
C1 DEMO subjects whose observed behavior is explained best by a type 1 heuristic (49
subjects).
C2 All subjects whose observed behavior is explained best by a type 2 heuristic (45
subjects).
C3 All subjects whose observed behavior is explained best by a type 3 heuristic (24
subjects).
19 Both, forward and backward optimal rules, have very similar DEMO price paths that only diﬀer
after a considerable number of search steps, see Figures 1 and 2. Therefore, the reported weak dis-
crimination DEMO both types of rules does not come unexpectedly. Changes in the experimental
design will not improve the discrimination between these two types of rules: (i) A decrease in the
standard deviation of the price distribution DEMO the number of search steps in which forward and
backward rules are identical (for identical parameter γ ). However, a decrease in the price distribution
also leads to fewer search steps per individual (Hey, DEMO), which then complicates discrimination. (ii)
An increase in the DEMO costs per step decreases the number of search steps in which forward and
backward rules are identical (for identical parameter γ ). However, an increase in the search costs also
leads to fewer search steps DEMO individual (Hey, 1987), which, again, complicates discrimination.
20 Technically, the likelihood function is rather ﬂat, although the diﬀerent decision rules DEMO asymptoti-
cally identiﬁed; see the discussion in Houser and Winter (2004).
20
C4 Sub jects whose observed behavior is explained best by a type DEMO or a type 2 heuristic,
but not by a type 3 heuristic (40 subjects).
4.3 The Relationship Between Preference Parameters, Search DEMO, and
Risk Attitudes
The ﬁrst question we investigate is whether there DEMO a relationship between the observed
search behavior and the elicited individual preferences (i. e., the coeﬃcient of risk atti-
tude). From the DEMO considerations above, the hypothesis follows that (at least)
for those subjects that are classiﬁed as users of one of the conditionally optimal DEMO
rules (type 1 or type 2 rules), there exists an DEMO between their risk attitude ob-
served in the utility function elicitation part of the experiment and their behavior in the
search experiment. We also DEMO this type of analysis to the whole sample. That is, we
DEMO assume that all subjects behave according to just one search rule, DEMO a type
1, a type 2 or a type 3 rule. DEMO should ﬁnd for all subjects in the sample that risk averse
subjects generally use a higher reservation price or have a higher value of DEMO search; subjects
classiﬁed as risk seeking should be attributed a lower DEMO price or a lower value of
γ search.
Since the assumption of a normal distribution of the observed individual parameters γ, δ
and λ across subjects is clearly rejected, we base part of our analysis on Spearman rank
correlation coeﬃcients. The signiﬁcance of the Spearman correlations is tested DEMO the
null hypothesis that the two variables under question are independent.
We focus on the key parameters that characterize individual search behavior, the at-
tributed constant reservation price level (RP), the average number of search steps per
search round (AS) and the search coeﬃcient γ search DEMO According to the basic search model
(15), we hypothesize that DEMO at least for subgroup C1 – γ is positively correlated with RP
and negatively correlated with AS. We further hypothesize that at least for DEMO C2,
γ is positively correlated with γ search and negatively correlated with AS. Furthermore,
due to being derived from the same underlying DEMO functional, the attributed con-
stant reservation price (RP) and the DEMO γ search are strongly positively correlated
(Spearman-ρ: 0.946, p-value: 0.00); we should therefore expect the hypothesized correla-
21
tions also for the subgroup C4. Table 3 reports the corresponding Spearman DEMO
coeﬃcients for all subgroups C1 through C4 and the whole sample.
Our data do not reject the hypothesis of independence between γ and the DEMO param-
eters RP, AS, and γ search for all subgroups and the whole sample. The ﬁnding from our
correlation analysis in Table 3 DEMO that the utility function based measures for risk attitude
on gains and losses, do not exhibit any signiﬁcant relationship with individual behavior
in search problems. This holds true regardless of whether we impose the usage of DEMO
speciﬁc type of search rule (e. g., the one-step forward-optimal search rule) to all subjects,
or whether we attribute to each subject the type of rule that describes best her behavior
and then, consequently, only consider the respective subgroups of the sample. To fur-
ther investigate this point, we classify the subjects according to their risk attitude γ as
measured in the utility function elicitation part. t-tests under the assumption DEMO diﬀerent
variances show that our hypothesis motivated above – that risk averse (γ > 0) subjects
generally use higher reservation price levels (RP) than risk-seeking (γ < 0) subjects –
cannot be conﬁrmed: DEMO null hypothesis of equal mean reservation price levels is clearly
not rejected across all subgroups considered. Even stronger: The mean reservation price
of risk seeking subjects is higher than the mean reservation price of risk-averse subjects
DEMO all subgroups and the whole sample.
We now consider the correlation between the psychometric measure for risk attitude in
the gambling domain and search DEMO There is some evidence that people who dislike
taking risks in the gambling domain tend to search less: For C2-subjects, we have a
DEMO of 0.26 (p-value 0.087) and for C4-subjects a Spearman-ρ of 0.29 (p-value
of 0.07) for the correlation between the measure for risk DEMO gambling and the average
number of search steps per round (AS)DEMO
With respect to the relationship between the utility function based risk measures and the
psychometric risk measures , we ﬁnd that apart from the DEMO C4, the loss aversion
parameter does correlate at least marginally with DEMO psychometric measure for risk on
gambling. If we consider the complete sample, we ﬁnd a Spearman ρ of -0.32 and a p-
21 The corresponding Spearman-ρ and p-values for the C1- and C3-group and for the DEMO sample are
0.14 (0.337), 0.06 (0.76) and 0.16 (0.21).
22
value of 0.009 for the correlation between the loss aversion parameter and DEMO psychometric
measure for risk on gambling.22
In summary, our data do DEMO conﬁrm our hypotheses on the relationship between utility
function based measures for risk aversion and search behavior. However, in Table 3 we
do ﬁnd signiﬁcant relationships between the attributed constant reservation price level
(RP) and DEMO loss aversion index λ derived from the utility function, as well DEMO between
the average number of search steps (AS) and the loss aversion index. These correlations
are signiﬁcant or at least marginally signiﬁcant across DEMO subgroups considered. For the
whole sample, we ﬁnd signiﬁcant correlations between DEMO loss aversion index and both,
RP and AS. Across all subgroups, subjects with a higher degree of loss aversion tend
to have a higher attributed reservation price and stop their search earlier. Additionally,
subjects’ DEMO attitude towards risky gambles is related to their loss aversion and to
the average number of search steps that they perform: People who avoid gambles tend to
have a higher degree of loss aversion and they DEMO to stop their search earlier.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
This study combines elements from diﬀerent literatures in experimental and behavioral
economics – a lottery-based DEMO designed to elicit subjects’ individual utility func-
tions (in particular, to estimate an index of risk attitude) and a search experiment designed
to reveal subjects’ decision rules in a search task. These experiments are augmented DEMO a
psychometric survey instrument that generates domain-speciﬁc measures of risk attitudes.
We should ﬁrst point out that the results of each of these components DEMO broadly in line
with earlier results in the literature. In particular, DEMO data from our search experiment
conﬁrm that subjects tend to search less often than predicted by the optimal decision rule
derived under the assumption DEMO risk neutrality. Also, relatively simple heuristics, such
as the constant reservation price heuristic and the satisﬁcer heuristic, describe observed
search behavior very well.
22 The corresponding Spearman-ρ and p-values for the subgroups C1, C2, DEMO, and C4 are -0.31 (0.032),
-0.37 (0.01), -0.38 (0.068), and -0.23 (0.153), respectively.
23
The key question raised in this paper is whether the decision rules DEMO observe in our data
correspond to optimal behavior of risk-averse subjects (DEMO though they are not optimal
in the standard search model under risk neutrality). We therefore relax the assumption
of risk neutrality made in DEMO standard search models. We allow for departures from risk
neutrality and develop optimal decision rules for such preferences. These decision rules
(type 1 and type 2 rules) classify the observed behavior of the largest part of our sample.
However, even the speciﬁcations of the generalized search models with risk aversion do not
seem to be able to describe search behavior DEMO in our experiment fully. Our analysis
rejects the hypothesized relationship between the individual preference parameter γ (the
measure for risk aversion) and various DEMO that characterize the observed search
behavior over various subgroups under consideration.
This result may be disappointing. Since the search problem formally corresponds to a
DEMO lottery task, and since both the lottery-based utility elicitation tasks and
DEMO search tasks were performed in one experimental session, we should expect DEMO
correlation between the parameters of the lottery-based utility function elicitation task
and characteristics of behavior in the search task at the subject level. However, while the
individual risk parameter γ does not correlate with individual search DEMO, we ﬁnd
that the loss aversion parameter λ does correlate with DEMO search behavior across
all subgroups considered. This latter parameter accounts for the fact that individuals
process losses diﬀerently than gains, and is related to the inﬂuential work on individual
preferences by Kahneman and Tversky that led DEMO the development of prospect theory.
Conceptually, our results support other studies (e. g., Camerer, 2005; Kahneman et al.,
1991; Rabin DEMO Thaler, 2001) that have suggested that loss aversion might be a major
factor in observed attitudes towards risk, at least for modest scales.
We conclude this section with a discussion of some restrictions of our DEMO design
and of our analysis. First, a drawback of the procedure DEMO used to elicit the shape of the
utility function is that it operates on a monetary range of gains and losses that is higher
DEMO the range considered in the search experiment. While this separation is helpful
for experimental design and parameter identiﬁcation purposes, it may be the case that
individual risk attitudes are diﬀerent for high and low monetary outcomes. DEMO allow for
24
this possibility, we analyzed our data under the weak assumption that the rank order
of individuals by the relevant measure of risk attitude is DEMO between the high-
outcome range for which it is elicited and the low-outcome range that is relevant for the
analysis of behavior in the DEMO game.23 A less restrictive, but also much more costly,
experimental DEMO would implement both the utility function elicitation procedure and
the search game on the same high payment scale, or on the same low payment scale. The
latter has been implemented in Schunk (2006), using a diﬀerent utility function elicitation
procedure. The ﬁndings support all conclusions drawn in DEMO paper.
Second, the classiﬁcation method used to assign decision rules to DEMO may seem
rather heuristic. For instance, depending on the set of DEMO decision rules, this
procedure may result in over-ﬁtting. In our data, over-ﬁtting is not an issue – we end up
assigning subjects only DEMO three classes of decision rules, and the variation within these
classes (i. e., the constant reservation price assigned to each subject) is DEMO to estimating
other preference parameters from experimental data. A ﬁnal open issue of our analysis
of search behavior is the role of errors in DEMO – in general, allowing for errors
would tend to reduce the DEMO in preference parameters and decision rules. Using
more sophisticated statistical methods for the classiﬁcation of decision rules that allow
for errors, as in Houser and Winter (2004) and Houser et al. (2004), is diﬃcult given
the nature of objective functions in search tasks and unlikely to DEMO substantively
diﬀerent results (Houser and Winter, 2004).
In summary, DEMO study was motivated by the desire to understand search behavior and
its relation to individual preferences, in particular risk attitudes. We have been able
23 In order to investigate the appropriateness if using rank correlations, we conducted a secondary analy-
sis of the data presented by Holt and DEMO (2002). In their experimental study, Holt and Laury elicit
three measures of risk aversion for each subject: two measures in a low-payoﬀ condition as well as one
measure in a high-payoﬀ condition. The latter DEMO payoﬀs that are either 20, 50, or 90 times the
amount of the low payoﬀ condition. They also used both real and hypothetical DEMO
When we re-analyze the data on those 187 subjects that were in a real payoﬀ treatment (i.e. subjects
that earned real money for lottery participation) we ﬁnd a Spearman correlation coeﬃcient of 0.49
(p < DEMO) between the ﬁrst low-payoﬀ risk attitude measure and the high-payoﬀ risk DEMO mea-
sure. For the second low-payoﬀ risk attitude measure and the high-payoﬀ risk attitude, the Spearman
correlation coeﬃcient is 0.61 (p < 0.0000)DEMO Identical signiﬁcance levels are found if we use only those
subjects that were in a hypothetical treatment. We conclude that individual measures of risk DEMO
elicited in low and high payoﬀ situations exhibit a (stable) rank correlation. Further details of our
re-analysis of the Holt and Laury (2002) data are available on request.
25
to replicate results from various previous studies on individual preferences and search
DEMO Our main methodological contribution is to combine experiments on preferences
and search so that correlations at the subject level could be analyzed. We ﬁnd DEMO there
is considerable diﬀerence in the strategies that subjects use to solve the search task. These
diﬀerences, however, do not seem to be DEMO related to individuals’ risk attitude
elicited in lottery experiments. In contrast, DEMO do ﬁnd a relationship between the degree
of loss aversion revealed in the lottery tasks and search behavior. In addition, our results
suggest that a psychometric measure of their attitude towards risky gambles is also related
DEMO observed behavior in the experimental search task.
According to Kahneman’s and Tversky’s prospect theory, the ﬁnding of a correlation
between individual loss aversion and search behavior suggests that reference point eﬀects
play a role when solving DEMO search tasks; subjects apparently do not solve the search
task only DEMO the gain domain, as suggested by classical search theory. Schunk (2006)
constructs and experimentally tests a descriptive model of search behavior that DEMO
for the observed reference points eﬀects in search behavior and ﬁnds results that are in
line with the ﬁndings in this paper. Overall, this model provides a better empirical ﬁt
than the standard model derived under DEMO neutrality or the extensions considered in the
present paper. Testing such models experimentally as well as combining psychometric and
decision-theoretic instruments for predicting behavior DEMO sequential gambles should be the
focus of future research on search behavior in particular and dynamic choice behavior in
general. Furthermore, our ﬁndings are of interest for work in applied search theory, e.g.
consumer and labor search: Here, results on individual search behavior and preferences
might be DEMO as a guide to econometric speciﬁcations that allow for heterogeneity, for
DEMO with respect to individual search duration.
26
References
Ab dellaoui, M. (2000): Parameter-free elicitation of utility and DEMO weighting func-
tions. Management Science, 46(11), 1497–1512.
Benartzi, S. and R. H. Thaler (1995): Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium puzzle.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 73–92.
Braunstein, Y. M. and A. Schotter (1982): Labor market search: An experimental study.
DEMO Inquiry, 20, 133–144.
Bromiley, P. and S. Curley (1992): Individual diﬀerences in risk-taking. John Wiley: New
York.
Camerer, C. F. (1989): An experimental test of several generalized utility theories. Journal
of DEMO and Uncertainty, 2, 61–104.
Camerer, C. F. (2005): Three cheers - psychological, theoretical, empirical - for loss aversion.
Journal of DEMO Research, 42, 129–133.
Cox, J. C. and R. L. Oaxaca (1989): Laboratory experiments with a ﬁnite-horizon job
search model. Journal of DEMO and Uncertainty, 2, 301–330.
Currim, M. and R. K. Sarin (1989): Prospect versus utility. Management Science, 35, 22
–41.
Eckstein, Z. and G. J. van den Berg (2007): Empirical labor search: A survey. Journal of
Econometrics, 136, 531–564.
Harrison, G. W. DEMO P. Morgan (1990): Search intensity in experiments. Economic Jour-
nal, 100, 478–486.
Hey, J. D. (1981): Are optimal search rules reasonable? And vice versa? (And does it matter
anyway?). DEMO of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2, 47–70.
Hey, J. D. (1982): Search for rules for search. Journal of Economic Behavior and DEMO,
3, 65–81.
Hey, J. D. (1987): Still searching. DEMO of Economic Behavior and Organization, 8, 137–
144.
Holt, C. DEMO and S. K. Laury (2002): Risk aversion and incentive eﬀects. DEMO Economic
Review, 92(5), 1644–1655.
Houser, D., M. Keane, and K. McCabe (2004): Behavior in a dynamic decision prob-
lem: An analysis of experimental evidence using a Bayesian type classiﬁcation algorithm.
Econometrica, 72(3), 781–822.
Houser, D. and J. Winter (2004): How do behavioral assumptions aﬀect structural infer-
ence? Evidence from a laboratory experiment. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
22(1), 64–79.
DEMO
Kahneman, D., J. L. Knetsch, and R. H. Thaler (1991): The endowment eﬀect, loss
aversion, and status quo bias: Anomalies. DEMO of Economic Perspectives, 5, 193–206.
Koebberling, V. and P. P. DEMO (2005): An index of loss aversion. Journal of Economic
Theory, forthcoming.
Kogut, C. A. (1990): Consumer search behavior and sunk DEMO Journal of Economic Be-
havior and Organization, 14, 381–392.
Lippman, DEMO A. and J. J. McCall (1976): The economics of job DEMO: A survey. Economic
Inquiry, 14, 155–189.
Moon, P. and A. Martin (1990): Better heuristics for economic search: Experimental and
simulation DEMO Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 3, 175–193.
Pennings, J. M. DEMO and A. Smidts (2000): Assessing the construct validity of risk DEMO
Management Science, 46(10), 1337–1348.
Pratt, J. W. (1964): Risk aversion in the small and in the large. Econometrica, 32, 122–136.
Rabin, M. (2002): Inference by believers in the law DEMO small numbers. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117, 775–816.
Rabin, M. DEMO R. H. Thaler (2001): Anomalies: Risk aversion. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15(1), 219–232.
Rapoport, A. and A. Tversky (1970): Choice behavior in an optimal stopping task. Orga-
nizational Behavior and DEMO Performance, 5, 105–120.
Schmidt, U. and S. Traub (2002): An experimental test of loss aversion. Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 25(3), 233–249.
Schotter, A. and Y. M. Braunstein (1981): DEMO search: An experimental study.
Economic Inquiry, 19, 1–25.
Schunk, D. (2006): Sequential decision behavior with reference-point preferences: Theory and
experimental DEMO University of Mannheim, Working Papers.
Seale, D. A. and A. Rapoport (1997): Sequential decision making with relative ranks: An
experimental investigation DEMO the “secretary problem”. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 69(3), 221–236.
Seale, D. A. and A. Rapoport (2000): Optimal stopping behavior with relative ranks: The
secretary problem with unknown population size. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 13,
391–411.
Sonnemans, J. (1998): Strategies of search. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
35, 309–332.
Sonnemans, J. (2000): Decisions and strategies in a sequential search DEMO Journal of
Economic Psychology, 21, 91–102.
Stigler, G. J. (1961): The economics of information. Journal of Political Economy, 69, 213–
DEMO
28
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1992): Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative repre-
sentation of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, DEMO
Wakker, P. P. and D. Deneﬀe (1996): Eliciting von Neumann-Morgenstern utilities when
probabilities are distorted or unknown. Management Science, 42, 1131–1150.
DEMO, E. U., A.-R. Blais, and N. E. Betz (2002): A domain-speciﬁc risk-attitude scale:
Measuring risk perceptions and risk behaviors. Journal DEMO Behavioral Decision Making, 15(4),
263–290.
Zwick, R., A. Rapoport, A. K. C. Lo, and A. V. Muthukrishnan (2003): Consumer
sequential search: Not enough or too much? Marketing Science, 22(4), 503–519.
29
FIGURES AND TABLES
FIGURE 1
Optimal constant reservation price level depending on DEMO individual risk coefficient γ
500
499
498
497
496
495
494
493
492
491
490
489
488
487
486
485
484
483
482
481
DEMO
Optimal Constant Reservation Price and Risk Coefficient
-0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Gamma
Optimal Reservation Price
FIGURE 2
Optimal reservation price path depending on individual risk coefficient γ
DEMO
495
490
485
480
475
470
465
Optimal Reservation Price Path for Various Risk Coefficients
(Finite Horizon Model)
gamma = -0.5
gamma = -0.3
gamma =-0.1
gamma = 0.00
gamma = 0.1
gamma = 0.3
DEMO = 0.5
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41
Number DEMO Searches
Optimal Reservation Price
480
481
4
82
483
484
485
486
4
87
488
489
DEMO
491
492
493
494
495
496
497
498
499
500
FIGURE 3
Distribution of the constant reservation prices observed in the experiment.
0.14
0.12
DEMO
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
Distribution of Constant Reservation Prices
Constant Reservation Price
Rel. Frequency
TABLE 1
Decision rules for the search problem
Number Description Parameter Values
DEMO
2
3
4a
4b
5a
5b
Constant reservation price heuristic
Stop searching as soon as a price below x € is
found.
Finite horizon DEMO search
Stop searching in search step t as soon as a price
below the reservation price xt,γ €, as specified by
the finite horizon search model, is found.
Satisficer heuristic
Stop searching as soon as the payoff from stopping
exceeds a certain threshold level of x €
DEMO rule
Have at least 2 searches and stop if a price quote is
received larger than the previous quote.
Modified one-bounce rule
Have at DEMO 2 searches and stop if a price quote is
received larger than the previous quote less the
search cost.
Streak-based rule
Stop searching as DEMO as 2 consecutive price draws
that are below some fixed threshold level x € are
received.
Streak-based rule
Stop searching as soon as 3 DEMO price draws
that are below some fixed threshold level x € are
received.
x e {480,…, 500}
γ e {-1.0, -0.95,…,DEMO
+0.95, +1.0}
x e {1,…, 20}
x e {485,…, 500}
x e {485,…, 500}
TABLE 2
Utility function estimation results and risk classification of the individuals.
DEMO function
Gains (γ)
Losses (δ)
Median estimate
Mean R²
Risk averse
subjects
Risk neutral
subjects
Risk seeking
subjects
2.003E-04 2.045E-04
0.9949 DEMO
63% 23%
15% 18%
22% 59%
Group (N)
C1 (49)
C2 (45)
C3 (DEMO)
C4 (54)
All (64)
γ
δ
λ
γ
δ
λ
γ
δ
λ
γ
δ
λ
γ
δ
λ
Preference
DEMO
(Risk on Gains)
(Risk on Losses)
(Loss aversion)DEMO
(Risk on Gains)
(Risk on Losses)
(Loss aversion)DEMO
(Risk on Gains)
(Risk on Losses)
(Loss aversion)DEMO
(Risk on Gains)
(Risk on Losses)
(Loss aversion)DEMO
(Risk on Gains)
(Risk on Losses)
(Loss aversion)DEMO
Constant Reservation Price Average Number of Searches Search coefficient γsearch
Spearman - ρ p-value Spearman - ρ p-value Spearman - ρ p-value
-0.03 0.82 DEMO 0.90 -0.05 0.72
-0.03 0.83 0.14 0.34 -0.06 0.66
0.23 0.12 -0.25 0.08 0.21 0.15
0.02 0.90 0.00 0.99 0.06 0.72
-0.03 0.87 0.11 DEMO -0.02 0.89
0.26 0.08 -0.30 0.04 0.21 0.16
-0.19 0.39 0.34 0.10 -0.12 0.59
-0.25 0.24 0.46 0.02 -0.17 0.43
0.35 0.09 -0.31 0.14 DEMO 0.17
0.03 0.86 -0.18 0.26 0.05 0.76
0.05 0.77 -0.13 0.43 0.03 0.84
0.22 0.16 -0.33 0.04 0.14 0.39
-0.07 0.56 0.09 0.47 -0.03 DEMO
-0.05 0.71 0.14 0.27 -0.44 0.73
0.28 0.02 -0.32 0.01 0.21 0.10
TABLE 3
Correlations between the search parameters (reservation price, average number
DEMO searches, search coefficient γsearch) and the preference parameters (γ, δ, λ) by
subgroup.
TABLE A1
Assessing x1 through bisection. An example of the Abdellaoui (2000) procedure.
Question
number
1
2
3
4
5
6
Alternatives
A = (200, 2/3; 100, 1/3) [200, 1200]
B DEMO (700, 2/3; 0, 1/3)
A = (DEMO, 2/3; 100, 1/3) [700, 1200]
B = (950, 2/3; 0, 1/3)
A = (200, 2/3; 100, 1/3) [700, 950]
B = (820, 2/3; 0, 1/3)
A = (200, 2/3; 100, 1/3) [820, 950]
B = (880, DEMO/3; 0, 1/3)
A = (200, 2/3; 100, 1/3) [880, 950]
B = (910, 2/DEMO; 0, 1/3)
Outcomes (€) Choice
x1 e
A
B
A
A
B
End
x1 = € 200, p = 2/3, r = 0, R = € 100
[880, 910]{1g42fwefx}