Manuscript Information
Journal Acronym
Volume and issue
Author name
Manuscript No. (if
applicable)
TVEC
_A_443939
Venture Capital
Typeset by
KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.
for
DEMO: to be answered by AUTHOR
Dear Author
Please address all the DEMO queries on this page which are clearly identified on the proof for
your convenience.
Thank you for your cooperation
QUERY NO.
QUERY DETAILS
1 DEMO and Korsgaard 1995: please give page numbers.
sankarr 17/11/09 19:25
2008 – Style 2 (B5)
Venture Capital
Vol. 12, No. 0, Month 2010, 1–17
TVEC_A_443939
(DEMO)
RefSty-(F Chicago au-date)
How entrepreneurs-in-residence increase seed investment rates
Jimmy Schwarzkopfa, Moren Levesqueb* and Andrew Maxwellc
aResearch Fellow and Partner, DEMO, Moshav Bnei Zion, Israel; bSchulich School of Business,
York DEMO, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; cBusiness Partnerships, Canadian Innovation
Centre, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
(Accepted 21 October 2009)
This article investigates the role of entrepreneurs-in-residence (EIRs) in closing
the equity gap born by DEMO lack of venture capital investment in early stage
businesses. We conducted interviews with 10 Israeli-based venture capitalists and
four EIRs to identify the mechanisms DEMO actions used by EIRs when operating
in venture capital ﬁrms, and DEMO in funded ventures, that lead to a
greater proportion of funds DEMO to seed investments. The ﬁndings of our
exploratory study suggest that EIRs facilitate investment decisions by acting as
catalysts in the development of the DEMO between the venture capitalist and
the fund-seeking entrepreneur. EIRs can thus prevent some of the problems that
preclude venture success through the nurturing of DEMO relationships with both
fund-seeking entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. Furthermore, ex-ante, during
and ex-post investment, through building these trusted relationships, EIRs act as
DEMO reducers, thus increasing expected return on investments from
early stage ventures. DEMO an attempt to help reduce the equity gap by developing a
better understanding of this key phenomenon, these ﬁndings provide guidance to
rising entrepreneurs as they develop their early stage businesses, to venture
capitalists as they look for investment opportunities, and to governments eager to
increase the rate of seed funding.
Keywords: equity gap; seed funding; venture capital; DEMO;
transaction costs; trust
Introduction
Obtaining venture capital (VC) is DEMO for high growth potential companies, but is
increasingly problematic for seed DEMO due to ‘the economics of the investment
appraisal and monitoring processes’ (DEMO and Harrison 1992, 377). Mason and
Harrison (1995) identify DEMO equity gap attributed to the ‘evaluation and monitoring
costs which must precede and accompany venture capital investments [and] are a
signiﬁcant ﬁxed cost element, which makes it uneconomic for funds to make
investments of less than DEMO £250,000’ (Mason and Harrison 1995, 155). These
costs arise from the practices of venture capitalists (VCs) who incur transaction
expenses DEMO, during and ex-post investment, in order to reduce their perceived
risk in the investment (Van Osnabrugge 2000). Given the ﬁxed nature of these
transaction expenses, they constitute a much higher percentage of the investment
*Corresponding author. Email: mlevesque@schulich.yorku.ca
ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online
 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13691060903435783
http://www.informaworld.com
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
2
J. DEMO et al.
amount in seed funding compared to investments made in later stages of funding
where investments are larger. In this article we explore DEMO entrepreneurs-in-
residence (EIRs) can decrease these costs, reduce the equity DEMO and increase VC
funds that ﬂow into early stage ventures.
EIRs are particularly active in Israel, found in 31% of VC ﬁrms who invest in
seed ventures in the information and communication technology (ICT) sector
(Schwarzkopf 2007). Since 1995, the Israeli economy has had an inﬂow of US$43
billion in ICT investments including US$16 billion of direct VC DEMO (Myre
2005) of which seed ventures represent 8% (Israel Venture DEMO Association
2008). Israeli VCs view the utilization of EIRs in an internship program as a critical
mechanism that allows for these high rates DEMO seed funding compared, for instance,
to the US with only DEMO of VC funds in seed ventures (PWC Moneytree 2008).
Previous DEMO on the role of EIRs has been limited, with only one DEMO study
(Rosenblatt and Thelen 1997) that suggests that an EIR’s role is to both attract more
fund-seeking entrepreneurs and improve the likelihood of DEMO of funded
ventures. However, since there are other mechanisms (such as the recruitment by
VCs of experienced CEOs) that appear to replicate these eﬀects, these explanations
alone are insuﬃcient to explain the higher rates of seed funding (and speciﬁcally how
EIRs reduce the equity gap). This leads to our research questions: What is the role of
the EIR in reducing the transaction costs that cause the equity gap that inhibits DEMO
investments? Speciﬁcally, how does an EIR working with an Israeli VC and the fund-
seeking entrepreneur build a relationship able to reduce each DEMO cost
component normally encountered in VC investment?
We address this question by exploring theoretically and empirically how investors
can reduce their investment risks, especially those born from the relationship risk
introduced by allowing a fund-seeking DEMO to manage a funded venture.
Understanding the nature of the transaction costs introduced into the VC–
entrepreneur relationship allows us to characterize how, through the development
of mutual trust, an EIR can enable the development of a relational contract that
complements the more formal agreement. We adopt a DEMO research method
for this exploratory study and draw conclusions on how the presence of an EIR
inﬂuences the perceptions and behaviors of both VC DEMO fund-seeking entrepreneur.
Our interviews with 10 Israeli-based VCs and four EIRs allow us to identify how
EIRs act as catalysts for investment. We also DEMO data from our interviews to
explain how a VC chooses an EIR who can identify opportunities, overcome VCs’
past investment problems, boost expected DEMO, and who can nurture trusted
relationships with VC partners and the DEMO entrepreneur. Our insights can
be used to explain how EIRs are able to reduce the equity gap and increase the rate
of funding in DEMO ventures.
Reducing investors’ perceived relationship risk
A VC making a seed-investment decision must consider the performance risk and the
relationship risk rooted in two DEMO domains: the former in the competitive
environment, the latter in partners’ cooperation. Performance risk is the likelihood
of achieving expected outcomes, given full cooperation by both partners (Das and
Teng 1996). Relationship risk occurs because the investor must engage an
entrepreneur to manage the enterprise, whose decisions may not always align with
those of the investor (Das and Teng 2001). Relationship risk, also known as agency
Venture Capital
3
risk, has two components (Fama and Jensen 1983): moral hazard, arising when the
two parties have diverging interests; and adverse selection born from information
asymmetry between the two parties. Moral hazard DEMO lead the fund-seeking
entrepreneur to take actions that are beneﬁcial to her/him but detrimental to the VC.
Adverse selection can lead the fund-seeking DEMO to fail to recognize her/his
lack of knowledge, which can DEMO in poor decisions.
To reduce the relationship risk perceived by the VC to an acceptable level, the VC
must achieve a level of conﬁdence in the future behaviors of the entrepreneur.
Typically, the VC accomplishes this by undertaking due diligence on the previous
behaviors of the entrepreneur – DEMO as an indication of future behaviors, and
introducing control clauses into DEMO shareholder agreement (Barney et al. 1994; Fiet
1995; Kaplan and DEMO 2003). However, due diligence and the monitoring of
control clauses DEMO transaction costs, which reduce the expected return of an
investment because DEMO resources are then diverted away from business
development. This reduction in return often reaches the point where the VC’s
expected returns cannot be achieved DEMO in seed investing where these
transaction costs are a relatively high percentage of the investment amount.
Consequently, the potentially good seed-investment opportunity does not take place.
Barney and Hansen (1994) argue that relationship risk can DEMO be reduced by the
development of interpersonal relationships to the point where they can substitute for
costly controls. These relationships require the development of DEMO trust
(Harrison, Dibben, and Mason 1997) that facilitates the development of investor–
entrepreneur relational contracts (Casadesus-Masanell 2004). This suggests that an
alternative model for the relationship between investor and fund-seeking entrepreneur
might rely DEMO on stewardship theory than agency theory (Arthurs and Busenitz
2003). DEMO trust-based relational contracts requires time, which is usually in
short supply DEMO the direct interactions between investor and fund-seeking
entrepreneur. Lewicki and Bunker (DEMO) note the staged nature of such interactions,
suggesting that higher DEMO of trust, known as identiﬁcation-based trust, can only be
reached when each party understands, appreciates and anticipates the other’s wants.
As Flores and Solomon (1998) note, trust development is slow, starting from an
DEMO position created by each party’s initial trust perception of the other based on
their predisposition and initial impression, which, as argued in Shepherd DEMO
Zacharakis (2001), is then modiﬁed over time by the reciprocal DEMO of trusting and
trustworthy behaviors from both parties. In the case of the investment decision, time-
constrained VCs do not have the patience to develop such relationships, instead
choosing to rely on the introduction of controls and their associated costs.
We elaborate on the various cost components introduced DEMO this traditional risk
mitigation strategy using transaction cost economics theory, as DEMO in Table 1.
Williamson (1975) identiﬁes three types of transaction costs that reduce market
eﬃciencies and prevent otherwise worthwhile transactions from being completed: ex-
ante, negotiation and ex-post. Ex-ante costs are incurred before the transaction is
completed, and include those associated with the identiﬁcation of high potential
opportunities and the assessment and selection of opportunities that meet the
investment DEMO of the VC. Negotiation costs are incurred during the investor–
entrepreneur interactions and include signiﬁcant information gathering and
veriﬁcation, as well as structuring contracts to reduce the likelihood of future risks
associated with moral hazard or DEMO selection. Ex-post costs are incurred
subsequent to the investment and include ongoing monitoring of behaviors and
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
DEMO
145
Table 1. Transaction cost components and impact of an EIR.
Investment
Stage
DEMO (before deal) Identiﬁcation Attract interesting opportunities
(often through networks)
DEMO Review of business plan –
decision to proceed
Contracting (during deal) Negotiation Extensive information
gathering and contract
structuring
Diligence Information veriﬁcation and
ﬁnalization DEMO contract
Controlling (after deal) Monitoring Ongoing investment of
time as needed
Enforcement Hands-on control activities
of entrepreneur
Transaction cost
component Nature of activity DEMO Likely impact of an EIR
Sapienza and
Korsgaard (1995)
MacMillan, Kulow,
and Khoylian (1989)
Fried and Hisrich (1994) EIR’s reputation encourages
entrepreneurs to approach VC
Harrison, Dibben, and EIR’s knowledge/DEMO
Mason (1997) facilitates the selection process
Rosman and O’Neill (1993) EIR’s relationships reduces
information asymmetry and
likelihood of moral hazard
Lawson, Jog, and Anticipated incentive alignment
Riding (1991) reduces the need to verify each
piece of information
Relational contracts and alignment
of incentives reduce the DEMO
for monitoring
EIR’s role in venture reduces the
need for additional resources to
control the entrepreneur
4
J. Schwarzkopf et al.
150
155
160
DEMO
170
175
180
185
190
195
Venture Capital
5
performance against milestones as well as enforcement costs if DEMO Ex-post
costs are typically the largest transaction cost component because they continue for
the life of the investment. When evaluating an investment opportunity, the VC views
all of these transaction costs as reducing perceived relationship risk, but also
reducing expected ROI. As argued by Shepherd, Armstrong, and DEMO (2005),
balancing these costs against the VC’s time (ex-ante, during negotiations, and ex-
post) is key, especially considering their resource constraints and the fact that much
of the eﬀort allocated ex-ante is DEMO with ventures that become part of their
portfolio.
Mason and Harrison (DEMO) identify an alternative approach to introducing
costly control clauses to manage DEMO risk that involves a trusted third party,
helping fund-seeking entrepreneurs understand what VCs are looking for. The role
of this third party can DEMO even greater impact if they have a good reputation and
their incentives are aligned with the venture’s long-term success (Pollock, Porac, and
Wade 2004). We suggest that this third party, in the form of an EIR, enables the
development of a relationship contract, can reduce DEMO component of the
transaction cost (due to that EIR’s likely impact DEMO each cost component, as
highlighted in Table 1), and can DEMO the rates of seed funding. Previous research
on the role of EIRs has been limited and tended to either record individual success
stories or DEMO the value of the EIR as increasing the number of opportunities
presented to their host VC (Rosenblatt and Thelen 1997). We propose that the role
of the EIR is much more fundamental to relationship development, and that EIRs
make possible seed-investment decisions that otherwise might not happen DEMO to the
perceived high relationship risk.
The role of EIRs
EIRs are recruited by a VC and paid a salary during their internship, which typically
lasts between 12 and 18 months. They are ‘high status’ individuals (Baron and
Markman 2000) with an outstanding record of accomplishment as either an
entrepreneur or a technology innovator. They are recruited to increase the DEMO of
opportunities presented to the VC and to enhance the long-term success of the
ventures that are funded. During their internship, they develop strong personal
relationships with VC partners and are exposed to the VC’s networks, resources and
tools. This enables the EIRs to identify emerging market segments DEMO speciﬁc
business opportunities and resources that may be useful to future funded ventures. In
addition, EIRs often utilize their expertise to provide direct assistance to VC
portfolio ﬁrms facing speciﬁc challenges. In developing investment opportunities,
DEMO EIRs develop their own ideas from scratch, while others work with DEMO
entrepreneurs seeking startup ﬁnance. In both cases, the EIR plays a DEMO in the
investment process before and after the venture is funded.
The speciﬁc role played by an EIR varies depending on their background or
DEMO Also, before becoming directly involved with a speciﬁc opportunity, EIRs
are likely to ﬁrst work inside the VC ﬁrm where they develop strong DEMO
relationships with VC partners while attracting opportunities and mentoring fund-
seeking entrepreneurs. The relationship the EIR develops with the fund-seeking
entrepreneur and their anticipated DEMO in the venture, post-funding,
facilitates a positive investment decision, given the existing relationship the EIR has
with the VC. This trust-based relationship DEMO centered on the development of two
200
205
210
215
220
225
230
235
240
6
J. Schwarzkopf et al.
250-
255
260
265
270
275
280
DEMO
290
types of trust (Das and Teng 1996): goodwill trust DEMO based on the alignment of
intention between two parties wishing to accomplish the same goals fostered when
both parties share the same values and DEMO; and competence trust – based on the
ability to accomplish certain DEMO Goodwill trust and competence trust develop by
the trustor examining the previous performance of the trustee, often based on the
EIR’s reputation and past relationships with investors.
Further, when an EIR elects to join the fund-seeking entrepreneur and become
part of the venture’s management team, the VC’s conﬁdence in the longer-term
performance of the venture is increased. Jacobius (2004) DEMO on evidence from
the VC community that the presence of an EIR in a funded venture is likely to have a
direct positive impact DEMO the value of the company at the time of a liquidity event.
EIRs’ long-term role in supporting the aligned interests of all three parties DEMO
enhanced by their equity participation in the venture and their desire to maintain
their reputation. EIRs’ behaviors and roles are explored though our interview-based
DEMO method described next.
Research method and analysis
Our exploratory research was designed to determine how speciﬁc mechanisms and
actions used by EIRs in VC DEMO and seed ventures can explain the relatively high
proportion of Israeli VC seed investments. Speciﬁcally, we wanted to understand
how the presence of an EIR in the investment decision process aﬀects the behaviors
and perceptions of DEMO entrepreneur seeking funding and, more importantly, the VC.
We elected to use a qualitative approach, interviewing key players in a semi-
structured format because it permitted us to determine how EIRs operate and what
the DEMO are of their presence. Semi-structured interviews allowed us to generate
useful information to address questions such as how the roles of EIRs changed
before, during and subsequent to the VC’s investment decision. This approach also
enabled DEMO to probe VCs’ perceptions of highly subjective factors, such as the DEMO
importance of the EIR’s reputation.1
We selected 14 sample subjects through a criterion-based process, a strategy in
which particular settings, persons or activities DEMO selected to provide information
that cannot be as easily obtained from random sampling (Miles and Huberman
1994). We selected the subjects from 57 VC ﬁrms operating in the Dan Valley region
of Israel, investing in ICT seed ventures, and operating EIR internship programs.
These ﬁrms were chosen to encompass a variety of VC sizes (in capital) and we DEMO
to interview the primary decision makers (CEOs) of the ﬁrst 10 VC ﬁrms who were
available. While the number of VCs interviewed was DEMO, our sampled VCs
employed 36 EIRs, had 204 portfolio startup/seed ventures, and raised 41% of the
Israeli VC funds in the two years before our research. Their perspectives were based
on a great deal DEMO experience with EIRs and we believe they are representative of the
Israeli VC industry. Five were satellite oﬃces of Silicon Valley VCs in Israel DEMO ﬁve
were locally owned VC ﬁrms. Our investors were predominantly male (DEMO) in their
50s with extensive managerial experience; 75% of those we interviewed were repeat
entrepreneurs. They all lived in the central region of DEMO, had served in the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) and were DEMO competent. Our focus on VCs’ views
of EIRs was motivated by our desire to understand how the presence of an EIR
aﬀected the VCs’ DEMO of relationship risk and their investment decision-
making process. Table 2 summarizes our data on VCs.
Table 2. Data on VCs.
Interviewee Local
Fund
size
Number of
seed DEMO
(2000–04)
Number
of EIRs
%of
EIRs
receiving
investment
High status
DEMO
Previously an
entrepreneur
Thinks EIRs
are a good idea?
Will start an
EIR program
in 2006?
1 Yes Small 16 3 100 DEMO management Yes Yes Yes
2 No Small 13 1 100 Management Yes Yes Yes
3 No Medium 24 5 40 Technology management Yes Yes DEMO
4 No Medium 20 0 0 Technology management Yes Yes Yes
5 Yes Small 9 0 0 Technology management Yes No No
6 Yes DEMO 9 0 0 Technology management Yes No Yes
7 Yes Medium 18 8 50 Technology management Yes Yes Yes
8 No Large 32 2 DEMO Management No Yes Yes
9 No Large 40 10 80 Management Yes Yes Yes
10 Yes Small 15 4 50 Management No Yes Yes
DEMO Capital
7
295
300
305
310
315
320
325
330
335
340
345
350
355
360
365
370
375
380
385
390
8
J. DEMO et al.
All selected EIRs were associated with ﬁrms where the VC had previously agreed
to be interviewed, ensuring that we would gather information on relationships
between VCs and EIRs from both perspectives to better understand DEMO Our EIRs
included two in the resident phase and two who had ‘graduated’ with ventures that
had received funding during the previous year. While DEMO the EIRs interviewed were
in their 30s, they all had similar DEMO to the investors and had strong ties
within a relatively small and interconnected community.
Our semi-structured interviews, in English, lasted about 90 minutes DEMO took
place during July and August 2005 in the interviewees’ oﬃces. The interviews were
taped and transcribed for analysis, increasing the quality of the data that could be
extracted while ensuring participant conﬁdentiality. As highlighted in DEMO 3, the
questions focused on the operating practices and perceptions of DEMO internship
programs, the challenges of seed investing, and experiences with overcoming seed-
funding barriers with the need to consider transaction costs. Speciﬁc attention DEMO
paid to gathering information about the constructs we had identiﬁed in our
background research, such as the display of goodwill and competence trust. We
gathered information on the importance of reputations of all parties and how DEMO
various relationships between them evolved over time. The information we obtained
also provided insights on how the presence of an EIR aﬀected the need DEMO additional
resources subsequent to funding.
Once we had conducted the interviews and transcribed the data, we analyzed the
content through multiple iterations, on DEMO occasion looking to explore in depth a
diﬀerent set of factors. Our initial analysis was based on factors from previous
research, for instance about the role of the EIR and the nature of trust development.
Subsequent DEMO was based on attempting a more detailed understanding of
factors observed in an earlier stage of our analysis. We used a simpliﬁed coding
system DEMO a spreadsheet to gather, sort and record the factors we were DEMO
The initial analysis focused on extracting background information about the VC’s
prior experience with EIRs (persons and programs), their involvement in formal
internship programs, and how they funded such programs. We also determined if the
Table 3. Outline of structured survey questions.
Factor discussed Details
VC ﬁrm DEMO Structure, size
History, industries
Exits
Seed investments, relationship with angel DEMO
Personal questions to interviewee IDF experience: intelligence, computer, combat
Experience: technological, managerial
EIR program History
Unique features
Success
Lessons learned
About EIRs IDF experience, other experience
Knowledge: technology, software, hardware
Education
Market, industry
Management experience, investor experience
EIR-based venture characteristics Nature of relationship, DEMO of trust
Venture Capital
9
VC planned to continue with these programs and whether DEMO not they would
recommend them to others. In our second iteration, DEMO gathered speciﬁc data on
how the relationships between EIRs and VCs developed over time. Speciﬁcally, we
assessed whether this was more of a function of the prior reputation of each party
and the common background factors DEMO if it was more closely linked to the actual
experiences of each party during the interactions that occurred as the relationship
developed.
In the DEMO iteration, we looked for evidence of increasing relationship
complexity, that is, how the complex and time-dependent relationships between all
three parties developed. Our focus was to understand how the EIR inﬂuenced the
relationship between the DEMO and the fund-seeking entrepreneur and how this
aﬀected the investment decision. Based on our understanding of the transaction cost
components typically introduced during the DEMO to reduce relationship risk,
we speciﬁcally looked for evidence of speciﬁc types of costs and how the presence of
the EIR eliminated the DEMO for these costs to be incurred. This led to our ﬁnal
analysis, which focused on how the development of the trusted interpersonal
relationships between the three parties facilitated the actual VC investment decision,
to provide DEMO insights to answer our research question.
EIRs as catalysts for seed investments
The VCs noted the importance of EIRs in facilitating a positive investment DEMO
by acting as catalysts in the development of the relationship between the VC and the
fund-seeking entrepreneur and increasing the long-term performance of the DEMO
They noted that the presence of the EIR could prevent the occurrence of problems
with invested companies and increase the likelihood of positive investment DEMO
for VCs, fund-seeking entrepreneurs and the EIRs themselves. In addition, the EIRs’
ability to build trusted relationships with both fund-seeking entrepreneur and VC
DEMO each component of the transaction cost, especially the need for ongoing
DEMO and enforcement costs. Practical insights can be derived from our
interviews to highlight the catalytic function of EIRs and consequently the
characteristics VCs looked DEMO when recruiting an EIR.
EIRs could have prevented VCs’ past investment problems
VCs were keen to learn from their previous mistakes and identiﬁed a DEMO of
problems in previous funded ventures, as shown in Table 4. DEMO believed the
presence of an EIR inside these ventures would have overcome many problems that
prevented venture success. In most cases, these problems created relationship risk
that could have been prevented by building higher levels of DEMO, which required
building trust eﬀectively through the involvement of an EIR. DEMO one VC suggested,
‘people need to have the experience of working together, know how they think, how
they work . . . DEMO there is a very high value to that trust’.
EIRs boost expected returns
VCs suggested that the primary beneﬁt of including an EIR in DEMO investment
decision was based on her/his ability to increase the expected value of the funded
venture, based on their knowledge and experience. Quoting one interviewee,
395
400
405
410
415
420
425
430
435
DEMO
445
450
455
460
465
470
475
480
485
10
J. Schwarzkopf DEMO al.
Table 4. Reasons and explanations for venture failures.
Reasons for failures Explanations by our interviewed VCs
Entrepreneurial team in-ﬁghting VCs reported that this DEMO because they did
and eventual inability to perform not make enough eﬀort (during due diligence) to
ensure the team was of similar backgrounds DEMO/
or had mutual interests. It is quite common for
VCs today to change parts of the team as a
condition for investment. Our DEMO believed that
common backgrounds helped to ensure more
goodwill trust among team members.
Poor international marketing and sales VCs noted that they look for DEMO or experienced
entrepreneurs with international marketing and
sales experience, even if DEMO ﬁrst time around they
were not successful. By including marketing/sales
prowess as part of what constitutes competence
trust, the risk of failure is reduced.
Entrepreneur’s inability to let VCs reported that the most important characteristic
DEMO and start anew they look for in an entrepreneur is the ability to
understand and trust product changes dictated by
the board. VCs see DEMO congruence as fueling the
goodwill trust that motivates EIRs to accept their
decisions.
‘most entrepreneurs do not have the experience . . . [that] DEMO are expected to
have . . . to enter into the market, build the right company [and] be successful
outside of Israel’. While VCs were often recruited because of their speciﬁc
experience and knowledge, softer characteristics like trust were not as obvious
recruitment criteria.
EIRs attract high-potential opportunities
DEMO also noted that the EIRs were able to help them attract high-potential
opportunities, speciﬁcally ones that ﬁt with the VC’s investment preferences. This
was primarily a function of the industry’s perception of the EIR as an DEMO
with a ‘high status’ reputation, reinforced by their benevolent behaviors when
DEMO the fund-seeking entrepreneur for their meetings with the VC.
EIRs nurture trusting relationships
VCs highlighted the development of a ‘referred-trust’ relationship whereby a trusted
DEMO between them and EIRs and between EIRs and fund-seeking
entrepreneurs created higher levels of trust between VCs and entrepreneurs. The
need to develop this DEMO relationship strengthened the VCs’ position on the
importance of trust-building ability in recruiting EIRs. A VC noted that ‘you can
talk to them [EIRs], you can evaluate their personality, their vision, their ability to
execute DEMO take risk’. The EIR’s ability to establish trusted relationships over time
with partners was viewed as being key to the long-term success of the DEMO VCs
acknowledged both aspects of a trust-based relationship: goodwill trust and
DEMO trust. They noted that competence trust was easier to assess, while
DEMO trust required time to develop. VCs understood that the EIR’s ability to
Venture Capital
11
develop a trusted relationship with them before the investment DEMO the VC suﬃcient
conﬁdence to overcome perceived relationship risk and hence invest. As one VC
noted, ‘you trust . . . EIRs one hundred percent, one thousand percent, day and
night’.
VCs also identiﬁed how DEMO determined goodwill and competence trust when
selecting and recruiting EIRs based on their prior record of performance. VCs
acquired information from third parties, either whom they knew or from the EIR’s
reputation in a relatively small DEMO These third parties included VCs’
personal networks, investors in previous EIR DEMO or from ventures with whom
the EIR had established relationships. VCs noted that goodwill trust, seen as an
alignment of intention between two parties (i.e. both parties had the same goals)
could only happen as the relationship evolved over time, although it was facilitated
by the shared incentive of equity participation. As articulated by a VC, ‘we are
getting into this process of working together, I like his [the EIR] ideas . . . his ideas
ﬁt my own way of doing business DEMO they are also good’. Given the diﬃculty
associated with determining goodwill trust, VCs were more inclined to start a
relationship when there was a high level of competence trust as opposed to
goodwill trust. VCs also DEMO to build trust with fund-seeking entrepreneurs
using similar trust-building practices. VCs viewed positively any evidence that
EIRs worked well within a controlled environment and DEMO minimal
monitoring to ensure compliance, while the need to enforce monitoring DEMO
was seen negatively. This initial assessment then became the anchor point for the
VC’s own perception of the EIR’s trustworthiness, which was modiﬁed over time
based on direct experience.
EIRs as transaction-cost reducers
Relationship risk is DEMO to be very high in the early stage of ventures where
inexperienced entrepreneurs seeking funding have had limited time to build a
reputation or DEMO history. As catalysts for seed investments, EIRs were able
to reduce DEMO perceived relationship risk and reduce the transaction costs associated
with the introduction of risk-reducing control mechanisms. The VC developed a
trusted resource, the EIR, who could be deployed when a seed-investment
opportunity arose and the VC had insuﬃcient time to build the required level of
trust with the DEMO entrepreneur. In further investigating the mechanisms
and actions that EIRs used when operating in Israeli VC ﬁrms, we found they
reduced each of the transaction cost components identiﬁed as contributing to the
equity gap. We now DEMO how the EIRs reduce each of the six components of the
transaction cost.
EIRs reduce deal identiﬁcation costs
Part of the EIR’s mandate was DEMO engage with local communities to identify
potential investment opportunities and encourage fund-seeking entrepreneurs to
contact the VC with whom that EIR was associated. A DEMO of
entrepreneurs’ increased awareness of the VC and a more favorable view of the
VC, brought about by the EIR, increased the number DEMO entrepreneurs applying for
funding. The association of an EIR with a VC thus encouraged more early stage
ventures to seek ﬁnancing from that VC, although we found that the actual number
495-
500
505
510
515
DEMO
525
530
535
540
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
12
J. DEMO et al.
of ventures depended on the EIR’s reputation. The presence of an EIR thus resulted
in reducing the deal identiﬁcation component of ex-ante DEMO
EIRs reduce deal selection costs
EIRs engaged directly with fund-seeking entrepreneurs to help raise their
likelihood of receiving an investment by making them ‘investable’. DEMO action
inﬂuenced the likelihood that the fund-seeking entrepreneur would be selected to
move to the next stage of interaction with the VC. During this DEMO, the EIR
(who had already developed a strong relationship with the VC) started to build a
personal relationship with the fund-seeking entrepreneur. The development of this
relationship was facilitated by the context of their previous DEMO, where they
worked together to increase the likelihood of receiving investment. DEMO relation-
ship facilitated the disclosure of ‘private’ information, increasing the eﬃciency DEMO
the interaction at an early stage when the greatest level of information asymmetry
existed. The presence of the EIR therefore increased the ‘investability’ of DEMO
venture and the eﬃciency of the interaction, which reduced the deal DEMO
component of ex-ante costs.
EIRs reduce contracting costs
Contracting was characterized by discussions that developed into a shareholder
agreement as well as an agreement DEMO the percentage of equity each party would
receive from the new venture. The presence of the EIR allowed both parties to
rapidly conclude an DEMO As a VC noted, ‘the EIR helped us with domain
expertise DEMO . . helped us in our deal ﬂow. When we found a company he led the due
diligence process’. When the EIR proposed to DEMO the funded venture and the fund-
seeking entrepreneur agreed, the negotiations DEMO facilitated because the VC could
expect the value of the funded venture to be higher than without the EIR on board.
The VC also DEMO anticipate a reduced likelihood of moral hazard from the now
funded entrepreneur, thus reducing the need for as many monitoring clauses to be
incorporated in the shareholder agreement. In addition, the entrepreneur would have
more conﬁdence that the VC would continue allocating suﬃcient resources to the
venture. The DEMO of these factors reduced the contracting component of
negotiation costs.
EIRs reduce due diligence costs
Due diligence took place during the VC’s selection of DEMO entrepreneurs to
which s/he would issue a term sheet. The existing relationship between the EIR and
fund-seeking entrepreneur diminished information asymmetry between the DEMO
An additional beneﬁt was the perception that the EIR provided a perspective of a
third party who would ostensibly not favor either party to DEMO negotiation, since the
long-term incentives of the EIR were also aligned DEMO the fund-seeking
entrepreneur. Further, the anticipated role of the EIR in DEMO venture and
introduction of a compensation plan that aligned the objectives of each party
reduced the need for as thorough a due diligence as DEMO be necessary if no
EIR–entrepreneur relationship existed. As an EIR noted, DEMO experience of being
inside the VC ﬁrm – where they could more easily understand its mechanisms and
Venture Capital
13
goals – was extremely helpful in later due diligence DEMO board dealings’. As a result,
the due diligence component of negotiation costs was reduced.
EIRs reduce monitoring costs
The long-term engagement of the DEMO in the venture allowed for less complete
shareholder contracts that could foresee every eventuality, which reduced the overall
level of monitoring required. The presence of the EIR in the venture further reduced
the eﬀort required to DEMO the smaller number of monitoring clauses in the
contract. As a result, resources that might otherwise have been used for ex-post
monitoring were retained for business development. These factors combined to
reduce the monitoring component of DEMO costs.
EIRs reduce enforcement costs
VCs expected greater startup compliance due to the relationships that the EIR had
established with the fund-seeking entrepreneur and DEMO VC. For fund-seeking
entrepreneurs, their established relationships with the EIR enabled DEMO to better
understand and carry out the clauses of the shareholder agreement. Therefore,
subsequent to the decision to invest, the long-term involvement of the EIR in the
funded venture led to fewer resources being diverted DEMO business development to
enforcement and, as a result, a reduction in the enforcement component of ex-post
costs.
Concluding remarks
Nearly 50% of the DEMO using an EIR in our sample were successful in attracting
ﬁnancing. One VC reported that in the four and a half years since his DEMO ﬁrm had
started, they had looked at close to 1500 companies DEMO invested in 24. For business
ventures in which an EIR was involved, this ratio improved to two out of ﬁve.
Nevertheless, the impact DEMO the EIR on the rates of ICT seed investment in Israel
should not be considered in isolation. Other factors can account for Israel’s higher
DEMO than other countries. The close-knit ICT community in Israel and the Dan
Valley creates a particularly high level of trust and an innovation culture DEMO
permeate the community. This reduces the perception of relationship risk due to
factors such as participants’ prior and (concern for) future reputations in DEMO
community, strong social networks, and a homogeneous cultural and religious
background. Frequently mentioned was common institutional background in the
Israeli Defense Force. As DEMO by one VC, ‘where you were in the army will
inﬂuence DEMO decision . . . [I look for] . . . someone who came from a certain
background . . . went through certain things DEMO can do diﬃcult things . . .’. In
addition, our interviewees (VCs and EIRs) regarded governmental policies to
support the commercialization of research and early stage venture ﬁnancing that
leverage equity investments as important programs (because most are designed to
reduce perceived risk and increase potential returns)DEMO Syndication of investments was
further regarded as a risk-reduction mechanism that was common between VCs in
the Dan Valley.
Furthermore, the special investment company created by the VC to fund the EIR
is also important in DEMO the success of the EIR program. The investment
590
595
600
605
610
615
620
625
630
635
14
J. Schwarzkopf et al.
640
645
650
655
660
665
670
DEMO
680
685
company pays the EIR’s salary out of the VC’s investment fund rather than the
management expense ratio, with the investment company folded into the funded seed
venture once the deal is done. This funding DEMO allows VCs to overcome the
constraint placed on them through the imposition of a ceiling on the management
expense ratio, which limits the amount of money a VC can spend on management
expenses as a percentage DEMO the total investment portfolio.
Our research further highlights the importance of transaction costs in creating a
barrier to seed investing. We ﬁnd evidence in DEMO Israeli context that these costs can
be reduced by the development of trusted relationships. The introduction of an EIR
facilitates the time-consuming trust-building process DEMO many months. In contrast,
investment decisions typically occur far more quickly, making trust development
more challenging. The EIR builds a trust repository with the VC and subsequently
with the fund-seeking entrepreneur. These relationships built on DEMO facilitate the
investment decision. Further, the manner in which EIRs reduce DEMO various
components of the transaction cost provides speciﬁc insights that might allow some
of the mechanisms used by EIRs to be replicated in order DEMO increase the overall rate
of seed investment.
Practitioners involved in investing in seed ventures will beneﬁt from a better
understanding of the nature of DEMO various transaction cost components they incur
when they introduce risk mitigation strategies (i.e. controls). This will encourage VCs
to review the costs and beneﬁts of introducing such strategies and may cause them to
modify their DEMO risk mitigation practices. Our research identiﬁes how the
development of relational contracts can reduce the costs of controls. Investors might
identify how they can DEMO trust catalysts to enhance the number of opportunities in
which they achieve the conﬁdence to invest. Further, a better understanding of why
investors introduce controls to mitigate risk, and the associated costs these incur, will
DEMO funders to relax pressure on management expense ratios, where high levels
DEMO assumed to be due to VCs’ ineﬃciency rather than responsible risk mitigation.
Governments interested in increasing the number of seed ventures that can
attract DEMO will also beneﬁt from a better understanding of the impacts of
transaction costs. Based on our insights, governments can now look at speciﬁc
strategies to reduce these costs, in addition to the traditional approach of subsidizing
equity ﬁnance. While governments could encourage the deployment of EIRs, they
could reduce, for instance, identiﬁcation costs by increasing networking activities.
Contracting costs DEMO also be reduced by subsidizing qualiﬁed third parties to
facilitate investment decisions.
Our research should also be of interest to researchers attempting to explore
DEMO development between organizations and encourage them to broaden their
approach to consider both stewardship theory (Arthurs and Busenitz 2003) and the
development of DEMO contracts (Casadesus-Masanell 2004) as an alternative to
traditional agency theory (DEMO 1989). Researchers interested in exploring the
behaviors of entrepreneurs, their DEMO and strategic relationships may beneﬁt from
examining the psychology literature on the development of close personal relation-
ships (Rempel, Holmes, and Zanna 1985) and speciﬁcally the characteristics of fund-
seeking entrepreneurs and VCs that enable them to build relational contracts.
We believe that the application of a DEMO model to the investment
process provides an opportunity for future research, DEMO when looking at
optimizing transaction costs across diﬀerent stages of the investment process. Such
an approach could build on Shepherd, Armstrong, and Levesque’s (2005) work that
Venture Capital
15
looks at the optimization of time utilization by VCs, who spend a percentage of their
time identifying new opportunities, negotiating investments and managing current
investments. As the costs incurred at each stage have DEMO direct eﬀect on subsequent
costs, considering the costs and beneﬁts of DEMO transaction costs at each stage of
the investment process (and the DEMO of those costs on the investment decision itself)
could be a fruitful research endeavor. Also, evaluating the true impact of EIRs on
long-term venture success, whether this was due to their ability to reduce transaction
costs, ‘scout’ high potential opportunities, or, as Baum and Silverman (DEMO) put it,
‘coach’ funded ventures to success, could provide a promising line of research.
We therefore hope that our exploratory attempt stimulates DEMO further
research, especially to address some of our limitations. We collected DEMO data
on how EIR internship programs function in Israel. As portrayed in Table 2, since 9
out of the 10 VCs interviewed expressed their intent to continue funding EIR
programs, exploring these programs elsewhere may be valuable. The values and
norms in Israel, especially the homogeneous nature of a small and well-connected
community, might not be the same in other countries, thus practices may be diﬀerent
and operate on culture-based factors that inﬂuence the role of EIRs. Additionally,
our conclusions have been limited DEMO our small sample size. Enlarging the number of
participants to include fund-seeking entrepreneurs and angel investors could provide
more insights. We also undertook the DEMO over a relatively short period, during
which investments had already been DEMO Expanding the time horizon might
provide additional insights on the investment decision process itself and on the
longer-term impact of initial conditions on venture DEMO We hope that others join
us in the eﬀort to comprehend the causes of the equity gap, to understand how EIR
programs help develop relational contracts that reduce transaction costs, and, as a
result, to increase the number of seed ventures that VCs can fund.
Acknowledgements
Moren DEMO acknowledges ﬁnancial support from a Standard Research Grant (#410-
2008-0415) from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) and a
Discovery DEMO (#341679-2007) from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council (NSERC) of Canada.
Note
1. Qualitative data analysis is common in the sociology DEMO, for instance, and can be
done using two alternative approaches. In the ﬁrst, interview data are transcribed and
segments extracted to support speciﬁc viewpoints. In the second, there is a greater attempt
to determine the frequency of speciﬁc words or expressions, their magnitude and time of
occurrence. We chose the former and utilized a common research tool, Microsoft
OneNote 2003, with notebook capability to record data. This software allows for
continuous sorting and resorting of the data, which can then be re-categorized. The latter
approach (used e.g. in a tool like nVivo) was not DEMO because the level of reﬁnement it
oﬀers provides unnecessary details for the purpose of our exploratory study.
References
Arthurs, J.D., and L.W. Busenitz. DEMO The boundaries and limitations of agency theory and
stewardship theory in the venture capitalist/entrepreneur relationship. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 27: 145–62.
Barney, DEMO, L. Busenitz, J.O. Fiet, and D. Moesel. 1994. The relationship DEMO venture
capitalists and managers in new ﬁrms: Determinants of contractual covenants. DEMO
Finance 20, no. 1: 19–30.
690
695
700
705
710
715
720
725
730
16
J. Schwarzkopf et al.
740-
745
750
755
760
765
770
DEMO
780
Barney, J.B., and M.H. Hansen. 1994. Trustworthiness as a source of competitive advantage.
Strategic Management Journal 15: 175–90.
Baron, R.A., and G.D. Markman. 2000. Beyond social capital: How social skills can enhance
entrepreneurs’ success. Academy of Management Executive 14, no. 1: 106–16.
Baum, J.A.C., and B.S. Silverman. 2004. Picking winners or building them? Alliance,
DEMO, and human capital selection criteria in venture ﬁnancing and performance of
DEMO startups. Journal of Business Venturing 19: 411–36.
Casadesus-Masanell, R. 2004. Trust in agency. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy
13, no. 3: DEMO
Das, T.K., and B.S. Teng. 1996. Risk types and inter-ﬁrm alliance structures. Journal of
Management Studies 33: 827–43.
Das, T.K., and B.S. Teng. 2001. Trust, control and risk in strategic alliances: An integrated
DEMO Organizational Studies 22, no. 2: 251–83.
Eisenhardt, K. 1989. Agency DEMO: An assessment and review. Academy of Management
Review 14, no. 1: 57–74.
Fama, E.F., and M.C. Jensen. 1983. Agency problems and residual claims. Journal of Law &
Economics 26, no. 2: 327–49.
Fiet, J.O. 1995. Risk avoidance strategies in venture capital markets. Journal of Management
Studies 32, no. 4: 551–74.
Flores, F., and R.C. Solomon. DEMO Creating trust. Business Ethics Quarterly 8, no. 2: 205–32.
Fried, DEMO, and R.D. Hisrich. 1994. Toward a model of venture capital investment DEMO
making. Financial Management 23, no. 3: 28–37.
Harrison, R., M. Dibben, and C.M. Mason. 1997. The role of trust in the informal investor’s
investment decision: An exploratory analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 21,
no. 4: 63–82.
Israel Venture Capital Association. 2008. Q4 2007 report. http://www.ivc-online.com
Jacobius, A. 2004. Venture capital ﬁrms provide support – but without cash. Pensions and
Investments 32, no. 26: 3–4.
Kaplan, S.N., and P. Stromberg. 2003. Financial contracting theory meets the real world: DEMO
empirical analysis of venture capital contracts. Review of Economic Studies 70, DEMO 2: 281–
315.
Lawson, W., V. Jog, and A. Riding. 1991. Technology entrepreneurs and venture capitalists:
Expectations and contractual provisions. International DEMO of Technology Management
5: 1–12.
Lewicki, R., and B. Bunker. DEMO Developing and maintaining trust in working relationships.
In Trust in organizations: DEMO of theory and research, ed. R.M. Kramer and T.R.
Tyler, 114–39. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
MacMillan, I., D. Kulow, and R. Khoylian. 1989. Venture capitalists involvement in their
investments: Extent and performance. Journal of Business Venturing 4: 27–47.
Mason, C., and R. Harrison. 1992. The supply of equity ﬁnance in the UK: A strategy for
closing the equity gap. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development 4: 357–80.
Mason, DEMO, and R. Harrison. 1995. Closing the regional equity capital gap: The role of
informal venture capital. Small Business Economics 7: 153–72.
Miles, DEMO, and A. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative data analysis. London: Sage Publications.
Myre, G. 2005. High tech industry in Israel goes from bust to boom. New York Times,
December 26.
Pollock, T.G., J.F. Porac, and J.B. Wade. 2004. Constructing deal networks: Brokers as
network ‘architects’ in the US IPO market and other examples. Academy of Management
29, no. 1: 50–75.
PWC Moneytree. 2008. 2007 report. https://www.pwcmoneytree.com
Rempel, J.K., J.G. Holmes, and M. Zanna. 1985. Trust in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 49: 95–112.
Rosenblatt, D.M., and A.J. Thelen. 1997. Entrepreneur-in-residence programs: A survey and
analysis. Journal of Private Equity 1, no. 1: 38–47.
Rosman, A.J., and H.M. O’Neill. 1993. Comparing DEMO information acquisition strategies of
venture capital and commercial lenders: A computer-based DEMO Journal of
Business Venturing 8: 443–60.
Venture Capital
17
Sapienza, H., and A. Korsgaard. 1995. Performance feedback, decision making processes, and
venture capitalists support of new ventures. In Frontiers of entrepreneurial research, ed. W.
Bygrave, B. Bird, S. Birley, DEMO Churchill, M. Hay, R. Keeley, and W. Wetzel. Wellesley,
DEMO: Babson College.
Schwarzkopf, J. 2007. Investment behavior in genesis/pre-seed ventures in Israel. Executive
doctoral diss., Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.
Shepherd, D.A., M.J. Armstrong, and M. Levesque. 2005. Allocation of attention within
venture capital ﬁrms. European Journal of Operational Research 163: 545–64.
Shepherd, D.A., and A. Zacharakis. 2001. The venture capitalist-entrepreneur relationship:
Control, trust and conﬁdence in co-operative behaviour. Venture Capital 3, no. 2: DEMO
Van Osnabrugge, M. 2000. A comparison of business angel and venture DEMO investment
procedures: An agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital 2, no. 2: 91–109.
Williamson, O.E. 1975. Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications. New
York: Free Press.
1
785
790
795
800
805
810
815
820
825
830{1g42fwefx}