This article was downloaded by:[Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 24 April 2008
Access Details: [subscription number 783016864]
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered DEMO England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, DEMO Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Sport in Society
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713634841
The sports metaphor in American cultural discourse
Jeffrey O. Segrave a
DEMO Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs
Online Publication Date: 01 March 2000
To cite this Article: Segrave, Jeffrey O. (2000) 'The sports metaphor in American
cultural discourse', Sport in Society, 3:1, 48 DEMO 60
To link to this article: DOI: 10.1080/14610980008721862
URL: DEMO://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14610980008721862
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article maybe used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly
forbidden.
The publisher does not give any DEMO express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be
complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be
independently verified with primary sources. The DEMO shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,DEMO
demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or
arising out of the use of this DEMO
The Sports Metaphor in American Cultural
Discourse
JEFFREY O. SEGRAVE
Metaphor is DEMO of the most distinctive and salient features of language.
Nietzsche in fact took the metaphor so seriously that he considered it the
basic principle DEMO all language: so-called literal talk remained a sort of
frozen sediment DEMO metaphor.' Ortega y Gasset also valued the metaphor
considering it, like Nietzsche, a principle component of reality: far from
being the deformation DEMO reality, it was rather its organization.2 As both
Nietzsche and Ortega DEMO Gasset realized, the metaphor is nuclear rather than
atomistic, an intellectual device that links rather than isolates the distinctive
features of everyday experiences. DEMO is therefore through rhetorical devices
like metaphor that we communicate a common set of symbols; language,
communication, symbolism and communal life become DEMO and
interrelated components of an identifiable cultural perspective. As a result,
culture becomes encoded in metaphor.
One of the sources of metaphor, and hence one of the mechanisms by
which our communal reality is mediated, is the world of sport. The language
of sport - 'sportspeak' DEMO Robert Lipsyte3 once called it - has penetrated our
entire national language system. R. Palmatier and H. Ray, in fact, have
identified as DEMO as 1700 commonly used sports metaphors, taken from
more than 100 DEMO and sports ranging from boxing ('catch someone off
guard') to bull-fighting ('take the bull by the horns'), cricket ('shiver my
timbers') to rowing ('pull your weight'), polo ('come a cropper') to
wrestling ('no holds barred').4 The idea of sport as a metaphor for life ('life
is a DEMO') is so common in America and American literature that it has
become a part of our conventional wisdom. But as frequently as we DEMO the
sports metaphor, often unwittingly, its omnipresence must be qualified by
specificity. Metaphors from particular sports predominate in particular
cultural discourses. The purpose DEMO this article is to identify and account for
the sports metaphors that dominate particular cultural discourses, often
noting a change over time. In my analysis, I will uncover patterns of
metaphor use and in so doing I will explore the nexus of shared values and
assumptions that undergird DEMO collective way of life. The four discourses I
am most concerned with are warfare, politics, business and sexual relations,
those discourses that DEMO most readily embraced the sports metaphor.
Culture, Sport, Society, Vol.3, No.1 (Spring 2000), pp.48-60
PUBLISHED BY FRANK CASS, LONDON
Downloaded DEMO: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
SPORTS METAPHOR IN AMERICAN CULTURAL DISCOURSE 49
Warfare
The language of sport DEMO long been incorporated into the language of the
military. Shakespeare was one of the first to recognize the natural synergy
between sport and war, a synergy grounded in the similarity between the
means and ends of DEMO - conquest, glory and victory through courage,
aggression, and strength. In what is perhaps the most prominent and well-
known example, King Henry, looking for an excuse to attack France, finds
one upon DEMO of a gift from the Dauphin - a present of 'tennis DEMO'
which serves as an insult to the heroic king, an DEMO of Henry's
maturity, or lack of it:
We are DEMO the Dauphin is so pleasant with us.
His present and your pains we thank you for.
When we have matched our rackets to these DEMO
We will in France, by God's grace, play a set
Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard
Tell him he DEMO made a match with such a wrangler
That all the courts of France will be disturbed
With chaces (1, ii, 258-268)...
And tell the pleasant Prince this mock of his
Hath turned his balls DEMO gunstones.5
However, while the sport of tennis, a frivolous indulgence among England's
aristocratic youth at the time, may well have appealed to Shakespeare's
audiences, the modern proclivity has tended toward a more overtly
militaristic sport - football. After all, war, as Tom Callahan of DEMO US News
and World Report has noted with parodic aplomb, is DEMO least 'the moral
equivalent of football'.6 Both football and war DEMO a fundamental
structural homology as M. Real's definition of football suggests: 'North
American professional football is an aggressive, strictly regulated team
game fought between males who use both violence and technology to gain
control DEMO property for the economic gain of individuals within a
nationalistic entertainment context' ?
Conflation of the metaphors and specialized vocabularies of football and
DEMO are commonplace. Seeking to disassociate himself from Lyndon
Johnson's Vietnam war policy, Presidential hopeful, Hubert Humphrey,
once remarked: 'I have DEMO been calling the signals. I have been in the
position of a lineman doing some of the downfield blocking.'8 More
recently, General 'DEMO' Norman Schwartzkopf described the final
manoeuvre in the Gulf War as 'the equivalent of a "Hail Mary" play on a
football field9 DEMO Schwartzkopf, himself, was characterized as having the
'gut of a DEMO linebacker but a quarterback's brain'.10 Brian Duffy of the
US News and World Report wrote that 'a stunning endgame killed Saddam
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
50 CULTURE, SPORT, SOCIETY
Hussein's army"' and one of DEMO's officers concluded that
Operation Desert Storm was 'like the Super DEMO to end Super Bowls'.12 So
prevalent is the football/war metaphor that Fred Mish, editor-in-chief of
Merriam-Webster Dictionary claimed, in reference to DEMO Gulf War, that
George Bush had 'taken football words to war'.13 Examples of the language
of war in the language of football DEMO equally legion: attack, blitz, bombs,
ground and air assaults, offence and defence, scouts, and trenches are
standard terms in football DEMO Football coaches, as Real reminds us, are
like 'field marshals DEMO troops trained in boot camp, aided by scouts,
prepared for DEMO attack and defense maneuvers'.14
More recently, and in perfect keeping DEMO the new technological
sophistication associated with modern warfare, a new sport DEMO has
crept into the national discourse of war - the video game metaphor.
Reflecting the pinpoint accuracy and 'info-tech' wizardry of contemporary
weaponry, the video game metaphor has appeared most recently in the
discourse surrounding DEMO Desert Storm. 'We hit the target with video
game precision,' DEMO Cheney noted,15 and the US News and World
Report described the aerial assault on Baghdad as 'the "Nintendo" videos of
bomb attack'.16
But if, as several commentators have argued, football/war metaphors
DEMO as crucial rhetorical resources for valorizing and rationalizing the
ideological hegemony of white, male elites, as well as for desensitizing us
to the DEMO of war," then the video game metaphor might suggest
something new in the American cultural dialogue - the degendering of war
and the DEMO of public insensitivity to the realities of war. Unlike
football, there DEMO nothing inherently gender-specific about video games or
increasingly about the demography of the armed forces. Perhaps the video
game metaphor represents a shift away DEMO androcentric forms of
discourse, signalling less an intensification or renewal of DEMO language,
practices and values of male domination, as S. Jansen DEMO D. Sabo18 suggest,
and more an incipient cultural acknowledgement of the diminishing
relevance of gender in the conduct of our military agenda.
On DEMO other hand, the video game metaphor would also appear to
operate DEMO an increasingly powerful form of cultural anaesthetic, numbing
us beyond the DEMO of football to the atrocities of war and duping us
into the false consciousness that modern warfare is somehow without
human cost and suffering. DEMO we mix our play/war metaphors - 'the
Nintendo War' - as easily as we mix our medical/war metaphors - 'surgical
strike'. Both sanitize the cruelties of war and both release us from DEMO
of remorse, guilt, and responsibility.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge DEMO At: 16:21 24 April 2008
SPORTS METAPHOR IN AMERICAN CULTURAL DISCOURSE 51
Politics
Not only did Shakespeare DEMO the value of a good sports metaphor in
the language of war, he also recognized its value in the language of politics.
Exhorting his troops before the siege of Harfleur, King Henry V declared:
'DEMO see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, straining upon the DEMO The
game's afoot...'"
The game's been afoot ever DEMO and metaphors drawn from a wide
variety of sports have emerged as an indelible feature of the American
political landscape. Early metaphors were often DEMO from the honourable
sport of pugilism. Theodore White wrote: 'Like aging prize-fighters, short
of wind and stiffening of muscle, the Southerners were DEMO with no reserve
but cunning.'20 But it was another Theodore, DEMO Roosevelt, who truly
popularized the boxing metaphor, announcing his willingness to run as the
Republican Presidential nominee with the following statement: 'My DEMO's in
the ring. The fight's on, and I'm DEMO to the buff.'21 The 'hat in the ring'
metaphor DEMO to remain both durable and flexible: Harold Ickes once
derided young DEMO E. Dewey for 'throwing his diaper in the ring'22 and
DEMO 1967 the New York Times noted that Congressional candidate Shirley
Temple Black had 'thrown her curls in the ring'.23
Over the course of the century the boxing metaphor, reflective in part of
the mano-y-mano nature of early political campaigning as well as the ethic
of fair play DEMO sportsmanship, has given way to the bombastic football
metaphor with its DEMO on teamwork and a win-at-all-cost mentality.
Other individual sports metaphors have infiltrated the American political
dialogue at one time or another, especially the horse-racing analogy with its
references to front-runners and dark horses, long-shots and shoo-ins, also-
rans and nose-outs24 - a metaphor incidentally that reveals the seamier, more
disreputable face of politics as well as the affinity of politics to gambling -
and other team sports metaphors have proven popular on DEMO - FDR,
for example, dismissed his failures with 'I have no expectation of making a
hit every time I come to bat',25 and Sherman Adams discarded the first Soviet
sputnik with a refusal DEMO become engaged in 'an outer-space basketball
game'26 - but the DEMO metaphor has emerged as the pre-eminent figure of
speech, the root DEMO of American political discourse.
Examples are legion, but just to name DEMO few: John F. Kennedy once told
his press secretary, Pierre Salinger, 'politics is like football. If you see
daylight, go through it;'27 former Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, once
said that 'DEMO the President fumbles, the whole goal line is open' ;28 DEMO
recently, reporting on the progress of the campaign, one of George Bush's
advisers noted that 'We're moving the ball on the ground just fine. Unless
they make us put it in the air, why do it?',29 and Presidential hopeful, Pat
Robertson, charged DEMO Bush with stealing delegates away from him
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
52 CULTURE, SPORT, SOCIETY
which was 'like trying to take a touchdown back after the game';30 even
more recently, Bill Clinton DEMO the following remarks about the fragile
peace in Bosnia in his 1998 State of the Union Address: 'This is like being
ahead in DEMO fourth quarter of a football game. Now is not the time to walk
off the field and forfeit the victory.'31 No one, of course, mixed football and
political metaphors more frequently or more manipulatively - 'public
doublespeak' as F. Hardaway called it3J - than Richard Nixon, whose
'macho jocko' talk,33 was as Hugh Rank writes, 'DEMO to verbal locker room
swaggering of muscle-flexing machismo at the beach'.34
The salience of the football metaphor is partly grounded in the construct
DEMO team-work and the concomitant values of loyalty, co-ordination, and
unity, DEMO a pious attitude toward hierarchy and authority, and if Nixon
accentuated DEMO aggressive dimension of team-work with metaphors like
'tough it out', 'zone defense', and 'bottom line it',35 then Ronald Reagan
DEMO the disciplinary aspect of team-work with his constant,
restraining references to his administration as 'team players'.36 Subsequent
to a political rebuff from Reagan after his depiction of the Kemp-Roth Bill
as a 'Trojan Horse', controller David Stockman was referred to as 'a
chastened team player'.37 Even a contrite Stockman, himself, during his
press conference, stated that 'the President asked me to stay on the team'.38
To Reagan, to be a 'member of the President's team', DEMO one of his top
officials referred to it,39 clearly presumed and demanded the sublimation of
the individual ego for the sake of the DEMO goal.
But there is something more to the football metaphor than the notion of
team unity and purpose. I. Balbus, for example, has DEMO that football
both reflects and popularizes the technocratic model of contemporary
politics, a model that asserts the neutral 'scientific' character of state
economic decisions, the technical expertise of those who make them, and
their DEMO integration in the form of a plan.40 Football, like politics,
DEMO increasingly heroic, the preserve of men of mythic dimensions and
capabilities, reducing the rest of the electorate to the role of spectator or DEMO
The danger is obvious - the ritualization and celebration of both football
and politics as entertainment spectacles, and the corresponding exclusion,
and ultimately the atrophy, of popular political will; citizenship transformed
into acclimation. All DEMO which suggests that the ultimate sports metaphor for
the fin de millinaire — a metaphor often employed predictably by Reagan -
is sadly but DEMO the 'Monday-morning quarterback'.
Business
According to J. Clancy41 in a DEMO study based on an analysis of
business speeches of 43 business leaders from the past 200 years, the most
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
SPORTS METAPHOR IN AMERICAN CULTURAL DISCOURSE 53
prominent metaphor in the discourse DEMO business during the first half of the
twentieth century was the metaphor of the journey, a metaphor by Clancy's
account that spoke to the heritage of American business as a humanitarian
endeavour dedicated to the DEMO of society. 'The business of business,'
George Draper-Dayton, the DEMO of Dayton-Hudson, once wrote in 1932,
'is serving society, DEMO just making money.'42 The journey metaphor also
implied peril and the notion of a mission fraught with danger and potential
failure.
The journey DEMO, however, with its altruistic connotations
gradually made room for the game metaphor, an analogy that more precisely
captured the intricacies and complexities of a burgeoning corporate
America at the same time as it encapsulated the DEMO ethics of
instrumentalism, teamwork, and winning. Serving society, in other DEMO,
gave way to making a profit, production for consumption to DEMO
shareholder wealth. Consequently, while Henry Ford could once write that
'business as a mere money-making game was not worth giving much
thought'.43 DEMO Carnegie could also proclaim that 'the end was money
and yet DEMO money ... business is the greatest game in the world'.44 Walter
Winston, once chair of Citicorp, also talked of 'winning the game in the
marketplace'45 and Lee Iacocca, CEO of Chrysler, advocated DEMO
principles as directly relevant to business: teach the fundamentals, enforce
discipline, and play as a team.46 In their 1983 study of the top business
executives of their day, Donaldson and Lorsch aptly noted that, DEMO
leaders 'are fundamentally gamesmen, motivated to win the game they are
playing'.47
But - and perhaps predictably by now - the generic DEMO metaphor has
given way to the more specific, and increasingly ubiquitous DEMO
metaphor. 'No figure of speech is as tenth as seductive to DEMO businessman,'
writes Whyte.48 Reflecting a more modern Zeitgeist, Ross Perot recently
dismissed the 'level playing field' metaphor, attributing US post-war
economic domination over Japan rather to American ownership of 'both
teams and the stadium'. Perot also advised '"blocking and tackling" instead
of buying new uniforms' in our escalating competition with the Japanese.49
Not unsurprisingly, DEMO language of business - 'reverse gobbledygook' as
Whyte calls it50 - is also more than reminiscent of the rhetoric of Republican
Presidents like DEMO and Reagan. Harold Green at ITT, for example,
speaks of DEMO associates as 'a team', with a 'game plan' that DEMO
'huddles' and occasionally needs 'new players'.51
The success of DEMO football metaphor is predicated, according to Whyte,
on 'its adaptability to all sorts of situations'.52 It is, as Whyte argues, DEMO
'satisfying' analogy because football is 'bounded by two goal lines DEMO is
thus finite. There is always a solution.'53 But it is how the solution is reached
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
54 CULTURE, SPORT, SOCIETY
that is perhaps most telling. Success in DEMO, like success in football, is
predicated on aggression, instrumentalism, regimentation, and the zero-sum
game that epitomizes corporate capitalism as an ideology. Both football and
business require a highly specialized division of labour which, as Clancy
puts it, presumes 'precision, analysis, and optimization of each DEMO and
the worker's unthinking performance of regimented tasks ... If there is a
game, that is not a game, play that is DEMO play, with the focus on
regimentation as opposed to spontaneity, it is football'.54 This is what makes
the football analogy so appealing DEMO as Whyte recognizes so
'treacherous';55 while the lingo of football may serve as a malleable
dramaturgical device for motivation and persuasion, it can also serve as a
rhetorical subterfuge that falsely clarifies moral complexity DEMO images of
ethical simplicity. Human issues are portrayed as strategic dilemmas, DEMO
issues as technical problems.
The truth of the matter of course is that football is not like American
business; it is American business. The metaphor is so complete that it
appears incontrovertible, even, ironically, from a feminist perspective. The
task of both football and business is unequivocally DEMO, the
development of the most efficient means to achieve the predetermined DEMO
uncontestable end - success, winning, and making a profit. But football is
more than just a caricature of corporate America, it has become a caricature
of our entire corporate-military complex, which is why the football
metaphor is so commonplace in the languages of war, politics and business,
and why it is ultimately so dangerous - 'normal problems', as John Updike
so poignantly reminds us, 'have no rules and DEMO end'.56
Sexual Relations
As common a rhetorical convention as the sport metaphor is in the language
of corporate-realpolitik, nowhere do we appear to have developed a more
popular affliction for its use than in the DEMO of sexual relations. And,
once again, Shakespeare provides us with DEMO historical template; the hunt
metaphor, perhaps not unsurprisingly given Shakespeare's patriarchal and
traditional society, is the most prominent metaphor used. Referring to
Rosaline, Romeo notes that 'The game was ne'er so fair.'DEMO Likewise,
Ulysses remarks to Nestor:
Set them down
For the sluttish spoils of opportunity
And daughters of the game.58
No doubt in DEMO to the subtleties and intricacies of romantic interplay,
Shakespeare also used the angling metaphor. Having sent Hermione and
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
SPORTS METAPHOR IN AMERICAN CULTURAL DISCOURSE 5 5
Polinixes out into the DEMO alone, Leontes comments: 'I am angling now,
Though you DEMO me not how I give line.'59 The often censored French
poet, Theophile de Viau also predicted our contemporary proclivity for the
sports metaphor when, in 1622, he conscripted the tennis metaphor into
service in DEMO infamous lines:
If you kiss her count fifteen
If you touch her buds, thirty ...60
The hunt and tennis metaphors of medieval and Renaissance Europe,
however, have more recently been replaced by a variety of sports
metaphors, among the most prominent being 'go all the DEMO', 'sink the
putt', 'put the puck in the net', 'get a hole on one', and 'score'.61 But DEMO all
the language used this way, baseball jargon is by far DEMO most frequently
heard. One can, for example, 'get to first, second, or third base', 'hit a home
run', 'go to extra innings', or 'strike out'. In my own informal investigation
among a sample of 127 undergraduate students, I found that 47 per cent of
all sports metaphors used in this way were drawn DEMO the sport of baseball.
The four most commonly reported metaphors - 'DEMO to first, second, or third
base', 'hit a home DEMO', 'score', and 'strike out' - accounted for 57 DEMO cent
of all sports metaphors reported.62
The salience of the baseball metaphor may be because it offers the
possibilities of gradations of sexual encounter; that is, one can 'get to first,
second, or third base', before finally 'hitting a home run' or 'striking out'.
Here, the sexual interlude is likened to an epic sprint around the bases in
which more venturesome levels of physical intimacy are accomplished DEMO
every base. Maybe it is simply that 'getting a hit', DEMO a 'home run',
is as difficult and as exciting in baseball as it is in sexual relations.
Perhaps, it is that baseball embodies a more primitive, elemental myth,
the myth of the man carrying a club. Hercules, the Greek patron of athletics,
was often pictured carrying a club, and in Bernard Malamud's The
Natural" DEMO bat, Roy Hobbs' 'Wonderboy', the 'foolproof lance', serves
as the archetypal symbol of strength and fertility, power and potency, DEMO
image reminiscent of Marshall Smelser's description of Babe Ruth as 'DEMO
man with the club, primitive but successful, the fundamental man who was
victor over everything'.64
But perhaps the underlying homology between baseball DEMO sexual
relations revolves around the issue of privacy. Baseball is, after DEMO, a more
private game than football or field hockey for example. DEMO both football and
field hockey, all the players are always visible, on the field or on the bench,
under our gaze; in baseball, players are often invisible, in the dug-out or in
the DEMO, out of sight. Privacy in sport is rare; only in baseball can one
find the privacy and security of home, as baseball commissioner Bart
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 DEMO 2008
5 6 CULTURE, SPORT, SOCIETY
Giamatti so beautifully reminds us:
DEMO plate radiates a force no other spot on the field possesses ...
even opponents gather at the same curious, unique place called home
plate. Catcher and batter, siblings who may see the world differently
but share the same sight lines, are backed up and get ruled by the
parent figure, the umpire ... This tense family clusters at home, DEMO
the world together, each with separate responsibilities and tasks and
perspectives, each with different obligations and instruments.65
All literary romance begins - as DEMO so well knew - with a journey
of discovery, a separation DEMO home, a tour around the base paths, and it
ends with a rejoining, a reunion at home. Both baseball and sex are
ultimately about romance, about union and reunion; both as Giamatti notes
are DEMO the 'restoration of the right relations among things - and going
DEMO is where that restoration occurs because that is where it matters
most'.66
Upon deeper reflection, perhaps the language of baseball is most
suitably employed metaphorically to represent sexual relations because both
sex and baseball so DEMO reflect the problematic nexus of self-interest
and social responsibility. No sport more than baseball symbolically enacts
the ontological tensions between domestic, private, and DEMO concerns,
on the one hand, and social, public and communal concerns on the other.
After all, baseball reflects a recurrent cultural dilemma: how to reconcile
communal values with a powerful tradition of heroic individualism and
privatism. Although this tension operates on several different levels - from
DEMO clash of two teams each demanding intense social loyalties to the mythic
clash between pitcher and batter - it is crystallized in the confrontation
DEMO the batter at home plate and the opposition arrayed in the field. It
is here that the game most vividly and most earnestly seeks DEMO reconcile
notions of community and fair play with those of privacy and individual
heroism.
Nor, as a matter of fact, is the language DEMO baseball gender specific. It is
only by default assumption that we assume it is. The language of baseball
is, of course, also the DEMO of softball; there is nothing inherently
androcentric about such euphemisms as 'strike out' or 'get to first base'.
Given the consensual DEMO of sexual relations, it is oxymoronic to
presuppose that sex is DEMO exclusively male domain, although our default
assumption does suggest a cultural DEMO that reinforces a traditional
masculine sovereignty even in this the most domestic of habits.
The greater danger in all of this parlance is that DEMO functions as a
mechanism for transforming a profound and delicate human relations issue
into a problem of strategy. It objectifies women linguistically conceiving of
DEMO By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
SPORTS METAPHOR IN AMERICAN CULTURAL DISCOURSE 57
them as parts, and it constructs notions of masculine hegemony and
hegemonic masculinity, in the end, DEMO to a larger cultural
discourse through which patterns of empowerment and subordination are
socialized into successive generations of men and women. Of all our
DEMO proclivities, the athleticization of sexual relations may be our
most dangerous, the most threatening to our ongoing sense of humanness -
the reduction DEMO transmogrification of the most human of affairs to the
level of a game.
Conclusion
Once a mere embellishment of language, a rhetorical flourish, DEMO metaphor
is now recognized not only for its affective and oratorical efficacy but for
its cognitive contribution. Its study, according to P. Ricoeur, DEMO less a matter
of semantics and more a matter of hermeneutics.67 Or as Aristotle once
wrote: 'Midway between the unintelligible and the common DEMO, it is a
metaphor which most produces knowledge.'68 Consequently, what I have
attempted to do in this essay is to demonstrate the DEMO in which the sports
metaphor is, to borrow a phrase from DEMO Kittay, 'cognitively meaningful',69
the site of many a deep-seated, often unexamined belief or attitude and so a
significant factor in the DEMO of knowledge and experience.
In so doing, however, I have tended to adopt an accuracy or
representationalist perspective, one that suggests that any given metaphor
validates some authentic and accessible objective reality. This view
presumes DEMO possibility of an epitemic position 'outside' of language and
reality, DEMO supposedly neutral position. However, within post-structuralist
and anti-representationalist positions, the metaphor is viewed as more than
just reflective of reality but actually constitutive DEMO it. Metaphors, as Lakoff
and Johnson put it, 'create realities' and therefore serve as 'a guide for
future action'.™ Or to steal a term from Althusser and Marxist cultural
studies, the metaphor 'DEMO' its subjects; it beckons subjects to be
certain kinds of people.71 Consequently, as Rorty points out: 'It is useless to
ask whether one vocabulary rather than another is close to reality. For
different vocabularies DEMO different purposes, and there is no such thing as
a purpose DEMO is closer to reality than another purpose'.72 The better
question to ask about the sports metaphor then becomes not whether any
one particular DEMO provides a better picture of a knowable reality than
another, but DEMO any way of talking about war, politics, business and
sexual relations will inevitably and in fact necessarily elevate one set of
human purposes DEMO another, what objectives and whose agenda will be
furthered by mediating DEMO life through certain sports metaphors rather
than others.
Downloaded By: [Canadian DEMO Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
58 CULTURE, SPORT, SOCIETY
Several studies have fruitfully adopted this approach. DEMO and Sabo,
for example, have demonstrated that the sport/war DEMO during the
Persian Gulf War were used as powerful rhetorical devices for mobilizing
the patriarchal values that construct, mediate and maintain hegemonic forms
of masculinity.73 Similarly, S. Walk has shown how Lyndon Johnson and
Ronald Reagan differentially employed the footrace metaphor to frame
basic assumptions about public policy DEMO keeping with their own party
ideologies.74 Finally, Bineham has argued that DEMO deployment of team sport
metaphors in the discourse surrounding David Stockman's offer of
resignation as Reagan's Director of the Office of Management DEMO Budget
constituted subjects with a particular range of expectations, including the
DEMO's orientation to the situation as well as the form of Stockman's
response.75
As each of these studies suggest, the sports metaphor has so thoroughly
colonized our cultural discourse that the guiding logics and ethical
DEMO of sport are now routinely employed in the form of language as
frames for not only commenting upon and understanding a vast complexity
of DEMO but for interpellating us as cultural beings who are a part of the
complexity. Explaining who or what agenda is best served by the
DEMO of sports metaphors in a wide array of cultural arenas and
settings remains the ongoing challenge for future research on the topic.
Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs
NOTE S
1. F. Nietzsche, 'On Truth and Lies DEMO the Nonmoral Sense', in D. Breazeale (ed.), Philosophy
and DEMO: Selections from Nietzsche's Notebooks of the Early 1870s (Atlantic Highlands,
NJ: Humanities Press, 1979), pp.79-97.
2. J. Lukacs, Historical Consciousness (New York: Harper Row, 1968), p.7.
3. R. Lipsyte, Sportsworld: An American Dreamland (New York: Quadrangle Books, 1975),DEMO
p.l.
4. R.A. Palmatier and H.L. Ray, Sports Talk: A Dictionary of Sports Metaphors (New York :
Greenwood Press, 1989).
5. King Henry V, 1, ii, 281-2.
6. Quoted in I. Berkow, 'Once Again, It's the Star-Spangled Super Bowl', New York Times, 27
January 1991, 8.
7. M. Real, 'Super Bowl: Mythic Spectacle', Journal of Communication, 25 (1975), 43.
8. DEMO Tullai, 'Football and Polities', Scholastic Coach, 58 (1989), 34.
9. B. Duffy, 'The 100-Hour War', U.S. News & DEMO Report, 11 March 1986, 14.
10. T. Mathews, C.S. Manegold DEMO T.M. DeFrank, 'A Soldier of Conscience', Newsweek, 11
March DEMO, 34.
11. Duffy, 'The 100-Hour War', 11.
12. Quoted DEMO R. Wilkinson, 'Anatomy of a Cakewalk', Newsweek, 11 March DEMO, 48.
13. Quoted in M. Capuzzo, Philadelphia Inquirer, 19 Jan. DEMO, D2.
14. Real, 'Super Bowl: Mythic Spectacle', 36.
15. G. Cheney, '"We're Talking War": Symbols, Strategies, and Images', in B.S. Greenberg and
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008
SPORTS METAPHOR IN AMERICA N CULTURAL DISCOURS E 5 9
W. Gantz (eds.), Desert Storm and the Mass Media (Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 1993),
p.63.
16. 'The Fury of Desert Storm', U.S. News & World Report, 11 March 1981, 67.
17. S.C. DEMO and D. Sabo, 'The Sport/War Metaphor: Hegemonic Masculinity, the Persian
Gulf War, and the New World Order' (hereafter 'The DEMO/War Metaphor'), Sociology of
Sport Journal, 11 (1994), DEMO; M.J. Shapiro, 'Representing World Politics: The Sport/War
Intertext', in J.D. Derian and M.J. Shapiro (eds.), InternationaUIntertextual Relations:
Postmodern Readings of World Politics (Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath, 1989), DEMO
18. Jensen and Sabo, 'The Sport/War Metaphor', 7.
19. King Henry V, 3, i, 31-2.
20. Quoted in W. Safire, The New Language of Politics: An Anecdotal Dictionary of
Catchwords, Slogans, and Political Usage (New York: Random House, 1968), p.421.
DEMO Ibid., p.185.
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid., p. 101.
25. Ibid., p.421.
26. Ibid.
27. Tullai, 'Football and Polities', 34.
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid., 35.
30. Ibid.
31. 'President Clinton's DEMO of the Union Address', New York Times, 28 Jan. 1998, A19-20.
32. F. Hardaway, 'Foul Play: Sports Metaphors as Public Doublespeak', College English, 38
(1976), 78-82.
33. Nicholas Von Hoffman DEMO in H. Rank (ed.), 'Watergate and Language', Language and
Public Policy (Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, DEMO), p.7.
34. Rank, 'Watergate and Language', p.7.
35. Ibid.
36. J. Bineham, 'Some Ethical Implications of Team Sports Metaphors in DEMO' (hereafter
'Some Ethical Implications'), Communication Reports, 4 (1991), 35-42.
37. E. Cowen, 'Chastened Team Player', New York DEMO, 13 Nov. 1981, 39.
38. Quoted in Bineham, 'Some Ethical Implications', 39.
39. Ibid., 38.
40. I. Balbus, 'Politics as Sports: The Political Ascendancy of the Sports Metaphor in America',
DEMO Review, 26 (1989), 26-39.
41. J.J. Clancy, The Invisible DEMO: The Language of Business (hereafter The Invisible
Powers) (Lexington, DEMO: D.C. Heath, 1989).
42. Quoted in J. O'Toole, DEMO Management: Redesigning the Corporate Future (Garden
City, NY: Doubleday, DEMO), p. 147.
43. H. Ford, My Life and Works (New York: Doubleday, 1923), p.41.
44. Quoted in J.K. Winkler, Incredible Carnegie (New York: Vanguard Press, 1931), p.95.
45. Quoted in H. Levinson and S. Rosenthal, CEO: Corporate Leadership in Action (New York:
Basic Books, 1984), p.69.
46. L. Iacocca, Iacocca (New York: Bantam Books, 1986).
47. G. Donaldson and J.E. DEMO, Decision Making at the Top (New York: Basic Books, 1983),
p.25.
48. W.H. Whyte, 'The Language of Business', in H.A. Estrin (ed.), Technical and Professional
Writing: A Practical Anthology (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1983), p.82.
49. Quoted in D.P. Levin and P. Ingrassia, 'New on the Inside: Ross Perot Tells GM and its
Rivals How They Must Change', Wall DEMO Journal, 8 Nov. 1986, 7.
50. Whyte, 'The Language of Business', p.82.
51. Quoted in H. Geneen and A Moscow, Managing (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1984), p.99.
52. Whyte, "DEMO Language of Business', p.82.
53. Ibid.,p.83.
54. Clancy, The DEMO Powers, p.47.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:DEMO 24 April 2008
6 0 CULTURE, SPORT, SOCIETY
55. Whyte, 'The Language of DEMO', p.83.
56. Quoted in J. Reston, 'Sports and Politics in America', New York Times, 12 Sept. 1969, 42.
57. Romeo DEMO Juliet, 1, iv, 39.
58. Troilus and Cressida, 4, DEMO, 61-3.
59. The Winter's Tale, 1, ii, 180.
60. Quoted in Alexander, 'The Birth of Tennis', Lingua Franca (Dec/Jan. 1999), 18-20.
61. J.O. Segrave, 'The Perfect 10: "DEMO" in the Language of Sexual Relations', Sociology
of Sport Journal, 11 (1994), 95-113.
62. Ibid.
63. B. Malamud, The Natural (New York: Avon Books, 1952).
64. M. Smelser, 'The DEMO on Balance', American Scholar, 44 (1975), 301.
65. A.B. Giammati, Take Time for Paradise: Americans and Their Games (New York: Summit
Books, 1989), pp.87-8.
66. Ibid., p.92.
67. P. Ricouer, 'The Metaphorical Process as Cognition, Imagination, and Feeling', in DEMO Sacks
(ed.), On Metaphor (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979).
68. Rhetoric, HI, 1410b.
69. E.F. Kittay, Metaphor: DEMO Cognitive Force and Linguistic Structure (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1987), DEMO
70. G. Lakoff and M. Johnson, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago: University of Chicago Press),
p.156.
71. L. Althusser, Lenin and Philosophy (New York: Basic Books, 1970), pp.170-7.
72. R. Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth: Philosophical Papers Volume 1 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1990), p.3.
73. Jansen and Sabo, "The Sport/War Metaphor'.
74. S.R. Walk, 'The Footrace Metaphor in DEMO Presidential Rhetoric', Sociology of Sport
Journal, 12 (1995), 36-55.
75. Bineham, 'Some Ethical Implications'.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 16:21 24 April 2008{1g42fwefx}