Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
197.?, Vol. 26, No. 3, 332-346
CONTENT ANALYSIS OF VERBAL COMMUNICATION
IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF A RELATIONSHIP:
CONDITIONS INFLUENCING SELF-DISCLOSURE1
VELLO SERMAT a AND MICHAEL SMYTH
York University, Ontario, Canada
The content of conversation between two individuals was investigated under
experimental control by having a subject interact with a confederate over
teletypewriters. DEMO main purpose was to study dimensions of verbal behav-
ior which influence self-disclosure, liking, and a desire to continue the rela-
tionship. In DEMO first experiment, the confederate either matched or exceeded
the subject's DEMO self-disclosure level, and also matched or exceeded it in
the questions DEMO asked. Both the confederate's statement and question levels
significantly influenced the subject's self-disclosure level, but questions had
the strongest and most consistently observed effect. In the second experiment,
confederates varied the amount of DEMO in their statements between
a "minimal" and "matching" level, DEMO trying to encourage the subject to
disclose more in both conditions. Content analysis revealed no significant dif-
ferences in the subject's self-disclosure level, related to the experimental ma-
nipulation, but subjects in the matching condition reported having disclosed
more about themselves (p < .001) and were DEMO likely to choose the same
partner, if given an opportunity to DEMO again (p < .001). A number of
sex differences were DEMO, with females asking more intimate questions and
also tending to disclose DEMO about themselves under certain conditions. In addi-
tion, two different methods DEMO analyzing the content of conversation were
used. Their relative merits are discussed and suggestions are offered for
future research.
This is an initial report DEMO a research
project, designed to investigate factors which
influence the development DEMO interpersonal
relationships in dyads. The general goal is to
determine which dimensions of verbal be-
havior facilitate the development of trust,
openness about DEMO, and various in-
dexes of attraction between individuals who
are initially DEMO to one another. The
experiments reported here have been pri-
marily focused on determinants of self-
disclosure.
1 This research was supported in part DEMO Grant
APA-264 fro m the National Research Council of
Canada, and DEMO part by Grants 69-0516, S70-0612,
and S71-0766 from the Canada DEMO, awarded to
the first author. Partial reports of these findings
were DEMO at the meeting of the Western Psy-
chological Association in San Francisco, April 23,
1971, and at the American Psychological Association
convention DEMO Hawaii, September 2, 1972. Experiment
I was conducted by the second -author as a partial
fulfillment of requirement for a master's degree DEMO
psychology at York University.
2 Requests for reprints should be sent to Velio
Sermat, Department of Psychology, York University,
4700 Keele Street, Downsview 463, Ontario, Canada.
332
Self-disclosure has been denned as the DEMO
plicit communication to others of some per-
sonal information which the others would be
unlikely to acquire unless the person himself
disclosed it, and which is of such a nature
that the individual is not likely DEMO disclose
it to everyone who asks for it (Culbert,
1970)DEMO The importance of disclosing personal
and intimate information about oneself has
been emphasized both in the context of form-
ing a friendship and for DEMO psycho-
therapy (Jourard, 1964; Mowrer, 1964;
Rogers, 1961)DEMO A series of unpublished in-
vestigations by the first author of the present
study, based on approximately 400 biographi-
cal documents and 400 questionnaires and
personal interviews, has shown that individ-
uals of varying ages and backgrounds attri-
bute their loneliness feelings above all to the
lack of DEMO opportunity to talk about per-
sonally important, private matters with some-
DEMO else. The need to express one's most im-
portant thoughts and feelings to an intimate
frien d or associate, without fear of being mis-
CONDITIONS INFLUENCING SELF-DISCLOSURE
333
understood or rejected, was mentioned spon-
taneously by a large majority of respondents
as being one of the most important DEMO in
their lives.
In the present study, self-disclosure was
employed as DEMO an independent and a de-
pendent variable. As former, greater self-
DEMO by one person (a confederate) was
expected to facilitate greater self-disclosure
by the other (the subject). Jourard (19S9)
has proposed DEMO one of the necessary con-
ditions for promoting self-disclosure in the
other is to make disclosures about oneself.
Jourard used the term "dyadic effect" to refer
to the principle that in dyads self-disclosure
tends to be reciprocal. Second, Jourard
(1959) has proposed that the amount of per-
sonal information that one person is willing
to disclose to another covaries DEMO his liking
for the other. Accordingly, self-disclosure was
examined in this DEMO as a possible measure
of the extent to which the relationship had
become positively valued by the subject.
Disclosing to someone else personal in-
DEMO about oneself, to which the other's
reaction is not known DEMO, involves
the risk of being misunderstood, judged, re-
jected, or possibly even exploited in ways that
could be harmful to the discloser. DEMO
(1970) has listed the factors involved in de-
termining the level of risk in self-disclosure.
One is determined by the topic and its DEMO
portance to the discloser; another involves
the concern that the disclosure DEMO not have
conveyed the message in the way it was in-
tended; a third is the concern about how the
other reacts to the information, and the un-
certainty about receiving the kind of response
that was hoped for. Especially the last source
of uncertainty and concern would DEMO reduced
if the other had previously expressed his own
thoughts and feelings on a related topic.
However, certain characteristics in a per-
son's verbal behavior are likely to increase
others' concern over receiving undesirable re-
sponses from him and therefore reduce the
probability that they would make DEMO
closures which would increase their vulner-
ability. Gibb (1965) has listed a set of vari-
ables which are likely to create a defensive
DEMO Among these are judgmental and
evaluative behavior, attempts to control the
DEMO's behavior, expressions of superiority,
and dogmatic attitudes. All of DEMO seem to
involve the common element of threatening
the sense of adequacy of the other to the
extent that his self-esteem depends on sup-
DEMO from others, or requires that he defend
himself against unfavorable judgments DEMO
attempts at domination. A person who be-
comes concerned over such threats is more
guarded against revealing himself and is also
more likely to DEMO the information he re-
ceives about the other, due to his DEMO
preoccupations and emotional arousal. As the
willingness to take risks decreases, DEMO does
the likelihood of developing a mutually valued
and personal relationship. In a different line
of investigation with dyadic relationships, in-
volving mixed-motive games, it was found
that under conditions which involved uncer-
tainty about the other's behavior and the risk
of being exploited, the interacting individuals
adopted strategies which resulted in less than
optimal outcomes for both (Sermat, 1970).
Although the level of risks taken and self-
disclosures made in a dyad may be reciprocal
over time, it cannot be instantaneously mu-
tual, because one person usually listens while
the other speaks. Since it is uncommon, at
least in our society, for people to DEMO explicit
agreements from the start as to what the
nature of their relationship will be and what
each will contribute to it, they will have to
take some risks in revealing things about
themselves or suggesting DEMO joint activity
in the hope that the other person will recipro-
cate the move. An individual can take the
initiative during an initial encounter DEMO dis-
closing something about himself, by asking
the other some questions DEMO require him
to disclose something, or by doing both. If
he DEMO questions, he puts the other under a
certain amount of pressure, because it is diffi-
cult to refuse to answer without seeming un-
DEMO, distrustful or even rude. Thus,
some self-disclosure may result from DEMO
asked certain questions, rather than reflect-
ing a certain degree of DEMO for the other
person. A person's willingness to answer per-
sonal questions may depend on the expecta-
tion that the other will reciprocate DEMO a simi-
lar manner and that this would further the
relationship. If, in time, it becomes evident
334
VICLLO SF.RMAT AND MICHAEL SMYTH
that the other person will not DEMO, his
partner's self-disclosure level, liking for him
and willingness to continue the relationship
should decrease. The two experiments de-
scribed in this DEMO investigated, under con-
trolled conditions, the relationship of one
person's self-disclosure level to the questions
asked and the self-disclosures made by the
DEMO
Conditions which influence the level of
self-disclosure have been previously investi-
gated by means of questionnaires. Jourard
(1959) and Jourard and Landsman (1960)
found a strong correlation between the
amount of information a person DEMO dis-
closing to a given individual and the amount
received from that individual. However, the
actual behavior of these individuals in inter-
personal relationships is not known.
Studies of experimental nature are rela-
tively few in DEMO Tognoli (1969) paired
subjects with confederates and required them
to select discussion topics which were pre-
viously scaled for level of intimacy. He DEMO
that subjects chose topics which tended to
match the intimacy level of topics chosen by
the confederates. Worthy, Gary, and Kahn
(1969) DEMO groups of four female subjects
into a situation where they were to become
acquainted with one another by answering
each other's questions in DEMO From a list
of seven questions, scaled for intimacy, the
subjects chose to answer significantly more
intimate questions with those individuals who
had DEMO correspondingly intimate answers.
Jourard and Resnick (1970) matched fe-
male undergraduates with high or low scores
on the Jourard Self-Disclosure Questionnaire
(Jourard, DEMO) into similar and dissimilar
pairs. In similar pairs, low-disclosing subjects
chose to discuss topics which were rated as
being significantly less intimate than DEMO
chosen by high-disclosing subjects. When a
"high" subject was paired with a "low" one,
the former did not change her disclosure DEMO
while the latter increased hers to a point
where no significant differences remained be-
tween them. Taylor, Altaian, and Sorrentino
(1969) had DEMO interact with an alleged
future teammate over an intercom system.
The subject was free to choose any number
of conversation topics from a pool DEMO items
prescaled for intimacy (Taylor & Altman,
1966). The DEMO person was a confederate
who systematically varied the interpersonal
reward and cost conditions by agreeing or
disagreeing with the subject. Positive feed-
back from DEMO confederate led to more dis-
closure and more favorable sociometric
ratings.
None of the studies mentioned above ex-
amined the actual content of the DEMO'
verbal messages. As it is possible to answer
any particular question with different amounts
of self-disclosure, the preexperimental ratings
of the intimacy level of the topics selected
for discussion do not give information about
the DEMO of self-disclosure that actually
took place. In the experiments described in
this article, the subject exchanged verbal mes-
sages with a confederate over a set of tele-
typewriters and the actual content of their
messages was DEMO judged for self-disclosure.
The subject's self-disclosure level was deter-
mined by two different methods. In one, two
judges independently selected the three most
disclosive statements and three questions ask-
ing for the highest amount of DEMO
from the transcript of each participant. The
judges then rank ordered these in terms of
the level of self-disclosure. Items with highest
combined ranks DEMO then given to other
judges who rated them on a 10-point scale of
self-disclosure, anchored in the self-disclosure
scale developed by Taylor and Altman
(1966). A subsequent analysis used a new
scale, composed of DEMO which had been ob-
tained under comparable experimental condi-
tions, using DEMO teletypewriter method, and
had been rated highly reliable by several
judges. DEMO second method of content analysis
involved dividing each transcript into three
parts of equal length and having independent
judges assign ratings on a 10-point DEMO for
the highest level of self-disclosure attained
in each part of the transcript.
The use of teletypewriters in the study of
verbal communication in DEMO has several
important advantages over other methods.
Through the complete elimination of visual
and auditory cues about the other person, his
looks, or DEMO quality, it is possible to investi-
gate the verbal communication process DEMO
more controlled conditions than would other-
CONDITIONS INFLUENCING SELF-DISCLOSURE
335
wise be possible. The use of the teletypewriter
DEMO for a continuous give-and-take of in-
formation, with a minimu m DEMO delay between
messages and no restraints on their format.
As a result, most subjects view the experience
as very realistic, after overcoming the DEMO
unfamiliarity with the equipment. Both the
subject and the confederate have at all times
a complete and permanent record of the in-
teraction that DEMO taken place, and this gives
the confederate an opportunity to inspect
DEMO the subject's behavior and his own and
to take several minutes to decide on the
proper response, while the subject is typing
out his next message.
Preliminary work with the teletypewriter
technique, as well as several experiments
which have been completed since, have shown
that participants tend to become quite in-
tensely and personally involved and will dis-
cuss DEMO intimate topics during the course
of a 1- or 2-hour experiment. Some have even
regarded their experience as amounting to
the beginning of a DEMO With very few
exceptions, the several hundred subjects who
have participated DEMO experiments involving
this method of communication have expressed
willingness and even eagerness to return for
further experimental sessions, without re-
questing payment or other compensation.
In the experiments reported in this article,
the confederates were DEMO to encourage
the subjects to discuss personal topics as
openly as possible, without exercising pressure
toward discussing any particular topical area.
They were to avoid making judgments, ana-
lyzing or interpreting the "deeper meaning"
DEMO what the subject said, or taking dogmatic
stands on any issues, in order to minimize
the kinds of behaviors that might make the
DEMO defensive. The subject was always
informed that he had complete freedom in
choosing what to say, and that he was under
no obligation to answer any questions he did
not like.
The first experiment investigated the DEMO
of "matching" versus "exceeding" the sub-
ject's self-disclosure level in statements made
by the confederate. Culbert (1970) has sug-
gested DEMO greater openness in a relationship
would result if one person makes statements
which are slightly more disclosive than those
of the other, and continues to respond to the
other at this "leading" level until an DEMO
level of mutual openness has been reached.
Second, the confederate also DEMO or ex-
ceeded the subject's current self-disclosure
level in the questions he directed to the sub-
ject. Thus, to the extent that the principle
of reciprocity of "exchange" (Gouldner,
1960; Romans, 1961; Thibaut & Kelley,
1959) is operating, greater self-disclosure by
the confederate should lead to greater self-
disclosure by the subject. If the "social de-
mand" pressures are operating in this situa-
tion, then DEMO more intimate ques-
tions should lead to increasingly greater self-
disclosure by the subject. The purpose of the
first experiment was to investigate the DEMO
effectiveness of the statement level and the
question level, and it DEMO expected that the
two variables would interact. Asking for
greater self-disclosure should produce the
greatest amount of disclosure from the sub-
ject, provided that the confederate's state-
ments about himself also "led" in self-dis-
DEMO The least amount of self-disclosure
from the subject was expected under the con-
ditions where both the confederate's state-
ments and questions matched DEMO subject's
current level, without leading him to higher
levels. The DEMO two conditions were expected
to be intermediate, and no directional hy-
DEMO was offered. The effect of the con-
federate's verbal behavior on the self-dis-
closure level requested in subject's questions
was also investigated, but no specific hypothe-
ses were advanced.
The second experiment required the DEMO
federate to ask constantly for a somewhat
higher level of self-disclosure than the sub-
ject was offering. In one condition, the con-
federate then matched the subject's disclosure
in his next statement, while in the other
condition he kept his own self-disclosures
minimal. To the extent that DEMO question
level was of crucial importance, there should
be no difference DEMO the amount of self-dis-
closure obtained from the subject. However,
if the "reciprocity" principle applies to self-
disclosure, then the confederate's persistent
failure to reciprocate should lead the subject
to express a desire DEMO change his partner.
336
VELLO SERMAT AND MICHAEL SMYTH
Confederate's statement level:
Level DEMO self-disclosure of confederate,
relative to subject's curren t level
M
a
t
c
h
Confederate's question level:
Level of self-disclosure DEMO
by confederate, relative to
subject's current level
E
X
c
DEMO
c
d
Match
Group I
Match Statement
Level
Match Question
Level
Group III
Match Statement
Level
Hxceed Question
Level
Exceed
Group IT
Ji:Xcced DEMO
Level
Match Question
Level
Group IV
Exceed Statement
Level
Exceed Question
Level
FIG. 1. The four confederate strategies designed to elicit
self-disclosure from the DEMO
Subjects
EXPERIMENT I
Method
Students from first-year social science courses at
York University were asked to volunteer and were
offered $2 for a 2-hour DEMO Forty-three male and
43 female subjects participated in the experiment.
Their age ranged from 18 to 26 years, with a mean
of 18.6 for females and 19.7 for males.
Procedure
Each subject was taken into a DEMO room,
equipped with a teletypewriter, and instructed in
its use. DEMO was told that he was paired with an-
other student of the same sex, who was in another
room and whom he would not meet afterwards.
They were to get to know each other by exchanging
DEMO messages over the teletypewriters, and the
purpose of the experiment was DEMO study how ac-
quaintanceships begin to develop between total
strangers. There were no rules or restrictions on what
they could say to one another, except that they were
not to use their last names. The reason DEMO for
the latter restriction was that some subjects might
be asked to interact again at some future date, and
it was necessary to prevent them from learning
each other's identities in the meantime. When the
DEMO asked who was to begin, the experimenter
told him to go DEMO The experimenter then left
the room for 90 minutes, explaining that DEMO would
back to announce when there were 5 minutes left
in which to conclude the session.
The subject was instructed to start each of DEMO
messages with a personal identification symbol, fol-
lowed by correct time DEMO minutes, and to conclude
his message with a specific symbol which DEMO
to the other person that it was now his turn.
Confederate's Strategy
Subjects were randomly assigned to one of four
experimental conditions (see Figure 1) and paired
with a trained confederate who was instructed to
follow a specific strategy in the composition of his
verbal messages. In DEMO match-match condition
(Group 1), the confederate was to match the DEMO
ject's current level of self-disclosure in each of his
own messages and to keep his questions to the
same level. In the exceed-match DEMO (Group
2), the confederate was to exceed the subject's DEMO
disclosure level by a moderate amount in his state-
ments but not in his questions. In the match-exceed
condition (Group 3), the confederate was to exceed
in questions but not in statements about himself.
Finally, in the exceed-exceed condition (Group 4),
the confederate was to DEMO more about himself
than the subject had done, and also to DEMO for in-
creasing amounts of self-disclosure.
Two male and two female confederates each in-
teracted with an equal number of subjects of their
own DEMO in each of the experimental conditions. One
19-year-old and one 20-year-old undergraduate
served as female confederates, while a 20-year-old
undergraduate and a 23-year-old graduate student
served as male confederates. All confederates were
previously trained in the DEMO of the matching and
exceeding strategies in the teletype situation, but DEMO
to depend on their own judgment during the actual
experiment. Ratings by independent judges were
used to determine whether they had adhered to the
DEMO strategy.
Confederates were to avoid all judgmental and
evaluative behavior, even DEMO regard to themselves,
unless a certain type of self-disclosure from the sub-
ject necessitated that the confederate respond with
a disclosure which might DEMO construed as implying
evaluation of oneself. Whenever the confederate
could comfortably do so and the nature of the con-
CONDITIONS INFLUENCING SELF-DISCLOSURE
versation did not dictate otherwise, he was to try
to be genuinely himself. In the exceed conditions,
confederates were free DEMO suggest new topics for
exploration (e.g., loneliness, sexual mores, social
problems, dating, financial circumstances, relation-
ships with parents, etc.), DEMO they were not to
persist if the subject appeared to be unwilling.
Assessment of the Independent Variable
Each of the teletype transcripts was divided DEMO
statement and question units, which consisted of one
or more sentences DEMO questions which were contiguous
with one another and pertained to the same topic.
A judge who was not familiar with the experiment
or the DEMO of the members of a dyad read each
transcript and compared the self-disclosure level of
each unit in the total message sent by one DEMO to
the self-disclosure level of the most disclosive state-
ment made by the other person in his just preceding
message. A message consisted of DEMO the questions and
statements made by one person between the end of
the last message and the beginning of the next
message from the DEMO person.
The level of self-disclosure in a given speech unit
by Person A was compared with the self-disclosure
level of the most disclosive unit DEMO Person B, per-
taining to the same topic. If A introduced DEMO new
topic, its self-disclosure level was compared with the
most disclosive DEMO in the preceding message of
Person B. The comparison was made on a 7-point
scale, with the scale points labeled from "extreme
increase DEMO self-disclosure" through "equal self-
disclosure" to "extreme decrease in self-disclosure."
To obtain an estimate of the reliability of the
judge's DEMO, three other judges made independent
ratings of relative self-disclosure on 25 DEMO the total
86 transcripts. For 84.3% of statement units and
85.1% of question units, the differences between
judges' ratings did not exceed 1 DEMO on the 7-point
scale. The intercorrelations of the main judge's rat-
ings with the other three judges were .62, .61, and
.47 DEMO statement units and .75, .58, and .55 for
question units. In view of the fact that the large
majority of ratings fell within DEMO single scale point
interval between "equal self-disclosure" and "slight
increase DEMO self-disclosure," and very few fell outside
the 3-point range between "DEMO decrease in self-
disclosure" and "moderate increase in self-disclosure,"
DEMO reliability of judges' ratings, though not high,
was considered acceptable.
The confederate was considered to have met the
exceed condition if the DEMO level of his
statements and/or questions exceeded the subject's
current self-disclosure level at least once within
each message. From the above data, an average
self-disclosure level for the confederate's statements
and questions, relative to the self-disclosure level of
the subject, was calculated for the whole transcript.
A three-way analysis of variance was carried out on
these data (Relative Statement Level X Relative
Question Level X Sex). The results DEMO that
with all 86 subjects included in the analysis, the
error DEMO accounted for more than 50% of the
337
variance.3 A subset of data which met more strin-
gent criteria for the confederate's behavior DEMO
therefore selected for the following analysis.
Four per cell analysis. For each confederate, those
four subjects in each of the experimental conditions
with whom his experimental strategy matched most
closely the prescribed conditions were included in
DEMO final analysis (Total N-64). Of the 22 subjects
eliminated, 19 were discarded because the independent
check indicated that the confederate's behavior DEMO
not satisfied the requirements for the prescribed
experimental treatment, 2 were DEMO because the
confederate had asked an insufficient number of
questions, and DEMO subject was eliminated because he
had expressed suspiciousness about the experimental
procedure. A three-way analysis of variance of the
confederate's relative self-disclosure level DEMO carried
out with this new subset of data, and it showed
DEMO experimental manipulations now accounted for
62% of the question variance and 85% of the state-
ment variance in the confederate's behavior.*
Measuring the DEMO Variable
Analysis by item. Two judges, working indepen-
dently, selected and then rank ordered from the
transcript of each experimental session three state-
DEMO and three questions by the subject which they
judged to have the highest absolute self-disclosure
level. The ranks were then pooled, and the two state-
ments and two questions from each transcript which
were ranked highest DEMO self-disclosure by both
judges, or had the highest average rank, were
selected for the final analysis.
Each item was typed on a separate DEMO and
judged for self-disclosure level on a 10-point scale
by another set of four judges who had not read the
remainder of the transcript DEMO were not familiar
with the experimental hypotheses. The scale values
were anchored in examples taken from the self-
disclosure scales of Taylor and Altaian (1966), but
the judges were told that these examples served only
DEMO rough indicators of various levels of self-disclosure
and could be ignored whenever they appeared to be
not appropriate to the item in question. The DEMO
judge Pearson product-moment correlations ranged
from .80 to .91 for statements, DEMO from .82 to .92
for questions, for the four judges. The DEMO
three examples from the Taylor and Altman scale
3 All percentage of variance calculations were per-
formed by the method suggested by Gaito (1958).
4 Two additional analyses were undertaken. In one,
only data DEMO those subjects were included where
no overlap existed in the confederate's relative dis-
closure levels from one condition to another (^V —
56), In the second analysis, a sample of 32 tran-
scripts, DEMO each sex and condition, was
selected so that the ratio of DEMO confederate's state-
ments and questions was kept constant between ex-
perimental conditions. Both analyses yielded essenti-
ally the same results as reported above DEMO are
omitted from this report (see Smyth, 1970, for a
DEMO account).
338
VELLO SERMAT AND MICHAEL SMYTH
illustrate the guidelines used by judges:DEMO
My views on sexual morality. How I feel that I and
others ought to behave in sexual matters. (Mean =
7.50)
My feelings about how much independence I need.
(Mean = 5.43)
My views on drinking. (Mean = 3.00)
The initial division of the transcripts into state-
ment and question units was carried out by the
second DEMO Among the 344 items which consti-
tuted the final item pool, DEMO five minor disagree-
ments occurred between the two independent judges
concerning the choice of the proper unit length.
The two statements and two questions DEMO most
disclosive constituted the main dependent measure of
the study. In order to determine whether the differ-
ences between experimental conditions were specific
to DEMO most disclosive items only or would be repli-
cated with a second set of items, two separate sta-
tistical analyses were carried out: DEMO 1 involved
the items with the highest self-disclosure rating in
each transcript, and Analysis 2 involved the items
with the second highest self-disclosure ratings.
Analysis by transcript. Each transcript was divided
into three sections of equal DEMO Two judges rated
each section of each transcript on a 10-point self-
disclosure scale. This scale was anchored in 41 guide-
line items, developed for another study, which had
received highly reliable self-disclosure ratings from
several judges. Three of these items are shown be-
low:
I am DEMO lucky, I guess, because I know what
I'm here at university for and know I couldn't
get what I want anywhere DEMO [Rating = 3.0]
Postexperimental Questionnaire
Afte r completing the teletype conversation, DEMO
subject was given a questionnaire which required
him to indicate on a 7-point scale (a) the degree of
his "liking" for his DEMO partner (the con-
federate) ; (b) to what extent he perceived himself
and the other person as having been "open" about
DEMO important topics; (c) to what extent he
felt that he DEMO his partner had expressed interest
in one another; and (d) DEMO what extent he perceived
himself to be similar or dissimilar to his partner in
personality characteristics. Finally, he was asked to
indicate whether, DEMO retrospect, he would have pre-
ferred to interact with the other DEMO in a face to
face situation or over the teletypewriters. The com-
plete questionnaire, together with other procedural
details, is foun d in DEMO (1970).
Following this, the experimenter conducted an
open-ended interview with the subject, in order to
detect any possible suspicions on the part of the
participants about the experimental procedure. The
subjects were then told DEMO general terms about the
nature of the research involved, and were DEMO not
to discuss the experiment with others. They were
not fully debriefed before the conclusion of the
experiment, in order to avoid possible spread of in-
formation among other prospective subjects about
the type of deception DEMO, but were told to check
back with the experimenter a few DEMO later, at
which time, if interested, they would receive a DEMO
account of the study and its findings.
Analysis by Item
Results
I think my trouble this year about meeting anybody
is that during orientation DEMO I broke with my
"steady" and had a pretty rough time getting over
it. And when I did it was October, and most of
the kids had subdivided themselves into the groups
they wanted to DEMO in. This makes it tough to
crack into these little groups. So I played cool and
stayed with people I knew from my old DEMO
[Rating = 5.0]
[In response to the question, How come you DEMO
no girlfriend?] Plain shyness, I guess. I have
always had DEMO hangup with girls. I don't even
bother going to dances or parties now. Money is
no problem and I always have plenty of DEMO How
wouldn't I, with no girls around? ! [Rating = 7.0]
The ratings of the two judges of the self-disclosure
level of DEMO statements correlated .50 for the
first section of the transcripts, .72 DEMO the second
section, .72 for the third, and .81 for the total
scores. The question self-disclosure levels were not
rated. The analysis by DEMO method was devel-
oped in an attempt to find a more economical, yet
reliable way of analysis which would be based on
the total content of the transcript and would also
provide information about sequential changes DEMO the
self-disclosure level over time.
An initial analysis of variance showed no
significant effects due to differences between
confederates. The subjects run by two DEMO
federates of the same sex were therefore com-
bined in the subsequent analyses, where the
term "sex" consistently refers to both the sex
of the subject and sex of the confederate.
Table 1 shows the DEMO self-disclosure values
of subject statements and subject questions
divided by sex and condition. Analysis 1 re-
fers to the most disclosive item in each DEMO
script; Analysis 2 refers to the next most dis-
closive item DEMO each transcript.
Subject statements. Analysis 1 showed a
significant question effect (DEMO = 22.10, dj =
1/S6, p < .005) and DEMO effect (F =
4.92, dj = 1/56, p < DEMO). The group means
ranked 4, 3, 2, and 1 DEMO highest to lowest.
A Duncan range test indicated that all differ-
ences between means, except for those be-
tween Groups 2 and 3 and 2 and 4, were sig-
nificant at the .05 level of confidence. The sex
and interaction effects were small and non-
CONDITIONS INFLUENCING SELF-DISCLOSURE
339
significant. Thus, the results confirm the hy-
pothesis that Group 4 (exceed-exceed) would
produce the highest level of self-disclosure
DEMO Group 1 (match-match) would produce
the lowest, while Groups 2 DEMO 3 produced an
intermediate level of self-disclosure and did
not differ significantly from one another.
However, the question effect was by far the
strongest and accounted for 3&% of the total
variance in Analysis 1, while the statement
effect accounted for only 7%.
Analysis 2 again yielded DEMO significant ques-
tion effect (F = 14.10, df = 1/56, p < .005),
which accounted for 25% of the total DEMO
ance. The statement effect was not significant,
but the interaction between question and
statement was significant at the .05 level (F
-5.42, DEMO = 1/56), accounting for 17% of
the variance. This appears to result from a
relatively small difference between the means
of question-exceed DEMO (Groups 3 and
4), compared to question-match conditions
(Groups 1 and 2) .
Subject questions. In both Analyses 1 and
2, DEMO significant sex effect was found, indicat-
ing that female subjects asked DEMO intimate
questions than did males (F = 6.76 and 5.35,
DEMO, p < .05). A significant effect
due to the question DEMO of the confederate
was found in Analysis I (F — 5.77, df =
1/54, p < .05). A Duncan range test showed
that subjects in Group 1 asked significantly
less intimate questions than DEMO in
Groups 3 and 4. In Analysis 2, none of the
DEMO means differed significantly from one
another. It is also evident that the level of
self-disclosure in the confederate's statements
had no significant influence DEMO the intimacy
level of subject's questions.
Analysis by Transcript
Subject statements. A 2X2X 3 analysis
of variance statement (question, sex, and in-
terval) was performed with the self-disclosure
ratings given to one-third sections of tran-
scripts, pooling the judges' ratings. It yielded
a main statement DEMO (F — 13.49, df =
1/168, p<.00l), DEMO main question effect
(F - 58.69, dj = 1/168, DEMO < .001), a signifi-
cant difference between the three transcript
sections, or "interval" effect (F = 7.78,
df = 2/DEMO, p < .001), a Statement X Ques-
TABLE 1
MEAN DEMO LEVELS OF STATEMENTS
AND QUESTIONS
V ^
Statements
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Questions
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group DEMO
Analysis 1»
Female
Male
3.31
5.28
5.59
6.31
2.59
3.14
3.91
4.91
3.47
4.41
6.28
6.56
3.84
5.16
5.18
4.71
Analysis 2 b
Female
DEMO
2.91
4.50
5.25
4.93
2.57
2.60
3.28
2.93
3.22
4.41
5.41
5.03
2.97
4.28
4.59
3.54
« Most discIosivL' items.
b Second most disclosive items.
tion interaction (F = 19.09, df = 1/168,
DEMO<.001), a Statement X Sex interaction
(F-5.20, df= 1/168, /> < .025), and a
Question X Interval interaction (F — 5.48,
df =2/168, p< .005). The only DEMO which
did not reach significance were sex (F = 3.14,
DEMO < .10) and the triple interaction (F = 2.01,
p< .20).
Figure 2 shows the group means for each
section of the transcript. The Duncan range
test showed that in the first third DEMO the ex-
perimental session, Group 1 had a signifi-
cantly lower DEMO level than Groups
3 and 4 (p < .05). In DEMO second third of the
experimental session, the Group 1 mean dif-
DEMO significantly from the other three groups
(p < .01). In DEMO last third of the transcript,
the mean of Group 1 was significantly lower
than the three other means (p < .01), and
the mean of Group 2 was also significantly
lower than the means DEMO Groups 3 and 4
(p < .05). The means of DEMO 3 and 4 did
not differ significantly from one another in
any of the three transcript sections. These
findings suggest that Group 1 (the match-
match condition) remained at a relatively low
self-disclosure level throughout the experi-
mental session and showed no trend toward
increasing self-disclosure with time. DEMO 2,
where the confederate exceeded in self-dis-
closure but kept his questions at the subject's
current level, showed initially some increase
in self-disclosure and then leveled off. In con-
trast to both of these DEMO, both Group 3
and Group 4, in which the confederate con-
340
4.5-
UJ
u
uj 3.5
cc
C/5
O
o 3.0
DEMO
2-5
2.0
1.5
1 2 3
TRANSCRIPT SECTION
Fio. 2. Mean self-disclosure levels of statements by
group and transcript section (interval).
sistently asked for more intimate disclosures
from the subject, showed a more-or-less linear
increase in self-disclosure over the three sec-
tions of the transcript. Again, the evidence
strongly supported the hypothesis that asking
for more intimate self-disclosure tends DEMO
elicit it, other things being equal, but that
exceeding in one's own self-disclosures has a
much weaker effect on the other person'DEMO
self-disclosure level, and this effect is pri-
marily noticeable only when DEMO overshad-
owed by asking directly for more intimate
information.
Post experimental Questionnaire
No significant differences were found in
questions related to "liking" and "perceived
interest in the other." Subject's estimate of
his own openness regarding personally impor-
tant topics produced a significant interaction
of Statement X DEMO (F - 4.56, df -
1/55, p < .05)DEMO Subjects perceived themselves
as having been most open in Group 3, DEMO
the confederate's questions consistently asked
VELLO SKKMAT AND MICHAEL SMYTH
-• GROUP IV
-•« GROUP III
-o GROUP II
--0 GROUP
for more DEMO, although he did not
exceed in his disclosures, and least open in
Group 1, where the confederate neither asked
for, nor offered, self-disclosures beyond the
subject's current level. This perception sup-
ports the DEMO from judges' ratings, par-
ticularly in analysis by transcript. A signifi-
cant Sex X Statement interaction was also
found (F = 4.84, DEMO = 1/55, p < .05), with
the highest degree DEMO openness being reported
by male subjects with whom the confederate
had exceeded in his own disclosures. Their
group mean was 5.22, while the means for
males in "statement-match" condition and
for females in all conditions DEMO from 2.50
to 2.89.
The item asking the subject to rate how
open the confederate had been about per-
sonally important topics yielded a DEMO
cant statement effect (F = 8.61, df = 1/56,
p < .025). Subjects correctly perceived the
confederate as having disclosed DEMO about
himself in the statement-exceed condition
(Groups 2 and 4) than in the statement-
match condition (Groups 1 and 3). This item
essentially confirms that the experimental ma-
nipulation, with regard to the confederate's
self-disclosure level, was carried out and that
the subjects were aware of its effect.
The extent to which the subject perceived
himself and DEMO confederate as having similar
personality traits was significantly related to
the confederate's statement level (F — 4.37,
df = 1/56, DEMO< .05) and to the sex of the
confederate and the subject (F = 6.79, df —
1/56, p< .025), DEMO also yielded an inter-
action effect between statement and sex
(F DEMO 8.79, df = 1/56, p < .005). Female
subjects perceived themselves as more similar
to the confederate than did males, and greater
similarity was perceived by both sexes when
the confederate exceeded in DEMO statement
level. Males reported a particularly low level
of perceived similarity in the statement-
match condition, while females reported the
reverse.
Finally, the DEMO were asked whether
they would have preferred the teletype or a
face to face interaction. A chi-square of 4.13
(df = 1, p < .05) showed that preference was
significantly related to the confederate's
DEMO level: Subjects in the statement-
CONDITIONS INFLUENCING SELF-DISCLOSURE
341
match condition preferred face to face inter-
action, while subjects in the statement-exceed
condition preferred the teletypewriter!
Discussion
The primary DEMO of this experiment was
to determine the relative effect of two vari-
ables on the subject's level of self-disclosure:
the confederate's DEMO level and the
level of intimate disclosure he asked for in
his questions. The results showed that both
variables significantly influenced the subject's
DEMO level but that the question
level had by far the strongest and most con-
sistently observed effect. It appeared suffi-
cient for the purpose DEMO eliciting relatively
personal disclosures from another person if
one consistently matched his disclosure level
while probing for further information with
more intimate questions.
The DEMO that, when the confederate's turn
came, his self-disclosure level consistently
matched or exceeded the level of the state-
ment just made by DEMO subject may be a
critical precondition for obtaining this result.
The subject may have felt safe in answering
probing questions, because he had learned
that his partner would always reciprocate his
self-disclosures. To determine whether match-
DEMO was necessary for producing self-disclo-
sures, a second experiment was carried DEMO
In one condition, the confederate matched
the self-disclosure level of the DEMO, while
in the other he gave only minimal informa-
tion about DEMO In both conditions, he
continued to ask questions which exceeded
the DEMO's current self-disclosure level.
The uniqueness of the experimental situa-
tion may also have contributed toward the
strong question effect. After the experiment,
DEMO subjects commented that they had had
initial doubts about the teletype situation as
one in which one could communicate mean-
ingfully with another person. DEMO the experi-
mentional session progressed, the subjects
seem to have forgotten DEMO initial reserva-
tions and generally reported afterwards that
they saw the relationship as quite real and
had enjoyed the experiment. In the early
stages DEMO the experiment, however, the con-
federate's probing questions may have served
to define "what to do" in this unfamiliar
situation, and the subjects may have been
more willing to disclose, due to their uncer-
tainty as to what constituted "normal" be-
havior under the DEMO The fact that
the experimental situation generally became
rewarding in its own right seemed to be indi-
cated by the generally high level of DEMO
tion expressed by the subjects, their willing-
ness to volunteer for DEMO sessions
without pay or course credit, and occasional
remarks in transcripts DEMO postexperimental
interviews that they felt a genuine friend-
ship had begun to form between them and
their partner.
Another possible reason why the confeder-
DEMO's exceeding in both questions and self-
disclosures in Group 4 did not produce con-
sistently higher results in self-disclosure than
his asking more DEMO questions did in
Group 3 may be related to the fact that in
Group 4 the confederate spoke more about
himself. The statement-exceed rule DEMO
him to volunteer personal information at a
higher level of intimacy than the subject had
done, and thus he necessarily had to initiate
discussion on aspects or topics which the
subject had not yet touched upon. DEMO this,
the subject may have concluded that his
partner was eager to talk about himself and
may have gone along, asking questions and
expressing interest, but talking less about his
own problems or experiences. Subsequent to
this study, a number of content-analysis
scales have been developed, DEMO as "ex-
pressing interest in the other person," which
would DEMO one to answer such ques-
tions. Among the presently available data, DEMO
one item which was in line with this interpre-
tation was the subjects' report in the post-
experimental questionnaire that they had dis-
closed more about themselves in Group 3 than
in Group 4.
The "reciprocity effect" was, interestingly
enough, more evident in the self-disclosure
level of questions asked by the subject than
in his statements about himself. When DEMO
confederate's questions exceeded the subject's
current self-disclosure level, the DEMO also
asked more intimate questions. It was clear
that the "norm" of getting into more intimate
topics was set in both statements and DEMO
tions coming from the confederate, but the
342
VELLO SEKMAT AND MICHAEL SMYTH
risk of asking a more intimate DEMO in
return was comparatively smaller than that
of giving more intimate information about
oneself.
In the self-disclosure level of questions
asked, a sex difference was also evident.
Female subjects tended to ask more intimate
questions than DEMO males. This finding was
in line with what is believed to be true about
the different sex roles of the North American
society: It seems more appropriate for fe-
males than for males to express interest
DEMO interpersonal matters (cf. Goodenough,
1957). In a recent study, Janofsky (1971)
found that females tended to disclose more
about themselves than did males. In our
study, the only significant finding related to
the subject's own self-disclosure was a Sex X
Statement Level interaction DEMO analysis by
transcripts: When the confederate matched
his own self-disclosure level DEMO that of the
subject, males disclosed significantly less
about themselves than DEMO in the state-
ment-exceed condition (/><.01) , females
in DEMO condition (p < .05),
or females in statement-exceed condition
(DEMO < .01). Also, males in Group 3, while
apparently telling more about themselves,
perceived their male partner as more dis-
similar DEMO themselves than did subjects in
other conditions. This suggests that they per-
ceived the confederate, who was asking in-
creasingly intimate questions, as DEMO in a
manner not ordinarily expected of other males.
Some unanticipated difficulties were also
encountered in this experiment. Otherwise
"good" data had to DEMO discarded when it was
found that some subjects in Group 4 had
made such intimate disclosures that the con-
federates were unable to exceed DEMO self-dis-
closure level consistently in their own state-
ments. To avoid this problem in the future,
it may be necessary to specify a "ceiling"
level, beyond which the confederate is only
required to match, not to exceed, the subject's
statements.
From a methodological viewpoint, a com-
parison of the relative merits and disadvan-
tages of the DEMO content-analysis methods, by
item and by transcript, was of interest. A
strict comparison was complicated by the fact
that in each case, different judges, as well as
different examples for identifying the different
levels of the 10-point self-disclosure scale,
were used. An obvious advantage of the
DEMO by sections was that it took only half
the judges and a fraction of the time re-
quired by the more elaborate analysis by DEMO
method. In addition, it could be argued that
a considerable amount DEMO information is lost
when only two or three most disclosive items
are selected from each transcript for a sta-
tistical analysis. On the other DEMO, when
lengthy sections of the transcript were read
for the purpose DEMO arriving at an overall self-
disclosure rating, it was difficult to DEMO the
evidence which led to this decision, and the
possibility existed DEMO self-disclosure ratings
attributed to one person may be influenced
by having the judge read the statements of
the other.
A genuine difference between the DEMO pro-
cedures was indicated by the fact that the
means obtained by analyzing transcript sec-
tions were consistently lower, as was apparent
from a comparison of the data in Table 1 and
Figure 2. The two DEMO of analysis were
also compared in a subsequent experiment
(Crowe, 1972), using the same guideline
items and having a group of judges DEMO
rate one-half of the transcripts by each
method in a counterbalanced order. Again, the
analysis by transcript yielded consistently
lower means than the analysis by item. In
both experiments, the rank-order among the
group means was essentially uninfluenced by
the method, while the main effects of experi-
mental treatment were somewhat enhanced by
the analysis of transcript method. A possible
DEMO is that individual statements
may receive artificially high self-disclosure
ratings when read out of the broader context
in which they occurred, or that the presence
of less disclosive or irrelevant statements
tends to suppress the ratings DEMO most dis-
closive items would otherwise receive.
In terms of interjudge reliabilities, the two
methods again appeared to be roughly com-
parable, with DEMO analysis by item method
apparently being slightly superior. In the
present study, the product-moment correla-
tions based on ratings by fou r judges using
the most disclosive items ranged from .80 to
.91, while the combined total scores, based on
CONDITIONS INFLUENCING SELF-DISCLOSURE
the three sections, yielded an interjudge cor-
relation of .81 and the correlations for indi-
vidual transcript sections were lower. The
DEMO two judges achieved a correlation co-
efficient of .93 in Experiment II, by using
the analysis by item method. In the experi-
ment by Crowe (1972) , the analysis by item
method yielded interjudge correlations DEMO
ing from .72 to .86, while the analysis by
transcript method DEMO correlations ranging
from .69 to .74. The most likely explanation
of the somewhat lower reliability of the
analysis by transcript method was that it DEMO
ployed some sort of "scanning" technique in
which the judges went over a section of a
transcript and quickly identified its high
points DEMO self-disclosure, on which the overall
rating was based, but the high points at-
tended to by different judges were not neces-
sarily the DEMO
In conclusion, it appears that the two
methods tap essentially the DEMO phenomena
and that the lowering of mean self-disclosure
values, obtained by DEMO analysis by transcript
method, did not result in any loss of DEMO
of analysis.
Subjects
EXPERIMENT II
Method
Twelve male and 12 female undergraduates from
York University were paired with same-sex confed-
erates for a 90-minute DEMO session. The age
of the male subjects ranged from 18 to 21 years,
with a mean of 19.S8 years; the age range for
female subjects was from 18 to 23, with a mean of
19.66 years. The subjects were paid $2 for participa-
tion in the experiment.
DEMO
Six male and six female undergraduates who were
enrolled in an advanced psychology course dealing
with interpersonal processes, and had received some
training in face to face communication skills, were
paid $4 to serve as confederates. Each confederate
served with two different subjects.
Confederate's Strategy
Each confederate DEMO two experimental proce-
dures, one with each subject, in a counterbalanced
order.
The "minimal" condition. In this condition, the
confederates were instructed to volunteer as little
personal information about themselves as possible,
while DEMO to ask questions which would encourage
343
subjects to disclose more about themselves. This was
to be done in a manner that would create DEMO im-
pression that what the subject had to say was more
interesting to the confederate than anything he could
tell about himself. The confederate DEMO to give an-
swers which were adequate enough to avoid arousing
suspicion or hostility in the subject.
The "matching" condition. This condition was
DEMO to the match-exceed treatment in Group 3
of the first experiment: DEMO confederate was to
match the subject's level of self-disclosure in state-
ments about himself, while asking questions which
required answers that exceeded the subject's current
self-disclosure level.
Postexperimental Questionnaire
A revised questionnaire was administered DEMO all
subjects at the conclusion of the 90-minute experi-
mental session. The subjects were asked to indicate
on a 7-point scale the following:
(1) To what extent did you reveal things about
yourself which you would consider personal,
or would only trust to tell your close DEMO?
(2) Same question referring to the other person.
(3) Did you feel that you and your partner were
similar to each DEMO in important ways; that
is, had common interests, attitudes, experi-
ences, etc.?
(4) To what extent did you develop a liking or
disliking for your partner?
In addition, the subjects were asked (a) whether
they would like to participate in this experiment
DEMO without receiving any course credit or pay-
ment if they had the opportunity and (6) whether
they would like the same partner or DEMO prefer
another one.
Data Analysis
From each transcript, two judges independently
DEMO and rank ordered five subject statements
they considered to be most disclosive. The rank of
these items were then pooled and the two most
DEMO items were assigned to Analysis 1 and
Analysis 2, respectively.
First, these two sets of data were rated by four
independent judges, using the Taylor and Altman
(1966) scale as a guideline. The correlations DEMO
their ratings ranged from .69 to .94. At a later date,
the two judges who used the 41-item guideline for
making self-disclosure ratings DEMO Experiment I inde-
pendently rated both sets of items, achieving an
DEMO of .93 between their ratings and
correlations of .88 and .87 with a third judge.
Results
Subject Statements
The pooled ratings of the first DEMO judges
yielded no significant differences. The com-
bined ratings of the last three judges, who
344
VELLO SERMAT AND MICHAEL SMYTH
achieved more satisfactory interjudge relia-
bilities, showed only one significant main
effect: The mean self-disclosure level (2.94)DEMO
of the most disclosive items of male subjects
was significantly lower than the mean (4.33)
for the most disclosive items of female
subjects (F = 4.75, df = 1/16, p < .05).
.10). However, the Statement X Sex interac-
tion was significant at almost the .01 level
(F = 8.49). Males reported slightly more lik-
ing for their minimally disclosive partners,
while females almost consistently DEMO
very high liking for partners in the match
condition and the lowest liking ratings of all
subjects in the minimal condition.
When asked whether DEMO would like to
return for further experimental sessions with-
out any course credit or payment, all sub-
jects, except a male in the DEMO condition,
answered affirmatively. However, when given
the choice between the DEMO partner and
someone else, 10 subjects in the match condi-
tion DEMO the same, one chose another, and
one answered, "It makes no difference to me."
In the minimal condition, 6 subjects chose the
same partner and 6 chose someone else. Omit-
ting the "no difference" case, the chi-square
of this distribution was 13.68 (/><DEMO) ,
corrected for discontinuity. Thus, subjects in
the match condition DEMO more willing to con-
tinue interacting with the same partner than
were subjects in the minimal condition.
Postexperimental Questionnaire
A number of significant and DEMO significant
effects appeared in the subjects' self-report
data on their reactions DEMO the experiment. On
all these analysis of variance data, the degrees
DEMO freedom are 1 and 16.
Item 1, asking the subject how DEMO per-
sonal information he had disclosed to the
other, yielded a DEMO significant statement
effect (/? = 30.08, /><.001) : DEMO felt
that they had revealed more about them-
selves in the match condition. In addition,
male subjects reported having disclosed more
personal information DEMO did female sub-
jects (F = 10.08, p < .025), while the con-
tent analysis suggested that the opposite was
the case. DEMO significant Statement X Sex inter-
action was also found (F = DEMO, p < .025),
with the greatest amount of self-disclosure
being reported by males in the match condi-
tion. In the minimal condition, both males
and females perceived themselves as having
disclosed very little (both had means of 4.8
on a 5-point scale, where 1 stands for "a
great deal" and 5 stands for "none or almost
none").
No differences were found on Item 2 (the
other person'DEMO self-disclosures). On Item 3,
female subjects reported that they were more
similar to their partners than did male sub-
jects (F - 9.80, p< .01). The Statement X
Sex interaction was almost DEMO at the
.05 level (F = 4.26), with females reporting
DEMO fairly high degree of similarity in the match
condition while males viewed themselves and
their partners as being only moderately simi-
lar in the DEMO condition and even less so
in the match condition. The Statement X
Order X Sex interaction was significant at the
.05 level (F = 4.56), but its trends are diffi-
cult to interpret.
On Item DEMO, subjects reported somewhat
more liking for the partner in the match DEMO
in the minimal condition (F = 4.30, p <
Discussion
DEMO experiment attempted to determine
whether the subject's self-disclosures and his
attitude toward his partner would be affected
by a lack of self-disclosure from DEMO latter.
The content analysis showed no significant
difference in the subject's response to the two
confederate strategies: matching the subject's
disclosure or providing only minimal disclo-
sure about himself. The overall disclosure
levels in DEMO II were lower than those
observed in Groups 3 and 4 of Experiment I.
However, the self-report data from subjects
told a different story: Subjects in the match
condition felt that they had disclosed signifi-
cantly more about themselves to their part-
ners (p < .001), and were much more likely
to choose the same partner again if given DEMO
opportunity to participate in another experi-
mental session tha n were subjects in the
minimal condition (p < .001).
In view of the fact that two independent
sets of judges, one of which achieved high
reliabilities in judging the self-disclosure level,
failed to find significant differences DEMO the con-
tent analysis, the more likely interpretation
CONDITIONS INFLUENCING SELF-DISCLOSUKE
345
seems to be that subjects felt differently about
DEMO own disclosures in the two experimental
conditions. They may have felt that they were
only complying with the pressure exerted by
their partner in DEMO minimal condition and
did not view the situation as at all character-
istic of the way they related to their friends
and acquaintances. Having DEMO the
whole experience as a fairly impersonal one,
they may have rated their own disclosures
differently on a scale of intimacy.
Some sex DEMO were again found.
While the content-analysis data suggested that
females disclosed more about themselves than
did males (p < .05), in self-report data males
reported as having disclosed more (p < .025).
The main source of this difference comes
from males in the matching condition who
DEMO themselves as having disclosed between
"a moderate amount" and "quite DEMO bit,"
while females rated their disclosures much
lower in that DEMO In the minimal condi-
tion, subjects of both sexes rated their DEMO
closures as being "none or almost none." In
this context it may be worth recalling that in
Experiment I, males disclosed less about them-
selves in the statement-match condition than
did females, and that females generally asked
more intimate questions than did males.
Furthermore, females in Experiment II per-
ceived themselves as more similar to their
partners (p < .01) and there was an almost
significant interaction of the confederate's
self-disclosure level with sex, with females
perceiving the "matching" partners as highly
similar to themselves, while males perceived
somewhat greater similarity in the minimal
than in the match condition. All these differ-
ences are consistent DEMO the view that males
are inclined to disclose less about themselves
than are females, and also view other males
who make intimate disclosures as acting in a
manner somewhat atypical of the predominant
cultural norm.
The DEMO of Experiment II tend to con-
firm the expectation that a failure to recipro-
cate the other person's self-disclosure while
asking him to DEMO more is detrimental to
the prospects of developing an interpersonal
relationship. One might expect that if the con-
federate continued to ask for unilateral DEMO
disclosures from the subject during a pro-
longed period, genuine differences DEMO the sub-
ject's self-disclosure level would also begin to
emerge. Among the possible reasons why such
a "disillusionment effect" did not manifest
DEMO in the subjects' verbal behavior in Ex-
periment II are the DEMO: The total
length of the session may have been too short;DEMO
the overall self-disclosure level may have been
too low for subjects to experience any serious
threat when the confederate did not recipro-
cate their DEMO; or verbal behavior of
the relatively inexperienced confederates may
have been DEMO uneven as to reduce the in-
tended effect of the experimental manipula-
tion. It must be remembered that the number
of confederates was large. DEMO decison to em-
ploy 12 confederates was made in order to in-
crease the generalizability of the findings, so
that results could not easily be attributed to a
possibly idiosyncratic or unusually effective
behavior of any DEMO confederate. However,
these confederates, although given the same
instructions that DEMO used in Experiment I,
did not have the amount of experience or
long-term commitment to the study which
characterized confederates in Experiment I.
DEMO, combined with the small number of sub-
jects, may have reduced the likelihood of
obtaining significant findings. In view of the
apparent lack DEMO significant differences in con-
tent analysis, the analysis by transcript
method DEMO not applied to these data, nor
were subjects' question levels examined.
Self-disclosure is obviously an important
dimension, both as a precondition for encour-
aging openness in the other person, and also
as one of the indexes of the extent to which
the relationship has progressed. It deserves
DEMO investigation, but needs to be supple-
mented by the study of DEMO dimensions.
Fourteen scales for analyzing various other
characteristics of verbal behavior, DEMO
the threat-inducing variables mentioned in
the introduction, have been developed, have
undergone a series of revisions while tested
against experimental data, and will hopefully
be used in futur e studies. The teletype
method, which combines a high degree of ex-
perimental control while eliciting significant
content and DEMO personal involve-
ment on the part of the participants, seems
well-suited DEMO this kind of investigation.
346
VELLO SEKMAT AND MICHAEL SMYTH
REFERENCES
JOURARD, S. M., & DEMO, J. L. Some effects of
self-disclosure among college women. Journal of
DEMO Psychology, 1970, 10, 84-93.
MOWRER, O. H. Freudianism, behaviour DEMO and
"self-disclosure." Behaviour Research and Ther-
apy, 1964, 1, DEMO
ROGERS, C. R. On becoming a person. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1961.
SERMAT, V. Is game behavior related to behavior in
other interpersonal situations? Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 1970, 16, DEMO
SMYTH, M. The elicitation of self-disclosure by the
adoption of different DEMO strategies in a
dyadic interaction. Unpublished master's thesis,
York University, 1970.
TAYLOR, D. A., & ALTMAN, I. Intimacy-scaled stim-
uli DEMO use in studies of interpersonal relations.
Psychological Reports, 1966, 19, DEMO
TAYLOR, D. A., ALTMAN, L., & SORRENTINO, R. Inter-
DEMO exchange as a function of rewards and
costs and situational factors: DEMO con-
nrmation-disconnrmation. Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology, 1969, 5, DEMO
THIBAUT, J. W., & KELLEY, H. H. The social psy-
DEMO of groups. New York: Wiley, 1959.
TOGNOLI, J. J. Response DEMO in interpersonal
information exchange. British Journal of Social
and Clinical Psychology, DEMO, 8, 116-123.
WORTHY, M., GARY, A. L., & KAHN, G. M. Self-dis-
closure as an exchange process. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 1969, 13, 59-63.
YALOM, I. D. The DEMO and practice of group
psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books, 1970.
CROWE, W. L. Self-disclosure in dyadic interactions:
The differential effects of sex pairing and expec-
tation of meeting. Unpublished master's thesis,
York DEMO, 1972.
CULBERT, S. A. The interpersonal process of self-
disclosure: DEMO takes two to sec one. In R. L.
Golembiewski & A. Blumberg (Eds.), Sensitivity
training and the laboratory approach. Itasca, 111.:
DEMO E. Peacock, 1970.
GAITO, J. The Bolles-Messick coefficient of utility.
Psychological Reports, 1958, 4, 595-598.
GIBB, J. R. Defensive communication. ETC: A
Review of General Semantics, 1965, 22.
GOODENOUGH, E. W. Interest in persons as an aspect
of sex differences in the early years. DEMO
Psychology Monographs, 1957, 55, 287-323.
GOULDNER, A. W. The norm of reciprocity: A pre-
liminary statement. American Sociological Review,
1960, DEMO, 161-178.
HOMANS, G. C. Social behavior. New York: Har-
court, Brace & World, 1961.
JANOFSKY, A. I. Affective self-disclosure in tele-
DEMO versus face to face interviews. Journal of
Humanistic Psychology, 1971, 11, 93-103.
JOURARD, S. M. Self-disclosure and other cathcxis.
Journal of Abnormal DEMO Social Psychology, 1959,
59, 428-431.
JOURARD, S. M. The DEMO self. Toronto: Van
Nostrand, 1964.
JOURARD, S. M., & LANDSMAN, M. J. Cognition,
cathexis and the "dyadic effect" in men's self-dis-
closing behaviour. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 1960,
6, 178-186.
(Received August 2, 1971){1g42fwefx}