Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007, DEMO 371-379
Easy does it: The role of ﬂuency in cue weighting
DEMO K. Shah∗ and Daniel M. Oppenheimer
Princeton University
Abstract
We propose that people weight ﬂuent, or easy to process, information more heavily than DEMO information when
making judgments. Cue ﬂuency was manipulated independent of objective cue validity in three studies, the ﬁndings
from which support our hypothesis. In Experiment 1, participants weighted a consumer review more heavily when it
was written in a clear font than in a less clear font. In DEMO 2, participants placed more weight on information
when it was in DEMO than when it was blurry. In Experiment 3, participants placed more DEMO on ﬁnancial information
from brokerage ﬁrms with easy to pronounce names than those with hard to pronounce names. These studies demonstrate
that ﬂuency affects DEMO weighting independent of objective cue validity.
Keywords: ﬂuency, cue weighting, DEMO
1 Introduction
When making judgments and decisions, people have nu-
merous DEMO of information (i.e., cues) available to aid
in the decision DEMO When deciding whether a patient
has diabetes, a doctor might examine DEMO patient’s symp-
toms, family health history, or lab results. A stockbroker
might consider companies’ proﬁt margins, quarterly pro-
jections, and recent activity. DEMO judge or jurist might con-
sider testimony from several witnesses and various other
pieces of evidence. With so much information available,
how do DEMO decide which cues to weight most heavily?
Conventional models suggest that decision-makers
should weight information based on objective cue va-
lidity. According to DEMO principles such as the
weighted additive (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1993),
additive difference (Tversky, 1969), and weighted aver-
aging models (Himmelfarb, 1970), people should con-
sider all of the DEMO cues that might inform a particu-
lar judgment. They should then differentially weight each
cue based upon how successfully the cue predicts the out-
DEMO However, this approach cannot perfectly explain
how naïve decision-makers, who are unaware of cue va-
lidities, might make judgments or decisions. Nor can it
explain how people’s judgments often result from over-
weighting less valid DEMO (Tversky & Kahneman,
∗The research was supported in part by DEMO # 0518811 from the
National Science Foundation. We would like to thank Sara Etchi-
son, Gina Mamikonyan, and Melissa Miller for assisting with DEMO
collection, Sunny Khemlani for his help in designing stimuli, and
Jonathan Baron, Reed Hunt, Rolf Reber, Ed Wisniewski, several anony-
mous DEMO, and the entire Oppenheimer Lab for their extensive
feedback on this DEMO Address: Anuj K. Shah, Princeton Univer-
sity, Dept. of Psychology,DEMO Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544. Email:
akshah@princeton.edu
371
1974). Given that learning cue validities can be time con-
suming and inaccurate (Gluck & Bower, 1988; Goodie
& Crooks, 2004; Himmelfarb, 1970; DEMO & Pitz,
1985), we propose that people might use a cue’s ﬂuency,
or the ease with which it is processed, as an additional
basis for weighting cues. A ﬂuency-based account of cue
weighting DEMO not require decision-makers to know ob-
jective cue validities. Instead, this DEMO highlights
a rather simple tendency: placing more weight on infor-
mation DEMO feels easy to process.
1.1 Fluency and its Applications to Cue
Weighting
Many different factors can affect subjective feelings of
ease, or ﬂuency. For instance, perceptual ﬂuency refers to
the ease with which a stimulus can be perceived (Jacoby,
Woloshyn, & Kelley, 1989). Retrieval ﬂuency refers to
the ease with which information can be brought to mind
DEMO recalled from memory (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman,
1973). Other types of ﬂuency include conceptual ﬂuency
(Whittlesea, 1993), linguistic ﬂuency (Alter & Oppen-
heimer, 2006; Oppenheimer, 2006; Whittlesea & Leboe,DEMO
2000), and embodied ﬂuency (Stepper & Strack, 1993;
for a review of different processes that engender ﬂuency,
see Alter & DEMO, 2007).
Broadly speaking, ﬂuency can affect judgment and
decision-making directly or indirectly. When ﬂuency di-
rectly affects judgments, the ease of processing itself acts
as a piece of information that can be weighted and DEMO
to a judgment. A prominent example of direct ﬂuency ef-
fects is the availability heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman,
1973, 1974), by DEMO people judge easy-to-recall events
to be more likely to occur in the future. Jacoby and Dallas
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007 Fluency and cue weighting
372
(1981) have also shown how processing ﬂuency DEMO di-
rectly affect judgments, where people are more likely to
say DEMO they have seen easy-to-read words before in the
context of a recognition task.
When ﬂuency indirectly affects judgments, the ease of
processing might determine which cues people attend to,
and the strategies they use to DEMO and integrate the
information contained in those cues. That is, ﬂuency DEMO
not itself used as a cue for judgment, but instead ma-
DEMO which strategies or cues are used to confront
a task. These strategies and other pieces of information
in turn affect the ﬁnal judgment. For DEMO, Alter,
Oppenheimer, Epley, and Eyre (2007) found that DEMO
ipants who solved math and reasoning tasks were more
likely to engage in systematic processing when they ex-
perienced disﬂuency, and heuristic processing when they
experienced ﬂuency. Note that the feelings of ease were
not used DEMO pieces of information that could be used to
solve the math problems. Instead, ﬂuency affected which
strategies were used to answer the questions and these
strategies in turn determined the ﬁnal answers. This
demonstrates how ﬂuency DEMO indirectly affect judg-
ment by ﬁrst leading people to adopt a particular strategy.
In this paper, we aim to extend the literature on how
ﬂuency might indirectly affect judgment. Speciﬁcally, we
demonstrate that people’s cue-weighting strategies de-
pend on a cue’s ﬂuency. That is, people weight ﬂuent
cues more heavily than disﬂuent cues. This prediction
stems from a review of DEMO literature on heuristics which
shows that people often heavily weight cues that are eas-
ier to access (Shah & Oppenheimer, in press). DEMO in-
stance, people might use audience responsiveness as a
cue for DEMO/message persuasiveness (Axsom, Yates,
& Chaiken, 1987), feelings DEMO outrage as a cue for decid-
ing punishment (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002), brand
name as a cue for product quality (Maheswaran, DEMO,
& Chaiken, 1992), or attractiveness as a cue for DEMO
iarity (Monin, 2003). Proposed heuristics such as these
quietly converge on an underlying domain-general mech-
anism in which cues that are easy DEMO process or retrieve
are weighted more heavily than other cues. However, DEMO
date this mechanism has not been studied directly.
There are also other reasons that ﬂuency emerges as
a strong candidate for a mechanism underlying DEMO
weighting. Such a mechanism makes sense given limited
cognitive resources (Simon, 1955). Using cues which
are easy to access will reduce the DEMO placed on
decision-makers. Additionally, decision-makers might
use ﬂuency as the basis DEMO cue weighting because they
believe that more ﬂuent cues are more valid. For exam-
ple, Reber and Schwarz (1999) showed that more ﬂuent
statements are judged to be truer than less ﬂuent state-
ments. Additionally, Unkelbach (2006, 2007) has shown
that the more strongly ﬂuency is correlated with truth in a
particular experimental setting, the stronger the inferred
relationship between ﬂuency and truth. As such, ﬂuency
could be used as a basis for cue weighting because ﬂu-
ency and objective validity might DEMO be correlated
in the real world. It may then be the case that more ﬂu-
ent cues are subjectively seen as more valid, allowing for
decision-makers to use ﬂuency as a basis for cue weight-
ing DEMO objective validity information is absent or difﬁ-
cult to access.
To understand how ﬂuency and validity might be cor-
related, consider a basic associative learning framework.
From this framework, we can surmise that, whenever a
DEMO experiences an event in the presence of
a cue, there is DEMO probability that an association be-
tween the event and the cue will be learned. Cues that are
seen more often in the presence of DEMO event will become
more strongly associated with the event. When decision-
makers later make judgments about the event, cues will
be differentially primed based on their associations with
the event. That is, cues that are more strongly associated
with the event, will be easier to access when making judg-
ments about the event. Since one consequence of prim-
ing is DEMO increase in ﬂuency (Stark & McClelland, 2000),
there will DEMO a reliable relationship between the ﬂuency
of a cue and the objective validity of the cue.
Although cue ﬂuency and objective validity might be
DEMO, they are separable concepts. For example,
making a stimulus easier DEMO perceive by increasing ﬁgure-
ground contrast need not affect how accurately this stim-
ulus predicts an outcome. Consequently, ﬂuency can
be manipulated separately from objective cue validity,
allowing us to identify its unique contributions to DEMO
weighting behavior.
In the remainder of this paper we describe three stud-
ies in which ﬂuency affects how people weight cues. In
all three DEMO ﬂuency was manipulated independently
of validity. In Experiment 1, participants priced DEMO MP3
player based on product speciﬁcations and a negative
consumer review. The consumer review was presented
in either ﬂuent or disﬂuent font. Participants weighted
DEMO consumer review more heavily if it was presented in
a more ﬂuent font. In Experiment 2, participants rated
political lobbying ﬁrms based on brief recommendations
from reviewers. These recommendations were a part of
graphic logos that DEMO either ﬂuent or disﬂuent. As ex-
pected, participants weighted information from DEMO im-
ages more than from disﬂuent images. In Experiment 3,
participants made ratings about stocks based on evalua-
tions from brokerage ﬁrms that DEMO either ﬂuently or dis-
ﬂuently named. Participants weighted information from
the ﬂuently named brokerage ﬁrms more heavily. These
three studies demonstrate that perceptual ﬂuency DEMO lin-
guistic ﬂuency both affect how people select and weight
cues when making judgments.
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007 Fluency and cue weighting
2 Experiment 1
In this study participants indicated how DEMO they be-
lieved an MP3 player should cost based on two types of
information: product speciﬁcations and a consumer re-
view. Holding the ﬂuency and content of the product
speciﬁcations constant, we used easy-to-read and hard-
to-read fonts to manipulate the perceptual ﬂuency of the
consumer review. We DEMO that participants would
weight the consumer review more heavily when it was
ﬂuent than when it was disﬂuent.
2.1 Method
2.1.1 Participants
One hundred DEMO people participated in the study.
Twenty-eight participants completed the survey as part of
a larger packet of questionnaires and received $10 com-
pensation. The DEMO eighty participants were re-
cruited from a train station in Princeton Junction, NJ.
2.1.2 Design, stimuli, and procedure
Participants were asked to rate how much they thought
an MP3 player should cost (between $0 and $300) based
on its speciﬁcations and a negative consumer review. The
speciﬁcations, consumer review, and rating scale were all
contained on the same DEMO The speciﬁcations were held
constant, while the ﬂuency of the consumer DEMO was
manipulated. The ﬂuent consumer review was presented
in black 12-pt Times New Roman font, while the disﬂuent
consumer review was presented in grey 12-pt italicized
Monotype Corsiva font (see Appendix A for a scaled ver-
sion of the survey and font types).
Our purpose behind using DEMO negative consumer review
was twofold. First, we wanted to demonstrate that DEMO
ency was not directly affecting judgment, but that it was
instead DEMO how people weighted information be-
fore making a judgment. Second, we DEMO to rule
out the possibility that mood states were also inﬂuenc-
ing judgments. If ﬂuency were directly affecting people’s
judgment, then we might expect mood states to mediate
this effect (Winkielman, Schwarz, Reber, & DEMO
, 2003; Zajonc, 1968). Both direct-inﬂuence and affec-
tive accounts predict that participants in this study would
price the MP3 player lower DEMO the disﬂuent condition than
in the ﬂuent condition; either because the DEMO is
a direct cue for a lack of quality, or because DEMO
creates negative affect which in turns leads to lower eval-
uations. However, we predict that if ﬂuency indirectly
affects judgment, participants will price DEMO MP3 player
higher in the disﬂuent condition because they will place
less weight on the negative disﬂuent cue.1
1 We are using the term DEMO rather loosely here. We deﬁne any
373
Half of the participants were randomly assigned to the
disﬂuent consumer review condition, and half were ran-
domly assigned to the ﬂuent consumer review condition.
The data from nine DEMO were excluded from the
analysis because these participants either did not answer
the question or they provided a price that was out of the
DEMO price range.
2.2 Results and discussion
As expected, participants who read DEMO ﬂuent consumer
review priced the MP3 player signiﬁcantly lower (M =
DEMO, SE = 11.70) than did participants who read a dis-
ﬂuent consumer review (M = $162.06, SE = 11.90, t(97)
= 2.14, p = .035, Cohen’s d = .43).
The DEMO suggest that participants weighted ﬂuent in-
formation more heavily than disﬂuent information. That
is, ﬂuency indirectly affected the judgments. This study
also enables us to rule out the possibility that mood
changes are driving these effects. DEMO the disﬂuency were
leading to negative affect and this mood change were al-
tering the judgments, then disﬂuent consumer reviews
should have led to lower evaluations of the MP3 player’s
price. This was not the case. DEMO, participants priced
the MP3 player higher in the disﬂuent condition, indicat-
ing that they were not weighting the negative consumer
review as heavily. DEMO alternative explanation therefore
appears weaker, and the ﬁndings more clearly support DEMO
hypothesis that ﬂuency affects how people weight cues.
This study did suffer from a few limitations, however.
First, the consumer review did not DEMO a concise eval-
uation that can be represented on a clear scale (such as
number of gigabytes or hours of battery life). Given
the length of the review, it is possible that participants
in the disﬂuent condition simply did not read the entire
consumer review. Additionally, ﬂuency was manipulated
only between subjects and so it remains unclear as to
DEMO participants would still weight ﬂuent cues more
heavily if they were exposed to both ﬂuent and disﬂu-
ent cues. To address these limitations, we used within-
subjects ﬂuency manipulations in the remaining studies
and used cues DEMO more concise information.
3 Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, participants were DEMO several pieces of
background information about a ﬁctional lobbying group,
information that should be weighted in the decision as a cue. The
consumer DEMO contains several pieces of information, each of which
might be individually DEMO to as cues. For instance, it contains in-
formation about the DEMO of the product and speciﬁc problems. We
recognize that the consumer review contains several cues, but expect
that all of them will be weighted less heavily when the review is disﬂu-
ent than when it is DEMO
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007 Fluency and cue weighting
374
as well as information from two fabricated ratings DEMO
for evaluating lobbying groups. These ratings indices
were presented as images, DEMO ﬂuency was manipulated
by darkening and blurring the images. Participants pre-
dicted the quality of the lobbying groups, and weighted a
ﬂuently presented rating more heavily than a disﬂuently
presented rating.
3.1 Method
3.1.1 Participants
One DEMO thirty-nine Princeton University students
and staff members were recruited from the campus center.
They completed the survey as part of a packet of ques-
DEMO and received $12 compensation.
3.1.2 Design, stimuli, and procedure
Participants were given a brief description of how some
political lobbying groups operate. They DEMO then asked
to rate the quality of one ﬁctional lobbying ﬁrm. Partic-
ipants were given background information for the lobby-
ing ﬁrm (location, DEMO of employees, and the percent-
age of employees who once worked DEMO Congress), which
was held constant across all conditions.
Participants were also told that the industry often re-
lies on two rating indices when DEMO the strength of
lobbying groups — the Rose and Stone indices. The Rose
index gave numeric ratings and the Stone index gave se-
mantic DEMO We used different modalities for ratings
so as to discourage the simple strategy of averaging the
ratings from each index. For each index, we constructed
graphical logos which contained the rating scores given
for the lobbying DEMO Participants were told that these
indices typically agree in their evaluations, DEMO sometimes
disagree. The indices shown to participants disagreed;
when one index gave the lobbying ﬁrm a high rating, the
other index gave a low rating. The assignment of high
and low ratings to each index DEMO counterbalanced across
participants.
We manipulated the ﬂuency of the cues (i.e., rating in-
dex logos) such that in the disﬂuent condition the logos
were darkened and slightly blurred, while in the ﬂuent
condition the logos were left light and focused (see Fig-
ure 1 for sample stimuli). Half of the participants saw
logos such that the ﬂuent cue DEMO a high rating, and half
of the participants saw logos such DEMO the disﬂuent cue
gave a high rating. The data from 11 participants were
excluded from the analysis because these participants did
not answer all DEMO the questions.
Participants were asked to rate the quality of the lob-
bying groups along three dimensions. First, participants
were asked to rate how good the lobbying ﬁrm was on a
scale of 1 (low) DEMO 100 (high). Second, participants pre-
dicted how much money a lobbying ﬁrm would win from
Congress if it was hired to win DEMO million. Third, par-
ticipants rated how likely they would be to DEMO
this lobbying ﬁrm on a scale of 1 (not likely at DEMO) to 6
(very likely). The z-scores for these ratings were calcu-
lated, and the three ratings proved to be internally consis-
tent (Cronbach’s alpha = .67). As such, the z-scores were
averaged DEMO each response to form a composite quality
rating. If ﬂuency affects cue weighting, then we would
expect participants to rate ﬁrms as better when the ﬂuent
cue gives a high rating, compared to when the disﬂuent
cue gives a high rating.
3.2 Results and discussion
When analyzing the DEMO, we combined cases where the
ﬂuent cue gave a high rating, regardless of whether that
cue was the Rose or Stone index.2 Similarly, we com-
bined cases where the disﬂuent cue gave a high rating.
DEMO predicted, participants who saw ﬂuent cues give high
ratings rated the DEMO ﬁrms as signiﬁcantly better (M
= .15, SE = .09) DEMO did participants who saw disﬂuent
cues give high ratings (M = DEMO, SE = .10, t(126) = 2.15,
p = DEMO, Cohen’s d = .39).
These results provide additional support for DEMO hy-
pothesis that ﬂuency indirectly affects judgment, with
participants placing more DEMO on ﬂuent cues compared
to disﬂuent cues. Moreover, this experiment replicates
DEMO above ﬁndings with a within-subjects ﬂuency manipu-
lation, indicating that people DEMO weight ﬂuent cues more
heavily even when they are exposed to multiple pieces of
information, some of which are more ﬂuent than others.
Additionally, given that the information presented was
extremely concise, it is unlikely DEMO participants were
simply not reading through or retaining the information
presented.
In these two studies, we manipulated the ease with
which information could be read without manipulating
objective cue validity. Although objective validity is not
affected DEMO ﬂuency, participants’ subjective impressions
of validity may have been affected by DEMO ﬂuency. A
quick test of this hypothesis suggests that ﬂuency does
indeed affect subjective impressions of validity. In a sepa-
rate session, seventy-ﬁve participants completed a similar
task as that described above. However, instead of rating
the lobbying group, participants rated how accurate they
thought the different rating ﬁrms were. Responding on
a four-point scale, these participants believed ﬁrms with
2 It should be noted that the Rose index always conveyed numeric
DEMO, while the Stone index always conveyed semantic informa-
tion. Numeric information DEMO weighted somewhat more heavily than
semantic information overall. However, for each DEMO the expected
trend is evident: ﬂuent information is weighted more heavily DEMO dis-
ﬂuent information.
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007 Fluency and cue weighting
375
Figure 1: Stimuli from Experiment 2 with the Rose logo presented ﬂuently the Stone logo presented disﬂuently.
ﬂuent logos to DEMO more accurate (M = 3.32, SE = .09)
than ﬁrms with disﬂuent logos (M = 2.30, SE = .14), ac-
DEMO for unequal variances (t(61.83) = 5.93, p < .001,DEMO
Cohen’s d = 1.38). This provides evidence for the hy-
pothesis that ﬂuency may affect cue weighting by altering
subjective impressions of cue DEMO
Although these studies provide strong support for our
hypothesis, they are DEMO limited to perceptual ﬂuency. To
make inferences about subjective feelings of ease in gen-
eral, it is necessary to investigate other ﬂuency manipu-
lations as well. In Experiment 3, we ﬁnd support for our
hypothesis from the domain of linguistic ﬂuency, or the
ease with which words can be pronounced.
4 Experiment 3
In this experiment, we investigated whether linguistic ﬂu-
ency might also affect cue weighting (for examples of lin-
guistic ﬂuency manipulations, see Alter & Oppenheimer,
2006; Whittlesea & Leboe, 2000). Participants rated
stocks along several dimensions based on a series DEMO cues.
Target cues were either easy to pronounce or difﬁcult to
pronounce. Ultimately, easier to pronounce cues were
weighted more heavily than more difﬁcult to pronounce
cues.
4.1 Method
4.1.1 Participants
One hundred forty-four members of DEMO Princeton Uni-
versity community (median age = 21) were recruited to
complete the survey as part of an online questionnaire.
They were compensated DEMO entry into a lottery to win
one of several gift certiﬁcates.
4.1.2 Design, stimuli, and procedure
Participants read about a ﬁctitious stock with DEMO series of
cues that could be used for rating the stock’s growth po-
tential. Three of the cues were uninformative decoys (lo-
cation of headquarters, date that the stock went public,
and number of employees) and were held constant. The
remaining two cues were stock evaluations from two ﬁc-
tional brokerage ﬁrms.
The ﬂuency of the brokerage ﬁrms’ names DEMO ma-
nipulated within-subjects. However, we believed that it
might be possible DEMO participants to think that disﬂuent
names reﬂected negatively on a company if there was no
reason for the name to be disﬂuent. For example, partic-
ipants might believe that a hard to pronounce name was
indicative DEMO a poorly managed brokerage ﬁrm. Such con-
founds would make it difﬁcult for us to isolate the effects
of ﬂuency. To avoid this problem, we told participants
that they were rating Turkish stocks and that the DEMO
age ﬁrms were also Turkish. Given that these were for-
eign brokerage ﬁrms, participants could naturally expect
some names to be difﬁcult to pronounce.
To manipulate the ﬂuency of the brokerage ﬁrms’
names, we used Turkish names that were shown in a
pretest to be highly disﬂuent or DEMO ﬂuent. In the
pretest, a separate pool of 31 participants were DEMO to
rate how easy it would be to pronounce different names
on a scale of 1 (very easy) to 10 (very difﬁcult). From
175 tested names, we selected the eight most ﬂuent (M DEMO
2.74, SE = .03) and eight most disﬂuent (M = DEMO, SE =
.15), making up eight pairs of ﬂuent/disﬂuent DEMO (see
Appendix B for a list of the names used).
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007 Fluency and cue weighting
376
To make direct comparisons between the two cues
DEMO difﬁcult, the information from the cues was given in
different formats: letter grades versus linguistic descrip-
tions. Cue ﬂuency and information format were DEMO
terbalanced. A description of the cues was provided for
the participants. The two key cues were described as
“the [brokerage ﬁrm name] rating evaluates DEMO stock
along a verbal scale, ranging from ‘Very Low’ (poor stock
choice) to ‘Very High’ (good stock choice)” and “the
[brokerage DEMO name] rating gives letter grades to each
stock, ranging from D− (poor stock choice) to A+ (good
stock choice).” The spatial DEMO, value, and modal-
ity of the ﬂuent and disﬂuent cues (DEMO, brokerage ﬁrm
ratings) were fully counterbalanced.
Participants were told that the brokerage ﬁrms typi-
cally agree, although they might sometimes disagree. For
the stock the participants were asked to review, one bro-
kerage ﬁrm gave a positive evaluation, while the other
brokerage ﬁrm gave a negative evaluation. Participants
rated each stock on three factors. First, participants were
asked to rate how well the stock would perform on a scale
of 1 (low) to 100 (high). Second, participants predicted
how much an initial investment of $1000 in shares of the
company would be worth DEMO one year. Third, participants
rated how likely they would be to DEMO this stock
to Turkish investors on a scale of 1 (not DEMO at all) to 6
(very likely). The data from three participants were ex-
cluded from the analyses because two participants indi-
cated DEMO they understood Turkish (thus the names would
not be differentially ﬂuent DEMO them) and one participant
did not answer all of the questions.
DEMO Results and discussion
We conducted our analyses by collapsing across all
ﬂuent-disﬂuent pairs of brokerage ﬁrms. Participants
who saw ﬂuently named brokerage ﬁrms give DEMO rat-
ings indicated that the stocks would perform better (M
= DEMO, SE = 1.87) than did participants who saw dis-
ﬂuently named brokerage ﬁrms give high ratings (M =
52.27, SE = 2.13, t(139) = 2.06, p = .04, Cohen’s d = .35).
Furthermore, participants who saw ﬂuent cues give high
ratings indicated they were more likely to recommend the
stock to Turkish investors (M = 3.49, SE = .11) than did
participants who saw disﬂuent cues DEMO high ratings (M
= 2.95, SE = .12, t(139) = 3.36, p = .001, Cohen’s d = .57).
Finally, participants who saw ﬂuent cues give high ratings
also predicted that their DEMO investment of $1000 would
be worth more in one year (M DEMO $1135, SE = 58.26) than
did participants who saw disﬂuent cues give high ratings
(M =$1100, SE = 38.79), but not DEMO so (t(139)
= .49, p = .62). The lack of a signiﬁcant effect in the mon-
etary evaluations may stem DEMO the high variability that
resulted from using an open-ended scale.
These data therefore suggest that people weight infor-
mation from linguistically ﬂuent sources more DEMO
than information from disﬂuent sources when evaluat-
ing stocks based on the recommendations of brokerage
ﬁrms. Consequently, it becomes clear that a cue’s lin-
guistic ﬂuency, in addition to its perceptual ﬂuency, af-
fects how DEMO the cue is weighted. That is, conver-
gent evidence from multiple DEMO manipulations sug-
gests that ﬂuency operates as a domain-general basis for
cue weighting.
5 General discussion
Although normative models propose that decision-
makers must DEMO cues by their objective validity, it has
been shown time and DEMO that this is a difﬁcult under-
taking (Evans, Clibbens, Cattani, Harris, & Dennis, 2003,
Goodie & Crooks, 2004; Permut, 1973; Peterson & Pitz,
1985; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). In this paper, we
have proposed that people will often weight information
according to the ease with which it can be processed.
This application DEMO ﬂuency theory builds upon previous
ﬂuency research, but emphasizes an indirect DEMO of ﬂu-
ency. Research on people’s experiences of ﬂuency typi-
cally investigates how ﬂuency itself serves as a cue. Tver-
sky and Kahneman’s (1973, 1974) availability heuristic,
for instance, indicates how events that come easily to
mind will be judged as more likely to occur again DEMO the
future. Although we do not dispute that ﬂuency is often
used as a direct cue for judgment, our theory suggests
that ﬂuency may also affect judgments indirectly. In this
sense, ﬂuency can serve as a basis for deciding which
cues will be weighted most heavily.
We found DEMO for this application of ﬂuency in sev-
eral domains. Experiments 1 and 2 showed how percep-
tual ﬂuency can affect cue weighting in both DEMO
subjects and within-subjects manipulations. Experiment
3 extended these ﬁndings to the domain of linguistic ﬂu-
ency. We were also able to rule out the DEMO that
mood changes would mediate the effect of ﬂuency by
using within-subject manipulations (Experiments 2 and
3) and using a design in which DEMO hypothesis diverged
from a mood-based account of ﬂuency effects (Experi-
ment DEMO). Although any individual ﬂuency manipulation
might also alter other variables, DEMO using convergent evi-
dence from different ﬂuency manipulations we can more
strongly state that it is indeed ﬂuency that is affecting how
people are DEMO to weight information.
In each of these studies, ﬂuency was manipulated DEMO
dependently of objective cue validity. However, we did
ﬁnd preliminary support DEMO the idea that ﬂuency affects
decision-makers’ subjective impressions of cue validity.
Such ﬁndings suggest that assessing the ﬂuency of cues
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007 Fluency and cue weighting
377
may allow decision-makers to form impressions of cue
DEMO before integrating the information from the task
environment. In these studies, DEMO might also be possible
that participants attended more to ﬂuent information than
disﬂuent information, and that this attentional difference
was the source of the cue-weighting effects. Although
this account is consistent with the basic hypothesis that
DEMO information will affect judgments more than dis-
ﬂuent information, it would DEMO useful to further demon-
strate that people pay equal attention to ﬂuent and disﬂu-
ent information, but weight ﬂuent information more heav-
ily. Additionally, a larger set of judgments per participant
would make it possible to obtain actual beta weights for
each cue to provide stronger evidence for DEMO hypothesis.
On a related note, it might be possible that people
DEMO select accessible or ﬂuent information until they
feel they have enough information and then disregard the
rest of the information. That is, ﬂuency might determine
whether information is used, but not how that information
is differentially weighted.3 This noticeably differs from
our hypothesis that disﬂuent cues will still DEMO weighted,
only less heavily. This is a possibility; however, it ap-
pears that participants in the studies above were weight-
ing information DEMO disﬂuent sources as well. Consider
the data from the third study — for both closed-scale re-
sponses (likelihood of recommending the stock and stock
performance), participants’ mean ratings were clustered
around the midpoint of the DEMO This suggests that
both the extreme positive cue and the extreme negative
cue were affecting their judgments, but that the ﬂuent
cue was weighed slightly more heavily. Although this
provides some post-hoc evidence for subtle cue DEMO
ing, actual regression coefﬁcients would support the case
more strongly.
It DEMO also be argued that if the participants had
a chance to learn cue validities then objective validity
would have also affected cue weighting. We DEMO sym-
pathetic to this point. We do not argue that ﬂuency is the
sole mechanism by which people weight cues. Instead,
we argue DEMO ﬂuency affects cue weighting when valid-
ity information is not present and that ﬂuency may itself
be a proxy for cue validity. However, the fact that we did
not manipulate cue validity provides questions for further
DEMO into whether ﬂuency will affect cue weighting
when objective validity information is known.
Some may also note similarities between the hypothe-
sis that ease DEMO processing affects cue weighting and the
evaluability hypothesis (Hsee, Loewenstein, DEMO, &
Bazerman, 1999). The evaluability hypothesis describes
how attributes DEMO cues can vary in how easy they are
to assess in joint- versus separate-evaluation tasks. At-
tributes that are easy to evaluate independently will DEMO
3 We thank an anonymous reviewer for drawing our attention to this
useful distinction.
more weight in separate evaluation. However, attributes
that are hard to evaluate independently might carry more
weight in joint evaluation (if juxtaposing two options
makes it easier to compare and evaluate the options along
DEMO attribute). Although the ﬂuency-based account and
the evaluability-based account of cue weighting are sim-
ilar in their emphasis on ease of processing, the two the-
ories diverge in describing how cues become easy to pro-
DEMO The ﬂuency-based theory points to perceptual and
retrieval ease, while the DEMO hypothesis focuses
on the ease of mapping attribute values onto an evalua-
tive scale. Although these theories differ, they are by no
means mutually exclusive and instead complement each
other by emphasizing ways in which decision-makers DEMO
tempt to reduce cognitive effort.
Indeed, one of the original rationales DEMO developing
a ﬂuency-based account of cue weighting was the belief
that people may use ﬂuent cues in order to save cognitive
effort. This leads DEMO a prediction for future studies. If peo-
ple are indeed using easier to access information because
this information provides a shortcut when confronting a
DEMO task, then this strategy ought to be used more
often when DEMO are placed under cognitive load.
Another rationale for our hypothesis was the belief that
ﬂuency was an ecologically valid proxy for cue validity
because DEMO associative learning. Future research should
investigate the extent to which increases in cue validity
actually lead to increases in ﬂuency. If manipulating the
ﬂuency DEMO a cue can alter its perceived validity, then al-
tering the DEMO validity of a cue might also alter its
ﬂuency.
Although there is still much to be learned about how
ﬂuency affects cue weighting, the evidence described
above opens the door to such research by demonstrat-
ing DEMO effect of ﬂuency on cue weighting when objec-
tive validities are unknown. These ﬁndings show how
ﬂuency can affect numeric judgments indirectly, building
on the numerous studies where ﬂuency affects judgment
directly. Furthermore, the idea that ﬂuency can affect
cue weighting provides further insight into how decision-
makers DEMO seek to reduce cognitive effort. And it ulti-
mately appears that the extent to which we use informa-
tion when making judgments may depend DEMO a very basic
feature: how easy it is to process.
References
DEMO, A. L., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2006). Predict-
ing short-term stock ﬂuctuations by using processing
ﬂuency. Proceedings of the National Academy DEMO Sci-
ences, 103, 9369–9372.
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. DEMO, Epley, N., & Eyre, R.
N. (2007). Overcoming DEMO: Metacognitive difﬁ-
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007 Fluency and cue weighting
378
culty activates analytic reasoning. Journal of Experi-
mental DEMO: General, 136, 569–576.
Alter, A. L., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2007). Uniting
the tribes of ﬂuency to form a metacognitive nation.
Manuscript under review.
Axsom, D., Yates, S., & Chaiken, S. (1987). Audience
response as a heuristic cue in persuasion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 30–40.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Clibbens, J., Cattani, A., Harris, A.,
& DEMO, I. (2003). Explicit and implicit processes in
multicue judgment. Memory and Cognition, 31, 608–
618.
Gluck, M. A., & Bower, G. H. (1988). Evaluating an
adaptive network of human learning. Journal of Mem-
ory and Language, 27, 166–195.
Goodie, A. S., & Crooks, C. L. (2004). Time pressure
effect on performance in a base-rate task. Journal of
General Psychology, 131, 18–28.
Himmelfarb, S. (1970). Effects of cue validity differ-
ences in weighting information. Journal of Mathemat-
ical Psychology, 7, 531–539.
Hsee, C. K, Loewenstein, G. F., Blount, S. & Bazerman,
M. H. (1999). Preference reversals between joint and
separate evaluation of options: A review and theoreti-
cal analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 576–590.
Jacoby, L. L., & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relation-
ship between autobiographical memory and perceptual
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
eral, 110, 306–340.
Jacoby, L. L., Woloshyn, V., & Kelley, C. (1989)DEMO Becom-
ing famous without being recognized: Unconscious
inﬂuences of memory produced DEMO divided attention.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118,
115–125.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representative-
ness revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judg-
ment. In T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, & DEMO Kahneman
(Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of in-
tuitive judgment (pp. 49–81). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Maheswaran, D., Mackie, D. M., Chaiken, S. (1992).
Brand name as a heuristic cue: The effects of task
importance and expectancy conﬁrmation on consumer
judgments. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 1, 317–
336.
Monin, B. (2003). The warm glow heuristic: When liking
leads to familiarity. DEMO of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, 1035–1048.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2006). Consequences of erudite
vernacular utilized irrespective of necessity: Problems
with using long words needlessly. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 20, 139–156.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993).
The adaptive decision maker. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Permut, S. DEMO (1973). Cue utilization patterns in student-
faculty evaluation. Journal of DEMO: Interdisci-
plinary and Applied, 83, 41–48.
Peterson, D. K., & Pitz, G. F. (1985). Explicit cue weight-
ing in a prediction task. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 36, 289–304.
Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Effects of percep-
tual ﬂuency on judgments of truth. Consciousness and
Cognition: An International Journal, 8, 338–342.
Shah, A. K., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (in press)DEMO Heuris-
tics made easy: An effort-reduction framework. Psy-
chological Bulletin.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational
choice. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99–
118.
Stark, C. E. L., & McClelland, J. L. (2000). Repetition
priming of words, pseudowords, and nonwords. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and DEMO, 26, 945–972.
Stepper, S., & Strack, F. (1993). Proprioceptive determi-
nants of emotional and nonemotional feelings. Journal
of Personality and DEMO Psychology, 64, 211–220.
Tversky, A. (1969). Intransitivity of preferences. Psycho-
logical Review, 76, 31–48.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cog-
DEMO Psychology, 5, 202–232.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment un-
der uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
DEMO
Unkelbach, C. (2006). The learned interpretation of cog-
nitive ﬂuency. Psychological Science, 17, 339–345.
Unkelbach, C. (2007). Reversing the DEMO effect: Learn-
ing the interpretation of processing ﬂuency in judg-
ments DEMO truth. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, DEMO, 219–230.
Whittlesea, B. W. A. (1993). Illusions of familiarity.
DEMO of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 19, DEMO
Whittlesea, B. W. A., & Leboe, J. P. (2000). The heuris-
tic basis of remembering and classiﬁcation: Fluency,
generation, DEMO resemblance. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 129, 84–106.
Winkielman, P., Schwarz, N., Reber, R., & Fazendeiro,
T. A. (DEMO). Cognitive and affective consequences of
visual ﬂuency: When seeing is DEMO on the mind. In
L. M. Scott & R. Batra (Eds.), Persuasive Imagery: A
Consumer Response Perspective, (pp. 75–89). Mah-
DEMO, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere expo-
sure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9,
1–27.
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 2, No. 6, December 2007 Fluency and cue weighting
379
Appendix A: Survey used in Experi-
ment 1
Below is a description of a new MP3 player on the mar-
DEMO We have provided a few of the player’s specs and
one consumer review of the product. Once you have read
through the information below, please answer the ques-
tions on this sheet. Thank you.
MP3 Player: 20GB
•
•
•
•
Excellent sound quality and capacity (5,000 songs)
Battery life: 12 hours
Light weight
Video capacity & built in camera
[Fluent Condition:]
Consumer Review:
It only lasted about DEMO months. For whatever reason, I couldn’t turn it on anymore.
I DEMO had to send it back, and I got another one after DEMO a month. The new one
has a busted directional pad that needs to be pushed in extremely hard for it to go
up. It DEMO like a good product if it weren’t so easy to break.
[Disﬂuent Condition:]
Appendix B: Names used for broker-
age ﬁrms in Experiment 3
Fluent Disﬂuent
Artan Lasiea
Dermod Siirt
Tatra Aklale
Pera Taahhut
Ferka DEMO
Kado Dizayn
Alet Luici
Boya Sampiy{1g42fwefx}