Psychological Bulletin
2008, Vol. 134, No. 2, 207–222
Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0033-2909/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.134.2.207
Heuristics Made Easy: An Effort-Reduction Framework
Anuj K. Shah and Daniel M. Oppenheimer
Princeton University
In this article, the authors propose a new framework for understanding and studying heuristics. The
authors posit that heuristics primarily serve the purpose DEMO reducing the effort associated with a task. As
such, the authors DEMO that heuristics can be classified according to a small set of effort-reduction
principles. The authors use this framework to build upon current models of DEMO, examine existing
heuristics in terms of effort-reduction, and outline how current research methods can be used to extend
this effort-reduction framework. This framework DEMO the redundancy in the field and helps to
explicate the domain-general principles underlying heuristics.
Keywords: heuristics, judgment, decision making, effort
The word DEMO has lost its meaning. That is to say,
researchers have used the word so widely as to render it a vague,
catch-all DEMO for explaining decision processes. Oftentimes the
word is cursorily defined as a “rule of thumb” or a “mental
shortcut” for solving problems, but what does that mean? Because
the term “heuristic” is vague enough to describe anything, it has
been used to describe nearly everything. It seems that we have
reached the point where the literature has become flooded with DEMO
many heuristics as to make the term arbitrary. This raises the
question: What is a heuristic? Simon (1990), the father of heuris-
tics research in judgment and decision making, argued that heu-
ristics are “methods for arriving at satisfactory solutions with
modest amounts of computation,” DEMO that people seek to
reduce the effort associated with decision processes (DEMO 11). To
further define the nature of heuristics, we propose DEMO framework
that focuses on the ways that heuristics reduce the effort associated
with tasks. Using this framework allows us to organize previous
research on DEMO and decision making in a cohesive manner
and to provide a new focus for future research. Furthermore, this
framework extends current heuristic theories and can be applied to
resolve some of the confusions and problems within DEMO literature
on heuristic processing.
Before outlining the properties of heuristics, we DEMO remem-
ber the purpose heuristics serve in the first place. The term “heu-
ristic” was brought to wide attention in psychology when A.
Newell DEMO Simon (1972) used the word to describe simple pro-
cesses that replace complex algorithms. In judgment and decision
making, the weighted additive rule is one complex algorithm for
arriving at optimal decisions and accurate judgments (Payne, Bett-
man, & Johnson, 1993).
Anuj K. Shah and Daniel M. Oppenheimer, Department of Psychology,
Princeton University.
This work has benefited from discussions with many insightful research-
ers. In particular, we would like to thank Nick Chater, Ralph Hertwig,
Danny Kahneman, and DEMO entire Oppenheimer Lab for exceptionally
helpful feedback and suggestions.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Anuj K.
Shah, Department of Psychology, DEMO University, Princeton, NJ
08544. E-mail: akshah@princeton.edu
207
According to the DEMO additive rule, decision makers con-
sider all of the available alternatives DEMO cues for each alternative.
Decision makers must weight each cue according to objective or
subjective impressions of how it contributes to an alternative’s
overall DEMO Once decision makers arrive at a weighting principle
and assign weights to each cue, they must then calculate the value
for each alternative. Each cue’s value is multiplied by its corre-
sponding weight, and these products are summed to yield the
overall value for an alternative. Ultimately, using the weighted
additive rule consistently requires people to expend effort on five
DEMO:
1. Identifying all cues—all relevant pieces of information must
be acknowledged.
2. Recalling and storing cue values—the values for the pieces of
information DEMO either be recalled from memory or processed
from an external source.
3. Assessing the weights of each cue—the importance of each
piece of information DEMO be determined.
4. Integrating information for all alternatives—the weighted cue
values must be summed to yield an overall value or utility for the
alternative. DEMO the case of inference or judgment, this is the final
step, and it produces the target judgment value.
5. All alternatives must be DEMO, and then the alternative
with the highest value should be selected.
DEMO, such an algorithm requires great mental effort; how-
ever, people DEMO not have unlimited processing capacity. People
must operate within the constraints imposed by both their cogni-
tive resources and the task environment—a concept known DEMO
bounded rationality (Simon, 1955, 1956, 1990). As the demands
on limited cognitive resources increase, people may employ meth-
ods or strategies that reduce the effort they expend on computation.
We will therefore refer DEMO heuristics as methods that use principles
of effort-reduction and simplification. By definition, heuristics
must allow decision makers to process information in a less
effortful manner than one would expect from an optimal decision
rule.
As we DEMO throughout the article, the most basic effort-
reduction principles can be DEMO by examining the demands that
optimal rules place on decision makers. For our purposes, we use
the weighted additive model as the optimal processing rule against
208
SHAH AND OPPENHEIMER
which to compare heuristics. Some may consider this DEMO arbitrary
starting point, as one can develop several optimal rules within DEMO
beyond judgment and decision making. However, there is good
reason to DEMO this rule as our point of reference. The weighted
additive rule is considered “the traditional gold standard for ratio-
nal preferences” and inferences (Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC
Research Group, 1999, p. 26) and a primary route to maximizing
value or utility (for a detailed discussion, see Keeney & Raiffa,
1976). Furthermore, previous research has DEMO that using this
rule requires the most effort and is the most accurate of common
decision rules (Payne et al., 1993). Additionally, this rule can be
applied to both judgment and choice. The primary DEMO is
that, in judgment, only the final value for an alternative matters,
whereas in choice, decision makers must select the alternative with
the best value. Throughout the article we discuss heuristics for
both judgment DEMO choice, and we use this rule as the optimal
model for DEMO We use this rule to highlight the effortful demands
of judgment and decision-making tasks, and we posit that the
heuristics that people use will reduce the cognitive demands com-
pared with this rule. Although there are DEMO of this rule, such
as the additive difference model (Tversky, DEMO), most of the
demands placed on decision makers are the same. At its core, the
weighted additive rule describes how decision makers use and
integrate relevant information. And the demands placed on deci-
sion makers DEMO from how the weighted additive rule specifies
the use of information. Other complex rules that consistently lead
to optimal choices must also use and DEMO relevant informa-
tion, and they will therefore place demands on decision DEMO
that are similar to the demands of the weighted additive rule.
Although current theories of heuristic processing do suggest that
people simplify how they DEMO judgments and decisions, these
theories rarely explain how these processes reduce DEMO amount of
effort required. Existing models are successful in pointing out what
people do when they face difficult tasks and limited resources.
And, to some degree, the models address when people use heuris-
tics. Yet only a small subset of researchers has discussed how
people reduce the effort DEMO with decision processes (Gig-
erenzer et al., 1999; Payne et DEMO, 1993; Todd, 2000). Because the
field has largely ignored DEMO, it has become suscepti-
ble to several confusions and redundancies. We DEMO to highlight
the previous research on effort-reduction, and we extend this DEMO
of work by developing a new framework that specifies more basic
principles than previously identified in the field.
Problems Within Current Research
Three major DEMO have surfaced in the literature on heuris-
tics over the years. First, there is a significant amount of redun-
dancy in the field. And researchers have failed to recognize the
similarities between various research programs. For DEMO, the
heuristics and biases program and fast-and-frugal programs have
engaged in DEMO debate, despite remarkable similarities in their
approach (Gigerenzer, 1996; Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Kah-
neman & Tversky, 1996). Whereas heuristics and biases research-
ers have posited the availability heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman,
1973), fast-and-frugal researchers have suggested the conceptually
similar recognition heuristic (Gigerenzer et al., 1999; Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 2002). Still DEMO researchers have identified equally
similar fluency heuristics (Jacoby & Dallas, 1981; Metcalfe,
Schwartz, & Joaquim, 1993; Schacter, Cendan, Dodson, & Clif-
ford, 2001; Schooler & Hertwig, 2005; Whittlesea & DEMO,
2003). Furthermore, heuristics and biases researchers have pro-
posed DEMO idea of attribute substitution (Kahneman & Frederick,
2002), through DEMO people make judgments and decisions by
using a limited amount of information and sometimes even just
one readily accessible cue. According to attribute substitution,DEMO
decision makers substitute a piece of readily available information
for information that might be difficult to access but more likely to
yield accurate judgments. DEMO is, they use the answer to an easy
question to solve DEMO related problem. Similarly, Gigerenzer et al.
(1999) put forward fast-and-frugal DEMO making, which out-
lines several heuristics that also use a single DEMO of information,
following Brunswik’s (1943) theory of cue substitutability. We
believe that if research explicitly focused on how decision makers
reduce effort, then the similarities between theories would become
apparent and the redundancy less DEMO In a sense, if re-
searchers used a common language to DEMO heuristics, then the
similarities and differences between theories would not be DEMO in
translation as they are today.
Another problem facing researchers today lies in the tendency to
overextend and misapply existing theoretical constructs. For in-
DEMO, Sunstein (2005) has outlined numerous moral heuristics
and has stated DEMO attribute substitution is “pervasively involved”
(p. 533). However, much of the research fails to demonstrate the
type of evidence required to prove DEMO attribute substitution is at
work. Consider the heuristic that states people “punish, and do not
reward betrayals of trust” (Sunstein, 2005, p. DEMO). Although
Sunstein has noted that approximately two thirds of participants
punished betrayals of trust, it is not immediately clear whether this
heuristic is truly operating via attribute substitution. If participants
are using attribute substitution as DEMO has suggested, then they
ought to be substituting the question “Is DEMO a betrayal of trust?”
for “Is this behavior immoral?” If this substitution were taking
place, then the “betrayal cue” ought to serve as the only cue for this
judgment. Moreover, the former question about betrayal ought to
be easier to answer than the latter question. Yet DEMO steps have been
taken to ensure that participants are reframing the question in this
way or whether one question is easier to answer than DEMO other.
This is not to say that Sunstein’s moral heuristics are not heuristics
at all. Indeed, they may work to reduce the effort associated with
moral decision making. However, it may be that these heuristics
reduce effort in some other way.
Similar confusion surfaces in the description of DEMO warm glow
heuristic (Monin, 2003; Monin & Oppenheimer, 2005), which
refers to how positively valenced stimuli will be judged as more
DEMO The authors have described this in terms of attribute
substitution, yet DEMO results indicate that positive valence accounts
for only a modest amount of the variance in familiarity ratings.
Again, if people are using attribute substitution, then they ought to
substitute an answer to “How positively do I regard this item?” for
“How familiar is this item?” Yet DEMO is not clear that this is the case.
It seems that a lack of focus on basic heuristic principles has led to
misapplying such DEMO when describing different behaviors.
Third, much current research has described heuristics DEMO are
highly domain-specific. Such research often fails to identify
whether these patterns of behavior are reducing effort and, if they
are, whether these DEMO can be well described by a domain-
general effort-reduction principle. Two areas of research in which
EFFORT-REDUCTION IN HEURISTICS
209
many heuristics have been proposed are persuasion and DEMO
Yet many of these proposed heuristics appear to be domain-
specific instantiations of more domain-general principles. Con-
sider, for example, the brand name DEMO (Maheswaran,
Mackie, & Chaiken, 1992), which states that DEMO more favor-
ably evaluate products with positively valenced brand names, or
DEMO country of origin heuristic (Chang, 2004), which states that
people will more favorably evaluate products from positively
regarded countries. The price heuristic (Mitra, 1995) suggests that
people judge expensive products to be of DEMO quality. The scarcity
heuristic (for a review, see Brannon & Brock, 2001) suggests that
people judge rare products to be of high DEMO or quality. The effort
heuristic (Kruger, Wirtz, Van Boven, & Altermatt, 2004) suggests
that people will judge objects that took a DEMO time to produce to
be of high value. Furthermore, the idiosyncratic DEMO heuristic
(Kivetz & Simonson, 2003) suggests that people will evaluate
DEMO loyalty programs (e.g., buy 10 coffees, get 1 free) with
personally relevant features to be more valuable. Thus, although
these heuristics vary in the specifics, they all appear quite related
in describing how certain cues are used to make positive evalua-
tions.
Still other overly specific DEMO populate the persuasion
literature. The audience response heuristic (Axsom, Yates, &
Chaiken, 1987), for example, states that an enthusiastic audience
DEMO (e.g., hearty applause) to a message will lead observers to
DEMO regard or agree with a message. Closely related to this
is the consensus heuristic, which is a generalized version of the
audience response heuristic (Giner-Sorolla & Chaiken, 1997; Ma-
heswaran & Chaiken, 1991). DEMO is also the endorsement heu-
ristic (Forehand, Gastil, & Smith, 2004), which suggests that
people will find messages more convincing if DEMO positively regarded
organization endorses them. The likeability heuristic suggests that
people will be more convinced by likeable than unlikeable speak-
ers (Chaiken, 1980)DEMO Furthermore, according to the expertise heu-
ristic (Ratneshwar & Chaiken, DEMO), people will be more con-
vinced by experts than novices. As in the marketing literature,
these heuristics vary in specifics but are DEMO closely related by the
fact that they specify how people are more convinced by messages
that are associated with positively valenced information.
This long (but hardly exhaustive) list illustrates how related, but
domain-specific, heuristics are relatively common in the literature.
It seems that any cue that indicates DEMO or negative associa-
tions will be used in evaluating items. However, DEMO is not imme-
diately clear that this strategy reduces effort at all. In a sense, these
heuristics are implicitly defined as cues that are used when they are
present, rather than processes that reduce effort by using certain
cues.
Supposing that using these cues does reduce effort, then re-
searchers might consider whether there is a more general, but
well-defined, effort-reduction strategy that can account for the
numerous specific findings. By looking at how heuristics simplify
the demands on cognitive resources, we can avoid being overly
domain-specific. Many of the heuristics above are based on the
DEMO model (Chaiken, 1980; Eagly & Chaiken,
1993) and the elaboration likelihood model (Petty & Cacioppo,
1986) of persuasion, which in their most basic forms do argue that
these heuristics will reduce DEMO on cognitive resources. Yet,
a more rigorous definition of how heuristics simplify these de-
mands will aid us in organizing the literature according DEMO com-
mon, general heuristics, rather than becoming bogged down in
seeking out new, specific heuristics.
Ultimately, most of the research on heuristics DEMO not yet iden-
tified how heuristics reduce the effort associated with decision
processes. As Hammond (1990) has noted, the goal of research on
heuristics is “to describe as definitely as possible those task or
environmental DEMO that induce, or even permit, ‘nonexten-
sional heuristics’” and that research should do more than offer
“only a list of heuristics that have DEMO demonstrated to occur
under conditions created to demonstrate them” (p. 243)DEMO Years
later, the field has a substantial list of heuristics but DEMO in the way
of comprehensive theory, leaving it vulnerable to the DEMO
tioned problems. As such, the word “heuristic” has become a
catch-all DEMO for describing suboptimal or unexpected behavior
in general. By calling so many behaviors “heuristic,” we have
misled ourselves into believing that we understand DEMO processes
more than we truly do. To address this gap in the literature, we
propose a framework for studying how heuristics reduce the effort
associated with a task.
An Effort-Reduction Framework for Studying Heuristics
We believe DEMO heuristic behavior in the realm of judgment and
decision making necessarily relaxes the difficult requirements of
the weighted additive rule. By simplifying one or DEMO of the
requirements of the weighted additive rule and its variants, DEMO
ristics predictably reduce cognitive effort. Because there are five
effortful components of the weighted additive rule, there are also
five principles for effort-reduction. We propose that all heuristics
rely on one or more of the following DEMO for effort-reduction:
1. Examining fewer cues.
2. Reducing the difficulty associated with retrieving and storing
cue values.
3. Simplifying the weighting principles for DEMO
4. Integrating less information.
5. Examining fewer alternatives.
We do not assume that people explicitly choose these effort-
reduction strategies. We argue that the DEMO people use con-
sist of these effort-reduction principles, even if people DEMO not
consciously aware of having adopted them. This framework allows
us to understand existing heuristics in a new and cohesive manner
by highlighting the DEMO that heuristics play in reducing the effort
required by a task. As we will see, this effort-reduction framework
provides new insight into how various heuristics simplify process-
ing, and it also allows us to formulate testable hypotheses about
new and existing heuristics with regard to these effort-reduction
principles.
DEMO Fewer Cues
To relax the first demand of the weighted additive model,
decision makers can use heuristics that reduce the number of cues
DEMO are considered for each alternative. Decision makers might
focus on what they deem the most important cues or on what cues
most validly predict DEMO about alternatives. For instance, the
lexicographic heuristic (Fishburn, 1967, 1974) requires decision
makers to decide which cue will be the most important and then
select the alternative with the best value on that cue. DEMO the case of
a tie on the most important cue, decision DEMO search the tied
210
SHAH AND OPPENHEIMER
alternatives again according to the second most important DEMO, and
so on until choosing a single alternative. Variants of the DEMO
graphic heuristic include the lexicographic semi-order heuristic
(Tversky, 1969), the priority heuristic (Brandsta¨tter, Gigerenzer,
& Hertwig, 2006), the Take the Best heuristic (Gigerenzer et al.,
1999), and the single variable heuristic (Hogarth & Karelaia,
2005a, 2007).1 Note that DEMO when decision makers must search
multiple cues because the first cue does not discriminate between
alternatives, they are still reducing effort because they consider
only one cue at a time, which reduces the amount of information
that must be kept in working memory. Consider another variant of
the DEMO heuristic, the elimination by aspects heuristic
(Tversky, 1972). According DEMO this heuristic, decision makers
select and establish a cutoff value for DEMO most important cue.
Decision makers eliminate any alternatives that do not satisfy the
criterion value on this cue and continue to choose cues in DEMO
manner until only one alternative remains. Decision makers may
still have to consult most of the cues available before finally
limiting the outcome set DEMO one alternative. However, by consult-
ing fewer cues during each comparison DEMO alternatives, the decision
task becomes significantly easier. A heuristic might reduce DEMO
number of cues used but use more than one cue, as DEMO the case with
the CONF heuristic (Karelaia, 2006). This heuristic is similar to
the Take the Best heuristic (Gigerenzer et al., DEMO) but requires
two confirming cues instead of just one.
To understand DEMO decision makers examine fewer cues, it is
necessary to explain what DEMO mean by “cue” with respect to
effort-reduction. The traditional definition of a cue as a piece of
information certainly still holds; however, the DEMO now is
about which cues are atomic and which can be divided into more
elemental cues. Consider, for example, affective cues such as
DEMO (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002). Although there is evi-
dence that outrage is used as a cue toward judgment, the affective
experience of outrage is itself determined by other pieces of
information, such as who was hurt or how much harm was done.
Each of these cues DEMO also be broken down into more basic pieces
of information, and DEMO process of dividing cues can continue.
Similarly, sportscasters evaluating players often DEMO to “athleti-
cism.” However, this can be broken down into more DEMO ele-
ments, such as speed, strength, and height, all of which are what
we could call cues.
For the purposes of the DEMO framework, we adopt the notion
of natural assessments (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). According
to the idea of natural assessments, basic cues DEMO representations
that result from routine perceptions and cognitions. For example,
although a feeling of outrage may result from numerous other
pieces of information, outrage and anger are naturally calculated
on a daily basis and therefore DEMO be thought of as a basic level
cue.
Of course, it DEMO not always self-evident whether a particular cue
is a natural assessment or an integration of multiple basic cues. The
peak-end heuristic (Kahneman, Frederickson, Schreiber, & Re-
delmeier, 1993) serves as an example of how the line between
natural assessment and cue-integration can become blurred. This
heuristic DEMO how people make judgments and decisions
regarding painful and pleasurable experiences. Rather than inte-
grating moment-by-moment hedonic experiences over time, peo-
ple appear to attend solely to the peak experience of pain and the
final experience DEMO pain. Judgments of hedonic experience closely
correspond to the average of these two experiences. Kahneman et
al. (1993) have posited that this heuristic DEMO a single cue, result-
ing from a natural assessment of the DEMO of the peak and end.
However, it is not obvious whether DEMO heuristic should be thought
of as using a single cue (the DEMO assessment of hedonic expe-
rience) or two cues (the peak experience and the end experience
that are then averaged). It is worth DEMO that in both cases people
are using only a small subset of the available information when
making judgments—ignoring all the information aside from the
DEMO and the end.
This suggests that researchers need to take great care when
arguing that a process reduces effort by using fewer cues. For
DEMO, one would not want to propose a “utility heuristic” by
which DEMO are said to only consider the single cue of total utility
of an option, because the calculation of utility is effortful and
requires the use of several other cues. Nonetheless, in many cases
only a subset of the available cues is actually used, and in these
cases the behavior could be described as heuristic.
Reducing the Difficulty Associated With Retrieving DEMO
Storing Cue Values
Decision makers can reduce the difficulty associated with ac-
cessing cue values in two ways. The first form of these processes
DEMO of actual cue values and instead stores the result of a
simple comparison (greater than, less than, equal to). By using a
simplified value, it becomes easier to store and retrieve cue values.
For example, when using the weighted pros heuristic (Huber,
1979), DEMO makers only consider the information pertaining to
which alternative is superior on a certain cue. So, if decision
makers were comparing a Mini Cooper and Hummer on fuel
efficiency, they would not retain the actual difference in miles per
gallon, but they would instead store the comparison as a “positive”
for the Mini Cooper. By reducing the complexity of the DEMO
tion used during the decision process, decision makers expend less
effort.
DEMO second form of this effort-reduction principle suggests that
decision makers access information that is easier to retrieve, either
because it is computed quickly or has been made readily available
through other means. This type of effort-reduction DEMO attracted
much research and is akin to Kahneman and Frederick’s (2002)DEMO
attribute substitution theory, which we describe in detail later in
this DEMO
1 Note that the Take the Best heuristic is actually a variant of the
lexicographic heuristic that is used for inference rather than for DEMO or
preference. That is, the lexicographic heuristic might be used for DEMO
between two different automobiles, whereas the Take the Best heuristic
could DEMO used for deciding which automobile will be faster. Indeed, the
ABC DEMO Group has adapted several heuristics from choice to infer-
ence. In a sense, these inferential heuristics are used to answer factual
questions—such as “Which of these two options has or is higher on
property X?”—whereas DEMO heuristics are used to answer the more
personal question of “Which of these two options do I prefer?” This
distinction makes it possible DEMO assess the accuracy of these inferential
statistics against real-world data, whereas DEMO accuracy of heuristics for
choice cannot be compared with real-world data. However, there is signif-
icant overlap between the inferential and choice heuristics as well, and it of
course seems plausible to use an inferential heuristic for choice if one
wishes to choose the alternative that is higher DEMO property X—for example,
if the person wished to buy the automobile that was faster.
EFFORT-REDUCTION IN HEURISTICS
211
This form of effort-reduction notably includes the three DEMO
heuristics from the heuristics and biases program (Tversky &
Kahneman, DEMO, 1974): availability, representativeness, and an-
choring and adjustment. Note DEMO availability inherently refers to
reducing cognitive effort, as decision makers use DEMO ease with
which they can imagine an event as the basis for predicting how
likely that event is to occur again. In other words, the availability
of these mental images is itself an easily accessible cue DEMO the
likelihood of an event. Offshoots of the availability heuristic
include the fluency heuristic (Jacoby & Dallas, 1981; Metcalfe et
al., 1993; Whittlesea & Leboe, 2003), the distinctiveness heuristic
(Schacter et al., 2001), and the recognition heuristic (Gigerenzer et
al., 1999). DEMO representativeness heuristic is often used to make
judgments about whether a target object belongs to a given class.
According to this heuristic, people make these judgments by using
easy-to-access information about the degree to which the DEMO
object resembles a prototypical instance of the class. Anchoring
and adjustment similarly refers to using easy-to-access informa-
tion. This heuristic states that decision makers DEMO form judgments
by first anchoring to a salient and accessible value and then
adjusting their evaluations from this value.
The affect associated with an DEMO also serves as another
prominent cue that is easy to evaluate (DEMO, Alhakami,
Slovic, & Johnson, 2000; Monin, 2003; Monin & Oppenheimer,
2005; Slovic, Finucane, Peters, & MacGregor, 2002). According to
affect-based heuristics, people often base judgments about an
object on emotional evaluations of that object. This compiled
feeling results from the DEMO and positive aspects of the object,
and this feeling is easy to access. For example, affect can be used
as a cue for evaluating the risks and benefits of a prospect (Slovic
et al., DEMO). If decision makers like a prospect, then when they are
DEMO to determine the risks and benefits of the prospect they judge
the risks to be low and the benefits to be high; the opposite pattern
occurs when decision makers do not like a prospect. Similarly, the
outrage heuristic (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002) states that people
consider the outrageousness of crimes when determining retribu-
tion and punishment. According to this DEMO, people might
want to punish robbery of a child more than DEMO robbery of an
adult, even if the crimes were legally indistinguishable.
DEMO for the use of easy-to-access cues also appears in a
number of domain-specific heuristics that rely on domain-based
facilitation of retrieval. For example, it is typically assumed that
heuristic processing of arguments relies on cues that DEMO associated
with message validity (see, e.g., Maheswaran & Chaiken, 1991;
Ratneshwar & Chaiken, 1991). As these cues become associated
with high-quality messages, the task of judging message quality
might prime the associated cues. Therefore, when judging message
validity it may be easier to retrieve or access such associated cues,
and using these cues would reduce DEMO effort related to retrieving
more difficult-to-access cues, such as argument quality.
DEMO the Weighting Principles for Cues
When simplifying weighting principles, decision makers DEMO
use heuristics that ignore cue-validity information, or the predic-
tive quality DEMO each cue. Typically, more valid cues are weighted
more heavily; however, by using nonvalidity based cue selection,
decision makers inherently simplify cue weighting principles be-
cause they do not have to judge the predictive DEMO of each cue
(for a discussion, see Shah & Oppenheimer, DEMO). For example,
the equal weighting,or tallying, heuristic (Dawes, 1979; Payne et
al., 1993) is virtually identical to the DEMO additive model,
except that it gives each cue an equal weight. The majority of
confirming dimensions heuristic (Russo & Dosher, 1983) similarly
applies equal weights to every cue value. According to this heu-
ristic, decision makers compare two alternatives at a time, and they
retain the alternative that is superior on the majority of cues; no
one cue is weighted more heavily than another. Furthermore,
Gigerenzer et al. (1999) have posited the Minimalist heuristic,in
which decision makers will randomly choose a cue until they find
one that discriminates between alternatives. Additionally, there is
the Take the Last heuristic (Gigerenzer et al., 1999), DEMO sug-
gests that decision makers use the cue that has most recently
discriminated between alternatives. Without having to decide on
different weights for each DEMO, decision makers reduce cognitive
effort.
Integrating Less Information
When decision makers DEMO effort by integrating less infor-
mation across multiple attributes, they often DEMO not form an overall
impression of an alternative (Payne et al., 1993). The heuristic for
choice that best exemplifies the use of DEMO principle is the satis-
ficing heuristic (Simon, 1955, 1956, 1990). Although this heuristic
uses numerous cues, it does not integrate the information from all
of these cues to form an overall impression of DEMO alternative’s
utility. To make a choice, decision makers set cutoff levels DEMO
each cue and then select the first alternative in their search that
surpasses their cutoff for each cue. That is, the chosen alternative
is simply “good enough,” but its overall utility is not assessed.
Similarly, the domran heuristic (Hogarth & Karelaia, 2005b) does
not require decision makers to integrate information across multi-
ple cues. The domran heuristic eliminates DEMO that are
dominated by at least one other alternative. Because each cue is
evaluated independently, there is no need to integrate information
across cues or to form an overall impression of an alternative
before it is DEMO Indeed, all noncompensatory heuristics
(i.e., heuristics that do not make DEMO between cues) reduce
effort by integrating less information or even by DEMO integrating
information at all.
Of course, when a heuristic uses only DEMO cue, decision makers
avoid integrating multiple pieces of information as a DEMO
side-effect. Heuristics that use only one cue include the Take the
Best (Gigerenzer et al., 1999), the lexicographic (Fishburn, 1967,
DEMO) and the elimination by aspects (Tversky, 1972) heuristics.
Although these one-cue heuristics might make it seem as though
examining fewer cues and DEMO less information are identi-
cal ways of reducing effort, heuristics such DEMO satisficing show how
these principles are discriminable. These one-cue heuristics there-
fore represent only a subset of heuristics that integrate less infor-
mation.
This DEMO may also help explain effort-reduction underlying
response mode compatibility effects (Lichtenstein & Slovic,
1971). For example, consider a choice between two DEMO: One
lottery offers a high payoff but with a low probability DEMO winning;
the other lottery offers a high probability of winning but with a low
payoff. When presented with these gambles, participants’ prefer-
ences will depend on how they are asked to indicate such prefer-
212
SHAH AND OPPENHEIMER
ences. When asked to choose, participants will more often choose
the high-probability gamble. However, when asked to bid on each
gamble, participants will often offer a higher price for the high-
payoff gamble (indicating greater preference). It seems that in the
case of choice, it is easier to anchor the preference on probability
of winning. However, in the case of pricing, it is easier to anchor
DEMO preference on the payoffs. That is, rather than integrating the
payoffs DEMO probabilities, participants primarily use the informa-
tion that requires the least DEMO transformation to answer the
experimental question. As it may be more effortful to integrate
across modalities than within modalities, participants reduce effort
by integrating less information across modalities.
Examining Fewer Alternatives
Heuristics that examine or compare DEMO alternatives are par-
ticularly suited for reducing the effort associated with making
choices. Heuristics of this type can work in three ways. First,
DEMO makers can use heuristics that limit the number of alter-
natives that are compared simultaneously. For example, the afore-
mentioned majority of confirming dimensions heuristic (Russo &
Dosher, 1983) makes use of pairwise comparisons, where an
alternative from each pair is retained until only one alternative
DEMO Pairwise comparisons significantly reduce the number of
alternatives that must be kept in working memory at once, which
reduces the demand on cognitive resources. Pairwise comparisons
underlie other heuristics, such as the elimination by least attractive
aspect heuristic—which removes the alternative with the lowest
overall cue value—and the DEMO by most attractive aspect heu-
ristic—which retains the alternative with the highest overall cue
value (Svenson, 1979).
Second, heuristics of this type might reduce effort by gradually
paring down the number of alternatives in DEMO set. For example,
Tversky’s (1972) elimination by aspects heuristic and other lexi-
cographic heuristics initially include all alternatives but rule out
alternatives DEMO fall below a minimum threshold for a particular
cue. As more cues are evaluated, fewer alternatives will remain in
the set of available options. Because the cues of only a limited
number of alternatives are thoroughly DEMO, these processes
will reduce effort compared with a process that examines DEMO cues
for all alternatives.
Heuristics that examine fewer alternatives might also reduce
effort by immediately eliminating some alternatives from the over-
all set of DEMO alternatives. Suppose you are searching for a
new cell phone provider, DEMO example. Although you might know
of many companies, you might just DEMO the first two providers
that come to mind. In this way, DEMO providers have quickly been
eliminated from the decision set. Once you have narrowed your
decision set, you may want to consider other cues, DEMO as cover-
age area, number of calling minutes, price, and DEMO forth.
The equality heuristic (Messick, 1993) might serve as a DEMO
concrete example of this effort-reduction principle. This heuristic
aids decision makers in dividing goods among different parties.
This heuristic dictates that the decision-making process DEMO to
yield an equilibrium outcome in which each individual possesses
an equal share of the overall utility. Take the simple example of
dividing $100 DEMO two people. The divider has the possibility
of giving $1 to the other person and retaining $99, or giving $2 and
keeping $98, DEMO so on. If each of these division scenarios repre-
sents an alternative, then decision makers using the equality heu-
ristic will immediately discard the alternatives that stray greatly
from a $50 –$50 distribution. Alternatives closer to DEMO equilibrium
outcome may receive closer investigation, however. Ultimately,
this heuristic DEMO a limited range of acceptable outcomes,
even though there exist additional mathematically plausible out-
comes in the set of alternatives. Indeed, such behavior occurs in
situations that tend to promote heuristic processing. When people
are DEMO under greater cognitive load, they will divide goods
amongst themselves and DEMO according to this equality heuristic.
When cognitive load is decreased, people DEMO adjust their division
to optimize their gain (Roch, Lane, Samuelson, Allison, & Dent,
2000).
Another heuristic that makes use of this effort-reduction prin-
ciple is the do-no-harm heuristic for policy reform (Baron, 1993,
1994; Baron & Jurney, 1993). Through this heuristic, decision
makers first rule out any policy change that would infringe upon
the rights of a group. After this initial step, the heuristic then
requires decision makers to continue using cues, such as fairness,
when deciding on policy changes.
It is worth noting that it is unclear DEMO the do-no-harm
heuristic and equality heuristic actually reduce effort by reducing
the number of alternatives or whether they might do so by sim-
plifying DEMO weighting. It is possible that the do-no-harm heuristic
immediately eliminates alternatives that impose harm on a person.
However, it is also possible that this heuristic simply places more
weight on a cue about whether a policy DEMO harm. Similarly,
the equality heuristic might consist of only examining distribution
outcomes within a specific range. Or one could say that the
equality DEMO uses a weighting function that simply places
great weight on whether the distribution outcome is near equilib-
rium. This confusion is precisely why we DEMO that researchers
will begin to define their heuristics algorithmically and in terms of
how they reduce effort. Greater specificity when describing new
heuristics can DEMO the difficulty in diagnosing how they op-
erate. Indeed, careful descriptions DEMO heuristics can shift the iden-
tification of these cognitive mechanisms from a seemingly arbi-
trary exercise to a scientific process.
These Principles Are Separable
DEMO is important to note that the five effort-reduction principles
discussed above are all qualitatively different from one another. As
such, the components of this framework can reduce effort individ-
ually or collectively. For instance, a heuristic might not noticeably
reduce the number of cues used but might instead DEMO numerous
easy-to-access cues. Other heuristics might reduce the difficulty
associated with storing cue values without using simpler weighting
principles. Such is the case with DEMO weighted pros heuristic
(Huber, 1979), which is virtually identical to the majority of
confirming dimensions heuristic but requires decision makers to
assign DEMO weights to cues.
Some heuristics might also use easy-to-access cues in conjunc-
tion with other effort-reduction principles. Consider anchoring and
adjustment, which uses easy-to-access cues and reduces the num-
ber of alternatives. According to this heuristic, people formulate
quantitative estimates by starting with an arbitrary value that was
DEMO recently. This arbitrary number serves as a numeric cue
that is easy to access given its recent presentation. The second part
EFFORT-REDUCTION IN HEURISTICS
of this heuristic states that people insufficiently adjust from DEMO
value to formulate their final judgment. Decision makers with
knowledge about an item use this information to establish a range
of values that might DEMO acceptable final judgments (to understand
this process, see Mussweiler & Strack, 1999). As soon as a value
within this range is reached, the adjustment ceases. This range of
acceptable values essentially establishes an outcome set with a
reduced number of alternatives, akin to the equality heuristic’s
putative principle.
The lexicographic heuristic also serves as evidence for the
independence DEMO these principles. According to this heuristic,
decision makers reduce effort by examining fewer cues and by not
integrating information; however, they might DEMO simplify cue
weighting (or search order). Similarly, heuristics that simplify cue
weighting (e.g., the equal weighting heuristic) do not necessarily
require decision makers to also use easy-to-access cues. Finally,
although satisficing does DEMO integrate information across cues, it
may require decision makers to establish DEMO levels for every
cue.
By examining each heuristic in terms of effort-reduction, we can
compare and contrast heuristics by a common standard. This
framework does not necessarily dismiss any heuristics that are
discussed in the literature DEMO, but instead it offers a more
rigorous understanding of what it DEMO for a process to be a
heuristic. This framework also requires heuristics to be more
precisely defined so that they can be compared along DEMO com-
mon dimensions of effort-reduction. The catalogue of heuristics
covered in this article appears in Table 1, with each heuristic’s
putative effort-reduction principles noted. In constructing this ta-
ble, we consulted the articles referenced to best glean how the
authors’ definitions of the heuristic might be captured by DEMO
effort-reduction model. As the table shows, these effort-reduction
principles are separable DEMO can either co-occur or operate indi-
vidually. Because many of the heuristics noted in the table are not
commonly discussed in terms of effort-reduction, it might be the
case that authors intended for their heuristics to DEMO interpreted
differently. Or, it may be that some proposed heuristics do DEMO
reduce the effort associated with a task, in which case it DEMO that
they may not truly be heuristics. The assignment of effort-
reduction principles in the table is an attempt to show how current
and DEMO heuristics can be more rigorously defined so as to
highlight the overlap and distinctions between heuristics.
Additionally, we can now use this framework to extend current
heuristic theories and to refocus research on how decision makers
DEMO engage in less effortful processing. In the next section, we
outline DEMO heuristic theories, noting how the effort-reduction
framework can direct more deliberate DEMO of these existing
frameworks.
Extending Current Heuristic Theories
Previous research on heuristics has typically identified a subset
of the effort-reduction principles set forth in DEMO current frame-
work. Some approaches have subtly implied the presence of such
principles, whereas other approaches have more directly described
a small number of principles. For example, Hogarth and Karelaia
(2005a, 2005b, 2007; Karelaia, 2006) have conducted a series of
experiments, wherein they study the accuracy of various heuristics
across different task environments (a topic beyond the scope of the
213
current article). As part of this work, they describe features that
can be used to predict which heuristics will DEMO suited to these
environments. They note that these features simplify the compu-
tations involved in the weighted additive rule and therefore this
approach touches DEMO concepts related to the current framework.
Although they do not discuss heuristics primarily in terms of
effort-reduction, Hogarth and Karelaia do identify features that are
related to the principles of examining fewer cues and integrating
less DEMO To some degree, they also discuss simpler
weighting principles as another DEMO of effort-reduction. How-
ever, this work’s focus was noticeably different from DEMO current
approach and concentrated on a subset of effort-reduction princi-
ples and a limited set of heuristics. Nevertheless, frameworks such
as Hogarth and Karelaia’s have provided the necessary beginnings
of the comprehensive effort-reduction framework that is DEMO forth
in this article. We discuss other related approaches in this section.
Dual-Process Models of Attitude Change and Persuasion
One branch of heuristic theory DEMO entails a dual-process view
of judgment and decision making (Chaiken, 1980; Eagly &
Chaiken, 1993; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986).2 According to these
theories, there are two styles of reasoning. System 1 takes short-
cuts to process information quickly, and System 2 deliberately
processes information.
Early dual-process models relevant to judgment and decision
making emerged from the DEMO on attitude change (Chaiken,
1980; Eagly & Chaiken, 1993; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). These
models offer insight into the what and when of heuristic process-
ing. According to these models, systematic processing uses infor-
mation that is more central to a persuasive message. On DEMO other
hand, heuristic processing uses cues that are peripheral to the
DEMO but perhaps related to the source of the message (e.g., a
speaker or writer). These peripheral cues are typically associated
with persuasive DEMO through rules developed from experi-
ence and observation (Chaiken, 1980). Therefore, a speaker’s
expertise might be weighted heavily by heuristic processing in
determining message quality. This would occur because people are
aware that experts DEMO often right, and so they might choose to use
the expertise DEMO, rather than the actual content of the message, for
their judgment. Heuristic processing occurs when a person has less
capacity or motivation to DEMO well in task or is less involved in the
task (Giner-Sorolla & Chaiken, 1997).
In addition to outlining what cues are used DEMO heuristic process-
ing and when this processing occurs, these dual-process models
DEMO assume that heuristic processing requires less effort (Ratnesh-
war & Chaiken, 1991). However, these models do not rigorously
outline how heuristics reduce effort. As discussed above, these
heuristics are often described as using cues that are related to
2 There is some discussion in the field DEMO whether dual-process views
most accurately capture human judgment and decision making. Some
researchers have argued that analytic and intuitive processing may not rely
on DEMO systems (Kruglanski, Fishbach, Erb, Pierro, & Mannetti, 2004).
This theoretical question is orthogonal to the effort-reduction framework.
We posit that DEMO effort-reduction principles outlined above underlie judg-
ment and choice heuristics, regardless DEMO whether these heuristics are used
by System 1, System 2, or a single, continuous system that can operate both
analytically and intuitively.
214 SHAH AND OPPENHEIMER
Table 1
Effort-Reduction Principles Underlying Heuristics
Reduces difficulty DEMO
Examines associated with weighting Integrates
fewer retrieving/storing principles less
Heuristic cues cue values for cues information Examines fewer alternatives
Anchoring and adjustment (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974) Easy to access Eliminates alternatives
Audience response (DEMO et al., 1987) Easy to access
Availability (Tversky & Kahneman,DEMO
1973, 1974) X Easy to access X
Brand name (Maheswaran DEMO al., 1992) Easy to access
Categorization by Elimination
(Gigerenzer et DEMO, 1999) X X Paring down
Choice by most attractive aspect
(DEMO, 1979) X X Fewer compared simultaneously
CONF (Karelaia, 2006) DEMO X
Consensus (Giner-Sorolla & Chaiken,
1997) Easy to access
Country of origin (Chang, 2004) Easy to access
Deterministic elimination by aspects
(Hogarth & Karelaia, 2005b) X X Paring down
Discount percentage (DEMO et al., 1995) Easy to access
Distinctiveness (Schacter et al., 2001) Easy to access
Domran (Hogarth & Karelaia, 2005b) X DEMO
Do-no-harm (Baron & Jurney, 1993) Eliminates alternatives
Effort (Kruger et al., 2004) Easy to access
Elimination by aspects (Tversky, 1972) X X Paring down
Elimination by least attractive aspect
(Svenson, 1979) X X Fewer compared simultaneously
Endorsement (Forchand et al., 2004) Easy to access
Equal weighting (Dawes, 1979) X
Equality (Messick, 1993; Roch et al.,
2000) Eliminates alternatives
Expertise (Ratneshwar & Chaiken,
1991) Easy to access
Fluency (Whittlesea & Leboe, 2003) DEMO to access
Idiosyncratic fit (Kivetz & Simonson,
2003) X Easy to access
Lexicographic (Fishburn, 1967, 1974) X X Paring down
DEMO semi-order (Tversky,
1969) X X Paring down
Likeability (Chaiken, 1980) Easy to access
EFFORT-REDUCTION IN HEURISTICS
215
Table 1 (continued )
Heuristic
Examines
fewer
DEMO
Reduces difficulty
associated with
retrieving/storing
cue values
Simplifies
weighting
principles
for cues
Integrates
less
information Examines fewer alternatives
Majority of confirming dimensions
(Russo & Dosher, 1983) Simple omparisons X
Minimalist (Gigerenzer et al., DEMO) X X X Paring down
Outrage (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002) X Easy to access X
Peak-end (Kahneman et al., 1993) X X
Price (Mitra, 1995) Easy to access
Priority (Brandsta¨tter et DEMO, 2006) X X Paring down
QuickEst (Gigerenzer et al., 1999) X X
Recognition (Gigerenzer & Goldstein,
1996) X Easy to access X
Representativeness (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974) X Easy to DEMO X
Satisficing (Simon, 1955, 1956, 1990) X X
Single DEMO (Hogarth & Karelaia,
2005a, 2007) X X
Scarcity (Brannon & Brock, 2001) Easy to access
Take the Best (Gigerenzer et al., 1999) X X Paring down
Take the Last (Gigerenzer et al., 1999) X Easy to access X X Paring down
Warm DEMO (Monin, 2003) X Easy to access X
Weighted pros (Huber, 1979) Simple comparisons
Note. This table is based on how the DEMO are described in the cited articles. Evidence for their use (or DEMO of the heuristics) can be found
in the cited articles as DEMO Where appropriate, we verbally identify the subtype of effort-reduction. Further research DEMO on this framework may reveal
that different principles in the framework underlie the heuristics.
simple rules for judgment. Although this idea begins to define DEMO
heuristic in terms of effort-reduction, it has proven somewhat
vague and DEMO thus resulted in researchers describing the many
domain-specific heuristics discussed earlier in the article, which
are at their core quite similar. For example, DEMO brand name
heuristic (Maheswaran et al., 1992) and country of DEMO heuristic
(Chang, 2004) are highly related, and they are also similar to other
heuristics in which positively valenced information affects human
judgment. DEMO these proposed heuristics are useful for de-
scribing domain-specific behavior, it DEMO easy to see that there can
be an infinite number of such heuristics (or at least, as many
heuristics as there are cues DEMO judgment in the world). Conse-
quently, using our approach to DEMO can offer a domain-
general approach to understanding how heuristics operate and
what heuristics are likely within a given environment.
Although heuristic processing for DEMO messages was not
originally discussed in terms of the current framework, DEMO does
not preclude it from being incorporated into the study of effort-
reduction. In fact, given that these models often mention that
heuristic processing saves effort, the current framework can com-
plement these dual-process models by enabling them to explain
how they reduce effort. For example, as the heuristics are currently
defined in the persuasion literature, they appear to all make use of
the second effort-reduction principle in the current framework,
DEMO cues that are easy to access. Yet the effort-reduction frame-
work also outlines other ways in which effort might be reduced.
Ideally, the additional principles from the current framework could
motivate future research to explore different DEMO of heuristic
processing when judging the persuasiveness of a message.
Currently, DEMO tests of many persuasion heuristics make it
difficult to properly identify which, if any, heuristic principle is
working to reduce effort. For instance, one cannot be certain that
a heuristic is drastically reducing the number DEMO cues that are
examined if studies only include a few key pieces of information,
such as a speaker’s message and a cue about DEMO speaker’s exper-
tise. If an experimental design already reduces the number of cues
available to the participant, there will be a floor effect when testing
cue-reduction principles. Indeed, some dual-process theorists even
say that message cues and peripheral cues are used in conjunction
(Ratneshwar & Chaiken, 1991) but that systematic processing
216
SHAH AND OPPENHEIMER
attenuates the effect of peripheral cues. If this DEMO the case, then this
suggests that what has been called heuristic DEMO might just
be behavior that shifts the weights applied to each cue, with
peripheral cues being weighted more heavily. Yet it is also hard to
tell whether this change in weighting is simpler (and therefore
effort-reducing) or whether it is only indicative of misweighting or
overweighting certain information without any effort-reduction.
Using the effort-reduction framework, we can say that the most
likely candidate for effort-reduction in heuristic processing in this
field is DEMO certain cues are used because they are easier to access
when forming a given judgment. This does appear to be what
authors suggest when DEMO discuss how peripheral cues are related
to simple judgment rules. As such, the current framework can
identify the common effort-reduction principle that is likely (but
not certain) to underlie the heuristics commonly discussed in the
DEMO literature. Furthermore, the effort-reduction framework
can help researchers determine the appropriate DEMO em-
pirical manipulations to determine whether a process is heuristic.
Dual-Process Models and Attribute Substitution
Kahneman and Frederick (2002) have posited attribute substi-
DEMO as a means to reduce effort. According to this hypothesis,
people will use cues that are easier to access when formulating a
judgment. DEMO instance, if you ask someone “How many dates did
you have DEMO month?” and then ask them “How happy are you
with your life in general?” the answers are highly correlated (p.
53). The authors have asserted that people substitute the informa-
tion about how DEMO dates that they have had for the information
about how happy they are. In a sense, people are answering a
different question. The authors have extended the attribute substi-
tution hypothesis to account for base-rate neglect DEMO the classic
Linda problem (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). According to this
problem, people will judge the likelihood that Linda is both a
feminist and a bank teller to be greater than the likelihood that DEMO
is either a feminist or a bank teller. Kahneman and Frederick have
argued that people do not use base rates when judging the likeli-
DEMO that Linda is a feminist bank teller. Instead, people answer a
DEMO question: How representative is Linda of a feminist bank
teller? People then substitute representativeness for their answer
and exhibit base-rate neglect. Thus, the authors have taken care to
specify how certain heuristics reduce effort. They DEMO argue
that decision makers reduce effort by using cues whose values are
easier to access than other cues.
Although this work does begin to DEMO effort-reduction
principles, the current effort-reduction framework can outline
more basic effort-reduction DEMO This different level of anal-
ysis permits researchers to further dissect heuristics into compo-
nents that are responsible for reducing effort.
We can highlight DEMO effort-reduction principles within
attribute substitution. By using easy-to-access cues, attribute sub-
DEMO reduces effort by addressing the second demand of the
weighted additive model. Furthermore, attribute substitution pre-
sumes that heuristic processes reduce effort by reducing the num-
ber of cues. In the case of representativeness, attribute substitution
largely discards the base rate cues. People have been shown to use
DEMO rates under various circumstances (for a review, see Koehler,
1996), such as when people have direct experience with base rates
(Manis, Dovalina, Avis, & Cardoze, 1980), when individuating
information is DEMO diagnostic (Ginossar & Trope, 1980), or when
information is presented in frequency formats (Gigerenzer & Hof-
frage, 1995). To account DEMO this wide body of research, Kahneman
and Frederick (2002) have DEMO that systematic, not heuristic,
processes make use of base rate DEMO They have argued
that manipulations, such as using frequency formats, to correct
base-rate neglect affect “the corrective operations of System 2, not
the intuitive operations of System 1” (p. 69). In other words, DEMO
have posited that base rates and representativeness cannot be
combined in a heuristic manner. Through this implicit assumption,
Kahneman and Frederick have addressed DEMO first demand of the
weighted additive model—that people must examine all cues.
Thus, we can use an effort-reduction approach to make explicit the
assumptions of Kahneman and Frederick’s effort-reduction model.
Their effort-reduction model relies on reducing DEMO number of cues
used and using a cue that is also easy to access. The current
framework also builds on this subset of effort-reduction DEMO
by describing how decision makers might confront the three other
demands of a weighted additive model.
The Adaptive Decision Making Framework
The current framework DEMO complements existing work on
effort-reduction. Such work was notably undertaken by Payne et
al. (1993), who developed a taxonomy of heuristics by classifying
strategies according to six binary features. First, heuristics might
or might not lead decision makers to form an impression of each
alternative. Second, heuristics can be compensatory or noncom-
pensatory. Third, heuristics can broadly use all information or
ignore some information. Fourth, heuristics can lead decision
makers to engage in quantitative or qualitative reasoning. Fifth,
heuristics can result in DEMO or selective processing. Finally,
heuristics might use attribute-based or alternative-based ap-
proaches.
In some regards, the current effort-reduction approach is similar
to this taxonomy. For example, the effort-reduction framework
explains that some heuristics, such DEMO satisficing (Simon, 1955,
1956, 1990), reduce effort by DEMO integrating information to form
an overall evaluation of an alternative. This principle is analogous
to Payne et al.’s (1993) distinction between forming and DEMO
forming impressions of alternatives.
However, the current approach differs from the DEMO deci-
sion making framework in several critical ways. First, this effort-
DEMO approach is not restricted to a binary classification
system, which allows DEMO finer distinctions between heuristics than
is possible using the adaptive decision making framework alone.
This difference is most salient when we consider the distinction
DEMO compensatory and noncompensatory heuristics. Compen-
satory heuristics consider multiple cues and allow for decision
makers to make trade-offs between cues. Noncompensatory heu-
ristics consider DEMO cue at a time and do not make trade-offs
between cues. This feature is clearly related to effort-reduction,
and the current framework maintains DEMO feature but can subdivide
it into two effort-reduction principles: examining fewer DEMO and
integrating less information. A noncompensatory heuristic would
be one that typically reduces the number of cues to one, whereas
a compensatory heuristic would use multiple cues. Additionally, a
noncompensatory heuristic would not integrate information,
whereas a compensatory heuristic would integrate all information.
EFFORT-REDUCTION IN HEURISTICS
217
The effort-reduction framework extends this classification sys-
tem, allowing for a graded effort-reduction, as opposed to an
all-or-nothing reduction by switching from compensatory to
noncompensatory strategies. The principle of examining fewer
cues DEMO help explain how the idiosyncratic fit heuristic (Kivetz
& Simonson, 2003) reduces effort, for example. This heuristic
is compensatory, but it uses just two cues (individual effort and
the effort required of others to complete the requirements of
consumer loyalty programs) in an extremely simple manner so
as to reduce effort.
The current effort-reduction framework can also be DEMO to
similarly subdivide the feature of whether a heuristic considers
all information. The two most obvious ways of ignoring infor-
mation involve examining fewer DEMO or examining fewer al-
ternatives. However, people can also use simple DEMO
functions to ignore information. Simpler weighting procedures,
such as equal weighting or random weighting, can reduce effort
by ignoring the information pertaining to cue validities/
importance. Additionally, decision makers can use simple com-
parisons (greater than, less than, equal to), thereby ignoring the
magnitude of differences between cues, such as in the weighted
pros heuristic (DEMO, 1979). Simple comparisons and simpler
weighting were not explicitly discussed DEMO Payne et al. (1993)
but were instead encompassed under the DEMO feature of
quantitative versus qualitative reasoning. The current frame-
work can therefore highlight the importance of these principles
as unique ways to reduce effort.
DEMO in some ways, Payne et al.’s (1993) framework provides
insight DEMO heuristic processing that would be lost when using an
effort-reduction framework alone. For example, the feature of
consistent versus selective processing describes how heuristics can
process the same information for each alternative (i.e., consistent)
DEMO they can engage in variable processing (i.e., selective). The
current framework does not help in identifying a subset of effort-
reduction principles DEMO would perfectly discriminate between the
two parts of this feature.
The distinction between alternative-based and attribute-based
heuristics also escapes simple classification in terms of DEMO
reduction. Decision makers using alternative-based heuristics
proceed by examining multiple attributes for a single alternative
before moving on to a new alternative. Decision makers DEMO
attribute-based heuristics proceed by evaluating multiple alter-
natives along a single attribute before moving on to a new
attribute. The current framework neglects this DEMO, and
our proposed effort-reduction principles could often be applied
to heuristics DEMO either sort. For example, decision makers could
examine fewer cues regardless DEMO whether they are using alter-
native based or attribute based strategies. In the former case,
they could simply not consider certain cues when DEMO an
evaluation of the alternative. In the latter case, they could DEMO
a decision after comparing the alternatives on a small subset of
the cues. In this way, Payne et al.’s (1993) approach can
identify distinctions that would be overlooked using solely an
effort-reduction approach. As such, the current framework and
the adaptive decision making approach complement each other.
DEMO can individually improve our understanding of heuristics,
and jointly they make up an exceptionally powerful tool.
The Fast-and-Frugal Framework
The fast-and-frugal heuristics framework (Gigerenzer et al.,
1999) has also examined how heuristics reduce effort, particularly
in the domain of inference (but for a fast-and-frugal approach DEMO
choice, see the priority heuristic; Brandsta¨tter et al., 2006). DEMO
cally fast-and-frugal heuristics for inference are built upon a three-
stage model. First, heuristics specify principles to guide search for
cues in some fashion (e.g., in order of validity or randomly).
Second, heuristics include rules for when decision makers should
stop searching for information. Third, cues are processed and a
judgment or inference is made. The fast-and-frugal approach DEMO
mately defines a heuristic as an algorithm that specifies a guiding
principle for each of these three stages. Although this definition
noticeably differs from DEMO definition of a heuristic in terms of
effort-reduction, the fast-and-frugal approach DEMO discuss some
ways in which heuristics reduce effort.
The fast-and-frugal framework most directly describes how
heuristics reduce effort in the rules for stopping search DEMO making
a decision. Gigerenzer et al. (1999) have noted that stopping rules
are necessary because it is psychologically implausible for cue-
search to DEMO exhaustive. Given this, many of the more widely
discussed fast-and-frugal heuristics DEMO searching for information
as soon as a single discriminating cue is found (e.g., the recogni-
tion, Take the Best, Take the Last, and Minimalist heuristics). This
is analogous to the current framework’s principle DEMO examining
fewer cues. Note that heuristics that use multiple cues (e.g., Quick-
Est or Categorization by Elimination; Gigerenzer et al., 1999) will
still help decision makers form a judgment based on a subset of
DEMO information. Further, the vast majority of fast-and-frugal
heuristics are noncompensatory and DEMO do not integrate
information, saving the decision maker the difficult task DEMO making
trade-offs between cues.
Fast-and-frugal heuristics must also specify search principles,
but the ways in which these principles reduce effort have not been
DEMO in detail. Instead, the fast-and-frugal program has fo-
cused on how DEMO search rules are differentially suited to various
task environments, which largely DEMO the accuracy of the
heuristics. The current framework can complement this approach
because in addition to varying in accuracy in different environ-
ments, search principles can vary in how they reduce effort.
The benefits of combining DEMO fast-and-frugal framework with
the effort-reduction approach can be seen when highlighting the
differences between the Take the Best and Minimalist heuristics
(Gigerenzer et al., 1999). According to the fast-and-frugal ap-
proach, these heuristics only DEMO in that Take the Best searches
cues according to validity, whereas DEMO Minimalist heuristic
searches cues randomly. It is noted that people with more infor-
mation about the environment might use the validity-based strat-
egy, whereas more naı¨ve decision makers might search cues ran-
domly (Gigerenzer et al., 1999). However, a strong body of
evidence suggests that learning DEMO using cue validities is difficult
to accomplish accurately (Evans, Clibbens, DEMO, Harris, &
Dennis, 2003; Goodie & Crooks, 2004; DEMO, 1970; Per-
mut, 1973; Peterson & Pitz, 1985; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974).
Therefore, when these two heuristics are viewed DEMO the lens
of the current framework, it appears that the Minimalist DEMO
would make use of an additional effort-reducing principle, one
analogous to DEMO weighting principles (where searching
218
SHAH AND OPPENHEIMER
cues randomly would be easier than searching cues DEMO order of
their validity).3 Combining the fast-and-frugal emphasis on eco-
logical validity and fit to the task environment with the current
approach’s focus DEMO reducing cognitive effort could yield insight
into when different search rules are adopted.
The effort-reduction approach can also clarify a number of
implicit assumptions DEMO how particular heuristics proposed
within the fast-and-frugal framework operate. Consider the recog-
nition heuristic (Gigerenzer et al., 1999). In this heuristic, fast-
and-frugal researchers have identified recognition of an item as a
particularly easy-to-access DEMO, similar to the availability heuristic
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). DEMO researchers have
also proposed a fluency heuristic (Hertwig & Herzog, 2007) that
also makes use of an easy-to-access clue: fluency. Yet, although
the fast-and-frugal approach has focused on the use of recognition
and fluency DEMO separate and unique processes, we would describe
them as specific instantiations DEMO the more general principle of
using easy-to-access cues.
The fast-and-frugal approach certainly provides the beginnings
of an effort-reduction framework. In discussing stopping and de-
DEMO rules, the fast-and-frugal approach touches on principles that
the current framework DEMO However, the effort-reduction
framework specifies principles—such as using easy-to-access cues
and DEMO weighting strategies—that, although evident in spe-
cific heuristics proposed by fast-and-frugal DEMO, have not
been explored formally. Additionally, although the fast-and-frugal
program has discussed heuristics that pare down alternatives, it has
not directly assessed heuristics that immediately eliminate alter-
natives from the decision set (though such an idea seems to be
implied by Gigerenzer et al., 1999). As such, the current frame-
work suggests new avenues for fast-and-frugal researchers to ex-
plore and complements and extends the three-stage model. It is
also DEMO noting that although the fast-and-frugal approach offers
great specificity in describing a particular set of heuristics, the
current framework can provide the added benefit of describing the
effort-reduction underlying components of a number of heuristics
that DEMO outside the scope of the fast-and-frugal analysis.
Just as the effort-reduction framework extends current heuristic
theories, it also reframes the research methods that one could use
in studying heuristic processing. In the next section, we briefly
discuss how various existing methods can be used to test for the
DEMO principles specified in this article.
Types of Methods in Heuristics Research
Researchers primarily seek three types of evidence when study-
ing heuristics in judgment DEMO decision making. First, researchers
use computer simulations to investigate the effort DEMO expected
accuracy of heuristics. Second, researchers study what information
is sought DEMO used on a moment-to-moment basis to arrive at a
decision. Third, DEMO examine how people’s behavioral out-
comes match patterns that are indicative of certain strategies.
Much has already been accomplished in using these techniques. In
DEMO section, we focus on how researchers can use existing meth-
ods, in conjunction with the organizing principles of the current
framework, to gain a deeper understanding of the effort-reduction
mechanisms underlying heuristics.4
When conducting computer DEMO, one way to quantify
cognitive effort is to consider decision processes DEMO terms of what
Payne et al. (1993) call elementary information processes (EIPs).
EIPs can account for the effort associated with processes, DEMO as
reading information, comparing alternatives on a cue, and so forth.
By counting the number of EIPs involved in a decision process,
DEMO can compare the effort involved in various processes.
Accordingly, the weighted DEMO rule has been shown to use
more EIPs than do most of the widely discussed processes that
reduce effort (Payne et al., 1993)DEMO
We can combine this methodology with the current framework
to make predictions about how certain heuristics will behave in
various conditions. Consider a heuristic DEMO Let the function H(a)
represent the number of EIPs used by H when there are a alter-
natives available in the decision DEMO We can use the slope of this
function to quantify the increase in effort for each additional
alternative in the decision set. As H DEMO fewer alternatives in
a set, the slope for H(a) decreases. Similarly, let H(c) represent the
number of EIPs used by DEMO when there are c cues available per
alternative. As H examines fewer cues per alternative, the slope for
H(c) should decrease.
We DEMO apply this to the effort-reduction framework directly by
quantifying how much effort is saved by a given effort-reduction
principle in particular. By comparing the DEMO of H(a) to the slope
of H(c), we DEMO understand whether a heuristic saves more effort
by reducing the number of alternatives or the number of cues. If
H(c) H(a), then we can say that this heuristic probably saves
more effort through DEMO latter principle. If H(a) H(c), then we
can DEMO that this heuristic probably saves more effort through the
former principle.5 Furthermore, this research method can be used
to determine whether multiple effort-reduction principles work
together in an additive manner or whether there is an interaction
DEMO certain types of effort-reduction principles.
Although computer simulations are useful, they DEMO prove
whether people actually use a given heuristic. As complements,
process tracing and outcome analysis provide strong empirical
assessments of effort-reduction. Process tracing DEMO to observ-
ing how people search for information before making a judgment
or decision. By tracking how participants search through informa-
tion, researchers can determine which types of decision processes
3 Note that because both of DEMO heuristics stop searching for informa-
tion as soon as a discriminating cue is found (and because the decision is
based on this discriminating cue), searching for a cue earlier essentially
gives it more weight in DEMO final decision (Brandsta¨tter et al., 2006). For
example, consider DEMO or choice between two alternatives—A and
B—supposing cue x favors option A, whereas cue y favors option B. If cue
x is searched before cue y, then the decision will essentially depend on cue
x—and vice versa if cue y is searched first.
4 Payne et al. (1993) and Gigerenzer et al. (1999) identified methods for
assessing the accuracy of heuristics, which are useful for describing when
heuristics will be used. These methods can be directly translated to assess-
ing the accuracy of DEMO effort-reduction principles as well. Currently, we
are interested in applying this DEMO to describing how decision
makers reduce effort. As such, the matters DEMO accuracy and when individual
effort-reduction principles are used are beyond the scope of this article.
5 Alternatively, a multivariable function H(a,c) DEMO better describe the
effort involved in a decision rule according to the number of alternatives
and cues in a decision set. If this were DEMO case, then the partial derivatives
of each variable could be used DEMO evaluate the effort-reduction associated
with alternatives and cues individually. For simplicity, DEMO, we use
separate linear functions in our discussion.
EFFORT-REDUCTION IN HEURISTICS
219
are being used. The basics of using process DEMO to study
judgment and decision making have been widely discussed else-
where (for reviews, see Payne et al., 1993; Rieskamp & Hoffrage,DEMO
1999; Svenson, 1979; Wedell & Senter, 1997).
Process tracing is especially useful for studying whether deci-
sion makers are examining fewer DEMO or alternatives. For exam-
ple, if decision makers are reducing effort DEMO comparing just two
alternatives at a time, then they might examine DEMO the attributes for
these two alternatives first. Moreover, if decision makers DEMO
searching alternatives on the right side of the screen, researchers
can DEMO that these decision makers are using a heuristic that
immediately eliminates alternatives from the decision set accord-
ing to spatial position. This pattern might DEMO limit the
number of cues that decision makers search if they are using a
cue-reduction heuristic. Participants who use cue-reduction heu-
ristics might also DEMO numerous alternatives according to only
one cue.
Processing tracing might also provide insight into whether par-
ticipants are reducing effort by using easy-to-access cues. DEMO par-
ticipants typically search alternatives for one cue, and they spend
DEMO shorter amount of time on this cue yet weight it heavily in
forming a judgment, then this suggests that the cue is easier to
access and integrate into their judgment formation. However,
because participants can DEMO lookup cues in a process tracing
environment, they need not always DEMO cues from memory. As
such, process tracing still remains a relatively DEMO method for
determining which cues are easier to access. Therefore, to DEMO
understand heuristics in terms of effort-reduction, we cannot solely
rely on DEMO tracing.
Process tracing is considerably more powerful when used in
conjunction with outcome analysis. When examining outcomes,
researchers establish a set of alternatives DEMO cues that yield
different choices according to different heuristics. By analyzing
the frequency with which participants arrive at a given outcome,
researchers can DEMO inferences about which heuristics are being
used. For this technique to work, however, outcomes must be
separable (Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999); DEMO single outcome cannot
be accounted for by multiple heuristics. This type of analysis might
be useful for studying whether people are examining fewer cues DEMO
alternatives, for instance. Researchers might have one group of
participants make DEMO or choices with a limited set of cues
(or alternatives), DEMO other groups view different levels of
expanded sets. If the decisions differ and reaction times signifi-
cantly increase with different levels of expansion, then it is less
likely that participants are examining fewer cues (or alternatives).
To determine whether people are using easier-to-access cues,
Kahneman and DEMO (2002) offer a different type of outcome-
oriented analysis called the heuristic elicitation method. They used
this method to test whether representativeness was DEMO base-
rate neglect in the classic Linda problem. In this design, DEMO
participants provide judgments for the target criterion, whereas
others provide judgments DEMO cues, such as representativeness, that
might be easier to access. If attribute substitution occurs, then the
two judgments should be highly correlated. Participants were
asked to rate how much Linda resembled the typical worker in DEMO
certain field (e.g., psychiatric social worker, bank teller, bank teller
active in the feminist movement)—a possibly easy-to-access
cue—and how likely she DEMO to be such a worker—the target
criterion. The correlation between the two rankings was .99, which
provides some support for the idea that representativeness drives
the probability judgments. However, as when using other forms of
outcome analysis, researchers must take care to ensure that cues,
such as representativeness, are separable from other cues that
might be driving the effect.
Given that heuristics ought to reduce effort, one should expect
the use of heuristics to increase with cognitive load. Using the
methods described above DEMO conjunction with cognitive load will
allow researchers to understand which heuristics are particularly
effective in reducing demands on cognitive capacity. Furthermore,
it is DEMO interest to know whether multiple effort-reduction strategies
are used as load increases, or whether any given effort-reduction
principle becomes single-handedly more prominent under signifi-
cant load.
Discussion
The goal of this article has been to motivate DEMO renewed focus on
how heuristics reduce effort. A framework of effort-reduction
might serve as a formal foundation for more rigorous analysis of
heuristics. The DEMO “heuristic” should not mean “curious behav-
ior” or “suboptimal choice.” Instead, DEMO word “heuristic” ought to
signal to readers that a decision process is reducing the effort
associated with a task and that readers should expect DEMO hear more
about how that process is reducing effort.
The current framework of effort-reduction makes intuitive sense
given that much of the work on DEMO has been done to
understand how people respond to bounded rationality (DEMO,
1955, 1956, 1990). Complex, optimal judgment and decision-
DEMO strategies typically demand a large amount of cognitive
capacity and effort. In this article, we have for numerous reasons
focused on the weighted additive model as a complex rule. For
instance, this rule is commonly used as the normative principle for
judgment and choice (Gigerenzer et al., DEMO; Payne et al., 1993).
Additionally, this rule is closely DEMO to normative rules for
evaluating expected value and expected utility (Keeney & Raiffa,
1976). Furthermore, this rule typically requires the most DEMO
from decision makers and results in the most accurate choices or
judgments (Payne et al., 1993).
The weighted additive rule and other DEMO strategies place
five demands on people: to consider all available cues, to retrieve
cue values accurately, to weight cues properly, to integrate DEMO
mation for each alternative, and to examine all alternatives. We
therefore DEMO that people confront limited cognitive resources
by addressing these five demands. They can reduce the effort
associated with any of these five demands individually DEMO collec-
tively.
With this effort-reduction framework in mind, we can finally
DEMO to understand what a heuristic is not. A heuristic is not, DEMO
example, a set of guidelines for reaching a goal unless these
DEMO reduce effort compared with an optimal model, such as
the weighted DEMO model. Consider trying to beat a chess
master who has memorized many of the common patterns ob-
served during the course of a match. DEMO novice might adopt the
following strategy: “Remove many pieces from the DEMO to avoid
making recognizable mistakes.” Although this guideline will beget
a curious and observable behavioral trend, it does not necessarily
reduce effort, as DEMO can be quite difficult to take many pieces from
a chess master.
220
SHAH AND OPPENHEIMER
Furthermore, heuristics are not merely curious representations
of a problem, even if these representations are commonplace. If
decision makers are asked to administer a penalty to a corrupt
corporation, then it is not necessarily a heuristic to use the infor-
mation such as long DEMO projections about the economic impact,
which would require substantive arithmetic. It saves effort, how-
ever, to access the information pertaining to how DEMO the
corruption seems, as this is an affect-based heuristic that is DEMO to
assess on a personal level (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002) DEMO thus
reduces effort through the second principle in the effort-reduction
framework. Both are interesting ways of representing the question:
“How much should we DEMO this company?” Yet only one
representation significantly decreases the effort associated with the
task.
Heuristics are also not cues in and of themselves. DEMO is a point
that often seems obscured in the literature. Simply preferring or
overweighting a cue across situations is not in itself a heuristic. DEMO
be part of a heuristic process, these preferred or overweighted cues
DEMO be easier to access or they might be used to the exclusion of
other cues. Consider consumers’ bargain-hunting behaviors. When
deciding whether to stop DEMO hunting for a low-cost product,
decision makers have been found to consider the percentage dis-
count of a product (Darke, Freedman, & Chaiken, 1995). In this
study, more people opted to continue DEMO hunting for a product
when they were offered a 10% discount than when they were
offered a 30% discount. Darke et al. (1995) DEMO that “the
percentage discount allows the buyer to estimate when further
search is warranted,” and they have explained this in terms of
heuristic DEMO (p. 585). The authors seem to assert that the
discount DEMO provides easy-to-access information for deci-
sion makers who are deciding whether to continue bargain hunting.
However, the researchers ought to consider whether it is a discount
percentage heuristic per se or whether the experimental environ-
ment DEMO made discount percentage an easy-to-access cue. In
this sense, the experimental DEMO may have indeed elicited
heuristic behavior. Yet discount percentage might not be the only
heuristic or cue that accounts for these behavioral findings. The
DEMO precise heuristic principle would be that participants are
using easy-to-access information for deciding whether to continue
bargain hunting. There may then be numerous cues DEMO help
decision makers estimate whether further bargain hunting is war-
ranted. For instance, the “length of sale” might also be a useful cue
for deciding whether to continue bargain hunting. A brief sale
might signal a DEMO bargain than a lengthier sale. We would not
jump to call this a “length of sale” heuristic, however, because
cues are not heuristics DEMO true heuristic is the under-
lying method or strategy that selects easy-to-access cues. We must
take care to identify the true heuristics at work, instead of pinning
down experimental artifacts or domain-specific behaviors as heu-
ristics. DEMO the same vein, a specific emotion is not a heuristic.
Instead, affect in general is serving as an easy-to-access cue, and
the heuristic principle is choosing to use easy-to-access cues
(Finucane et al., 2000; Frederick, 2002; Kahneman & Frederick,
2002; Monin, 2003; Monin & Oppeneheimer, 2005; Slovic et al.,
2002).
All of DEMO is to say that not all unexpected, curious, suboptimal,
or irrational behaviors are the result of heuristic behaviors. Al-
though these behavioral DEMO are interesting and worthy of
investigation, they are not necessarily heuristic DEMO Heuris-
tics may sometimes appear as optimal or suboptimal, expected or
DEMO, but they should foremost share the common goal of
reducing the DEMO associated with a task.
The current framework can help researchers to properly exam-
ine their heuristics for effort-reduction. Consider the testing of
heuristics that DEMO used in one-reason decision making, such as the
recognition heuristic (Gigerenzer et al., 1999). Proponents of the
recognition heuristic argue that it reduces cognitive effort in two
ways: it is an easily retrievable cue and it is the only cue used for
decision making. The first DEMO has found much supporting evi-
dence, particularly given that it is DEMO similar to the availability
heuristic and other fluency-based heuristics (Tversky & DEMO
man, 1974). The second claim, however, has received much DEMO
icism because recognition is often confounded with other cues
such as knowledge, thereby making it difficult to determine how
many cues are truly being used (Oppenheimer, 2003; Richter &
Spa¨th, 2006). These fast-and-frugal heuristics therefore make use
of one of the proposed effort-reduction principles— easy-to-access
DEMO but the point that they reduce the number of cues used to
just one cue has been called into question. Even though the
heuristics DEMO defined to use just one cue, the feasibility of this
approach DEMO be studied further. In this way, the effort-reduction
framework may help DEMO define heuristics more accurately
and to test for different effort-reduction principles more precisely.
The how of effort-reduction presents the next challenge for
those who DEMO heuristics. Computer simulations, process trac-
ing, and outcome analyses have been used to describe what people
do when making decisions and when people DEMO certain strate-
gies. Now, these experimental methods must be used to DEMO
how people are reducing effort. Future research will need to
develop new methods to investigate how people reduce effort. For
instance, researchers can turn to reaction time analyses to compare
how quickly people can access certain DEMO This might provide a
measurement for the effort associated with cue-value retrieval.
Researchers might also return to the literature on EIPs (Payne et
al., 1993). Perhaps reducing the number of alternatives typically
leads people to use fewer EIPs than does reducing the number of
cues. Or perhaps DEMO are interactions between the five types of
effort-reduction principles. With a new framework for studying
effort-reduction, researchers can ultimately return to the existing
methods for quantifying effort while also working to establish new
methods.
Although examining DEMO is an important step to-
ward a proper understanding of heuristics, DEMO is not sufficient by
itself. The current framework also raises several questions. For
instance, why are some cues easier to access than others? DEMO
answer to such a question lies beyond the scope of this current
framework. Yet, answering this question will go a long way in
defining heuristic behavior and predicting when it affects decision
making.
We must also DEMO careful attention to when a heuristic is used,
as well as how often a heuristic is used. If attribute substitution
(Kahneman & Frederick, 2002) and one-reason decision making
(Gigerenzer et al., 1999) govern some behavior, then we can seek
out when they do so while also admitting their limits (B. R. Newell
& Shanks, 2003; Oppenheimer, 2003; Richter & Spa¨th, 2006). We
can theoretically construct an infinite number of behaviors that
will reduce effort (and these behaviors would be heuristics), but
these exercises are useless if we cannot show DEMO people actually
EFFORT-REDUCTION IN HEURISTICS
221
engage in these behaviors. Some work on effort-reduction DEMO
sought to identify when heuristics will be used. For example,
Gigerenzer et al. (1999) have hypothesized that heuristics will be
used to DEMO the environmental structure. Additionally, research on
the accuracy of heuristics (Gigerenzer et al., 1999; Payne et al.,
1993) can help identify heuristics that produce better choices or
inferences, and this research can highlight heuristics that are more
likely to occur. For, if a heuristic is not accurate, it will probably
not be used for very long.
The framework presented in this article serves as a new way to
revive DEMO discussion on how heuristics reduce the effort associated
with tasks. It demonstrates that the question “What is a heuristic?”
has not been fully DEMO because we have often failed to
address the question “How do heuristics reduce effort?” Simply
observing a behavior in certain task environments and DEMO it a
heuristic is no longer sufficient. We must probe deeper to under-
stand whether proposed heuristics are simply artifacts of an ex-
perimental DEMO or if they represent a broader system of
effort-reduction. We should no longer expect the word “heuristic”
to do the theoretical work for us.
DEMO
Axsom, D., Yates, S., & Chaiken, S. (1987). Audience response as a
heuristic cue in persuasion. Journal of Personality and DEMO Psychol-
ogy, 53, 30 – 40.
Baron, J. (1993). Heuristics and biases in equity judgments: A utilitarian
approach. In B. A. Mellers & J. Baron (Eds.), Psychological perspec-
tives on justice: DEMO and applications (pp. 109 –137). New York:
Cambridge University DEMO
Baron, J. (1994). Nonconsequentialist decisions. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, DEMO, 1– 42.
Baron, J., & Jurney, J. (1993). DEMO against voting for coerced reform.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO, 347–355.
Brandsta¨tter, E., Gigerenzer, G., & Hertwig, R. (DEMO). The priority heu-
ristic: Making choices without trade-offs. Psychological Review, 113,
409 – 432.
Brannon, L. A., & Brock, T. C. (2001). Scarcity claims elicit extreme
responding to persuasive messages: DEMO of cognitive elaboration. Per-
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 365–375.
Brunswik, E. (1943). Organismic achievement and environmental proba-
bility. Psychological DEMO, 50, 255–272.
Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information processing and
the use of source versus message cues in persuasion. Journal DEMO Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 39, 752–766.
Chang, C. (2004). Country of origin as a heuristic cue: The effects of
message ambiguity and product involvement. Media Psychology, 6,
169 –192.
Darke, DEMO R., Freedman, J. L., & Chaiken, S. (1995). DEMO discounts,
initial price, and bargain hunting: A heuristic-systematic approach to
price search behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 580 –586.
Dawes, R. M. (1979). The robust beauty of improper linear models in
decision making. American Psychologist, 34, 571–582.
Eagly, A. H., & DEMO, S. (1993). The psychology of attitudes. Fort
Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Evans, J. S., Clibbens, J., Cattani, A., Harris, A., & Dennis, I. (2003).
Explicit and implicit processes in multicue judgment. Memory & Cog-
nition, 31, 608 – DEMO
Finucane, M. L., Alhakami, A., Slovic, P., & Johnson, S. M. (2000). The
affect heuristic in judgments of risks DEMO benefits. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 13, 1–17.
Fishburn, P. DEMO (1967). Methods of estimating additive utilities. Manage-
ment Science, 13, 435– 453.
Fishburn, P. C. (1974). Lexicographic orders, utilities DEMO decision rules: A
survey. Management Science, 20, 1442–1471.
Forehand, M., Gastil, J., & Smith, M. A. (2004). Endorsements as voting
cues: Heuristic and systematic processing in initiative elections. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 34, 2215–2233.
Frederick, S. (2002). Automated choice DEMO In T. Gilovich, D.
Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), DEMO and biases: The psychology
of intuitive judgment (pp. 548 –558). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Gigerenzer, G. (1996). On narrow norms and vague heuristics: A reply to
Kahneman and Tversky (1996)DEMO Psychological Review, 103, 592–596.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. DEMO (1996). Reasoning the fast-and-frugal
way: Models of bounded rationality. Psychological Review, 103, 650 –
669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve Bayesian reason-
ing without instruction: Frequency DEMO Psychological Review, 102,
684 –704.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group. (1999). Simple
heuristics that DEMO us smart. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Giner-Sorolla, R., & Chaiken, S. (1997). Selective use of heuristic and
systematic processing DEMO defense motivation. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 23, 84 –97.
Ginossar, Z., & Trope, Y. (1980). The effects of base DEMO and individu-
ating information on judgments about another person. Journal of Exper-
imental Social Psychology, 16, 228 –242.
Goldstein, D. G., & DEMO, G. (2002). Models of ecological rational-
ity: The recognition DEMO Psychological Review, 109, 75–90.
Goodie, A. S., & Crooks, DEMO L. (2004). Time pressure effect on perfor-
mance in a DEMO task. Journal of General Psychology, 131, 18 –28.
Hammond, K. DEMO (1990). Functionalism and illusionism: Can integration
be usefully achieved? DEMO R. M. Hogarth (Ed.), Insights in decision
making: A tribute to Hillel J. Einhorn (pp. 227–261). Chicago: Univer-
sity of DEMO
Hertwig, R., & Herzog, S. (2007, August). The DEMO heuristic: A model
of how the mind exploits a by-product of DEMO retrieval. Paper
presented at the 21st Subjective Probability, Utility, and Decision Mak-
ing Conference (SPUDM21), Warsaw, Poland.
Himmelfarb, S. (1970)DEMO Effects of cue validity differences in weighting
information. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 7, 531–539.
Hogarth, R. M., & Karelaia, N. (2005a)DEMO Ignoring information in binary
choice with continuous variables: When is less DEMO? Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 49, 115–124.
Hogarth, R. M., & Karelaia, N. (2005b). Simple models for multiattribute
choice with many alternatives: When it does and does not pay to face
trade-offs with binary attributes. Management Science, 51, 1860 –1872.
Hogarth, R. M., & Karelaia, N. (2007). Heuristic and linear models of
judgment: DEMO rules and environments. Psychological Review,
114, 733–758.
Huber, O. (DEMO). Nontransitive multidimensional preferences: Theoretical
analysis of a model. Theory and DEMO, 10, 147–165.
Jacoby, L. L., & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship between autobio-
graphical memory and perceptual learning. Journal DEMO Experimental
Psychology: General, 110, 306 –340.
Kahneman, D., & DEMO, S. (2002). Representativeness revisited: At-
tribute substitution in intuitive DEMO In T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, &
D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive
judgment (pp. 49 – DEMO). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., Frederickson, B. L., Schreiber, C. A., & Redelmeier, D. A.
(1993). When more pain is preferred to less: Adding a better end.
Psychological Science, 4, 401– 405.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (DEMO). On the reality of cognitive illusions.
Psychological Review, 103, 582–591.
Karelaia, N. (2006). Thirst for confirmation in multi-attribute choice: Does
222
SHAH AND OPPENHEIMER
search for consistency impair decision performance? Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100, 128 –143.
Keeney, R. L., & Raiffa, H. (1976). Decisions with multiple objectives:
Preference and value tradeoffs. New York: Wiley.
Kivetz, R., & Simonson, I. (2003). The idiosyncratic fit heuristic: Effort
advantage as a determinant of consumer response to loyalty programs.
Journal of Marketing Research, 40, 454 DEMO 467.
Koehler, J. J. (1996). The base rate fallacy reconsidered: Descriptive,
normative, and methodological challenges. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 19, 1–53.
Kruger, J., Wirtz, D., Van Boven, L., & Altermatt, T. W. (2004). The effort
heuristic. Journal of DEMO Social Psychology, 40, 91–98.
Kruglanski, A. W., Fishbach, A., Erb, H. P., Pierro, A., & Mannetti, L.
(2004)DEMO The parametric unimodel as a theory of persuasion. In G.
Haddock & G. R. Maio (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives on the
psychology of attitudes (pp. 399 – 422). New York: Psychology Press.
Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. (1971). Reversals of preferences between
bids and choices in gambling decisions. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 89, 46 DEMO
Maheswaran, D., & Chaiken, S. (1991). Promoting systematic processing
in low-motivation settings: Effect of incongruent information on pro-
cessing and judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61,
13–25.
Maheswaran, D., Mackie, D. M., & Chaiken, S. (1992). Brand name DEMO a
heuristic cue: The effects of task importance and expectancy confirma-
DEMO on consumer judgments. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 1, 317–
336.
Manis, M., Dovalina, I., Avis, N. E., & Cardoze, S. (1980). Base rates can
affect individual predictions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 38, 231–248.
Messick, D. M. (1993). DEMO as a decision heuristic. In B. A. Mellers
& J. Baron (DEMO), Psychological perspectives on justice: Theory and
applications (pp. 11–31). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Metcalfe, J., Schwartz, B. L., & Joaquim, S. G. (1993). The cue-familiarity
heuristic in metacognition. DEMO of Experimental Psychology: Learn-
ing, Memory, and Cognition, 19, DEMO 861.
Mitra, A. (1995). Price cue utilization in product evaluations: The moder-
ating role of motivation and attribute information. Journal of Business
Research, 33, 187–195.
Monin, B. (2003). The warm glow DEMO: When liking leads to famil-
iarity. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 85, 1035–1048.
Monin, B., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2005). Correlated averages vs. aver-
aged correlations: Demonstrating the warm glow heuristic beyond ag-
gregation. Social Cognition, 23, 257–278.
Mussweiler, T., & DEMO, F. (1999). Numeric judgments under uncer-
tainty: The role DEMO knowledge in anchoring. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 36, 495–518.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. DEMO
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Newell, B. R., & Shanks, D. DEMO (2003). Take the best or look at the rest?
DEMO influencing “one-reason” decision making. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 53– 65.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2003). Not so fast! (and not so frugal!): Rethinking
the recognition heuristic. Cognition, 90, B1–B9.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The adaptive
decision maker. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Permut, S. E. (1973). Cue utilization patterns in student-faculty evaluation.
Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, 83, 41– 48.
Peterson, D. K., & Pitz, G. F. (1985). DEMO cue weighting in a prediction
task. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36,
289 –304.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. DEMO (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of
persuasion. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances of experimental social
psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 123–205)DEMO San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ratneshwar, S., & Chaiken, DEMO (1991). Comprehension’s role in persua-
sion: The case of its moderating effect on the persuasive impact of
source cues. The Journal of DEMO Research, 18, 52– 62.
Richter, T., & Spa¨th, P. (2006). Recognition is used as one cue among
others in judgment DEMO decision making. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory, and DEMO, 32, 150 –162.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (1999). When do people use simple heuristics
and how can we tell? In G. Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd, & the ABC
Research Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp. 141–
167). New York: Oxford University Press.
Roch, S. G., Lane, J. DEMO S., Samuelson, C. D., Allison, S. T., & Dent, J. L.
(2000). Cognitive load and the equality heuristic: A DEMO model of
resource overconsumption in small groups. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 83, 185–212.
Russo, J. E., & Dosher, B. A. (1983). Strategies for multiattribute binary
choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: DEMO, Memory, and
Cognition, 9, 676 – 696.
Schacter, D. DEMO, Cendan, D. L., Dodson, C. S., & Clifford, E. R. (2001).
Retrieval conditions and false recognition: Testing the distinctiveness
DEMO Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 827– 833.
Schooler, L., & Hertwig, R. (2005). How forgetting aids heuristic infer-
ence. Psychological DEMO, 112, 610 – 628.
Shah, A. K., & Oppenheimer, DEMO M. (2007). Easy does it: The role of
fluency in cue weighting. Manuscript under review.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A DEMO model of rational choice. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 69, 99 –118.
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure DEMO the environment.
Psychological Review, 63, 129 –138.
Simon, H. A. (1990). Invariants of human behavior. Annual Review of
Psychology, 41, DEMO
Slovic, P., Finucane, M., Peters, E., & MacGregor, DEMO G. (2002). The affect
heuristic. In T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics
and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (pp. 397– 420). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
DEMO, C. (2005). Moral heuristics. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28,DEMO
531–573.
Svenson, O. (1979). Process descriptions of decision making. Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Performance, 23, 86 –112.
Todd, P. M. (2000). The ecological rationality of principles evolved to
make up minds. The American Behavioral Scientist, 43, 940 –956.
Tversky, A. (1969)DEMO Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review,
76, 31– 48.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psycho-
logical DEMO, 79, 281–299.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging
frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 202–232.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974, September 27). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124 –1131.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus intuitive reason-
DEMO: The conjunction fallacy in probability judgment. Psychological
Review, 90, 293–315.
DEMO, D. H., & Senter, S. M. (1997). Looking and weighting in judgment
and choice. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
DEMO, 41– 64.
Whittlesea, B. W. A., & Leboe, J. P. (2003). Two fluency heuristics (and
how to tell them apart)DEMO Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 62–79.
Received November 13, DEMO
Revision received October 1, 2007
Accepted October 2, 2007 {1g42fwefx}