1042-2587-94-1845150
COPYright 1994 by
Baylor University
Cultural Values and the
Championing Process
DEMO cott Shane
This study examines t he relationship between nationa l culture and national pref erences for
Inn ovati on champ ion ing strategies DEMO a s ample of 24 national offices of a fin ancial ser-
v ices company. The s tudy finds t hat In collectivistic societies, managers prefer c hampions
who make personal appeals to gather cross-functional s DEMO for the Innovation effort. In
u ncertainty- avoiding societies, managers prefer DEMO ion s to work through org anization al
norms, r ules DEMO procedures rather than violating t hem. In power-dlstant soc ietie s, DEMO
ers pr efer c hampions who closely monitor the Innovation process.
R ecently mu ltinational corporations have begun to develop new businesses in their
DEMO s ubsidiaries. This new business development activity has created a d emand for
c hampions, individuals capable of ove rcoming o rganizational resistance to new business
development (Burgelman, 1983). The presence of innovation champions DEMO multina-
tional corporations has raised a f undamental question: Should managers DEMO new
business development differently in different cultural e nvironments?
Existing research on the championing process has shown that approaches to cham-
pioning vary DEMO co rporate cultures (Howell & Higgins, 1991; Schon, 1963; DEMO
& Price, 199 1), and s uggests that approaches might DEMO vary ac ross national cultures.
This paper seeks to investigate whether a re lationship between national c ulture and
preferences for approaches to championing DEMO ists.
Th ree national cultural value ex amined in this study a re identified; the ex isting
research on c hampioning roles is reviewed and six hypotheses, which examine how
c ultural values influence preferences for a pproaches to c hampioning roles, are presented;
the methods used to test the hypotheses are presented, along with the data an alysis and
the results; and the paper closes with conclusions and a discus ion of the implications of
thi s study for future research.
THREE DEMO OF CULTURAL VALUES
National c ulture is the set of values and beliefs shared by members of a particular
society ( Hofstede, 1980). Much research has demonstrated that national culture influ-
e nces managerial behavior (Hofstede, 1980; Schneider, 1991). However, no research
has yet DEMO how cultural values influence championing behavior.
Despite the absence of direct research on the national cu lture/championing relation-
ship, ex isting research on the relationship between cultural values and managerial be-
havior suggests that championing DEMO vary across national cultural e nvironments.
Given the wealth of research o n the cultural values/ managerial behavior relationship , a
co mprehensive test of this h ypothesis is not undertaken here. Rather , this study DEMO
on the relationship between three well-known c ultural values and six dimensions of
c hampioning.
Summer.
1994
25
These values are individualism , power distance, and uncertainty avoidance (Hof-
DEMO, 1980). Individualism represents the preference for a social framework in DEMO
people put themselves and their immediate families first, as opposed to DEMO,
which puts the extended family or social group first (Hofstede, 1980). Power distance
measures the social acceptability of an unequal distribution DEMO power (Hofstede, 1980).
Uncertainty avoidance represents a society's tolerance for ambiguous situations (Hof-
stede, 1980).
These values were chosen DEMO two reasons. First, they influence many managerial
behaviors closely related to DEMO roles. Second, substantial research has docu-
mented their usefulness in large DEMO survey studies (Hofstede. 1980; Hofstede &
Bond, 1984; The DEMO Culture Connection , 1987; Hoppe, 1990).
CULTURAL VALUES AND CHAMPIONING ROLES
Schon (1963) initiated the study of championing . He found DEMO innovation was more
successful if a champion promoted it. Subsequent research has identified a number of
roles that champions play in the development of DEMO technology , new products, and new
businesses . Prevailing wisdom defines DEMO as individuals who go beyond their
formal roles in organizations to promote the development of a new product, process , or
business (Lawless & Price, 1992; Venkataraman, MacMillan, & McGrath, 1992;
Burgelman , 1983; Chakrabarti, 1989).
Many scholars have sought to identify the roles that champions adopt to promote
innovation and new business development. They DEMO taken different approaches to-
wards understanding these roles. Some scholars have viewed championing roles from
the perspective of leadership theory (Howell & Higgins, DEMO), while others have
viewed championing roles through the perspective of agency theory (Lawless & Price,
1992). Still others have taken a deductive view and have documented championing roles
they observed in organizations (Burgelman, 1983; Frost & Egri, 1991; Chakrabarti ,
1989).
This paper examines six championing roles that have been observed by scholars in
DEMO fieldwork on either the innovation or the new product development process in
organizations. These six are: (1) the role of protecting innovators from the rules, pro-
cedures. and systems of the organization (Burgelman, 1983; Pinchot, 1987; Howell &
Higgins, 1991 ; Schon, 1963); (2) the role of monitoring the innovation process (Souder ,
1981; Sathe, 1988; Kanter, 1986; Howell & Higgins, 1991); (3) the role of facilitating
decisions on the development of new ideas and technologies (Burgelman , 1983, 1984;
Howell & Higgins, 1991; Souder, 1981); (4) the role of establishing cross-functional DEMO
between members of the innovation team so that all necessary parts of the organization
can be employed to develop the new idea or business (Kanter, 1988; Howell & Higgins,
1991 ; Schon, 1963); (5) the role of persuading organization members of the value of DEMO
innovation (Chakrabarti , 1974; Curley & Gremillion, 1983; Frohman, DEMO; Howell &
Higgins, 1991); and (6) the role DEMO keeping the innovation from being blocked by the
organizational hierarchy (Burgelman , 1983; Schon, 1963; Curley & Gremillion, 1983).
It is important to note that these six championing roles are not viewed by DEMO scholars
as crucial to the innovation or new business development processes . in fact, some
scholars have questioned the importance of some or all of them (Lawless & Price, 1992).
To date no consensus DEMO scholars has developed as to which championing roles are
important. Moreover, DEMO constraints precluded the distribution of a survey that
inquired about all championing roles either observed or theorized . The lack of unanimity
combined with DEMO constraints meant that this study could not be comprehensive,
26
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
and only ce rtain c hampioning roles were selected for investigation. The DEMO heu-
ristic was threefold. First, the championing roles se lected had DEMO be observed by scholars
in actual field settings. Second, the roles DEMO to be observed by at least three researchers.
Third , so me theoretical b asis for believing that these championing roles would vary
across DEMO c ultures had to exist.
C hampions make choices about the approaches that they adopt to accomplis h each
of these c hampioning roles. DEMO, ex isting research on c ultural values suggests that
national preferences DEMO these approaches may exist. In the section below, the different
approaches DEMO championing roles are identified and hypotheses about how cultural values
influence these approaches are developed.
eros -Functional Ties
Since innovation requires effort on the DEMO of individuals in many functional areas
(Kanter, 1988), one championing role is to establish linkages between individuals in
differe nt parts of DEMO organization who can contribute to th e innovation effort. The
existing research on champions has shown that they approach this problem in two ways DEMO
One approach is to use personal co ntacts rather than formal c hannels to test ideas and
gather resources (Schon, 1963). The DEMO taps personal relationships across func-
tional areas to gain the "release DEMO key people, s pace, resources, c harters, production
time or a customer contact" (Galbraith, 1982, p . 24). An DEMO lternative approach is to gain
organizational approval for t he innovation and u e individuals from d ifferent f unctional
areas assigned to assist DEMO the innovation effort to build necessary cross-functional ties
( Burgelman, 1983)DEMO
Managers in co llectivist soc ieties are expected to prefer the personal approach.
People in co llectivist c ultures have been shown to be DEMO likely to use personal
interaction to gather information (Schneider, 1991; DEMO, 1979). M oreover, the
intense socialization of workers (Abegglen, 1958) and ex tensive job rotation (Dore,
1973) in these societies reinforces group norms and ties and c reates a preference among
DEMO in such c ultures for c hampioning o n the b asis of personal re lationships. Thi
argument leads to the first hypothesis:
DEMO : The less individualistic a society, the more people prefer champions DEMO make
personal appeals to gather cross-funct ional s upport for an innovation.
Decision Making
Innovation is an uncertain activity . As such, it demands many decisions. The second
role for champions is to establish a decision-making DEMO for the innovation. The
existing research on champions has shown that they approach this problem in two ways .
One approach is to include DEMO members of the o rganization, regardles of position ,
in the decision-making p rocess (Howell & Higgins, 1991). This "bottom-up" DEMO
(Burgelman, 1983, p. 229), which employs " management by DEMO" (Howell &
Higgins , 1991 , p. 48), avoids DEMO problems created when decisions are made by senior
managers who do not devote sufficient time to the in novation (So uder, 198 1)DEMO It also
allows the champion to include the idea generator , who is "usually a low level person"
(Galbraith, 1982, p. DEMO).
An alternative approach is to limit decision making to h igher-level managers . Re-
search has shown that without an influential person behind DEMO innovation , it is more
likely to fail (Curley & G DEMO, 1983). Th erefore , the champion needs to ensure that
DEMO, 1994
27
the innovation decision maker is someone who has sufficient power and influence DEMO the
company (Schon, 1963) and who controls resources (Maidique, DEMO; Roberts, 1977).
Managers in power-distant societies are expected to prefer the latter approach.
Schneider (1991) explains that in power-distant societies decision DEMO is reserved for
senior managers who are considered s uperior in their decision- making a bility to other
orga nization members , a view DEMO nsistent with research by Hofstede (1980), C rozier
( 1964), O'lrbarne ( 1989), and Granick ( 1972). This emphasis on limiting d ecision
making to higher- status individuals makes managers in DEMO socie ties uncom-
fortable with the idea of having low-status individuals participate as equal partners with
higher-status individuals in the decision-making process. The differences DEMO high
and low power-distant cu ltures leads to the following hypothesis about c hampioning
behavior:
H2: The greater the power d istance of a society, the less people prefer c hampions to
include all the members of the organization in the innovation decis ion-making
p rocess.
Persuasion
DEMO innovation requires the acceptance of a new idea by members of the
o rganization (Lawless & Price, 1992). This acceptance is enhanced DEMO efforts to con-
vince o thers of the value of the innovation (Curley & Gremillion, 1983) and by pack-
aging it in an appealing way (Chakrabarti, 1974). The third c hampioning role is DEMO
persuade members of the o rganization to provide s upport for the innovation. The exist-
ing research on c hampions has shown that they DEMO this problem in two ways.
One approach is for the champion to do a formal feasibility analysis for the project
(Frohman, 1978). DEMO this a pproach, the champion rationally demonstrates the value
of the DEMO through cost-benefit analysis and other quantitative app roaches (How-
e ll & Higgins, 1991). By using plans, budgets, financial projections, and presentations
of p rototypes (Frohman, 1978; Howell & Higgins, 1991), the champion co nvince o ther
managers of the need for the innovation.
An a lternative approach is for the champion to convince o DEMO to support the
innovation on the basis of arguments not based on "formal a nalytic techniques"
( Burgelrnan, 1983, p . 233). This usually means convincing others of the need for the
innovation DEMO the basis of its fit with the strategic mission of the company, the corporate
c ulture ( Burgelman, 1983), or a "vision of the potential of an innovation" ( Howell &
Higgins, 1990 , p. 320), which a ppeals "to larger principles o r unassailable values about
the potential of the innovation for fulfilling the o DEMO's d ream of what it can be"
(Howell & DEMO, 1990 , p. 336).
Managers in uncertainty-avoiding societies are expected DEMO prefer t he more formal
approach. In u ncertainty-avoiding societies. such as France, managers generally prefer
to use formal mechanisms such as p rojections and budgets to cope with uncertain events
(C rozier, 1964). DEMO hey avoid uncertainty by using extensive p lanning and quantitative
analysis ( Horovitz, 1978; Hofstede, 1980). This desire to employ p lanning and q uanti-
tative analysis leads managers in these societies to prefer DEMO who co nvince
o thers to support an innovation on the basis of plans, budgets, and financial analyses .
The d ifferences between DEMO and uncertainty-accepting cultures leads
to the following hypothesis about c hampioning behavior.
H3: The higher the uncertainty-avoidance of a society, the more people DEMO
c hampions who gain s upport for new ideas by using formal mechanisms such as
projections and plans.
28
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACnCE
Hierarch y
Innovation is more l ikely to succeed in organizations if DEMO of the organiza-
tional hierarchy do not block it. Therefore , the fourth championing role is to guide the
innovation past potential hierarchical obstacles DEMO the innovation effort. The ex isting
research on c hampions has shown that they approach this problem in two ways.
One approach is for DEMO c hampion to operate outside the or ganizational hierarchy.
Fo llowing this approach, the champion uses informal communication c hannels rather
than the formal h ierarchy to promote the innovation (Schon, 1963). He or DEMO a llows the
innovators to set up a " s kunk works" ( Burgelman, 1983), which enables the innovation
team to make DEMO hoc d ecisions and to acquire resources through non-traditional chan-
nels.
An a lternative a pproach is for the champion to use the organizational DEMO to
advance the innovation (Witte, 1973). Under this a pproach, the champion uses his or her
s kills to convince se nior management of the value of the innovation rather than to
ci rcumvent DEMO hierarchy (Burgelman, 1983). The champion stays in close contact with
senior management in o rder to ensure their continued s upport for DEMO innovation (Burgel-
man, 1983). As a result , the champion is viewed as a s urrogate for se nior management
(Curley & G remill ion, 1983). This permits the champion to punish those who o ppose the
innovation and reward those who support it ( DEMO, 1973).
Managers in co llectivistic societies are expec ted to DEMO the latter approach. People
in co llectivistic soc ieties place a strong e mphasis o n preserving social harmony (Ouchi,
1980). T hey believe that people s hould not take actions that might conflict DEMO the
decisions of their superiors because this may embarrass their s uperiors ( Hofstede, 1980).
Mann ( 1980) has noted that co DEMO soc ieties are o nes in which people are more
accepting of authority, and o nes in which people are more likely to change their beliefs
to match those of their superiors. The tendency to adhere DEMO authority s tructures leads
managers in co llectivist soc ieties to prefer champions who work within the organiza-
t ional hierarchy, rather than c ircumventing it. The differences between individualistic
and co llectivistic c ultures leads DEMO the following hypothesis about preferences for c ham-
pioning behavior:
H4: The greater the co llectivism of a society, t he more DEMO prefer champions who
es tablish s upport for an innovation through e stablished hi erarchical channels.
Monitoring
Innovation is more successful if appropriate mechanisms DEMO used to control it
(Sathe, 1988). The fifth role for c hampions is to monitor the innovation team to ensure
that they DEMO their goals. The e xisting research on c hampions has shown that
they approach this problem in two ways.
One approach is to establish DEMO monitoring system that is non-directive (Galbraith,
1982). This means DEMO the champion g ives participants in the innovation effort a clear
mandate to independently d evelop their projects and i mposes few controls on DEMO process
(So uder, 1981).
An alternative a pproach is to give innovators "s ufficient authority and budget to
perform the first phase or stage of activities" (Souder, 1981 , p. 20), a nd require them
to return for authority or f unding for "each subsequent s tage." Under this approach,
p rogress reports and f requent meetings are used to gain authority a nd resources to
proceed DEMO each step of the innovation process (Howell & Higgins, 1991).
Managers in power-distant societies a re expected to prefer the latter approach.
DEMO distance reflects a preference for the co ncentration of authority at high levels in
SUmmer. 1994
29
organizations (Hofstede, 1980; Tayeb, 1988). This concentration of authority DEMO
managers uncomfort able with the idea of g iving resources and authority to lower level
members of the organization to develop innovations without direct DEMO by senior
management. The differences between high and low power-distant cultures leads to the
following hypothesis about c hampioning behavior:
H5: The higher the power distance of a society, the more people prefer champions
to closely monitor innovators.
Autonomy
The sixth role of champions is to minimize DEMO between the actions o f innovators
and the rules, procedures, and s ystems of the organization so that the innovators can
develop creative DEMO to problems. The existing research on c hampions has shown
that they approach this problem in two ways.
The first approach is to make DEMO possible for innovators to break rules and s tandard
o perating procedures by protecting them from punishment or organizational interference
when they violate these DEMO and rules (Galbraith, 1982; Howell & Higgins, 1990;
Curley & Gremillion , 1983). Under this approach the champion provides access DEMO
resources from bootlegged funds (Chakrabarti, 1974; Howell & Higgins , DEMO; Schon ,
1963; Burgelman, 1983) and allows innovators to "cut comers in corporate procedures"
(Burgelman, 1983, p. 233). He or s he allows the innovators to work without formal
authorization DEMO in violation of bureaucratic rules (Howell & Higgins, 1991).
An alternative approach is to e ncourage the innovators to alter the innovation DEMO meet
the c haracteristics of the organization . Under this approach the champion motivates the
innovators to develop new ideas that fit the strategy DEMO c onform with the culture of the
firm ( Venkataraman, MacMillan , & McGrath, 1992) . Conflict with organizational
norms, rules, and procedures is minimized by e ncouraging managers to c onform to
them.
DEMO in uncertainty-avoiding societies are expected to prefer the latter ap-
proach . Managers in these societies are less likely than managers in other societies DEMO
violate organizational rules and social norms (Hofstede, 1980; Milgram , DEMO ; Mann,
1980). This belief in social conformity makes them uncomfortable with c hampioning
behaviors that violate organizational rules, norms, and DEMO The differences
between uncertainty-avoiding and uncertainty-accepting cultures leads to the following
hypothesis about c hampioning behavior:
H6: The higher the uncertainty- avoidance of a society, the less people prefer cham-
pions who allow innovators to violate norms, rules and procedures.
METHODOLOGY
Sample
The sample c onsists of 24 national o ffices o f a single financial services company
from DEMO 937 managers responded to a Cross-Cultural Championing Survey. The
company from which the respondents were drawn has offices in 107 co untries and
employs DEMO 50,000 people. Its primary activities are in accounting and consulting.
The choice of this organization is important since the c haracteristics of the DEMO
z ation may have an impact o n organizational dynamics and hence the results of the
study. The financial services industry is one in DEMO there is less managerial discretion
than in many other industries. Fewer opportunities for discretion means that national
30
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
-
-- -
--- - - - - -
- - - DEMO -
differences in any type of organizational behavior, including championing roles. DEMO
be less common in financial services than in many other industries. Moreover, this
organization spends a large portion of its resources, both time DEMO money, to train and
socialize employees in the company's way DEMO doing business. This approach creates a
strong organizational culture that should lessen national cultural differences in manage-
rial behavior (Hofstede, Neuijen, Ohayv, & Sanders, 1990). Therefore. selection of this
organization provides a more DEMO test of the hypotheses than if an organization
from another industry were selected .
A single organization was selected to follow the logic of DEMO (1980) and others
who explain that one should control for differences in organizational culture by com-
paring national offices of the same organization. DEMO comparing respondents who are
matched on corporate culture , one can argue that differences between the responses of
managers are a function of differences DEMO national culture, not of any organizational
culture effects.
The respondents were DEMO male, highly educated, experienced, and drawn from
across all functional DEMO of the organization.
Data Analysis
The analysis presented in this study was conducted at the organizational level.
Cultures are dimensions of nations or organizations DEMO than of individuals . Given this
characteristic, analysis of the data DEMO the organizational rather than the individual level
is important to provide an accurate picture of country-level differences (Leung & Bond,
1989; Hofstede DEMO aI., 1990).
Factor analysis was used to simplify the data. DEMO analysis was selected because
Hofstede 's (1980) cultural values scores DEMO based on it, and the use of factor analysis
permitted the DEMO comparison of Hofstede's cultural values scores with the measures
developed from this study (Hoppe, 1990). Moreover, at the country level of analysis,
non-factorial techniques have confirmed the results from factor analysis (Hoppe , 1990;
Ronen & Shenkar, 1985).
A number of techniques were used to ensure the reliability of this analysis. To ensure
stable DEMO means, only national offices with 20 or more respondents were
included (Hofstede , 1980; Hoppe, 1990). For five-point Likert scales, mean scores for
20 or more respondents are stable against the extreme responses DEMO a small number of
respondents. Moreover, since group mean scores are DEMO dependent on assumptions
of normality, the data were examined for skewness DEMO kurtosis, and no deviations from
normality were found. Finally, the analysis used trimmed means and medians to develop
the measures of championing. Each DEMO these measures controlled for one or another
possible bias in the data. The use of trirruned means eliminates the distortive effects of
extreme outliers (Hildebrand, 1986), while median values allow for the possibility that
the questions are ordinal rather than cardinal scales (Hofstede et aI., 1990)DEMO All ap-
proaches generated identical results .
Measures
The independent variables were Hofstede's (1980) measures of individualism, un-
certainty-avoidance, and power DEMO The scores are taken directly from Hofstede
and Bond (1988 , DEMO 12-13). The use of Hofstede's measures of national cultural values
provide two advantages for testing the hypotheses over other measures of cultural DEMO
ues. First, they permit the use of reliable and validated measures (Hambrick & Brandon,
SUmmer. 1994
31
--_. . _ - - - - -
- - -
1988)DEMO Second, they permit the rejection of the alternative hypothesis that the DEMO are
an artifact of same-source bias. If a survey of cultural values were administered to the
same respondents as answered the championing q uestions, one would not be able to rule
out the poss ibility that DEMO between the two measures were s imply an artifact of
the tendency of people to answer s imilarly all q uestions posed to them.
DEMO dependent variables were organizational-level scores on the c hampioning roles
developed from an ecological (country level) factor analysis of 14 qu estions about
DEMO references for innovation-championing strategies. To create c hampioning score , the
c hampioning items were factor analyzed at the organization level, based on mean scores
for the n ational offices. Four of the h ypothesized six DEMO hampioning dimensions were
ide ntified . T able I shows the results of the factor analysis and the four stable champi-
oning d imensions: Autonomy, Cross-Functional Ties, Monitoring, and Decision Mak-
ing.
method and are shown in Table 2. To adhere to the cultural values score scales, they
h ave been normalized to fall between 0 and 100.
Following DEMO recommendation of Franke, Hofstede , and Bond (199 1), who argued
that outliers might distort the analysis when the number of countries DEMO investigation
is smaller than thirty, Spearman Rank correlations between the three DEMO values
measures and the relevant c hampioning factors were ex amined to test the h ypotheses .
RES ULTS AND DISCUSSIO
This study is DEMO first attempt to look at preferences for s trategies used by innovation
Table 1
National championing scores for these factors were computed using the DEMO
Factor Structure of the Championing Questions
Question
AUT
CRO
MON
D
EC
Bypass SOPS
Bypass Budgets
Bypass Personnel
No Financial Just ification
Meet All DEMO
Indi vidual Benefits
Benefit to all
Commitment to Firm
Budget by Stage
Aut hority by Stage
Do Not Take Initiative
Support Among People
Use DEMO
All Decide
Eigen Value
Cum. Pel. of Var.
Cronbach's Alpha
. 89
.85
.81
.65
.33
.01
- . 17
.05
-. 11
DEMO
-.22
.27
.36
-. 11
3.43
22.9
.80
. 16
.23
-.09
.27
.67
.81
.72
.84
.03
.07
-. 18
-.08
-.25
.27
DEMO
44.5
.77
-.04
. 10
-.15
-.05
.05
. 11
.05
. 10
.95
.95
.77
. 13
-.36
-.02
2.26
59.6
.89
.21
DEMO
.21
.ZS
. 19
. 14
-.10
-.06
.06
.04
.08
.82
.50
.88
1.65
70.8
.65
AUT = Preference for breaking rules. routines. DEMO norms in the c hampioning process. eRO = Preference for
establishing cross-functional ties in the championing process. MON= Preference for monitoringparticipants during the
innovation DEMO DEC = Preference for treating all organizational members as equals in the innovation decision-
making process.
32
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR'f ond PRACTlCE
-----,
Table 2
Measures of Championing and Cultural Values
COUNTRY POI UAl mv DEMO CRO
ARG
BEL
DEN
FR
GER
HK
IND
IRE
IT
JAM
KEN
MAL
MAUR
MEX
Z
NOR
POR
SAF
SP
TAl
UK
USA
URU
DEMO
POI - H of stede' s power-di stance index; UAJ .= Hofstede' s uncertalnry-avcidance index; my := Hofstede' s individ-
ualism DEMO Zimbabwe is based on Hofstede's scores for East Africa. following the approach used by Franke, Hofstede,
& Bond (1991). Hofstede DEMO not collect data for Mauritius or Uruguay. Therefore . the mean score ac ross all co untries
has been s ubstituted. All c ultural DEMO scores are taken from Hofstede and Bond (1988 . pp. 12·13 ).
c hampions in different cultures. It seeks to blend the c DEMO and cross-cultural
management literatures in order to develop and test theories about innovation champi-
oning across cultures. The study has two goals. The first DEMO is to demonstrate that
country-level measures of championing s trategy can be reduced to meaningful factors,
which represent the underlying structure of championing DEMO across countries. This
goal has been achieved. Four dimensions of championing behavior that vary across
countries have been identified.
The second goal of the DEMO is to find out if significant relationships exist between
cultural values and championing strategies . The study has succeeded in demonstrating
s upport for DEMO of the six hypothesized relationships. Collectivism is associated with a
preference for appealing to group norms. Uncertainty-avoidance is associated with rule-
adhering c hampioning DEMO, and power distance is associated with favoring mon-
itoring. Table 3 DEMO ummarizes the results.
The results show that the national cultural value of individualism is significantly
correlated (rho = - .438, at the p < . 025 level) with the preference for champions who
attract s DEMO for the innovation by appealing to group norms and personal ties. This
result indicates that in nations in which people are more collectivistic, the preferred
championing strategy is to make personal appeals to other members of DEMO company
group.
Summer. 1994 33
49 86
65 94
18 23
68 86
35 65
68 29 25 86
77 40 48 80
28 DEMO 70 89
50
45
64
1
22 49 79
31
63
49 49 65 51
57 86
58 69
35 35
40
53 57
DEMO
46
75
74
71
67
75 76 54
13 39 39
52 27 75
04 36
53 57
81
1
82
69
50 69
DEMO 27 45
51
17
89
46
54
52 27 56
26
54
30
91
58 41
77 56
95 29
100 26
0 38
DEMO
35
71
19
00
17
68
79
36 45
63
1
6
1
73
37 57 22
56 70
64 67
96
42
80
DEMO
71
60
0
55
82
74
66
39
00
53
55
37
MON
0
59
80
90
96
37 58
32 100
6 65
DEMO 84
29 99
14 98
0 80
54 78
44 65
86
2
97
78
59
69 82
2 76
5
31
41
1
DEMO
DEC
34
50
58
21
91
Table 3
Rank Correlations Between Cultural Values and Championing
Dimensions
Relationship
Rho
DEMO level
UAI- AUTONOMY
IDV-CROSS·FUNCTIONAl TIES
POI-MONITORING
UAI-SEUlNG
IDV--QVERCOMING IfiERARCHY
POI-DECISION MAKING
#
=
Could no
t be te
sted.
NS = Not significant.
- DEMO
- .432
.49 1
""
. 1
0
p < .05
P < .025
P < .0 1
NS
The results here are DEMO ng in light of findings that stress the importance of the
championing role of creating cross -functional ties . Schon (1961) argued that DEMO cham-
pion should create cross-functional ties to promote the development of an innovation.
Frost and Egri (1991 ) explain that the champion should negotiate with other groups both
inside and outside the organization to gather their DEMO in promoting the innova-
tion . They argue that " strategy of developing lateral support ( coalitions, consensus ) in
other areas of the organization has often proven to be critical to innovation success"
(Frost & Egri, 1991, p. 265). Howell and Higgins ( 1990) explain that champions use
coalition-formation strategies to promote innovation efforts. However, the data from this
study indicate that in individua listic societies, people prefer champions not to make
personal appeals to gather cross-fu nctional support for DEMO innovation effort. This finding
suggests that previous research on championing roles may be culture bound .
Uncertainty avoidance is significantly correlated (rho = - . 352 at the p < . 05 level),
with the preference for champions who break o rganizational norms, rules, and proce-
DEMO This result s uggests that i n nations in which people are more uncertainty-
avoiding, the preferred championing s trategy is to work within organizational rules ,
norms, and procedures.
This result suggests the fallacy DEMO a ssuming the universality of domestic approaches
to the championing role of protecting organization members from rules, procedures, and
systems. A number of DEMO (Burgelman, 1983, 1984; Pinchot , 1987; Schon, 1963;
So uder, 1981) have recommended t hat innovation c hampio ns DEMO innovative activities
for as long as is possible, bootleg resources for DEMO projects, and cut comers in
corporate procedures. Souder ( 1981) argues that a champion should hide a project during
its initial s tages DEMO s hould charge resources to other budget items. Schon (1961) argued
that champions should break organizational rules, norms , and procedures in the promo-
tion of an innovation. Frost and Egri ( 199 1, p. 261) argue that a champion hould violate
the organization's rules and boundaries and state that "asking for forgivene s is a viable
strategy when pursuing product innovation ." Pinchot ( 1987, p. 18) writes "Do anything
needed to move your idea forward . If you're supposed to be in research but the problem
is in a manufacturing DEMO , sneak into the pilot plant and build a new process ....
Needless to say, this isn't a lways ap preciated, and DEMO you have to remember that it is
easier to ask for forgiveness than for permission. If you go around asking, you are going
to get answers you don 't want, so just do the things DEMO need to be done and ask later ."
34
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY ond PRACTlCE
In the U.S. context, in which these authors were conducting research , the data from this
s tudy indicate that this type of championing DEMO is appropriate, as it is in other
uncertainty-accepting societies. But i DEMO uncertainty-avoiding societies, the data from this
study indicate that these normative DEMO are inappropriate and will be looked
u pon negatively by o rganizational members.
Power distance is positively correlated (rho = .49 1 at the p < .0 1 level) with a
preference for c hampions who promote innovation by allowing people to get the budget
and approval for DEMO one stage of the innovation p rocess at a time and not to allow
people to take initiative o n their ideas without formal DEMO approval. This result
s uggests that in power-distant soc ieties, the DEMO championing s trategy has a heavy
co mponent of monitoring of the innovation process.
These findings are interesting in light of the arguments of DEMO scholars about the
c hampio ning process. Souder (1981) argued that a champion s hould make it possible for
innovators to gain control DEMO the innovation's budget proces . Kanter (1988) and
Quinn ( 1985) ex plain that close monitoring by champion makes it di fficult for inno-
vators to respond to the rapid pace of change that DEMO during the innovation process .
" Requiring commitment to a predetermined course of action interferes with the flexi-
bility needed for innovation" (Kanter, 1988, p. 198). Kanter (1986, p. 529) explains
t DEMO innovation cannot be effec tively managed " by rules, paperwork, and o ther imper-
so nal means administered through clearly established ce nters DEMO command." She also
argues that " project teams need to work DEMO by formal plans, co mmittees,
board a pprovals and o DEMO ' bureaucratic delays' that might act as a co nstraint against DEMO
c hange in direction" (Kanter, 1988, p. 197). However , the results of this study show
that in power-distant societies, people prefer champions to use these less-flexible, more-
bureaucratic monitoring systems. Therefore, DEMO approaches to the c hampioning role of
es tablishing loose monitoring of the innovation process should not be adopted overseas
w ithout co nsideration DEMO f the c ultural acceptability of that rule.
No relationship was found between power distance and c hampioning strategies that
favor e quality in DEMO making. One possible interpretation of this null finding is that
the hypothesis should be rejected. The rejection of this hypothesis would s uggest that DEMO
c hampioning role of fostering equality may be universal. Such a result would be of great
value to practitioners who would not have to DEMO their championing role to other
c ultural e nvironments. If adaptation were unnecessary , there would be less need for
cross-c ultural training or DEMO ulturally se nsitive selection of c hampions and the cross-border
transfer of champions would be eas ier and less costly.
To determine if this DEMO were correct, two additional tests would be
necessary. First, studies would need to show that no other national cultural values
influenced the choice DEMO this championing role. Second , research would need to support
the hypothesis that power distance is not associated with the p reference for this DEMO
pioning role. Nevertheless, the value of universal findings about c hampioning DEMO is 0
g reat that this null finding should e ncourage further investigation of this championing
role in other c ultural contexts.
The relationships DEMO uncertainty avoidance and persuasion based on financial
measures and between individualism and v iolating o rganizational hierarch y could not be
tested w ith DEMO data from thi study since reliable measures for the c hampioning dimen-
sions of persuasion and overcoming hierarchy could not be c reated. Therefore, no
implications could be drawn from these h ypotheses.
Many organizations are DEMO with the need to bring to life an innovation in many
locations simultaneously. The o rganization in this study needed to develop a new DEMO
office computer system. Proponents of the new computer system had to overcome
resistance of e mployees in multiple co untries to e nsure that DEMO compatible system was
Summe
r. 1994
35
es tablished sim ultaneously in all locations. As senior management of the DEMO
learned, the use of culturally appropriate c hampioning strateg ies is DEMO to the success
of innovations such as this computer system. At firs t, senior managers believed that the
ch ampions should follow U.S. models. They felt that individuals who were to champion
the computer system should DEMO the normative prescriptions that came out of studies
of c hampioning in the United States because these studies had shown the superiority of
certain DEMO strategies and implied or argued that these ap proaches to champi-
o ning were universal .
However , the results of this study showed DEMO managers of th is company that the
definition o f what are acceptable c hampioning s trategies is influenced by national cul-
tural values. DEMO fi ndings s uggest a reevaluation of what c hampioning roles should be
in d ifferent c ultures . T hey indicate that c DEMO s hould use different approaches to
promote innovation in d ifferent c ultures, and that approaches to champion ing that schol-
ars have found to be useful in the United States may not be appropriate in DEMO ther c ultures .
Limitations of This Study
While this study ac hieved most of the goals set for it, its failure to demonstrate
s upport for ome of the specific cul ture-championing relationships hypo thesized DEMO
an ex amination o f limitations that might h ave affected t hese results. One major limita-
tion was that of sample size. The DEMO e mployed a restricted sample of countries and
had a relatively low number of respondents from each co untry. To accurately test the
three DEMO hypotheses, greater var iance among countries may be needed.
However , DEMO, such a design would have been extremely diffic ult . Re-
DEMO urce restrictions on tran lation and communication, and the ability to DEMO access to
multiple offices of a mult inational corporation limited this study to 24 fairly large and
industrialized countries.
Moreover, the study may not have been s ufficiently large in terms of t he number of
DEMO per co untry. Since the d emographic characteristics of the respondents dif-
fers across countries, a more accurate measurement of the re lationships hypothesized in
this study may require the construction of country means from the DEMO of subgro ups
based on gender, education, experience , and other demographic variables. With the
creation of stable means d ependent on the DEMO of samples of 20 or more, a more
accurate research design DEMO have required samples of 200-300 in each co untry. Such
a d esign is difficult for most researchers to achieve, but it may be necessary to accurately
measure many of the rel ationships hypothesized.
A third DEMO of the study was the decision to focus on people's acceptance of
c hampioning behavior rather than their actual behavior as champions. The DEMO for this
c hoice was resource driven. Since only one-half of the respondents had championing
experience, a sample twice as large as the one e mployed would h ave been necessary to
c onfine the analysis DEMO individuals with actual c hampioning e xperience. A study of those
dimensions was beyond the scope permitted by the resources ava ilable. Nevertheless,
DEMO resulting design leaves this study open to the criticism th at can be made about all
atti tudinal research--that it may not hold true DEMO actual situations.
A final limitation of the study is that it is based on the ass umption that the concept
of national culture is DEMO that exists and can be measured. Many anthropologists
question this a ssumption. Since this paper cannot resolve the debate between anthro-
pologists o n DEMO one hand and sociologists a nd management scholars on the o ther over
this ass umption, I believe it necessary to point out the basis for the an thropologists'
c riticism as a limitation of DEMO paper. The anthropologists' c riticism of th is assumption
is threefold. DEMO, there may not be a statistical basis for arguments about the DEMO istribution
36
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
of cultural e lements within populations. Second , cultural and social bo DEMO may not
be cotermi nous, so the nation state may not DEMO a valid proxy for national culture. Third,
it may not be possible to co mpare questionnaire items about national cultural values to
items DEMO an aspect of behavior because the behavior items a nd the national culture
items may be part of the same broad co nstruct and DEMO, by definition, be correlated.
FUTURE RESEARCH
All of this brings us to the research agenda. T his study s uggests two avenues for
DEMO research. First, a theory of how and why c hampioning behavior DEMO vary
across cu ltures needs to be developed. This st udy has de monstrated the existence of
c ulture/c hampioni ng relationships; however , it did not explain the underlying processes
that account for these DEMO C ultural values are unlikely to be the p roximate cause of
differences in championing styles. They are more likely to create org anizational DEMO
and routines that require certain c hampioning s tyles. Further development of a tbeory
that accurately captures the pattern of the e mpirical relationships DEMO in this study will
require research into why c hampions in different cultures operate in different ways .
This additional effort would provide value-added DEMO for practicing managers.
T his study shows managers what c hampioning styles are preferred in different countries .
It demo nstrates that t hese DEMO ifferences are associated w ith differences in national culture.
Managers can use the results here to avoid ex porting inappropriate U.S. c hampioning
roles DEMO other co untries. However, much of the c hampioning process is DEMO mergent. In
each country individuals emerge as champions to promote the development of innova-
tions and new businesses in ways that are ap propriate DEMO individuals in that country. To
u nderstand how these c hampions can be supported and e ncouraged, more research on
n ational d ifferences in the c hampioning process is necessary. We need to figure out DEMO
h appens in co llectivist c ultures that c reates a need for the championing role of creating
coa litions of support across parts DEMO the organization. We need to understand what
organizational norms and routines c reate the need for c hampions who closely monitor
and control innovators DEMO power-distant societies . We need to learn what dr ives cham-
pions in uncertainty-avoiding culture to work within rules, n orms, and standard DEMO
ating procedures rather than doing s uch things as bootlegging resources or hiding their
activities.
Second, we need to identify the role played by corporate c ulture, national culture,
industry, firm, stage of the innovation process, and pe rsonality c haracteristics of inno-
vation c hampions on the choice of championing strategies. To do this, the championing
literature should expand the types of variables that are controlled in c ross-national
DEMO tudies of the cha mpioning phenomenon.
Hofstede et al. (1990) found that national and organizational c ultures are affected by
industry , job, and function as well as demographic characteristics of the members of the
DEMO nizations. This s tudy has strengthened o ur level of confidence in e xplaining c ulture/
c hampioning relationships by demonstrating that they DEMO even when corporate c ulture
is contro lled. From this study, DEMO can learn that c hampioning behaviors are not
affected just by the organization in which they work, but also by the national culture
from which they come.
However, much more work is needed. This study cannot tell managers what the
effect of the interaction of national and org DEMO c ulture is on c hampioning be-
h avior. Managers might wonder what differences there might be between two J apanese
managers, each of whom promotes championing in different organizations. Would these
differe nces be greater DEMO lesser than the di fferences between a J apanese and a U .S . man-
Summer,
1994
37
ager in the same organization? Only when studies incorporate both organizational and
national culture measures of championing behavior will it be possible to make DEMO
isons of the effects of the two . Now that preliminary re sults show a relationship between
c ultural values and c hampioning behavior , we need to answer qu estion s about the
s tructure of these relationships relati ve to other relationship .
Similarly, many sc holars have shown how the characteristics of indi vidual s, the type
of innovation, the stage of the innovati on process, and the organ DEMO's reward s truc-
ture influen ce the cbampioning roles that e merge in these o rganizations ( Lawless &
Price , 1992; DEMO, MacMillan, & McGrath, 1992; Howell & Higgin s, 1990)DEMO
While this study indicates that national c ulture also influen ces c hampioning roles , it does
not s how how national culture interacts DEMO these other variabl es . Managers need to
know if the effect of national culture is moderated by the type of innovation , the DEMO
of the innovation process, the personality of the champion, and the structure of the
organization and its reward system. Future research should include DEMO culture in
models of the c ham pioning process that e xamine these other influen ces. Such model s
will tell manager s how DEMO c ulture interacts with other factors to det ermine cham-
pioning roles.
CONCLUSIO
Recent re search h as s ugges ted that multin ational DEMO have greater oppor-
tunities to develop new co mpetitive advantages than do domestic firms because they are
present in more e nvironments and these DEMO nvironments c reate the variation necessary for
the development of new competitive advantages (Ghoshal, 1987). Senior m anagers of
these multinational firms DEMO to learn how to harness this diver ity . One way to do this
is to actively manage new business development across multiple cultural DEMO
This study shows that if managers choose this approach, they c DEMO simply tran sfer
U.S .- style championing overseas. To gain the s upport of others necessary for innovation
( Kanter, 1988), managers need to learn c ulturally appropriate innovation championing
strategies.
REFERENCES
Abegglen , J. (1958). The J apanese fa ctory : Aspects of its social DEMO ization . Glencoe, lL: Free Press.
Burgelman , R. (1983)DEMO A p rocess model of internal corporate venturing in tbe major di versified finn .
Adm inistrative Science Quanerly , 28. 223-244.
Chakrabarti, A. ( 1974). The role of champion in product innovation. California Management DEMO,
17(2), 58-62
Chakrabarti, A. (1989). The division of labor in innovation management. Research Management, 19,
161-171.
Chinese Culture Connection. ( 1987). Chinese values and the search for culture-free dimensions DEMO culture .
J ournal of Cross-Cullural Psychalogy. 18(2), 143-164.
Crozier, M. ( 1964). The b urea ucratic p henomenon. London: DEMO avistock.
Cuzley, K. , & Gremillion, L. ( 1983). The role of the champion in DSS implementation. Inf ormalion and
M anagement DEMO 6. 203-209.
38 ENTREPRENEURSIllP TH EOR'I' and PRACTICE
.
D'lrbame, P. (1989). LIJ log/que de l'h DEMO Paris: Editions du Seuil.
Dore, R. (1973). Britishfactory, Japanesefactory: The origins of diversity in industrial relations . Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Franke, R. . Hofstede, G .• & Bond. M. (1991). C ultural roots of economic performance: A research note .
Strategic Management J ournal , 12. 165-173.
Frohman, A. (1978). DEMO performance of innovation: Managerial roles. California Management Review,
20(3),5-12.
Galbraith, J. (1982). Designing the innovating organization. Or gani DEMO onal Dynamics, Winter, 5·25.
Ghoshal. S. (1987). Global strategy: An organizing framework. Strategic Management J ournal. 8. 425-
440.
Granick, D.
and Russia .
(1972). Manag erial co mpa riso ns of fo ur d eveloped countries: France . Britain, United States
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hambrick, D., & Brandon, G . ( DEMO). Executive values. I n D. Hambrick ( Ed.), The executi ve effect :
Concepts and me/hods f or studyin g top managers. Greenwich. CT: JAJ Press.
Hildebrand, D. ( 1986). Statisticalthinkingjor DEMO s cientists . Boston: Duxbury Press.
Hofstede. G. (1980). Culture 's consequences: I nternational differences in work related values , Beverly
DEMO , CA: Sage Publications.
to economic grow
th.
Hofstede , G.• DEMO, B. • Ohayv, D. , & Sanders, G. (1990). Measuring organizational c ultures: A
qualitative and quantitative study across twenty cases. Administrative Sc ience Quarterly. 35, 286-316.
Hoppe, M. (1990). Ar eplication of Hof stede's meas ures. Unpublisheddoctoral dissertation, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Horovitz, J. (1978). Management control in France, UK and Germany. Columbia J ournal o/World Busi-
ness. 13. 16-22.
Howell. J., & Higgins, C. ( 1990). Champions of technological DEMO Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 35, 317-341.
& Bond, M. (1984). Hofstede's culture dimen ions: An independent validation using Ro-
s urvey. J ournal of Cross-C ultural Psychology, /5. 417-433.
& Bond, M. (1988). The Confucius connection: From cultural roots
l Dynamics, 16, 4-21.
Hofstede. G.,
keach's value
Hofstede, G.,
DEMO
Howell. I .. & Higgins, C. ( 199 1). Champions DEMO change: Identifying, understanding. and s upporting
c hampions of technological innovations. Organization Dynamics, 10(1). 4()..55.
Hui, H., & DEMO H. ( 1985). Measurement in cross-cultural psychology . Journal of Cross-Cultural
P sychology. /6, 131-152.
l mai, K. • Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi . C. (1985). Managing the new product development process: How
Japanese companies leam and unleam. In K. Clark. R. Hays, & C. Lorenz (Eds.) , The Uneasy Alliance.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press .
Kanter. R. (1988). When a thousand flowers bloom: Structural, coUective and social conditions for inno-
vauon in organization. DEMO B. Staw & L. Cummings (Eds . ). Research in organizational behavior . Green-
wich. CT: IAI Press.
Lawless, M., & Price, L. ( l 99 I). An agency perspective on new technology champions. Organization
Science . 3(3). 342-355.
Summer, 1994 39
Leung, K. , & Bond, M. (1989). On the empirical identification of dim ensions for cross-cultural compar-
isons. J ournal of Cross-C DEMO Psychology , 20(2), 133-151.
Maidique , M. ( 1980). Entrepreneurs, c hampionsand technological innovation. Sloan Management Review,
2 1(2),59-76.
Mann, L. (1980). Cross-cultural studies of small groups. In H. Triandis & R. Brislin (Eds.), H andbook of
cross cultural psychology 5 , pp. 155-209. Boston: Allyn and Bacon .
Milgram, DEMO . ( 1961). Nationality and co nformity. SC ientific A merican. 205(6) , 45-5 1.
Ouchi , W. ( 1980). Markets, bureaucracies, and c lans. Administrative Science Quarterly , 25, 129-142.
Roberts, E. (1977). Generating effective corporate innovation. Technology Review. 80(1),27-33 .
Ronen, S., & S henkar, O. ( 1985). C lustering countries on attitudinal dimensions: A review and synthesis.
Academy of Management Review. 10 . 435-454.
Sathe , V. (1988). Fosteri ngentrepreneurs hip in the large diversified finn. Organiza tional Dynamics, 7(2) ,
20-32.
Schneider, S. (1991). Strategy fo rm ulation: The impact of nati onal culture. Organiz ation Studies , 10(2),
149-168.
Schon, D. (1963). Champions for radical new inventions. Harvard DEMO Review , 4 1, 77-86 .
Souder, W. (1981). DEMO entrepreneurs hip in the large corporations. R esearch Management , May.
18-22.
T ayeb , M. (1988). Organizations and national culture . London: Sage.
Venkataraman, 5., MacMillan, I. , & McGrath , R. (1992). Progress in research on corporate venturing. In
D. Sexton (Ed.), State of the art in e ntrepreneurship. New York: Kent Publishing Company.
Witte, E. (1973). Organization f ur Innovationsentscheidun gen . DEMO: Otto Schwarz & Co.
Yoshino, M. (1979). Emergi ng DEMO multinati onal enterprises. In S. Davis (Ed.), Managing and
o DEMO the multinational corporation. New York: Pergamon.
Appendix 1. Items Loading 0.50 DEMO Better on the Four
Championing Factors
Factor 1: Autonomy
B2 Malee DEMO possible for the people working on an innovation to bypass standard
operating procedures to develop the innovation (Schon , 1963; Howell & Higgin DEMO,
1991; Burgelman, 1983).
B3 Be allowed to bypass certain budgetary procedures to get funds for an innovation
(Schon. 1963; Pinchot , 1987; Burgelman , 1983).
B4 Be allowed to bypass c DEMO personnel procedures to get people committed to an
innovation ( Howell & Higgins, 1991).
B 13 Not be required to s eek the organi zation's support for an innovation by presentin g
regular financial DEMO s demonstrating the value of the innovation ( Quinn, 1979).
DEMO
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Factor 2: C ross-F unctional Ties
B17 Meet frequently with all people working on a n innovation rather than just the
hi ghest-ranking members (Howell & Higgins, 1991),
B21 Convince people in other departments DEMO an innovation deserves their support by
s howing the benefits of the innovation to them as individuals (Kanter, 1988).
B 22 Attempt DEMO get people in other departments to commit their resources to an inno-
vation by showing them the benefit of the innovation to the organizatio DEMO as a whole
( Howell & Higgins, 1991).
B23 Attempt DEMO get people in other de partments to conlribute manpower to an innova-
tion by appealing to the employees' sense of co mmitment to the organization
(Howell & Higgins, 1991).
Factor 3: Monitoring
B5 Help the people working on an innovation to get a budget to undertake DEMO one
stage of the innovation at a time (lmai, Nonaka, & Take uchi, 1985; Souder, 1981).
B6 Help the people DEMO on an innovation to get au thority to undertake only one
stage of the innovation at a time (Imai, Nonaka, & T akeuchi , 1985; Souder, 1981).
B7 Not make it possible for DEMO working on an innovation to take initiative on their
ideas without getting formal a pproval for them (Howell & Higgins, 1991; Kanter ,DEMO
1986; Sathe, 1988).
Factor 4: D ecision M aking
DEMO 10 Create s upport for an innovation among employees before formal approval of the
innovation by senior management (Howell & Higgins, 1991; Burgelman, 1983).
B 16 Make it possible for people working on an innovation to make decisions based on
their intuition ( Burgelman, 1983).
B 18 Include all the people working on an innovation in its DEMO process
( Howell & Higgins, 1991).
Items with a negative DEMO have been reworded to make them conform with the factor
s tructure.
I would like to thank Bill Gartner, S. Venkataraman. Ian MacMillan, DEMO Sue Birley for their advice
and helpful comments on this paper. Support for this research was provided by Citibank N.A .. through the
Intern DEMO Fellows Program. the Wharton School's Huntsman Center for GlobalCompetition through an
Area Chemicals Company Doctoral Dissertation Fellow hip, and its Fishman-Davidson Center through a
fellowship for the Study of the Service Sector.
Summer, 1994
41
Copyright of Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice is the property of Blackwell Publishing Limited
and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple DEMO or posted to a Iistserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However. users may print. download. or email
articles for individual use.{1g42fwefx}