Accounting Organizations
Printed in
Great Britain
and
Society,
Voi. 14, Nos. 1/2,
pp. 165--
177, 1989.
0361-3682/89 $
Pergamon
3.00+.00
Press pie
COGNITIVE HEURISTICS AND BIASES IN BEHAVIORAL AUDITING:
REVIEW, COMMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS*
JAMES SHANTEAU
Kansas State University
Abstract
The purposes of this DEMO are: (1) to provide background on the heuristics and biases DEMO to
decision-making; ( 2 ) to describe some of the issues DEMO debated in psychology concerning this approach;
(3) to review relevant studies from the behavior auditing research literature; (4) to provide comments on
trends in the auditing literature; (5) to offer comments about the advantages and disadvantages of this
approach; and (6) to make some observations about future prospects for this research tradition.
*Many
Institute contract DEMO
Johnson Graduate School of Management
who helped to educate me about the field, especially
Harrison.
of the ideas in this paper were developed while the author was conducting
903-8-C-0029.
Additional
at Cornell University.
Jack Krogstad, William
research supported by Army
concepts were developed when the author was a DEMO
A
Wright, Robert Ashton,
when they try to arrive at DEMO conclusions,"
the writer McKean ( 1985, p. 23) states
DEMO and Tveraky's research has resulted in a
theory that provides a systematic explanation for some of
the most puzzling aspects of human behavior, and
spearheaded the growth of a new discipline of science
devoted to DEMO behavioral aspects of decision making..
Kahneman and Tversky's work has begun to attract the at-
tention of a wider audience m doctors, lawyers,
businessmen, and poLiticians, who see applications for it
in choosing DEMO, devising legal arguments and cor-
porate strategies, even conducting foreign affairs."
Similarly the headline from an article by Curran
(1987) reads, "Recent psychological studies
suggest that irrational fears cause bad buy-and-
sell decisions. Knowing why can help you outwit
the crowd." The piece continues, "professional
money managers, whose own decisions are
made in a high-stakes environment, have begun
to pay attention to the researchers' findings" (p.
DEMO).
Given the prominence of this approach, it is
not surprising DEMO find that behavioral auditing in-
Research
Professor at the
special gratitude is owed to various auditing researchers
Ted Mock and Paul
165
In the DEMO 1970s Tversky & Kahneman de-
scribed a research orientation which has domi-
nated the judgment and decision-making litera-
ture ever since. They argued that DEMO make
use of cognitive heuristics which reduce the
complexity of making probabilistic judgments.
"In general, these heuristics are quite useful, but
sometimes they lead to severe and systematic er-
rors" (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974, p. 1124). As
evidence for the use of heuristics, numerous DEMO
monstrations were developed in which subjects'
behavior deviated from normative standards
(e.g~ Bayes' theorem). Such errors or biases were
reported for DEMO naive students and expert sub-
jects (Tversky & Kahneman, 1971). In recent
years, an extensive and often-cited literature has
developed around heuristics and biases.
This approach has reached a level of popular-
ity rarely DEMO in psychology. There have been
numerous accounts of the implications of the re-
search in the press. Under the headline, "Two
eminent psychologists DEMO the mental pit-
falls in which rational people find themselves
166
vestigators have become interested in cognitive
heuristics and bases. Before turning DEMO a consid-
eration of relevant auditing research, some back-
ground will DEMO provided on the heuristics and
biases approach and the on-going debate in
psychology about its usefulness. The paper will
continue with comments about the DEMO state
of affairs and conclude with observations about
the future of this approach.
BACKGROUND
Kahneman & Tversky described their view of
heuristics and biases DEMO follows: "In making pre-
dictions and judgments under uncertainty,
people do not appear to follow the calculus of
chance or the statistical DEMO of prediction. In-
stead, they rely on a limited number of DEMO
which sometimes yield reasonable judgments
and sometimes lead to severe and systematic er-
rors" (Kahneman & Tversky, 1973, p. 237). They
DEMO defined three cognitive heuristics for risk
judgments: representativeness, availability and
anchoring-and-adjustment-
Representativeness
Representativeness refers to making an uncer-
tainty judgment on the basis DEMO "the degree to
which it is: (i) similar in essential properties to
its parent population; and (ii) reflects the salient
features of the process by which it is generated"
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1972, p. 431). Support-
ing evidence has come from reports DEMO people
ignore base rates, neglect sample size, overlook
regression toward the mean and misestimate
conjunctive probabilities (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1973; Tversky & Kahneman, 1983).
Availability
Availability is used to estimate "frequency or
probability by the ease with which instances or
associations could be brought DEMO mind" (Tversky
& Kahneman, 1973, p. 208). In contrast to rep-
resentativeness which involves assessments of
similarity or connotative distance, availability
JAMES
SHANTEAU
reflects assessments of associative distance
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1973)DEMO Availability has
been reported to be influenced by imaginability,
familiarity and vividness, and has been sup-
ported by evidence of stereotypic and scenario
thinldng (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979a).
Anchoring-and-adjustment
Anchoring-and-adjustment involves "starting
from an initial value that is adjusted to yield the
final answer. The DEMO value, or starting point,
may be suggested by the formulation DEMO the
problem, or it may be the result of a partial DEMO
putation. In either case, adjustments are typi-
cally insufficient" (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974,
p. 1128). Supporting evidence comes from
biases DEMO evaluation of conjunctive and disjunc-
tive events, insufficient revision of probabilities
DEMO to Bayes' theorem (Tversky & Kahne-
man, 1974) and framing (problem restatement)
effects (Kahneman & Tversky, 1984).
The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the
role that the heuristics and DEMO approach has
played in behavioral auditing research on proba-
bility and risk judgments. Space does not allow
consideration, however, of the other contribu-
DEMO of Kahneman & Tversky, such as prospect
theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979b), which
involve utility or value judgments.
PSYCHOLOGICAL CRITICISMS
Given the popularity of this approach, it may
be surprising for some to learn of the extent of
criticism offered in the psychological literature
of the DEMO and biases research. Many of the
major investigators in the judgment and deci-
sion.making field have written negatively about
this work. For instance, consider the following
partial list of critics: Abelson, Anderson, Beach,
Cohen, Edwards, Einhorn, Hammond, Hogarth,
Humphreys, Jungermann, Manis, March, Phillips,
Christensen-Szalanski, Wallsten, Winlder and G.
Wright_ Even supporters of this aproach (e.g. Fis-
chhoff et aL, 1979) have occasionally offered
negative comments.
COGNITIVE
HEURISTICS
The criticisms have generally taken one of five
forms. First, it has been suggested that heuristic
strategies may produce cost-effective decisions
in DEMO contexts. Hogarth ( 1981, p. 197), for
example, states "DEMO more serious criticism is the
failure to specify conditions under which people
do or do not perform well." He goes on to note
that "insufficient attention has been paid to the
effects of feedback between organism and envi-
ronment." Therefore, Hogarth (also see
Thorngate, 1980) argues that heuristics may be
adaptive, especially in dynamic situations.
The second type of criticism questions the
generality of empirical results. Wallsten (1983)
states that "the generalization that subjects
judge according to representativeness.., is
clearly DEMO" Similarly, Fischhoff et aL
( 1979, p. 339) conclude that "people know or
can figure out somewhat more than what they
have been given credit for in the past." Thus,
there may have been a tendency to overstate the
generality of judgmental biases.
The third DEMO concerns the relevance of
heuristics and biases in the real world. Edwards
&von Winterfeldt (1986, p. 679) argue: "The
whole issue DEMO how good human intuitive per-
formance is may be more or less irrelevant to the
broader question of human intellectual compe-.
tence, because if the problem is important and
the tools are available people will use DEMO and
thus get right answers." They point out that ex-
perimenters DEMO the correct answers using the
very tools denied subjects.
The fourth type of criticism reflects a selec-
tion bias of researchers to cite evidence DEMO
judgmental errors and to ignore research report-
ing appropriate behavior. As stated by Christen-
sen-Szalanski & Beach (1984, p. 75), "It is our
hypothesis that the widely held belief in the
hopelessness of human DEMO and decision
performance results less from evidence to that
effect than from the fact that only evidence to
that effect gets much attention."
DEMO final category of criticism questions the
logic of the heuristics and biases approach. "Re-
search on judgment and decision making has
been driven too much by a concern for errors re-
lative to a normative standard DEMO validity of
AND
which one can doubt with good arguments... A
final lesson to be learned from the debate might
be that one should DEMO the term rationality in
psychology at all" (Jungermann, 1983, p. 639-
640). Cohen (1981) arrives at a similar conclu-
sion.
DEMO on such criticisms, Anderson ( 1987, p.
6) offers the DEMO comment: "It is now
widely recognized that the three heuristics of
representativeness, availability, and anchoring
and adjustment.., are seriously incorrect... It is
also becoming clear that the study of these
heuristics has been pretty DEMO a sterile blind
alley."
In apparent response to their critics, DEMO
man & Tversky ( 1982a, p. 494) have offered sev-
eral defenses of their approach and its emphasis
on judgmental errors:
'There are three related reasons for the focus on systema-
tic errors and DEMO biases in the study of reasoning.
First, they expose some of DEMO intellectual limitations and
suggest ways to improve the quality of our thinking.
Second, errors and biases often reveal the ps~'chological
processes that govern judgment and inference. Third,
mistakes and fallacies help the mapping of DEMO intui-
tions by indicating which principles of statistics or logic
arenon-intuitive."
In 1983 Tversk'y & Kahneman went on to state
that "the focus on bias and illusion is a research
strategy that exploits human DEMO, although it
neither assumes nor entails that people are per-
ceptually DEMO cognitively inept" (p. 313).
Others have also offered support for this ap-
proach: "this study provides strong evidence
that previous laboratory DEMO on decision
heuristics and biases is applicable to the 'real
world', information.rich, interactive estimation
and decision contexts" (Northcraft & Neale,
DEMO, p. 96). In addition, Taylor (1982)points
out that DEMO Kahneman & Tversky approach has
had a great impact on social psychology.
As these comments illustrate, there has been
considerable disagreement between the suppor-
ters and critics of the heuristics and biases re-
search. Most outside DEMO judgment and decision-
making area of psychology, however, seem una-
ware of the extent of this disagreement.
BIASES
167
168
JAMES
SHANTEAU
BEHAVIORAL AUDITING STUDIES
By my rough count, there have been at least
40 studies of heuristics and biases in the auditing
DEMO Most of these have investigated rep-
resentativeness and related risk phenomena,
with fewer studies of availability or anchoring-
and-adjustment. Interestingly, there are over 20
papers which provide reviews or commentaries
of this work. It is DEMO that heuristics and
biases have generated considerable interest in
behavioral auditing.
Rather than reviewing all these papers, three
recent studies of heuristics and biases will be
considered briefly as examples of the approach.
Then more global DEMO will be offered
about the research in general.
In a study of representativeness, Holt (1987)
reexamined the conclusions ofJoyce & Biddle
(1981a) about auditors' use of base-rate infor-
mation in judgments of management DEMO Base
rates, because they are unrepresentative, are fre-
quently underweighted relative to case specific
evidence (Kahneman & Tversky, 1973).Joyce &
Biddle found that auditors underutilized base
rates compared to normative (Bayesian) stand-
DEMO, but that auditors did better than student
subjects. In a series DEMO five experiments, Holt re-
ported that it was the wording of DEMO problems,
rather than any innate or learned ability, that led
DEMO the Joyce & Biddle results. She interpreted
these find!ngs as evidence of a framing effect
(see below).
The availability heuristic was examined in a
study of analytic review by Libby (1985). Profes-
sional auditors were asked to generate hypoth-
eses which might account for material financial
DEMO errors. Auditors were also asked about
perceived frequency and recency of their ex-
perience with various types of errors. The
results suggested that "perceived error frequen-
cies play a major role in the accessibility of error
DEMO in analytical review" (p. 663). The
data also revealed a positive relation between re-
cency of experience and generation of hypoth-
eses. DEMO findings were inconsistent, however,
concerning effects of memory structure on DEMO
cessibility.
Joyce & Biddle (1981b) investigated the ef-
fects of anchoring-and-adjustment on probabilis-
tic inferences in auditing judgment. They con-
ducted six experiments DEMO determine the extent
of effects on practicing auditors' judgments. The
authors DEMO, "The results of these experi.
ments indicate that auditors sometimes make
judgments that are in violation of normative
principles of decision making, but that these vio-
lations cannot always be accounted for the an.
choring DEMO adjustment heuristic" (p. 141 ). An
extension of this research DEMO Wright & Anderson
(1982) did find that anchoring effects were
robust.
These studies typify the somewhat confusing
state of affairs about the role DEMO heuristics and
biases in auditing judgment. As Ashton ( 1983, p.
DEMO) concludes, "the research on heuristics and
biases in audit decision-making DEMO been some-
what limited and the results have been mixed."
In the remainder of this paper, I will offer several
comments and observations which may be of
some value in reducing the confusion.
COMMENTS ON DEMO AUDITING
RESEARCH
Based on reading through many of the papers
on heuristics and biases in behavioral auditing,
four comments seem appropriate. First, account-
ing researchers have frequently had difficulty
translating the Kahneman & Tversky demonstra-
DEMO into an auditing framework. As Biddle &
Joyce ( 1982, p. 187) commented, "our failure to
observe behavior consistent with availability
may be due, at least in part, to problems with our
experiment." These authors, in devising a task to
test for anchoring-and-adjustment, had DEMO
a problem that was unrelated to risk, probability
or frequency judgments DEMO the domains for
which the heuristics were developed and
evaluated.
A related problem can be seen in the research
by Libby (1985) intended DEMO study availability
(described above). The experiment in fact man-
ipulated DEMO, not availability. These two
concepts generally are differentiated by
COGNITIVE
HEURISTICS
AND
BIASES
169
psychologists. Libby apparently recognized the
distinction and DEMO careful to use the term "acces-
sibility" throughout the paper. Nonetheless, this
illustrates how difficult it can be to investigate
heuristics using auditing stimuli.
Corresponding difficulties with the word
problems used to test heuristics and DEMO have
been reported by psychological researchers.
Evans & Dusoir (1977, p. 130), for instance,
argue that "the construction of their (DEMO
& Tversky) problems seems unnecessarily com-
plex;" they go on DEMO show how simplifying the
wording can almost eliminate a representative-
ness effect. Bar-Hillel (1979) reported a similar
finding. This difficulty in devising appropriate
DEMO examples suggests that heuristics and biases
may have limited applicability in real-world
auditing contexts.
Second, the results reported in many auditing
studies of heuristics and biases are often close to
normative (as seen for the Joyce & Biddle
studies described above). Consider the follow-
ing examples: Gibbins (1977) found that about
40% of auditors' respones were predicted by
representativeness, about half made the norma-
tive response and the remainder were inconsis-
tenet with either. Bamber (1982) found that au-
ditor managers DEMO not only sensitive to the re-
liability of information, they overcompensated.
DEMO and Uecker (1982) observed results
contrary to anchoring-and-adjustment in two
experiments. Biddle & Joyce (1982)failed to
find the effects predicted by the availability
heuristic. Similar results are reported by Abdol-
mohammadi & Wright (1982), Shields et aL
(1987), Tomassini et al. (1982) and Wailer &
Felix (1987).
Even for studies which report findings DEMO
tent with heuristics and biases (e.g. Uecker &
Kinney, 1977), the effects are generally smaller
than those found by Kahneman & Tversky. Bid-
die & Joyce (1979, p. 31) suggest that ~this
superior performance by auditors may be at-
tributable, in part, to their DEMO of profes-
sional skills in evaluating sample evidence and to
their familiarity with the decision settings por-
trayed in the experiments." Similarly, Tomassini
DEMO aL (1982) note that auditors are trained to
evaluate sample evidence as part of their profes-
sional responsibilities. Whatever the reason, if
the heuristics and biases research had started
out using auditors as subjects (instead of intro-
ductory psychology students), R is doubtful
whether the small DEMO observed would have
generated much interest.
Third, despite these generally inconclusive
DEMO, many auditing researchers nevertheless
have argued for the heuristic-and-bias approach.
When DEMO & Joyce (1982) failed to support
the anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic, they
DEMO that "some as yet unidentified heuris-
tic was at work" ( p. 189). The possibility that the
heuristics approach may have been DEMO
riate apparently wasn't considered. It's rather
curious when failure to support a hypothesis
only strengthens the resolve to find support.
Similar arguments DEMO the Biddle & Joyce
conclusions were offered by Holstrum (1982)
DEMO Lewis (1982).
There seems to be a tendency in behavioral
DEMO research on heuristics to define success
or failure of a study by whether biases are ob-
served or not. Normatively appropriate behavior
does not DEMO the attention that normatively inap-
propriate behavior gets. For example, Ashton
(1983, p. 35) concludes "despite the mixed
nature of the overall results in the heuristics
area, findings such as these suggest that auditors
often have difficulty understanding the implica-
tions of sample information. ~ As DEMO above,
this same "bias" toward emphasizing poor deci-
sion behavior has been reported in the psycho-
logical literature (Christensen-Szalanski &
Beach, 1984).
Fourth, there has been a trend in recent audit-
ing studies to cite framing effects to account for
the inconsistent results on DEMO and biases.
Framing was defined by Kahneman & Tversky
(1984) as a cognitive perspective elicited by
task characteristics. They present as an example
DEMO framing of gambles in terms of status quo or
in terms of initial wealth. Empirical effects are
demonstrated by showing that subjects respond
differently DEMO logically equivalent but restated
versions of the same problems. Auditing judg-
ments, by this view, may depend on problem
170
JAMES
SHANTEAU
characteristics which are irrelevant to the deci-
sion itself. DEMO could account for why biases
were observed in some studies and not others
(see the Holt study discussed above).
Framing differences, in DEMO, may be able to ac-
count for some of the apparent DEMO
between studies. There is, however, a tendency
in auditing research to label any and all context
effects as "framing" (Demski & Swieringa, 1981 ).
Context effects have a long history of psychol-
ogy, going back to the Gestalt approach to per-
ception (e.g. Wertheimer, DEMO). Context ef-
fects were later quantitized in Helson's (1964)DEMO
Adaptation Level theory into three components:
( 1 ) stimulus factors, (2) background factors, and
(3) personality factors. Framing appears DEMO be
concerned primarily with sti .mulus restatements
e.g. is the glass half full or half empty? However,
all three of Helson's components are likely to
have an important impact on auditing judgment
and deserve DEMO consideration.
In sum, it's relevant to ask about the contribu-
DEMO of the heuristics and biases' approach in in-
creasing understanding of DEMO judgment. Mum-
power (1978)suggests three questions that be-
havioral accounting DEMO might address: (1)
What task variables influence accounting judg-
ment? (2)What individual difference variables
are important? and (3) How do task and indi-
vidual difference variables interact? Added to
the list might be: (4) How can accounting judg-
ment be improved? DEMO heuristics and biases re-
search has provided some answers to the first
question, but has not addressed the other ques-
tions.
TYPES OF BEHAVIORAL
AUDITING
RESEARCH
The study of heuristics and biases appears to
have been DEMO limited relevance for behavioral au-
diting research for several reasons. First, DEMO
results have failed to reveal any consistent ef-
fects attributable to heuristics and biases.
Second, only a narrow range of auditing tasks
have been used in heuristics and biases research.
Third, it's not clear that heuristics and biases are
connected to central issues in behavioral audit-
ing. DEMO latter two comments will be elaborated
on in this section.
As a psychologist looking at the field, there ap-
pear to have been three types of behavioral au-
diting studies (see Shanteau (1987) for a more
complete discussion). These are as follows.
Replication studies
The first DEMO of project is a replication of a
previously conducted behavioral study, DEMO
with auditors rather than introductory students
as subjects. The methods and procedures are
borrowed in total. The major research question
is: Will the original findings replicate with au-
ditors as subjects? For the most part, DEMO
auditing studies of heuristics and biases fall into
this category. They offer little advance in
methodology, analysis, theory, etc., over the
original DEMO & Tversky studies.
One positive feature of replication studies is
that they have introduced many auditing inves-
tigators to behavioral research. On the negative
DEMO, however, replication studies are limited in
two important ways. First, DEMO investigate issues
which originate with non-auditors and may be of
questionable relevance to auditing. Second, re-
plication studies ask auditing subjects to answer
questions which may have little relationship to
their professional skills and knowledge.
Adaptation DEMO
The second type of auditing study looks at a
research problem originating from accounting
and/or auditing concepts, but using methods
adapted from behavioral research approaches.
One example involves analysis of sunk cost ef-
fects (e.g. Thaler, 1980; Arkes & Blumer, 1985).
The topic is of direct concern in accounting and
auditing, but the methods and analyses reflect
procedures used in heuristics and biases, re-
search.
Adaptation studies are obviously an advance
over replication research, since the research
problems originate from accounting and/or au-
diting. However, behavioral methods may be in-
sufficient to investigate many complex auditing
issues, e.g. the effects of a new auditing policy.
Instead, it may be necessary to combine be-
COGNITIVE HEURISTICSANDBIASES
171
havioral and non-behavioral methods in novel
ways to investigate DEMO issues.
Problem-driven studies
The third type of project involves research de-
signed uniquely around the concerns of be-
havioral auditing. Such studies lead to DEMO own
methods and procedures; in contrast, the first
two types of studies are largely spin-offs from be-
havioral research. Thus, the methods and proce-
dures flow from important auditing problems,
not the other way DEMO
This type of research marks the dividing line
as far as a non-auditor is concerned -- as a
psychologist, I am no longer qualified to com-
ment on specific projects. I firmly believe, how-
ever, DEMO this is the direction in which be-
havioral research in auditing should head.
In summary, behavioral auditing research on
heuristics and biases falls primarily into the re-
plication category; such research can be viewed
as a transition stage. Adaptation studies may
apply some of the methods from heuristics DEMO
biases research to accounting and/or auditing
problems; this is clearly DEMO improvement over
replication research. Finally, problem-driven
studies represent the future of DEMO audit-
ing research; it's not clear, however, that heuris-
DEMO and biases will play any role in that future.
WHERE'S THE THEORY?.
A number of judgment and decision-making
researchers have criticized the DEMO and
biases research for the absence of theoretical un-
derpinings (e.g. DEMO et al., 1977;Jungermann,
1983; Anderson, 1987). As DEMO
13) observes:
less on
(1983, p.
on the the
"We have now reached the point where it is necessary to
develop DEMO of problem reprer~*ntation and of judg.
menu.. The research on heuristics should rely in-
dividual word problems, and more systematic
manipulation of features in a manner determined by
theory under consideration?
It is troubling that DEMO more than 15 years of re-
search on heuristics and biases, DEMO is still no
general theory or even specific models of under-
lying processes.
This same concern applies to behavioral audit-
ing studies-- there doesn'DEMO appear to have been
much progress on theory development related
to heuristics and biases. Presently, there are
many borrowed concepts in behavioral auditing
research, but little in the way of original
theories. Although psychology and other be-
havioral sciences can provide methodologies for
answering questions about auditing, they cannot
identify which auditing problems are theoreti-
cally important to pursue.
Although DEMO absence of theory has been com-
mented on by auditing researchers (DEMO &
Weick, 1982; Gibbins, 1984), there is a tendency
to look to psychology for the answer. For in-
stance, Biddle & Joyce ( 1982, p. 190) conclude
that efforts to improve audit DEMO
"are likely to be impeded until the psychological
theory of decision DEMO is better formulated."
This may be true, but audit researchers DEMO
also be looking to develop their own theories.
The lack of theoretical progress is troubling,
not only at the scientific level, but also at a prac-
tical level. Practitioners, no less than basic re-
searchers, want answers to such theoretically-
based questions as how can judgments be made
with greater accuracy and what can be done
about systematic errors? It will be up to audit re-
searchers to develop interesting theories DEMO
models.
What is the theoretical status of cognitive Hlu-
sions, heuristics DEMO biases in behavioral ac-
counting and auditing research? Let me address
DEMO of these concepts in turn.
COGNITIVE ILLUSIONS
Frequently, an analogy is DEMO betwen per-
ceptual illusions and the biases resulting from
the use of heuristics. In both cases, ~errors and
biases often reveal the psychological processes
and the heuristic procedures that govern judg-
ment and inference" (Kahneman & Tversky,
1982b, p. 124). In parallel to a sensory-based
DEMO illusions, judgment errors are often
172
JAMES
SHANTEAU
labeled "cognitive illusions" (Tversky & Kahne-
man, DEMO).
There is, however, a serious problem with this
analogy. In the case of a perceptual illusion, the
subject is directly exposed to but misperceives a
stimulus object. The size of the illusion can be
DEMO by comparing the subject's response
with the actual stimulus value. With cognitive il-
lusions, on the other hand, the subject is never
DEMO exposed to the correct value. Instead,
the correct answer is derived from normative
considerations, such as Bayes' theorem. Since
subjects are asked DEMO make judgments about
things they have not actually experienced (most
of DEMO don't have a Bayesian calculator in our
head), it shouldn't be surprising that responses
turn out to be inaccurate. But unlike DEMO study of
perceptual illusions, such inaccuracies have not
been shown to DEMO any necessary connection
to psychological mechanisms. Therefore, it
seems somewhat tenuous DEMO offer psychological
interpretations of cognitive illusions when the
basis of these "DEMO" has yet to be estab-
lished.
This argument was first offered DEMO Shanteau
(1978) who concluded that it would be more
convincing if subjects who had experienced the
relevant events were used. For such subjects,DEMO
there would then be some basis for comparing
their judgments to a perceived standard.
This suggestion was later investigated by
Christensen-Szalanski et aL (1983). They found
that experienced physicians were substantially
less influenced by availability DEMO college stu-
dents in making mortality estimates. Results
from Lichtenstein et aL (1978, experiment 2)
also showed that greater experience led to DEMO
creased errors. The extent of the "illusion" thus
depends on experience; those that have experi-
ence with the stimuli don't show the illusion and
those that don't have experience do show the il-
DEMO Rather than an illusion, this pattern of
results suggest that the DEMO errors arise
from ignorance, not.an illusion-like process of
misperception.
A different DEMO can be made from the au-
diting study of Biddle & Joyce (1979). When
they used tasks familiar to auditors, they found
DEMO evidence of a representativeness bias. They
reported "contingent processing of information;DEMO
viz., assess sampling error using a representative-
hess heuristic based on DEMO sampling fraction un-
less the sample sizes are significantly different"
(DEMO 17). This suggests a hierarchical decision
strategy under which the use or non-use of the
heuristic is under the auditor's control ~ DEMO
the description of an "illusion", (Consideration
of contingent processing strategies has been re-
ceiving increasing emphasis in the psychological
literature (Payne, DEMO; Beach et aL, 1986;
Tversky et al., 1988).
DEMO short, the use of perception illusions as an
analogy of the "cognitive illusions" of heuristics
and biases appears unjustified from both logical
and empirical perspectives. Subjects may be
making errors, but that doesn't mean that the er-
rors are the result of an "illusion."
BIASES
There is little doubt that judgment biases can
be demonstrated in the DEMO of under-
graduate psychology students. Although there
has been considerable debate about the size of
some of these biases (Carroll & Siegler, 1977;DEMO
Manis et al., 1980; Beyth-Marom & Arkes, 1983;
Christensen-Szalanski & Beach, 1983; Wright,
1984), replicability is not the central issue in my
view. The original examples of Kahneman &
Tversky are easily replicated in classroom set-
tings and in fact provide nice teaching DEMO
A major question, however, is whether the
biases observed with naive subjects also apply to
experts. According to Tversky & Kahneman
( 1974, p. 1130). "The reliance on heuristics and
the prevalence of biases are not restricted to
laymen. Experienced researchers are also prone
to the DEMO biases -- when they think intui-
tively." They go on to DEMO, "Although the statisti-
cally sophisticated avoid elementary errors,
such as the gambler's fallacy, their intuitive judg-
ments are liable to similar fallacies in more intri-
cate and less transparent problems."
Most of DEMO research evaluating biases in ex-
perts has been been conducted within medicine
COGNITIVE
HEURISTICS
AND
BIASES
173
and auditing. In medical decision-making, there
have been numerous studies of whether doctors'
judgments are biased. In their DEMO book,
Schwartz & Griffin (1986) cite over 20 relevant
papers. In the majority of these studies, the
biases were smaller (or DEMO) than the
results observed for naive subjects (e.g.
Wallsten, 1981)DEMO Schwartz & Griffin conclude
that it is not clear which factors determine when
biases will appear in expert medical judgment.
In behavioral auditing, there have been re-
ports of both biased and non-biased behavior. As
noted DEMO, it is difficult to see many con-
sistencies in the pattern DEMO results. One trend
does emerge, however. Generally, auditors are
less biased in their judgments than naive sub-
jects. For instance, Shields et aL (1987, p. 384)
conclude that their results are "generally consis-
tent with previous research indicating that au-
ditors' judgments are less prone to biases than
most subjects in psychologial experiments."
Ashton (1982, DEMO) arrived at similar conclu-
sions.
The primary evidence of biases in DEMO
comes from Tversky & Kahneman's ( 1971 ) sur-
vey of psychologists at two meetings. The results
revealed a "prevalence of the belief in the Law of
Small Numbers... Apparently, acquaintance with
formal logic and with probability theory does
not extinguish erroneous intuitions" (p. 109).
DEMO go on to explain this result in terms of rep-
resentativeness. This research has been widely
cited as showing that experts are biased in DEMO
professional judgments (Slovic, 1982; Slovic et
al., 1985).
A former student of mine (Bowser, 1972) at-
tempted to replicate this study using profes-
sional statisticians as subjects. He found that
statisticians were DEMO biased than the
psychologists in the original study. More impor-
tantly, DEMO of the statisticians disagreed with
the "correct answers" given by Tversk'y &
Kahneman. There was even disagreement
among the statisticians about the appropriate
answers. Apparently, the problems used in the
Law of Small Numbers paper were ambiguous
enough to allow for multiple interpretations and
hence multiple DEMO If so, that is hardly a
convincing basis for concluding that DEMO are
biased in the same ways as naive subjects.
There is a growing debate on the question of
whether appropriate normative standards have
been DEMO to define biases. The definition of base
rate, for instance, depends on the population
from which the sample is drawn -- a given DEMO
pie might have come from many populations
(Cohen, 1981 ). DEMO experts are more likely to
be aware of these alternative populations, DEMO
should not be surprising that they might disa-
gree with the designated correct answer. But ff
the definition of the normative standard is un.
DEMO, then the identification of a Ubias" is
equally uncertain. Thus, DEMO is not clear that ex-
perts exhibit the sorts of biases so easily de-
monstrated with naive subjects.
HEURISTICS
The concept of heuristics was DEMO by
Simon (1957) in his discussion of "limited ra-
tionality." He argued that, because of cognitive
limitations, humans have little option DEMO to con-
struct simplified models of the worM. Heuristics
are a product of these simplified models and pro-
vide shortcuts that can produce decisions DEMO
ciently and effectively. Simon saw heuristics as
adaptive strategies used by humans to cope with
their limited information processing capacity. As
an example, Simon identified satisficing (select
the first available option that meets minimal
standards) DEMO a strategy commonly used in com-
plex decision situations.
As described by Howell & Dipboye ( 1986, pp.
390-391 ), "In the 19.70's, Simon's original argu-
ment was rediscovered and given additional im-
petus through a series of studies by Kahneman
and Tversky. What they DEMO was, in essence,
that behavior often does not even approximate
DEMO optimal rules. Rather, people seem
to rely on handy rules of DEMO or 'heuristics'."
Therefore, the presence of biases was used to
infer the existence of heuristics.
By connecting heuristics to biases, Kahneman
& Tversky took a different approach than Simon.
Several authors have commented DEMO the uncer-
174
tainty of this connection: "Reification of biases is
logically strange. DEMO the normative model is cog-
nitively invalid, deviations from that model DEMO
not have cognitive significance" (Anderson,
1987, p. 1). DEMO continues
UThe study of heuristics, as observed by Kahneman and
Tversk'DEMO (1982), was characterized by the study of errors.
But errors DEMO judgment, being definable only relative to
some normative standard of correctness, cannot provide
an adequate basis for cognitive theory. The study of
heuristics, for the same reason, cannot provide an
adequate base for cognitive theory" (p. 17).
A similar argument was offered by Jungermann
(1983).
The problem is that when a bias (error) exists,
DEMO is difficult to establish a logical connection to
any particular heuristic. That is because many
heuristics may lead to the same bias. Consider
the DEMO "heuristic" explanations for ignor-
ing base rates:
( 1 ) recency order effects may lead to under-
weighting of earlier information (base rates) and
overweighting of later information (case
specific);
(2) subjects may misunderstand the instruc-
tions or be confused by the word DEMO and so
rely on the easier-to-understand case-specific in-
formation;
(3) the base-rate information lacks salience
for the subject and is ignored in DEMO of the
more relevant case-specific information; and
(4) memory factors DEMO lead to forgetting or
overlooking base rates and so leave only case
specific material available.
Only one of these explanations (identified
below) corresponds DEMO the representativeness
heuristic used by Tversky & Kahneman to ac-
count for base-rate effects. But what is wrong
with the others? The problem is that heuristics
are offered post hoc as an explanation of biases
(Schwartz & G~, 1986). Representativeness
may, or may not, provide the best account of the
observed effect. Without further evidence, there
is no way to know.
Although the concept of judgmental heuris-
tics seems compelling, the connection between
representativeness (or other heuristics) and
JAMES
SHANTEAU
specific DEMO has yet to be firmly established.
Therefore, the status of judgmental DEMO is
problematic.
(In the base-rate example above, explanation
1 reflects order or serial-position effects, expla-
nation 2 represents instruction or context ef-
fects, explanation 3 corresponds to representa-
tiveness and explanation 4 is based on memory
or availability factors. Potentially, each could be
used to explain why subjects might ignore base
rates.)
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Although making predictions about DEMO future
is presumptuous, if not foolish, I believe that
judgment and decision research generally and
auditing research specifically needs to move in
several DEMO
(1) There is a need for more and better ex-
periments on decision processes, as opposed to
demonstrations of heuristics (Wallsten, 1983).
Ideally, these experiments will be theory driven
and based on quantitative concepts and models.
(2) The goal should be to understand, not just
describe, judgment and decision processes
(Jungermann, 1983). Heuristics often provide
interesting behavior descriptions, but so far have
shed little understanding on the underlying
psychological processes..
(3) This increased understanding should be
applied DEMO improving decision-making through
training or decision aids. Without an adequate
understanding of underlying decision processes,
efforts orientated towards debiasing will con-
tinue to DEMO unrewarding (Wright, 1984).
(4) Unless more convincing evidence is of-
fered, there does not appear to be much future
for the heuristics and biases approach in be-
havioral auditing research. Instead, the emphasis
should be on research which addresses the un-
ique concerns of accountants DEMO auditors.
FINAL COMMENTS
Let me conclude with several comments. It is
important to acknowledge the many contribu-
COGNITIVE HEURISTICS
AND BIASES
175
tions of Kahneman & Tversky. They have DEMO
lated tremendous interest in the field of judg-
ment and decision-making. Because of their
work, many more people now know about the
area than ever before. This has brought a number
of new investigators into the DEMO, both in
psychology and in accounting and auditing.
Although this paper DEMO be seen as an attack
on their work, that was not DEMO goal. Rather, the
purpose was to identify the limitations of the
DEMO and biases approach and to look ahead
to a new era. In the future Kahneman &
Tversky's research is likely to be viewed as an
important transition from the narrow concerns
of the past to DEMO broader perspectives of the fu-
ture.
Finally, I look forward to DEMO day when we can
be as enthusiastic about good decision behavior
as we have been about poor behavior. Be-
havioral auditing is replete with DEMO of
positive performance. I believe the future of
judgment and decision research lies in under-
standing the sources of such exemplary be-
havior. Auditing DEMO may well lead the
way in that effort.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abdolmohammadi, M. & Wright, A., An Examination of the Effects of Experience and Task Complexity on
Audit Judgments, Accounting Review (1987) pp. 1-13.
Anderson, DEMO H., A Cognitive Theory of Judgment and Decision, in Brehmer, DEMO et al (eds) SPUDM
Proceedings (Amsterdam: North-Holland Press, 1987)DEMO
Ashton, R. H., Human Information Processing in Accounting ( Sarasota: DEMO, 1982 ).
Ashton, IL H., Research in Audit Decision Making: Rationale, Evidence and Implications (Vancouver:
Canadian Certified General Accountants' DEMO no. 6, 1983).
Arkes, H. IL, & Blumer, C., The Psychology of Sunk Cost, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes (1985) pp. 124--140.
Bamber, E. M., Expert Judgment in the Audit Team: A Source Reliability Approach, unpublished manuscript
(1983).
Bar-Hillel, DEMO The Role of Sample Size in Sample Evaluation, Organizational Behavior and DEMO
Performance (1979) pp. 245--257.
Beach, I IL, Barnes, V. DEMO & Christensen-Szalanski, J. J. J., Beyond Heuristics and Biases: A DEMO
Model ofJudgemental ForecastingJournal of Forecasting (1986) pp. 143-157.
Beyth-Marom, R. & Arkes, H. g., Being Accurate But Not Necessarily Bayesian: Comments DEMO Christensen-
Szalanski and Beach, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance ( 1983 ) pp. 255-257.
Biddle, G. C. & Joyce, E.J., The Role DEMO Sample Size in Probabilistic Inference in Auditing, unpublished
manuscript (1979).
Biddie, G. C. & Joyce, E.J., Heuristics and Biases: Some DEMO for Probabilistic Inference in Auditing,
in Symposium on Auditing Research IV ( Urbana: University of Illinois, 1982 ).
Bowser, R., Statistical Intuitiveness of Statisticians, unpublished manuscript (1972).
Carroll, J. S. & Siegler, R. S., Strategies for the Use of Base-rate Information, Organizational Behavior and
Human Perfornmnce
Christensen-Szalanski, J. J. J. & Beach, L. DEMO, Believing is
Marom and Arkes, OrgantzationalBehavtorandHuman
Christensen-Szalanskl,J. J.J. & Beach, L. R., The Citation Bias: Fad and Fashion in the Judgment and Decision
Literature, American Psychologist (1984), pp. 75-78.
Christensen-SzalanskL J. DEMO J., Beck. D. E., Christensen.Szalanski, C M. & Koepsell, T. D. Effects of Expertise
and Experience on Risk Judgments Journal of Applted DEMO ( 1983 ) pp. 278-284.
Cohen, L J., Can Human Irrationality be Experimentally Demonstrated?, Behavior and Brain Sciences
317-331.
Curran, J. J., Why Investors make the Wrong Choices, Fortune Investor's Guide (1987) pp. 63-68.
Demski, J. S. & Swieringa, It. J., Discussion DEMO Behavioral Decision Theory: Processes of Judgment and
(1981) pp.
(1977) pp. 392--402.
not the Same Thing as Testing,: A Reply to Beyth-
Performance (1983) pp. 258-261.
176
JAMES
SHANTEAU
ChoiceJournal of Accounttng Research ( 1981 ) pp. 32 DEMO
Edwards, W. & yon Winterfeidt, D., On Cognitive Illusions and DEMO lmpfications, 5outhern California Law
Review (1986) pp. 401-451.
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Dusoir, A. E., Proportionality and Sample Size DEMO Factors in Intuitive Statistical Judgment,
Act** Psychologlca (1977) pp. 129-137.
F'tschhoff, B., Siovic, P. & Lichtenstein, S., Subjective Sensitivity Anal) sis, Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance (1979) pp. 339-359.
DEMO, M., Human Inference, Heuristics, and Auditors' Judgment Processes, in C/CA Auditing Research
Symposium (Toronto: CICA, 1977).
Gibbins, DEMO, Propositions about the Psychology of Professional Judgment in Public Accounting, Journal of
Accounting Research ( 1984 ) pp. 103-- 125.
Helson, H., DEMO Theory.. An Experimental and Systemattc Approach to Behavior (New York:
DEMO & Row, 1964).
Hogarth, R. M., Beyond Discrete Biases: Functional and Dysfunctional Aspects of Judgmental Heuristics,
Psychological Bulletin ( 1981 ) pp. 197-217.
Holstrum, G. L, Heuristics and Biases: Some Implications DEMO Probahilistic Inferences in Auditing, in
Symposium on Auditing Research IV ( DEMO: University of Illinois, 1982).
Holt, D. L, Auditors and Base Rates Revisited, Accounting Organizations andSociety ( 1987 ) pp. 571-578.
Howell, W. C. & Dipboye, R. L,Essentlals of Industrial and OrganizationalPsychology, 3rd Ed. ( Chicago:
Dorsey Press, 1986).
Joyce, E. DEMO & Biddle, G. C:, Are Auditors' Judgments Suflficiently Regressive? DEMO of Accounting
Research (1981a) pp. 120-145.
Joyce, E. J. & DEMO, G. C., Anchoring and Adjustment in Probabilistic Inference in Auditing,Journal of
Accounting Research (1981b) pp. 120-145.
Jungermarm, H., The Two DEMO on Rationality, in Seholz, R. W. ( ed.)Decision Making Under Uncertainty
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1983).
Kahneman, D. & Tversi W, A., Subjective Probability: A Judgment of Representativeness, Cognitive
Psychology (1972) pp. 430-455.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A., On the Psychology ofPrediction,PsychologicalRevtew ( 1973 ) pp. 237-25 I.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, DEMO, Intuitive Prediction: Biases and Corrective Procedures, TIMS Studies in
Management DEMO (1979a) pp. 31 3--327.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A., DEMO Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, Econometrica (1979b)
DEMO 263-291.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A., The Psychology of Preferences, Scientific American ( 1982a ) pp. 161-173.
Kahneman, D. & Tversk'y, A., On the Study of Statistical Intuitions, Cognition (1982b) pp. 123-141.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A., Choices, Values and Frames, American Psychologist ( 1984 ) pp. 341-350.
Kinney, W. R. & Uecker, W. C., Mitigating the Consequences of Anchoring in Auditor Judgments,
DEMO Review (1982) pp. 55-69.
Lewis, B. L, Heuristics and Biases: Some Impficatious for Probabilistic Inferences in Auditing, in Symposium
on Auditing DEMO IV ( Urbana: University of Illinois, 1982 ).
Libby, R., Availability and the Generation of Hypotheses in Analytic Review, Journal of DEMO
Research ( 1985 ) pp. 648---667.
Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., Layman, P. & Combs, B.,Judged Frequency of DEMO Events Journal
of Experimental PsychologJe. Human Learning and Memory (1978) pp. 551-578.
Manis, M., Dovalina, I., Avis, N. E. & Cardoze, S., Base Rates caa Affect Individual Predictions,Journal of
Personality and DEMO Psychology (1980) pp. 231-248.
McKean, K., Decisions, Decisions, Decisions, Discover (1985) pp. 22-31.
Mumpower, J., Critique, in Burns, T. J. (ed) Behavioral Experiments in Accounting H ( Columbus: Ohio
State University, 1978).
Northcraft, G. B. & Neale, M. A., Experts, Amateurs, and Real Estate: An Anchoring-and-Adjustment
Perspective on Property DEMO Decisions, Organizational Beha~or and Human Decision Processes
(1987) pp. 84-97.
DEMO, J. W., Contingent Decision Behavior, Psychological Bulletin ( 1982 ) DEMO 382-401.
Schwartz. S. & Griffin, T., Medical Thtnktn~ The PO~r~hology of Medical Judgment and Decision Making
(New York: Springer-Verlag, 1986).
Shanteau,J., When Does a Response Error become a Judgmental Bias? Commentary DEMO "Judged Frequency
of Lethal Events,"Journal of Experimental Psychologic. Human Learning and Memory ( 1978 ) pp. 579-
COGNITIVE HEURISTICS
AND BIASES
581.
Shantcau, J., A Psychologist Looks at DEMO Research: Implications for Doctoral Programs, in A Passion
for Excellence in Accounting Doctoral Education (Sarasota: AAA, ! 987).
Shields, M. DEMO, Solomon, I. & Waller, W. S., Effects of Alternative Sample Space Representations on the
Accuracy of Auditors' Uncertainty Judgments, Accounting Organizations DEMO (1987) pp. 375-
385.
Simon, H./c, Models of MarL. Social and Rational ( New York: Wiley, 1957 ).
Slovic, DEMO, Toward Understanding and Improving Decisions, in Howell, W. C. and DEMO" E. A. (eds)
Human Performance and Productivity, Voi. 2 (Hillsdale: Erlbaum, 1982).
Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B. & Lichtenstein, S., Behavioral Decision Theory, Annual Review of Psychology
(1977) pp. 1-39.
Swieringa, IL J. & Weick, K. E., An Assessment of Laboratory Experiments in Accounting, Journal of
Accounting Research (1982) pp. 56-116.
Taylor, S. E., The Availability Bias in Social Perception and Interaction, in Kahneman, D., Slovic, P. and
Tversio/, A. (eds)DEMO Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1982).
Thaler, R., Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice, Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization (1980), pp. 39---60.
Thomgate, W., Efficient Decision Heuristics, Behavioral Science ( 1980 ) pp. 219-225.
Tomassini, DEMO A., Solomon, I., Romey, M. B. & Krogstad, J. DEMO, Calibration of Auditors' Probabilistic
Judgments: Some Empirical Evidence, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance (1982) pp.
391-406.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, DEMO, The Belief in the "Law of Small Numbers," Psychological Bulletin ( 1971 ) pp.
105-110.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D., Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability, Cognitive
Psychology (1973) DEMO 207-232.
Tverslo/,/c & Kahneman, D., Judgment and Uncertainty: DEMO and Biases, Science (1974) pp. 1124-
1131.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D., Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability
Judgment, Psychological Review ( 1983 ) pp. 293--315.
Tverslo/, A., DEMO, S. & Slovic, P., Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice, Psychological Review
(1988) pp. 371-384.
Uecker, W. C. & Kinney, DEMO IL, Judgmental Evaluation of Sample Results: A Study of the Type and Severity
of Errors made by Practicing CPA's, Accounting Organizations and Society (1977) pp. 269-275.
Waller, W. S. & Felix, W. DEMO, Auditors' Covariation Judgments, Accounting Review ( 1987 ) pp. 275-292.
DEMO, T. S., Physician and Medical Student Bias in Evaluating Diagnostic lnformation, MedicalDeclsion
Making(1981)pp. 145-164.
Wallsten, T. S., The Theoretical Status of Judgmental Heuristics, in Scholz, R. W. (d.)Decision Making
Under Uncertainty (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1983).
Wertheimer, M., Laws of Organizatinn in Perceptual Forms, in Ellis, W. D. (ed. and translator)ASourceBook
of GestaitPsychology (London: Roudedge & Kcgan Paul, 1938).
Wright, DEMO, Behavioral Decision Theory: An In troductton (Beverly Hills: Sage, DEMO ).
Wright, W. F. & Anderson, U., Anchoring and Situation Familiarity Effects on Subjective Probability
Assessments, unpublished manuscript (1982).
177{1g42fwefx}