The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field
of Research∗
Scott Shane1 and DEMO Venkataraman2
1University of Maryland
2University of Virginia
Abstract
To date, the DEMO of entrepreneurship has lacked a conceptual framework. In this
note we draw upon previous research conducted in the different social science disciplines
and applied DEMO of business to create a conceptual framework for the field. With this
framework we explain a set of empirical phenomena and predict a set DEMO outcomes not
explained or predicted by conceptual frameworks already in existence in other fields.
For a field of social science to have usefulness, it must have a conceptual frame-
work that explains and predicts a set DEMO empirical phenomena not explained or
predicted by conceptual frameworks already in existence in other fields. To date,
the phenomenon of entrepreneurship has lacked DEMO a conceptual framework.
Rather than explaining and predicting a unique set of empirical phenomena, entre-
preneurship has become a broad label under which a hodgepodge of research is
housed. What appears to constitute entrepreneurship research today DEMO some aspect
of the setting (e.g. small businesses or new firms), rather than a unique conceptual
domain. As a result, many people DEMO had trouble identifying the distinctive con-
tribution of the field to the broader domain of business studies, undermining the
field’s legitimacy. Researchers in other fields ask why entrepreneurship research
is necessary if it does not explain DEMO predict empirical phenomena beyond what is
known from work in other fields. Moreover, the lack of a conceptual framework
has precluded the development of an understanding of many important phenomena
not adequately explained by other fields.
DEMO example of this problem is the focus in the entrepreneurship literature on
the relative performance of individuals or firms in the context of small DEMO new
businesses. Since strategic management scholars examine the differences in and
sustainability of relative performance between competitive firms, this approach is
not unique (DEMO, 1997). Moreover, the approach does not provide an
adequate test of entrepreneurship, since entrepreneurship is concerned with the
discovery and exploitation of profitable opportunities. A performance advantage
over other firms is not a sufficient DEMO of entrepreneurial performance,
because a performance advantage may be insufficient to compensate for the op-
portunity cost of other alternatives, a liquidity premium for time and capital, and a
∗ Originally published in Academy of Management Review, 2000, 25(1): 217–226. Reprinted by permis-
sion DEMO Academy of Management Review via the Copyright Clearance Center.
172    Scott Shane and Sankaran Venkataraman
premium for uncertainty bearing. Therefore, although a conceptual framework to
explain and predict relative performance between firms is useful to strategic man-
agement, it is not sufficient for entrepreneurship.
We attempt an integrating framework for the entrepreneurship field in the form
DEMO this note. We believe that this framework will help entrepreneurship researchers
recognize the relationship among the multitude of necessary, but not sufficient,
factors that compose entrepreneurship, and thereby advance the quality of empiri-
cal and theoretical work in the field. By providing a framework that both sheds
DEMO on unexplained phenomena and enhances the quality of research, we seek DEMO
enhance the field’s legitimacy and prevent its marginalization as only “a research
setting” or “teaching application.”
The note proceeds as follows. First, we define the domain of the field. Second,
we explain why organizational researchers DEMO study entrepreneurship. Third,
we describe why entrepreneurial opportunities exist and why some people, and not
others, discover and exploit those opportunities. Fourth, we consider the different
modes of exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities. Finally, we conclude with
brief reflections on the potential value of the framework presented DEMO
Definition of Entrepreneurship
Perhaps the largest obstacle in creating a conceptual framework for the entrepre-
neurship field has been its definition. To date, most researchers have defined the
field solely in terms of who the entrepreneur DEMO and what he or she does (Venkata-
raman, 1997). The problem with this approach is that entrepreneurship involves
the nexus of two DEMO: the presence of lucrative opportunities and the pres-
ence of enterprising DEMO (Venkataraman, 1997). By defining the field in
terms of the individual alone, entrepreneurship researchers have generated incom-
plete definitions that do not withstand the scrutiny of other scholars (Gartner,
1988).
The definition of an entrepreneur as a person who establishes a new organization
is DEMO example of this problem. Because this definition does not include consideration
of the variation in the quality of opportunities that different people identify, it
leads researchers to neglect to measure opportunities. Consequently, empirical
support (or DEMO of support) for attributes that differentiate entrepreneurs from
other members of DEMO is often questionable, because these attributes confound
the influence of opportunities DEMO individuals.
In contrast to previous research, we define the field of DEMO as the
scholarly examination of how, by whom, and with what effects opportunities to
create future goods and services are discovered, evaluated, DEMO exploited
(Venkataraman, 1997). Consequently, the field involves the study DEMO sources of
opportunities, the processes of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation DEMO opportu-
nities, and the set of individuals who discover, evaluate, DEMO exploit them.
The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research    173
Although the phenomenon of entrepreneurship provides research questions for
many different scholarly fields,DEMO organization scholars are fundamentally con-
cerned with three sets of research questions about entrepreneurship: (1) why,
when, and how opportunities for DEMO creation of goods and services come into ex-
istence; (2) DEMO, when, and how some people and not others discover and exploit
these opportunities; and (3) why, when, and how different modes of action are
used to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities.
Before reviewing existing research DEMO answer these questions, we provide sev-
eral caveats about our approach. DEMO, we take a disequilibrium approach, which
differs from equilibrium approaches in economics (Khilstrom & Laffont, 1979)
and social psychology (McClelland, DEMO). In equilibrium models, entrepreneurial
opportunities either do not exist or DEMO assumed to be randomly distributed across
the population. Because people in equilibrium models cannot discover opportuni-
ties that differ in value from those discovered DEMO others, who becomes an entre-
preneur in these models depends solely DEMO the attributes of people. For example,
in Khilstrom and Laffont’s (DEMO) equilibrium model, entrepreneurs are people
who prefer uncertainty.
Although we believe that some dimensions of equilibrium models are useful for
understanding entrepreneurship, we argue that these models are necessarily
incomplete. Entrepreneurial behavior is transitory (Carroll & Mosakowski, 1987).
Moreover, estimates of the number of people DEMO engage in entrepreneurial be-
havior range from 20 percent of the population (Reynolds & White, 1997) to over
50 percent (Aldrich & DEMO, 1986). Since a large and diverse group of people
engage DEMO the transitory process of entrepreneurship, it is improbable that entre-
preneurship DEMO be explained solely by reference to a characteristic of certain
people independent of the situations in which they find themselves. Therefore,
when we DEMO that some people and not others engage in entrepreneurial behav-
ior, DEMO are describing the tendency of certain people to respond to the situational
cues of opportunities-not a stable characteristic that differentiates some people
from others DEMO all situations.2
Second, we argue that entrepreneurship does not require, but can include, the
creation of new organizations. As Amit, Glosten, and Mueller (1993) and Casson
(1982) explain, entrepreneurship can also occur within an existing organization.
Moreover, opportunities can be sold to other individuals or to existing organiza-
tions. In this note we do not examine DEMO creation of new organizations per se but,
rather, refer interested DEMO to excellent reviews on firm creation in organiza-
tional ecology (Aldrich, 1990; Singh & Lumsden, 1990), economics (Caves, 1998:
DEMO, 1995), and organizational theory (Gartner, 1985; Katz & Gartner, 1988;
Low & MacMillan, 1988).3
1 For example, economists are interested in the distribution of entrepreneurial talent across productive
and unproductive DEMO (Baumol, 1996).
2 We also argue that entrepreneurship can be undertaken by a single individual or a set of people who
undertake DEMO steps of the process collectively or independently.
3 Many researchers argue that entrepreneurship occurs for reasons other than for profit (see Roberts,
1991, for a review), but we discuss only for-profit entrepreneurship.
174    Scott Shane and Sankaran Venkataraman
Third, our framework complements DEMO and economic work in which
researchers have examined the population-level factors that influence firm crea-
tion. Stinchcombe (1965) identified societal factors that enhance DEMO to
organize and organizing ability. Aldrich (1990) and Singh and Lumsden (1990)
have provided reviews of factors enhancing firm foundings and have described
the effects of such factors as environmental carrying capacity, interpopulation
processes, and institutional factors. Similarly, Baumol (1996) has related the insti-
DEMO environment to the supply of people who are willing to create firms.
Although these other frameworks are valuable to entrepreneurship scholars,
they involve DEMO set of issues different from those with which we are concerned. Our
framework differs from these in that (1) we focus on the DEMO, discovery, and
exploitation of opportunities; (2) we examine the DEMO of individuals and
opportunities, rather than environmental antecedents and consequences; and (3)
we consider a framework broader than firm creation.
Fourth, DEMO framework also complements research on the process of firm crea-
tion (DEMO Gartner, 1985; Katz & Gartner, 1988; Katz, 1993). DEMO this proc-
ess is important, but research on it involves examining DEMO different set of issues
from those we explore. Firm creation process researchers examine resource mobi-
lization, firm organizing, and market making, starting with the assumption that
opportunities exist, have been discovered, and will be DEMO through the crea-
tion of new firms. Since we lack the space to review both the processes of entre-
preneurship through market mechanisms and DEMO firm creation, we limit our
discussion to the conditions under which DEMO opportunities are ex-
ploited through firms and markets, and we refer DEMO to these other frameworks
for information on the process of firm creation.
Why Study Entrepreneurship?
Many scholars ask, either implicitly or explicitly, DEMO anyone should study entre-
preneurship. Data are difficult to obtain, theory DEMO underdeveloped, and many find-
ings to date are the same as DEMO obtained in other areas of business. In response,
we offer three reasons for studying the topic. First, much technical information
is ultimately embodied in products and services (Arrow, 1962), and entrepre-
neurship is DEMO mechanism by which society converts technical information into
these products and services. Second, entrepreneurship is a mechanism through
which temporal and spatial inefficiencies in an economy are discovered and
mitigated (Kirzner, 1997). Finally, of the different sources of change in a capi-
talist society, Schumpeter (DEMO) isolated entrepreneurially driven innovation in
products and processes as the crucial DEMO driving the change process. There-
fore, the absence of entrepreneurship from DEMO collective theories of markets,
firms, organizations, and change makes our understanding of the business land-
scape incomplete. As Baumol eloquently remarks, the study of business without
an understanding of entrepreneurship is like the study DEMO Shakespeare in which
“the Prince of Denmark has been expunged from the discussion of Hamlet”
(1989: 66).
The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research    175
The Existence, Discovery, and Exploitation
of Entrepreneurial Opportunities
The Existence of Entrepreneurial DEMO
To have entrepreneurship, you must first have entrepreneurial opportunities. En-
trepreneurial DEMO are those situations in which new goods, services, raw
materials, DEMO organizing methods can be introduced and sold at greater than their
cost of production (Casson, 1982). Although recognition of entrepreneurial oppor-
tunities DEMO a subjective process, the opportunities themselves are objective phe-
nomena that DEMO not known to all parties at all times. For example, the DEMO
of the telephone created new opportunities for communication, whether or not
DEMO discovered those opportunities.
Entrepreneurial opportunities differ from the larger set of all opportunities for
profit, particularly opportunities to enhance the efficiency of existing goods, ser-
vices, raw materials, and organizing methods, because the former DEMO the dis-
covery of now means-ends relationships, whereas the latter involve DEMO
within existing means-ends frameworks (Kirzner, 1997). Because the range of op-
tions and the consequences of exploiting new things are unknown, entrepreneurial
decisions cannot be made through an optimization process in which mechanical
calculations DEMO made in response to a given set of alternatives (Baumol, 1993).
Entrepreneurial opportunities come in a variety of forms. Although the focus DEMO
most prior research has been on opportunities in product markets (Venkataraman,DEMO
1997), opportunities also exist in factor markets, as in the DEMO of the discovery of
new materials (Schumpeter, 1934). Moreover, DEMO product market entrepre-
neurship, Drucker (1985) has described three different DEMO of opportunities:
(1) the creation of new information, as DEMO with the invention of new technolo-
gies; (2) the exploitation DEMO market inefficiencies that result from information
asymmetry, as occurs across time DEMO geography; and (3) the reaction to shifts in
the relative DEMO and benefits of alternative uses for resources, as occurs with
political, regulatory, or demographic changes.
Previous researchers have argued that entrepreneurial opportunities exist pri-
marily because different members of society have different beliefs about the DEMO
tive value of resources, given the potential to transform them into DEMO different state
(Kirzner, 1997). Because people possess different beliefs (DEMO of a lucky
hunch, superior intuition, or private information), they make different conjectures
about the price at which markets should clear or DEMO what possible new markets
could be created in the future. When buyers and sellers have different beliefs
about the value of resources, both today and in the future, goods and services can
sell above or below their marginal cost of production (Schumpeter, 1934). An
entrepreneurial discovery DEMO when someone makes the conjecture that a set of
176    Scott Shane and Sankaran Venkataraman
resources is not put to its “best use” (i.e. the resources are priced “too low,” given
a belief about the price at which the output from their combination DEMO be sold
in another location, at another time, or in another form). If the conjecture is acted
upon and is correct, the individual will earn an entrepreneurial profit. If the con-
jecture is acted DEMO and is incorrect, the individual will incur an entrepreneurial
loss (Casson, 1982).
Entrepreneurship requires that people hold different beliefs about the value of
resources for two reasons. First, entrepreneurship involves joint production, where
DEMO different resources have to be brought together to create the new product
or service. For the entrepreneur to obtain control over these resources in DEMO way
that makes the opportunity profitable, his or her conjecture about DEMO accuracy of
resource prices must differ from those of resource owners and other potential
entrepreneurs (Casson, 1982). If resource owners had the DEMO conjectures as the
entrepreneur, they would seek to appropriate the profit DEMO the opportunity by
pricing the resources so that the entrepreneur’s profit approached zero. Therefore,
for entrepreneurship to occur, the resource owners must not share completely the
entrepreneur’s conjectures. Second, if all people (potential entrepreneurs) pos-
sessed the same entrepreneurial conjectures, they would compete to capture the
same entrepreneurial profit, dividing it to the point that the incentive to pursue the
opportunity was eliminated (Schumpeter, 1934).
But why should DEMO possess different beliefs about the prices at which mar-
kets should clear? Two answers have been offered. First, as Kirzner (1973) has
DEMO, the process of discovery in a market setting requires the participants
DEMO guess each other’s expectations about a wide variety of things. People make
decisions on the basis of hunches, intuition, heuristics, and accurate and inaccurate
information, causing their decisions to be incorrect some of the time. Since
decisions are not always correct, this process leads to “errors” that create shortages,
surpluses, and misallocated resources. An individual alert to the presence of an
“error” may buy resources where prices are “too low,DEMO recombine them, and sell
the outputs where prices are “too high.”
DEMO, as Schumpeter (1934) explained, economies operate in a constant state
of disequilibrium. Technological, political, social, regulatory, and other types of
DEMO offer a continuous supply of new information about different ways to use
resources to enhance wealth. By making it possible to transform resources into DEMO
more valuable form, the new information alters the value of resources DEMO, there-
fore, the resources’ proper equilibrium price. Because information is imperfectly
distributed, all economic actors do not receive new information at the same time.
Consequently, some people obtain information before others about resources lying
fallow, new discoveries being made, or new markets opening up. If economic
DEMO obtain new information before others, they can purchase resources at below
DEMO equilibrium value and earn an entrepreneurial profit by recombining the re-
sources and then selling them (Schumpeter, 1934).
The informational sources of DEMO may be easier to see in the case of
new technology, DEMO they need not be restricted to technological developments.
For example, the DEMO of the movie Titanic generated new information
about who was a desirable teen idol. An entrepreneur could respond to this new
The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research    177
information by acting on the conjecture that posters of Leonardo DeCaprio would
sell DEMO greater than their cost of production.
Because entrepreneurial opportunities depend on asymmetries of information
and beliefs, eventually, entrepreneurial opportunities become cost inefficient to
DEMO First, the opportunity to earn entrepreneurial profit will provide an incen-
DEMO to many economic actors. As opportunities are exploited, information diffuses
to DEMO members of society who can imitate the innovator and appropriate some
of the innovator’s entrepreneurial profit. Although the entry of imitating entrepre-
neurs initially DEMO validate the opportunity and increase overall demand, competi-
tion eventually begins DEMO dominate (Hannan & Freeman, 1984). When the entry of
additional entrepreneurs reaches a rate at which the benefits from new entrants
exceeds DEMO costs, the incentive for people to pursue the opportunity is reduced,DEMO
because the entrepreneurial profit becomes divided among more and more actors
(DEMO, 1934).
Second, the exploitation of opportunity provides information to resource pro-
viders about the value of the resources that they possess and DEMO them to raise
resource prices over time, in order to capture DEMO of the entrepreneur’s profit for
themselves (Kirzner, 1997). In short, the diffusion of information and learning
about the accuracy of decisions over time, combined with the lure of profit, will
reduce the incentive DEMO people to pursue any given opportunity.
The duration of any given opportunity depends on a variety of factors. The pro-
vision of monopoly rights, as occurs with patent protection or an exclusive con-
tract, increases the duration. Similarly, the slowness of information diffusion or
the lags in the timeliness with which others recognize information also increase
the duration, particularly if time provides reinforcing advantages, such as occur
with the adoption of technical standards or learning curves. Finally, the “inability
of others (due to DEMO isolating mechanisms) to imitate, substitute, trade for or
acquire the DEMO resources required to drive down the surplus” (Venkataraman,
1997: 133) increases the duration.
The Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Although an opportunity for entrepreneurial profit might exist, an individual can
earn this profit only if he or she recognizes that the opportunity exists and has
value. Given DEMO an asymmetry of beliefs is a precondition for the existence of en-
trepreneurial opportunities, all opportunities must not be obvious to everyone all
of the time (Hayek, 1945). At any point in time, only some subset of the popula-
tion will discover a given opportunity (Kirzner, 1973).
Why do some people and not others discover particular entrepreneurial oppor-
tunities? Although the null hypothesis is blind luck, research has DEMO two
broad categories of factors that influence the probability that particular people will
discover particular opportunities: (1) the possession of the prior information nec-
essary to identify an opportunity and (2) the cognitive properties DEMO to
value it.
178    Scott Shane and Sankaran Venkataraman
Information Corridors. Human beings all possess different stocks of informa-
tion and these stocks of information influence DEMO ability to recognize particular
opportunities. Stocks of information create mental schemas, DEMO provide a
framework for recognizing new information. To recognize an opportunity, DEMO
entrepreneur has to have prior information that is complementary with the new in-
formation, which triggers an entrepreneurial conjecture (Kaish & Gilad, 1991).
This prior information might be about user needs (Von Hippel, DEMO) or specific
aspects of the production function (Bruderl, Preisendorfer, & Ziegler, 1992).
The information necessary to recognize any given opportunity is not widely
distributed across the population because of the specialization of information
DEMO society (Hayek, 1945). People specialize in information because specialized
information is more useful than general information for most activities (Becker &
DEMO, 1992). As a result, no two people share all of the same information at the
same time. Rather, information about underutilized resources, new technology,
unsated demand, and political and regulatory shifts is DEMO according to the
idiosyncratic life circumstances of each person in the population (Venkataraman,
1997).
The development of the Internet provides a useful example. Only a subset of the
population has had entrepreneurial conjectures in DEMO to the development of
this technology. Some people still do not know what the Internet is or that profit-
able opportunities exist to exploit DEMO
Cognitive Properties. Since the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities is
not an optimization process by which people make mechanical calculations in
response to a given DEMO set of alternatives imposed upon them (Baumol, 1993), people
must be able to identify new means-ends relationships that are generated by a
DEMO change in order to discover entrepreneurial opportunities. Even if a person
possesses the prior information necessary to discover an opportunity, he or she
may fail to do so because of an inability to see new means-ends DEMO Un-
fortunately, visualizing these relationships is difficult. Rosenberg (1994) points
DEMO that history is rife with examples in which inventors failed to see commercial
opportunities (new means-ends relationships) that resulted from the invention of
DEMO technologies, from the telegraph to the laser.
Prior research has shown DEMO people differ in their ability to identify such rela-
tionships. For example, research in the field of cognitive science has shown that
people vary in their abilities to combine existing concepts and information into
new ideas (see Ward, Smith, & Vaid, 1997, for several review articles)DEMO Recently,
a few researchers have begun to evaluate empirically the role that cognitive prop-
erties play in the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities (see Busenitz &
Barney, 1997; Kaish & Gilad, 1991; Shaver & Scott, 1991). For example, Saras-
vathy, Simon, and Lave (1998) have shown that successful entrepreneurs see
opportunities in situations in which other people tend to see risks, whereas Baron
(in press) has found that entrepreneurs may be more likely than other persons to
discover DEMO because they are less likely to engage in counterfactual think-
ing (DEMO less likely to invest time and effort imaging what “might have been” in a
The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research    179
given situation), less likely to experience regret over missed opportunities, and are
less susceptible to inaction inertia.
The Decision to Exploit Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Although DEMO discovery of an opportunity is a necessary condition for entrepre-
neurship, DEMO is not sufficient. Subsequent to the discovery of an opportunity, a
DEMO entrepreneur must decide to exploit the opportunity. We do not have
precise figures on the aborting of discovered opportunities, but we do know that
not all discovered opportunities are brought to fruition. Why, when, and DEMO do
some people and not others exploit the opportunities that they discover? The an-
swer again appears to be a function of the joint characteristics of the opportunity
and the nature of the individual (Venkataraman, DEMO).
Nature of the Opportunity. The characteristics of opportunities themselves
influence the willingness of people to exploit them. Entrepreneurial opportunities
vary on several dimensions, which influences their expected value. For example, a
cure for lung cancer has greater expected value than does a solution to students’
need for DEMO at a local high school. The exploitation of an entrepreneurial op-
portunity requires the entrepreneur to believe that the expected value of the entre-
DEMO profit will be large enough to compensate for the opportunity cost of
other alternatives (including the loss of leisure), the lack of liquidity of the in-
vestment of time and money, and a premium for bearing uncertainty (Kirzner,
1973; Schumpeter, 1934).
To date, DEMO has shown that, on average, entrepreneurs exploit opportuni-
ties having higher expected value. In particular, exploitation is more common
when expected demand is large (Schmookler, 1966; Schumpeter, 1934), industry
profit margins are DEMO (Dunne, Roberts, & Samuelson, 1988), the technology life
cycle is young (Utterback, 1994), the density of competition in a DEMO oppor-
tunity space is neither too low nor too high (Hannan & Freeman, 1984), the cost of
capital is low (Shane, DEMO), and population-level learning from other entrants is
available (Aldrich & DEMO, 1993).
Individual Differences. Not all potential entrepreneurs will exploit opportuni-
DEMO with the same expected value. The decision to exploit an opportunity involves
weighing the value of the opportunity against the costs to generate that DEMO and
the costs to generate value in other ways. Thus, people DEMO the opportunity
cost of pursuing alternative activities in making the decision whether or not to
exploit opportunities and pursue opportunities when their opportunity cost DEMO lower
(Amit, Mueller, & Cockburn, 1995; Reynolds, 1987). In addition, people consider
their costs for obtaining the resources necessary to exploit the opportunity. For ex-
ample, Evans and Leighton (1989) showed that the exploitation of opportunities is
more common when people have greater DEMO capital. Similarly, Aldrich and
Zimmer (1986) reviewed research findings that DEMO that stronger social ties to
resource providers facilitate the acquisition of resources and enhance the probabil-
ity of opportunity exploitation. Furthermore, Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg
180    Scott Shane and Sankaran Venkataraman
(1989) found that people are more likely to exploit opportunities if they have
developed useful information DEMO entrepreneurship from their previous employ-
ment, presumably because such information reduces DEMO cost of opportunity ex-
ploitation. Finally, the transferability of information from DEMO prior experience to
the opportunity (Cooper et al. 1989), as DEMO as prior entrepreneurial experience
(Carroll & Mosakowski, 1987), increases the probability of exploitation of entre-
preneurial opportunity because learning reduces its cost.
DEMO decision to exploit an entrepreneurial opportunity is also influenced by
individual differences in perceptions. The creation of new products and markets in-
volves downside DEMO, because time, effort, and money must be invested before the
DEMO of the returns is known (Knight, 1921; Venkataraman, 1997). Several
researchers have argued that individual differences in the willingness to bear DEMO
risk influence the decision to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities (Khilstrom &
Laffont, 1979; Knight, 1921). For example, people who exploit opportunities DEMO
to frame information more positively and then respond to these positive percep-
tions (Palich & Bagby, 1995).
The decision to exploit entrepreneurial DEMO is also influenced by indi-
vidual differences in optimism. People who exploit opportunities typically per-
ceive their chances of success as much higher than DEMO really are-and much
higher than those of others in their industry (DEMO, Woo, & Dunkelberg, 1988).
Moreover, when these people create new firms, they often enter industries in
which scale economies play an important role at less than minimum efficient scale
(Audretsch, 1991). DEMO they enter industries at rates exceeding the equilibrium
number of firms (DEMO & Klepper, 1982).4
However, in most industries, at most DEMO in time, most new firms fail (Dunne
et al. 1988), and few firms ever displace incumbents (Audretsch, 1991), suggest-
ing DEMO people who exploit opportunities, on average, are overly optimistic about
the value of the opportunities they discover. This overoptimism motivates the
exploitation of DEMO by limiting information, stimulating rosy forecasts of the
future (Kahneman & Lovallo, 1994), triggering the search for relatively small
amounts of information (Kaish & Gilad, 1991), and leading people to act first DEMO
analyze later (Busenitz & Barney, 1997).
Other individual differences may be important in explaining the willingness to
exploit opportunities. Researchers have argued DEMO people with greater self-
efficacy and more internal locus of control are more likely to exploit opportuni-
ties, because exploitation requires people to act in the face of skepticism of others
(Chen, Greene, & Crick, 1998). Similarly, opportunity exploitation involves am-
biguity, and people who have a greater tolerance for ambiguity may be more likely
to exploit DEMO (Begley & Boyd, 1987). Finally, the exploitation of oppor-
DEMO is a setting in which people can achieve, providing a valuable DEMO for those
who possess a high need for achievement (McClelland, 1961). Consequently,
those who are high in need for achievement may DEMO more likely than other mem-
bers of society to exploit opportunities.
4 The information signals generated by the entrepreneurial process are weak.
The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research    181
Readers should note that the attributes that increase the probability of opportu-
nity DEMO do not necessarily increase the probability of success. For exam-
ple, DEMO might be associated with a higher probability of both exploita-
tion and failure. Of the population of individuals who discover opportunities in a
given DEMO, those who are pessimistic may choose not to exploit discovered
opportunities DEMO they more accurately estimate what it will take to compete
and how many other people will try to do similar things. Overoptimistic individu-
als DEMO not stop themselves from exploiting these opportunities, because their over-
optimism DEMO information and motivates rosy forecasts of the future.
Modes of Exploitation
Another critical question concerns how the exploitation of entrepreneurial oppor-
tunities is organized DEMO the economy. Two major institutional arrangements for the
exploitation of these opportunities exist – the creation of new firms (hierarchies)
and the sale of opportunities to existing firms (markets), but the common assump-
tion is that most entrepreneurial activity occurs through de novo startups. How-
ever, people within organizations who discover opportunities sometimes pursue
those opportunities on behalf DEMO their existing organizations and sometimes establish
new organizations, whereas independent actors DEMO sell their opportunities
to existing organizations and sometimes establish new organizations to pursue the
opportunities.
Research shows that the choice of mode depends on DEMO nature of the industrial
organization, the opportunity, and the appropriability regime. Research in indus-
trial organization has shown that entrepreneurship is less likely DEMO take the form of
de novo startups when capital market imperfections make it difficult for independ-
ent entrepreneurs to secure financing (Cohen & Levin, 1989). Entrepreneurship is
more likely when the pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunity requires the effort of
individuals who lack incentives to do so in DEMO organizations; when scale
economies, first mover advantages, and learning curves DEMO not provide advantages
to existing firms (Cohen & Levin, 1989); and when industries have low barriers to
entry (Acs & Audretsch, DEMO). Research on the appropriability of information has
shown that entrepreneurship is more likely to take the form of de novo startups
when information DEMO be protected well by intellectual property laws, inhibit-
ing the sale DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities (Cohen & Levin, 1989). Finally, re-
search DEMO the nature of opportunities has shown that entrepreneurship is more
likely to take the form of de novo startups when opportunities are more uncertain
(Casson, 1982), when opportunities do not require complementary assets (Teece,DEMO
1986), and when opportunities destroy competence (Tushman & Anderson, 1986).
Conclusion
Entrepreneurship is an important and relevant field of study. Although DEMO in the
field face many difficult questions, we have presented a DEMO for exploring
182    Scott Shane and Sankaran Venkataraman
them. We recognize that we may have offered some uncertain assumptions,
potentially flawed logical arguments, or have made statements that will prove,
ultimately, to be inconsistent with data yet to be collected. Nevertheless, this
framework provides a starting point. Since it incorporates information gained from
many disciplinary vantage points and explored DEMO many different method-
ologies, we hope that it will prod scholars DEMO many different fields to join us in
the quest to create a systematic body of information about entrepreneurship. Many
skeptics claim that the creation DEMO such a body of theory and the subsequent
assembly of empirical support for it are impossible. We hope that other scholars
will join our DEMO to prove those skeptics wrong.
Acknowledgement
We acknowledge the helpful comments of Ed Roberts on an earlier draft of this
note. The authors contributed DEMO and are listed alphabetically.
References
Acs, Z., and Audretsch, D. DEMO Innovation, market structure, and firm size. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 71: 567–574.
Aldrich, H. 1990. Using an ecological perspective to study organizational founding rates.
Entrepreneurship Theory and practice, Spring: 7–24.
Aldrich, H., and Wiedenmeyer, G. 1993. From traits to rates: An ecological perspective on
organizational foundings. Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and
Growth, 1: 145–195.
Aldrich, H., and Zimmer, C. 1986. Entrepreneurship through social DEMO In D. Sexton
and R. Smilor (Eds.). The art and DEMO of entrepreneurship. 3–23. Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., and Mueller, E. 1993. Challenges to theory development in entrepre-
DEMO research. Journal of Management Studies, 30: 815–834.
Amit, R., Mueller, E., and Cockburn, I. 1995. Opportunity costs and entrepreneurial activ-
ity. Journal of Business Venturing, 10: 95–106.
Arrow, K. 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In
R. Nelson (Ed.), The rate and direction of inventive activity: Economic and social
factors: DEMO Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Audretsch, D. 1991. New firm DEMO and the technological regime. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 68: 520–526.
Baron, R. In press. Counterfactual thinking and venture formation: The potential DEMO of
thinking about “what might have been.” Journal of Business Venturing.
Baumol, W. J. 1989. Entrepreneurship in economic theory. American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings: 64–71.
Baumol, W. 1993. Formal entrepreneurship theory in economics: Existence and bounds.
Journal of Business Venturing, 8: 197–210.
Baumol, W. 1996. Entrepreneurship, management, and the structure of payoffs. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Becker, G., and Murphy, K. 1992. The division of labor, coordination costs, and knowl-
edge. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107: DEMO
The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research    183
Begley, T., and Boyd, D. 1987. Psychological characteristics associated with performance
in entrepreneurial firms and smaller businesses. Journal of Business Venturing, 2: 79–93.
DEMO, J., Preisendorfer, P., and Ziegler, R. 1992. Survival chances DEMO newly founded
business organizations. American Sociological Review, 57: 227–242.
Busenitz, DEMO, and Barney, J. 1997. Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large
organizations: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business
Venturing, DEMO: 9–30.
Carroll, G., and Mosakowski, E. 1987. The career dynamics of self-employment. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 32: 570–589.
Casson, M. 1982. The entrepreneur. Totowa, NJ: Barnes and Noble Books.
Caves, R. 1998. Industrial organization and new findings on the turnover and mobility of
firms. DEMO of Economic Literature, 36: 1947–1982.
Chen, C., Greene, P., and Crick, A. 1998. Does entrepreneurial self-efficacy distinguish en-
trepreneurs from managers? Journal of Business Venturing, 13: 295–316.
Cohen, W., and Levin, R. 1989. Empirical studies of innovation and market structure.
In R. Schmalensee and R. Willig (Eds.), Handbook of industrial organization,
Vol. II: 1060–1107. New York: Elsevier.
Cooper. A., Woo, C., and Dunkelberg. W. 1988. Entrepreneurs’ perceived chances for suc-
cess. Journal of Business Venturing, 3: 97–108.
Cooper, A., Woo, C., and Dunkelberg, W. DEMO Entrepreneurship and the initial size of
firms. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO: 317–332.
Drucker, P. 1985. Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York: Harper DEMO Row.
Dunne, T., Roberts, M., and Samuelson, L. 1988. DEMO of firm entry and exit in U.S.
manufacturing industries. Rand Journal of Economics, 19: 495–515.
Evans, D., and Leighton, L. 1989. Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. American
Economic Review, 79: 519–535.
Gartner, W. 1985. A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture
creation. DEMO of Management Review, 10: 696–706.
Gartner, W. B. 1988. Who DEMO the entrepreneur? is the wrong question. American Journal of
Small Business, 12:11–32.
Geroski, P. 1995. What do we know about entry? DEMO Journal of Industrial Or-
ganization, 13: 421–440.
Gort, M., and Klepper, S. 1982. Time paths in the diffusion of product innovations. Eco-
nomic Journal, 92: 630–653.
Hannan, M., and Freeman, J. 1984. Structural inertia and organizational change. American
Sociological Review, 49: 149–164.
Hayek, F. 1945. The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review, 35: 519–530.
Kahneman, D., and Lovallo, D. 1994. Timid choices and DEMO forecasts: A cognitive per-
spective on risk taking. In R. P. DEMO, D. E. Schendel, and D. Teece (Eds.), Fun-
damental DEMO in strategy: A research agenda: 71–96. Boston: Ballinger.
Kaish, S., and Gilad, B. 1991. Characteristics of opportunities search of entrepreneurs ver-
DEMO executives: Sources, interests, and general alertness. Journal of Business Ventur-
DEMO, 6: 45–61.
Katz, J., and Gartner, W. 1988. Properties DEMO emerging organizations. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 13: 429–441.
Khilstrom, DEMO, and Laffont, J. 1979. A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory of firm
formation based on risk aversion. Journal of Political Economy, 87: 719–748.
DEMO, I. 1973. Competition and entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kirzner, I. 1997. Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process: An
Austrian DEMO Journal of Economic Literature, 35: 60–85.
Knight, F. 1921. Risk, uncertainty and profit. New York: Augustus Kelley.
184    Scott Shane and Sankaran Venkataraman
Low, M., and MacMillan, I. 1988. Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges.
Journal of Management, 14: 139–161.
McClelland, D. 1961. The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: DEMO Nostrand.
Palich, L., and Bagby, R. 1995. Using cognitive theory DEMO explain entrepreneurial
risk-taking: Challenging conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10:
425–438.
Reynolds, P. 1987. New firms: Societal contribution versus survival DEMO Journal of
Business Venturing, 2: 231–246.
Reynolds, P., and White, S. 1997. The entrepreneurial process. Greenwich, CT: Greenwood
Press.
Roberts, DEMO 1991. Entrepreneurs in high technology: Lessons from MIT and beyond. New
DEMO: Oxford University Press.
Rosenberg, N. 1994. Uncertainty and technological change. Conference on growth and de-
velopment: The economics of the 21st century. Stanford, CA: Stanford University,
Center for Economic Policy Research.
Sarasvathy, D., Simon, H., and Lave, L. 1998. Perceiving and managing business DEMO:
Differences between entrepreneurs and bankers. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 33: 207–225.
Schmookler, J. 1966. Invention and economic growth. Cambridge, DEMO: Harvard University
Press.
Schumpeter, J. 1934. Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. New York: Harper and Row.
Shane, S. 1996. Explaining variation in DEMO of entrepreneurship in the United States:
1899–1988. Journal of Management, DEMO: 747–781.
Shaver, K. G., and Scott, L. R. 1991. Person, process, and choice: The psychology of new
venture creation. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Winter: 23–42.
Singh, J., and Lumsden, C. 1990. Theory and research in organizational ecology. Annual
Review of Sociology, 16: DEMO
Stinchcombe, A. 1965. Social structure and organizations. In J. March (Ed.), Handbook of
organizations: 260–290. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Teece, D. 1986. Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, col-
laboration, licensing, DEMO public policy. Research Policy, 15: 286–305.
Tushman, M., and Anderson, P. 1986, Technological discontinuities and organizational en-
vironments. Administrative Science Quarterly, 31: 439–465.
Utterback, J. 1994. Mastering the dynamics of innovation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Busi-
ness School Press.
Venkataraman, S. 1997. The distinctive DEMO of entrepreneurship research: An editor’s
perspective. In J. Katz and R. DEMO (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, firm
emergence, and growth, Vol. 3: 119–138. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Von Hippel, E. 1986. DEMO users: A source of novel product concepts. Management Sci-
ence, 32: 791–805.
Ward, T., Smith, S., and Vaid, J. (Eds.). 1997. Creative thought. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.{1g42fwefx}