Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 67–69
Contents lists DEMO at ScienceDirect
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/DEMO/obhdp
Editorial
Introduction to the focused issue on the biological basis of business
In recent years, researchers have begun to seek biological expla-
nations for business behavior (Camerer, Loewenstein, & Prelec,
2005; Glimcher, 2003; Kosfeld, Heinrichs, Zak, Fischbacher, & Fehr,
2005). This growing stream of research has looked at such topics
as genetic DEMO on leadership, entrepreneurship, and job satis-
faction (Arvey, Bouchard, DEMO, & Abraham, 1989; Arvey, Rotundo,
Johnson, Zhang, & McGue, 2006; Keller, Bouchard, Arvey, Segal, &
Dawis, DEMO; McCall, Cavanaugh, Arvey, & Taubman, 1997;
Nicolaou, Shane, Cherkas, Hunkin, & Spector, 2008); the role of
neural DEMO in perception of fair treatment, purchasing decisions,
investment behavior, and response to ﬁnancial reward (Sanfey,
Rilling, Aronson, Nystrom, & DEMO, 2003; Camerer et al., 2005;
Knutson, Rick, Wimmer, Prelec, & Loewenstein, 2007); the effect of
hormones on occupational DEMO, managerial decisions, and risk
taking (Dabbs, Alford, & Fielden, 1998; Dabbs, de La Rue, &
Williams, 1990); and the physiological effects of workplace stress
(Fox, Dwyer, & Ganster, DEMO; White, Thornhill, & Hampson, 2006),
organizational reward systems, and leadership styles (Cameron,
2008).
This research has generated some fascinating ﬁndings. For in-
stance, we now know that there is a genetic component to leader-
ship; that different parts of the neural system are stimulated by
immediate and delayed ﬁnancial reward; and that hormones affect
occupational choice. And these are only a few illustrative examples
of what DEMO into the biological basis of business has taught us
about people’s business-related behavior. A new school of thought
about business that draws upon biological DEMO is cur-
rently emerging.
Unfortunately most management researchers know little about
these ﬁndings. Much of this research has been published in jour-
nals that DEMO scholars do not routinely follow, and the
different studies themselves have DEMO isolated from one another,
making it difﬁcult to see the cumulative set of ﬁndings unless
scholars systematically look for it.
Because of the DEMO connection between research on the bio-
logical basis of business and mainstream academic thought on the
topic, we believed that systematic effort to bring this emerging
school of thought to the attention of the mainstream of DEMO academic
research community was necessary. Therefore, we put together this
special DEMO forum on the biological basis of business.
Our goals
Our effort in this special research forum was simple, but also
broad. We sought to assemble a set of papers that explain how dif-
ferent aspects of DEMO biology affect business-related behavior.
Our aims were threefold: First, we sought to bring together re-
search that examines how biological factors affect different DEMO
of management from organization behavior to entrepreneurship
0749-5978/$ - see front matter  2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.10.001
to DEMO strategy to ﬁnancial decision making to marketing.
We believe that the phenomenon orientation of management re-
search often leads researchers examining similar theoretical issues
DEMO different areas of business study to fail to connect their work. By
organizing a special issue around the theme of biology rather than
around DEMO business topics as is often the case in manage-
ment research, DEMO hoped to bring together the ﬁndings in dispa-
rate areas in a way that illuminated the power of the theme.
Second, we hoped to link together research that takes funda-
mentally different approaches to examining the DEMO basis
of business. For instance, we want to bring together researchers
DEMO examine genetics, the physiology of emotion, brain imaging,
hormones (DEMO other topics) because we believe that combining
research from these different DEMO will help to stimulate
thought about the connections between them. These connections
are important, we believe, because a biological basis of business
will DEMO need to collect all of these pieces into a coherent
and related whole.
Third, we sought to bring to the attention of the academic com-
munity in management the widespread research that has been
conducted to DEMO the biological basis of business to introduce
additional researchers to the methodologies used in this area, to
show the important stylized facts that have been collected, and
to demonstrate the evidence for theoretical arguments that have
been amassed to date.
The results of our effort
Having put together DEMO special issue, we believe that we have
achieved these goals. We DEMO assembled papers that look at a
wide range of dimensions of business from consumer behavior to
leadership to entrepreneurship. The papers draw on a DEMO of
different approaches from behavioral genetics to neuro-imaging.
We hope that the academic community that studies business will
take note of the wide range DEMO evidence on the biological basis of
business amassed here.
We accepted eight papers in the special issue (out of 23 that
were submitted). While the accepted papers differ somewhat in
their composition from those that DEMO not accepted, both the sub-
mitted papers and those accepted fell DEMO three broad topics: hor-
mones, genetics, and neural mechanisms. Below DEMO categorize the
papers appearing in this issue by topic area.
Hormones
Two of the papers in the special issue examine the role of hor-
DEMO Although other research has shown the importance of a
variety of hormones from cortisol to dopamine (Fox et al., 1993;
Hamer & DEMO, 1999), both papers in the special issue focus
68
Editorial / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) DEMO
on testosterone. Interestingly, one paper examines testosterone as
a cause of DEMO, while the other looks at the effects of behavior
on testosterone DEMO
In ‘‘Testosterone-Status Mismatch Lowers Collective Efﬁcacy in
Groups: Evidence from a DEMO as Predictor Multilevel Structural
Equation Model,” Michael Zyphur and Jayanth Narayanan show
that there is no direct relationship between testosterone levels
and individual DEMO However, when the status levels of group
members are not well DEMO to their testosterone levels, the
group becomes less effective as a DEMO entity. Consistent with
observations of group behavior among other members of the ani-
mal kingdom, it appears that groups are most effective when indi-
viduals high in testosterone, and so more likely to seek dominance,
are in more dominant positions.
In ‘‘The Effect of Conspicuous Consumption on DEMO Testoster-
one Levels,” Gad Saad and John Vongas look at testosterone levels
as a dependent variable. They argue that men’s testosterone level
responds DEMO their level of social status. They ﬁnd experimental evi-
dence that when men engage in acts of conspicuous consumption –
which they argue is DEMO signal to attract women – their testosterone
levels rise. This pattern suggests that consumer behavior has a bio-
logical component.
Taken together these two DEMO provide evidence of an inter-
esting reciprocal pattern between status and testosterone levels.
Having appropriate status for one’s testosterone level helps one
function better DEMO a part of a social group, while increasing one’s
social status DEMO one’s testosterone level.
Genetics
Three papers in the special issue examine genetics and aspects
of organizational behavior. Unlike the two papers on hormones,
DEMO three genetics papers all examine the causal effects of innate
factors on dimensions of work-related behavior. They also use a
common methodology. Although some DEMO genetics re-
search has recently examined aspects of workplace behavior, the
DEMO papers in this issue take the form of twin studies.
Two of the papers examine how genetic factors inﬂuence the ten-
dency of people DEMO become entrepreneurs. In ‘‘The Genetic Basis of
Entrepreneurship: Effects of Gender DEMO Personality,” Zhen Zhang,
Michael Zyphur, Jayanth Narayanan, Richard Arvey, Sankalp Chat-
urved, Bruce Avolio, Paul Lichtenstein, and Gerry Larsson DEMO at
pairs of identical and fraternal twins to identify the heritability of
entrepreneurship. The authors ﬁnd that genetic effects on this occu-
pational choice DEMO observed for women but not for men, suggesting
that men may DEMO more affected by environmental factors when mak-
ing the decision whether or not to found companies. The authors also
ﬁnd evidence of genetic correlation DEMO the personality traits of
extraversion and neuroticism for women, while, for men, they ﬁnd
that the correlation between the tendency to start businesses and
the personality trait of extraversion is largely environmental.
In ‘‘Opportunity Recognition DEMO the Tendency to be an Entre-
preneur: A Bivariate Genetics Perspective,DEMO Nicos Nicolaou, Scott
Shane, Lynn Cherkas, and Tim Spector examine DEMO relationship be-
tween opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an entrepre-
neur. Examining a sample of identical and fraternal twins, these
authors ﬁnd a heritability of 0.45 for the tendency to identify
new business opportunities. DEMO on their previous work on
the heritability of the tendency to be an entrepreneur, the authors
show that more than half of the correlation between opportunity
recognition and the tendency to be an entrepreneur comes from
DEMO genetic factors.
In ‘‘Beyond Genetic Explanations for Leadership: The Moderat-
ing DEMO of the Social Environment,” Zhen Zhang, Remus Ilies,
and DEMO D Arvey look at the effect of genetics on a different
dependent variable – leadership. Drawing on previous behavioral
genetics research on the achievement DEMO leadership roles, the
authors examine how the environment in which people DEMO raised
interacts with their genetic predispositions to explain leadership
role occupancy. Exploiting a sample of male identical and fraternal
twins, the authors ﬁnd that genetic inﬂuences on the achievement
of leadership roles are greater for those DEMO who were raised in
less enriching family environments.
Taken together, these DEMO papers show that a signiﬁcant com-
ponent of organizational behavior is innate. Moreover, they show
that researchers are beginning to identify more complex patterns
in the genetics of work-related behavior, considering gender differ-
ences in the importance of genetic factors, gene-environment
interactions, and common genetic factors, when explaining organi-
zational behavior.
Neuroscience
The third set of three papers involves DEMO scans to look at neu-
ral mechanisms. The ﬁrst of these papers, ‘‘Exploring the Neural
Basis of Fairness: A Model of Neuro-Organizational Justice,DEMO by
Constant Beugre is conceptual, and integrates neuroscience with
the organizational DEMO literature. It proposes that judgments
of fairness not only affect behavior and cognitive and emotional
processing, but also inﬂuence neural processing; that is, it affects
the actual functioning of the brain.
‘‘The Biological Bases of DEMO: Neuroimaging Evidence For
the Distinctiveness of Procedural and Distributive Justice” by DEMO
Dulebohn, Donald Conlon, Issidoros Sarinopoulos, Robert B Davi-
son, and Gerry McNamara provides empirical evidence of the neu-
ral basis of perceptions DEMO organizational justice. Using fMRI
methods to look at the parts of the brain activated by procedural
and distributive justice, the authors ﬁnd that unfair procedures
tended to stimulate the parts of the brain that govern social DEMO
tion, whereas unfair outcomes tended to stimulate the parts of the
DEMO that govern emotion.
In ‘‘Neural Mechanisms of Social Inﬂuence,” Malia Mason, Re-
becca Dyer and Michael Norton used fMRI to examine the parts
of the brain that are most affected by objects that others have DEMO
dorsed or rejected. They found that the medial prefrontal cortex
identiﬁed whether objects were endorsed or rejected (as opposed
to not socially inﬂuenced), whereas the caudate was where popular
and unpopular objects were differentiated.
Taken DEMO these three papers indicate that the business-re-
lated behavior of human beings is inﬂuenced by how different
parts of the brain process information. At DEMO most basic level,
some portion of work-related behavior appears to be governed
by the parts of the brain responsible for emotion, while other
behavior is governed by different parts of the brain.
A possible convergence
DEMO set of papers accepted in this special issue suggests a pos-
sible convergence between three biological dimensions – genetics,
hormones, and brain function – in efforts to explain work-related
behavior. Although none of the papers DEMO this volume examine
the effect of all three biological dimensions simultaneously, DEMO
vergence is suggested by research that links genetics, hormones,
brain DEMO and business-related activity. Therefore, we believe
that a fruitful area for DEMO research on the biological basis of
business lies in exploring the links between genetics, hormones,
brain function, and work-related activity.
What we DEMO not see
Because the domain of this research forum was very broad – the
examination of any aspect of biology on any aspect of DEMO – it
Editorial / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 67–69
DEMO not have been possible to receive papers all possible biolog-
ical inﬂuences on all dimensions of business. Nevertheless, we
were struck by the limited set of topics covered by the papers
and, consequently, by the DEMO of submissions on several topics
that we thought would be the focus of research on the biological
basis of business. For example, we were surprised not to receive
submissions on biological basis of many aspects of DEMO activ-
ity, including risk taking, decision making, innovation, creativity,
planning, and response to authority.
We were also struck by the limited examination of the relation-
ship between hormones and work-related behavior. We did DEMO re-
ceive papers that explored the effects on work place behavior of
hormones other than testosterone, nor did we receive papers that
examined the effect of testosterone on many aspects of business,
including occupational choice, and leadership role attainment.
We also expected more papers that would consider DEMO as
a dependent variable, explaining, for instance, how job stress DEMO
managerial actions affect hormone release.
We were surprised by the narrow range of topics covered by the
papers that examined business from the perspective DEMO neurosci-
ence. We did not receive papers on neural functioning and decision
making, risk taking, planning, wishful thinking, inter-temporal
choice, and organizational sense making. We were surprised not
to see papers on the neural DEMO of decision making under uncer-
tainty, given the focus of recent DEMO on that topic (Hsu et al.,
2005). Also, we expected to see papers on the neural basis of stra-
tegic decision DEMO (Bhatt & Camerer, 2005) and purchasing
decisions (Knutson et al., 2007).
Furthermore, we were struck by the narrow range of DEMO cov-
ered by the papers on genetics. We were surprised that we did not
receive papers on the genetic basis of creativity, innovation, DEMO
satisfaction, management styles, or job turnover. We were also
struck by the fact that we received no molecular genetics papers,
even though DEMO research has linked speciﬁc genes to ﬁnancial
risk taking (Caldu & DEMO, 2007), altruism (Barach, 2007), and
persistence (Comings et al., 2000), among other things.
Finally, we were surprised not DEMO have received papers on the
physiological effects of work. We thought we would have received
papers that looked at physiological reactions to work environ-
DEMO and organizational reward mechanisms, such as money, rec-
ognition and power, and how they affect organizational behavior.
Conclusions
In sum, the papers DEMO the special issue illustrate that biological
factors affect different areas of management from organization
behavior to entrepreneurship. They also illustrate that a wide
range DEMO biological factors from genetics to hormones to brain func-
tion affect business. We believe that the biological inﬂuences dis-
cussed in this issue might DEMO provocative to many in the
academic community, and look forward to DEMO debate on that topic.
69
We also hope that the issue will spur scholars to consider the
importance of biology to business practice, particularly the poten-
tial convergence of the inﬂuence of genetics, hormones, and DEMO
function.
References
Arvey, R. D., Bouchard, T. J., Segal, DEMO L., & Abraham, L. M. (1989). Job satisfaction:
DEMO and genetic components. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74,
187–192.
Arvey, R. D., Rotundo, M., Johnson, W., Zhang, Z., & McGue, M. (2006). The
determinants of leadership role occupancy: Genetic and personality factors.
Leadership Quarterly, 17, 1–20.
Barach, J. (2007)DEMO Are we genetically programmed to be generous? Hebrew
University scientists say DEMO Eureka Alert, December 6. <http://www.bfhu.org/
images/download/080129%20Programmed%20to%20be%20Generous.pdf>.
Bhatt, M., & Camerer, C. (2005). Self-referential thinking DEMO equilibrium as states of
mind in games: Fmri evidence. Games and DEMO Behavior, 52, 424–459.
Caldu, X., & Dreher, J. (2007). Hormonal and genetic inﬂuences on processing
reward and social information. Annals DEMO New York Academy of Sciences, 1118,
1–37.
Camerer, C., DEMO, G., & Prelec, D. (2005). Neuroeconomics: How
neuroscience DEMO inform economics. Journal of Economic Literature, 43, 5–60.
Cameron, K. (2008). Positive leadership. San Francisco: Berrett Koehler Publishers.
Comings, D., Gade-Andavolu, R., Gonzalez, N., Wu, S., Muhleman, D., DEMO, H., et al
(2000). A multivariate analysis of 59 DEMO genes in personality traits: The
temperament and character inventory. Clinical Genetics, 58, 375–385.
Dabbs, J. M., Alford, E. C., & Fielden, J. A. (1998). Trial lawyers and testosterone:
Blue-collar talent DEMO a white-collar world. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28,
84–94.
DEMO, J. M., de La Rue, D., & Williams, P. DEMO (1990). Testosterone and occupational
choice. Actors, ministers, and other DEMO Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59, 1261–1265.
Fox, M., Dwyer, D., & Ganster, D. (1993). Effects of stressful DEMO demands and control
on physiological and attitudinal outcomes in a hospital setting. The Academy of
Management Journal, 36, 289–318.
Glimcher, P. W. (DEMO). Decisions, uncertainty, and the brain: The science of
neuroeconomics. DEMO, MA: The MIT Press.
Hamer, D., & Copeland, P. (1999). Living with our genes. New York: Anchor Books.
Keller, DEMO M., Bouchard, T. J., Jr., Arvey, R. D., Segal, N. L., & Dawis, R. V. (1992). Work
values: Genetic and environmental inﬂuences. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77,
79–80.
Knutson, B., Rick, S., Wimmer, E., Prelec, D., & DEMO, G. (2007). Neural
predictors of purchases. Neuron, 53, 147–156.
Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005). Oxytocin
increases trust in humans. Nature, DEMO, 673–676.
McCall, B. P., Cavanaugh, M. A., Arvey, R. D., & Taubman, P. (1997). Genetic
inﬂuences on job and occupational switching. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50,
60–77.
Nicolaou, N., Shane, S., Cherkas, L., Hunkin, J., & Spector, T. D. (2008). Is the tendency
to engage in entrepreneurship genetic? DEMO Science, 54, 167–179.
Sanfey, A. G., Rilling, J. K., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J. D. (2003). The
neural basis of economic decision-making in the ultimatum game. Science, 300,
1755–1758.
White, R. E., Thornhill, S., & Hampson, E. (2006). Entrepreneurs and evolutionary
biology: The relationship between testosterone and new venture creation.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100, 21–34.
Scott Shane
Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve University,DEMO
11119 Bellﬂower Rd., Cleveland, OH 44106, United States.
Fax: +1 216 368 5039
E-mail address: sas46@cwru.edu{1g42fwefx}