Technology Regimes and New Firm Formation
Author(s): Scott Shane
Reviewed DEMO(s):
Source: Management Science, Vol. 47, No. 9 (DEMO, 2001), pp. 1173-1190
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/822556 .
Accessed: 12/03/2012 21:09
Your DEMO of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and DEMO discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase DEMO and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, DEMO contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and DEMO access to Management Science.
http://www.jstor.org
Technology
New Firm
Regimes and
Formation
Scott
Shane
R.H. Smith School
of DEMO, University of Maryland, College
sshane@rhsmith.umd.edu
Park,
Maryland 20742
At least since Schumpeter (1934 and 1942), researchers have been interested in identifying
the dimensions of technology regimes that facilitate new firm formation as a DEMO of
technology exploitation. Using data on 1,397 patents assigned to the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology during the 1980-1996 period, I show that four hypothesized dimensions of
the technology regime-the age of the technical field, the tendency of the market toward
segmentation, the effectiveness of patents, and DEMO importance of complementary assets in
marketing and distribution-influence the likelihood that new technology will be exploited
through firm formation.
(Entrepreneurship;
Technology
Regimes;
Patents)
Introduction
Under what conditions is new technology exploited
through firm DEMO? For 40 years, researchers
have looked to market structure to answer this ques-
tion (Cohen and Levin 1989, Kamien and Schwartz
1982)DEMO For example, researchers have examined the
effect of average firm size, capital availability, research
and development intensity, and industry concentra-
tion on DEMO firm formation. Unfortunately, the results
of the effort to explain cross-industry DEMO in firm
formation on the basis of market structure alone are,
at best, inconclusive (Cohen and Levin 1989).
Evolutionary economists argue DEMO the failure to
explain this variation is the result of a lack of attention
to the technological regime (Nelson and Winter 1982,
Malerba and Orsenigo 1997), or knowledge system,
under which innovation occurs (Winter 1984). Unlike
industrial organization economists, who argue that
variation in the mode of technology exploitation is
a function of firm-level competitive dynamics, evolu-
tionary economists argue that variation in technology
life cycles (Utterback and Abernathy 1975, Gort and
Klepper 1982) and appropriability conditions (Arrow
1962, Levin et al. 1987, Nelson and Winter 1982)
0025-1909/01 /4709/1173$5.00
1526-5501 electronic ISSN
account for at least some of the DEMO varia-
tion in firm formation rates.
However, to date we have DEMO little empir-
ical evidence of how specific dimensions of the
technology regime enhance or inhibit new firm for-
mation. While evolutionary economists have gener-
DEMO agreed that some industries, but not others, face
technological regimes in which new firm formation is
relatively common (Acs and Audretsch 1990, DEMO
and Orsenigo 1997), they have disagreed about the
specific characteristics that facilitate new firm forma-
tion (see, for example, the differences between Winter
1984 and Malerba and Orsenigo 1997).
Moreover, efforts to gather evidence in support
of the relationship between particular dimensions of
technological regimes DEMO rates of firm formation
have been limited by three obstacles. First, DEMO
have found it difficult to observe new technologies
that are simultaneously at risk of exploitation by inde-
pendent entrepreneurs and established firms. How-
ever, if researchers examine technologies that already
belong to one of these two DEMO, they cannot test
the effect of technology regime characteristics on the
DEMO for inventions to be exploited through
the formation of new companies. If an independent
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE
? 2001 INFORMS
Vol. 47, No. 9, DEMO 2001 pp. 1173-1190
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
entrepreneur or established firm already possesses a
DEMO technology, any examination of the effects of the
technology regime will DEMO confounded with strategic
decisions already made by the entrepreneurs or firm
managers.
Second, researchers rarely observe firm formation
but instead examine entry into industry. As a result,
research on cross-industry variation on the effects
of DEMO regime characteristics on firm forma-
tion must infer the effects from empirical investi-
gation of industry entry. However, as Malerba and
Orsenigo (1996) explain, firm formation and indus-
try entry are conceptually different. A new entrant
may be an established firm that has existed for a
long DEMO in another industry. Consequently, empir-
ical findings on industry entry often DEMO the
efforts of established firms to diversify their oper-
ations (Caves DEMO). Although population ecology
research generally overcomes this obstacle by explor-
ing firm formation directly, ecological work examines
firms in a single industry. Therefore, it cannot inform
researchers about the effects of cross-industry varia-
tion in the characteristics of technology regimes on
the rate of firm formation.
Third, researchers rarely observe gross firm forma-
tion but instead observe firm formation DEMO of exit.
Unfortunately, net entry fails to capture the response
of DEMO to technological opportunities in industries
with a high degree of entry and exit (Geroski 1995).
Although net entry captures variation in the propen-
sity of entrepreneurs to form new firms to exploit
opportunities, it confounds this variation with the
effect of failure rates. From the examination of DEMO
firm formation rates, one does not know if cross-
industry variation DEMO because new firms are more
likely to be founded or because newly founded firms
are less likely to fail. Only the examination of gross
DEMO formation allows researchers to determine how
technology regime conditions influence the likelihood
that new technology will be exploited through firm
formation.
This study overcomes DEMO three methodologi-
cal problems outlined above to provide empiri-
cal evidence about the relationship between specific
dimensions of the technology regime and new firm
DEMO By exploring data on the 1,397 patents
1174
Firm
assigned to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
from 1980-1996, the study shows that four dimen-
sions of the technology regime-the age of the techni-
cal field, the importance of market segmentation, the
effectiveness of patents, and the DEMO of com-
plementary assets-influence the propensity of new
firms to be formed to exploit technology.
The article proceeds as follows. In the next section,DEMO
I review the literature on the technology regime and
develop specific hypotheses for why technology life
cycles and appropriability conditions influence the
likelihood that DEMO invention will be commercialized
through firm formation. In the third section, DEMO describe
the dataset and the methods used for analysis. In the
fourth section, I summarize the findings. In the final
section, I discuss DEMO implications of the results for
research on and the practice of entrepreneurship.
Theory Development
In the Schumpeterian (Schumpeter 1934) framework,
the invention DEMO a new technology is an exogenous
event that creates a disequilibrium in markets. By
altering the equilibrium value of resources, a new
technology makes it possible to recombine resources in
a way that generates a surplus DEMO revenues over costs.
In the Schumpeterian context, entrepreneurs are actors
who DEMO opportunities to recombine resources that
result from the invention of new technology.
Entrepreneurs can exploit the technological oppor-
tunities that result from exogenous inventions DEMO cre-
ating new firms (Schumpeter 1942). In general, an
entrepreneur's decision to establish a new firm to
exploit a technology is DEMO by the effectiveness
of a new organization as a mechanism to generate
and appropriate entrepreneurial profit (Arrow 1962,
Venkataraman 1997). The technological regime in
which the new firm's exploitation effort would oper-
ate DEMO the relative advantage or disadvantage
of new firms at this activity. On average, potential
entrepreneurs will respond to these cost-benefit trade-
offs by establishing new firms when conditions are
more favorable to that mode of technology DEMO
tion. Although many other factors, such the attributes
of particular inventions, or the characteristics of the
people making the commercialization decision, might
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September 2001
Formation
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
also influence the choice of the mode DEMO exploitation,
the characteristics of technological regimes will have
systematic effects on whether or not new firms are
formed to exploit inventions.1
Technology Life DEMO
Industry life-cycle theories argue that technologies
develop along trajectories, which begin DEMO a
preparadigmatic phase and end in a paradigmatic
phase (Dosi 1982)DEMO Moreover, technology develop-
ment and market competition vary across the stages
DEMO the life cycle (Utterback and Abernathy 1975). As a
result, the favored mode of organization to exploit a
technology shifts over time.
DEMO an entrepreneur founds a new firm in
response to the invention of a new technology, he
or she does not possess the advantages of learn-
ing, scale economies, or complementary assets (or
the disadvantages of an existing customer base) that
established companies possess. The relative advan-
tages and disadvantages of these assets depend on the
age of the technology DEMO the tendency of a market
toward segmentation. Technology life-cycle theories
hold that new firms are the favored mode of exploita-
tion when technologies are DEMO and when markets
are segmented.
Age of the Technology
Technology life-cycle theories argue that industries
develop along similar evolutionary paths. When tech-
nologies are DEMO developed, the markets for them
are small and few firms compete DEMO operate in them.
Through a process of information diffusion, market
growth DEMO over time, and new firms enter the
industry. Eventually, the market becomes saturated,
a shakeout ensues, and many firms exit the industry
(Gort and Klepper 1982).
1 Moreover, in the particular setting DEMO which data were collected,
the decision-making process also exhibits properties of a garbage
can model (Cyert and March 1963). Potential entrepreneurs search-
ing for technologies come together with inventions that have been
created (Hsu and Bernstein 1997). In many cases, this process
results in single bidders for a given technology and no one seeking
to exploit some DEMO Nevertheless, the patterns generated
by technology regimes are still observed in DEMO setting.
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol.
47, No. 9, September
2001
Firm
The age of the technical field influences the effec-
tiveness of firm formation DEMO a mode of technology
exploitation. Four different arguments have been put
forth to explain this life-cycle pattern. First, in the
early stages of a new technology, markets are too
small to justify investment by large, DEMO firms.
Instead, independent entrepreneurs with low oppor-
tunity cost tend to DEMO new markets. Over time, as
markets grow in size, large firms become attracted to
them and enter.
Second, at the founding of a technical field, all
firms are new to the field, providing no DEMO
to incumbency. However, as the technology matures,
firms that entered DEMO develop learning curve advan-
tages (Nelson 1995). As a result, new firms are at
an increasing knowledge disadvantage as a technical
field DEMO
Third, the maturation of technology changes the
basis for competition. As DEMO matures, product
innovation becomes less important, and the reduction
of production costs and scale economies become more
important (Pavitt and Wald 1971). Therefore, over
time, competitive advantage shifts to those things
at which DEMO firms are advantaged at the
expense of those at which new firms excel.
Fourth, complementary assets are important to
competition in many industries. As technologies
mature, these assets are brought under the control
of established firms to reduce contracting problems.
As the industry matures, the tendency of established
firms to obtain control over complementary assets
makes entry more difficult for DEMO firms (Teece 1987).
These arguments lead to the first hypothesis.
DEMO
the likelihood that an invention will be exploited through
firm formation.
Market Segmentation
Technologies vary on the degree to which markets for
them can DEMO segmented. For example, Klevorick et al.
(1995) found that managers DEMO for technol-
ogy development in paints, screw machinery prod-
ucts, cosmetics, and radio and television ascribed
more importance to designing for market segments
than did managers responsible for other types of
technologies.
1175
Formation
H1. DEMO older a technical
field, the lower
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
The degree to which markets DEMO themselves to
segmentation depends largely on customers' will-
ingness to trade DEMO different attributes (e.g., cost,
functions, reliability, size). For example, automo-
bile technology lends itself to market segmentation
because some automobile customers will prefer
lower-cost-lower-performance cars, whereas others
will prefer higher-cost-higher-performance cars. In
contrast, medical device technologies may not lend
themselves as readily to market segmentation because
customers will not trade off attributes such as cost
and DEMO
Life-cycle theories argue that new technologies tend
to be exploited first by new firms in small market seg-
ments. The lack of performance reliability DEMO high
costs mean that new technology will tend to start in
small segments where its unique performance advan-
tages are critical (Utterback and Kim 1984). These
technologies later spread to mainstream markets after
their superiority DEMO been demonstrated in the initial
segment (Christiansen and Bower 1996).
DEMO markets are segmented, new firms often
enter to exploit inventions. Large, established firms
allocate their resources to satisfy the demands of
their major DEMO (Christiansen and Bower 1996).
Given the small size of the DEMO in which the new
technology is initially exploited, the application of DEMO
new technology to the initial segment does not pro-
vide sufficient revenue to justify investment by estab-
lished companies. Because they focus on mainstream
DEMO, established firms cede niche markets for
the new technology to new DEMO with low opportu-
nity cost. Thus, in segmented markets, new firms can
obtain a foothold for a new technology before facing
competition from DEMO firms.
When
markets
are not
segmented,
however,
new firms face immediate competition from estab-
lished firms. In unsegmented markets, large estab-
lished firms pursue new technologies immediately
because these technologies affect the needs of DEMO
major customers (Christiansen and Bower 1996). The
interest of major DEMO means that the new tech-
nology provides sufficient potential revenue to jus-
tify investment by established companies. As a result,
established firms do DEMO cede unsegmented mar-
kets to new firms, and new firms cannot DEMO a
1176
foothold before facing competition from established
firms. Consequently, new DEMO are more dif-
ficult to exploit through the creation of new firms in
markets that do not tend toward segmentation than
in markets that DEMO This argument leads to the second
hypothesis.
H2. The
more
a market
tends toward
seg-
Appropriability
The willingness to exploit an invention depends on
DEMO ability to appropriate its value (Arrow 1962).
Appropriability is the DEMO of knowledge and
the environment in which it operates that allows
an invention to be protected against imitation (Dosi
1988). The favored mode of organization to appropri-
ate the returns to the exploitation of new DEMO
depends on the effectiveness of patents and the mag-
nitude of complementary assets in an industry.
Appropriability arguments hold that the propensity
of entrepreneurs DEMO exploit new technologies through
firm formation is greater when patents are effec-
tive and complementary assets are unimportant to
the generation of competitive advantage. DEMO an
entrepreneur founds a firm in response to the devel-
opment of a new technology, the new firm typically
does not yet possess complementary assets, like a dis-
tribution system or specialized manufacturing, which
provide DEMO competitive advantage (Teece 1987). The
more effectively that entrepreneurs can DEMO a new
technology against appropriation by competitors dur-
ing the development of the new firm's value chain,
the more likely that they DEMO be to form new firms.
The ability to protect a new technology against appro-
priation, in turn, depends on the effectiveness of intel-
DEMO property protection and the magnitude of the
complementary assets that need to be developed.
Effectiveness of Patents
Mechanisms to prevent imitation include legal rights
DEMO protection. Patents are the strongest legal form
of protection against imitation because they pro-
vide inventors with the right to exclude others from
MANAGEMENT
DEMO/Vol.
47, No. 9, September
2001
HYPOTHESIS
mentation, the higher DEMO likelihood that an invention will
be exploited through firm formation.
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
practicing duplicative inventions (Teece 1998). There-
fore, legal rights of production depend largely on the
effectiveness of patents.
Research has shown that patent effectiveness varies
across technologies (Levin et al. 1987). In some fields,
patents can be invented DEMO at low cost whereas in
others, they provide strong protection for DEMO dura-
tion (Teece 1987). In fields in which patent protection
DEMO ineffective, new firms have difficulty reaping the
benefits of new technology DEMO their new knowl-
edge dissipates quickly to competitors who are often
better able to exploit it (Von Hippel 1982).
Effective patent protection increases the likelihood
that a new technology will be exploited through the
creation DEMO a new firm. First, effective patent pro-
tection allows the developer DEMO the new technology
to develop the value chain before the knowledge of
the new technology dissipates to competitors (Teece
1987). In particular, DEMO possession of a strong patent
position provides time to raise money from capital
markets (Lerner 1994). Because new firms lack exist-
ing cash flow to finance investment, this time win-
dow is more important for the efforts of new firms
to exploit new technologies than for similar DEMO by
established firms.
Second, effective patent protection provides the
firm with DEMO time to adapt the new technology to
market needs. New technologies often turn out to
have significant value but are initially commercial-
ized for DEMO wrong market segment or with the wrong
design. Strong patent protection allows a firm to come
to market with the wrong product but have DEMO time
to alter the technology to market needs before com-
petitors can imitate it (Teece 1987). Because new firms
lack the information about customer preferences that
established firms have developed over time, this time
window for adaptation is more important to new
firms than to established firms.
DEMO, effective patent protection allows a new firm
to compete on the DEMO of differentiation rather than
on the basis of costs. When patent protection is inef-
fective, an imitator can copy a first mover's novel
design. This ability to copy allows large, established
firms to shift competition to manufacturing costs, at
which they generally have an advantage over new
firms. However, when patent protection is effective,
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September 2001
the new firm can offset the imitator'DEMO manufactur-
ing cost advantage by maintaining competition on
the basis of its superior technology. Consequently, the
new firm can avoid competition on the basis of factors
at which it is disadvantaged. This argument leads to
the DEMO hypothesis.
HYPOTHESIS The greater the effectiveness of
patents in an industry, DEMO higher the likelihood that an
invention will be exploited through firm formation.
Complementary Assets
In many cases, effective legal protection of a new
technology is difficult to obtain, and other firms who
have better manufacturing or distribution assets can
imitate the invention. If the invention can be copied
DEMO and the imitator can provide more or better
attributes at a lower price, the imitator will capture
the returns that result from the inventor's technology
(Teece 1987).
When a technology itself is difficult to protect, the
firm must develop alternative barriers to imitation to
appropriate the value of the invention (Teece 1998).
Teece (1987) has explained that these alternative bar-
riers can be created if the invention is DEMO along with
complementary assets, such as specialized manufac-
turing, a distribution system, or after-sales support.
These complementary assets cannot be easily imitated
because they result from a process of learning-by-
doing that involves the interaction DEMO people from
different parts of the organization (Teece 1992). By
DEMO the invention with these hard-to-imitate
complementary assets, the inventor can protect DEMO
invention.
Complementary assets are difficult to access
through market mechanisms because they are often
specialized with the new technology. Specialization
creates asset specificity, which makes it important to
bring both assets both under the control of DEMO sin-
gle firm (Williamson 1985). The tendency of estab-
lished DEMO to acquire control over complementary
assets to mitigate bargaining problems makes it diffi-
cult for new firms to contract for these assets in the
DEMO place (Teece 1987). Consequently, new firms
often must build complementary assets from scratch
or incur the cost of establishing strategic alliances or
DEMO to obtain them.
1177
H3.
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
The greater the importance of DEMO
assets in marketing and distribution to competitive
advantage in the industry, DEMO lower the likelihood
that a new technology will be exploited through firm
formation. When complementary assets in marketing
and distribution are important to competitive DEMO
tage in the industry, existing firms with these assets
already in DEMO will be advantaged relative to new
firms, who must build these DEMO from scratch or
contract with third parties to obtain them. People will
be less willing to found new firms to exploit new tech-
nology DEMO complementary assets in marketing and
distribution are important to capturing the returns to
new technology because they will expect to be less
likely to DEMO the returns from the exploitation of
that technology. This argument leads to the fourth
hypothesis.
HYPOTHESIS H4. The more important complementary
assets in marketing DEMO distribution are in an industry,
the lower the likelihood that an invention will be exploited
through
firm formation.
Methodology
Sample
This study explores DEMO incidence of firm formation
as the mode of exploitation for the population of
1,397 patents issued to the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology between DEMO and 1996 for inventions by
members of the MIT community that made material
use of university resources.
I examine MIT inventions as my sample DEMO sev-
eral reasons. First, patented inventions provide a
recorded population of DEMO that are identified
before the mode of exploitation of those inventions
is determined. Examination of the mode of exploita-
tion before the exploitation decision DEMO been made
reduces the risk of selection bias that will occur if
one mode of exploitation is harder to identify than
the other. This DEMO typically the case with technology
exploitation through firm formation. Because new
firms both have higher failure rates than established
firms and are less likely DEMO be recorded in publicly
available sources, technology exploitation efforts by
1178
DEMO firms are more difficult to identify than tech-
nology exploitation efforts by established firms. Con-
sequently, examination of the mode of exploitation
after the exploitation decision has been made typi-
cally results in a selection bias DEMO which efforts by new
firms to exploit new technology are undercounted rel-
ative to similar efforts by established firms.
Second, to predict firm formation as a mode of
invention exploitation, one must identify a popula-
tion of inventions that are simultaneously at risk of
exploitation by both new DEMO established firms. Uni-
versity inventions provide a group of new technolo-
gies simultaneously at risk of exploitation through
both modes because universities seek to DEMO their
technologies to both established firms and indepen-
dent entrepreneurs. In contrast, inventions developed
by established firms and independent entrepreneurs
are not simultaneously at risk of exploitation through
firm formation and by established firms. Inventions
made DEMO established firms are not at risk of exploita-
tion through new firm formation until the established
firms have decided not to pursue them (generating a
biased sample). Similarly, inventions made by inde-
pendent entrepreneurs are not at risk of exploitation
by established firms until the entrepreneurs decide
DEMO license those inventions to other firms (again gen-
erating a biased DEMO). By exploring university
inventions, I can examine the mode of DEMO
exploitation absent the biases that would occur from
the examination of patents belonging to established
firms or independent entrepreneurs (Henderson et al.
1998).
Third, patented inventions are a relatively homoge-
nous group of new technological opportunities
because a patent must meet the patent office stan-
dard for DEMO, novelty, and value (Malerba and
Orsenigo 1996). The universe DEMO all technological
opportunities is subject to much greater heterogene-
ity than the universe of patented inventions because
unpatented inventions do not need to meet DEMO
office standards. This heterogeneity increases the
probability that unobserved factors influence the firm
formation decision. By exploring a pool of patented
inventions, I can minimize the variance in unobserved
characteristics that are likely to influence the DEMO
to found firms, and therefore reduce the likelihood of
biased estimation DEMO the regression analysis.
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September 2001
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
Analysis
Ordinary least squares regression DEMO inappropriate for
count dependent variables that have large numbers
of zero observations and remaining observations tak-
ing the form of small positive numbers. Therefore, I
employ Poisson regression as the analytical technique
for this study. Poisson DEMO is appropriate to
examine the incidence of firm formation from patent
data because this statistical technique is designed for
maximum likelihood estimation of the DEMO of
occurrences of nonnegative counts of events. More-
over, tests of DEMO goodness of fit chi-square indicate
that, given the models examined, one can accept that
the data are Poisson distributed.
Because I seek to DEMO information on annual
changes in some of the covariates, I use DEMO cross-
sectional time series Poisson regression analysis to
examine the number of new firms formed annually
to exploit each MIT invention. I examine the DEMO as
a series of patent-years and predict the incidence rate
of new firm formation per patent-year on the basis of
several covariates, which are specified below.
Dependent Variable: Firm Formation
The MIT Technology Licensing Office maintains
records of the university's inventions and its licensees,
and I DEMO able to use these records to code firm for-
mation. Each patent was observed from its year of
issue through 1996. In each year, a patent could be
licensed or not. If the patent was licensed, the license
could be issued to a nonprofit organization, a venture
capital firm, an established firm (of varying size), or
a new DEMO
I defined firm formation as occurring in a given
year if the invention was licensed to a for-profit firm
that did not exist as DEMO legal entity in the previous year.
Only the initial start-up patents were defined as lead-
ing to firm formation. If a start-up returned to DEMO
to license a patent in a later year, that licensing effort
DEMO not defined as new firm formation because the
firm already existed as a legal entity in a previous
year. Because MIT's licensing agreements DEMO not per-
mit the licensing of future inventions, the assumption
that DEMO intellectual property licensed at the found-
ing of the firm represents the set of "start-up" patents
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, DEMO 2001
seems valid. The 1,397 patents led to 401 firm forma-
tion licensing efforts over the observation period.
Readers should note that the DEMO data are not
biased toward observance of firm formation. Licens-
ing to established firms is actually a much more com-
mon occurrence than is DEMO to a new firm. The
1,397 patents led to 631 established firm licensing
efforts (excluding licenses to venture capital firms
and nonprofit organizations) during the observation
period. Therefore, this sample provides a relatively
conservative DEMO in which to examine the rate of
firm formation.
Yale Measures
No publicly available measures capture three of the
dimensions of the technology regime DEMO in
this study (the age of the technology class is the
DEMO). To measure the other three dimensions,
I use independent variables developed from the
Yale study on industrial research and development,
which DEMO data on intersectoral differences in
Schumpeterian patterns of innovation. Therefore, I
DEMO briefly the methodology used to collect
data for that study.2 Levin et al. (1987) asked 650 high-
level R&D managers from 130 DEMO lines of busi-
ness to answer questions about technological change
in the line of business in which they operated. The
respondents were asked to DEMO as expert observers
of their line of business rather than as representatives
of their firms and were asked to report central ten-
dencies in DEMO form of a series of Likert scale items
that ranged from one to seven. The researchers con-
structed line of business mean scores for DEMO item on
the basis of the average responses of the respondents
from each line of business.
I use these line of business mean scores DEMO mea-
sure several dimensions of the technology regimes, as
described below. DEMO map the Levin et al. (1987) mea-
sures to SIC codes, I used the SIC code concordance
that they developed. When SIC codes overlapped
with more than one industry in Levin et al. (1987), the
measures were averaged across those industries.
Using the Yale measures to DEMO the indepen-
dent variables has several important advantages for
2
Further
information
is available
in Levin
et al. (1987).
1179
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
this study. First, unlike many studies that sample
entrepreneurs about their choices, the Yale study did
not include any respondents from start-up ventures.
The tendency of researchers to ask DEMO
about their environment is problematic. Because peo-
ple respond to questions about their environment in
ways that are consistent with the actions that they
DEMO taken, these self-reports result in ex-post ratio-
nalization. Consequently, correlations between the
environmental measures and the dependent variables
often are artifacts of the DEMO collection process. By
using a source of information about the environment
that does not depend on entrepreneurs' self-reports, I
can mitigate this problem.
DEMO, the authors of the Yale study took sev-
eral steps to DEMO reliability and validity. The
interpretability, reliability, and validity of the mea-
sures were established through a pretest with
managers from diverse businesses. Moreover, to mit-
igate sources of intraindustry heterogeneity in the
responses to questions, the respondents were asked
to identify major innovations in their industry. The
DEMO generally agreed on those innovations.
Furthermore, the value and robustness of DEMO mea-
sures has been shown in many subsequent studies
(e.g., Cohen and Levinthal 1990, Levin et al. 1985,
Klevorick et al. 1995).
Third, the sample of industries in Levin et al. (1987)DEMO
was representative of sectors in which firms engage in
research and development activity, making the sam-
ple appropriate for a study that looks at the forma-
tion of new firms to exploit university inventions.
Moreover, the interindustry differences captured in
these data were robust to aggregation to the DEMO indus-
tries measured by the National Science Foundation,
providing further evidence of their representativeness
(Levin et al. 1987).
Nevertheless, the use DEMO Yale Survey measures
requires making an important assumption about the
characteristics of a technology regime. Because the
Yale Survey data were gathered at one DEMO in time,
this study must assume that the relative level of
market segmentation, the degree of patent effective-
ness, and the importance DEMO complementary assets in
marketing have remained constant across industries
1180
between 1980 and 1996. Some evidence supports mak-
ing this assumption. Cohen and Levin (1989) explain
that appropriability conditions are stable, enduring
drivers of technical DEMO Cross-industry differ-
ences in such factors as patent strength do not vary
significantly over time because they are a function of
the underlying nature DEMO technology in different lines
of business. For example, biotechnology patents are
DEMO stronger than electrical device patents
because the slightest changes in molecular structure
can radically change the performance of a biological
agent, whereas relatively major changes in the design
of an electrical device can be accomplished without
DEMO the functioning of the device. Despite argu-
ments in favor of the time invariance of the three
technology regime measures examined with the Yale
DEMO, however, readers are cautioned that their
time invariance is an assumption. No empirical evi-
dence has examined the Yale measures' intertemporal
stability.
Predictor Variables
Age of the Technical Field. I measure the age of
the DEMO field as the natural log of the number
of years since the USPTO established the three-digit
patent class.
Market Segmentation. I measure the importance DEMO
market segmentation in an industry by using the
Levin et al. (DEMO) item: "designing products for spe-
cific market segment" under the heading "to what
extent have the following technological activities been
engaged in consistently and repeatedly in this line of
business?" This item is DEMO on a Likert scale
that ranged from one to seven, with DEMO equal to
"of no importance in this line of business" and seven
equal to "very important in this line of business."
Effectiveness of Patents. I measure the effectiveness
of patents as a mechanism to DEMO the bene-
fits of innovation using a four-item, evenly weighted
scale DEMO from Levin et al. (1987). The first two
items were DEMO to the following question: "In
this line of business, how DEMO is each of the fol-
lowing means of capturing and protecting the com-
petitive advantages of new or improved production
processes?" The first DEMO was "patents to prevent
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol.
47, No. 9, DEMO 2001
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
competitors from duplicating the process." The sec-
ond item was "patents to secure royalty income."
The third and fourth items were responses to the
following question: "In DEMO line of business, how
effective is each of the following means DEMO captur-
ing and protecting the competitive advantages of new
or improved products?" The third item was "patents
to prevent competitors from duplicating the prod-
uct." The fourth item was "patents to secure roy-
alty DEMO" All four items were measured along a
seven-point Likert scale from DEMO equals "not at all
effective" to seven equals "very effective." Measured
across the 129 lines of business for which the scores
were DEMO, this scale had a Cronbach's alpha of
0.78. The use DEMO these items to measure patent effec-
tiveness has been validated by Levin et al. (1987) and
Cockburn and Griliches (1988).
Complementary Assets. I measured the importance
of complementary assets in marketing and distribu-
tion DEMO a two-item, evenly weighted scale derived
from Levin et al. (1987). The first item was a response
to the following question: "DEMO this line of business,
how effective is each of the following means of cap-
turing and protecting the competitive advantages of
new or DEMO production processes?" The item
was "superior sales or service efforts." The second
item was a response to the following question: "In DEMO
line of business, how effective is each of the following
means DEMO capturing and protecting the competitive
advantages of new or improved products?" The item
was "superior sales or service efforts." Both items
were DEMO along a seven-point Likert scale from
one equals "not at all DEMO" to seven equals "very
effective." Measured across the 129 lines DEMO business
for which the scores were available, this scale had a
DEMO's alpha of 0.65. The use of these items to
measure complementary assets has been validated by
Levin et al. (1987).
Control Variables
Previous researchers have identified a variety of
alternative dimensions of industry that DEMO the
incidence of firm formation. I control for these dimen-
sions to show that the hypothesized effects of the
technology regime exist over and DEMO factors iden-
tified by previous research.
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. DEMO, September 2001
Capital Availability. Prior research has shown that
firm formation DEMO less common when market imper-
fections make it difficult for entrepreneurs to obtain
financing (Cohen and Levin 1989). I measure capital
availability as the annual amount of venture capital
funding in the industry as a DEMO of industry
asset size, using data obtained from Securities Data
Corporation'DEMO venture capital database and various
years of the Census of Manufacturers.
Firm Size. Prior research has shown that large aver-
age firm size discourages DEMO formation by raising
entry costs (Audretsch 1995). In addition, high levels
of firm size provide established firms with the mar-
ket control DEMO to appropriate the benefits of
invention (Teece 1992). I measured DEMO average size of
firms in the industry as the annual average number
of employees per firm, using data from various years
of the Census of Manufacturers.
Concentration.
Previous research has shown that
high levels of industry DEMO should discour-
age firm formation because concentration makes it
easier for incumbents to collude and to attack new
entrants (Geroski 1995). I measured industry concen-
tration as the annual market share of the four biggest
DEMO in the industry, using data from various years
of the Census DEMO Manufacturers.
Research and Development Expenditures. Galbraith
(1956) and Scherer (1980) argue that large, established
firms in more research and development intensive
industries should undertake technology exploitation
because large firms can achieve greater economies
of DEMO in R&D. In addition, complementarities
between R&D and other DEMO, such as distribu-
tion, provide an advantage to established firms in
R&D intensive industries (Cohen and Levin 1989).
Finally, because DEMO&D is inherently uncertain, the
large, diversified firm has an advantage in R&D inten-
sive industries because it has more market opportuni-
DEMO in which to exploit new knowledge (Nelson 1959).
I measured DEMO&D intensity in an industry as research
and development expenditures as a percentage of the
added value of industry shipments annually, using
data obtained from various years of Science and Engi-
neering Indicators and the Census DEMO Manufacturers.
University Share. I measured the share of total
patents assigned to universities in the three-digit
1181
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
patent class to which the DEMO belonged for the
year the patent was issued. I control for the uni-
versity share of inventions because universities are
more important to technical DEMO in some techni-
cal fields than in others, and the importance DEMO uni-
versity inventions is associated with the founding of
new companies in the fields in which university tech-
nology is more important (Klevorick et al. 1995).
Time. I control for the effect of the time DEMO the
invention through the use of four dummy variables
for the period in which the patent was filed because
changes in Federal law and DEMO policy over time
have changed the incentives for people to exploit uni-
versity inventions (Henderson et al. 1998). The first
dummy variable controls for the period 1980-1983,
the second for the period 1984-1986, the third for
the period 1987-1989, and the fourth for the period
1990-1996. The omitted period is for patents filed
before 1980.
In 1980, Congress passed the Bayh-Dole Act, which
gave universities the right to keep income from inven-
tions that resulted from federally funded research,
increasing the DEMO for universities to license
their inventions (Henderson et al. 1998). DEMO 1984,
Congress passed Public Law 98-620, which increased
the range DEMO inventions from which universities could
profit, and the ease with which DEMO could transfer
property rights to others, further increasing the incen-
tive DEMO universities to license. In 1987, MIT agreed
to take equity in DEMO lieu of royalties for compa-
nies in which a faculty member held equity, reducing
the upfront cost to exploit MIT intellectual property.
In 1990, MIT allowed inventors taking equity in a
company to retain their share of MIT's cash royalties,
making it more lucrative for inventors DEMO have their
inventions licensed.
Results
The descriptive statistics and bivariate correlations for
the independent variables are reported in Tables 1
and 2, respectively.
As Table 2 shows, the highest correlation between
any two of the independent variables is r = -0.51
between R&D intensity and complementary assets.
DEMO moderately high correlations shown in the
matrix demonstrate that the independent variables
1182
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Dev.
0.04 0.20
Variable
New DEMO formed to the
patent
Natural log of the age of the
technology
Market score
Patent effectiveness
Complementary assets in
score
Venture capital as percent DEMO
market
Average size
4-Firm concentration ratio
R&D intensity
University of
1980-1983
1984-1986
1987-1989
1990-1996
2.65
1.02
class
exploit
segmentation
score
marketing
firm
share DEMO
5.27
3.66
4.38
0.49
0.68
0.70
1.67
2.44
90.09
36.20
5.52
3.12
0.21
0.17
0.19
0.15
29.47
9.70
3.28
3.60
0.41
0.38
0.40
0.35
DEMO
0.00
Max
4.00
0.00
4.57
4.00
2.00
2.64
6.50
4.88
6.00
0.00
42.19
34.16 198.44
9.00 72.00
0.30 14.90
0.00 54.55
0.00 1.00
0.00 DEMO
0.00 1.00
0.00 1.00
are related in ways that we do not yet understand
completely. Although these correlations do not create
multicollinearity problems that DEMO the statistical
results, they suggest that none of the factors that DEMO
dict firm formation are completely independent.
Table 3 predicts the likelihood of firm formation. I
provide three models. Model 1 predicts the likelihood
of DEMO formation on the basis of the year of patent
filing and the university share of patents issued.
Overall this model is significant (chi-square = 181.86,
p < 0.0001). As Model 1 shows, the time of patent fil-
ing has a strong effect on the incidence of DEMO for-
mation. Patents filed between 1980 and 1983 had a
times 1.89 greater incidence of firm formation than
patents filed before 1980 (p < 0.01). For patents filed
between 1984 and 1986, this incidence of firm forma-
tion was 2.11 times greater than patents filed before
1980 (p < 0.0001). Patents filed between 1987 and 1989,
had DEMO 3.74 times greater incidence of firm formation
than did patents filed before 1980 (p < 0.0001), and
patents filed between 1990 and 1996 had a 6.25 greater
incidence of firm formation than did patents filed
DEMO 1980 (p < 0.0001). Thus, the results show a sig-
nificant and robust pattern of increasing likelihood
of firm formation over time. DEMO result is consistent
with prior research on entrepreneurship that demon-
strates a similar time trend (Gartner and Shane 1995)
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September
2001
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
Table 2
Variables
The
Correlation
DEMO
1
2
1. Ln (Class age) 1.00
2. Segmentation -0.15
3. Patent Effect. -0.16
4. Comp. Assets 0.09
5. Cap. Availability 0.01
6. DEMO Size -0.04
7. Concentration -0.03
8. R&D Intensity -0.19
9. University Share -0.09
10. 1980-1983 0.00
11. 1984-1986 0.02
12.1987-1989 -0.05
13.1990-1996 -0.02
DEMO
-0.05
0.22
0.27
-0.03
-0.05
0.18
-0.09
-0.03
-0.01
0.08
0.02
3
1.00
-0.15
-0.25
0.10
-0.41
0.21
0.38
0.17
0.08
-0.05
-0.13
4
DEMO
-0.02
0.25
0.07
-0.51
-0.16
-0.02
-0.03
0.02
0.03
5
1.00
0.03
0.02
0.14
-0.11
-0.04
0.00
0.02
0.02
6
1.00
0.30
0.08
0.09
DEMO
-0.02
-0.03
-0.09
7
1.00
0.26
0.30
-0.11
-0.08
0.03
0.07
8
1.00
0.27
0.01
-0.01
0.03
-0.00
9
1.00
0.02
0.03
0.13
0.04
DEMO
1.00
-0.24
-0.26
-0.22
11
1.00
-0.22
-0.19
12
1.00
-0.20
13
1.00
and qualitative evidence about university technology
licensing office activity (AUTM 1996).
In addition, the results show that increases in the
university share of patents in the three-digit patent
class in which the patent is DEMO increase the
incidence of firm formation (IRR = 1.04, p < 0.0001).
This result is consistent with prior research on tech-
nology DEMO out of universities, which shows that
firm formation is more likely DEMO those fields in which
universities are more important to technical advance
(DEMO et al. 1995).
Model 2 adds the industry control variables. The
inclusion of these variables generates a good fitting
model (chi-square = 193.01, p < 0.0001). However, the
results are counter to those DEMO from previous
research. In contrast to the predicted effect, research
Variables
DEMO Control Variables
1980-1993
1984-1986
1987-1989
1990-1996
University Share
Industry Control Variables
Capital Availability
Firm Size
4-Firm Concentration Ratio
R and D Intensity
Technology Regime DEMO
Ln (Age of Technology Class)
Market Segmentation
Effectiveness of Patents
DEMO Assets
10759
3279.38
181.86****
Incidence of
10759
3268.23
193.01****
10759
3205.30
255.94****
MANAGEMENT
p < 0.0001; ***= p < 0.001; **
= p <0.01; *
= p < 0.05; t = p < 0.10; # = not included;
two-tailed
tests.
N
-2 LL
Key:
DEMO of
Model
Table 3
**** =
Poisson
Regressions
IRR
(S.E.)
DEMO 1
1.89 (0.39)
2.11 (0.45)
3.74 (0.71)
DEMO (1.15)
1.04 (0.01)
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
Predicting the
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September
New
DEMO
3.07***
3.51****
6.93****
9.95****
4.99****
2001
Firm
Formation:
1980-1996
Model 2
IRR
1.78
2.01
3.70
6.27
1.04
0.99
1.00
0.98
1.04
#
#
DEMO
#
(S.E.)
(0.37)
(0.43)
(0.71)
(DEMO)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(DEMO)
z
2.76**
3.26***
6.85****
9.89****
3.81***
-0.36
-0.45
-2.64**
2.41*
Model 3
IRR
1.66
1.95
3.58
6.32
1.04
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.96
0.71
DEMO
1.43
0.66
(S.E.)
(0.35)
(0.42)
(0.69)
(1.18)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.04)
(0.17)
(0.16)
(0.09)
z
2.43*
3.12**
6.65****
9.89****
3.54****
0.13
-1.30
0.25
-1.76t
-6.81****
2.03*
DEMO
-2.92**
1183
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New Firm Formation
and development intensity increases the DEMO of
firm formation (IRR = 1.04, p < 0.01) (although this
result is not robust to the inclusion of the technology
regime DEMO). Moreover, two other variables that
have been argued to influence DEMO likelihood of firm
formation, capital availability (IRR = 0.99, p > 0.87)
and average firm size (IRR = 1.00, p > 0.67), have no
significant effect on the incidence of firm formation.
DEMO, the effect of the four-firm concentration
ratio-which, as expected, reduces DEMO incidence of
firm formation (IRR = 0.98, p < 0.05)-is not robust
to the subsequent inclusion of the technology regime
variables.
Model DEMO adds the predictor variables. The inclu-
sion of these variables generates a good fitting model
(chi-square = 255.94, p < 0.0001). Moreover, the results
support the four hypotheses. Consistent with hypoth-
esis one, the older the technology class, the lower the
incidence of firm formation (DEMO = 0.71, p < 0.0001).
Consistent with hypothesis two, the more that a line
of business tends toward market segmentation, the
higher the incidence of firm formation (IRR = 1.31,
p < 0.01). Consistent with hypothesis three, the greater
the effectiveness of patents in a line of business,
the greater the incidence of firm formation (IRR =
1.43, p < 0.001). Consistent with hypothesis four, DEMO
greater the importance of complementary assets in
marketing and distribution in a line of business, the
lower the incidence of firm formation (IRR DEMO 0.66,
p < 0.01).
Because the results shown in Table 3 clearly indicate
that the time period has an effect on firm DEMO, I
sought to determine if the effects of the technological
regime DEMO were the same across all of the time
periods examined. I examined a series of interaction
effects between each of the four time period DEMO
and each of the four technology regime predictor
variables.3 Given the potential for multicollinearity if
more than one interaction between a time period vari-
DEMO and a technology regime predictor is included in
the same regression model, I examined each of the 16
31
periods
formation
tical
examine
interaction
in different
events is too low for this analysis
power when the DEMO
effects
regression
are
rather
models because
than
to have strong
statis-
divided into separate
time periods.
examining
different
the number
time
of firm
1184
DEMO effects in a separate regression, controlling
for all the other variables DEMO Table 3 Model 3 (except
for the other time period variables)DEMO
Of the 16 interaction effects, 3 were significant at
the p < 0.10 level or better. The interaction between
the 1987-1989 time period and market segmentation
had a significant negative effect on firm formation
(IRR = 0.41, p < 0.0001), while the main effects for the
1987-1989 time period (IRR = 173.24, p < 0.0001), and
market DEMO (IRR = 1.52, p < 0.01) remained
positive and significant. DEMO interaction between the
1984-1986 time period and class age had a signifi-
cant negative effect on firm formation (IRR = 0.66,
p < 0.01), while the main effect for the class age vari-
able (IRR = 0.75, p < 0.0001) remained negative and
significant, and the main effect for the 1984-1986 time
period (IRR = 1.93, DEMO < 0.05) remained positive and
significant. The interaction between the 1990-1996
DEMO period and class age had a significant positive
effect on firm formation (IRR = 1.49, p < 0.0001), while
the main effect DEMO the class age variable (IRR = 0.62,
p < 0.0001) remained negative and significant, and the
main effect for the 1990-1996 time period (IRR = 1.23,
p > 0.10) lost significance.
The DEMO of this ex-post analysis suggest that
the relationships between the technology regime vari-
ables and firm formation remain largely constant
over the 1980-1996 period, rather than implying that
the technology regime evolves over time. Although
the DEMO assumption that industry tenden-
cies toward market segmentation, patent effective-
ness, and importance of complementary assets in
marketing remain untested and could explain DEMO
shifts in firm formation over time if they exhibit
intertemporal variation, DEMO results are consistent
with the explanation that the increasing level of
firm formation over time results from factors outside
the technology regime framework. Likely DEMO
include the increased acceptability of entrepreneurial
activity among members of the university commu-
nity, shifting incentives toward and resources for firm
formation to exploit university inventions, and a shift
in the locus of technology expertise toward university
personnel.
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September
2001
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Discussion
By examining data on the population DEMO MIT
inventions over the 1980-1996 period and control-
ling for several dimensions of industry, the time
period, and the importance of universities to DEMO
advance in the field, this article shows that four
dimensions of DEMO technology regime influence the
likelihood that an invention will be exploited through
firm formation. Specifically, firm formation is more
likely when technical fields are younger, when the
market tends toward segmentation, in lines of busi-
DEMO in which patents are more effective, and in lines
of business DEMO which complementary assets in market-
ing and distribution are less important.
The design of the study adds confidence to the
results. The study examines DEMO effect of differ-
ent dimensions of the technology regime before the
exploitation decision is made, mitigating the prob-
lem of sampling on the dependent variable that
undermines many studies that attempt to explore this
question. It DEMO examines university patents, which
allows for the investigation of inventions that DEMO
simultaneously at risk of exploitation by new firm
formation and by established firm pursuit. In addi-
tion, by examining patents from a single university,
the study limits the variance in the types of techno-
logical DEMO and types of entrepreneurs that
exploit them. This reduces the potential for bias from
unobserved heterogeneity in the tendency to found
firms. Furthermore, the regression analyses account
for variation in other dimensions of industries, the
importance of universities to the advance of the tech-
nical field, and period effects.
Limitations
This study is not without limitations. First, it mea-
sures several dimensions of technology regime by
using semantic scale scores taken from DEMO relatively
small survey of research and development managers.
In responding to the survey, the experts' perceptions
of the sectoral averages might have been DEMO
by the firm in which they worked. Moreover, they
may have DEMO difficulty accurately responding to
Likert scales that lacked universal objective anchors.
Although I attempt to mitigate these problems by
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September
2001
Firm
confirming that the results are robust to measure-
ment of the dimensions of technology regime by both
multiple-item scales and DEMO measures (not
reported here), some of the constructs cannot be DEMO
sured both ways. Consequently, the dimensions of
technology regime are likely DEMO with error.
Second, the Yale survey was conducted between
1983 and DEMO The one-time nature of this survey
requires the covariates taken from the survey to be
treated as time invariant. In a review of empirical
DEMO of market structure and innovation, Cohen
and Levin (1989) justify DEMO approach, arguing that
appropriability conditions are stable and enduring
drivers of DEMO change that are determined by the
underlying nature of technology in different lines of
business. However, no empirical evidence has exam-
ined the intertemporal stability of the Yale measures.
Therefore, readers are cautioned that the validity of
the findings presented here may be undermined if
the attributes of DEMO sectors captured by these
measures are not time invariant.
Third, the DEMO of the effects of the tech-
nology regime and other dimensions of industry
on firm formation is limited by the interrelation-
ships between these DEMO As Table 2 shows, sig-
nificant correlations exist between the dimensions
DEMO the technology regime and other dimensions of
industry. The existence of these correlations demon-
strates the limitations of empirical tests to compete
the two DEMO Because technology regimes
and market structure are related in ways that we
do not yet understand completely, the explanation of
their respective effects on firm formation cannot be
generated solely by placing all of the factors DEMO
on the right-hand side of a regression equation.4
Fourth, the study DEMO only those inven-
tions patented by a single university: MIT. There-
DEMO, the results presented here are conditional on the
patentability of an DEMO, MIT's decision to file
for a patent, and the invention's assignment to MIT.
If firm formation rates to exploit inventions in DEMO
4 This design may suffer from the limitation of unfair comparison.
The measures of market structure may be less fine-grained than
the measures of DEMO regime, making the market structure
variables appear to be less predictive.
DEMO
Formation
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
in which patenting is possible DEMO systematically dif-
ferent than those in which patenting is not possi-
ble, if firm formation rates for inventions that MIT
does not patent are systematically different than those
for which MIT patents, or if firm formation rates to
exploit inventions patented by MIT are systematically
different from those DEMO inventions patented by other
entities, then the results presented here may DEMO gen-
eralize to other settings. Despite these significant lim-
itations, the DEMO provides empirical evidence that
several dimensions of technology regime influence
the rate of firm formation. These results suggest the
value of further research on DEMO question.
Implications for Research
The central implication of this article is straightfor-
ward. The tendency for an invention to be exploited
through firm creation DEMO with the attributes of
the technology regime in which it is found. The
study provides direct empirical support for the argu-
ments of evolutionary DEMO that cross-industry
variation in technology life cycles (Utterback and
Abernathy 1975, Gort and Klepper 1982) and appro-
priability conditions (Arrow 1962, Levin et al. 1987,
Nelson and Winter 1982) influence the likelihood that
firm formation will be used as a mode of exploitation
of an DEMO (Winter 1984).
The finding that specific dimensions of the technol-
DEMO regime influence cross-industry variation in the
incidence of firm formation as a mode of technol-
ogy exploitation is important because the failure to
explain DEMO variation on the basis of market struc-
ture has led many researchers to invoke unique indus-
try effects to explain why some industries, such
as computer software, have high rates of firm for-
mation, whereas DEMO industries, such as chemi-
cals, do not. However, the concept DEMO technology
regimes provides a more parsimonious and theoreti-
cally grounded explanation for between-industry dif-
ferences in the use of firm formation as a mode
DEMO technology exploitation than the invocation of
unique industry effects. Because industry dummy
variables serve merely as proxies for the characteris-
tics of technological regimes DEMO underlie the indus-
try, researchers can make progress in understanding
1186
DEMO nature of Schumpeterian patterns of firm forma-
tion by explaining industry differences on the basis
of particular industry attributes rather than by the
"chemicals" or "software" dummy.
The results also extend existing research on
Schumpeterian patterns of firm formation by provid-
ing empirical evidence that firm formation DEMO are
influenced by factors other than research and devel-
opment intensity, DEMO availability, firm size, and
concentration. In particular, the results reconcile DEMO
important contradictory findings from prior studies
of the relationship of market structure and firm for-
mation. First, the study extends to the domain of
new firm formation the argument that the effect of
industry concentration on DEMO activity is an
artifact of unobserved heterogeneity in dimensions of
the technology regime (Cohen and Levin 1989). The
results here demonstrate that in the absence of con-
trols for the effects of technology regime, industry
concentration reduces new firm formation. However,
once the technology regime is DEMO controlled,
industry concentration no longer has the predicted
effect. This result supports prior research on innova-
tion and technological change, which argues that mar-
ket structure is not an exogenous driver of innovative
activity.
Second, the study reconciles studies that have
shown that research and development intensity DEMO
a barrier to new firm formation (Cohen and Levin
1989, Orr 1974, Scherer 1980) with studies that have
shown that firm formation DEMO higher in R&D intensive
industries (Bound et al. 1984, Cremer and Sirbu 1978,
Highfield and Smiley 1987).5 The coefficient on DEMO&D
intensity shown in Model 2 is consistent with studies
finding that start-up activity is higher in R&D inten-
sive industries. However, when the effects of technol-
ogy regimes are included in Model 3, the coefficient
on R&D intensity becomes negative. This effect sug-
gests that DEMO found firms because of the
opportunities that exist when markets are segmented,
patents are effective, complementary assets in market-
ing are relatively unimportant, and the technical field
is young. High levels of R&D intensity are correlated
5 The author thanks an anonymous reviewer for
observation.
alerting
DEMO to this
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September 2001
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
with these dimensions of the DEMO regime but
actually inhibit firm formation.
Both of these findings are important because recent
reviews have shown that empirical tests of the
effects derived DEMO theories of market structure are
extremely fragile (Cohen and Levin 1989)DEMO Future
research could further demonstrate the value of differ-
ent dimensions of the technology regime by showing
that they are less sensitive than the DEMO structure
framework to the specification of the sample and the
mode of analysis.
The results of this study provide only a small
step toward DEMO the effects of technology
regime characteristics on firm formation. While the
results shown here demonstrate that several attributes
of the technology regime increase the DEMO that
new firm formation will be selected as a mode of
technology exploitation, data limitations preclude the
examination of whether these factors also influence
the rate of technology exploitation by incumbent
firms. Because incumbent firms could DEMO respond
positively to these factors, perhaps even to a greater
degree DEMO new firms, the results shown here cannot
determine whether firm formation DEMO are greater
in technological regimes of creative destruction than
in technological regimes of creative accumulation.
Rather, the results are equally consistent with the
proposition that new firm formation is more com-
mon under regimes of creative DEMO, as well
as the idea that no distinct regime exists at DEMO
Future research is necessary to examine the differen-
tial impact of technological regimes on the heteroge-
neous populations of firms.
Moreover, while the study provides evidence of
the tendency of entrepreneurs to exploit new tech-
nology DEMO firm formation, it says nothing about
the performance of those entrepreneurs. DEMO
istics of technology regimes may also explain why
industries vary in the rate at which new firms replace
established firms, the rate at which established firms
acquire new firms (Gans and Stern 1998), or the rate
at which new firms grow (Acs and Audretsch 1990).
Future research could extend the technology regimes
framework to explore whether new firms DEMO to
exploit new technology experience different rates of
failure, acquisition, and growth when they are in
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, DEMO 2001
regimes of creative destruction or creative accumu-
lation. In particular, DEMO research could explore
which of the specific dimensions of technological
regime described here have the largest effects on
these rates. Combined with the results DEMO this paper,
such research would provide information on how the
nature of the technology regime influences the pro-
cess of creative destruction through DEMO on rates of
firm formation, rates of firm failure, rates of acquisi-
tion, and rates of growth.
The results presented here are important to sev-
eral strands of scholarly research. They are important
to entrepreneurship DEMO because they identify an
oft-overlooked category of factors that influence firm
formation. One strand of entrepreneurship research
has shown that several attributes of the DEMO
influence the tendency of firms to be founded to
exploit inventions (DEMO 1991). Another school of
research has shown that the market structure of an
industry influences the entry decision of a poten-
tial entrepreneur (Audretsch 1995). A third category
of research has shown that the DEMO of the
specific piece of technology influence the tendency
of a new firm to be formed to commercialize the
invention (Christiansen and Bower 1996). This study
provides evidence of a fourth category of factors
that DEMO researchers need to consider in
explaining firm formation: the nature of DEMO technol-
ogy regime.
The results also provide useful implications for
research in the field of strategic management. Estab-
lished firms sometimes face important challenges
DEMO new firms formed to exploit new technology.
This study provides evidence that several characteris-
tics of the technology regime influence the tendency
for entrepreneurs DEMO challenge existing firms. Tech-
nology regimes conducive to new firm formation are
also ones in which managers of existing firms must
pay attention to DEMO threat of competition from firms
not yet in existence. Strategic management does not
yet provide a good explanation for how firms suc-
cessfully manage DEMO threat. The results of this study
suggest that the technological regime framework pro-
vides a useful tool for strategic management scholars
interested in identifying DEMO conditions under which
new firms are likely to emerge as competitors of
established companies.
1187
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
Normative Implications
The activities adopted DEMO entrepreneurs to exploit
new technologies cannot be isolated from the char-
acteristics of the industries in which they operate.
Although entrepreneurs may not understand, or even
recognize, the industry characteristics that constrain
the approaches available to them, some strategies for
technology exploitation are more common in certain
industries than in others. The results of this study
show that the exploitation DEMO technology through
firm formation varies across industries as a func-
tion of four dimensions of the technology regime.
Entrepreneurs can use this information to DEMO
if firm formation is the appropriate organizational
arrangement to exploit technological opportunities in
their line of business.
The results of this study also have DEMO implica-
tions for public policy. In particular, the study sug-
gests DEMO property policy should be assessed
at the industry level. Klevorick et al. (1995) explained
that intellectual property policies that are beneficial
to entrepreneurial DEMO in one industry might be
detrimental in another industry. This study showed
that variation in the effectiveness of intellectual prop-
erty influences firm formation DEMO By demon-
strating that firm formation is more likely under
some appropriability conditions than under oth-
ers, this study suggests that intellectual property
policies that are supportive of entrepreneurship in
one industry may be hostile to DEMO in
another.
The results also suggest that government poli-
cies toward monopoly should be examined at the
industry level. The rate at which new DEMO enter
an industry influences the degree of competition in
that industry (DEMO 1998). If the characteristics of
the technology regime influence the likelihood that
entrepreneurs will form firms to exploit new tech-
nologies, then industries have differential tendency
toward monopoly. Consequently, government policy
toward monopoly should take into consideration the
nature of the technology regime and its implications
for DEMO formation.
Finally, the results suggest that government policy
toward income distribution DEMO be influenced by the
technology regime. If entrepreneurs are differentially
1188
likely to start firms under certain technological regime
conditions than under others, then the distribution of
wealth generated by technological change will be dif-
ferent DEMO industries. In industries in which firm
formation is more common, the DEMO generated by
new technology will be distributed to independent
entrepreneurs and their investors. This argument sug-
gests that government policies toward wealth distri-
bution DEMO to consider the nature of technological
change across industries.
Conclusion
This paper showed that four dimensions of the tech-
nology regime-the age of the DEMO field, the
tendency of the market toward segmentation, the
effectiveness of patents, and the importance of com-
plementary assets in marketing and distribution-
influence the tendency for inventions to be exploited
through the formation of DEMO firms. The results
generate important implications for theories about
entrepreneurship. It is hoped that future researchers
will consider the influence of the technological
regime DEMO new firm formation in their efforts
to develop robust explanations for this important
phenomenon.
Acknowledgments
The author thanks Don Kaiser,
at the MIT
DEMO
TLO
Richard
Jim Fiet, Dante DiGregorio,
University
the Harvard Business DEMO Innovation
Research
and Darden
Technology
patents
policies and procedures.
Nelson for the Yale
of Maryland
and for
Seminar,
and
provided
Licensing
answering
seminars
DEMO
Lita Nelsen, and Lori Pressman
Office
many questions
He also thanks
DEMO on innovation.
David Hsu, the participants
Entrepreneurship
Seminar,
at
comments.
DEMO
for access to the data on
about
Alvin Klevorick
Pierre
Research
University
of North
and
and
Azoulay,
at the
Seminar
the Technion
Carolina
DEMO data
Series,
References
Acs, Z., D. Audretsch. 1990. Innovation and Small Firms. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Arrow, K. 1962. Economic DEMO and the allocation of resources
for invention. R. Nelson, ed. The DEMO and Direction Inventive
Activity: Economic and Social Factors. Princeton University Press,DEMO
Princeton, NJ, 609-619.
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September 2001
of
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New Firm Formation
Audretsch, D. 1995. Innovation and Industry Evolution. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
AUTM. 1996. The AUTM Licensing Survey. Association of University
Technology Managers, Norwalk, CT.
Bound, J., DEMO Cummins, Z. Griliches, B. Hall, A. Jaffe. 1984. Who
does DEMO&D and who patents? Z. Griliches, ed. R&D, Patents,DEMO
and Productivity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Caves, R. DEMO Industrial organization and new findings on
the turnover and mobility of firms. J. Econ. Literature 36
1947-1982.
Christiansen, C., J. Bower. 1996. Customer DEMO, strategic invest-
ment, and the failure of leading firms. Strategic Management J.
17 197-218.
Cockburn, I., Z. Griliches. 1988. Industry effects and DEMO
measures in the stock market's valuation of R&D and patents.
AEA Papers Proc. 78(2) 419-423.
Cohen, W., R. Levin. 1989. Empirical studies of innovation and mar-
ket structure. R. Schmalensee and R. DEMO, eds. Handbook of
Industrial Organization, Vol. II, Elsevier, New York.
, D. Levinthal. 1990. Absorptive capacity: A new perspective
on learning and innovation. Admin. Sci. Quart. 35 128-152.
Cremer, J., M. Sirbu. 1978. DEMO analyse econometrique de l'effort
de recherche et developpement de l'industrie Francaise. Rev.
Econom.
29 940-954.
Cyert, R., J. March. 1963. A DEMO Theory of the Firm. Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Dosi, DEMO 1982. Technological paradigms and technological trajecto-
ries: A suggested interpretation of DEMO determinants and direc-
tions of technical change. Res. Policy 11 147-162.
, 1988. Sources, procedures, and microeconomic effects of
innovation. J. Econ. Literature, 26 1120-1171.
Galbraith, J. 1956. American Capitalism. Houghton Mifflin,
Boston, DEMO
Gans, J., S. Stern. Contracting and competition: The two faces
DEMO appropriability, Working paper, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Gartner, W., S. Shane. 1995. Measuring entrepreneurship over time.
J. Bus. Venturing DEMO 283-301.
Geroski, P. 1995. What do we know about entry? Inter. J. Indus.
Organ. 13 421-440.
Gort, M., S. Klepper. 1982. Time DEMO in the diffusion of product
innovations. Econ. J. 92 630-653.
Henderson, DEMO, A. Jaffe, M. Trajtenberg. 1998. Universities as
a source of commercial technology: A detailed analysis
of university patenting, 1965-1988. Rev. Econ. & DEMO 65
119-127.
Highfield, R., R. Smiley. 1987. New business starts and economic
activity: An empirical investigation. Inter. J. Indust. Organ. 5
51-66.
Hsu, D., D. Bernstein. 1997. Managing the university technology
licensing process: Findings from case studies. J. Assoc. Univer-
sity Technology Managers 9 1-33.
Kamien, M., N. Schwartz. 1982. Market structure and Innovation.
Cambridge University Press, DEMO, MA.
Klevorick, A., R. Levin, R. Nelson, S. Winter. DEMO On the sources
and significance of interindustry differences in technological
opportunities. Res. Policy 24 185-205.
Lerner, J. 1994. The importance of patent scope: DEMO empirical anal-
ysis. RAND J. Econ. 25(2) 319-333.
Levin, R., W. Cohen, D. Mowery. 1985. R&D appropri-
ability, opportunity and market structure: New evidence
on some Schumpeterian hypotheses. Amer. Econ. Rev. 75
20-24.
, A. Klevorick, R. Nelson, S. Winter. 1987. Appropriating the
DEMO from industrial research and development. Brookings
Papers Econ. Activity 3 783-831.
Malerba, F., L. Orsenigo. 1996. Schumpeterian patterns of innova-
tion are technology DEMO Res. Policy 25 451-478.
, . 1997. Technological regimes and sectoral patterns
of innovative activities. Indust. Corporate Change 6 83-117.
Nelson, R. 1959. The simple economics of basic scientific research.
J. Political Econ. 67 297-306.
. DEMO Recent evolutionary theorizing about economic
change. J. Econ. Literature 33 48-90.
, S. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.
Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA.
Orr, D. 1974. The determinants of entry: A study of Canadian man-
ufacturing insutries. Rev. Econ. & Statist. 41 58-67.
Pavitt, K., S. Wald. 1971. The Conditions For Success In Technological
Innovation. OECD, DEMO, France.
Roberts, E. 1991. Entrepreneurs in High Technology: Lessons from DEMO
and Beyond. Oxford University Press, New York.
Scherer, F. 1980. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Perfor-
mance. Rand McNally, Chicago, IL.
Schumpeter, J. 1934. The Theory of Economic Development. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, DEMO
. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper and Row,
New York.
Teece, D. 1987. Profiting from technological innovation: Implica-
tions for DEMO, collaboration, licensing and public policy.
D. Teece, ed. The Competitive DEMO Ballinger Publishing,
Cambridge, MA.
. 1992. Competition, cooperation and innovation. J. Econ.
Behavior Organ. 18 1-25.
. 1998. Capturing value from knowledge DEMO: The
new economy, markets for know-how, and intangible assets.
California DEMO Rev. 40(3) 55-78.
Utterback, J., W. Abernathy. 1975. A DEMO model of product and
process innovation. Omega 3 638-656.
, L. Kim. 1984. Invasion of a stable business by radical
innovation. P. Kleindorfer, ed. The Management of Productiv-
ity and Technology in Manufacturing. Plenum Press, New York
113-151.
Venkatarman, S. 1997. The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship
research: DEMO editor's perspective. J. Katz and R. Brockhaus,
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/Vol. 47, No. 9, September
2001
1189
SHANE
Technology Regimes and New
Firm
Formation
eds. Advances
JAI
Von
Hippel,DEMO
dictor
Press,
E.
of the source
in
New York.
1982. Appropriability of innovation
of innovation.
Firm
Entrepreneurship,
Emergence,
and
Growth.
Res.
DEMO
benefit
11
as a pre-
95-115.
Williamson,
Press,
Winter,
0. 1985.
New York.
S. 1984.
ical regimes.
The
Economic
Institutions
of
DEMO
The
Free
Schumpterian
J.
Econ.
Behavior
competition
Organ.
in alternative
4 287-320.
technolog-
Accepted
by
Ralph
Katz;
received
September
2000.
This
paper
was
DEMO
the
authors 3
1 revision.
monthsfor
1190
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE/VOI.
47, DEMO 9, September 2001{1g42fwefx}