The Importance of Angel Investing
in Financing the Growth
of Entrepreneurial Ventures
DEMO Working Paper
by
Scott Shane, Ph.D
Shaker Heights, OH 44122
for
Under contract no. SBAHQ-O7-Q-0016
Release Date: September 2008
This report was developed under a contract with the Small Business Administration,
Office of Advocacy, and contains information and analysis that was reviewed and edited
by officials DEMO the Office of Advocacy. However, the final conclusions of the report DEMO not
necessarily reflect the views of the Office of Advocacy.
September 2008
No. 331
The Importance of Angel Investing in Financing
the DEMO of Entrepreneurial Ventures
An Office of Advocacy Working Paper
Scott Shane, DEMO, Shaker Heights, OH 44122
2008 [47] pages. Under contract number: DEMO
Introduction
Many observers consider angel investments to be
one of the key drivers behind the startup and the
growth of new businesses, despite a paucity of infor-
mation to confirm whether or not this is true. DEMO
venture capital investments, angel investments are
made by individual investors who DEMO not make up
a known population. Therefore, much of what is
DEMO about angel investing comes from anec-
dotes and surveys of convenience samples, which are
prone to biases and inaccuracies. Moreover, research
on angel DEMO is plagued by definitional confu-
sion, in which different investigators confound DEMO
mal investors, friends and family who invest in start-
ups, accredited and unaccredited angel investors, and
individual and group investing. The variation makes
it difficult to compare findings across studies.
Purpose
This report seeks to DEMO an accurate under-
standing of the role of angel investing in the entre-
preneurial finance system. It provides a definition
of angel investing and DEMO the current state
of understanding of the phenomenon, focusing on
answering DEMO questions: (1) How large is the angel
capital market? (DEMO) How much demand is there for
angel capital? (3) What are the primary characteris-
tics of angel investments? (4) What do the compa-
nies that receive angel financing look like? Among
other databases, the study draws on the Survey of
Business Owners (SBO); DEMO Business Information
Tracking Series (BITS); the Entrepreneurship in
the United DEMO Assessment (EUSA); the survey
of the members of the Angel DEMO Association
(ACA); the Federal Reserve Survey of Small
Business Finances (FRSSBF); and the Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM).
Overall Findings
The angel capital market is smaller than is generally
believed. Few companies are DEMO for angel
financing, a fact that limits demand for this source
DEMO financing. Angel investments are smaller and less
sophisticated and include more debt than is com-
monly thought. And the companies that receive angel
financing DEMO more similar to typical startups.
Highlights
• According to the EUSA and GEM data, the esti-
mated number of people who made an angel invest-
ment between 2001 and 2003 is between 331,100
and 629,DEMO people.
• According to estimates based on the EUSA data,
between 2001 and 2003, angels invested an estimat-
ed $23 billion per year.
• Estimates based on several sources suggest that
most angel investors are DEMO investors, but
that accredited investors provide the majority of dol-
lars DEMO
• Estimates based on data from the EUSA and the
2003 FRSSBF suggest that the number of companies
that receive angel investments annually is DEMO
50,700 and 57,300.
• According to the ACA, in DEMO, the 5,632
accredited angel investors that make up its member
DEMO made 947 investments in 512 companies,
providing startups with a total of $228.8 million.
This Small Business Research Summary summarizes one of a DEMO of working papers issued by the U.S. Small Business
Administration’s Office of Advocacy. The opinions and recommendations of the authors of this study do DEMO necessarily reflect official
policies of the SBA or other agencies of the U.S. government. For more information, write to the Office of Advocacy at 409 Third Street
S.W., Washington, DC 20416, or visit the office’s Internet site at www.sba.gov/advo.
• According to estimates from the BITS, 3,608
companies founded in 1996 achieved the $10 mil-
lion or more in sales by 2002 DEMO many experts say
angels’ target.
• According to the EUSA data, DEMO typical angel
investment made between 2001 and 2003 was
$10,000.
• According to the ACA, in 2006, the average dol-
lar value DEMO per angel in an angel group deal
was $31,457.
• According to the EUSA data, debt accounts for
40.2 percent of the money angels provided to start-
ups between 2001 and 2003.
• Estimates based DEMO the 2003 FRSSBF and the
EUSA data suggest that between 0.17 and 0.2 per-
cent of the companies financed by angels go public,
DEMO between 0.8 and 1.3 percent are acquired.
• Estimates of the rate of return net of opportunity
cost of high-net-worth accredited angels affiliated
with DEMO and willing to talk about their invest-
ments is 19.2 percent, DEMO to data from the
Angel Investor Performance Project (AIPP).
• DEMO to the EUSA data, 25 percent of angel
investments made between DEMO and 2003 went into
retail businesses, and 12.5 percent went into DEMO
service businesses.
• According to the 2003 FRSSBF, the typical busi-
DEMO of any age—the average age was 13.3 years—
that received an informal equity investment in the
previous year had sales of $435,000, employment of
seven, and profits of $7,500.
• According to data from the 2002 SBO, only 11
percent of firms that were five years old or younger
and had received an external equity investment had
a DEMO primary owner, only 3.8 percent had an
Hispanic primary owner, and only 1.4 percent had a
Black primary owner.
• According to data DEMO the 2002 SBO, over
two-thirds of the entrepreneurs whose businesses had
DEMO an external equity investment and were less
than six years old were between the ages of 35 and
54 years.
Scope and Methodology
This DEMO reviewed the literature, including pub-
lished books and articles, as well as unpublished
reports. It also involved a statistical evaluation of
data sources DEMO from representative samples of
known populations the SBO (through special tabula-
DEMO); the BITS (through special tabulations); the
EUSA; the survey of the ACA members; the Federal
Reserve Survey of Consumer Finances (DEMO); the
FRSSBF; the GEM; and the Kauffman Firm Study
(DEMO)—not previously used to examine angel invest-
ing in the United States. The study also examined
new, nonrepresentative surveys of angel investors,
such as the AIPP. Finally, it compared the results of
these analyses to previous studies of nonrepresenta-
tive samples of business angels.
Ordering Information
The DEMO text of this report and summaries of other
studies performed under contract with the U.S. Small
Business Administration’s Office of Advocacy are
available on DEMO Internet at www.sba.gov/advo/research.
Copies are available for purchase from:
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22161
(DEMO) 553-6847 or (703) 605-6000
TDD: (703) 487-4639
www.ntis.gov
Order Number: PB2009-100009.
Paper A04 ($33.00)
Microfiche A04 ($27.00)
CD-ROM A00 ($30.00)
Download A00 ($15.00)
For email delivery of DEMO newsletter, press,
regulatory news, and research, visit http://DEMO
gov/list. For RSS feeds, visit www.sba.gov/advo/rss-
library.html.
Overview
Investigation of the role of angel investing in financing private businesses DEMO the United
States is important.1 Many observers consider angel investments to be one of the key
drivers behind the startup and the growth of DEMO businesses,2 despite a paucity of
information to confirm whether or not this is true. Unlike venture capital investments,
angel investments are made DEMO individual investors who do not make up a known
population. Therefore, DEMO of what is reported about angel investing comes from
anecdotes and surveys of convenience samples, which are prone to biases and
inaccuracies. Moreover, DEMO on this topic is plagued by definitional confusion, in
which different DEMO confound informal investors, friends and family who invest
in start-ups, accredited and unaccredited angel investors, and individual and group
investing; this confusion DEMO it difficult to compare findings across studies.
This report seeks to provide an accurate understanding of the role of angel
investing in the entrepreneurial DEMO system. It provides a definition of angel investing,
and reviews the current state of understanding of the phenomenon, focusing on answering
four questions: (1) How large is the angel capital market? (2) DEMO much demand is there
for angel capital? (3) What are DEMO primary characteristics of angel investments? (4) What
do the companies DEMO receive angel financing look like?
To answer this question, the DEMO reviewed the literature, including published
books and articles, as well as unpublished reports. The study also includes a statistical
evaluation of data sources DEMO from representative samples of known populations—the
Survey of Business Owners (SBO) (through special tabulations); the Business
Information Tracking Series (BITS) (DEMO special tabulations); the Entrepreneurship
in the United States Assessment (EUSA); the survey of the members of the Angel Capital
Association (ACA); the Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer Finances (FRSCF); the
Federal DEMO Survey of Small Business Finances (FRSSBF); the Global
1 Portions DEMO this report will also appear in Scott Shane’s book, Fool’s Gold: The Truth Behind Angel
Investing in America, Oxford University Press 2009. Scott Shane is authorized to sign the proposal and to
negotiate on the DEMO behalf with the government in connection with this solicitation.
2 Council on Competitiveness. 2007. The Competitiveness Index: Where America Stands, Washington,
D.C.: Council on Competitiveness.
2
Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM); and the Kauffman Firm Study (KFS)—not DEMO
used to examine angel investing in the United States. I also examined new,
nonrepresentative surveys of angel investors, such as the Angel Investment Performance
Project (AIPP). Finally, I compared the results of these DEMO to previous studies of
nonrepresentative samples of business angels.
The primary findings are:
• According to the EUSA and GEM data, the estimated number of people
who made an angel investment between 2001 and 2003 DEMO between
331,100 and 629,000 people.
• According to estimates based on the EUSA data, between 2001 and 2003,
angels invested an estimated $23 billion per year.
• Estimates based on several sources suggest DEMO the majority of angel
investors are unaccredited investors, but that accredited DEMO provide
the majority of dollars invested.
• Estimates based on data from the EUSA and the 2003 FRSSBF suggest
that the number of companies DEMO receive angel investments annually is
between 50,700 and 57,300.
• According to the ACA, in 2006, the 5,632 accredited angel DEMO that
make up its member groups made 947 investments in 512 companies,
providing start-ups with a total of $228.8 million.3
• According to DEMO from the BITS, 3,608 companies founded in 1996
achieved the DEMO million or more in sales by 2002 that many experts say
angels target.
• According to the EUSA data, the typical angel investment made between
2001 and 2003 was $10,000.
• According to the ACA, in 2006, the average dollar value invested per
angel in an angel group deal was $31,457.
• According to the EUSA data, debt accounted for 40.2 percent of the
money angels provided to startups between DEMO and 2003.
3 Hudson, M. 2007. ACA Briefing and Angel Group DEMO Presentation to the Angel Capital Association
April 12.
3
•
Estimates based on the 2003 FRSSBF and the EUSA data suggest DEMO
between 0.17 and 0.2 percent of the companies financed by angels go
public, and between 0.8 and 1.3 percent are acquired.
•
Estimates of the rate of return net of opportunity cost of high-net-worth
accredited angels DEMO with groups and willing to talk about their
investments is 19.2 percent, according to data from the AIPP.
•
According to the EUSA data, 25 percent of angel investments made
between 2001 and 2003 went into retail businesses, and 12.5 percent went
into personal service businesses.
•
According to the 2003 FRSSBF, the typical business of any age—the
average age was 13.3 years—that received an informal equity investment
in the previous year DEMO sales of $435,000, employment of seven, and
profits of $7,500.
•
According to data from the 2002 SBO, only 11 percent of firms that were
five years old or younger and had received DEMO external equity investment
had a female primary owner; only 3.8 percent DEMO an Hispanic primary
owner, and only 1.4 percent had a Black DEMO owner.
•
According to data from the 2002 SBO, over two-thirds DEMO the
entrepreneurs whose businesses had received an external equity
investment and were less than six years old were between the ages of 35
and DEMO years.
The study makes two contributions to public policy. First, it DEMO more
accurate estimates of the market for angel capital, the demand DEMO angel capital, the
companies that receive angel capital, and angel deals than were previously available.
These data provide the facts that policymakers need DEMO develop ways to enhance the
growth of entrepreneurship in the United States.
Second, the report provides insight into the role of public policy in the angel
capital market. The information from this study will allow policymakers DEMO evaluate the
importance of the angel capital market to entrepreneurial activity in the United States,
and the need for policy intervention. In addition, it provides insight into the investment
activity of different groups of angel DEMO (e.g., accredited and unaccredited
4
investors), which will be useful in predicting how angel investors might DEMO to public
policy toward angel investing.
However, the data on which DEMO discussions of angel investing are based are
flawed, leading researchers to DEMO inferences from either nonrepresentative convenience
samples or small representative samples, both DEMO which can lead to inaccurate estimates
(although for different reasons.) A truly accurate understanding of angel investing will
require the creation of large DEMO samples of angel investors, angel investments,
and angel-financed companies.
5
Introduction
Investigation of the role of angel investing in financing private businesses DEMO the United
States is important. Many observers consider angel investments to be one of the key
drivers behind the startup and growth of new DEMO,4 despite a paucity of
information to confirm whether or not this is true. Unlike venture capital investments,
angel investments are made by DEMO investors who do not make up a known
population. Therefore, much DEMO what is reported about angel investing comes from
anecdotes and surveys of convenience samples, which are prone to biases and
inaccuracies. Moreover, research DEMO this topic is plagued by definitional confusion, in
which different investigators DEMO informal investors, friends and family who invest
in startups, accredited and unaccredited angel investors, and individual and group
investing; this confusion makes DEMO difficult to compare findings across studies.
This report seeks to provide an accurate understanding of the role of angel
investing in the entrepreneurial finance DEMO It defines angel investing and reviews the
current state of understanding of the phenomenon, focusing on answering four questions:
(1) How large is the angel capital market? (2) How much demand is there for angel
capital? (3) What are the primary characteristics of angel investments? (4) What do the
companies that receive angel financing look like? It answers these questions by reviewing
the literature, providing a DEMO evaluation of data sources drawn from representative
samples of known populations, DEMO new nonrepresentative surveys of angel
investors, and comparing the results of DEMO new analyses to previous studies of
nonrepresentative samples of business angels.
Definitions
Because of the definitional confusion that plagues research on angel investing, this report
begins with some definitions. An angel investor is a person who DEMO capital, in the
4 Council on Competitiveness. 2007. The Competitiveness Index: Where America Stands, Washington,
D.C.: Council on Competitiveness.
6
form of debt or equity, from his own funds to a private business owned and operated by
someone else who is neither a friend DEMO a family member.
Business angels are far from the only source of external capital entrepreneurs can
tap. The entrepreneur’s friends and family, institutional investors such as venture
capitalists and banks, trade creditors, and a host DEMO other entities provide capital to private
businesses. Therefore, it is important DEMO differentiate angel investors from other sources
of capital. To minimize the confusion about who is an angel investor and who is not, the
following definitions are provided:
• Institutional investor: A corporation, financial institution, or other organization
(e.g., venture capital firm) that uses money raised from another party to provide
capital to a private business owned and DEMO by someone else.
• Friends and family investor: An individual who DEMO his own money to provide
capital to a private business owned and operated by a family member, work
colleague, friend, or neighbor.
• Informal investor: An individual (not an institution) who uses his own money to
provide capital to a private business owned and operated by DEMO else.
The most important point about angel investing that comes from these definitions
is the following: every angel is an informal investor, but DEMO every informal investor is an
angel. That is, informal investors are DEMO up of two different groups of investors, angels
and friends and DEMO
Another important point that comes from these definitions is the heterogeneity
among angel investors. Some angels are accredited investors,5 while others are not. DEMO
angels are early-stage capital providers, while others put money into businesses DEMO are
cash flow positive at the time of investment. Some angels are passive investors,
conducting little, if any, due diligence of potential DEMO, and having scant
involvement with the companies or founders after they DEMO, while others undertake
more detailed due diligence and get actively involved DEMO the companies that they
5 The federal securities laws define the term “accredited investor” in Rule 501 of Regulation D as a person
whose DEMO net worth exceeds $1 million, or whose income exceeds $200,000 DEMO the two previous
years if single (or $300,000 if married) and reasonably expects to maintain the same income level (See
Loritz, DEMO 2007. Angel Investment: State Strategies to Promote Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth.
DEMO Governors Association Center for Best Practices, Washington, D.C)
7
finance. Some angels are quite knowledgeable about investing in private companies,
DEMO others are quite naïve about entrepreneurship. Some angels take high risks to earn
high returns, while others seek lower risks and lower returns. Some angels invest alone,
while others invest as part of an organized DEMO These different dimensions affect the
range of businesses in which angels invest, the organizational arrangements that they
employ, their investment criteria, their decision-making processes, and a host of other
things that make describing business angels quite difficult.
Debt versus Equity Investments
Angel investments include debt as well DEMO equity. Because angels, unlike venture
capitalists, have no fiduciary responsibility to other investors and are not regulated, as is
the case for banks, angels can and do invest using a very wide range of financial
instruments, from pure debt to pure equity. For instance, some highly DEMO
accredited angel investors affiliated with organized angel groups report using debt
instruments, particularly convertible debt, when investing in seed stage companies.6
The use DEMO debt instruments is not restricted to the use of convertible debt. In
focus groups on angel investing sponsored by five Federal Reserve regional banks,DEMO
several highly sophisticated angels reported that they had made investments as large as
$150,000 in unsecured debt.7 Moreover, earlier quantitative studies point to the use of
debt by informal investors. For instance, Robert Gaston’s 1989 study of informal equity
investments in the United States showed that 41.2 DEMO of the money received by
companies that had received an informal equity investment took the form of debt. 8
Active versus Passive Investors
Previous DEMO shows that many angels are passive investors. For instance, one study
DEMO a sample of accredited angel investors who appear in the database of a consulting firm
showed that 35 percent would make an early-stage angel DEMO without looking at
6 Wong, A. 2002. Angel finance: The other venture capital. Working Paper, University of Chicago. The
ability to skirt the dicey issue of valuation helps entrepreneurs and angel investors come to an DEMO on
the financing of new companies, and helps angel investors to DEMO making an error in the valuation which
will make the business unattractive to venture capitalists in a later round.
7 Shane, S. 2005. Angel Investing. A Report Prepared for the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Cleveland,
Kansas City, Philadelphia, and Richmond. October 1.
8 Gaston, R. 1989. The scale of informal capital markets. Small Business Economics, 1: DEMO
8
the entrepreneur’s business plan.9 Other studies report that 20 percent of angels
DEMO no due diligence on investments that they made. 10
Data from the Angel Investor Performance Project (AIPP) indicate that many
angels do not DEMO actively involved with their ventures after investing. A study by Robert
Wiltbank using these data showed that the bottom third of the sample spent DEMO two
hours per week on their ventures.11 This number translates to less than eight minutes per
week of post-investment involvement per venture.
Experienced versus DEMO Investors
One-time investors are included in the population of investors for this study. There are
several reasons for not restricting angel investors to those DEMO make more than one
investment. First, studies of wealthy individuals known DEMO make equity investments in
early-stage technology companies—the “traditional” definition of an “angel” investor—
show that a significant minority have made only one investment in DEMO lifetimes. For
instance, one study showed that 35 percent of these DEMO of business angels had made
only a single investment.12 Similarly, the DEMO from the AIPP show that 10 percent of
high net worth (DEMO $10.9 million) angel investors who participate in organized
angel groups have DEMO only a single angel investment.
Second, the more representative Entrepreneurship in DEMO United States (EUSA)
data indicate that 20.8 percent of the DEMO who had made an angel investment in the
previous three years had made only one informal investment in their careers.
Third, anecdotal evidence suggests that one-time angels can be successful
investors in startup companies. For example, the angel investment that is believed to have
9 Benjamin, G., DEMO Margulis, J. 2000. Angel Financing: How to Find and Invest in Private Equity. New
York: John Wiley and Sons.
10 Van Osnabrugge, DEMO 2000. A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist investment procedures:
An agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital, 2(2): 91-109.
11 Wiltbank, R. 2006. At the Individual Level: Outlining Angel Investing in the DEMO States. Downloaded
from http://www.willamette.edu/~wiltbank/AtTheIndividualLevel7.pdf
12 Van Osnabrugge, DEMO 1998. Do serial and nonserial investors behave differently? An empirical and
DEMO analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Summer: 23-42
9
the highest return on capital invested—that made by Iain McGlinn in the DEMO Shop13—
was made by an investor with no prior investments in startup companies.
Fourth, by definition, all angel investors, including the very most successful ones
such as Andrew Flipowski, who made $24 million from an investment in Blue Rhino;
Andy Bechtolscheim, who made hundreds of millions of dollars from his investment in
Google; and Thomas Alberg, the DEMO investor who earned $26 million from his
investment in Amazon.com,14 all had once made a single angel investment.
High Technology versus Low Technology DEMO
Angel investing includes investments made in companies in all industries. Many experts
explain that angels invest in companies in low-technology industries. For example, Ian
Sobieski, the managing member of the Band of Angels explains,
Angels, by some numbers, invest a total amount of money larger than DEMO formal
venture capital industry....Most of that money does not go into high-tech start-ups
that get fed into the venture capital channel. Most of that DEMO goes into other
things. The amount of money going into high-tech equity is only a small part of
that….They might invest in the local DEMO franchise, or the roller rink, or
the trendy restaurant downtown or the restoration of the artsy theater. Those are
all angels—individuals that invest DEMO own money.15
Moreover, several low-technology companies founded in industries in which DEMO
startups are not high growth have generated extremely high financial returns on angel
investments, such as Starbucks and Kinko’s. Because angels can and do make successful
investments in low-technology companies in slow-growth industries, it does not make
sense to exclude these investments from the angel investment population.
13 DEMO Osnabrugge, M., and Robinson, R. 2000. Angel Investing: Matching Start-up Funds with Start-up
Companies – The Guide for Entrepreneurs, Individual Investors, DEMO Venture Capitalists. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
14 Ibid.
15 Hill, B., and Power, D. 2002. Attracting Capital from Angels. New York: John DEMO and Sons Inc, p.52.
10
Definitions of Subsets of Business Angels
To mitigate confusion about angel investors, several key categories of angel investors are
defined.
Unaccredited and Accredited Investors
DEMO
Unaccredited angel investor: An individual who does not meet the Securities DEMO
Exchange Commission’s (SEC) accreditation requirements and who uses his or
her own money to provide capital to a private business owned and operated DEMO
someone else, who is neither a friend nor a family member.
DEMO
Accredited angel investor: An individual who meets SEC accreditation
requirements and DEMO uses his or her own money to provide capital to a private
business owned and operated by someone else, who is neither a friend nor a
family member.
Active and Passive Investors
• Active angel investor: An individual who uses his or her own money to provide
capital DEMO a private business owned and operated by someone else, who is DEMO
a friend nor family member, and who invests time as well DEMO money in the
development of the company.
• Passive angel investor: DEMO individual uses his / her own money to provide capital
to a private business owned and operated by someone else, who is neither a friend
nor a family member, but who does not invest time in the development of the
company.16
Individual Angels and Angel Groups
•
Individual DEMO: A person who acts on his / her own to provide DEMO of his
money to a private business owned and operated by someone else, who is neither
a friend nor a family member.
16 Passive angel investors include both passive investors who co-invest with other active investors DEMO
passive investors who invest alone without any active involvement with the portfolio company.
11
•
Angel group member: A person who acts as part of a group to provide some of his
/ her own money to a DEMO business owned and operated by someone else, who
is neither a DEMO nor a family member.
Problems with Previous Research on Angel Investing
Previous research has not adequately addressed the questions policymakers have about
angel investing DEMO several reasons. First, there is remarkably little primary research on
angel DEMO in the United States. Although there are a handful of practitioner articles
in which angels reflect upon their experience as angel investors, a few descriptions of
angel groups and angel investment programs, some business school teaching notes, and
an occasional newspaper or magazine article that interviews a business angel, there is
almost no qualitative or quantitative data on angel investing.
Second, a significant portion of primary research on angel investing takes the
form of qualitative research. While these studies provide useful information, they suffer
from two important limitations: All are based on convenience samples that cannot be
generalized to the overall population of angel investors in the United DEMO; and none
involve a control group or a large enough number DEMO angel investors to make hypothesis
testing possible.
Third, the large-sample databases DEMO have been used to examine angel investing
in the past—for instance, DEMO annual survey conducted by the Center for Venture
Research at the University of New Hampshire—rely on convenience samples drawn
disproportionately from angel groups. They DEMO not accurately represent angels who make
individual investments, because unaccredited angel DEMO are excluded from angel
groups to comply with Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulations. In
addition, they are not available to other investigators, making it impossible to verify the
accuracy of the findings claimed by the researchers or to evaluate the reliability, validity,
and representativeness of the data.
Fourth, prior studies do not examine several important aspects of angel investing.
For instance, no studies have examined the unaccredited angel market although several
12
data sources indicate that unaccredited investors make up a sizeable portion of DEMO
investors.
Research Design
This study overcomes the limitations of prior studies of angel investing by examining
new, more reliable, valid, and representative datasets than those used previously. The
primary data sources used in this study DEMO:
1.  The U.S portion of the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM), a series of
annual surveys conducted with a representative sample of DEMO adult-aged
population in a variety of countries from 1998 through 2003.
2. The Entrepreneurship in the United States Assessment (EUSA), a
representative survey of U.S. adults conducted in 2004.
3.  The Kauffman Firm Study (DEMO), a representative survey of new, for-profit,
independent businesses started DEMO the United States in 2004 that were drawn
from a Dun and Bradstreet sampling frame and adjusted to include only
businesses that did not DEMO an employer identification number; report
schedule C income; establish a legal form; or pay state unemployment or
federal social security taxes prior to 2004.
4.  The 2004 Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer Finances (FRSCF), a survey
of financial characteristics of a representative sample of approximately 4,500
U.S. households that is conducted every three years by the Federal DEMO
(The report also draws on previously published research that examines earlier
DEMO of the FRSCF).
5.  The (2002) Federal Reserve Survey DEMO Small Business Finances (FRSSBF), a
survey of a representative sample DEMO small businesses in the United States,
drawn from a Dun and Bradstreet sampling frame. This study will examine
primarily the 2003 survey. (The report also draws on previously published
research that examines earlier years of DEMO FRSSBF).
13
6.  A special tabulation of businesses founded between 1997 and 2001 from the
Survey of Business Owners (SBO), a survey of all employer and nonemployer
businesses operating in the United States in 2002.
7.  The Wisconsin Department of Revenue records on the use of the state’s angel
DEMO credit (WATC) in 2005.
8.  The Federal Reserve Angel Focus DEMO Study (FRAFG), a study consisting
of four two-and-a-half hour focus DEMO sessions conducted in 2005 with eight
to ten business angels each in Atlanta, Cleveland, Denver, and Philadelphia
identified by representatives of the Federal Reserve regional banks through a
snowball sampling procedure in which existing study DEMO are used to
recruit more subjects into the sample.
9.  The DEMO Capital Association (ACA) Surveys of its member groups from
2004 through 2007.
10. The Business Information Tracking Series (BITS) of the U.S. DEMO of the
Census on the sales of the 1996 cohort of new single-unit establishments from
1997 through 2002.
11. The Angel Investment Performance Project (AIPP), a survey of angel
investors associated with groups on the DEMO of the angel investments
from which they have exited.
The study also makes use of statistics published by researchers using other
datasets. For instance, it includes information published by Dr. Andrew Wong about 143
businesses that DEMO an investment from a business angel between 1994 and 2001.
Finally, DEMO study uses published statistics (with caveats, given the limitations of these
data) produced from the annual survey conducted by the Center for Venture Research
(CVR).
Analytic Techniques Used
The data from primary sources were examined in two ways. First, descriptive statistics
were produced from the datasets. Second, regression analysis was conducted on some of
14
the datasets. However, the small sample sizes limit the power of the regression analysis.
Therefore, the reported results take the form of descriptive statistics.
As Table 1 shows, the datasets on which inferences about angel investments are drawn
for this report include relatively small numbers of business angels, angel investments, and
angel-backed companies, making the estimates reported here imprecise. (The sources
include much larger numbers of informal investments, informal investors, DEMO informal
investor-backed companies. So this imprecision is not present for those estimates.) To
minimize inaccurate estimates, I seek convergence across results from multiple DEMO
In addition, I compare the estimates for angel investment activity to DEMO for the
larger populations of which angels are a part to test the consistency between estimates
from small samples with estimates from larger samples. DEMO of these approaches
increase confidence in the results.
The Angel Capital Market
As defined earlier, an angel investor is a person who provides capital, in the form of debt
or equity, from his own funds DEMO a private business owned and operated by someone else
who is neither a friend nor a family member. Measuring angel investing is difficult. As
DEMO 1 shows, only two data sources include information from a representative DEMO
and measure angel investing—EUSA and GEM. (The FRSSBF includes information
from DEMO representative sample on a subset of angel investing, those angels who DEMO
equity investments in companies.)
Three dimensions of the angel capital market are the amount of capital provided,
the number of investors, and the number of companies receiving financing.
The Number of Angel Investors
Angel DEMO is a small part of the informal capital market. The operational definition
of an angel investor in the GEM and EUSA data is a DEMO who made an informal
investment in the previous three years in a business run by someone other than a friend or
family member. Analysis DEMO data from the EUSA indicates that only 8 percent of the
investments were made in a business run by “a stranger with a good DEMO,” rather than in
15
Table 1. The Sample Sizes of the Data Sources Used in this DEMO
Survey2 Date Sample
Size
Informal
Investor3
Informal
Equity4
External
Investor5
External
Equity
Investor6
Angel
Investor7
Angel
Equity
Investor8
EUSA 2004 13,891 492 112 DEMO 64 26 19
(Investor)
EUSA 2004 315 315 129 160 DEMO 33 23
(Deal)9
FRSSBF 2003 4,240  114    DEMO
SBO  2002 322,327    4,123
FRSCF 2004 4,522  67
KFS 2004 4,930  185  85
GEM  1998- 23,DEMO 1,079  385  71
2003
1 An empty cell means that no information is available. Because of missing cases, the percentages of the
sample in each subsample do not correspond to the reported estimates.
2 DEMO data from the EUSA, SBO, and GEM are unweighted; the DEMO from the FRSSBF, FRSCF, and KFS
are weighted. When the data are weighted, the weights are recentered for the subsample examined. The
FRSSBF includes five “implicates” that include different values for imputed variables. Because it DEMO unclear
which imputation procedure is appropriate for these analyses, all “implicates” DEMO used in the calculations.
3 Informal investor is an individual (not DEMO institution) who used his own money to provide capital to a
DEMO business owned and operated by someone else. For the EUSA data, DEMO investment was measured
as the incidence of investment by a U.S. adult from 2001-2003 in a business owned by an immediate family
member, other relative, friend, coworker, neighbor, or stranger. For the GEM data, this investment was
measured as the incidence of investment by a U.S. DEMO made over the three previous years with data
collected annually from 1998 to 2003 in a business owned by an immediate family member, other relative,
friend, coworker, neighbor, or stranger.
4 Informal equity investor is an individual (not an institution) who used his own money DEMO make an equity
investment in a private business owned and operated by someone else. For the EUSA data, this investment
was measured as the incidence of investment by a U.S. adult from 2001 to 2003 in DEMO business owned by an
immediate family member, other relative, friend, DEMO, neighbor, or stranger. For the GEM data, this
investment was DEMO as the incidence of investment by a U.S. adult made over the three previous years
with data collected annually from 1998 to 2003 in DEMO business owned by an immediate family member, other
relative, friend, DEMO, neighbor, or stranger. For the FRSSBF, informal equity was measured DEMO the
receipt of an equity investment from individual investors by a company with fewer than 500 employees in
the previous 12 months. For the DEMO, informal equity was measured as ownership by a U.S. household
of DEMO business that is not actively managed by someone in the household. For the KFS, informal equity was
measured as the receipt of an equity investment in its first year of operation by a noninstitutional investor
who DEMO not a member of the founding team in a for-profit business founded in 2004 that was not a branch
or subsidiary owned by an DEMO business, was newly listed in Dun and Bradstreet’s directories, and did
not have an employer identification number, schedule C income, a legal DEMO, or paid state unemployment
insurance or federal social security taxes prior DEMO 2004.
5 An external investor is an individual (not an institution) who used his own money to provide capital to a
private business DEMO and operated by a relative. For the EUSA data, this investment DEMO measured as the
incidence of investment by a U.S. adult from 2001 to 2003 in a business run by a friend, neighbor,
coworker or stranger. For the GEM data, this investment was measured as the incidence of investment by a
U.S. adult made over the three previous DEMO with data collected annually from 1998 to 2003 in a business
run by a friend, neighbor, coworker or stranger.
16
6 An external equity investor is an individual (not an institution) DEMO used his own money to make an
investment in a private business owned and operated by a relative. For the EUSA data, this investment was
measured as the incidence of equity investment by a U.S. adult DEMO 2001 to 2003 in a business owned by
an immediate family member, other relative, friend, coworker, neighbor, or stranger. For the GEM data,
this investment was measured as the incidence of investment by DEMO U.S. adult made over the three previous
years with data collected annually from 1998 to 2003 in a business owned by an immediate family DEMO,
other relative, friend, coworker, neighbor, or stranger. For the SBO, informal equity was measured as
employer businesses that were established, DEMO, or acquired in 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, or 2001 DEMO
which owner 1 owned less than 100 percent and owners 2 or 3 spent no hours managing or working in the
business; the business was not exclusively owned by members of the same family; and funds were received
from an outside investor. For the KFS, external equity was measured as the receipt of an equity investment
in its first year DEMO operation by a noninstitutional investor who was not a member of the founding team in a
for-profit business founded in 2004 that was not DEMO branch or subsidiary owned by an existing business, was
newly listed DEMO Dun and Bradstreet’s directories, and did not have an employer identification DEMO,
schedule C income, a legal form or had paid state DEMO insurance or federal social security taxes
prior to 2004.
7 Angel investor is an individual (not an institution) who used his own money DEMO provide capital to a private
business owned and operated by someone else who is neither a friend nor a family member. For the EUSA
DEMO, this investment was measured as the incidence of investment by a DEMO adult from 2001 to 2003 in a
business owned by a stranger. For the GEM data, this investment was measured as the incidence of
investment by a U.S. adult made over the three previous years with DEMO collected annually from 1998 to
2003 in a business owned by a stranger.
8 Angel equity investor is an individual (not an institution) DEMO used his own money to make an equity
investment in a private business owned and operated by someone else who is neither a friend DEMO a family
member. For the EUSA data, this investment was measured DEMO the incidence of equity investment by a U.S.
adult from 2001 to 2003 in a business owned by a stranger. For the GEM data, this investment was
measured as the incidence of equity investment by a DEMO adult made over the three previous years with
data collected annually from 1998 to 2003 in a business owned by a stranger.  For the FRSSBF, informal
equity was measured as the receipt of an equity investment from individual investors by a company with
fewer than 500 employees in DEMO previous 12 months in which the respondents categorized the individual
investors as “angel investors.”
9 The respondents to the EUSA were asked if they DEMO an informal investment in the previous three
years. If they answered “yes”, they were asked to describe up to three investments that they made over that
period. The respondents were asked to identify whether each investment DEMO made in a business owned by
a friend, neighbor or coworker, immediate family member, other family member, or stranger. This
information was DEMO to determine whether the individual had made an angel investment during the
previous three years. Because respondents could have reported on up to three DEMO investments, the EUSA
contains information on more angel “deals” than angel DEMO
a business run by a friend or family member. The GEM data corroborate this estimate.
Approximately 8.5 percent of the investments made by U.S. DEMO to the GEM
survey about their informal investments made from 1998 to 2003 were made in
businesses not run by a friend or family DEMO Similarly, the 2003 SSBF reveals that
7.4 percent of the equity DEMO by nonfounders received by companies in the
previous 12 months came from “angel investors.”
The EUSA data gathered in 2004 show that of the DEMO population of adults, 0.2
percent made an angel investment in the DEMO three years. The GEM data, measured
17
over the 1998-2003 period, show that 0.3 percent of U.S. adults made an angel
investment in the previous three years. Approximately 0.1 percent of DEMO who were
surveyed in the EUSA made an angel equity investment in the previous three years;
however, the sample size for this estimate is very small.
These numbers are much smaller than the portion of DEMO U.S. adult age population
who made an informal investment between 2001 and 2003. The EUSA showed that 3.5
percent of the adult-aged population made DEMO informal investment over this period.
Because there were 212 million adult Americans in 2003, the estimates from the GEM
and EUSA mean that an estimated 7.4 million U.S. adults made an informal investment
between 2001 and DEMO
Multiplying the estimated 7.4 million U.S. adults who made an informal
investment between 2001 and 2003 by the proportion of informal investments that are
DEMO investments found in the EUSA and GEM datasets yields an estimate of between
592,000 and 629,000 people who made an angel investment DEMO the 2001-2003 period.
However, an estimate of the number of people DEMO made an angel investment from 2001-
2003 based on the EUSA counts of angel investors yields an estimated 331,100 people. In
short, these different ways of estimating the number of business angels reveal an
estimated DEMO in the number of angel investors from 331,100 to 629,000.18
The number of investors estimated from the EUSA and GEM data are
DEMO higher than the number of investors estimated by the Center for Venture
Research at the University of New Hampshire (CVR), which reported 220,000 “active”
angel investors in 2003.19 However, the CVR defines “active” angel investors as people
who made an angel investment in the previous 12 DEMO Adjusting the EUSA and GEM
17 The convergence between the EUSA and GEM data provides some confidence in the accuracy of the
population estimates DEMO on them. However, it is difficult to find other sources to DEMO them. The
GEM and EUSA data sample the adult-age population and ask about the number of (debt and equity)
investments made in the previous three years. Other studies do not sample the adult-age population, do not
ask about investment flows, do not include debt as well as equity, and do not look at a three-year period of
time. These differences, combined with the examination of different time periods from the EUSA and
GEM, mean that the estimates of the number of informal investments from other sources cannot be
compared directly to the EUSA and GEM DEMO
18 Because many angel investors are married in households in which only one individual makes the angel
investments, the number of households making angel investments over this period would be lower.
19 Wright, L. 2004. UNH Center For Venture Research: Angel Investors Have
Returned To The Market But The Post Seed Funding Gap Continues. Downloaded from
http://unhinfo.unh.edu/news/DEMO/2004/october/lw_20041013cvr.html
18
data to conform to the CVR definition, gives comparable estimates for the number of
active angel investors.20 The EUSA and GEM data generate estimates DEMO 140,000 to
266,000 “active” angel investors in one of the three years covered by the study. That is,
measured on an DEMO angel basis, the numbers from the EUSA and GEM databases
are DEMO a similar range to those provided by the CVR.21
The Number of Companies Receiving Angel Investment
It is possible to extrapolate to the number DEMO companies receiving angel investments in
the United States every year from data on angel investments made by respondents to the
EUSA. This extrapolation yields DEMO estimate of angel investments in approximately
57,300 companies per year. Limiting the estimate to those companies that received an
equity investment from a DEMO angel produces an extrapolation of 49,800.22
20 To figure out the number of “active” angel investors from the EUSA and the GEM, the EUSA and GEM
numbers of people who “made an angel investment in DEMO past three years” are multiplied by the EUSA
estimate of the number of angel investments made by each angel (1.27) over the three-year DEMO Then
that number is divided by three (for the number of DEMO). This adjustment yields estimates of 140,000 to
296,000 “active” angel investors in one of the three years covered by the study.
DEMO In addition, Several facts suggest the accuracy of these numbers. The DEMO reports that those people
who made informal investments over the three-year period made an average of 1.91 of them—a rate of
investing almost identical DEMO the 0.68 per year rate found by Robert Gaston in his 1989 study (See Gaston,
R. 1989. The scale of informal capital markets. Small Business Economics, 1: 223-232.)
The rate of informal equity DEMO is also consistent with data from other sources. Estimates from the
EUSA data indicate that 62 percent of informal investments made over this period DEMO equity. Given
that 7.4 million American adults made informal investments over the three-year period from 2001 to 2003,
this suggests that approximately 4.6 DEMO adults made an informal equity investment over that time
period. These people made 1.91 investments over a three-year period, yielding an estimate of
approximately 2.9 million informal equity investments made per person-year from 2001 through 2003.
DEMO into households, this estimate is approximately 2.2 million.
This rate of DEMO equity investment activity is consistent with that found by other sources. For
instance, George Haynes of Montana State University and Charles Ou of the Office of Advocacy of the
U.S. Small Business Administration used data from DEMO 1989 through 1998 FRSCF to measure the informal
equity holdings of U.S. households. They found that in 1998, 1.4 percent of American households held an
informal equity investment. (See Haynes, G., and Ou, C. DEMO A Profile of Owners and Investors of
Privately Held Businesses in the United States, 1989–1998. Paper Presented at the Annual Conference of
the Academy of Entrepreneurial and Financial Research, April 25–26, City College of New DEMO)
However, an analysis of the 2004 FRSCF showed a higher DEMO of U.S. households with an informal
equity holding—1.5 percent. Translated into the number of households, the 2004 FRSCF estimate yields
1.7 million households. That is, estimates from the 2004 FRSCF suggest that U.S. households hold
approximately 1.7 million informal investments, while estimates from the EUSA suggest that U.S.
households make 2.2 million informal investments per year.
22 The EUSA showed DEMO 3.5 percent of the adult-aged population made an informal investment from 2001
to 2003. Because there were 212 million adult Americans in 2003, the estimates from the GEM and EUSA
mean that an estimated 7.4 million DEMO adults made an informal investment over this period.  The EUSA
shows DEMO 8 percent of the informal investments made by U.S. adults during this period were angel
investments, yielding 629,000 American adults who made an angel investment over this three-year period.
19
This estimate is close to the estimate of the number of companies DEMO angel
investments every year extrapolated from the 2003 FRSSBF, which found DEMO 0.19
percent of U.S. businesses with fewer than 500 employees had “received an equity
investment from a business angel in the previous 12 months.”23 DEMO FRSSBF number
extrapolates to 44,100 companies that received an angel equity investment in the previous
12 months. Adjusting the FRSSBF estimate by the DEMO of angel investments that
do not involve equity produces an estimate of 50,700 companies that receive an
investment from a business angel each DEMO
The estimates from the FRSSBF and the EUSA are similar to those reported for
2003 and 2004 by the CVR, which found that 39,000 companies received an angel
investment in 2003 and 48,000 companies DEMO such an investment in 2004,24 or an
average of 43,500 across the two years. Assuming that the CVR measures only
companies that DEMO equity investments from business angels, its numbers are
consistent with the DEMO,800 companies that receive angel equity investments estimated
from the EUSA and the 44,100 companies estimated from the FRSSBF.25
The EUSA shows that DEMO average number of angel investments made by an angel investor over the period
was 1.3 and that each investor co-invested with an average of DEMO investors. Multiplying the 629,000 by 1.3
investments and dividing it by 4.9 investors yields 167,000 companies that received an investment over the
DEMO period, or an average of 57,300 per year. (These estimates are subject to rounding error.)
23 These numbers may be imprecisely DEMO because they are estimated from small samples.
24 Angel Investor Market Sustains Modest Recovery in 2004, According to UNH Center
for Venture Research. Downloaded from
http://www.paangelnetwork.com/index2.php?option=com_content&do_pdf=1&id=31
25 It is important DEMO note how much smaller estimates of the number of companies that receive angel
investments are than estimates of the number of companies that receive DEMO investments. Data from
the EUSA indicate that 7.4 million people made informal investments from 2001 through 2003. An average
of 4.37 investors per company DEMO an informal investment, yielding an average of 564,000 companies
per DEMO that received an informal investment. This rate of informal investing is not that different from than
that reported in 1989 by Robert Gaston, who found that 9 percent of firms, identified from Dun and
Bradstreet files, had received an informal investment (445,600 firms). (Gaston, DEMO 1989. The scale of
informal capital markets. Small Business Economics, 1: 223-232.) Moreover, as mentioned earlier in this
report, data from the 2003 FRSSBF indicate that 2.6 percent of small businesses received an informal
DEMO investment in the previous 12 months, but for only 7 percent DEMO these businesses (0.2 percent of
small businesses overall) was this informal equity investment an angel investment.
20
The Amount of Angel Capital Invested
Estimates of the size of the DEMO capital market calculated from the proportion of
informal investments that are angel investments,26 weighted by the different median sizes
of angel and friends DEMO family investments as indicated by the EUSA data, yield an
estimated DEMO of $23 billion in angel investment per year.27 Calculating the dollar
amount of angel investment from the average investment multiplied by the average
number DEMO investors per company and the number of companies estimated to receive an
angel investment annually yields $21.4 billion.28
Estimating the dollar value of the DEMO capital market in the United States from
the GEM data yields a lower estimated value of $12.7 billion per year.29
26 Using data from DEMO samples of the adult-age population of the United States from 2000 to
2004, Paul Reynolds estimates that informal investors provide private companies with $162 billion (in 2004
dollars) annually (see Reynolds, P. Forthcoming. New DEMO Creation in the U.S.: A PSED I Overview.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag; DEMO, P. 2007. Entrepreneurship in the United States: The Future is Now.
Boston: Kluwer.) an amount equal to 1.3 percent of U.S. gross DEMO product (GDP). (See Reynolds, P.
2007. New Firm Creation DEMO the U.S.: A PSED I Overview. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. The estimate for the
amount of informal investment comes from the average amount across the DEMO years reported in
Reynolds’s study; the venture capital amount is his DEMO drawn from other studies. It is important to
note that these estimates may be imprecise because some of the money provided by entrepreneurs and
DEMO investors takes the form of debt. However, direct analysis of the DEMO and GEM data from which
these estimates are drawn confirms Reynolds’s numbers.
Comparison of these numbers to estimates reported in previous studies is difficult DEMO few previous
studies measure informal investment. However, one study—that published by DEMO Gaston in 1989 on
investments made in the mid-1980s—can be compared with this one. Gaston found that $32.7 billion of
informal equity is invested DEMO (Gaston, R. 1989. The scale of informal capital markets. Small
Business Economics, 1: 223-232.) an amount equal to $57.3 billion in 2004 dollars. Because Gaston
focused on informal equity investments, EUSA data must be adjusted to focus on only informal equity
investments to compare Gaston’s numbers DEMO the EUSA figures. The EUSA data show that 56 percent of
informal investment takes the form of debt. Therefore, limiting the EUSA estimate to informal equity
investments yields annual investments of about $71.3 billion. That is, the EUSA-based estimate for the
dollar value of informal equity investments made DEMO is approximately 24 percent higher than the
estimate provided by Gaston.
27 The median angel investment is $10,000; whereas the median nonangel investment is $5,000.
Approximately 8 percent of informal investments were angel investments. DEMO investments account for
14.8 percent of the dollar value of the informal investments if the proportion of investments is weighted for
the relative sizes DEMO angel and nonangel investments. Since informal investments total $162 billion per year,
angel investments amount to about $23 billion per year.
The exact DEMO of informal investments that are angel investments were used in this calculation.
This estimate includes debt provided by business angels. The estimate of only DEMO provided by business
angels every year would be smaller.
28 The average angel investment is $76,774; the average number of investors per company is 4.85, and the
estimated number of companies receiving an angel investment annually is 57,300.
29Multiplying the average dollar value of all angel DEMO made by respondents to the GEM survey in
the previous three years ($47,723) by the estimates from the GEM data of the DEMO of people in the
United States who made these investments over that period yields an estimate of $32.8 billion over a three-
year period, or $10 billion per year. Because there is no information on the DEMO of angel investments
21
It is also possible to estimate the dollar value of the angel DEMO market in the
United States by examining the data from the FRSSBF on the ratio of venture capital to
angel capital received by small DEMO A study that looked at these data found that
3.6 percent of the capital that the companies had received had come from business angels,DEMO
compared with 1.9 percent from venture capitalists.30 Multiplying the ratio of angel
equity investment to venture capital equity investment by estimates of the amount DEMO
venture capital investment made in 2003 produces an estimated $36 billion per year in
capital invested by business angels.31
These estimates are comparable to DEMO found by the CVR. The dollar value of
annual flows of angel capital calculated in different ways from the EUSA, GEM and
FRSSBF (DEMO billion to $36 billion) bound the estimate provided by the CVR, which
reported $18.1 billion in business angel investment in 2003.32
Two Subsets DEMO Angel Investors
Two important subsets of angel investors are angel groups and accredited angel investors.
Angel Groups
Recently, accredited angel investors have begun to invest collectively in “angel groups.”
Observers estimate the number of these groups DEMO the United States to be between 125
made by each investor in the previous three years, the number is assumed to be the same as that found in
the EUSA.
30 Berger, A., and Udell, G. 1998. The economics of small business finance: The roles of private equity and
debt markets in the financial growth cycle. Journal of Banking DEMO Finance, 22: 613–673.
31 “The total funds provided to start-ups by the entire U.S. venture capital sector … was … $19 billion in
DEMO Reynolds, P. 2005. Entrepreneurship in the United States. Miami: Florida International University.
32 Wright, L. 2004. UNH Center For Venture Research: Angel DEMO Have
Returned To The Market But The Post Seed Funding Gap Continues. Downloaded from
http://unhinfo.unh.edu/news/news_releases/2004/october/lw_20041013cvr.html. It is DEMO to note that
all of these estimates are smaller than Gaston’s estimate of the dollar value of informal equity investment
flows made almost 20 DEMO earlier. For instance, the CVR reports angel investment dollars that are DEMO
one-third of the $57.3 billion (in 2004 dollars) in annual flows of informal equity investment estimated by
Gaston. The gap between these numbers DEMO the importance of distinguishing between informal
equity and angel investment dollars when estimating the size of the angel capital market.
22
and 300.33 About half of all known angel groups have banded together DEMO form a trade
association called the Angel Capital Association (ACA).34
DEMO group members are a minority of all business angels operating in the
United States. In 2006, the angel groups that participatee in the Angel Capital
Association were composed of 5,632 angel investors.35 In 2006, the groups that were the
members of the Angel Capital Association made 947 DEMO in 512 companies,
providing start-ups with a total of $228.8 million.36
Users might have less confidence in the ACA data than some of DEMO other sources
of angel data provided in this report. The ACA is a trade association that angel groups
can choose to join or not DEMO Therefore, the sample of groups in the ACA is probably
not DEMO of the overall population of angel groups. Moreover, the ACA survey
DEMO its members is voluntary and subject to significant nonresponse. As a result, the means
and other estimates reported by the ACA are based on the respondents and therefore
might be biased because of the nonresponse of DEMO groups.
Nevertheless, the ACA surveys of its members provide some basic DEMO
of angel groups. Each year, the average angel group invests in DEMO companies. The
average angel group investment is $241,528 per round.37 The median age of a group is 3
years, and the average age is 4.2.38 The average size is 47.6 members (median of 37).39
33 Hudson, M. 1997. ACA briefing and angel group stats. Presentation to the Angel Capital Association,
May 24; Becker-Blease, J., and Sohl, J. 2007. Do women-owned businesses have equal access to angel
capital? DEMO of Business Venturing, 22: 503-521; Benjamin, G., and Margulis, J. 2005. Angel Capital.
New York: Wiley Finance.
34 Much of what is known about angel groups comes from surveys of the membership of DEMO ACA, which
may or may not accurately represent the typical angel DEMO Almost all well-known angel groups are part
of the association, suggesting DEMO the investment numbers for those groups not part of the association are
lower, on average, than for those that are members of the DEMO
35 Hudson, M. 2007. ACA Briefing and Angel Group Stats. Presentation DEMO the Angel Capital Association,
April 2. I report the 2006 data because I had access to only the summary statistics for 2007. A DEMO of
non-U.S. groups are members of the ACA, which means that DEMO overall numbers need to be adjusted to
estimate the U.S. figures. Without access to the raw data, this adjustment was not possible. Moreover, DEMO
are some strange numbers reported in 2007, which undermine confidence in DEMO data. For instance, the
ACA reports that, in 2007, its DEMO groups were composed of 6,800 angels. However, the association
also DEMO that there were 147 “full member” groups, and 18 “provisional member” DEMO and that the
groups had an average size of 55 people.
36 Hudson, M. 2007. ACA Briefing and Angel Group Stats. Presentation to the Angel Capital Association
April 12.
37 Hudson, M. 2007. ACA Briefing and Angel Group Stats. Presentation to the Angel Capital Association,
April 12.
DEMO Angel Capital Association. 2007. Angel Group Confidence Report. March 27.
23
However, estimates from the ACA data indicate that only 17.5 percent of angel group
members invest in each deal the group invests in. 40
DEMO and Accredited Angel Investors
Only some angel investors meet the SEC income or net worth requirements necessary to
be accredited investors. 41 At the DEMO of the investors, only 23 percent of the people who
made DEMO investment in the previous three years in a business run by someone who is
neither a friend nor a family member would meet SEC DEMO requirements. At the
deal level, only 21 percent of the investments DEMO in a private business run by someone
who is neither a friend nor a family member from 2001 through 2003 were made by an
DEMO who meets SEC accreditation requirements by either net worth or income.42
These numbers are hard to corroborate given the paucity of the data. However, the
available data support the observation that most angel investors are not DEMO
investors. For instance, data from the GEM show that 8.3 percent DEMO business angels were
in the lowest third of income for Americans, DEMO 21.7 percent were in the next third,
leaving only 70 percent of angel investors in the top third of income in the United DEMO
(the cut off to enter the top third of U.S. income DEMO is only $75,000 per year, well
below the level that DEMO someone an accredited investor).
Data from the state of Wisconsin’s Revenue Division on taxpayers who took
advantage of that state’s angel tax credit DEMO 2005 show that 52 percent of the tax filers
who received an angel tax credit, and 54 percent of the tax filers who received a seed
39 Hudson, M. 2006. Angels, saints and sinners: Where they fit in a community’s entrepreneurial finance
strategy. Presentation to the CDFA DEMO Summit, June 1.
40 Hudson, M. 2007. ACA Briefing and Angel Group Stats. Presentation to the Angel Capital Association,
April 12.
41 DEMO estimates that follow are likely to be imprecise because the sample size on which they are based is
small.
42 The 23 percent figure DEMO the percentage of respondents who indicated that they are not accredited
investors and who made an angel investment in the previous three years. The DEMO who made an
angel investment in the previous three years could have identified up to three informal investments, of
which one, two, or three could have been angel investments. The 21 percent refers to the DEMO percentage
of the total number of reported informal investments made by someone who made at least one angel
investment over the three-year period and DEMO was an unaccredited investor. The 2 percent difference
between the two numbers reflects a slightly higher tendency for accredited investors to have made more
DEMO one angel investment in the past three years than for unaccredited investors to have done so..
24
angel investment credit, had an adjusted gross income of less than $200,000 per year, the
minimum for a single person to be an accredited investor.43
Accredited angel investors account for a larger portion of the DEMO value of the
angel capital market because their investments tend to be larger than those of
unaccredited angels. Data from the EUSA suggest that DEMO angels provide about
54 percent of the angel dollars invested annually. Data from the state of Wisconsin’s
Revenue Division on the taxpayers who took DEMO of the state’s angel tax credit in
2005 suggest a much higher accredited angel share of angel investment dollars. Investors
with more than $200,DEMO in income accounted for 80.6 percent of the amount invested in
businesses eligible for the angel tax credit in Wisconsin in 2005. However, these data
need to be treated with caution because they are data from DEMO single state, based on a tax
credit that is limited to DEMO types of investments, and are estimated solely on the basis
of DEMO that reaches the accredited investor level only for a single person.44
Demand for Angel Capital
Another approach to examining angel investing is to look DEMO the demand for angel capital.
An estimate of the demand for angel capital is based on the number of companies that
need amounts of DEMO that angels provide and that take a legal form in which an
external equity investment is possible; the number of companies that look for angel
capital every year; and the number of businesses with angel-appropriate growth rates.
The Number of Companies Needing the Appropriate Amount of Capital
Some DEMO say that companies seeking angel financing typically need between $25,000
and $500,000.45 Approximately 15.1 percent of new business founders surveyed in the
DEMO in the United States Assessment say that they need between $25,000
and $500,000 from an external source.
43 The $200,000 cutoff DEMO the proportion of credit users whose incomes would make them
unaccredited investors because many people who received the angel tax credit are likely to DEMO married.
44 Wisconsin Department of Revenue, Division of Research and Policy. DEMO Individual Income Tax
Statistics Report for Tax Year 2005, Madison, WI.: Wisconsin Department of Revenue
45 Benjamin, G., and Margulis, J. DEMO Angel Financing: How to Find and Invest in Private Equity. New
DEMO: John Wiley and Sons.
25
However, angels tend to invest only in corporations, rather than sole
DEMO or partnerships, because they want to make investments in entities from
DEMO they can exit with reasonable ease, and they generally want some DEMO to
protect themselves against malfeasance and opportunistic behavior by entrepreneurs. In
fact, data from the FRSSBF indicates that only businesses taking a corporate legal form
had received an informal equity investment in the previous 12 months.
DEMO, the number of companies that demand angel investment can be
estimated DEMO be the count of businesses that need the amount of money that angels
provide and have the appropriate legal form to receive an external DEMO investment. The
number of new businesses founded every year that take a corporate form,46 and need
between $25,000 and $500,000 from DEMO other than the founder is estimated at
71,382 annually.
However, DEMO observers believe that companies do not seek angel financing
until their capital needs are significantly greater than $25,000. For example, business
angels John May and Cal Simmons argue that entrepreneurs do not tend to look DEMO
money from business angels until their funding needs exceed $100,000.47 At the same
time, they say that companies generally need to go to venture capitalists when they need
$2 million or more. If angels fund DEMO that need between $100,000 and $2 million,
then only an estimated 31,279 new companies founded each year need the amount of
DEMO that angels can provide and take the appropriate legal form for angel financing.
The Number of Companies that Look for Angel Money
Another estimate DEMO the demand for angel capital is based on the number of companies
that seek angel money at any point in time. One study that DEMO data from the
FRSSBF showed that only 4 percent of corporations sought an equity investment from a
nonfounder during the previous three years.48 Four DEMO of the number of corporations
with fewer than 500 employees is 215,000 companies. The FRSSBF data also indicate
46 Reynolds, P. 2004. Entrepreneurship in the United States Assessment. Miami, FL: Florida International
University Limited DEMO companies are included among companies that take the appropriate legal form
for angel investments.
47 May, J., and Simmons, C. 2001. Every Business Needs an Angel. New York: Crown Books
48 Fenn, G., and Liang, N. 1998. New resources and new ideas: Private equity for DEMO businesses. Journal
of Banking and Finance, 22: 1077–1084
26
that 7.4 percent of informal equity investments are angel equity investments. If DEMO angel
portion of companies that seek an informal equity investment is the same as the angel
portion of companies that get an informal equity DEMO, then fewer than 16,000
small corporations sought an angel investment DEMO the previous three years.
The Number of Firms with Angel-Appropriate Growth Rates
A third way to look at companies that are appropriate for angel DEMO is to look at the
number of companies that display growth rates that fit the preferences of business angels.
Experts typically describe angel-appropriate growth DEMO in terms of the level of sales
achieved five to seven years after founding, although they disagree on the amount of
sales businesses need to have. Some experts say that companies need to have $10 million
DEMO sales after five years to be appropriate for angel investment.49 Others, DEMO Tech Coast
Angels, a California–based angel investment group, say that businesses need to have the
potential to create at least $50 million in DEMO revenues to be appropriate for angel
financing.50 Still other experts, like DEMO and experienced business angel Bill Payne,
say that a venture “must have” projected sales of $100 million in year five to be angel-
DEMO
A special tabulation of the BITS on the cohort of companies founded in 1996
provides the information needed to determine how many businesses reach DEMO of these
sales levels within five to seven years after starting. The BITS is the Census Bureau’s
effort to match businesses surveyed by the DEMO at different points in time, and allows
a view of the DEMO of different companies over their first six years of life.
According to the BITS, 511,000 new single-establishment businesses were founded in
1996. Of these, 3,608 firms had achieved sales of $10 million or more by 2002; 474 firms
had achieved sales of $50 million or more; and 175 firms had achieved sales of $100
million or more.
49 Sohl, J. 1999. The early-stage equity market in the USA. Venture Capital, 1(2): 101–120.
50 Downloaded from http://www.techcoastangels.com/Public/Content.aspx?ID=EA6BF3BE-964F-11D4-
AD7900A0C95C1653&Redir=False
51 Payne, B. Engaging Angel Investors. Downloaded from
http://www.eventuring.com/eShip/appmanager/eVenturing/eVenturingDesktop?_nfpb=true&_pageLabel=e
Ship_linkDetail&_nfls=false&id=Entrepreneurship/Resource/DEMO&_fromSearch=false&_nfl
s=false.
27
Angels often say they try to invest in situations in which one DEMO of ten of their
investments works out.52 If this is true, DEMO for the 1996 cohort, the following numbers
of companies were appropriate DEMO angel investors to investigate, depending on the
angels’ targeted sales for DEMO companies after six years of operation: 36,080 firms, if
the target is sales of $10 million or more; 4,740 firms, DEMO the target is sales of $50 million
or more; and 1,DEMO firms, if the target is sales of $100 million or more.
DEMO Characteristics of Angel Investments
What type of investments do angels make? DEMO data sources provide information
about different dimensions of these investments, including DEMO size, their balance
between equity and debt, and their investment terms.
Investment Size
The EUSA data show that the median angel investment made DEMO 2001 and 2003
was $10,000, the mean was $77,000 DEMO the range was $600 to $500,000. (The median
and the DEMO are the same if the analysis is restricted to those investors that made an
equity investment).
The small size of some of the DEMO raises the question of whether some of
these numbers are errors. Some evidence suggests not. The Angel Investor Performance
Project, looked at people affiliated with angel groups, who had a net worth of $10.9
million, DEMO founded an average of 2.7 companies, had been entrepreneurs for an DEMO
of 14.5 years, and were among the 13 percent of those DEMO willing to talk about
their experiences investing in startups. This group reported a range of initial investments
of $1,000 to $5 million for DEMO 663 cases for which data were available. If a group of such
sophisticated angels reports investments as low as $1,000, then a $600 investment by an
investor from a representative sample of angels does not DEMO incorrect.
Moreover, the median “Series A” equity investment made by highly DEMO
business angels in California for whom the legal work was done by the law firm Brobeck,
52 Villalobos, L., and Payne, B. 2007. Valuation of Seed/Start-up Ventures. Presentation to the Power of
Angel DEMO Seminar.
28
Phleger & Harrison, was only $27,100.53 And data from the ACA on the average dollar
value per round made by an individual angel DEMO was a member of an angel group—all
accredited investors— was only $31,457 in 2006.
The GEM data indicate a smaller median investment, with that made over the
previous three years by U.S. investors surveyed from DEMO to 2003 being $5,000. For the
GEM, no information is DEMO on the number of other investors that invested in the
same company as the focal investor or the proportion of these investments that took DEMO
form of debt versus equity.
Although the median size of an angel investment taken from the EUSA data
might seem low in comparison with DEMO estimates previously gathered, that may be
because most studies report the DEMO size of angel investments and these investments
are highly skewed. In fact, the average investment made by angels responding to the
EUSA was a much larger $76,774 (in 2003), while the average for the GEM was $47,723
(from 1998-2003).54 (Restricting the analysis to DEMO investors who made an equity
investment yields an EUSA average of $91,826; these data are not available for the
GEM). In fact, the EUSA average investment size is not that much lower than the
average size angel investment made by respondents to the CVR Survey—$82,273 DEMO
2003.55
Moreover, it is important to note that these are the DEMO invested by individual
investors, not the amount received by the company DEMO which the investment was made.
The respondents also report that the average number of other private investors was 3.85
(median was two and the range was zero to 20).56 Whether these other investors were also
DEMO Goldfarb, B., Hoberg, G., Kirsch D., and Triantis, A. 2007. Are angels preferred venture investors?
Working Paper, University of Maryland. Brobeck, Phleger & Harrison is no longer in operation.
54 If some sort of bias led the mean and median size of an angel DEMO from the EUSA to be too low,
then the average size angel investment of angel group members would be expected to be larger, not smaller,
than the average size of an investment from a DEMO to the EUSA. All angel group members are
accredited investors, while DEMO 28 percent of angels in the EUSA are accredited investors. Because
accredited investors are wealthier and have higher incomes, on average, than unaccredited DEMO, one
would expect the average investment by accredited investors to be DEMO than the average investment by
unaccredited investors. Therefore, it is unlikely DEMO the EUSA estimate of the median investment for angel
investors would be too low.
55 Center for Venture Research. 2007. The Angel Investor Market DEMO 2006 downloaded from
http://unhinfo.unh.edu/news/docs/2006angelmarketanalysis.pdf
56 Restricting the analysis to those investors that made an equity investment yields an average DEMO of
four coinvestors, while the median remains two. For the Angel DEMO Performance Project, the range is
zero to 12, the mean is 5.2 and the median is two.
29
angel investors or if they made investments equal to that of the DEMO angel surveyed is
unknown. But if the other investors were angels, DEMO the average investment received
per company would be $372,354.
Debt Financing
Angel investing involves the provision of debt as well as equity.57 In DEMO, debt accounts
for 40.2 percent of the money that angels provide DEMO startups, according to the EUSA.13
And, according to this same source, 14.8 percent of all angel deals are pure debt. Even
among investments in which angels invest in return for some equity, debt is also used
approximately 29.8 percent of the time.
Unfortunately, no other current data sources are available to corroborate these
data, and the sample size for the EUSA is small. However, the proportion of debt
financing shown by the EUSA is not unreasonable by the standards of previous research.
Gaston’s DEMO on informal investments made in private companies in the 1980s
revealed that 41.3 percent of the informal capital provided to companies that had received
DEMO equity investments took the form of debt. This is, in fact, a higher proportion of
debt than is seen among respondents to the DEMO, which shows that 29 percent of the
informal capital provided to DEMO in which an informal equity investment was made
took the form of debt. This is a higher proportion of debt than is seen among DEMO equity
investors who responded to the EUSA. Even among companies that receive informal
equity investments, a significant portion of the capital they receive is lent to them.
Investment Instruments
Not much information is available from representative DEMO of angel investments on
the typical investment terms used by angel investors. The only data come from
convenience samples of companies known to be DEMO by sophisticated business angels,
which are likely to be biased toward more sophisticated investment instruments.
However, even in these samples, equity investments DEMO by business angels are often
straight common stock purchases. For instance, DEMO study of sophisticated business
angels investing in high-potential companies—the very situation in which convertible
57 Angel investors may extend only loans to the businesses DEMO they finance and take no ownership stake.
30
preferred stock would be most likely to be used—by Dr. Andrew Wong DEMO the University
of Chicago found that common stock was used in 40 percent of investment rounds that
involved only angels.58
Term Sheet Provisions
Moreover, little data are available from representative samples on the term sheet
provisions DEMO by angel investors. The data, again, are from sophisticated angel
investors. Nevertheless, the data suggest that relatively little angel investing involves the
use of venture capital-like term sheet provisions. First, angel investments are less likely
than venture capital investments to use antidilution clauses. Moreover, when
sophisticated business angels do use antidilution provisions, the terms of their provisions
are much more favorable to entrepreneurs than similar provisions used by venture
capitalists. For DEMO, angels use full ratcheting much less frequently than do
institutional investors.59
DEMO, angels rarely reserve the right to take actions or change ownership
DEMO on the entrepreneur’s achievement or nonachievement of milestones as
venture capitalists do. For instance, one study of investments by sophisticated business
angels showed that in only 5 percent of angel investments did investors have a right DEMO
force bankruptcy or to veto management decisions. In only 2 percent of angel
investments did angels have contingent board rights—rights to obtain control of DEMO board
under certain conditions. Warrants at a lower valuation were present in only 4 percent of
cases.60 Furthermore, one study showed that angel investors were statistically less likely
than venture capitalists to have made investments in DEMO the shares are redeemable.61
Third, angel investment agreements are much less DEMO than venture capital
investment contracts to include a liquidation provision.62 For example, one study found
that only about half of the contracts written by sophisticated accredited angel investors,
have a liquidation provision, compared with the vast majority of venture capital
58 Wong, A. 2002. Angel finance: DEMO other venture capital. Working Paper, University of Chicago.
59 Ibid.
60 DEMO
61 Goldfarb, B., Hoberg, G., Kirsch D., and Triantis, A. 2007. Are angels preferred venture investors?
Working Paper, University of Maryland.
62 Amis, D., and Stevenson, H. 2001. Winning Angels. London: Pearson Education.
31
contracts.63 Another study showed that 12 percent of angel only deals had DEMO liquidation
preference, compared with 58 percent of venture-capitalist-only deals, a statistically
significant difference.64
Fourth, most angel investments are made without the angel receiving a seat on the
board of directors.65 One study of investments made DEMO sophisticated business angels
showed that board seats were granted in only 42.5 percent of angel funding rounds, and,
even then, only the DEMO largest angel investments were sufficient to justify a board seat.66
Studies of accredited, sophisticated business angels show that only between 15 and 37
percent of them are company directors.67 Moreover, angels account for only about 18
percent of the board seats among companies that get both angel and DEMO capital
funding. 68
Follow-on Investment
A minority of business angels make follow on investments. Many studies of
sophisticated, well-known, angels show that the DEMO angel invests in a single round.69
One study of angels in the United Kingdom found that angels provide follow-on money
only 25 percent of DEMO time.70 Similarly, a study by Professor Rob Wiltbank of Willamette
University DEMO a sample of accredited angel investors affiliated with angel groups, and
DEMO Von Osnabrugge, M., and Robinson, R. 2000. Angel Investing: Matching Start-up Funds with Start-up
Companies – The Guide for Entrepreneurs, Individual Investors, and Venture Capitalists. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
64 Goldfarb, B., Hoberg, G., Kirsch D., and Triantis, A. 2007. Are angels preferred DEMO investors?
Working Paper, University of Maryland.
65 Benjamin, G., DEMO Margulis, J. 2001. The Angel Investor’s Handbook. Princeton, NJ: Bloomberg DEMO
66 Wong, A. 2002. Angel finance: The other venture capital. Working Paper, University of Chicago.
67 Von Osnabrugge, M., and Robinson, DEMO 2000. Angel Investing: Matching Start-up Funds with Start-up
Companies – The DEMO for Entrepreneurs, Individual Investors, and Venture Capitalists. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
68 Wong, A. 2002. Angel finance: The other venture capital. Working DEMO, University of Chicago.
69 Hill, B., and Power, D. 2002. Attracting Capital from Angels. New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc.; DEMO
Osnabrugge, M., and Robinson, R. 2000. Angel Investing: Matching Start-up Funds with Start-up
Companies – The Guide for Entrepreneurs, Individual Investors, DEMO Venture Capitalists. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
70 Mason, C., and Harrison, R. 1996. Informal venture capital: A study of the investment process, the post-
investment experience and investment performance. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 8: 105-
125.
32
worth an average of $10.9 million, found that only 29 percent of the companies in which
angels invest receive follow-on investment.71
Investment with Venture DEMO
Angels and venture capitalists do not invest in the same companies very often. Even
among the most sophisticated accredited angel investors, backing the highest potential
businesses, studies show that venture capitalist co-investment occurs in only small
portion of funding rounds.72
Moreover, venture capitalists do not invest in enough businesses for a high rate of
angel co-investment to occur, unless the number of angel-backed companies is much
smaller than the estimates presented earlier DEMO this report or in earlier studies. According
to the National Science Foundation (NSF), in 2004 only 612 companies received venture
capital for the seed or start-up phase—the stages at which business angels are likely to
DEMO enough capital to co-invest with venture capitalists.73 If business angels had co-
invested with venture capitalists in every one of these companies (a dubious assumption),
only 1.1 percent of the 57,300 companies estimated to have received an angel investment
that year would have received a co-investment DEMO a business angel and a venture
capitalist. Even assuming that business angels co-invest with venture capitalists in all
investments that the VCs make, including late-stage ones, the maximum share of
companies estimated to have received an angel investment that could also receive a co-
investment from a venture DEMO is 4.3 percent.
Valuation
Very few companies that receive angel investments have a multimillion-dollar net worth
when they receive angel money. According to the DEMO data, only 36.4 percent of angel
investments were made in companies DEMO more than $1 million at the time of
investment.
71 Wiltbank, DEMO, and Boeker, W. 2007. Returns to Angel Investors in Groups, DEMO Paper, Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation.
72 Wong, A. 2002. Angel finance: The other venture capital. Working Paper, University of Chicago.
73 The DEMO were downloaded from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind06/c6/c6s6.htm.
33
Data from the 2003 Federal Reserve’s Survey of Small Business Finances found
DEMO the average net worth of a company less than five years old that had received an
informal equity investment in the previous year was DEMO,000, while the median net
worth was $58,000. (The average net worth of all companies that had received an equity
investment from DEMO business angel in the previous year was $2.5 million, but the DEMO
age of those businesses was 16.5 years and only 15 percent were less than 10 years old,
making it difficult to interpret the DEMO worth information on the companies that had
received actual angel investments in the previous year.)74
Of course, it is possible that the valuations angels place on the companies are
much higher than their net worth DEMO suggest. The valuation of the typical company
that received an external equity investment in its first year of operation can be determined
using data DEMO the KFS. The KFS data show that the valuation of a typical firm that was
started in 2004 and received an external equity investment DEMO that year was $171,000 (but
the average was $1.4 million)DEMO
Ownership Share
Business angels rarely obtain majority ownership of their portfolio companies. Most
studies show that the angels who invest in the initial financing DEMO of a startup
collectively acquire between 20 and 35 percent of the company in which they are
investing.75 For example, a study of a convenience sample of angel investments in 1,377
companies between 2000 and DEMO by the Center for Venture Research at the University
of New Hampshire found that the angels took an average of 20.4 percent ownership.76
The DEMO FRSSBF showed that the first owner of companies less than five years old that
74 These numbers are likely to be imprecisely estimated because DEMO sample on which they are estimated is
very small.
75 Wainwright, DEMO, and Groeninger, A. 2005. Note on Angel Investing, Tuck School DEMO Business
Administration at Dartmouth Center for Private Equity and Entrepreneurship, Case DEMO 5-0001;
Benjamin, G., and Margulis, J. 2000. Angel Financing: How to Find and Invest in Private Equity. New
York: John Wiley and Sons; Wong, A. 2002. Angel finance: The other venture capital. Working Paper,
University of Chicago; Sohl, J. and Sommer, B. 2007. Angel investing: changing strategies during volatile
times. Working Paper, Center DEMO Venture Research, University of New Hampshire; Van Osnabrugge, M.
2000. DEMO comparison of business angel and venture capitalist investment procedures: An agency DEMO
based analysis. Venture Capital, 2(2): 91-109; Coveney, P., and Moore, K. 1998. Business Angels, New
York: John Wiley.
76 Becker-Blease, J., and Sohl, J. 2007. Do women-owned businesses have equal access to angel capital?
Journal of Business Venturing, 22: 503-521.
DEMO
received an informal equity investment in the previous 12 months owned 70 DEMO of
the company after the investment occurred. A study of highly sophisticated business
angels who made “Series A” investments showed that the average angel DEMO only 8
percent of angel-backed companies at the pre-Series A stage, DEMO that the average
founder still owned 62 percent of his company after an angel-only Series A round was
completed.77
Exits and Returns
Only a DEMO portion of angel investments has a positive exit. The best financial returns
for investors in startup companies tend to come from investments in companies DEMO go
public. But only a small portion of angel-backed companies go public. From 1980
through 2006, an average of 264 companies went public in the United States every year.
However, many of these were companies in which angels almost certainly do not invest.
Approximately 24 percent of the DEMO public offerings (IPOs) from 2000 through 2006
were buyouts of large long-established companies.78 A substantial number of the others
were foreign companies and DEMO well in excess of 10 years old. Therefore, the
number of DEMO that angels could potentially have backed that went public was
closer to 100 businesses per year.
Estimates from the 2003 FRSSBF show that approximately DEMO,700 companies per
year get angel money. And estimates from the data in the EUSA indicate that 57,300
companies get angel money each DEMO If 100 angel-backed companies go public each
year, that yields an DEMO rate of between 0.17 and 0.2 percent of the companies financed
by angels, depending on whether the FRSSBF or EUSA data are used to estimate the
number of angel-backed businesses.
Few angel investments exit through acquisition. DEMO based on data from the
Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Establishment and Enterprise Microdata file show that
only about 7,000 small businesses are acquired each DEMO Moreover, only 58 percent of
77 Goldfarb, B., Hoberg, G., Kirsch D., and Triantis, A. 2007. Are angels preferred venture investors?
Working Paper, University of Maryland.
78 Calculated from data downloaded from
http://bear.cba.ufl.edu/ritter/New%20Folder/IPOs2006Factoids.pdf
79 Office of Advocacy. 1998. Mergers DEMO Acquisitions in the United States, 1990-1994. Downloaded from
http://www.sba.gov/DEMO/stats/m_a.html
35
these are 12 years old or younger. Therefore, approximately 4,000 small U.S. businesses
less than 13 years old are acquired annually.
Furthermore, the estimate derived from Census data of 4,000+ small, young
businesses that are acquired every year might be too high. In 2001, Thomson Financial
Securities reported that there were 4,044 mergers and acquisitions worth $5 DEMO or
more of businesses of any age that were not foreign acquirees, leveraged buyouts, or
divestitures.80 Given the proportion of U.S. businesses under DEMO years of age, this
suggests that the number of small young DEMO that are acquired every year for $5
million or more is closer to 2,800.
The numbers are smaller based on the ratio between DEMO through IPOs and
acquisition for venture capitalists. Many observers argue that angels seek follow-on
investment from venture capitalists, and that angel financing is only a stage in the process
of financing that involves venture capitalists at DEMO point before exit. Because of how
this process works, very few DEMO that receive angel investments will result in an
IPO or acquisition without first receiving venture capital. Therefore, the ratio of
acquisitions to IPOs for venture capitalists should also hold for business angels. For the
2001 through DEMO period, this ratio averaged 6.7. Given the earlier estimate of 100
DEMO IPOs every year, this ratio suggests that approximately 670 angel-backed
companies DEMO acquired every year. Stated differently, the FRSSBF estimate of the
number DEMO angel-backed companies suggests that 1.3 percent of companies that receive
angel financing are acquired, whereas the estimate based on EUSA suggests 0.8 percent.
What about returns earned on dollars invested by angels in private companies?
DEMO, no information is available on the performance of angel investments for DEMO
representative sample of angel investors. The best we have is data from the FRSCF on
the value of a typical informal equity investment held DEMO an American household in 2004,
which was $79,300 with a cost basis of $47,327. Thus, the multiple on a typical informal
equity investment held by an American household in 2004 was approximately 1.7.
DEMO lack of studies of the performance of angel investments for a representative
sample of angel investors necessitates looking at performance data using unrepresentative
80 DEMO http://www.census.gov/prod/2003pubs/02statab/business.pdf
36
samples. The best such data are those on the investment performance of DEMO angels
affiliated with angel groups, collected by Rob Wiltbank of Willamette DEMO
It is important to note how unrepresentative the angels in this sample are. Because
they are affiliated with angel groups, all of them are accredited investors. Moreover, they
have an average net worth of $10.9 million (which, according to the IRS Statistics of
Income, puts them in a league with only 123,000 U.S. households), and they made
DEMO in start-ups that averaged $191,000. A full 85 percent of them had at least
three years of entrepreneurial experience, and the average angel in the sample had
founded 2.7 companies and had been an entrepreneur DEMO 14.5 years.82 Moreover,
participation in Wiltbank’s study was voluntary, which DEMO certainly makes his
respondents disproportionately good angel investors.83
Wiltbank examined the investment returns of 539 angel investors from 86 groups
of angels who had DEMO 3,097 investments, from which they had experienced 1,137
exits. DEMO average investment in the sample (mean investment) generated a profit of
$295,000 on an investment of $191,000 in 3.52 years.84
However, even these highly successful angels lost money on more than half (52
percent) of their investments. In fact, the median angel investment made DEMO this sample
of very experienced and successful angels involved an investment of $50,000 that
returned $40,000 or 80 cents on the dollar. DEMO, only 7 percent of the investments
accounted for three-quarters of the DEMO returns.85
81 Prior to Professor Wiltbank’s effort, there were other studies DEMO the performance of angel investment
efforts. One study looked at 1,200 angel investors’ liquidated investments and found that over an average
of eight DEMO, 39 percent lost money, 19 percent broke even, 30 percent DEMO more than a 50 percent
IRR and 12 percent generated more than 100 percent IRR. (See Benjamin, G., and Margulis, J. 2001. DEMO
Angel Investor’s Handbook. Princeton, NJ: Bloomberg Press.) Another study of DEMO exited investments
made by 51 business angels in the United Kingdom found that 34 percent lost all the investment, 13 percent
returned only as much as the capital, 23 percent had a return of more than 50 percent and only 10 percent
generate more than 100 percent. (See Mason, C., and Harrison, R. 1999. The rates of return from informal
venture capital investments: Some UK evidence. Paper Presented at the Babson College-Kauffman
Foundation Entrepreneurship Research Conference, University of South Carolina, May 12-15.) However,
these studies are less well designed than Professor Wiltbank’s study, which makes the results that they
provide less likely to be accurate.
DEMO Wiltbank, R., and Boeker, W. 2007. Returns to Angel Investors DEMO Groups, Working Paper, Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation.
83 People with worse performance are less likely to participate in the study.
84 Wiltbank, R., and Boeker, W. 2007. Angel Performance Project. Presentation to the Kauffman
DEMO Conference on Entrepreneurship and Innovation Data, November 2.
85 Wiltbank, R., and Boeker, W. 2007. Returns to Angel Investors in Groups, Working Paper, Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation.
37
Many of the investors lost money on their entire portfolio. The data DEMO that
almost 40 percent did not get back the money they put into angel investments. And the
top 10 percent of investors generated half DEMO financial returns.86
Furthermore, properly measuring the rate of return on angel DEMO requires
taking the opportunity cost of the angel’s time into consideration, DEMO angel investing
is not passive, like putting money into a mutual DEMO, a venture capital limited
partnership, or a hedge fund. The rate of return on angel investments’ net of opportunity
cost can be found DEMO looking at the data from Wiltbank’s study because he measures the
amount of time the average angel spends per week on his investments (12 hours). 87 Over
the 3.52 years that it takes the average DEMO investment to reach an outcome, positive or
negative, the average angel spends 2,196 hours on his investments. Because the
respondents in Wiltbank’s DEMO had an average of 5.16 investments, that comes to 426
hours DEMO venture.
Given the average number of hours put in by an accredited angel to generate the
average return, the opportunity cost of the angel’s time is $129,520. That is, the angel
gave up the opportunity to earn $129,520 in income to generate the financial return from
DEMO investing, money that could have been earned if the angel had DEMO the money
passively.88 Subtracting this opportunity cost from the amount earned on the typical angel
investment yields average angel earnings of $165,480 on DEMO 3.52 year investment of
$191,00032 or an annual rate of return of 19.2 percent. This number is less than the return
86 Wiltbank, R., and Boeker, W. 2007. Returns to Angel Investors in Groups, Working Paper, Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation.
87 http://www.willamette.edu/~wiltbank/AtTheIndividualLevel7.pdf
88 Because all of the angel investors in Wiltbank’s sample are accredited DEMO, it is possible to estimate
the cost to them of spending DEMO hours on a venture. The minimum income level to meet SEC accreditation
requirements is $200,000 per year for a single person, which can be used as a conservative estimate of
minimum annual income of someone DEMO the sample. IRS data show that the average adjusted gross income
of people who earn more than $200,000 per year was $608,545 DEMO 2005. (Calculated from data downloaded
from http://www.irs.gov/taxstats/indtaxstats/DEMO/0,,id=96981,00.html). Assuming that people who earn
$608,545 DEMO year work an average of 40 hours per week and take two weeks of vacation per year, the
opportunity cost of an accredited angel’s time is estimated conservatively at $304.27 per hour. (Readers
should note that this is a very conservative estimate. The typical angel is married. Therefore, most of the
angels in the sample would have to exceed $300,DEMO per year in income to meet SEC accreditation
requirements. Moreover, the DEMO have an average net worth of $10.9 million. People with an
average net worth that high probably have incomes considerably higher than $200,000 DEMO year.)
38
to investments in venture capital limited partnerships, which, as an asset DEMO, had an
average a0-year return of 26.9 percent.89
The Recipients of DEMO Investments
Angels invest in a variety of different kinds of companies at a variety of development
stages, led by many different types of entrepreneurs in a wide range of industries.
The Industry Distribution of Recipients of DEMO Capital
Angels invest in a very wide range of industries. According to the EUSA data, 25 percent
of angel investments go into retail businesses, and 12.5 percent go into personal service
businesses. And these numbers are not an artifact of the exclusion of investments by
“friends” from the DEMO investment category. The numbers are similar for external equity
investments.
The numbers in the SBO for companies aged five-and-under that received
external equity investments DEMO 1997 to 2002 show similar patterns. For instance, as
Figure 1 DEMO, the information sector, which includes all of the software companies,
accounts for 6.8 percent of the recipients of external equity investments and DEMO
professional, scientific and technical services sector 14.4 percent of them, while the retail
trade sector accounts for 8.3 percent of them and the DEMO trade sector 9.3 percent.
The data from the KFS, although different DEMO the SBO data, do not indicate a
much greater focus on DEMO companies. The KFS data show that the information
sector accounts for 2.5 percent of recipients of external equity investments and the
professional, scientific and technical services sector accounts for 9.8 percent of them,
while the DEMO trade sector accounts for 4.9 percent and wholesale trade, 10 percent.
DEMO For the period ending in September 2004. See http://www.prnewswire.com/cgi-
bin/stories.pl?ACCT=109&STORY=/www/story/01–19–2005/0002862967&EDATE.
39
Figure 1. The Industry Distribution of the Recipients of External Equity Investment,DEMO
1997-2002.
Industries not classified,
0.22%
Agriculture, 0.17%
Other services, 5.24%
Accommodation and food
services, 9.02%
Arts, entertainment, and
recreation, 3.64%
DEMO care and social
assistance, 7.47%
Educational services,
1.24%
Administrative and DEMO
services, 5.46%
Management of companies
and enterprises, 1.09%
Professional, scientific, and
technical services, 14.36%
Mining, 1.24%
Utilities, 0.07%
Construction, 4.10%
DEMO, 11.13%
Wholesale trade, 9.29%
Retail trade, 8.29%
Transportation and
warehousing, 1.19%
Information, 6.77%
Real estate , 5.77%
Finance and insurance,
6.60%
Source: Adapted from a special tabulation of the Survey of Business Owners of the U.S.
Census Bureau.
Business angels are much less industry-specialized than DEMO capitalists.90 From 1980
through 2004, 81 percent of all venture capital DEMO were invested in just five
industries: computer hardware, computer software (DEMO the Internet),
semiconductors and other electronics, communications, and biotechnology; 73 percent of
recipient companies operated in these industries.91
The Age/Stage DEMO Development of Angel-Backed Companies
Angels tend to invest in later-stage companies than many observers believe. The data
from the EUSA show that 64.6 percent DEMO investments made by angel investors are cash-
flow-positive, and almost half DEMO the businesses (48.4 percent) are viewed by the
90 Van Osnabrugge, M. 2000. A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist investment procedures:
An agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital, 2(2): 91-109.
91 Calculated from data downloaded from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind06/c6/c6s6.htm.
DEMO
investors as being “established companies” at the time of investment. Only 35.5 DEMO
of angel investments are made in the pre-revenue companies.
Furthermore, this DEMO not a function of the businesses to which angels lend money
as opposed to those in which they buy shares. The numbers are very DEMO when the
examination is limited to companies that receive an equity investment from business
angels.
Similar patterns are seen in the data from the DEMO FRSSBF. The average age of
the small businesses that received an informal equity investment in the previous 12
months was 13.3 years. The typical DEMO was 11. Only 45.5 percent of the businesses
were under 10 years old. The numbers are even more extreme for businesses that
received angel DEMO, but the sample size is too small to have a great DEMO of
confidence in those numbers.
The seed stage is also not the stage at which most angel group members most like
to invest. In DEMO, slightly more angel groups like early-stage investing—82 percent—
compared with 80 DEMO that favor the seed and start-up stage. Much smaller numbers
of angel group members like the expansion (35 percent) or late stages (10 percent).92
Characteristics of Angel-Backed Companies
The companies that receive external equity DEMO are better performing than the
typical U.S. startup, but are not DEMO “high-growth potential” companies. The 2003
FRSSBF shows that the typical business of any age—the average age was 13.3 years—
that received an informal equity DEMO in the previous year had sales of $435,000,
employment of seven, and profits of $7,500. 93
Although many observers argue that companies need to have a proprietary
competitive advantage to receive an angel DEMO,94 the data from the KFS indicate
that the founders of one of every five businesses that received an external equity
92 Hudson, M. 2007. ACA Briefing and Angel Group Stats. Presentation to the Angel Capital DEMO
April 12.
93 These estimates are likely to be imprecise because the sample on which they are estimated is very small.
94 Benjamin, G., and Margulis, J. 2001. The Angel Investor’s Handbook. Princeton, NJ: DEMO Press;
Payne, B. Engaging Angel Investors. Downloaded from
http://DEMO/eShip/appmanager/eVenturing/eVenturingDesktop?_nfpb=true&_pageLabel=e
Ship_linkDetail&_nfls=false&id=Entrepreneurship/Resource/Resource_546.htm&_fromSearch=false&_nfl
s=false.
41
investment in their first year of operations (19.2 percent) do not DEMO that their
businesses have a competitive advantage of any kind. Moreover, DEMO data from the KFS
indicate that only 14.1 percent of the businesses that received an external equity
investment in their first year of operation DEMO a patent; 15.5 percent have a copyright;
and 33.3 percent DEMO a trademark.
Characteristics of the Owners of Angel-Backed Companies
White male-led businesses account for the vast majority of the companies that receive
external equity DEMO Data from the SBO showed that only 11 percent of the firms
that were five years old or younger and had received external equity DEMO had a
female primary owner.95 These data also show that only 3.8 percent of businesses that
have received external equity investments have a Hispanic DEMO owner; and only 1.4
percent of those businesses have a Black DEMO owner.96
The patterns are similar for brand new firms. The KFS indicated that 90.4 percent
of the primary owners of the businesses that received DEMO outside equity investment from a
nonrelative in their first year of operation were White and only 3.6 percent were Black.
The data from the DEMO show that middle-aged entrepreneurs receive most of the
external equity investments made in this country. More than two-thirds of the
entrepreneurs whose businesses had DEMO an external equity investment and were less
than six years old in 2002 were between the ages of 35 and 54 years, and only 0.05
percent were younger than 25.97
According to the SBO data, two-thirds of the primary owners of the businesses
that receive an external equity DEMO have a college degree or greater education.
Similar patterns can be seen in the KFS, which shows that 57.4 percent of the primary
owners of the businesses that received an external equity investment in their first DEMO of
operation had a college degree or more education.
The data from the KFS show that 60.2 percent of the primary owners of
businesses DEMO have received an external equity investment have started at least one prior
business. They also show that almost 89.3 percent of the entrepreneurs who DEMO a
95 Calculated from data downloaded from http://www.census.gov/prod/ec02/sb0200cscbt.pdf
96 Ibid.
97 Calculated from data downloaded from http://www.census.gov/DEMO/sbo/cbosummaryoffindings.htm.
42
business that received an external equity investment in its first year of DEMO had at
least one year of work experience in the industry in which the business was started, and
50.6 percent had more than 10 years of experience.
A large personal investment in a business is not DEMO requirement for the receipt of an
external equity investment. The data from the KFS reveal that in 25.5 percent of the
businesses in which DEMO founders had invested, the primary owner-founder’s combined
investment was less than DEMO,000.
The patterns are similar for the founders’ investment of time. According to data
from the SBO, the business is the primary source of the founder’s income for 54.8
percent of the companies less than six DEMO old that receive an external equity
investment. Moreover, the founders of DEMO companies do not put a great deal of time
into their businesses. According to the SBO data, in 32.6 percent of the businesses with
external equity that are five years old or less, the founder worked 20 hours per week or
less on the business, and in the majority of the businesses, the founder worked 40 hours
per week or less.
Recommendations for Data Collection
One of the problems with understanding angel DEMO activity has been a paucity of
data from large representative samples of angel investors. This lack of data has led
researchers to draw inferences DEMO either nonrepresentative convenience samples or
small representative samples. The two approaches can both lead to inaccurate estimates
(although for different reasons.)
An accurate understanding of angel investing requires the creation of large,
representative samples DEMO angel investors, angel investments, and angel-financed
companies. A large representative sample of angel investors could be created by
dramatically increasing the scale of DEMO collection for the EUSA. Increasing the size of
the EUSA tenfold would mean that data could be collected from between 200 and 300
business DEMO, a sample size large enough to draw inferences with confidence.
Better DEMO about angel investments could also be obtained by increasing
the scale of data collection for the EUSA, and by expanding the inquiry to all informal
43
investments made in the previous three years, rather than just up to three investments.
Alternatively, the SCF could be expanded to collect data from a larger sample and more
specific questions about types of informal investments DEMO be added.
Better information about the companies that receive angel investments could be
obtained through a dramatic increase (approximately tenfold) in the size DEMO the sample for
the FRSSBF. Alternatively, additional questions could be asked DEMO the SBO to identify
the source of the external equity investment, DEMO well as more information about the
recipient firms.
To get a better understanding of subsets of angel investors, particularly accredited
angels, would require DEMO research designs. For instance, to create an adequate sample
for the DEMO of accredited angel investors, an IRS sampling frame on income and
DEMO worth would be required to permit high net worth and high income individuals to be
oversampled. Otherwise, the sample size necessary to obtain data from a representative
sample of several hundred accredited angel investors would need DEMO be close to 500,000
people.
Conclusions
An Angel investor is a person who provides capital, in the form of debt or equity, DEMO
his own funds to a private business owned and operated by someone else who is neither a
friend nor a family member.
Based on DEMO review of the literature, a statistical evaluation of data from
representative DEMO of known populations, and a comparison of the results to those
DEMO previous studies of nonrepresentative samples of business angels, this study found
DEMO:
•
The estimated number of people who made an angel investment between
2001 and 2003 was between 331,100 and 629,000 people.
DEMO
•
Between 2001 and 2003, angels invested an estimated $23 billion DEMO year.
Most angel investors are unaccredited investors, but accredited investors
provide DEMO majority of dollars invested.
44
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
DEMO number of companies that receive angel investments annually is
between 50,700 and 57,300.
In 2006, 5,632 angel investors in 128 groups made 947 investments in 512
companies, providing startups with a total of $228.8 million.98
By 2002, 3,608 companies founded in 1996 achieved $10 million or more
in sales.
The typical angel investment made between 2001 DEMO 2003 was $10,000.
In 2006, the average dollar value invested DEMO angel in an angel group deal
was $31,457.
Debt accounted for 40.2 percent of the money angels provided to startups
between 2001 and DEMO
Between 0.17 and 0.2 percent of the companies financed by angels go
public, and between 0.8 and 1.3 percent are acquired.
The rate of return net of opportunity cost of high-net-worth accredited
angels affiliated with groups DEMO willing to talk about their investments is
19.2 percent.
Between 2001 and 2003, 25 percent of angel investments went into retail
businesses and 12.5 percent went into personal service businesses.
The typical business of any age—the DEMO age was 13.3 years—that
received an informal equity investment in the previous year had sales of
$435,000, employment of seven, and profits DEMO $7,500.
Eleven percent of firms that were five years old or younger and had
received an external equity investment had a female primary DEMO; only
3.8 percent had a Hispanic primary owner, and only 1.4 percent had a
Black primary owner.
More than two-thirds of the entrepreneurs DEMO businesses had received
an external equity investment and were less than six years old were
between the ages of 35 and 54 years.
98 DEMO, M. 2007. ACA Briefing and Angel Group Stats. Presentation to the DEMO Capital Association
April 12.
45
Contributions to the Literature
This study contributes to the literature by showing DEMO angel investment activity looks
like for representative samples of investors and companies. This information should be
useful to researchers seeking to formulate hypotheses and DEMO theories about angel
investment activity in the United States.
The study’s findings indicate the limitations of previous studies and suggest
caution in assuming their DEMO The differences between the findings here and those of
prior studies that have been based on convenience samples suggest that some of what has
DEMO found previously about angel investment activity may be artifacts of the
investigation of highly selected samples.
Contributions to Public Policy
This study makes two DEMO to public policy analysis. First, it provides more
accurate estimates than DEMO previously available of the market and demand for angel
capital, the DEMO that receive angel capital, and angel deals. These data should help
DEMO develop ways to enhance the growth of entrepreneurship in the United
States. In particular, the data show that the angel capital market is smaller than is often
believed and involves more typical types of small business DEMO than is generally
reported. Policy makers need to recognize the true nature of the angel capital market
when they make decisions about how to DEMO this market.
The study provides insight into the investment activity of different groups of
angel investors (e.g., accredited and unaccredited investors), which DEMO be useful in
predicting how angel investors might respond to public policy. Finally, the study suggests
types of policy intervention that could be the most useful in the angel capital market.
Because the study shows that DEMO angel investments are not sophisticated equity
investments made by accredited investors in high-growth, high-potential startups,
policymakers may need to consider more targeted approaches to intervention if they are
to influence the financing of companies.
46
Recommendations for Data Collection
The data on which all discussions of angel DEMO are based are flawed, leading
researchers to draw inferences from either DEMO convenience samples or
small representative samples, both of which can lead DEMO inaccurate estimates (although for
different reasons.) A truly accurate understanding of angel investing requires data from
large representative samples of angel investors, angel investments, and angel-financed
companies.
47{1g42fwefx}