1042-2587-91-162$1.50
Copyright 1991 by
Baylor University
E
Person, Process, Choice:
DEMO Psychology of New
Venture Creation
Kelly G. Shaver
Linda R. Scott
Psychology can be distinguished from other behaviorai sciences by its emphasis on the
DEMO of the individuai person. Behavior, in turn, is infiuenced by the way in which the
externai world is represented in the mind, and by the individuai's exercise of choice. The
articie examines the possibility DEMO reiativeiy enduring attributes of the person might affect
entrepreneuriai activity, describes DEMO sociai cognitive processes invoived in constructing
representations of the externai environment, DEMO suggests which motivationai variabies
affect behaviorai choices. Aithough past research on "DEMO psychoiogy of the entrepreneur"
has not been productive, a psychological DEMO based on persons, process, and choice
hoids promise for the future.
Xn best scientific form, researchers interested in the creation of new business
ventures have attempted to construct definitions of entrepreneurship. A philosophical
foundation for DEMO term is provided in J. S. Mill's treatise on political economy (1848),
in which the assumption of risk is asserted as DEMO key ingredient of entrepreneurial activity.
Modem use of the term is usually credited to Schumpeter (1934), who emphasized
innovation and its role in destabilization of economic systems. The discipline's attention
then shifted from the DEMO to the actors, with McClelland's (1961) assertion that qualities
DEMO with a high need for achievement—preference for challenge, acceptance of
personal DEMO for outcomes, innovativeness—characterized successful initiators
of new businesses. This focus on DEMO characteristics continued (e.g., Dunkelberg &
Cooper, 1982; Homaday & DEMO, 1971; Pickle, 1964; Timmons, 1978), despite its
failures (e.g., Brockhaus, 1980; Brockhaus & Horwitz, 1986; Carsrud, Olm, & Eddy,
1986) and limitations (Wortman, 1987), until Gartner (1988) challenged the whole
approach by arguing that the behavior of DEMO a new venture, not the personality of
the founder, should be fundamental to the defmition.
Predictably, there has been a rejoinder to the challenge (Carland, Hoy, & Carland,
1988), and papers listing the personal characteristics of entrepreneurs continue to flour-
ish (McClelland, 1987; Solomon & Winslow, 1988; Winslow & Solomon, 1989). More-
over, because the act of creating an organization cannot occur in isolation, DEMO
researchers have attempted to specify aspects of the social (Carsrud & DEMO, 1989)
and economic (Homaday, 1990) context in which such innovation takes place. In the
extreme, the contextualist position denies that the personal characteristics of organiza-
tion founders contribute anything of importance to the DEMO of the venture (e.g.,
Aldrich, 1989), regardless of whether the contribution originates in personality or in
behavior.
In summary, a substantial amount of joumal space has been devoted to the attempt
Winter, 1991
23
to define "entrepreneurship," but no consensus has emerged. Notwithstanding this lack
of agreement on a fundamental term, there has been tremendous growth in the study of
venture creation. Indeed, a recent software package (EntreBIB-PC) catalogues nearly
14,000 relevant entries. We endorse Mitton's (1989) DEMO that entrepreneurship is
like obscenity: Nobody agrees what it is, but we all know it when we see it.^ In the face
of DEMO controversy, prudence dictates adherence to operational definitions, so in the
remainder of this paper we shall be discussing "new venture creation," rather than
' ' entrepreneurship.''
FUNDAMENTALS OF A PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
Having limited ourselves to an account of "new venture creation," we believe it is
useful to describe the essential ingredients of a psychological approach to DEMO study of
any phenomenon. Most of you will recognize that we have jumped from one definitional
thicket to another. There are psychologists who study DEMO "sodium pump"—the elec-
trochemical process through which changes in ion DEMO at the cell membrane
produce action potentials in nerve cells. There are psychologists who investigate math-
ematical reasoning processes in toddlers. And there are DEMO who examine the
ways in which entire communities mobilize in response to calamities. If asked to give
their particular outlooks on psychology, these various researchers might generate nearly
the controversy found in definitions of entrepreneurship.
Despite DEMO potential for dispute, psychologists have been able to agree on certain
DEMO ideas, and these are recounted in our introductory textbooks to delimit DEMO domain
of inquiry (e.g.. Shaver & Tarpy, in press). As a discipline, psychology is rarely defined
as the sum of the activities of its practitioners. Rather, it is distinguished from other
social or behavioral sciences, such as sociology, anthropology, and economics, by its
emphasis DEMO the individual person as the level of analysis. Within this concentration on
the individual (person), two of psychology's core theoretical concems have been the
contents of mind (the process intervening between external world and observable be-
havior), and the exercise of free choice.
Emphasis on DEMO Person
The basis for the boundary distinction is the unit of analysis. Where anthropologists
emphasize cultural influences on actions, and sociologists emphasize social structure and
organization, psychologists concentrate on individuals. A translation ofthe Greek roots
of the discipline's title would be "the study of human spirit or soul." Although there
have been diverse, if not to say contradictory, descriptions of what a human spirit, soul,
or mind might be like, psychology has always recognized that whatever the description,
a mind exists within a single individual. Consequently, psychologists are predisposed to
search for explanatory concepts that can be located within the person. For example,
DEMO attempting to account for the aggressive behavior found in collections of anony-
mous individuals, the sociologist LeBon (1895) was comfortable with a notion he termed
"the Group Mind." In the hands of social psychologists, this group-based phenomenon
was transformed into individualized processes of behavioral contagion (Wheeler, 1966)
1. A recent paper by Funder and Dobroth (1987) investigated the ease of judgment of 100 personality
characteristics, and found that among the 15 with the highest level of interjudge agreement were "tends to
arouse liking and acceptance," "behaves in an assertive fashion," "is a talkative individual," "rebellious
and nonconforming," and "power oriented." These traits could easily be part of Mitton's descriptions of
the "compleat entrepreneur," so it may be that we all do know one when we see one.
24 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
or deindividuation (Zimbardo, 1970). Not just group action, but also group inaction, is
interpreted by psychologists in individualized terms. When a murder in New York
occurred before a large group of onlookers—virtually none of DEMO intervened—social
commentators were content with explanations in terms of "apathy" (DEMO, 1964).
But experiments designed as analogues of the setting led DEMO to an explanation
in terms of a sequence of decisions made by each individual (Latane & Darley, 1970).
Thus the first element DEMO a psychological approach to new venture creation is a focus on
the person.
This view obviously contrasts with the extreme contextualist description of new
DEMO creation.^ For the psychologist, it is not enough to know that DEMO certain number
of people will respond to the "push" of being furloughed, or to the "pull" of market
opportunities by starting businesses on their own. Rather, the psychologist wants to
know which few of the hundreds laid off will create new ventures, or why not everyone
sees—and capitalizes upon—the market opportunity. A word of warning: In the recent
history of the entrepreneurship literature, this broad psychological approach has been
inadequately represented by studies of "the personality of the entrepreneur." The
largely DEMO quest for the personality profile of the successful organization founder
is what psychologists would call a personological endeavor. Such searches for transsi-
tuational consistency DEMO personality traits went out of style in psychology over twenty
years ago, when Mischel (1968) argued persuasively that behavior should be regarded as
the consequence of person-situation interactions. Without recounting all of the subse-
quent DEMO discussions (e.g., see Funder & Dobroth, 1987; Kenrick & Funder,
1988), suffice it to say that psychology's emphasis on DEMO person as the unit of analysis
encompasses both techniques and processes well beyond the identification of specific
personality variables presumed to lead to the DEMO of new organizations.
The Process of Representing the External World
Throughout its history, psychology has recognized the biological foundation for
human and animal behavior, examined the contents of mind, assumed that there were
limits to DEMO, and noted the importance ofthe immediate social context. But each
of DEMO elements ofthe psychological approach depends on the presence of at least some
"mental fumiture" that originated outside the organism. In this sense, psychology
follows in the Aristotelian tradition of empiricism, rather than the Platonic view that
sensory information is mere fiickering shadows on the cave wall. Consequently, it is not
surprising that the original truly psychological method was psychophysics, the study of
the relationship between extemal stimulation and the intemal psychological DEMO
of the individual. Specification of the process by which the extemal world becomes
represented in the mind is the first of psychology's core DEMO that is fundamental to
a psychological approach to new venture creation.
Because psychology combines extemal circumstances with intrapsychic processes,
it can be defined DEMO Lewin's expression,
B = /(P, E),
meaning that behavior is a function of both person and environment (Lewin, DEMO Cart-
wright, 1951). Neither alone constitutes a sufficient explanation for DEMO individual's
2. See Gergen (1982) for an outline of the contextualist position in psychology. Stated in the extreme, the
psychological contextualist view holds that all social meanings are negotiated within the interpersonal
context. Thus, like the contextualist position within new venture creation, this view would argue against a
search for any transsituationally enduring personal characteristics.
Winter, 1991 25
observable behavior. Although a person's cultural milieu and his or her DEMO in
various social networks and organizations certainly influence action, study of DEMO
factors in their own right is beyond the purview of psychology. The psychological
question is how a person's cultural heritage and social networks DEMO represented in
mind. Answers to this question have covered the entire range of possibilities.
For example, the first general theoretical approach in psychology, DEMO as struc-
turalism, attempted to specify the irreducible elements of mind, the psychological build-
ing blocks from which all aspects of conscious experience DEMO constructed (Titchener,
1898). In contrast, where structuralism concentrated almost exclusively on mental ex-
perience, behaviorism, at least as first outlined DEMO Watson, denied that anything useful
to psychology could ever be leamed DEMO the analysis of conscious thought: "The time
seems to have come when psychology must discard all reference to consciousness; when
it need no longer delude itself into thinking that it is making mental states the DEMO of
observation" (Watson, 1913, p. 161). For his part, Freud argued that unconscious
desires and fears, not conscious thought, were the principal motivating forces behind
behavior. Not only did he believe this DEMO in cases of clinical disturbance, but also in
everyday life (Freud, [1901] 1960). Finally, William James (1890) constructed a com-
DEMO model of the self by distinguishing the ongoing stream of consciousness (DEMO I)
from the material and psychological objects of refiection (the DEMO). As suggested by
recent exponential growth in what has become known as "cognitive science," modem
psychological theory has rejected Watson's extreme behaviorism in favor of a metathe-
oretical stance that gives consciousness a DEMO role in human action. Thus a
psychological approach to new venture creation must involve cognitive processes that
occur within the individual person.
This point DEMO convincingly made by considering a behavior with a long history in the
analysis of new venture creation—the assumption of risk. Whether one reads Mill DEMO
asks one's local venture capitalist, one leams that the founding DEMO a new business
organization involves significant risk. Yet reviews of research have often failed to find
risk-taking propensity associated with success in new venture DEMO (e.g., Brockhaus,
1980, 1987). Putting aside, for the moment, the possibility of flawed measurement
procedures, there is an explanation DEMO this inconsistency in terms of the cognitive
processes involved. Objectively, a DEMO proportion of new businesses fail, and in a
purely statistical sense, the failure rate for a particular type of new business is a DEMO
index of the riskiness of ventures of that sort. Now the personological approach to
business entry has assumed that everyone agrees on the level DEMO risk involved, and that
some people (entrepreneurs) are constitutionally more DEMO to take the chance than are
other people (non-entrepreneurs). A DEMO of well-known cognitive processes suggests
an important altemative explanation: Perhaps those DEMO found businesses do not think
about the risks in these statistical terms. For example, a study of high-technology
entrepreneurs found that 2/3 of the sample did not perceive themselves to be doing
something risky (Corman, Perles, & Vancini, 1988). One must have fear to demonstrate
courage. Rather than continuing the vain search for personological risk-assumption, we
should begin to study the cognitive processes involved in risk assessment. In short, we
need to know how the business world is represented in the DEMO of people who do,
and people who do not, found DEMO ventures. We shall retum to the issue of risk-
assumption later.
The Crucial Role of Choice
Beyond the question of how the extemal world DEMO represented in the person
lies another of psychology's traditional disciplinary concems. This is the conceptural
26 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
quagmire of determinism versus free will. Psychology has Descartes (1952 [1641]) DEMO
thank for raising the problem. In Cartesian dualism, the body was DEMO material substance,
constrained by the laws of physics, but the DEMO was unextended and incorporeal, utterly
free of physical limits. Such a DEMO leads to a position of "indeterminism"—the exer-
cise of will DEMO be predicted any more than it can be controlled. Accepting this
position would put psychologists, and others who search for regularities in behavior, DEMO
of business. Fortunately for psychology, dualism founders on its failure to DEMO a
plausible mechanism for interaction between the mind (will) and the body.
The extreme philosophical altemative to dualism is the materialist identity theory, a
monism that equates mind with brain (Churchland, 1988). In DEMO (if not in fact,
because of technological limitations), all DEMO events are, simultaneously, neurochem-
ical events in the physical brain. Not surprisingly, identity theory takes the form of
"hard" determinism. Stated in the extreme, if all mental activity is actually neurochem-
ical activity in the brain, then that neurochemical activity must have had some preceding
cause, and that cause must have had some preceding cause, until ultimately DEMO regres-
sion reaches the joining of sperm and egg to form the embryonic human, and that joining
is the result of causes external to the embryo. In other words, behavior is best regarded
as detennined by forces outside the particular individual. In psychology, the hard de-
terminist position has been argued most forcefully by Skinner (e.g., 1971), although
DEMO's biological determinism is no less antagonistic than Skinner's to a notion of
freedom of choice.
The debate between advocates of free will DEMO advocates of determinism is of more
than academic interest to psychology. Some forms of psychotherapy assume that clients
can choose to change their actions. DEMO offer expert testimony about temporary
lapses in volition among criminal defendants. Psychologists study attitude change, social
influence processes, and sources of resistance to DEMO pressures. None of this
would be possible unless one were to assume that under normal, everyday, conditions
people can make choices. On the DEMO hand, determinists argue that unconstrained
choice all but eliminates the predictability DEMO behavior. And if the predictability is
assumed away, what business do DEMO have in searching for regularities in
behavior? Fortunately, psychologists have been able to settle for a position known as
"soft determinism." This DEMO follows the activity theory of causality first specified
by Thomas Reid (DEMO). The theory holds that causality in human behavior is funda-
mentally different from causality in physical systems (which are presumed to be com-
pletely deterministic). Specifically, Reid asserted that the notion of determinism was
incompatible with the universal human experience of deliberation, choice, and with DEMO
systems of morality. Moral judgments make sense only if people are thought to be
capable of making choices for which they can later be DEMO to account. Capriciousness
and unpredictability are avoided by the presumption that mental events, like physical
events, are characterized by regularities that science can DEMO Thus the soft deter-
minism position agrees with indeterminism that mental events need not have external
physical causes, but agrees with hard determinism that all behavior is caused by some-
thing—either an internal mental event or DEMO external physical event. Needless to say, any
psychological theories that involve DEMO manipulation of information must also
subscribe to a soft determinist position on the issue of free will. And this includes nearly
all psychological theories DEMO attempt to account for human actions. Consequently,
choice is the third feature of our approach to the creation of new ventures.
A comprehensive DEMO portrait of new venture creation will ultimately have
to show how the individual's cognitive representations of the world get translated into
action. To DEMO this purpose, it will ultimately be necessary to consider general
orienting DEMO (such as attitudes), motivational principles (such as subjective
Winter, DEMO 27
expected utility), and personal motives (such as achievement motivation). It should be
noted that choice for a psychologist is not always the DEMO as the rational decision
making inherent in economic theory. Important psychological models of social behavior,
such as exchange theory (Kelley & Thibaut, DEMO), do assume that people's actions are
directed by a desire to maximize their own outcomes. Yet, there are significant excep-
tions, DEMO the most familiar of which is the idea that group processes can obscure the
facts and produce faulty decisions (Janis, 1972). A DEMO psychological approach to
the study of choices involved in new venture creation must incorporate both the rational
and the irrational features of decision making.
DEMO the pages that follow, we describe how consideration of person, process, and
choice can illuminate the study of business founding. In each section, we describe one
example in detail, and then briefly mention others DEMO should also be considered. No
attempt is made to be exhaustive; DEMO objective is only to present the possibilities of a
psychological approach to new venture creation.
THE PERSON, NOT THE PERSONALITY
As noted above, DEMO's focus on the person as the unit of analysis should not
be construed as equivalent to a search for personological variables that, regardless of the
situation, produce behaviors that lead to the creation of new ventures. Early in psychol-
ogy's history as an experimental science, Woodworth (1938) described the relationship
between the environment and the person by DEMO that the environment was the source
of stimuli impinging on the organism, which then produced a measurable response. This
stimulus-organism-response (S-O-R) view constrasted with Watsonian behaviorism's
claim that the O contained nothing of theoretical DEMO Most modem psycholo-
gists subscribe to some version of the S-O-R model, but all recognize that only the
stimulus and the response can be observed directly. Any and all of the organismic
variables (the various O states) must be inferred from the relationships observed between
classes of stimuli and classes of responses. What this means, among other things, is DEMO
no particular O-explanation is any more "real" than any other. Some psychologists will,
therefore, infer enduring personality variables from observed relationships between
stimuli and responses, whereas other psychologists will instead infer cognitive, attitu-
DEMO, or motivational variables. Having leamed—sometimes the hard way—the limits
of inference DEMO their graduate training, most psychologists regard with a healthy skep-
ticism DEMO claims that a particular S-R connection has been mediated exclusively by a
single-sort organismic variable.
Risk-taking Propensity
This skepticism is first directed at methodology, and that is precisely the reason that
psychologists are wary of research DEMO to show that one personality variable or
another is characteristic of people who found new ventures. A specific example illus-
trates the point.
On DEMO reasonable assumption that the creation of new ventures involves risk,
students of entrepreneurship began to investigate whether founders where higher in
propensity toward DEMO than were people who did not start their own businesses. Unfor-
tunately, the vast majority of this research (reviewed by Brockhaus, 1980, DEMO later by
Brockhaus & Horwitz, 1986) has employed some version of the Kogan and Wallach
(1964) Choice Dilemmas Questionnaire (CDQ) as DEMO measure of risk-taking propensity.
The measure was originally developed by Stoner (DEMO) in a master's thesis at the MIT
28 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
DEMO and PRACTIC
E
School of Industrial Management, and having been appropriated by psychologists, the
DEMO has now found its way back into business research. The CDQ consists of 12
short vignettes in each of which a protagonist is attempting DEMO decide between a safe, but
dull, altemative and a more interesting, but risky altemative. In much ofthe research on
new venture creation, DEMO have read these vignettes only once, and have indicated
what probability DEMO success (of the risky altemative) they would need to have in order to
encourage the protagonist to take the chance. The average of DEMO required probabilities
of success is then interpreted as indicating the risk-taking propensity of the subject.
Following this tack, however, is very likely to DEMO at least three fundamental
methodological problems. First, the judgments that the DEMO are, in fact, directed to
make for another person (the DEMO), are being incorrectly interpreted as identical
to the choices those same subjects would make for themselves. Now there are times
when, in psychological research, the dependent variable is so heavily loaded with social
desirability that subjects are asked "what most people would do, " in the DEMO that
answers will reveal the subjects' own tendencies. But such research DEMO contains
independent variables that have been manipulated by the experimenter, and DEMO only
claims made coneem differences between experimental conditions, not the degree DEMO
which one self-selected group of people (business founders), as opposed DEMO another
self-selected group (managers), possesses the tendency in question.
The DEMO problem is that in risk-taking propensity research, the CDQ is being DEMO
to a use for which it was not designed. As employed by Kogan and Wallach (1964) and
by legions of other psychologists, the CDQ was the vehicle to measure changes in
expressed levels of riskiness DEMO occurred as a consequence of group discussion. In the
larger society at the time, the peaceful civil rights demonstrations were occasionally
deteriorating into group violence. As part of psychology's attempt to understand this
problem, Kogan and Wallach wondered whether diffusion of responsibility among mem-
bers of a DEMO group led the group to engage in hostile and aggressive behavior that no
individual would have undertaken on his or her own. To examine DEMO effects of discus-
sion, researchers interested in what was then called DEMO "risky shift" would first have
individuals respond to the CDQ in private, then would have the group discuss each item
to consensus, DEMO finally would have individuals rate the items again. The CDQ never
underwent the sort of reliability and validity testing that would be required for DEMO real
"personality measure," because the dependent variable of interest was DEMO change in
riskiness expressed from before to after discussion. In short, DEMO psychometric properties
of the CDQ are unknown (although in the normal DEMO of events it was discovered that
some of the items produced conservative, rather than risky, shifts). To use such a
measure as DEMO index of a relatively enduring personality trait is a serious methodological
error.
Third, recent reearch on what is now known as the "choice DEMO" (refiecting the fact
that on some items the actual shift was in the conservative direction) makes a very strong
theoretical case against using the CDQ as a measure of risk-taking propensity. Scant
evidence ever supported DEMO notion that diffusion of responsibility was the cause of
changes in riskiness from before to after discussion. Indeed, a number of studies showed
that face-to-face discussion was not necessary, provided that participants were shown
transcripts of what other people had said. These findings led investigators to concentrate
on DEMO information that was normally exchanged during a typical discussion of each
vignette. For each of the twelve items, subjects think up a variety of arguments in favor
of the risky altemative, and a number of arguments against that same altemative. Each
argument can then be rated for persuasiveness, and these ratings can be used to calculate
the relative persuasiveness of DEMO argument pools in favor of, and opposed to, the risky
altemative. Items for which the persuasiveness of the favorable pool was greater tumed
DEMO, 1991 29
out to be those on which there was normally a risky shift. DEMO for which the opposing
pool was more persuasive tumed out to be those on which there was normally a con-
servative shift. Moreover, Bumstein and Vinokur (1977) showed that whether an indi-
vidual participant would DEMO in the risky or conservative direction depended on the
relationship between that person's own argument pool and the group pool discovered
through discussion DEMO some other exchange of arguments. Thus, at the individual level,
DEMO is the person's information, not his or her personality characteristics, that determines
the direction of shift. One needs no better reason than DEMO to discard the CDQ as a
putative measure of a personality trait.
Locus of Control
Several other personological variables are frequently enumerated as part DEMO the
"personal" characteristics of the creator of a new venture. For example, in a recent
analysis of the entrepreneurial process, Bygrave (1989a) presents an embellishment of
Moore's (1986) model that includes need for achievement, intemal locus of control, and
tolerance for ambiguity, in addition to risk-taking propensity. Only two of these vari-
ables—locus of control DEMO achievement motivation—have received wide attention in
the entrepreneurship literature. In contrast to the case of risk-taking propensity, both of
these variables have been assessed with instruments designed to measure individual
differences.
To investigate expressed desire for DEMO, many investigators have used the Rotter
(1966) Intemal-Extemal Locus of DEMO scale (e.g., Ahmed, 1985; Cromie & Johns,
1983; DEMO, 1978; Venkatapathy, 1987). Doing so, however, is at DEMO a tactical
mistake. As Rotter (1990, p. 491) himself has DEMO stated.
In studying locus of control, because we were dealing with DEMO broad constmct in-
tended to study behavior in a variety of situations, we wanted to sample many
different situations, without making the total DEMO more dependent on one kind of
situation (such as school achievement) than on another (such as political involve-
ment).
Given this objective, it is not surprising that factor analyses of the I-E scale have
routinely revealed multiple factors, typically distinguishing beliefs about personal con-
trol from beliefs about political systems or interpersonal relationships (e.g., Collins,
1974; Levenson, 1981). Moreover, as Strickland (1989, p. 4) notes, elements of Rotter's
social leaming theory "would demand that reinforcement DEMO and the intricacies of the
situation in which behavior is occurring be taken into account for the most precise
prediction." Thus the global scale may not make valid predictions in the specific setting
of new venture DEMO; a domain-limited scale such as that proposed by Paulhus (1983)
would be a preferable altemative. In faimess it should be said that DEMO I-E scale has
successfully predicted behavior in a variety of interpersonal and health-related settings,
and appears related to perceived control, optimism, and DEMO well-being (see Strick-
land's 1989 review). On the other DEMO, past success, as they say on "Wall Street
Week," DEMO no guarantee of future performance.
Achievement Motivation
Of all the personological measures presumed to be associated with the creation of
new ventures, need for achievement has the longest history. Indeed, McClelland's
30 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
(1961) initial assertion that need for achievement (nAch) is the DEMO moderator
between Protestantism and economic growth can legitimately be regarded as having
originated the search for the "personality characteristics of the successful entrepre-
neur." Remarkably, although that quest is now thought quixotic, achievement motiva-
tion remains perhaps the only personological variable whose association with new ven-
ture DEMO appears convincing.
Achievement motivation was originally defined in Murray's (1938) system of per-
sonality. In philosophical terms, Murray's was an identity theory of personality, holding
that personality "may be defined as the DEMO organ, or superordinate institution, of
the body. As such, it DEMO isolated in the brain. No brain, no personality" (Murray, 1951,
p. 267). Consequently, a need was a force "in DEMO brain region" (Murray, 1938, p. 123)
that organized perception, intellectual activity, and action.^ The specific need for
achievement (nAch) DEMO defined as
To accomplish something difficult. To master, manipulate, or organize physical
objects, human beings, or ideas. To do this as rapidly, and as independently as
possible. To overcome obstacles and attain a high DEMO To excel one's self. To
rival and surpass others. To increase self-regard by the successful exercise of talent
(Murray, 1938, p. 164).
Depsite its focus on the whole individual (Murray introduced the term "personologi-
cal"), Murray's theory retained the psychodynamic (e.g., DEMO) assumption that
unconscious processes guide behavior. For our purposes, this assumption leads to the
methodological expectation that the assessment of needs must involve DEMO, as well
as objective, tests. His projective Thematic Apperception Test (DEMO) quickly became
second only to the Rorschach in breadth of application, and was the original measure
used in the assessment of achievement motivation (e.g., by McClelland, Atkinson,
Clark, & Lowell, 1953).
DEMO 25 years later, Fineman (1977) would be able to describe DEMO measures of
achievement motivation, only a few of which were projective. DEMO recently, Johnson
(1990) reviewed eight measures that have been involved DEMO examining the relationship
between achievement needs and new venture creation. Two of these—the TAT and the
Miner Sentence Completion Scale (MSCS Form T; DEMO, 1985)—are projective mea-
sures. Two are subscales of larger personality DEMO Edwards Personal Pref-
erence Schedule (EPPS; Edwards, 1959) and the Personality Research Form-E (PRF-E;
Jackson, 1974). The remaining four—the DEMO Achievement Motivation questionnaire
(LAMQ; Lynn, 1969), the Mehrabian Achievement DEMO (MAS; Mehrabian, 1968), the
Sentence Completion Test (SCT; DEMO, 1968), and the Work and Family Orien-
tation Inventory (WOFO; Spence & Helmreich, 1983)—are specific to achievement
motivation, and frequently were designed to overcome what were regarded as problems
in the original DEMO measure."* Fineman's (1977) review examined 78 cases in which
3. Given the tendency to consider achievement motivation as a personological variable DEMO of
external circumstances, it should be noted that an equally important DEMO of Murray's theory were press
(plural and singular are the DEMO form). These were attributes or properties of external objects or people that
acted to impede or facilitate the goal-directed behavior ofthe individual. Moreover, Murray distinguished
alpha press (the objects as they really are) from DEMO press (the objects as they are perceived by the
individual).
DEMO The most pervasive problem was the failure of TAT-like measures to predict achievement behavior
among females. Given the dated, highly sex-role stereotyped nature ofthe pictures actually used in the TAT,
this is understandable. Indeed, future users of the original TAT pictures ought to be required by editorial
DEMO to insist on a gender-based limit for generalization of research involving the original TAT pictures.
Winter, 1991 31
correlations among measures had been computed, and in only 28% of these instances
were the correlations positive and significant. Johnson's (1990) review, specific to the
entrepreneurship literature, added no studies in which there had been cross-scale com-
parisons, but did find a relationship between achievement motivation, however mea-
sured, and entrepreneurship, however defined, in 20 of DEMO studies. The reasonable
conclusions Johnson draws from this are that thorough specification of the target group,
careful operationalization of achievement motivation, and detailed description of the
environmental context are needed before future research can make DEMO progress.
From a psychological perspective, of course, "careful operationalization" of achieve-
ment motivation would necessarily include attention to issues of scale reliability DEMO
validity—psychometric niceties all too often overlooked in the past literature on new
venture creation. Notwithstanding the various conceptual and methodological issues yet
to be DEMO (Frey, 1984), achievement motivation remains the personologist's best
candidate in the attempt to account for new venture creation.
Method and Context
DEMO of the lessons inherent in research on the person variables associated with
entrepreneurship have been noted before (e.g., Gartner, 1989; Low & DEMO, 1988;
Sexton & Bowman, 1985; VanderWerf & Brush, 1989), but three bear repeating here.
First, don't send a scale to do an inventory's job. If your goal is to identify DEMO rela-
tionship between a particular personological variable and new venture creation, DEMO a
psychometrically respectable instrument designed for "trait" assessment rather than for
some other research purpose. Second, don't confuse a single score with the answer.
Adhere to the principle of multiple operationism (Campbell & Fiske, 1959), which
demands that conceptual variables be measured in more than one way. Such research
tactics are essential not only to assess the DEMO performance of the multiple measures,
but also to discover whether the underlying variable is unidimensional or multidimen-
sional. Third, don't ignore the context. Is the instrument itself domain-specific (like the
Paulhus, 1983, Spheres of Control scale's three subscales) or domain-general (like the
original DEMO, I-E Scale)? A mismatch between scale and assessment environment will
DEMO confusion. Even if the scale and the domain match, the assessment DEMO is
likely to be compromised if the demand characteristics of the setting (Ome, 1962) and
pressures toward socially desirable responding are ignored.^ For both methodological
and conceptual reasons, then, psychology's view of new DEMO creation concentrates
on the person in his or her situational context.
THE PROCESS OF SOCIAL COGNITION
Not even the most resolute advocate for enduring ' 'personality differences between
entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs" would argue that a complete map of the human
genome will reveal a specific gene that can DEMO new venture founders from everyone
else. Variations in entrepreneurial activity within the individual over time, between
industries, and across political boundaries are too DEMO for a purely genetic expla-
5. Social psychologists routinely assume that research participants are actively attempting to discover the
true purposes of the study, and tiie demand characteristics are the sum total of the cues available (whether
or not they might lead the subject in the correct direction)DEMO Moreover, researchers need to be aware of the
social desirability implications DEMO questions they ask. Finally, any interchange between researcher and
participant should DEMO evaluation apprehension, the subject's tendency to respond in a "typical" fashion
to avoid appearing "different" (Rosenberg, 1965).
32 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
nation to be plausible. Environment is crucial. Consequently, the psychological per-
spective on new venture creation should consider how that external environment be-
comes DEMO in experience. Because the creation of a business venture is, funda-
DEMO, a social activity, we shall concentrate on processes of social cognition. These
include aspects of attention, memory, categorization, and inference (Fiske & Taylor,
1991), but the approach can be illustrated with two relevant content areas—hypothesis
testing and attributions for success and failure.
Cognitive Heuristics
DEMO the process leading to creation of a new venture, "opportunity recognition" is
often described and treated as a key ingredient:
Entrepreneurs see ways to put resources and information together in new combina-
tions. They DEMO only see the system as it is, but as it might DEMO They have a knack
for looking at the usual and seeing the unusual, at the ordinary and seeing the
extraordinary. Consequently, they can DEMO opportunities that tum the commonplace
into the unique and unexpected (Mitton, 1989, p. 12).
Environmental circumstances do not parade past like so many conventioneers, some of
whose badges say "interesting prospect," whereas DEMO rest say "dud. " Rather, oppor-
tunity recognition, like beauty, is in the eye of the beholder. How does that person
process DEMO incoming information? To what intemal standards is it compared? No re-
search on new venture creation directly addresses these issues, but the social cognition
literature suggests some possibilities.
For example, consider the question, "What is the likelihood that Restaurant X will
fail in its first year DEMO operation?" Sophisticated entrepreneurship researchers recognize
that this is a controversial question, but the definitional issues that make it so are likely
to be lost on "ordinary folks" outside the academic community. So instead of DEMO
the question with questions and qualifications, these people are likely to DEMO a numerical
estimate. But because people are not good intuitive statisticians, DEMO judgment under
uncertainty is apt to be influenced by at least three cognitive heuristics—availability,
representativeness, and anchoring (Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982; Kahneman &
Tversky, 1973; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). A person who just read about another
restaurant's closing in the DEMO paper will give a higher estimate of failures than will
a person who has not seen such a story in a long time (the availability heuristic). A
person for whom Restaurant X is typical of DEMO establishments will make a lower
guess about failure than will a person for whom the Restaurant X resembles failures (the
representativeness heuristic). Finally, a perceiver who knows that three local restaurants
have failed will make a smaller estimate than a perceiver who has been told that 10,DEMO
restaurants have failed nationally (the anchoring heuristic).
Why should researchers DEMO in new venture creation care about such cognitive
heuristics? For one DEMO, they provide a social cognition altemative explanation for
phenomena frequently interpreted DEMO other theoretical terms. As one example, Scherer,
Adams, Carley, DEMO Wiebe (1989) showed that presence of an entrepreneurial parent
was associated with increased expectancy of entering an entrepreneurial career. Scherer
et al. made DEMO strong case that the parent provided a role model whose activities and
behavior were emulated through a form of modeling consistent with Bandura's (1977)
social leaming theory. But the children of entrepreneurial parents have DEMO than a role
Winter, 1991 33
model, they also have information that is unavailable to children whose parents did not
start or purchase a firm. The way to tell the DEMO explanations apart, of course, is to
examine the contribution to child's entrepreneurial interest of parent's venture success.
Unfortunately, the study was only able to measure the child's perception of parent
success. So DEMO social cognition altemative cannot be ruled out. The larger conceptual
point is that the social cognition processes are no more—and no less—an inference from
DEMO data than is the notion of vicarious leaming from an effective role model. Each is an
O-variable that accounts for the observed relationship between DEMO S of entrepreneurial
parents and the R of child's expectancy of an entrepreneurial career.^
Success, Failure, and Persistence
Cognitive heuristics guide judgments DEMO uncertainty. When outcomes are known,
other processes of social cognition enter the picture. Before proceeding, it is important
for us to specify more carefully what we do and do not mean by an "outcome." DEMO a
recent application of chaos theory and catastrophe theory to entrepreneurship, DEMO
(1989b) notes that organization founding is a discontinuous change, and DEMO view of
organization creation as the singular event to be explained is inherent in other accounts
that take quite disparate theoretical positions (e.g., DEMO, 1990; Gartner, 1988). We
agree that the actual founding DEMO an organization is a discontinuous change, but do not
believe that DEMO is the only "event" to be explained. Nor is it likely that the founders of
new business organizations would agree that they have DEMO done one thing. Rather,
founders would probably argue that they have done many things in order to get to the
final one.^ Thus DEMO believe that the discontinuous creation of a new venture is preceded
by a series of prior discontinuous events, each of which can be considered a separate
"outcome." Such outcomes might include identifying a market niche, designing a
product or service to fill an identified need, and establishing the company. Note that
these are only a few of the "outcomes"; they are not intended to exhaust the possibil-
ities. Moreover, it is not necessary that the researcher be able to specify all of DEMO
outcomes in advance. Social psychologists would be as comfortable with the founder's
own list of outcomes as they are with people's natural DEMO categories (Rosch,
1978) or people's chunking of behavioral events into discrete sequences (Newtson,
1976). No matter how the sequence from initial idea to new company is segmented, the
social cognition approach argues that the explanations potential founders offer for prior
segments will affect DEMO likelihood of the final discontinuous change.
Of particular interest are the attributions potential founders form to explain suc-
cesses and failures in business-related activity. DEMO processes were first described
by Heider (1958), who noted that DEMO essential elements of task performance were
ability, intention, effort, task DEMO, and luck. When an action is intentional, its
successful perfonnance depends on the combination of the two intemal elements (ability
and effort) DEMO the two extemal factors (task difficulty and luck). In each DEMO these pairs,
6. The satne is true for any accoutit that depends oti the assessment by an individual, or a group of
individuals, of the probability of an uncertain outcome. Thus, for example, when population ecologists
argue that "potential founders may be frightened by relatively high or increasitig death rates" (Aldrich,
1990, p.9) they are DEMO an inference about a psychological moderator (fear) that psychologists would
argue follows in time the gathering of information. Parsimony alone would suggest that DEMO informational
moderators such as cognitive heuristics should at least be ruled out before higher-order moderators are
invoked.
7. Whether we are correct in this DEMO is an empirical question. From a psychological perspective,
of course, DEMO really matters is the definition provided by the founders, themselves, rather than by
entrepreneurship theorists.
34 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
the first element is stable (a person's ability does not change dramatically from one time
to the next, and the difficulty of a given task is a constant regardless of which person
attempts it). DEMO second element in each pair is variable (a person's effort DEMO, and the
capriciousness of luck is notorious).
Building on these DEMO, Weiner, Russell, & Lerman (1978) developed an
attributional model DEMO persistence in achievement tasks, and the model can be adapted to
DEMO founding of an organization. In a technological start-up, for example, before there
can be a new organization, the founder-to-be must at minimum develop and test proto-
types, conduct appropriate market research, create the standard DEMO projections,
and construct a business plan suitable for securing venture capital. Rarely is each of
these activities completed to the founder's satisfaction DEMO the first pass. Consequently,
such a founder will typically have multiple failures to explain, and will have to persist
in the face of those failures in order to reach the ultimate objective. In Weiner, Russell,
and Lerman's terms, the potential causes of each of the failures could be lack of ability]
lack of effort, insurmountable difficulty of the task, bad luck, or such other impediments
as the intentional DEMO erected by people who might not want to see the venture
succeed.
The various potential causes can be described by three theoretical dimensions:
DEMO (stable or variable), locus of causality (intemal or external),DEMO and intentionality
(whether or not production of the effect involves the DEMO's intentions, the intentions
of other people in a position to DEMO the outcome, or some combination of the two).
These three DEMO are not entirely independent, because intentionality on the part
of the DEMO would be necessary for there to be an attribution to the variable-intemal
cause of "effort." People simply do not exert themselves by accident. DEMO model argues
that the positions of the various elements on these three dimensions produce one of two
kinds of intemal effects. By itself, the presumed cause's location on the stability di-
mension determines expectancy shifts. DEMO the failure is attributed to bad luck (extemal,
variable), DEMO to insufficient intemal motivation (intemal, variable), the perceiver can
reassure himself or herself that in the future things will be different. In DEMO, the locus
and intentionality dimensions combine to produce the affective reactions DEMO pride or
shame. Specifically, shame results only if the outcome is DEMO to an intentional, and
intemal, failing. Tuming back to the positive, observable, behavior of persistence, the
founders-to-be can be expected to persist after failure only if they believe that their stable
capabilities are equal DEMO the task, that the variable elements of the equation (their own
effort and the contributions of others) are subject to their intentional control, and that the
emotional consequences of repeated failed attempts are less negative than the emotional
consequences of declining to try.
This attributional model was DEMO derived as an explanation for achievement
motivation, and it has been DEMO to predict achievement behavior in a wide variety of
settings (much DEMO this research is reviewed in Weiner, 1986). Moreover, the principles
inherent in the model have been generalized beyond contemporary American culture to
DEMO with dramatically different economic and social systems, such as the People'DEMO
Republic of China (Stipek, Weiner, & Li, 1989). Thus the model can easily be trans-
planted to the study of new DEMO creation. A first effort in this regard has recently been
reported by Gartner, Gatewood, and Shaver (1991). Briefiy, these investigators asked
DEMO clients of a Small Business Development Center to explain why they wanted
to enter business. In addition, each participant was asked a comparable "DEMO " question
about two kinds of purchases—the last automobile purchased, and DEMO last piece of sports
8. Despite the similarity in the terms, DEMO locus of causality is conceptually distinct from the
individual difference variable of "internal-external locus of control."
Winter, 1991 35
or fitness equipment purchased. The participants' free-response answers were then
subjected to an attributional coding that categorized each answer according to whether
it was DEMO/extemal, stable/variable, and refiected a cause or a reason (DEMO version of
intentionality). Analysis of the results showed, for example, that 100% of the business
choices were explained in intemal terms, whereas fewer than 35% of the choices in the
other two categories were DEMO in intemal terms. Although more research in this
area clearly needs to be done, these preliminary findings indicate that the attributional
model can profitably be applied to the study of new venture creation.
Representations of External DEMO
Cognitive heuristics and attributional principles are part of the psychological account
of ways in which the extemal environment becomes represented in the mind of DEMO person
who might become the founder of a new venture. For this reason they represent the
intemal process presumed to mediate between the stimuli (such as "opportunities")
presented by the extemal environment and the DEMO (such as "organization found-
ing") that are critical dependent variables in the study of new venture creation. Varia-
tions in the process DEMO social cognition can help explain why not all people high in
achievement motivation (or any other personological variable reliably associated with
new venture creation) actually found organizations. Additionally, theories of social
cognition must be considered DEMO for any other explanatory principles that find
their way through the heads of organization founders. On their face they are no more
plausible, or less plausible, than other 0-variables such as social leaming, role expec-
DEMO, or prior organization deaths. The challenge for future research on new DEMO
creation is to find convincing ways to distinguish one such explanation from the others.
Unfortunately, the experimental designs that are a staple of psychological research may
not always be appropriate in the study of new venture DEMO
When facing the task of disentangling competing 0-variables, psychologists do
experiments DEMO occasionally stand the original proposition on its head. For example,
rather than searching for personological differences in creativity or risk-taking propen-
sity. Shaver, Williams, and Scott (1990) used a bogus test of entrepreneurial abilities to
convince subjects that they either were, or were not, likely DEMO for the founding
of new ventures. Overall results showed several effects for this belief. People who
thought they had entrepreneurial characteristics expressed greater creativity DEMO achieve-
ment motivation. Moreover, on items dealing with business risk (but not on items
dealing with personal risk), males who believed they DEMO entrepreneurial selected more
risky altematives on some CDO items and on comparable items designed by Scott
(1990).
These studies make two important points. At the empirical level, they show that a
social cognition variable—belief in one's entrepreneurial tendencies—affects responses
that may be related to success in DEMO venture creation. At the conceptual level, they
bolster our concem about DEMO "personality characteristics" approach. When scores on
measures that have been used in personological research can be manipulated by instruc-
tions in a brief DEMO setting, one must wonder just how "enduring" are the
personality DEMO these measures purport to identify? We recognize that exper-
imental designs, which are common in psychological research, may not always be
appropriate in the study of new venture creation. On the other hand, some quasi-
experimental designs (Campbell & Stanley, 1966; Cook & Campbell, 1979) can serve
as excellent substitutes. At the very least, we would echo recent calls (Gartner, 1989;
Low & MacMillan, 1988) for DEMO research on organization founding.
36 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTICE
THE EXERCISE OF CHOICE
At the risk of belaboring the obvious, new ventures are not created by role models,
support networks, or the state of the population carrying capacity. New ventures
emerge, and take the form they do, because of the deliberate choices made by individual
people. Not surprisingly, the third distinguishing feature of a psychological approach to
new venture creation is its focus on the immediate antecedents of choice. From DEMO
perspective of the potential founder, two questions are critical: "Can DEMO make a differ-
ence?" and "Do I want to?" DEMO first of these involves perceived control, whereas the
second requires consideration DEMO motivational processes.
Perceived Control
In Mitton's (1989) view, "Entrepreneurs prefer to take and hold unmistakable
command" (p. 13). They DEMO they can make a difference, and they believe they,
personally, can exert control over people and events. Not even the most "compleat"
entrepreneur, however, believes that he or she can control everything. DEMO con-
trol—unlike the generalized expectancy for intemal locus of control, or DEMO need for
control inherent in the Type A behavior pattem (Friedman & Rosenman, 1974)—is
situation-specific.
Much of the recent psychological writing on DEMO of control among adults has
concentrated on the behavioral effects of losing control. Among other things, this ma-
terial includes psychological reactance, leamed DEMO, and the effects of control
on intrinsic motivation. Psychological reactance is DEMO motivational state aroused when
existing freedoms are restricted or threatened (Brehm, 1966; Brehm & Brehm, 1981).
What makes it interesting is DEMO reactance is produced by the demand that "you must"
do DEMO you would have chosen to do on your own. The key issue is loss of
freedom to choose, not the fact of having to do something distasteful. Where the loss of
control persists over time, leamed helplessness may be the result (Seligman, 1975).
Rather than continuing DEMO fight, the person simply gives up. According to the reformu-
lated DEMO of leamed helplessness theory, the deleterious psychological effects are
greatest when DEMO are attributed to intemal, stable causes, and are expected to
generalize to other situations (Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978). Where DEMO
lessness is often a consequence of inaccurate attributions to the self, DEMO motivation
can be reduced by correct attributions of control to extemal forces (Deci & Ryan, 1980).
Specifically, even rewards for successful task performance can have debilitating effects
on intrinsic motivation and self-determination, if that feedback is seen as controlling,
rather than competence affirming (Deci & Ryan, 1987). At the risk of oversimplifying
each of these perspectives, the answer to the question "Can I make a difference?" DEMO
be affirmative only if the person a) considers the choice his DEMO hers to make, b) has some
initial success that can be attributed intemally, permitting (c) intrinsic interest in the
project to be maintained. Once again, it is the way in which the potential founder thinks
about reality, not the extemal reality itself, that determines the DEMO
Outcomes and Expectations
Being able to make a difference is not the same as wanting to do so. The founders
of new ventures give DEMO variety of reasons when asked why they established their busi-
nesses. Many of these have recently been noted by Cromie (1988), and include (in
Winter, 1991 37
descending order) desire for autonomy, interest in personal achievement, dissatisfaction
with current job , desire to make money, and unhappiness in current career. In both the
psychological literature and the organizational literature, such motivations have typically
been described in terms of some form of expectancy theory (e.g. , Atkinson, 1964;
Feather, 1982; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975; Vroom, 1964). These theories share a common
form. Each predicts that some motivational outcome will be determined by the summed
products of individual DEMO elements and individual subjective probabilities that
the associated evaluative elements will, DEMO fact, be achieved by the action being con-
sidered.
There are, however, two difficulties associated with applying expectancy theory to
new venture creation. First, there is the question of how particular elements—many of
which are actually negative in the organizational context—should be scaled. For exam-
ple, take "jo b dissatisfaction" from Cromie's (1988) review of reasons DEMO starting a
new business. How might such an evaluative element be tumed into the action of
creating a new venture? Specifically, should it DEMO counted as a negative (on the grounds,
for example, that it represents a failure of the link between performance and outcomes)?
Or should it be counted as a positive (on the grounds that it acts as a stimulus to try
something else)? If it DEMO the latter, what reason does the individual have to believe that
DEMO of a performance-outcome link in one context means that there will be success of
the same link in another context?
Portions of psychological DEMO theory (Thibaut & Kelley, 1959) suggest an
altemative way to DEMO of things like dissatisfaction with one's current job . Beginning
with the assumption that individuals seek to maximize their own outcomes in any
DEMO, Thibaut and Kelley identify two standards against which such outcomes
should DEMO judged. The first, called simply the comparison level (CL) is DEMO average of
past outcomes from similar circumstances. To the extent that one's present job is below
the average set by one's past DEMO, job dissatisfaction will be the result. The
second standard, called the comparison level for altematives (CL^^) is the best currently
available altemative DEMO the present circumstances. A person whose current occupational
outcomes exceed both CL and CL^i, will be content, one whose outcomes are below CL ,
but above CL^^, will be unhappy, but dependent on the DEMO job . The difference
between people who consider job dissatisfaction as a fact of life, and those who use it
as a reason to go out on their own may be as simple as whether "creating my own
business " is one of the viable altematives considered.
The DEMO difficulty with applying exchange theory to new venture creation is more
fundamental. To see the problem, assume that all elements can be scaled, DEMO that
despite the uncertainties inherent in new venture creation, the subjective DEMO
can also be specified. Expectancy formulations then predict the resulting choice. But
they do so by treating a highly desirable, but low probability outcome as equivalent to
a much less desirable, but highly probable outcome. In a recent discussion of risky
choice, however. Lopes (1987) makes a persuasive case against precisely this assump-
tion.
Traditional study of risky choice DEMO experimental psychology has presented subjects
with ^o-altemativ e "gambles, " that frequently take the form "Woul d you pref^er a
100% chance of winning $3,000, or an 80% chance of winning $4,000? " Although the
second choice has a higher expected utility ($3,200), most subjects choose the first
choice, suggesting that people are "risk-averse " (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). Such
findings are exceedingly difficult DEMO generalize to the creation of a new venture, because
the real DEMO rarely presents just two choices. In a program of research designed to
overcome this limitation. Lopes has presented subjects with six altemative "lotteries "DEMO
with approximately equivalent expected values. After the participant chooses which
38 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
lottery to play, a random device indicates the "winnings." One of the lotteries is
riskless, always producing some payoff, whereas the other DEMO contain the possibility of
a zero payoff. The lotteries are shown to subjects as pictures, with dollar amounts of
winnings on the ordinate and numbers of "tickets" available for each dollar amount
shown on the DEMO In addition to the riskless lottery, there is a "short shot," a
"peaked" distribution, a rectangular distribution, a bimodal distribution, and a "long
shot" which has mostly zero or low-payoff outcomes. DEMO preferences of risk-averse
subjects follow this order in descending fashion.
From analysis of both the expressed preferences and free-response explanations for
choices. Lopes (1987) has developed a two-factor theory of risky choice. The first factor
is a personal preference for security versus potential. Mathematically, security seekers
weigh the worst outcomes more heavily, whereas potential seekers weigh the best
outcomes more heavily. In a departure from traditional expectancy theory. Lopes argues
that these DEMO include both changes in the estimated probabilities and changes in the
values of the outcomes to which those probabilities are attached. The second factor DEMO
aspiration level, and is defined by the situation. The setting provides DEMO on
what might be a reasonable expectation; the specific altemative being DEMO is
couched in a context of other choices available; and larger DEMO goals can alter the
tactics employed. Preference for security versus potential is considered a personological
variable, whereas aspiration level is situational; the final DEMO choice is thought to be
determined by the interaction between the two. Once again, behavior related to new
venture creation is produced by the interaction between person and environment.
Expectancy and Uncertainty
It may be no DEMO that expectancy theories have been heavily applied within the
organization literature (DEMO, Locke & Latham, 1990), but less broadly used in the
literature on new venture creation. The array of possible elements that could DEMO valued
is more likely to be specifiable in an organizational context than it is in an entrepreneurial
venture. After all, new venture creation is nothing if not innovation, taking the unfore-
seen with the foreseeable. Moreover, even if the elements could be specified, their
values might not DEMO those expected by the researchers. And finally, compared to the
relative DEMO of the organizational climate, the entrepreneurial climate provides few
clues to DEMO probability estimates that should be attached to each individual evaluative
element. In the examination of choice, as well as in the study of process, the psycho-
logical perspective incorporates both personal and situational variables.
CONCLUSIONS
The study of new venture creation began with some reasonable assumptions about
the DEMO characteristics of "entrepreneurs." Through the years, more and more
of DEMO personological characteristics have been discarded, debunked, or at the very
least, found to have been measured ineffectively. The result has been a tendency to
concentrate on almost anything except the individual. Economic circumstances are im-
DEMO; social networks are important; entrepreneurial teams are important; marketing is
DEMO; finance is important; even public agency assistance is important. But none of
these will, alone, create a new venture. For that we DEMO a person, in whose mind all of
the possibilities come together, who believes that innovation is possible, and who has the
motivation to persist until the job is done. Person, process, and choice: for these we need
a truly psychological perspective on new venture creation.
Winter, 1991 39
REFERENCES
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Leamed helplessness in humans: Cri-
tique and DEMO Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 49-74.
Ahmed, S. U. (1985). nAch, risk-taking propensity, locus of control, and entrepreneurship. Personality and
Individual Differences, 6, 781-782.
Aldrich, H. (1989). From traits DEMO rates: An ecological perspective on organizational foundings. Paper
presented at the DEMO Conference on Entrepreneurship, St. Louis, MO.
Aldrich, H.E . (1990). Using an ecological perspective to study organizational founding rates. Entrepre-
neurship DEMO and Practice, 14(3), 7-24.
Atkinson, J. W. (1964)DEMO An introduction to motivation. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
Bandura, A. (1977)DEMO Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Brehm, J. DEMO (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. New York: Academic Press.
Brehm, S. S., & Brehm, J. W. (1981). Psychological DEMO: A theory of freedom and control. New
York: Academic Press.
Brockhaus, R. H., Sr. (1980). Risk taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management Journal,
23, 509-520.
Brockhaus, R. H., Sr. (DEMO). Entrepreneurial folklore. Journal of Small Business Management, 25(July),
1-6.
Brockhaus, R. H., Sr., & Horwitz, P. S. (1986). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In D. L. Sexton &
R. W. Smilor (Eds.), The art and science of entrepreneurship, pp. DEMO Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Bumstein, E., & Vinokur, A. (1977). Persuasive argumentation and social comparison as determinants of
attitude polarization. Journal DEMO Experimental Social Psychology, 13, 315-332.
Bygrave, W. D. (1989a). The entrepreneurship paradigm (I): A philosophical look at its research method-
ologies. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14{\), 7-26.
Bygrave, W. D. (1989b). The entrepreneurship paradigm (II): Chaos and catastrophes among quantum
jumps. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14(2), 7-30.
Campbell, D. DEMO, & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation DEMO the multitrait-
multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 81-105.
Campbell, D. DEMO, & Stanley, J. C , (1966). Experimental and quasi-experimental DEMO for research.
New York: Houghton-Mifflin.
Carland, J. W., Hoy, F., & Carland, J. A. C. (1988). "Who is an DEMO?" is a question worth
asking. American Journal of Small Business, /^(Spring), 33-39.
Carsmd, A. L., & Johnson, R. W. (1989). Entrepreneurship: A social psychological perspective. Economic
& Regional Development, 1, 21-31.
Carsrud, A. L., Olm, K. W., & Eddy, G. G. (1986). Entrepreneurship: Research in quest of a paradigm.
In D. L. Sexton & R. W. Smilor (Eds.), The art and science of entrepreneurship, pp. 367-378. Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger.
Cartwright, D. (Ed.). (1951). Field theory in social science: Selected theoretical papers by Kurt Lewin.
New York: Harper & Row.
40 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
Churchland, P. M. (1988). Matter and consciousness (rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Collins, B. E. (1974). Four DEMO of the Rotter Intemal-Extemal scale: Belief in a difficult world, a
just world, a predictable world, and a politically responsive world. Journal DEMO Personality and Social
Psychology, 29, 381-391.
Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design and analysis issues for field
settings. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Corman, J., Perles, B., & Vancini, P. (1988). Motivational factors influencing high-technology entrepre-
neurship. Journal DEMO Small Business Management, 26 (January), 36-42.
Cromie, S. (1988). Motivations of aspiring male and female entrepreneurs. Journal of Occupational Be-
DEMO, 8, 251-261.
Cromie, S., & Johns, S. (1983). Irish entrepreneurs: Some personal characteristics. Journal of Occupational
Behaviour, 4, 317-324.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1980). The DEMO exploration of intrinsically motivated processes. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances DEMO experimental social psychology, vol. 13, pp. 39-80. New York: Academic
DEMO
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1987). The support of autonomy and the control of behavior. Journal of
Personality and DEMO Psychology, 53, 1024-1037.
Descartes, R. (1952 [1641]). Meditations on first philosophy (translated by E. S. Haldane & G. R. T.
Ross). In R. M. Hutchens (Ed.), Great books of the western world, vol. 31, pp. 69-293. Chicago: Ency-
clopaedia Britannica.
Dunkelberg, DEMO C , & Cooper, A. C. (1982). Entrepreneurial typologies. In K. H. Vesper (Ed.), Frontiers
of entrepreneurship research, pp. 1-15. DEMO, MA: Babson College.
Edwards, A. L. (1959). Manual for the Edwards Personal Preference Schedule. New York: The Psycho-
logical Corporation.
Feather, N. T. (Ed.). (1982). Expectations and actions: Expectancy-value DEMO in psychology. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fineman, F. (DEMO). The achievement motive constmct and its measurement: Where are we DEMO? British
Journal of Psychology, 68, 1-22.
Fishbein, M., & DEMO, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention and behavior: An DEMO to theory and
research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition (2nd ed.). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Freud, S. (1960 [1901]). Psychopathology of DEMO life. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard
edition DEMO the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 6. London: Hogarth Press.
Frey, R. S. (1984). Need for achievement, entrepreneurship, DEMO economic growth: A critique of the
McClelland thesis. Social Science Journal, 21, 125-134.
Friedman, M., & Rosenman, R. H. (1974). Type A behavior and your heart. New York: Knopf.
Funder, D. DEMO , & Dobroth, K. M. (1987). Differences between traits: DEMO associated with interjudge
agreement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 409-418.
Gartner, W. B. (1988). "Who is an entrepreneur?" is the wrong question. American Journal of Small
Business, /i(Spring), 11-32.
Gartner, W. B. (1989). Some suggestions for research on entrepreneurial traits and characteristics. Entre-
preneurship Theory and Practice, 14(1), 27-38.
Winter, 1991 41
Gartner, W. B., Gatewood, E., & Shaver, K. G. (DEMO). Reasons for starting a business: Not-so-simple
answers to simple questions. DEMO G. E. Hills & R. W. LaForge (Eds.), Research at DEMO marketing/
entrepreneurship interface, pp. 90-101. Chicago: Office of Entrepreneurial Studies, University of Illinois at
Chicago.
Gergen, K. J. (1982). Toward transformation in social knowledge. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley.
Homaday, J. A., & Aboud, J. (1971). Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs. Personnel Psychology,DEMO
24, 141-153.
Homaday, R. W. (1990). Thinking about entrepreneurship: A fuzzy set approach. Presented at the Meeting
of the Academy of DEMO, San Francisco.
Jackson, D. N. (1974). Personality Research Form DEMO Goshen, NY: Research Psychologists Press.
James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New York: Holt.
Janis, I. L. (1972). Victims of groupthink: A psychological study of foreign policy decisions andflascoes.
Boston: DEMO Mifflin.
Johnson, B. R. (1990). Toward a multidimensional model of entrepreneurship: The case of achievement
motivation and the entrepreneur. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14(3), 39-54.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of prediction. Psychological Review, 80,
237-251.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica,
47, 263-291.
Kelley, H. H., & Thibaut, J. W. (1978). Interpersonal relations: A theory of interdependence. New York:
Wiley.
Kenrick, D. T., & Funder, D. C. (1988). Profiting from controversy: Lessons from the person-situation
debate. DEMO Psychologist, 43, 23-34.
Kogan, N., & Wallach, M. A. (1964). Risk taking: A study of cognition and personality. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, & Winston.
Latan6, B., & Darley, J. M., Jr. (1970). The unresponsive bystander: Why doesn't he help? New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
LeBon, G. (1895). Psychologie desfoules. Paris: Olean. (Trans, as The crowd. London: T. Fisher Unwin,DEMO
1896.)
Levenson, H. (1981). Differentiating among intemality, powerful DEMO, and chance. In H. M. Lefcomt
(Ed.), Research with the locus of control construct: Assessment methods, vol. 1, pp. 15-63. New York:
Academic Press.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). Work motivation and satisfaction: Light at the end of DEMO tunnel.
Psychological Science, 1, 240-246.
Lopes, L. L. (1987). Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. In L. Berkowitz (DEMO), Advances in
experimental social psychology, vol. 20, pp. 255-295. New York: Academic Press.
Low, M. B., & MacMillan, I. C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges. Journal of
Management, DEMO, 139-161.
42 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
Lynn, R. (1969). An achievement motivation questionnaire. British Journal of DEMO, 60, 529-534.
McClelland, D. C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
McClelland, D. C. (1987). Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs. Journal of Creative Behavior 21
219-233.
McClelland, D. C , Atkinson, J. W., Clark, R. A., & Lowell, E. L. (DEMO). The achievement motive. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Mehrabian, A. (1968)DEMO Male and female scales of the tendency to achieve. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 28, 493-502.
Mill, J. S. (1848). Principles of DEMO economy with some of their applications to social philosophy.
London: John DEMO Parker.
Miner, J. B. (1985). Sentence completion measures in personnel research: The development and validation
ofthe Miner Sentence Completion Scales. In H. J. Bemardin & D. A. Bownas (Eds.), Personality assess-
ment in organizations, pp. 145-176. New York: Praeger.
Mischel, W. (1968). DEMO and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mitton, D. G. (1989). DEMO compleat entrepreneur. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 13(3), 9-20.
Moore, C. F. (1986). Understanding entrepreneurial behavior. In J. A. Pearce, DEMO, & R. B. Robinson, Jr.
(Eds.), Academy of Management DEMO Papers Proceedings. Forty-sixth annual meeting of the Academy of
Management, Chicago.
DEMO, B. N. (1968). Achievement values and scientific productivity. Journal of Applied Psychology
52, 145-147.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York: Oxford.
Murray, H. A. (1951). Some basic psychological assumptions and conceptions. Dialectica, 5, 266-292.
Newtson, D. (1976)DEMO Foundations of attribution: The perception of ongoing behavior. In J. H. DEMO,
W. J. Ickes, & R. F. Kidd (Eds.), New directions in attribution research, vol. 1, pp. 223-248. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ome, M. T. (1962). On the social DEMO of the psychological experiment: With particular reference
to demand characteristics and DEMO implications. American Psychologist, 17, 776-783.
Paulhus, D. (1983). Sphere-specific measures of perceived control. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 44, DEMO
Pickle, H. B. (1964). Personality and success: An evaluation DEMO personal characteristics of successful small
business managers. Small Business Research Series No. 4. Washington, DC: U. S. Govemment Printing
Office.
Reid, T. (DEMO). The works of Thomas Reid (W. Hamilton, Ed.). Edinburgh: Machlachlan & Stewart.
Rosch, E. H. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. H. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and
categorization. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rosenberg, M. J. (1965)DEMO When dissonance fails: On eliminating evaluation apprehension from attitude
measurement. Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 28-42.
Rosenthal, A. M. (1964). Thirty-eight witnesses. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for intemal versus extemal locus of control of reinforcement.
Psychological DEMO, 80, Whole No. 609, 1-28.
Winter, 1991 43
Rotter, J. B. (1990). Intemal versus extemal control of reinforcement: A case history of a variable.
American Psychologist, 45, 489-493.
Scherer, R. F., Adams, J. S., Carley, S. S., & Wiebe, F. A. (1989). Role model performance effects on
development of DEMO career preference. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 13(3), 53-71.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934). Theory of economic development: An inquiry into DEMO, capital, credit, inter-
est, and the business cycle. New York: Oxford University Press.
Scott, L. R. (1990). Entrepreneurs and risk taking propensity: Can both be created in the individual?
Unpublished honors thesis. College of William & Mary.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1975)DEMO Helplessness: On depression, development, and death. San Francisco: Free-
man.
Sexton, D. L., & Bowman, N. B. (1985). The DEMO: A capable executive and more. Journal of
Business Venturing, 1, DEMO
Shaver, K. G., & Tarpy, R. M. (In press). Psychology. New York: Macmillan.
Shaver, K. G., Williams, S. L., &Scott, L. R. (1990). Entrepreneurial beliefs, creativity, and risk-taking:
Personality or situation? Unpublished manuscript. College of William & Mary.
Skinner, B. F. (1971). Beyond freedom and dignity. New York: Knopf.
Solomon, G. T., & Winslow, E. K. (1988). Toward DEMO descriptive profile of the entrepreneur. Journal of
Creative Behavior, 22, 162-171.
Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. L. (1983). Achievement DEMO motives and behaviors. In J. T. Spence
(Ed.), Achievement and DEMO motives: Psychological and sociological approaches, pp. 9-74. San
Francisco: Freeman.
DEMO, D., Weiner, B., & Li, K. (1989). Testing some attribution-emotion relations in the People's
Republic of China. Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 56, 109-116.
Stoner, J. A. F. (1961). A comparison of individual and group decisions including risk. Unpublished M. DEMO
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, School of Industrial Management.
Strickland, DEMO R. (1989). Intemal-extemal control expectancies: From contingency to creativity. American
Psychologist, 44, 1-12.
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. New York: Wiley.
Timmons, J. A. (1978). Characteristics and role demands of entrepreneurship. American Journal of Small
Business, 3, 5-17.
Titchener, E. B. (1898). DEMO postulates of a structural psychology. Philosophical Review, 7, 449-465.
Tversky, DEMO, & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgments under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
1124-1131.
VanderWerf, P. A., & Brush, DEMO G. (1989). Achieving empirical progress in an undefined field. Entre-
DEMO Theory and Practice, 14(2), 45-58.
Venkatapathy, R. (1984)DEMO Locus of control among entrepreneurs: A review. Psychological Studies, 29,
97-100.
Vroom, V. H. (1964). Work and motivation. New York: Wiley.
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views DEMO Psychological Review, 20, 158-177.
44 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Weiner, B. (1986). An attributionai theory of motivation and emotion. DEMO York: Springer-Verlag.
Weiner, B., Russell, D., & Lerman, D. (1978). Affective consequences of causal ascriptions. In J. H.
Harvey, DEMO Ickes, & R. F. Kidd (Eds.), New directions in attribution research, vol. 2, pp. 59-90.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
DEMO, L. (1966). Toward a theory of behavioral contagion. Psychological Review, 73, 179-192.
Winslow, E. K., & Solomon, G. T. (DEMO). Further development of a descriptive profile of entrepreneurs.
Journal of Creative Behavior, 23, 149-161.
Woodworth, R. S. (1938). Experimental psychology. DEMO York: Holt.
Wortman, M. S., Jr. (1987). Entrepreneurship: DEMO integrating typology and evaluation ofthe empirical
research in the field. Journal of Management, 13, 259-279.
Zimbardo, P. G. (1970). The human DEMO: Individuation, reason, and order versus deindividuation,
impulse, and chaos. In W. J. Amold & D. Levine (Eds.), Nebraska symposium on motivation, 1969, pp.
237-307. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Kelly G. Shaver is Professor of Psychology at the College of William & Mary.
DEMO R. Scott is a student at T. C. Williams School of Law, University of Richmond.
The authors thank Elizabeth J. Gatewood and Lanny Herron for their helpful comments on an earlier
version of this paper.
Winter, 1991 45
{1g42fwefx}