NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL:
IGNORANCE, EXTERNAL
SHOCKS, AND RISK
REDUCTION STRATEGIES
DEMO A. SHEPHERD
University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado
EVAN J. DOUGLAS
Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia
MARK SHANLEY
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
Although scholars have long recognized the increased mortality risk that new
EXECUTIVE ventures face in terms of a “liability of newness,” DEMO of the discussion
SUMMARY around this risk has been in terms of the contextual constraints that new ven-
tures face and the difﬁculties that DEMO have in overcoming them. This
emphasis is in part a reﬂection of the perils of newness but also stems from
the retrospective and aggregate DEMO taken by researchers. Although
the macro-level perspective of new venture mortality has made a signiﬁcant contribution to our knowledge
of mortality risk patterns, there has been little interest in identifying how venture managers can address
the DEMO that all new organizations face.
We argue that in order to make progress in explaining new venture survival, a theoretical model
is required that uses a more micro-level perspective to explain new venture failure (and the ﬂip side, new
venture survival). In this paper we develop such a model. We establish a deﬁnition of mortality risk and
argue that DEMO liability of newness is largely dependent on the degree of novelty (DEMO) associated
with a new venture. Novelty is viewed in three different DEMO, viz.: to the market, to the technology
of production and DEMO management. Novelty to the market concerns the degree to which the customers
are uncertain about the new venture. Novelty in production concerns the extent DEMO which the production
technology used by the new venture is similar to the technologies in which the production team has
experience and knowledge. Novelty DEMO management concerns the entrepreneurial team’s lack of busi-
Address correspondence to Dean A. Shepherd, College of Business, Campus Box 419, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0419; Fax: (303) 492-5962, E-mail: dean.shepherd@colorado.edu
DEMO thank the editor and anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on earlier versions of
the paper.
Journal of Business Venturing 15, 393–410
 2000 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved. 0883-9026/00/$–see front matter
655 DEMO of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 PII S0883-9026(98)00032-9
394
D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
ness skills, industry speciﬁc information and start-up experience. We argue that mortality risk increases
with DEMO degree of novelty in each dimension and with the number of dimensions in which the new venture
is novel.
We propose that the decline DEMO mortality risk occurs as the venture’s novelty in each of the three
dimensions is eroded by information search and dissemination processes. This allows the DEMO ﬁrm to
become an established business and explains what we term the “evolutionary” path of mortality—novelty
and risk decline monotonically, after a period of adolescence, as ignorance decays over time due to ‘pas-
sive learning’. We also propose that there is a “strategic” mortality risk path that reﬂects DEMO impact of
positive and negative shocks (shocks are exogenous events that DEMO the overall degree of novelty at
a point in time— positive shocks decrease overall novelty, while negative shocks increase overall nov-
elty) and DEMO (endogenous actions that increase the overall novelty of the new venture DEMO a point
in time) on the mortality risk of a new DEMO
If the incidence and effects of these disruptions can be managed, DEMO venture managers may be
able to mitigate the mortality risk for their venture. We argue that risk reduction strategies can be em-
ployed, most of which impact on one or more of the dimensions of mortality DEMO in order to increase
the ﬁrm’s chances of survival. A series of risk reduction strategies are proposed and their impact on the
determinants of DEMO risk is considered.  2000 Elsevier Science Inc.
INTRODUCTION
One estimate of the failure rate for new ventures is 40% in the ﬁrst year DEMO 90% over
10 years (Timmons 1990). Although there is dispute DEMO research scholars about
how high the failure rate for new ventures is, it is generally acknowledged that starting
a new business is a high-risk activity. Why do so many new ventures fail? The risks of
failure facing a new venture are derived from several sources: including the costs of
learning new tasks (Stinchcombe 1965; Singh et al. 1986); DEMO characteristics of the new
product (Aldrich and Auster 1986); the DEMO of conﬂicts regarding new organiza-
tional roles (Stinchcombe 1965; Singh et al. 1986); the presence or absence of informal
organizational structures (Stinchcombe 1965); the stability of links with key stakehold-
ers (Stinchcombe 1965; Singh et al. 1986); and the degree of organizational stability/
inertia (Hannan and Freeman 1984). Stinchcombe introduced the concept of the liability
of newness to explain why more new ventures failed than did DEMO businesses
(Stinchcombe 1965).
There is considerable agreement that the above DEMO contribute to the liability
of newness and that the liability of newness declines over time.1 Researchers disagree,
however, over the ability of an entrepreneur to implement actions that might allow them
to more rapidly reduce DEMO risk. Whittington (1993) proposes researchers typically
have either an evolutionary or procedural view of strategy. The evolutionary view inves-
tigates the survival of DEMO of organizations across large populations to understand
the ability to learn. The procedural view concentrates on a more micro-level approach
and provides information about DEMO learning takes place within and between organi-
zations.
Some evolutionary scholars are pessimistic about the possibilities of one organiza-
tion gaining competitive advantage through DEMO ventures enter a Darwinian
world to which they cannot adapt if they are unsuited to their business environment
(Hannan and Freeman 1989). It follows that new ventures which ‘begin wrongly’ are
most likely to perish DEMO attempts to change their course of action or behavior—
1 The period of adolescence precedes the liability of newness and is discussed below.
NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL
395
ﬁrms travel down an “evolutionary” path, and there is little the entrepreneur can do.
In this view, the question of why some new ventures succeed is either answered in terms
of good DEMO at founding or is left unaddressed.
Some evolutionary scholars, however, are optimistic that the acquisition of infor-
mation and knowledge may improve a DEMO organization’s chances of adaptation and
survival (Parkhe 1991) and argue that positive results stem from learning derived from
interactions among organizations (Davis 1991; Burns and Wholey 1993; Haunschild
1993). For example, Miner and Haunschild (1995) ﬁnd that organizations do learn from
other organizations facing DEMO circumstances and that there is also a collective learn-
ing across organizations—a population-level learning. This research stream offers a mi-
cro-level perspective to learning DEMO was previously only viewed through a macro-level
lens (Strang and Meyer DEMO).
In hindsight, it may appear that new ventures are subject DEMO the predetermined
laws proposed by evolutionary scholars. Closer scrutiny, however, reveals that entrepre-
neurs are continuously making decisions about highly uncertain environments and DEMO
new venture’s internal structures that in turn modify its performance outcomes. New
venture managers may learn from past choices about how to perform better DEMO the fu-
ture. Sometimes, this learning can facilitate adaptation to changed DEMO condi-
tions—it is the strategic choices of managers that help deﬁne the environmental pres-
sures a business faces and how it maneuvers to meet DEMO We propose that a new
venture manager’s decisions can impact the liability of newness—new venture managers
can affect this unique package of issues facing DEMO new venture. This does not necessarily
deny the existence of a predetermined path proposed by evolutionary scholars, but sug-
gests these paths are extremely broad and allow the entrepreneur strategic discretion
in the direction and speed DEMO progress (Mintzberg 1990). We argue that managing this
strategic discretion DEMO signiﬁcantly improve a new venture’s chance of survival.
How new venture managers exercise their discretion depends on the information
available to them and to DEMO parties with whom they must deal. Entrepreneurs often
start a new venture ignorant of many key dimensions of running their businesses and
must obtain DEMO necessary information if they are to survive. The views of new venture
survival, discussed above, all share an emphasis on the acquisition of DEMO, either
by venture managers or by customers, suppliers, buyers, regulators, and others. They
suggest that for new ventures to succeed, it DEMO critical that their managers obtain informa-
tion and distribute it quickly and appropriately. They differ on what information is re-
quired for survival, what parties need the information, and how easily it can be obtained.
To make progress in explaining new venture survival, a theoretical model is re-
quired that explains new venture failure (and the ﬂip side—new venture survival) in
terms of a predetermined “evolutionary” path and strategic choices (in DEMO, risk
reduction strategies). In this paper we develop such a DEMO We begin by establishing
a deﬁnition of mortality risk and argue that the liability of newness is largely dependent
on the degree of novelty (ignorance) associated with a new venture. Novelty is viewed
in three different dimensions, viz.: to the market, to the technology of production, DEMO
to management. We argue that mortality risk increases with the degree of novelty in
each dimension and with the number of dimensions in which DEMO new venture is novel.
We propose the decline in mortality risk occurs as the venture’s novelty in each of the
three dimensions is eroded DEMO information search and dissemination processes. This
allows the new ﬁrm to become an established business and explains the predetermined
396 D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
“evolutionary” path of DEMO We argue that novelty and risk decline monotonically,
after a period of adolesence, as ignorance decays over time.2
We also propose that the decline in mortality risk for a new venture (the “evolution-
ary” path) can be disrupted by reversals in the decay of ignorance and/or environmental
shocks. If the incidence and effects of these disruptions can be DEMO, then venture
managers may be able to mitigate the mortality risk DEMO their venture. We argue that
risk reduction strategies can be employed, DEMO of which impact on one or more of the
dimensions of mortality risk in order to increase the ﬁrm’s chances of survival. A series
DEMO risk reduction strategies are proposed and their impact on the determinants of mortal-
ity risk is considered.
MORTALITY RISK
In the context of new DEMO, we deﬁne mortality risk to mean the probability that
a ﬁrm DEMO become insolvent and be unable to recover from that insolvency before being
bankrupted and ceasing operations. Thus, new venture mortality refers to the departure
of the business entity from the market for reasons of insolvency. This DEMO is more
narrow than deﬁning mortality as discontinuance (either change in DEMO or closure
of the business (Fredland and Morris 1976)). A business may change ownership as a
result of its success, not as a result of poor performance. Our deﬁnition also differs from
that of DEMO and Bradstreet (1979), which requires a business to either go DEMO bank-
ruptcy or cease operations with resulting losses to creditors. By our deﬁnition a business
that is technically bankrupt (based on an accounting deﬁnition) but has not ceased oper-
ations is not (yet) a mortality.
Business mortality simply requires that an unexpected fall in revenues and/or DEMO
unexpected rise in expenses be of such magnitude(s) that the DEMO becomes insolvent,
is unable to attract new debt or equity funding (including the tolerance of creditors)
and thus cannot continue to operate.3 This approach to mortality is appropriate for this
paper as it is DEMO on the life of the organization. It is not based on the life of the man-
agement team and is not dependent upon particular DEMO operationalizations.
New organizations begin life with a basic expectation that they will survive, even
while continually subject to the risk that an unanticipated event or combination of
events will force them out of business. Some environments DEMO more threats than
others do. Within the same general environment, some DEMO are more hazardous than
others are. At the same time, most DEMO ventures will be initially more vulnerable to
environmental pressures than are otherwise similar, but more established ﬁrms. Threats
to the performance of established ﬁrms may threaten the very existence of new ventures.
Although more vulnerable than DEMO ﬁrms, new ventures will differ in their
capabilities for meeting environmental DEMO What are the factors that contribute to
one new venture being able to survive while others fail? As an entrepreneur, what can
2 DEMO and Levinthal (1991) refer to the period of adolescence as a honeymoon period—the initial
stage of venture development when it is protected from DEMO external environment, and consequently there
is a low risk of failure. DEMO the end of the period of adolescence, there is a rapid DEMO in mortality risk which
then follows the age-dependent, monotonically declining pattern DEMO by the liability of newness (the
honeymoon is over) (Bruderl DEMO Schussler 1990; Fichman and Levinthal 1991; Barron et al. 1993).
3 Note that mortality risk is quite different from business risk or DEMO risk. It is concerned with
survival, not the variance of proﬁts DEMO expected levels, except insofar as this would jeopardize solvency.
For a DEMO of various measures of risk, see Balzar (1994).
NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL
397
I do to increase my chance of survival? The rest of this paper addresses these two
questions.
MORTALITY RISK DEPENDS DEMO NOVELTY
Previous research investigates the activities organizations might undertake to acquire
information or knowledge and whether this learning occurs at the population-level
(Miner and Haunschild 1995), organization-level (Mezias and Glynn 1993), or whether
this learning has any affect at all on the survival chances of an DEMO This paper
investigates where knowledge (or ignorance) resides and how a lack of knowledge and
a failure to acquire knowledge affects the mortality DEMO of a new venture. We propose
that the more novel a new venture is, the more information must be acquired to inform
managers and stakeholders.
The degree of novelty of a new organization may reside in DEMO or in manage-
ment, and both types of novelty contribute to DEMO liability of newness. Novelty in these
two dimensions may also affect the organization’s absorptive capacity. Absorptive ca-
pacity is the ability of a ﬁrm DEMO recognize the value of new, external information, assimi-
late it, DEMO apply it to commercial ends—it is largely a function of the ﬁrm’s level of
prior related knowledge (Cohen and Levinthal 1990).
However, DEMO is not only novelty to the organization (novelty in production and DEMO
elty in management) that inﬂuences venture survival, but also the novelty of the new
venture to the market. The less that customers know DEMO a new venture, the lower
the probability of purchase thereby increasing DEMO risk of new venture failure. Therefore,
we consider novelty on three separate dimensions, viz.: novelty to the market, novelty
to production, DEMO novelty to management.
NOVELTY TO THE MARKET
Novelty to the market concerns the degree to which customers are uncertain about the
new venture. From DEMO concept of the “liability of newness,” we know that the process
by which customers learn about a new venture and come to perceive DEMO as established
will affect its risks, as well as its organizational DEMO, legitimacy, and customer
trust (Singh et al. 1986; Aldrich and Fiol 1994). The new venture’s novelty to potential
customers is derived DEMO more speciﬁc uncertainties regarding the new venture’s orga-
nization and management. Where customer knowledge is incomplete on the new ven-
ture’s organization or management, market novelty is present and can have a signiﬁcant
and negative relationship DEMO the new venture’s chances of survival (Shepherd and Shan-
ley 1998)DEMO
For example, suppose that Nike launched a corporate venture into the DEMO
industry. Although Nike would be a new player in the motorbike industry, the ﬁrm is
a well-known producer of athletic footwear and sporting apparel. While there may be
few obvious relationships between footwear and motorbikes, customers’ knowledge
and/or experience with Nike may provide some legitimacy to its DEMO venture. New
product releases from existing companies or even corporate ventures can be viewed as
more familiar (less novel) to the market than DEMO new venture in which the customers
are completely ignorant about the organization launching themselves on to the market.4
4 New venture here refers to DEMO venture as in Aldrich and Fiol (1994).
398
D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
Potential customers are DEMO likely to purchase from a more novel organization. In
its planning, DEMO new venture must foresee expenditures on advertising to familiarize
and inform potential consumers about the new venture and, in so doing, reduce novelty
DEMO the market. There is likely to be a large variance around the expected value of that
expenditure, since, until the depths of consumer DEMO have been plumbed (which
requires experience in the market), venture DEMO may have only a limited idea of
how much marketing is needed. Conversely, a new venture that is less novel to the mar-
ket will likely have fewer advertising expenditures and less variance around those ex-
DEMO
NOVELTY IN PRODUCTION
Novelty in production concerns the extent to which the production technology used by
the new venture is similar to the technologies DEMO which the production team has experience
and knowledge. The difﬁculty of manufacturing the new venture’s product, relative to
the knowledge and experience of the production team, is a major indicator of the novelty
in production. For example, a new venture assembles a new production team—people
that have not worked with each other before. There are likely to be some conﬂicts DEMO
garding new organizational roles and the absence of an informal organizational struc-
ture. Furthermore, the new venture’s production team might be operating with new
production technology (or maybe just the newer version of the manufacturing machin-
ery that they had used in the past), which introduces costs DEMO with learning new
tasks. These issues contribute to the liability of newness.
Furthermore, research into the learning curve provides evidence that the costs of
producing manufactured items decrease with the cumulative number of items produced
(Yelle 1979). The beneﬁts of the learning curve may also beneﬁt organizations DEMO ways
unrelated to production costs, such as higher quality, more effective pricing decisions,
and marketing (Besanko et al. 1997). Although there is some evidence to suggest that
the lessons of experience may spillover DEMO one activity to another (Hatch and Mowery
1998), this will DEMO on the relatedness of the activities at issue. High novelty in pro-
duction relates to minimal experience spillover from previous businesses and therefore
reduced DEMO curve advantages.
Mortality risk increases with novelty in production because novelty will probably
require greater expenditures in terms of dollars and time to overcome DEMO costs associ-
ated with overcoming conﬂicts about new organizational roles, the DEMO of in-
formal organizational structures, and learning new tasks.
NOVELTY TO DEMO
The primary criteria used by venture capitalists in assessing new venture proposals are
managerial capabilities and other factors related to competence such as: quality of man-
agement, management’s track record, entrepreneur’s knowledge, and management ex-
pertise (Hisrich and Jankowitz 1990; Shepherd, Ettenson, and Crouch in DEMO). Other
researchers have found that venture capitalists believe failure lies primarily with incom-
petent senior management (Gorman and Sahlman 1986; Meyer et DEMO 1993; Shepherd,
Ettenson, and Crouch in press). Venture capitalists, in explaining their decisions, spe-
ciﬁcally refer to managerial skill in DEMO particular sector being entered (Dixon 1991;
NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL
399
Kahn 1987). Similarly, entrepreneurs perceived that management quality was one of
the reasons they were denied venture capital (Bruno and Tyebjee 1986).
The reliance of venture capitalists on the competence DEMO the management team is
a response to the uncertainty facing a new venture. Venture capitalists can assess a ven-
ture’s strategy and projected environment DEMO a business plan, but this only provides
the strategic intentions behind DEMO venture. Plans almost certainly will not turn out as
predicted, and DEMO environment faced by a venture will not be as anticipated and may
change frequently. Performance will deteriorate if changes in the environment are not
DEMO by the entrepreneur(s), if strategies are not reassessed, and DEMO new strategies
are not formulated and implemented. These all require management skills.
Venture capitalists reduce their risk associated with an uncertain environment by
choosing DEMO those ventures that are managed by entrepreneurs they believe will
be able to cope with uncertainty, especially those that have demonstrated their compe-
tence in prior adaptive activities. The importance that venture capitalists place on nov-
DEMO to management implies that success is more likely to be achieved by those entering
an industry in which venturers have prior experience.
Industry-speciﬁc human DEMO appears to be a signiﬁcant determinant of venture
survival, especially those DEMO with founders that have experience with rapid growth
ﬁrms that compete in the same industry as the start up (Cooper et al. 1994; DEMO and
Maidique 1986). The rapidity of change in emergent industries means that opportunities
are likely to occur too quickly to be grasped by DEMO Venture managers must pos-
sess the necessary skills from the start (DEMO and Willard 1990).
Having said this, we also note that DEMO all of the competencies necessary for venture
survival are industry-speciﬁc. Some are more general. Ventures need to be well man-
aged by individuals with DEMO business skills. They need to have marketing acumen,
which involves not just knowledge of who to market towards, but also how to market.
The need for industry speciﬁc competencies should not blind venture managers or DEMO
sponsors to the need for a wide portfolio of skills to be represented in the venture man-
agement team. Industry know-how is a necessary DEMO not a sufﬁcient requirement
for success.
Similarly, an entrepreneur’s experience with DEMO start up ventures and new
ventures in their early growth stages should not be neglected as a source of advantage.
For example, a chronic problem with a new venture is lack of organization. There is
conﬂict DEMO confusion within a new venture in recognizing the tasks that need to be
performed and in allocating people to those tasks. There is also DEMO for employ-
ees in the venture regarding how to perform their new role effectively and how to adjust
to market changes (Stinchcombe 1965). New ventures need to construct an organiza-
tional structure that speciﬁes tasks, allocates people to those tasks, and provides avenues
of authority. Informal structures also need to be developed to facilitate communication
within the organization. Efforts DEMO also required to create and foster relationships with
key stakeholders. These are issues for management that are relatively unique to new
ventures: that is, established ventures have structures in place, people performing their
identiﬁed tasks, and long standing relationships with stakeholders. An entrepreneur
who has experience with DEMO start up or early stage new venture has had to deal with these
important management issues.
Although management skills may include a variety of DEMO and speciﬁc compo-
nents, what makes them essential to the venture DEMO is how venture managers use
them in the speciﬁc situations they face. Management skill is relatively more important
400
D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
FIGURE 1
A DEMO Mortality Risk.
for new ventures than for established ﬁrms, since venture DEMO must address a vari-
ety of new and pressing problems without the slack available to managers of established
ﬁrms and without the prior history DEMO interactions upon which managers in an estab-
lished ﬁrm can draw. Thus, overall management skill for new ventures is highly situa-
tional and constitutes the principal means by which venture managers reduce uncer-
tainty around them DEMO establish their enterprises. Therefore, novelty to management
concerns the entrepreneurial team’s DEMO of business skills, industry speciﬁc information,
and start-up experience. Management DEMO equates to a greater liability of newness
and a greater risk of failure.
RISK DECLINES OVER TIME FOR EACH CATEGORY
The decay of ignorance DEMO be represented by a “learning curve” for each dimension—
novelty of the market, production, and management. In Figure 1, we show mortality
risk curves for three new ventures with various initial degrees of overall novelty. DEMO
call these the “evolutionary” mortality risk curves—the decline in novelty in one or more
of the dimensions, mentioned above, due to passive learning—as DEMO by evolution-
ary scholars. The “evolutionary” mortality curve indicates the decline in ignorance due
to the accumulation of information and experience in one or DEMO of the three technolo-
gies, as time passes, for each venture. Movement along the curve is expected to take
place as the parties DEMO accumulate information and experience about their partic-
ular technologies. The “evolutionary” mortality risk curve for each new venture is thus
negatively sloped with respect DEMO time (after the period of adolescence). Thus, risk of
mortality is highest initially, when the new venture has had little time to reduce uncer-
tainty in any area of novelty (with the exception of the period of adolescence).
We should expect the “evolutionary” mortality risk DEMO decline and to approach
some minimum level over time. In principle, DEMO benchmark level would be the mortal-
ity risk of the most established ﬁrm with a similar product in the same or similar industry
and DEMO context. This benchmark level of risk should be understood to be a moving
target, shifting as macroeconomic and environmental conditions change. The above dis-
cussion leads to our ﬁrst two propositions:
NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL 401
Proposition 1: The overall decline in the “evolutionary” mortality risk curve of a new
venture is a function of the DEMO learning that occurs on each dimension of novelty
(the market, production, and management) and approaches some benchmark level
of risk.
Proposition 2: The “evolutionary” mortality risk for a new venture with a low overall
DEMO of novelty will begin lower than the “evolutionary” mortality risk of a more
novel new venture.
To extend the above discussion, it appears appropriate to investigate a new ven-
ture’s timing of entry, which is critical to a ﬁrm’s chances of survival and subsequent
success (Golder and Tellis 1993; Shepherd and Shanley 1998). Researchers of timing
of entry have typically investigated the differences between pioneers and late followers.
A pioneer is DEMO venture that enters a new product market ﬁrst (that is, they create an indus-
try)—overall novelty is likely to be relatively high; a late follower is a venture that enters
late in an industry’s DEMO of development—overall novelty is likely to be relatively low.
Prior research indicates that market pioneers (relative to late followers) have higher
returns if DEMO are successful (Abell 1978; DeCastro and Chrisman 1995; Rogers 1983),
have long lived market share advantages (Bond and Lean 1977; DEMO and Urban
1992), but also must bear a higher risk of failure (Aaker and Day 1986; Mitchell 1991;
Carroll and Delacroix DEMO). Pioneers must learn new roles with few (if any) role models
and often must establish links with key stakeholders that do not DEMO or acknowl-
edge their existence (Hannan and Carroll 1992; Stinchcombe 1965)—pioneers have less
legitimacy then followers (Aldrich and Fiol 1994). We argue that a pioneer’s higher
risk of failure (lower legitimacy) is DEMO to its higher level of overall novelty. The above
discussion leads to a third proposition:
Proposition 3: The “evolutionary” mortality risk for a pioneer will begin higher than
the “evolutionary” mortality risk for a late DEMO
REVERSALS AND SHOCKS TO MORTALITY RISK
Although we suggest a continuing decline in mortality risk as time passes, it is also possi-
ble that the mortality risk of a new venture could increase, rather than decrease, as it
ages. This could occur due to reversals and/or shocks. Reversals refer to an endogenous
action that increases the overall novelty of DEMO new venture at a point in time. Shocks refer
to an exogenous event that alters the overall degree of novelty at a point in DEMO Positive
shocks decrease overall novelty, while negative shocks increase overall novelty. DEMO
are conceptually similar to environmental jolts which are deﬁned as “transient perturba-
tions whose occurrences are difﬁcult to foresee and whose impact on organizations DEMO
disruptive and potentially inimical” (Meyer 1982: 515; Venkataraman and Van DEMO Ven
1998)—a low probability-high consequence event with an adverse economic impact
(Venkataraman and Van de Ven 1998). This paper’s deﬁnition of shock is similar to
an environmental jolt, except that it directly affects the degree of novelty of a new ven-
ture which can have either DEMO positive or negative inﬂuence on new venture survival—it
can increase novelty (DEMO negative shock) or decrease novelty (a positive shock).
An example of a negative shock would be loss of a communication/promotion chan-
DEMO, for example, government legislation is enacted that bans companies that manufac-
ture and sell alcohol from advertising on television or radio (similar to the ban on adver-
402 D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
tising for tobacco DEMO). This would immediately inhibit the ability of a new
venture to decrease its market novelty.
As producers learn the technology of production they DEMO undertake exploratory
variations in the production process in search of lower materials costs, faster production
speed, higher output quality, and so on. If the change in the production process produces
a signiﬁcant and unintended negative DEMO in product quality, the market reaction
may be so strongly adverse DEMO to threaten the venture’s continued survival. In markets
for food, health, and medical products, a negative variation in product quality may be
life threatening, and the market may lose conﬁdence in the new venture’s ability to avoid
such mistakes (reversals) in the future.
Concerning the reduction DEMO management novelty, the ﬁrm may suffer a reversal
with the loss DEMO a particular manager or other employee, such that the business needs
DEMO rediscover some trade secrets or other information critical for the marketing or pro-
duction process. Alternatively, analogous to negative production variations, the actions
DEMO a manager may be so inept, bizarre, or unethical that the market loses conﬁdence
in the ﬁrm’s managerial competence or even in its DEMO abilities. In banking, for exam-
ple, one can envision clients withdrawing their deposits because of an action taken by
the bank (or by bank personnel) which would threaten the security of one’s deposits
if it were allowed to happen again.
These reversals and negative shocks will affect DEMO ﬁrm’s ability to reduce uncer-
tainty in the market, production, and management and suggests a fourth proposition:
Proposition 4: Reversals and/or negative shocks shift a new venture’s mortality risk
to a higher curve DEMO a given point in time. Positive shocks shift a new venture’s mortality
risk to a lower curve at a given point in time.
RISK DEMO STRATEGIES
As discussed earlier, entrepreneurs are not necessarily passive in the DEMO process—
they can use risk reduction strategies. Risk reduction strategies are actions taken by the
new venture to decrease overall novelty. We propose that DEMO lowering overall novelty,
the new venture reduces its mortality risk. In Figure 2, we show two mortality risk
curves—one represents an “evolutionary” mortality risk path and the other a “strate-
gic” mortality risk path. The DEMO mortality risk path demonstrates a mono-
tonic decline of risk over time (after a period adolescence) and reﬂects the evolutionary
perspective of strategy. DEMO “strategic” mortality risk path demonstrates the impact of
positive and negative shocks, reversals and risk reduction strategies on the mortality risk
of a single organization. Note that a risk reduction strategy has a similar impact as DEMO
positive shock.
A risk reduction strategy provides new information to consumers, DEMO, or
managers which reduces their ignorance. Thus, risk reduction strategies are expected
to reduce the variability of potential cost and revenue outcomes and DEMO also in-
crease the expected net present value of proﬁts. On the other hand, the cost of risk
reduction strategies will typically reduce the ﬁrm’s margins (or ‘upside’ potential). The
main point of a risk reduction strategy is to truncate the ‘downside’ risk and conse-
quently avoid DEMO ﬁnancial failure of the ﬁrm. This leads to our ﬁfth proposition:
Proposition 5: Risk reduction strategies shift a new venture’s mortality risk to a lower
level at a given point in time.
NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL
403
FIGURE 2 Comparison of Evolutionary and Strategic Mortality DEMO Paths.
Risk reduction strategies include a variety of actions, including insurance, advertis-
ing and promotion, and education and training. They can also include: poaching experi-
enced and educated employees from other ﬁrms; and overfunding DEMO venture or accel-
erating funding schedules. Furthermore, they can include a DEMO of strategies for
linking with other ﬁrms, such as: licensing rather than manufacturing; leasing rather
than buying assets; committing to a more DEMO growth plan; forging marketing
agreements with established ﬁrms; and buying a franchise rather than starting an inde-
pendent business. Stafﬁng strategies can also DEMO in risk reduction, such as in hiring con-
sultants when needed (rather than full-time accountants, lawyers, and other specialists),
hiring temporary rather than permanent staff; and operating from home or sharing of-
ﬁce expenses to keep overheads down. We shall brieﬂy consider how some of DEMO
reduce risk by impacting upon the novelty to the market, production, and/or man-
agement.
RISK REDUCTION STRATEGIES IMPACTING ON
CONSUMER IGNORANCE
Attempting DEMO break into a market as a new venture confers additional mortality risks,
as compared to an established ﬁrm broadening its product line to DEMO the same new
product (Lambkin and Day 1989). Informative advertising, and perhaps personal sell-
ing, must be undertaken to disseminate information and to overcome the reluctance
of potential customers to bear quality risk or DEMO costs. For example, customer
education must include demonstration, documentation, product DEMO informa-
tion (Heiman and Muller, 1996) as well as engender DEMO trust in the new venture.
Thus, information dissemination to potential customers DEMO be seen as a risk reduc-
tion activity, because it serves DEMO better inform them about the new venture. Most ven-
tures will need to disseminate information to consumers and other stakeholders. What
makes this activity DEMO is when it involves substantial investments of human and
ﬁnancial capital to lay the groundwork for the success of the venture. These investments
404
D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
are often unlikely DEMO be justiﬁed on the basis of immediate sales but instead provide
a framework upon which stronger links with customers are developed, for example, DEMO
building of corporate reputation and customer loyalty.
An alternative (or concurrent) risk reduction strategy may be to seek a marketing
agreement with an DEMO ﬁrm which would market the product either under the estab-
lished ﬁrm’s brand name or allow the new venture to operate under the established
DEMO corporate umbrella more generally. The ability of a corporate identity to provide
an umbrella for new product development and new venturing is well-recognized (Dacin
and Brown 1997; Belch and Belch 1987; Keller and Aaker 1994; Wansink 1989). Existing
brand names and corporate logos from established organizations DEMO information
about the probable quality of the product, the quality of DEMO service and/or warranty
associated with the product, and so on. DEMO the new venture under the umbrella of
a legitimate established organization will thus serve to reduce novelty in the market
place and allow the DEMO venture to avoid substantial marketing costs.
This relationship with an established organization may provide a reduction in the
ﬁnancial risk associated with educating the DEMO, although a portion of the rights to
revenues is also shifted DEMO the umbrella organization. In addition, the venture also loses
opportunities to DEMO brand and reputation capital through a successful launch. As a
result, DEMO managers should think carefully about the high costs of reducing con-
sumer uncertainty through such a joint venture relationship.
Thus, the new venture may seek a joint venture with an established ﬁrm which has
an appropriate DEMO in its product line, and jointly package and market the product. DEMO
should serve to assure the consumer (to some extent) that the new venture is legitimate
because an established ﬁrm would not be expected DEMO risk loss of reputation by associat-
ing itself with an inappropriate partner.
These risk reduction strategies may have a positive impact on consumer ignorance
DEMO the new venture although care must be taken to ensure that they do not overly
increase novelty on one or both of the other DEMO (a reversal), possibly increasing
rather than decreasing overall mortality risk. DEMO example, entering into a joint venture
relationship with an established ﬁrm DEMO reduce consumer ignorance but could also
increase risks in terms of quality assurance and the management of the joint ven-
ture relationship.
RISK REDUCTION DEMO IMPACTING ON
PRODUCER IGNORANCE
The production process will require the prior assembly of raw materials, productive
assets, personnel, and information, which cost DEMO to purchase, hire, lease, rent, or
otherwise acquire. Much of this outlay may need to be made ‘up front’ which exposes
the DEMO venture to an increased risk of ﬁnancial failure if some cost and revenues are
incorrectly anticipated. Licensing production rights to, or contracting for manufacture
by, an established ﬁrm (rather than attempting to manufacture the product DEMO) is a
means by which the new venture can reduce production DEMO and leverage the value
of their strategic assets, such as product DEMO This strategy will avoid most of the major
outlays (including learning DEMO), which are necessary with a manufacturing strat-
egy, and thus DEMO the new venture from ﬁnancial ruin to some large extent.
The troubles with this strategy are two-fold. First, the long-term success of the ven-
NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL
405
ture may depend on the ﬁrm acquiring manufacturing DEMO and experience directly. This
is delayed by licensing production, and venture DEMO may ﬁnd it more expensive
to acquire that experience at larger volumes than in increments. Second, to the extent
to which the production process is difﬁcult to understand and subject to considerable
variation, the venture’s gains in reduced capital outlays may be offset by increased
transaction costs that DEMO incurred in contracting with and monitoring the licensee
(Shane 1994).
DEMO than acquire production knowledge through outsourcing, a risk reduction
strategy may DEMO to build production knowledge through education and training pro-
grams as well as personnel hiring policies. For example, Microsoft was unable to hire
experienced computer programmers in the early to mid 1980s (due to the industry being
so young very few people could be classiﬁed as experienced). DEMO were able to reduce
their production ignorance by hiring exceptionally ‘bright’ people—people who could
rapidly learn and adapt (continually shifting the production novelty level downwards
at a rapid rate).
Once gain, however, this risk DEMO strategy in one dimension may increase
novelty in the other two dimensions. For example, managing such bright and creative
people created a number of novel management challenges for Microsoft, for example,
introducing control systems while maintaining intellectual freedom and creativity.
RISK REDUCTION STRATEGIES IMPACTING ON
MANAGEMENT IGNORANCE
DEMO education and training, and/or the poaching of managers with required
DEMO and experience from other ﬁrms, will directly diminish ignorance of best DEMO
management technology. Successful entrepreneurs typically display management and
business skills which include the ability to recognize market opportunities, the ability
to develop informal organizational structures, to manage potential conﬂicts arising from
new organizational tasks, to DEMO links with key stakeholders, and to manage cash
ﬂows. Such skills DEMO be learned and/or further developed via formal business education
programs, DEMO courses, and discussions with other entrepreneurs. To the extent that
managers DEMO something new and pertinent to the situation at hand, management ig-
DEMO is reduced, possibly reducing the downside risk of proﬁt outcomes and DEMO
shifting the mortality risk curve downwards.
Cooperative arrangements between a venture and other ﬁrms will help to round
out the skill set of the DEMO venture by complementing its capabilities with those of its
partners. These will not successfully reduce managerial novelty, however, unless the
venture’s management team DEMO the skills gained through partnerships,
alliances, and other such arrangements. DEMO fact, cooperative arrangements are more
common in ventures with experienced management DEMO rather than in those with in-
experienced teams. This likely occurs because experienced managers are more knowl-
edgeable about which skills the venture needs DEMO augment through cooperative arrange-
ments (McGee et al. 1995).
Insurance DEMO cash reserves are mortality risk reduction strategies, which may obvi-
ate DEMO ruin in the aftermath of unexpected cost and negative revenue shocks. Such
decisions certainly require information (albeit estimates) of future costs and revenues,DEMO
with particular reference to their expected magnitudes, variances, and timing. On the
406 D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
basis of such DEMO received, competent ﬁnancial managers will either insure and
conserve cash balances, or not.
Introducing management information and control systems may also help reduce
DEMO novelty—these systems condense considerable information into ‘digest-
ible’ chunks and decrease wastage of valuable resources. However this risk reduction
strategy may turn the company’s DEMO internally towards preparing reports and at-
tending efﬁciency meetings and turn attention away from monitoring, responding to,
and educating the market—increasing novelty in the other dimensions of mortality risk.
COMBINATION RISK REDUCTION STRATEGIES
It is DEMO from the above that some strategies reduce mortality risk by reducing more
than one dimension of novelty. Allowing another ﬁrm to manufacture and market DEMO
license, for example, obviates the need for production knowledge, to DEMO customer
awareness of the new venture, or manage the production and DEMO functions. How-
ever, we must also be aware that, although a risk reduction strategy may have the desired
effect in one dimension, it may have an undesirable effect on ignorance in one or both
of DEMO other dimensions of novelty and therefore mortality risk. For example, reducing
DEMO on production and management but failing to reduce ignorance for consum-
ers may lead to the venture becoming more capable at activities that are DEMO desired
by a changing marketplace—a competency trap. Risk reduction strategies must be ana-
lyzed in terms of their impact on all three dimensions and DEMO be a result of the realiza-
tion that the relationship between the dimensions of novelty and mortality risk may
be contingent in nature. This DEMO to our ﬁnal proposition.
Proposition 6: The relationship between the dimensions DEMO novelty and mortality risk
may be contingent (interactive) in nature.
CONCLUSION
Although scholars have long recognized the increased mortality risk that new ventures
DEMO in terms of a “liability of newness,” most of the discussion around this risk has been
in terms of the contextual constraints that DEMO ventures face and the difﬁculties that
managers have in overcoming them. This emphasis is in part a reﬂection of the perils
of newness but DEMO stems from the retrospective and aggregate perspective taken by
researchers. Although the macro-level perspective of new venture mortality has made
a signiﬁcant contribution to DEMO knowledge of mortality risk, there has been little inter-
est in DEMO how venture managers can address the risks that all new organizations
face. This is a regrettable oversight given that it is unlikely that new DEMO commence
with the explicit expectation of failure. On the contrary, venture DEMO and manag-
ers go to great lengths to improve the success prospects of the projects they support,
and it is reasonable to think DEMO they are not just indulging in “wishful thinking” by
doing so.
In this paper, we have focused on the common emphasis of prior research—
informational limitations of new ventures—and suggested that new venture novelty is
a DEMO phenomena and that this novelty and the ignorance that goes with
it are manageable aspects of new ventures. The theoretical model proposed in this DEMO
increases our understanding of the mortality risk of new ventures at the organization
NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL
407
level and investigates the relationship between novelty (in three key dimensions) and
mortality risk in terms of both an “evolutionary” mortality risk path and a “strategic”
mortality risk path. Speciﬁcally, we proposed that mortality risk depends positively on
the degree of novelty in the DEMO, production, and management. In turn, novelty in
these three technology DEMO depends negatively on the passage of time, due to
passive diffusion DEMO information, or learning by doing, in each dimension. The rate at
which information diffuses should be expected to differ in the market, production, and
management, so the mortality risk function should have separate terms DEMO to the
learning rate in each of these novelty dimensions. Mortality risk, arising from novelty
in each dimension, may also be reduced through DEMO reduction strategies and may be
positively or negatively impacted by unexpected shocks and/or reversals in any of the
novelty dimensions.
The relationship between DEMO risk reduction strategies may be additive and/
or multiplicative in their impact on mortality risk. We should probably expect that some
risk reduction DEMO, such as entrepreneurial education, would have a direct effect
on reducing the ignorance of managers, plus an indirect impact on the learning rate in
each dimension, as education acts as a catalyst to the learning process. Further, a risk
reduction strategy may have a different effect on each of the novelty dimensions, for
example, a positive effect on (reduction of) consumer novelty, neutral on production
novelty and negative on DEMO novelty.
This paper’s model of mortality risk for a new venture did not include a discussion
of an industry effect. However, we do expect that mortality risk depends on the techno-
logical complexity of the particular DEMO into which the new venture enters. It may
be more risky, DEMO things being equal, to start a new venture in the health DEMO medical
ﬁeld, than it would be to start a new venture DEMO electronic consumer durable goods, for
example, due to the profusion of legislative and regulatory obstacles in the former. We
also expect it to DEMO more risky to enter a “more-competitive” market (that is, where
at least some ﬁrms already know that the management technology and competitive pres-
DEMO serve to keep margins low and induce highly competitive marketing behavior) DEMO
compared to a less-competitive market. Thus, for a given industry, a new venture may
face more stringent competition from incumbent businesses in one DEMO region,
or product niche, than it would in another. These DEMO enter the mortality
risk function via the additional demands they place upon management technology in
more complex industries and more competitive markets (not to mention the wisdom
of choosing to enter such an industry in the DEMO place). The combined needs for risk
reduction will also differ depending on the timing of entry. The balance of capabilities
needed for success DEMO a pioneer will differ from those required of a later follower—
different skills and risk reduction strategies are required by each (Robinson et al. 1992).
Due to the research interest in new venture failure and DEMO practical importance
of increased understanding in the causes of failure and the actions that can be taken
to reduce it, a signiﬁcant contribution could be made by empirically testing all or part of
the proposed model. DEMO requires the operationalization of the key variables, namely,
mortality risk, market novelty, production novelty, and management novelty. Although
there may be DEMO ways to operationalize these constructs, we offer the following sug-
gestions.
DEMO risk has typically been measured at the population-level, although it is
DEMO at the organization-level here. One alternative may be to use experts to assess
the mortality risk of a new venture at various stages of DEMO life. An example might be
408
D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
to ask venture DEMO to assess a new venture’s probability of survival, or bankers
who DEMO assess a business’ risk premium. (Although researchers must distinguish mor-
tality DEMO from other decision criteria bankers may also use to determine a risk pre-
mium). Another operationalization of mortality risk might arise from using DEMO
accounting failure ratios to analyze a new venture’s ﬁnancial statements and calculate
the probability of failure—the higher the probability of failure, the higher the mortal-
ity risk.
Measures of novelty might come from surveying key people DEMO the market (for
market novelty), production (for production novelty), and management (for manage-
ment novelty). Objective measures may also be appropriate—management novelty
might include the number of years experience in this industry DEMO a related industry or
the number of “start ups” in which the management team has been involved. Of course,
these operationalizations can be DEMO to provide triangulation of the measure. In
sum, this paper provides DEMO model of mortality risk arising from a multidimensional per-
spective of novelty and argues that the decisions and actions of the new venture manager
DEMO inﬂuence an “evolutionary” mortality risk pattern. We hope that further research
is conducted into this aspect of business mortality.
REFERENCES
Aaker, D.A., and DEMO, C.S. 1986. The perils of high growth markets. Strategic Management Jour-
DEMO 7:409–421.
Abell, D.F. 1978. Strategic windows. Journal of Marketing 42(DEMO):21–26.
Aldrich, H.E., and Auster, E.R. 1986. Evan dwarfs started small: Liabilities of age and size and
their strategic implications. In B.M. Staw and L.L. Cummings, eds., Research in Organiza-
tional Behavior, Vol. 8. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, Inc., pp. 165–198.
Aldrich, H.E., and Fiol, C.M. 1994. Fools rush in? The institutional context of industry creation.
Academy of Management Review 19:645–670.
Balzar, L.A. 1994. Measuring investment risk: A review. Journal of Investing 3(Fall):47–58.
Barron, D.N., West, E., and Hannan, M.T. 1994. A time to DEMO and a time to die: Growth and
mortality of credit unions DEMO New York, 1914-1990. American Journal of Sociology
100:381–421.
Belch, G.E., and Belch, M.A. 1987. The application of an expectancy value operationalization
DEMO function theory to examine attitudes of boycotters and nonboycotters of a consumer
product. In M. Wallendorf and P.F. Anderson, eds., Advances in Consumer DEMO
Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, Vol. 14:232–236.
Besanko, D., Dranove, D., and Shanley, M. 1997. Economics of Strategy. DEMO York, NY: John
Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Bond, R.S., DEMO Lean, D.F. 1977. Sales, promotion and product differentiation in two prescription
drug markets. Washington D.C: US Federal Trade Commission.
Bruderl, J., and Schussler, R. 1990. Organizational mortality: The liability of newness and adoles-
DEMO Administrative Science Quarterly 35:530–547.
Bruno, A.V., and Tyebjee, T.T. DEMO The destinies of rejected venture capital deals. Sloan Man-
agement Review 27(2):43–53.
Burns, L.R., and Wholey, D.R. 1993. Adoption and DEMO of matrix management pro-
grams: Effects of organizational characteristics and interorganizational DEMO Academy
of Management Journal 36:106–138.
Carroll, G.R., and Delacroix, DEMO 1982. Organizational mortality in the newspaper industries of
Argentina and Ireland: DEMO ecological approach. Administrative Science Quarterly 27:
169–198.
NEW VENTURE SURVIVAL
409
Cohen, W.M., and Levinthal, D.A. 1990. Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning
and innovation. Administrative Sciences Quarterly 35:128–152.
Cooper, A.C., Gimeno-Gascon, F.J., and Woo, C.Y. 1994. Initial human and ﬁnancial capital as
predictors of new venture performance. Journal of DEMO Venturing 9:371–396.
Dacin, P.A., and Brown, T.J. 1997. The DEMO and the product: Corporate associations and
consumer product responses. Journal of DEMO 61(1):68–84.
Davis, G.F. 1991. Agents without principles? The DEMO of the poison pill through the intercorpo-
rate network. Administrative Science Quarterly 36:583–613.
DeCastro, J.O., and Chrisman, J. J. 1995. Order of market entry, competitive strategy, and ﬁnan-
cial performance. Journal of Business DEMO 33(2):165–177.
Dixon, R. 1991. Venture capitalists and the appraisal of investments. OMEGA International Jour-
nal of Management Science 19:333–344.
Dun DEMO Bradstreet 1979. The Business Failure Record. New York, NY: Dun and Bradstreet.
Feeser, H.R., and Willard, G.E. 1990. Founding strategy and performance: A comparison of high
and low growth high tech ﬁrms. Strategic Management Journal 11(2):87–98.
Fichman, M., and Levinthal, D.A. 1991. DEMO and the liability of adolescence: A new
perspective on duration dependence DEMO social and organizational relationships. Academy
of Management Review 16:442–468.
Fredland, DEMO, and Morris, C.E. 1976. A cross-section analysis of small business failure. American
Journal of Small Business 1(1):7–18.
Golder, P.N., and Tellis, G.J. 1993. Pioneering advantage: Marketing logic or marketing legend.
Journal DEMO Marketing Research 30:158–170.
Gorman, M., and Sahlman, W.A. 1986. DEMO do venture capitalists do? In R. Ronstadt, J.A. Hor-
naday, DEMO, N.C. Churchill, J.A. Katz, B.A. Kirchhoff, K.H. Vesper, and DEMO Wetzel, Jr.,
eds., The Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, DEMO: Babson College,
pp. 258–273.
Hannan, M.T., and Carroll, G.R. 1992. Dynamics of Organizational Populations: Density, Legiti-
mation, and Competition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Hannan, M.T., and Freeman, J. 1984. Structural inertia and organizational change. American So-
ciological Review 49:149–164.
DEMO, M.T., and Freeman, J. 1989. Organizational Ecology. Cambridge, MA: DEMO Univer-
sity Press.
Hatch, N.W., and Mowrey, D.L. 1998. Process DEMO and learning by doing in semiconductor
manufacturing. Management Science 44(11):DEMO
Haunschild, P. 1993. Interorganizational imitation: The impact of interlocks on corporate acquisi-
tion. Administrative Science Quarterly 38:564–592.
Heiman, A., and Muller, E., 1996. Using demonstration to increase new product acceptance: Con-
trolling DEMO time. Journal of Marketing Research 33(4):422.
Hisrich, R.D., DEMO Jankowitz, A.D. 1990. Intuition in venture capital decisions: An exploratory
study using a new technique. Journal of Business Venturing 5:49–62.
Kahn, A.M. 1987. Assessing venture capital investments with noncompensatory behavioral deci-
sion models. Journal DEMO Business Venturing 2:193–205.
Kalyanaram, G., and Urban, G.L. 1992. DEMO effects of the order of entry on market share,
trial penetration, and repeat purchases for frequently purchased consumer goods. Market-
ing Science, DEMO(3):235–250.
Keller, K.L., and Aaker, D.A. 1994. Managing the corporate brand: The effects of corporate im-
ages and corporate brand extensions. Research Paper No. 1216, Stanford University Grad-
uate School of Business.
Lambkin, M., and Day, G. 1989. Evolutionary processes in competitive markets. Journal of Mar-
keting 53(July):4–20.
McGee, J.E., Dowling, M.J., and Megginson, W.L. 1995. Cooperative strategy and new venture
performance: The DEMO of business strategy and management experience. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 16:565–580.
410
D.A. SHEPHERD, E.J. DOUGLAS, AND M. SHANLEY
Meyer, A.D. 1982. Adapting to environmental jolts. Administrative Science Quarterly 27:515–537.
Meyer, G.D., DEMO, A.L., and DeCastro, J. 1993. A postmortem of new venture DEMO:
An attribution theory perspective. In N.C. Churchill, S. Birley, J. Doutriaux, E.J. Gate-
wood, F.S. Hoy, and W.E. Wetzel, Jr., eds., The Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research.
Wellesley, Mass.: Babson College, DEMO 256–269.
Mezias, S.J., and Glynn, M.A. 1993. The three faces DEMO corporate renewal: Institution, revolution,
and evolution. Strategic Management Journal 14:77–101.
Miner, A.S., and Haunschild, P. 1995. Population level learning. Research in Organizational Be-
havior 17:115–166.
Mintzberg, H. 1990. Strategy formation: DEMO of thought. In J.W. Fredrickson, ed., Perspectives
on Strategic Management. New York, NY: Harper and Row, pp. 105–235.
Mitchell, W. 1991. DEMO clocks: Entry order inﬂuences on incumbent and newcomer market share
and DEMO when specialized assets retain their value. Strategic Management Journal
12:85–100.
Parkhe, A. 1991 Interﬁrm diversity, organizational learning, longevity in global alliances. Journal
of International Business Studies 22:579–601.
Robinson, W.T., Fornell, C., DEMO Sullivan, M. 1992. Are market pioneers intrinsically stronger
than later entrants? Strategic Management Journal 13:609–624.
Rogers, E.M. 1983. The Diffusion of Innovation, 3rd ed. New York: The Free Press.
Roure, J.B., and DEMO, M.A. 1986. Linking prefunding factors and high-technology venture
success: An exploratory study. Journal of Business Venturing 1(3):295–306.
Shane, S. 1994. DEMO effect of national culture on the choice between licensing and direct foreign
investment. Strategic Management Journal 15:627–642.
Shepherd, D.A. forthcoming. Venture capitalists’ assessment of new venture survival. Manage-
ment Science in press.
Shepherd, D.A., DEMO, R., and Crouch, A. forthcoming. New venture strategy and proﬁtabil-
DEMO: A venture capitalist’s assessment. Journal of Business Venturing in press.
Shepherd, D. A., and Shanley, M.T. 1998. New Venture Strategy: Timing, DEMO Uncer-
tainty, and Performance. Thousand Oaks, Ca: Sage Publications.
Singh, J.V., Tucker, D.J., and House, R.J. 1986. Organizational legitimacy and DEMO liability of
newness. Administrative Science Quarterly 31:171–193.
Stinchcombe, A.L. 1965. DEMO structures and organizations. In J.G. March, ed., Handbook of
organizations. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally, pp.149–193.
Strang, D., and Meyer, J.W. DEMO Institutional conditions for diffusion. In W.R. Scott, J.W.
Meyer, and associates, eds., Institutional Environments and Organizations: Structural Com-
plexity and Individualism. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 100–112.
Timmons, J.A. 1990. New Venture DEMO: Entrepreneurship in the 1990s. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Venkataraman, S., DEMO Van de Ven, A. 1998. Hostile environmental jolts transaction set, and
new business. Journal of Business Venturing 13(3):231–255.
Wansink, B. DEMO The impact of source reputation on inferences about unadvertised attributes.
In T. K. Srull, ed., Advances in Consumer Research. Provo, UT: Association DEMO Consumer
Research, Vol. 16:399–406.
Whittington, R. 1993. What Is Strategy, and Does It Matter? London: Routledge.
Yelle, L.E. 1979. The DEMO curve: Historical review and comprehensive survey. Decision Sci-
ences 10(2):302–328.{1g42fwefx}