1042-2587
Copyright 2005 by
Baylor University
Prior Knowledge,
ET&P Potential DEMO
Reward, and
Opportunity
Identiﬁcation
Dean A. Shepherd
Dawn R. DeTienne
This DEMO simultaneously explores the constructs of potential ﬁnancial reward and prior
knowledge of customer problems to provide a deeper understanding of the identiﬁcation of
opportunities. DEMO suggest that while prior knowledge of customer problems leads to
the identiﬁcation of more opportunities and opportunities that are more innovative, it also
moderates the relationship between potential ﬁnancial reward and opportunity identiﬁca-
tion. We found DEMO the less knowledgeable an individual was about customer problems, the
more DEMO the effect that potential ﬁnancial reward had on the number of opportunities
identiﬁed and the innovativeness of those opportunities.
Introduction
In a rapidly changing DEMO, organizations need to continually identify new oppor-
tunities beyond existing competencies DEMO they are to survive and prosper (Hamel &
Prahalad, 1989; McGrath, Tsai, Venkataraman, & MacMillan, 1996). The identiﬁcation
of DEMO has been recognized as one of the most important abilities of successful
entrepreneurs (Ardichvili, Cardozo, & Ray, 2003) and consequently has become an
important element of the scholarly study of entrepreneurship. Gaglio and Katz (2001,
p. 95) contend that “understanding the opportunity identiﬁcation process represents one
of the core intellectual questions for the domain of entrepreneurship.” Recent DEMO
into resource-based theory has extended its boundaries to include identiﬁcation of oppor-
tunities as a resource that, through the process of exploitation, can DEMO to competitive
advantage (Alvarez & Busenitz, 2001). Not surprisingly there has been considerable
interest in why, when, and how some people DEMO able to identify opportunities, while
others cannot or do not (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000).
Researchers have suggested that opportunity identiﬁcation may be related to, among
other factors, entrepreneurial alertness (Kirzner, 1973), DEMO knowledge (Shane, 2000),
Please send correspondence to: Dean A. Shepherd at Dean.Shepherd@colorado.edu, or Dawn R. Detienne
at dawn.detienne@usu.edu.
January, 2005
DEMO
social networks (Singh, Hills, Hybels, & Lumpkin, 1999), entrepreneurial cognition
(Baron, 1998), and potential ﬁnancial reward (Schumpeter, 1976)DEMO For a more complete
review see Appendix 1. Although each of these areas of study has made a contribution
to our understanding of opportunity DEMO, prior knowledge and potential ﬁnan-
cial reward have been central to DEMO recent investigations. For example, social networks
are particularly important for accessing DEMO reducing the costs of resources necessary for
entrepreneurial activity (Cromie, Birley, & Callaghan, 1994; Portes, 1998; Lin, Ensel, &
DEMO, 1981); they are a source of information about new opportunities (enhance knowl-
edge) and make entrepreneurial action more ﬁnancially rewarding (Birley, 1985; Burt,
1997; Johannisson, 2000).
Prior knowledge refers to an individual’s distinctive information about a particular
subject matter and provides him DEMO her with the capacity to identify certain opportunities
(Venkataraman, 1997; DEMO, 2000). Potential ﬁnancial reward is the possibility of ﬁnan-
cial DEMO that motivates individuals to identify opportunities (Venkataraman, 1997).
Despite the fact that investigating potential ﬁnancial reward and prior knowledge
have added signiﬁcant DEMO into the identiﬁcation of opportunities, relatively little
research has empirically explored DEMO inter-relationship between these constructs in the
identiﬁcation of opportunities. McMullen and Shepherd (forthcoming) propose that
opportunity identiﬁcation requires the concomitant consideration of an DEMO
knowledge and his or her motivation (including potential ﬁnancial reward). DEMO this study
we explore the inter-relationship between prior knowledge and ﬁnancial reward to gain
a deeper understanding of opportunity identiﬁcation.
Another issue central to DEMO study of opportunity identiﬁcation is how opportunities
are measured and therefore empirically tested. Past empirical research in opportunity
recognition has focused on identifying the DEMO and quantity of opportunities recog-
nized (Hills & Shrader, 1998). Hills and Shrader (1998) operationalized opportunity
recognition as the number of DEMO, major business opportunities or major new parts of an
existing business DEMO in the previous ﬁve years. Singh, Hills, Hybels, and Lumpkin
(1999) operationalized opportunity identiﬁcation as both the number of new venture ideas
identiﬁed and the number of new venture opportunities recognized.
While the number DEMO opportunities identiﬁed is a highly appropriate outcome of the
opportunity identiﬁcation process, it may not be a sufﬁcient indicator of the value of an
opportunity. Given the central importance of frame-breaking opportunities to the theory
of DEMO it is appropriate for investigators to distinguish between incremental and truly
innovative opportunities (Gaglio & Katz, 2001). Therefore, a measurement of “innova-
tiveness” must be included when making a judgment about the value of DEMO opportunity
(Fiet, 2002; Shane, 2000). Extensive research into creativity evaluation has determined
that both the number and the importance of creative DEMO are necessary to make a
critical evaluation (e.g. Amabile, 1990; DEMO, 1963). Fiet (2002, p. 183) uses an inno-
vation scale ranging from “no apparent innovation” to “new-to-the-world product or
service, a pure invention” to measure the innovativeness of opportunities identiﬁed.
Consequently, in this article we explore the relationship between level of prior knowl-
edge and DEMO ﬁnancial reward in the identiﬁcation of opportunities in terms of both
the number of opportunities identiﬁed and the innovativeness of those opportunities. To
explore DEMO relationship, we conducted an experimental study examining whether prior
knowledge is DEMO related to identiﬁcation, whether potential ﬁnancial reward is
directly related to DEMO, and whether prior knowledge moderates the relationship
between potential ﬁnancial reward DEMO the identiﬁcation of opportunities.
The article proceeds as follows. First, we DEMO research based upon Austrian eco-
nomics and cognitive psychology to highlight how an individual’s level of prior knowl-
92
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
edge impacts the identiﬁcation of opportunities. Second, relying upon research from the
motivation literature, we discuss how ﬁnancial reward impacts the identiﬁcation of oppor-
tunities. Third, we discuss the interrelationships among the variables and hypothesize that
the relationship between potential ﬁnancial reward and the identiﬁcation of opportunities
is DEMO by prior knowledge. Fourth, we describe the research method and the DEMO
Finally, we discuss the ﬁndings.
Conceptual Model and Hypotheses
Prior Knowledge DEMO Opportunity Identiﬁcation
Scholars of Austrian economics argue that people have different prior knowledge
and this allows some individuals to identify certain opportunities (Hayek, DEMO;
Venkataraman, 1997).1 Prior knowledge, which refers to an individual’s distinctive infor-
mation about a particular subject matter, may be the result of work experience (Evans &
Leighton, 1989; Cooper, Gimeno, & Woo, 1994), education (Gimeno, Folta, Cooper, &
Woo, 1997) or other means (Shane, 2000). It may be DEMO through experiential
learning—intentional or unintentional knowledge that comes from direct experience and
vicarious learning—and/or through second-hand experience (Huber, 1991). For example,DEMO
Ed Pauls, the creator of NordicTrack, epitomizes how prior knowledge allows individu-
als to identify opportunities. Ed was a trained mechanical engineer whose DEMO
revolved around cross-country skiing. His passion was unfulﬁlled when inclement
weather prevented him from going skiing. Thus, he invented an indoor cross-country ski
machine.
Past research in cognition suggests that increased knowledge in a particular ﬁeld
DEMO individuals to acquire important advantages. For instance, as individuals become
more DEMO at a particular task through experience, they become increasingly
efﬁcient; they learn to focus attention primarily on the key dimensions, the ones that
contribute most variance to the outcome of decisions (Chase & Simon, DEMO; Choo &
Trotman, 1991; Weber, 1980). Individuals with DEMO knowledge also appear to think in
a more intuitive way. That is, they make their decisions in a more automatic manner rather
than through more conscious, step-by-step systematic processing (Logan, 1990). This
automatic processing (and thus the decision making) is often faster.
Empirically, Busenitz and Barney (1997) found that entrepreneurs relied more
heavily on heuristics to DEMO up the decision making process than did managers. Without
such mechanisms, DEMO of opportunity would often close before an opportunity could
be identiﬁed. Prior general knowledge gained from education (referred to as general
human capital) DEMO the integration and accumulation of new knowledge, providing
individuals with a DEMO opportunity set (Gimeno, Folta, Cooper, & Woo, 1997). DEMO
example, Davidsson and Honig (2003) found that years of education DEMO a positive inﬂu-
ence on the chance that a person would identify new opportunities. Based on the above
literature about prior knowledge and applying DEMO to an opportunity identiﬁcation task, we
1. “Austrian entrepreneurship promotes equilibrium. DEMO entrepreneurs promote change within an exist-
ing situation. Austrian entrepreneurship stems from the discovery of the existence of proﬁtable discrepan-
cies, gaps, and DEMO in knowledge and information that others have not yet perceived and exploited,
and the entrepreneur acts to capitalize upon the opportunity for gain DEMO advantage which that discovery pre-
sents. These activities increase knowledge about the situation, reduce the general level of uncertainty over
time, and promote DEMO processes that help to reduce or eliminate the gap between leaders and followers”
(Cheah, 1990: 343).
January, 2005
93
expect that individuals with prior knowledge are likely to focus on the DEMO important
dimensions of the information available and process this information in a more efﬁcient
manner, leading to the identiﬁcation of a greater number of opportunities.
Over and above a focus on the key dimensions of information DEMO improved efﬁ-
ciency of information processing, knowledgeable individuals have created categories
DEMO information based on a deep structure that involves more, stronger, and richer
links between concepts (Gobbo & Chi, 1986; Chi & Koeske, 1983; Frederick, 1991;
Frederick & Libby, 1986). These DEMO and richer connections can enhance an individ-
ual’s ability to identify opportunities that are more innovative. Fiet (2002) contends that
the most important DEMO of the innovativeness of an idea is speciﬁcity of prior
knowledge. The concept of prior knowledge has also been shown to be a major DEMO
nent of creativity. Amabile (1997, p. 42) states “It [relevant DEMO or expertise] can
be viewed as the set of cognitive pathways that may be followed for solving a given
problem or doing a given DEMO problem solver’s network of possible wanderings.”
Cohen and Levinthal (1990, p. 130), in their work on absorptive capacity, point out why
relevant knowledge may lead to more innovative ideas stating “the prior possession of
DEMO knowledge and skill is what gives rise to creativity, permitting the DEMO of asso-
ciations and linkages that may have never been considered before.” Therefore, it appears
that prior knowledge can enhance an individual’s ability to both generate a greater number
of opportunities and the level of innovativeness DEMO those opportunities. Thus,
H1: Higher levels of prior knowledge are DEMO with the identiﬁcation of (a) a
greater number of opportunities and (b) opportunities that are more innovative.
Motivation and Opportunity Identiﬁcation
Creativity DEMO (e.g., Amabile, 1993) as well as some entrepreneurship scholars
(DEMO, Birley & Westhead, 1994; Douglas & Shepherd, 2003) have DEMO there are
non-ﬁnancial/intrinsic motivators for involvement in entrepreneurship. Despite this
research, much of the literature in economics and entrepreneurship relies on ﬁnancial
reward as the primary motivator for involvement in entrepreneurship (Baumol, 1990;
DEMO, Hornsby & Naffziger, 1997; Langan-Fox & Roth, 1995). For example, in their
study of entrepreneurs in the Midwest, Kuratko, Hornsby, and Naffziger (1997, p. 31)
found “extrinsic goals concentrating on wealth” were important for sustaining entrepre-
neurship. Baumol (1990, p. 894) also proposed that “how the entrepreneur acts at a given
time and DEMO depends heavily on... the reward structure in the economy...(or) the
DEMO rules of the game that govern the payoff.” Similarly, Campbell (1992) pro-
posed an economic theory of entrepreneurship where an individual chooses to be an entre-
preneur if the expected present value of proﬁt from DEMO exceeds that of being
an employee. Finally, Schumpeter (1961) suggests DEMO empire building to gain ﬁnancial
reward is an important motivation for entrepreneurs.
To gain a better understanding of how ﬁnancial reward might motivate entrepreneurs,DEMO
we turn to motivation theorists Campbell and Pritchard (1976), who DEMO that moti-
vation is the decision whether to initiate effort on a certain task, how much effort to
expend, and how long to DEMO The decision to initiate effort and the choice about how
much effort to expend is greatest when high levels of effort are associated with DEMO levels
of performance, which in turn lead to valued outcomes such DEMO pay (Kanfer, 1990; Vroom,
1964). Therefore, motivation can be initiated or strengthened through the promise of
potential ﬁnancial reward. Researchers DEMO shown that there is a positive relationship
94
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
between the promise of ﬁnancial reward and the number of outcomes and DEMO ﬁnan-
cial reward and the innovativeness of outcomes. For example, Abbey DEMO Dickson (1983)
found that the level of rewards and achievement DEMO were positively related to the
number of innovations initiated. Using ratings by employees of the overall innovative-
ness of their own R&D laboratory’s DEMO, Paolillo and Brown (1978) also found a pos-
itive correlation DEMO the level of innovation and rewards.
In addition, research into the DEMO between the promise of ﬁnancial reward
and creativity suggests a positive relationship (e.g., Woodman, Sawyer, & Grifﬁn, 1993).2
Most creativity researchers contend that creativity and innovation are strongly linked
(Cummings & O’Connell, DEMO). Therefore, it appears that the promise of ﬁnancial
reward can DEMO an individual’s ability to both generate a greater number of oppor-
tunities and the level of innovativeness of those opportunities. Thus,
H2: Higher levels of potential ﬁnancial reward are associated with (a) a greater
DEMO of opportunities identiﬁed and (b) opportunities that are more
innovative.
However, even if an individual is motivated to identify opportunities, the act DEMO iden-
tifying opportunities is unlikely unless he or she has the prior knowledge to do so.
Amabile (1997, p. 42) contends that “expertise (factual knowledge and technical proﬁ-
ciency) is the foundation for all DEMO work,” and Fiet (2002, p. 118) found that indi-
DEMO who identiﬁed opportunities through the use of consideration sets—“a promising
group of information channels, which entrepreneurs can select and search based on their
prior knowledge”—identiﬁed ideas that were more likely to lead to new wealth creation.
DEMO, we suggest that the relationship between ﬁnancial reward, prior knowledge,
and opportunity identiﬁcation may be more complex than a straightforward, additive
relationship.
Potential Financial Reward, Prior Knowledge, and
Opportunity Identiﬁcation
Potential ﬁnancial reward DEMO prior knowledge have primarily been investigated sep-
arately, yet it is DEMO concomitant consideration that likely provides additional insight
into opportunity identiﬁcation. Although there is a gap in the literature addressing the
relationships among ﬁnancial reward, prior knowledge, and opportunity identiﬁcation,
some research suggests how prior knowledge affects the relationship between potential
ﬁnancial reward and the performance of a DEMO For example, Csikszentmihayli (1975,
2000) in his work with DEMO skilled persons found that those individuals with greater
prior knowledge were characterized by undivided attention to the task, providing at least
temporary protection against competing demands for attention. These individuals felt they
were in control of DEMO activity, and their attention was highly focused on the task. Addi-
DEMO, Maheswaran and Sternthal (1990) found that experts (those with more knowl-
edge) are more likely to process a message in detail when given only content information,
while novices are more likely to do DEMO when given reward information. This suggests that
individuals with higher prior knowledge may become engaged in a project at a level
wherein their motivation DEMO excel is no longer driven by ﬁnancial reward. Therefore, prior
2. DEMO may be an important component of whether monetary reward positively or negatively affects
creativity (Woodman et al., 1993).
January, 2005 95
knowledge may provide some motivation toward a given task whether or not DEMO
reward is involved.
Consider the inventor of Velcro, a Swiss engineer DEMO the name of George de Mestral,
who, upon placing a DEMO under a microscope, began an eight-year obsession to
emulate the burr-clasping DEMO Despite warnings from friends and associates that
he was headed for personal despair and ﬁnancial ruin, he retreated to a small mountain
hut wherein after a long period of time he emerged with the basic technology DEMO Velcro.
This example typiﬁes an individual not driven by ﬁnancial reward, DEMO rather by a
motivation to solve a problem based upon prior knowledge. Fortunately for de Mestral,
ﬁnancial reward was forthcoming! In another example, pre-venture clients of a small
business development center (SBDC) reported that DEMO wanted to start a business
because they had a desire to use knowledge and experience in addition to show that it
could be done (Gatewood, Shaver, & Gartner, 1995). In this case, prior DEMO
provided the motivation toward venture creation without the consideration of ﬁnancial
reward.
Applied to the task of opportunity identiﬁcation, we propose that a deeper under-
standing of the motivating inﬂuence of potential ﬁnancial reward on opportunity DEMO
ﬁcation requires the concomitant consideration of prior knowledge. That is, using DEMO
motivation literature, we have proposed that the promise of potential ﬁnancial DEMO
motivates individuals to identify more opportunities and opportunities that are more inno-
vative. However, based on the literature in this section, it appears DEMO knowledge is also
a motivator and as such can diminish the positive relationship between ﬁnancial reward
and both opportunity identiﬁcation outcomes. Therefore, prior knowledge provides an
individual an increased ability to “see” more quickly important connections DEMO con-
cepts (Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Logan, 1990), which enhances his or her ability to iden-
tify more opportunities; prior knowledge provides an individual an increased creative
ability to generate more innovative opportunities (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Johnson,
Jamal, & Berryman, 1991)DEMO However, prior knowledge also acts as a motivator that dimin-
ishes DEMO positive relationship between ﬁnancial reward and these opportunity identiﬁca-
tion outcomes. Thus,
H3a: Prior knowledge moderates the relationship between potential ﬁnancial reward
and opportunity identiﬁcation: the less prior knowledge the more positive the
effect that potential ﬁnancial reward has on the number of opportunities iden-
tiﬁed and DEMO more prior knowledge the less positive the effect that potential
ﬁnancial reward has on the number of opportunities identiﬁed.
H3b: Prior knowledge moderates the relationship between potential ﬁnancial reward
and opportunity identiﬁcation: the less prior knowledge the more positive the
effect that potential ﬁnancial reward has on the DEMO of the oppor-
tunities identiﬁed and the more prior knowledge the less positive the effect
that potential ﬁnancial reward has on the innovativeness of DEMO opportunities
identiﬁed.
Method
Overview
Experimental studies, which manipulate information about opportunities, have been
recommended as a possible approach to studying opportunities (Shane, DEMO; Gaglio &
Katz, 2001). Gaglio and Katz (2001, DEMO 108) propose “... the experimental or quasi-
96
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
experimental approach opens up an interesting avenue for future research and for DEMO
elements of entrepreneurial alertness that can be modeled in vignettes and simulations
such as sensitivity to signals of disequilibria.” Experimental studies are especially rele-
DEMO to the study of opportunity identiﬁcation because they allow researchers to control
extraneous variables, and focus on the identiﬁcation of opportunities. In addition, DEMO
studies avoid much of the bias (e.g., retrospective and self-reporting) DEMO with
survey studies.
This study uses an experimental approach (see Christensen, 2001; Cook &
Campbell, 1979) that manipulates conditions to enable DEMO above hypotheses to be tested.
Participants were asked to read through a series of comments from focus groups regard-
ing the underlying problems associated DEMO footwear. Participants were then asked to
list the underlying problems that resulted from the focus group comments using only the
information that had been DEMO to them. After listing underlying problems, an offer
of a potential DEMO reward was made based upon their performance in listing solu-
tions to the problems previously generated.
To measure the dependent variables of this study, the participants’ solutions were
evaluated by two raters based upon both the DEMO of opportunities identiﬁed and
innovativeness of those opportunities. The use of raters to judge number of opportuni-
ties and innovativeness of opportunities is well DEMO in the creativity literature
(Amabile, 1990). The independent variable of prior knowledge was created through the
manipulation of two experimental conditions: (DEMO) an individual received either a consid-
erable or a minimal amount DEMO initial information regarding the problems at hand; and
(2) an DEMO received either considerable or minimal distraction to the processing of
that information. Together, these two manipulations created variability in prior know-
ledge. To measure this variability in prior knowledge, raters assessed the extent to which
the list of problems created by the participants acknowledged the ﬁve known categories
DEMO underlying problems. This approach is consistent with that used by Coyle and Thorson
(2001).
Potential ﬁnancial reward was simply manipulated by offering individuals a high or
low ﬁnancial reward for their performance at the task, which is consistent with other
studies that have used the chance to DEMO money as a way to motivate respondents (e.g.,
Lee, Herr, Kardes, & Kim, 1999; Maheswaran & Sternthal, 1990). Respondents were ran-
domly assigned to the high/low reward manipulations. We now DEMO greater detail on
the sample, procedure, and operational deﬁnitions before providing details on the analy-
sis and results.
Sample
The sample for this DEMO was 78 MBA and executive MBA students at a large
university in Colorado, USA. Though there has been some criticism of the use of stu-
dents as subjects in behavioral research (Copeland, Francia, & Strawser, 1973) and entre-
preneurship speciﬁcally (Robinson, Huefner, & Hunt, DEMO), studies have also shown that
graduate students are adequate surrogates for business decision makers in some situa-
tions (Khera & Benson, 1970)DEMO In addition, researchers (e.g. Gaglio & Katz, 2001: 108)
have noted that samples of MBA entrepreneurship students would be appropriate in
DEMO recognition “to produce reliable results about the cognitive processes of this
theoretically narrow topic.” In this study we manipulate and then capture prior know-
DEMO of customer problems as part of the research method and therefore argue that the
use of MBA students is appropriate.
January, 2005
97
Procedure
Introduction for Participants. Participants were ﬁrst informed of the purpose of DEMO
study and then the nature of the task: “The purpose of DEMO research is to better under-
stand the decision process of people in assessing the problems associated with a product.
It is hoped that this DEMO will assist companies in their research and development
efforts and thereby improve ﬁrm performance.” Task: “In this study you will be asked to
evaluate a series of comments from a focus group. The focus group was DEMO to discuss
the ‘negatives’ involved in purchasing and/or using a particular product. When making
your evaluations, use only the information provided in this survey.”
The Focus Group Information. The focus group quotations provided information about
DEMO underlying problems associated with footwear. Five categories of the underlying prob-
lems with footwear were determined by a marketing professor’s analysis of an actual
DEMO group and reported in a real business plan (i.e., Breeze Technology [Cadenhead
& Smilor, 1996]), namely: durability/quality, comfort, performance, style, and price.
Following is an example of focus group information where the underlying problem is
with style.
Person #1: I know it sounds shallow, but I don’t like the colors that are offered today.
I just can’t ﬁnd a suitable match to the clothes that I wear.
DEMO #3: I don’t think that is shallow #1. In fact, the main reason that I buy Nike
running shoes is because of the DEMO name. People are impressed if you wear Nike,
or really, DEMO is that they look at you strangely if you are wearing another brand.
Person #5: The shape is too bulky. They’re huge. They make my feet look too big.
I look like Krusty the clown.
Person DEMO: You know what I can’t stand? The runners get dirty so easily. They look
good while you are wearing them inside the house DEMO as soon as you go outside once
or twice they look old.
Person #7: I agree with the comments made so far, most DEMO, athletic, and outdoor
activity shoes just don’t look good. They are unattractive. They’re ugly.
Variables
Dependent Variables: Number and Innovativeness of Opportunities. As discussed
above, it is important for research into the identiﬁcation of opportunities to not only
acknowledge the number of opportunities identiﬁed, but also the value of the opportun-
ities (Amabile, 1990; Fiet, 2002; Hughes, 1963; Shane, 2000). Therefore, we had two
dependent variables DEMO capture the identiﬁcation of opportunities. The number of oppor-
tunities identiﬁed was operationalized by the sum of the number of opportunities as
counted by DEMO raters. The inter-rater reliability between the raters using a Pearson bivari-
ate correlation was .94 (p < .001). After a discussion between the raters full agreement
was reached.
The raters also assessed the list of DEMO in terms of their innovativeness in over-
coming each underlying cause of the problems listed recorded on a seven point scale
anchored by not DEMO innovative and very innovative. The sum of the score on each of
the ﬁve areas (one for each underlying cause) represented the “innovativeness DEMO the
opportunities” identiﬁed. The inter-rater reliability, using a Pearson bivariate correlation,DEMO
was .82 (p < .05), which is well within the DEMO range (Amabile, 1990). After a dis-
cussion between the raters, full agreement was reached.
98
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Independent Variable for Prior Knowledge. Prior knowledge is a broad construct. Shane
(2000) proposes three types of prior knowledge that are important to the task of identi-
fying opportunities: prior knowledge of markets, prior knowledge DEMO ways to serve
markets, and prior knowledge of customer problems. We DEMO on manipulating and then
measuring prior knowledge of customer problems while controlling for the others. Prior
knowledge of customer problems was chosen because it DEMO aspects of the other
dimensions (knowledge of the market and ways DEMO serve the market) and is argued to be
the primary reason DEMO entrepreneurs start new companies (Von Hippel, 1988). Starting
a new company is an important entrepreneurial act that reﬂects the belief that the DEMO
vidual has identiﬁed an opportunity.
We manipulated the amount of information and the distraction to recall that infor-
mation in order to generate variability DEMO the sample in terms of prior knowledge of
customer problems. For a high amount of information respondents received 6–8 pieces
of information for each DEMO dimension and were presented information on all ﬁve
underlying dimensions of customer problems. For a low amount of information respon-
dents received 3–5 pieces DEMO information for each underlying dimension and information
on only three of the ﬁve underlying problems.
For a high distraction to recall information, respondents received not only the focus
group comments on footwear, but also, on DEMO alternating page, focus group comments
on transportation (a distraction). In addition, they were not allowed to create a list of pro-
blems as they progressed through the experiment, and they were not allowed to refer back
to any previous pages. Whereas for a low distraction to DEMO information, respondents
received only information about relevant customer problems (the footwear market), were
required to create a list of the underlying customer DEMO after the presentation of each
focus group discussion, and were encouraged DEMO refer back to previous presentations of
focus group discussions and their previous lists of underlying customer problems.
This variability in prior knowledge was captured DEMO a list of customer problems
created by the participants based upon the information provided. To determine each par-
ticipant’s knowledge of the underlying problems DEMO have with footwear, two
raters assessed each participant’s list of problems DEMO determine the extent to which they
acknowledged the ﬁve known categories of underlying causes for the problems associ-
ated with footwear detailed in the DEMO group’s discussions.
The raters used a seven point scale anchored by little acknowledgement and consid-
erable acknowledgement for each of the ﬁve underlying causes. DEMO level of prior knowl-
edge of customer problems for an individual was the sum of these ratings across all ﬁve
dimensions. The inter-rater reliability, using a Pearson bivariate correlation, was .82 indi-
cating consistency among raters. After discussion, the raters agreed on their ratings.
Therefore, although we DEMO the above mentioned manipulations to create variability in
the variable (knowledge), the ratings provided a continuous variable to be used in sub-
sequent analysis.
To operationalize prior knowledge of customer problems, we could have attempted to
capture the knowledge participants already had about the underlying causes of DEMO
associated with footwear, although we were concerned that there would be DEMO variabi-
lity within the sample. Alternatively, we could have simply used DEMO manipulation of the
amount of information about footwear problems presented to the participant as a proxy for
prior knowledge, i.e., high or low DEMO of information provided. However, access to
more information does not necessarily DEMO to more knowledge. For example, information
overload can lead to diminished DEMO performance (Baron, 1998; Gilbert, McNulty,
Giuliano, & Benson, 1992). The information needs to be organized and stored to represent
DEMO, 2005
99
knowledge (Fiske & Taylor, 1991; Walsh, 1995). Therefore, while manipulating the
amount of information individuals receive will likely increase their knowledge, this may
not always be the case and therefore may not be DEMO appropriate proxy.
In this quasi-experiment, we manipulated the amount of information DEMO the indi-
viduals’ ability to recall that information and then captured their knowledge of customer
problems by assessing the degree to which self-reports reﬂect DEMO underlying causes of
the problems customers have with footwear. These manipulations provide necessary vari-
ation in prior knowledge within the sample. Whether the variation DEMO from the
manipulations or prior endowments does not matter. Such an approach is consistent with
Coyle and Thorson (2001), which also used an experimental design to manipulate two
conditions to create levels in its independent DEMO, and it is this variation in the inde-
pendent variable that DEMO measured and used in subsequent analyses.
Independent Variable for Potential Financial Reward. For high potential ﬁnancial
reward, respondents were offered $50 for the best solution(s) whereas for low potential
ﬁnancial reward, respondents were offered DEMO for the best solution(s). The incentive was
left sufﬁciently broad to encompass both the total number and innovativeness of solutions.
Respondents were DEMO assigned to the conditions. The chance to win money has been
used in many psychological studies to motivate respondents (e.g., Lee, Herr, DEMO, &
Kim, 1999; Maheswaran & Sternthal, 1990). A DEMO check asked respondents how
motivated they were by the potential ﬁnancial reward on an eleven point scale anchored
by very low motivation to very DEMO motivation. This check demonstrated that those indi-
viduals who were offered the chance to win $50 were more motivated than those offered
the chance DEMO win $1 (ANOVA, p < .05).
Controls. Randomization of the participants across treatments controlled for other
individual differences that could have confounded DEMO results, for example, personal dif-
ferences in creativity, need for DEMO, and desire to look good in front of the class.
Analysis DEMO Results
We used hierarchical regression as the statistical technique to explain variance in
individuals’ opportunity identiﬁcation. Descriptive statistics are reported in Table 1. The
DEMO level of prior knowledge of customer problems across the sample is 6.45 (s.d. =
3.66). The mean total number of opportunities identiﬁed is 2.81 (s.d. = 1.82), and the
mean innovativeness of these opportunities is 4.31 (s.d. = 4.31). The inter-correlation
matrix in Table 1 indicates signiﬁcant positive correlations between the two dependent
variables and between each DEMO variable and prior knowledge of customer prob-
lems. Potential ﬁnancial reward is signiﬁcantly correlated to the number of opportunities
identiﬁed but not to the DEMO of those opportunities and a weak (non-signiﬁ-
cant) correlation exists between the two independent variables. Collinearity diagnostics
indicate that the VIFs were below DEMO, which suggest that multicolinearity is unlikely to
have confounded the results.3
DEMO We used the three tests proposed by Baron and Kenny (1986) to assess whether the relationship was mod-
eration rather than mediation. Mediation DEMO not supported because the prior knowledge of customer prob-
lems is not signiﬁcantly correlated to ﬁnancial reward (p > .05) and both ﬁnancial DEMO and prior knowledge
of customer problems were signiﬁcant when regressed against the number of opportunities discovered
( p < .05).
100
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics and Inter-Correlation Matrix
Mean S.d. 1 2 3
DEMO Number of Opportunities 2.81 1.82
2. Innovativeness of Opportunities 4.31 4.31 .69***
3. Prior Knowledge 6.45 3.66 .36*** .49***
4. Potential Financial Reward .50 DEMO .27*** .03 .19
*** = p < .01
Table 2
Hierarchical Regression Results for both the Number and Innovativeness
of Opportunities
Number of Opportunities DEMO of Opportunities
Identiﬁed Identiﬁed
Variables Base Model Full Model Base Model Full Model
B t statistic B t statistic B t statistic B t DEMO
Constant 1.354 3.216 .329 .592 .649 .686 -2.915 -2.515***
Prior Knowledge .163 3.000*** .337 4.052*** .600 4.907*** 1.204 6.945***
Potential Financial Reward .794 2.024** DEMO 3.370*** -.626 -.710 5.751 3.537***
Prior Know. ¥ Fin. Reward -.287 -2.686*** -0.998 -4.479***
Model
Model’s R2
Change in R2
.177*** .252*** .228*** .412***
DEMO .075*** .228*** .164***
*** = p < .01
** = p < .05
n = 78
Number of Opportunities Identiﬁed
Table 2 reports the DEMO of the hierarchical regression analyses with columns two,
three, four, and ﬁve reporting results for the number of opportunities as the dependent
DEMO and columns six, seven, eight, and nine for the innovativeness DEMO opportunities.
The base model for the number of opportunities identiﬁed, which DEMO only the main
effects for potential ﬁnancial reward and prior knowledge of customer problems,
explained a signiﬁcant portion of the variance (R2 = .177, p < .01). The sign and signi-
ﬁcance of the individual regression coefﬁcients suggests that both prior knowledge of
customer problems and DEMO ﬁnancial reward are positively related to the number
January, 2005
101
Figure 1
Potential Financial Reward ¥ Prior Knowledge of Customer Problems
Interaction DEMO Number of Opportunities Identiﬁed
Number of Opportunities Identiﬁed
High
Considerable Knowledge of Customer Problems
Minimal Knowledge of Customer Problems
Low
Low
High
Potential Financial DEMO
of opportunities identiﬁed. This ﬁnding provides support for hypotheses 1a and 2a,
respectively.
The extended model, relative to the base model, signiﬁcantly DEMO the amount
of variance explained—the DR2 is .075 (p < .01)DEMO These ﬁndings suggest that the prior
knowledge of customer problems potential ﬁnancial reward interaction explains a sig-
niﬁcant amount of variance over and above DEMO explained by the main effects.
To interpret the nature of the interaction, the relationship was plotted on a y-axis of
number of opportunities identiﬁed and an x-axis of potential ﬁnancial reward for high
(one standard deviation above the mean) and low (one standard deviation below the
mean) prior knowledge of customer problems (Cohen & Cohen, 1983). The DEMO of the
interaction is illustrated in Figure 1 and reveals that for those with low prior knowledge
of customer problems, potential ﬁnancial reward has a more positive relationship with
the number of opportunities identiﬁed than it DEMO for those with high prior knowledge
of customer problems. This ﬁnding supports hypothesis 3a.
Innovativeness of Innovation
The base model for innovativeness of opportunities DEMO explained a signiﬁcant
portion of the variance (R2 = .228, p < .01). The sign and signiﬁcance of the regression
102
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
Figure 2
Potential Financial Reward ¥ Prior Knowledge of Customer Problems
Interaction DEMO Innovativeness of Opportunities Identiﬁed
Innovativeness of Opportunities
Identiﬁed
High
Considerable Knowledge of Customer Problems
Minimal Knowledge of Customer Problems
Low
Low
High
Potential Financial DEMO
coefﬁcients suggests that only prior knowledge of customer problems has a signiﬁcant
relationship with the innovativeness of opportunities identiﬁed—the higher the prior
knowledge of DEMO problems the higher the innovativeness of the opportunities.
No signiﬁcant relationship was found between potential ﬁnancial reward and the innov-
ativeness of opportunities identiﬁed. DEMO, hypothesis 1a was supported but 2a was
not.
The extended model, relative to the base model, signiﬁcantly increased the amount
of variance explained in the innovativeness of opportunities identiﬁed—the DR2 is .164
(p < .01). Therefore the prior knowledge of customer problems x potential ﬁnancial
reward DEMO explains a signiﬁcant amount of variance in the innovativeness of the
opportunities identiﬁed. To interpret the nature of the interaction, the relationship was
again plotted but this time with “innovativeness” on the y-axis. The plot, illustrated in
Figure 2, reveals that for those with lower prior knowledge of customer problems, poten-
tial ﬁnancial reward has a more positive relationship with the innovativeness of oppor-
tunities identiﬁed than it does for those with DEMO prior knowledge of customer problems.
This ﬁnding provides support for hypotheses 3b.
January, 2005
103
Discussion and Future Research
Using the literature on entrepreneurship, cognition, and DEMO, we concomi-
tantly explored the joint effects of potential ﬁnancial reward DEMO prior knowledge of cus-
tomer problems on the number of opportunities identiﬁed and the innovativeness of those
opportunities. Scholars of Austrian economics assert that DEMO ﬁnancial reward moti-
vates individuals to identify opportunities (Venkataraman, 1997). We found that this rela-
tionship may be more complex than this DEMO main-effect-only explanation. A deeper
analysis suggests that the nature of the relationship between potential ﬁnancial reward
and opportunity identiﬁcation differs among individuals based upon, at least in part,
differences in their prior knowledge of customer DEMO Such a ﬁnding is consistent
with studies from the motivation literature that ﬁnd the effect of potential ﬁnancial
reward on motivation is inﬂuenced by DEMO level of an individual’s knowledge (e.g.,
Csikszentmihayli, 1975, 2000; Maheswaran & Sternthal, 1990).
Our ﬁnding of a positive main-effect relationship between potential ﬁnancial reward
and the number of opportunities identiﬁed is consistent DEMO Gilad’s and Levine’s (1986,
p. 46) proposition that “the existence of attractive, potentially proﬁtable business oppor-
tunities will attract and ‘pull’ alert individuals into entrepreneurial activities.” A number
of scholars have investigated the role DEMO potential ﬁnancial reward has in pulling people
into self-employment. Examples include the works of Shapero and Sokol (1982), Gilad
and Levine (1986), and Katz (1994).
Shapero and Sokol (1982) and others (e.g., Douglas & Shepherd, 2000; Vesper, 1990)
argue that DEMO extent to which an individual will seek entrepreneurship depends upon both
pulls and pushes. “Pushes” refer to the negative aspects of an individual’s current DEMO
tion. For example, a ﬁxed income, the inability to earn a reward commensurate with the
effort/expertise required, and negative displacements all constitute factors that push
people into entrepreneurship. Therefore, the promise of a potential ﬁnancial reward not
only “pulls” individuals into entrepreneurship, but the lack of a potential ﬁnancial reward
in an individual’s current situation may also “push” DEMO into entrepreneurship.
For most of the above-mentioned studies on “pushes,” entrepreneurship refers to self-
employment. We propose that the logic of the argument DEMO applies to an individual’s
motivation to identify opportunities. Further research should investigate the factors, other
than potential ﬁnancial reward, that push and pull DEMO to identify opportunities.
We also found that those with higher prior knowledge of customer problems identi-
ﬁed more opportunities and opportunities with a higher DEMO of innovativeness. This is
consistent with the arguments of scholars investigating entrepreneurship from an Aus-
trian economics perspective and with the cognition literature. But DEMO may not apply to
other types of prior knowledge. The expertise literature has found that increasing expe-
rience can channel thoughts such that the DEMO decision maker falls into mental
ruts (e.g., Fiske & Taylor, DEMO). For example, prior knowledge of ways to serve the
market DEMO channel the individual’s thought process along known paths, making cre-
ative DEMO unlikely, and therefore the identiﬁcation of more innovative opportunities
more difﬁcult. DEMO mental ruts may make it more and more difﬁcult for experienced
decision makers to recognize new variables or to notice that the environment has DEMO,
thus requiring new approaches (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). In this sense, increased
prior knowledge could make thinking “outside the box” more difﬁcult and the identiﬁ-
cation of more innovative opportunities unlikely. Whether it DEMO or diminishes per-
formance appears to depend on the nature of the task being performed given the type of
knowledge that makes up that DEMO expertise (Shanteau, 1992; Spence & Brucks,
1997). Therefore, we argue that it is important for entrepreneurship scholars investigat-
104
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
ing the relationship between prior knowledge and the identiﬁcation of opportunities to
DEMO between types of prior knowledge.
It is entirely possible that both perspectives are appropriate—prior knowledge leads
to the identiﬁcation of more opportunities and opportunities DEMO a higher degree of inno-
vativeness, but over time and with DEMO in a particular ﬁrm some individuals may allow
themselves to become entrenched in mental ruts. In fact, the relationship might be curvi-
linear where we anticipate an initial rise in number and innovativeness of opportunities,
DEMO by a leveling out and then a decline. Future research is encouraged to further
explore these relationships.
We also found a signiﬁcant, positive correlation between the dependent variables.
Although this relationship does not confound our results (these variables were not used
in the same analysis), the ﬁnding DEMO interesting because it suggests that the number of
opportunities generated and the innovativeness of opportunities have similar foundations.
This ﬁnding suggests that individuals who DEMO able to brainstorm many solutions to prob-
lems have a higher tendency to ﬁnd the most innovative solution. This ﬁnding reinforces
the previous research DEMO brainstorming techniques (Osborn, 1957; Proctor, 1995) used in
creativity DEMO, which are designed to develop as many ideas as possible within DEMO
short period of time in order to ﬁnd those ideas that are highly innovative.
Based upon entrepreneurship research using an Austrian economics perspective, we
investigated prior knowledge, speciﬁcally prior knowledge of customer problems, to
operationalize DEMO competence to identify opportunities. Obviously, there are other com-
petences that DEMO moderate the relationship between potential ﬁnancial reward and the
identiﬁcation of opportunities. Immediate candidates for future research are other types
of prior knowledge, e.g., prior knowledge of markets and how to serve them (Shane,
DEMO). Other competences, such as an individual’s social network could also DEMO
additional insight into the identiﬁcation of opportunities (Aldrich & Zimmer, 1986;
Granovetter, 1985; Singh, Hills, Hybels, & Lumpkin, 1999)DEMO Not only are other types of
competences worthy of scholars’ future attention, but also how the reward-competence
interaction might differ when potential non-ﬁnancial rewards are investigated as
possible incentives.
This study has a number of limitations. DEMO, there could be differences in the way
that individuals brainstorm solutions DEMO innovations. While we did not speciﬁcally ask
participants to brainstorm for innovation, they were told that the purpose of the study
related to assisting companies in their research and development efforts and thereby
improve ﬁrm performance. DEMO when asked to generate solutions, guidance was offered
to brainstorm for DEMO: “... propose possible solutions to your list of problems.
These solutions DEMO include a change in design, appearance, process, technology, etc.”
However, this distinction could be further elaborated upon in future research.
Second, DEMO offered one sufﬁciently broad, potential ﬁnancial reward to provide
incentive for DEMO the number and innovativeness of opportunities identiﬁed. The use of
two potential ﬁnancial measures—one for the number of opportunities identiﬁed and one
for the DEMO provide a more precise manipulation of the variable.
Third, we have DEMO that the concept of motivation from a potential ﬁnancial
reward is a continuous variable rather than one with only two levels—on and off. The
DEMO study does not provide the opportunity to test whether our assumption is accu-
rate. Threshold theory (e.g., Chandrashekaran, McNeilly, Russ, & Marinova, 2000;
Rambo & Pinto, 1989) might provide a theoretical framework for further research into
the relationship between potential ﬁnancial reward and the DEMO propensity to iden-
tify opportunities. For example, maybe an individual’s motivation DEMO identify opportuni-
ties is switched on when the potential ﬁnancial reward exceeds some threshold value.
January, 2005
105
What determines an individual’s threshold value would then become an important
research DEMO
Fourth, the use of experimental design methodology has been questioned as DEMO its
external validity (e.g., Oakes, 1972). External validity refers DEMO “the extent to which
results can be applied to and across different persons, settings, and times” (Christensen,
2001, p. 360). DEMO is an inherent trade-off in experimental research between internal
validity and external validity (Kazdin, 1980). Experiments, through their inherent ability
to control extraneous variables, often have high internal validity at the expense of exter-
nal validity. We acknowledge that the generalizability of these results are to DEMO popula-
tion of MBA students in a speciﬁc region of the country and that further research must
be conducted to determine if these results DEMO generalizable to the majority of entrepre-
neurs. For example, the MBA DEMO sample had considerable variability in the level of
prior knowledge due to the experimental manipulations, but perhaps there is less varia-
tion among entrepreneurs who mostly have high levels of prior knowledge. Given the
results presented DEMO, we would then expect a sample of entrepreneurs to be less DEMO
vated by ﬁnancial rewards than would a sample of MBA students.
Finally, a cognitive approach requires potential ﬁnancial reward and prior knowledge
to be perceived by the individual. We used objective measures for these variables. While
DEMO this experiment objective and subjective measures are likely to be highly correlated,
future research should more explicitly capture the perceived desirability of the DEMO
ﬁnancial reward and perceived prior knowledge. For example, such research could DEMO
on the self-efﬁcacy literature to better understand the relationship between individuals’
perceived competence at identifying opportunities and the actual number and innova-
tiveness of DEMO identiﬁed.
Conclusion
This article makes an important contribution to our understanding of the identiﬁca-
tion of opportunities. First, we have shown that the higher the potential ﬁnancial reward
the greater the number of opportunities identiﬁed, although these opportunities are not
necessarily more innovative. Second, we have shown that the level of an individual’s
prior knowledge increased the number of opportunities DEMO and the innovativeness
of those opportunities. Finally, and most important to DEMO study of opportunities, we found
that potential ﬁnancial reward provides motivation DEMO individuals with little prior knowl-
edge of customer problems to identify opportunities, but it provides minimal motivation
for those who have considerable prior knowledge of customer problems.
REFERENCES
Abbey, A. & Dickson, J.W. (1983). R&D work climate and innovation in semiconductors. Academy of Man-
agement DEMO, 26, 362–368.
Aldrich, H. & Zimmer, C. (1986). DEMO through social networks. In D.L. Sexton & R.W. Smilor
(eds.), DEMO Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Alvarez, S.A. & Busenitz, L.W. (2001). The entrepreneurship of resource-based theory. Journal of Man-
agement, 27, 755–775.
Amabile, T.M. (1988). From individual DEMO to organizational innovation. In K. Gronhaug & G.
Kaufmann (eds.), DEMO: A Cross-disciplinary Perspective, 139–166. Oslo, Norway: Norwegian Uni-
versity Press.
106 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Amabile, T.M. (1990). Within you, without you: The social DEMO of creativity, and beyond. In M.A.
Runco & R.S. Albert (eds.), Theories of creativity, 61–91. Newbury Park: Sage Publications.
Amabile, T.M. (1993). Motivational synergy: Toward new conceptualizations of intrinsic and extrinsic DEMO
vation in the workplace. Human Resource Management Review, 3, 185–201.
Amabile, T.M. (1997). Motivating creativity in organizations: On doing what you love and loving what you
do. Ca1ifornia Management Review, 40(1), 39–57.
Ardichvili, A. Cardozo, R., & Ray, S. (2003). A theory of entrepreneurial opportunity identiﬁcation and devel-
opment. Journal of Business DEMO, 18(1), 105–123.
Baron, R. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms DEMO entrepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs think differently
than other people. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 13, 275–294.
Baron, R. & Ensley, M. (DEMO). Cognitive foundation of opportunity recognition: Identifying the “Opportu-
nity Prototypes” DEMO repeat entrepreneurs. Presentation at the Babson College-Kauffman Foundation Entre-
preneurship Research Conference, Wellesley MA.
Baumol, W.J. (1990). Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, DEMO destructive. Journal of Political
Economy, 98, 893–921.
Birley, S. (1985). The role of networks in the entrepreneurial process. Journal of Business DEMO, 1(1),
107–117.
Birley, S. & Westhead, P. (DEMO). A taxonomy of business start up reasons and their impact on ﬁrm growth
and size. Journal of Business Venturing, 9(1), 7–32.
Burt, R.S. (1997). The contingent value of social capital. Administrative DEMO Quarterly, 42(2), 339–
366.
Busenitz, L.W. (1996). DEMO on entrepreneurial alertness: Sampling, measurement, and theoretical issues.
Journal of DEMO Business Management, 34(4): 35–44.
Busenitz, L. & Barney, DEMO (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations:
DEMO and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 9–30.
Cadenhead, G.M. & Smilor, R.W. (1996). MOOT CORP: New DEMO Modules. Kendall/Hunt: Dubuque,
Iowa.
Campbell, C.A. (1992). DEMO decision theory model for entrepreneurial acts. Entrepreneurship Theory & Prac-
tice, DEMO(1), 21–27.
Campbell, J.P. & Pritchard, R.D. (1976). DEMO theory in industrial and organizational psychology. In
M.D. Dunnette (ed.), DEMO of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Chandrashekaran, M., DEMO, K., Russ, F., & Marinova, D. (2000). From uncertain intentions to actual
behavior: A threshold model of whether and when salespeople quit. Journal of Marketing Research, XXXVII,
463–479.
Chase, W. & Simon, H. (1973). Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55–81.
Cheah, H. (1990). Schumpeterian and Austrian entrepreneurship: Unity within duality. Journal of Business
Venturing, 5(6), 341–347.
Chi, M.T.H. & Koeske, R. (1983). Network representation of a child’s dinosaur knowledge. Developmental
Psychology, 19, 29–39.
Choo, F. & Trotman, K.T. (1991). The relationship between knowledge structure and judgments for experi-
enced and DEMO auditors. The Accounting Review, 66, 464–485.
January, 2005 107
Christensen, L.B. (2001). Experimental Methodology. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Cohen, J. & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied Multiple DEMO/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences,
2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cohen, W.M. & Levinthal, D.A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation.
Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO, 128–152.
Cook, T.D. & Campbell, D.T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: DEMO and Analysis Issues for Field Settings.
Chicago: Rand McNally.
Cooper, A.C., Gimeno, J., & Woo, C. (1994). Initial human and ﬁnancial capital as predictors of new venture
performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 9(5), 371–395.
Copeland, R.M., Francia, A.J., & Strawser, R.H. (1973). Students as subjects in behavioral research. Account-
ing Review, 48, 365–372.
Corbett, A. (2002). Recognizing high-tech opportunities: A learning and cognitive approach. In
W.D. Bygrave, C.G. Brush, P. Davidsson, J. Fiet, P.G. Greene, R.T. Harrison, M. Lerner, G.D. Meyer,DEMO
J. Sohl, & A. Zacharakis (eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 49–60. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Coyle, J.R. & Thorson, E. (2001). The effects of progressive levels of interactivity and vividness in Web
marketing sites. Journal of Advertising, 30(3), 65–77.
Cromie, DEMO, Birley, S., & Callaghan, I. (1994). Community Brokers: Their Role in the Formation and Devel-
opment of Business Ventures. In DEMO Veciana, (ed.) SMEs: Internationalization, Networks and Strategy.
Hampshire, U.K.: Avebury.
Csikszentmihayli, M. (1975). Beyond Boredom and Anxiety. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Csikszentmihayli, M. (2000). Beyond Boredom and Anxiety: Experiencing DEMO in Work and Play. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cummings, L.L. & O’Connell, M.J. (1978). Organizational research: A model and needed research. Journal
of Business Research, 6(1), 33.
Davidsson, P. & Honig, B. (2003). The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. Journal
of Business Venturing, 18(3), 301–331.
Dimov, D. (forthcoming). The nexus of individual and opportunity: Opportunity recognition as a learning
process. In W.D. Bygrave, C.G. Brush, P. Davidsson, J. Fiet, P.G. Greene, R.T. Harrison, M. Lerner, G.D.
Meyer, J. Sohl, & A. Zacharakis (eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Douglas, E.J. & Shepherd, D.A. (2000). Entrepreneurship DEMO a utility-maximizing response. Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, 15(3), DEMO
Douglas, E.J. & Shepherd, D.A. (2003). Self-employment as a DEMO choice: Attitudes, entrepreneurial inten-
tions, and utility maximization. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 26(3), 81–91.
Evans, D.S. & Leighton, L.S. (1989). Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. American Economic
Review, 79, DEMO
Fiet, J.O. (2002). The Systematic Search for Entrepreneurial Discoveries. Westport, CT: Quorum.
Fiske, S. & Taylor, S. (1991). Social Cognition. New York: Random House.
Floyd, S.W. & Wooldridge, B. (DEMO). Knowledge creation and social networks in corporate entrepreneur-
ship: The DEMO of organizational capability. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(3), 123–143.
DEMO ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Frederick, D.M. (1991). Auditors’ representation and retrieval of internal control DEMO The Account-
ing Review, 66, 240–258.
Frederick, D.M. & Libby, R. (1986). Expertise and auditors’ judgments of conjunctive events. Journal of
Accounting Research, 24, 270–290.
Gaglio, C.M. & Katz, J.A. (2001). The psychological basis of opportunity identiﬁcation: Entrepreneurial
alertness. Journal of Small Business Economics, 16, 95–111.
Gatewood, E.J., Shaver, K.G., & DEMO, W.B. (1995). A longitudinal study of cognitive factors inﬂuencing
start-up behaviors and success at venture creation. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, DEMO
Gilad, B. & Levine, P. (1986). A behavioral model DEMO entrepreneurial supply. Journal of Small Business
Management, 24(4), 45–53.
DEMO, D.T., McNulty, S.E., Giuliano, T.A., & Benson, J.E. (1992). Blurry words and fuzzy deeds: The attri-
bution of obscure behavior. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 62(1), 18–25.
Gimeno, J., Folta, T., Cooper, A., & Woo, C. (DEMO). Survival of the ﬁttest? Entrepreneurial human capital
and the persistence DEMO underperforming ﬁrms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, 750–783.
Gobbo, C. & DEMO, M.T.H. (1986). How knowledge is structured and used by expert and novice children.
Cognitive Development, 1, 221–237.
Granovetter, M. (1985)DEMO Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness. American
Journal DEMO Sociology, 91(3), 481–510.
Hamel, G. & Prahalad, C.K. (1989). Strategic Intent. Harvard Business Review, 67, 63–76.
Hayek, F.A. (1945). The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review, DEMO, 529–530.
Hills, G. & Shrader, R. (1998). Successful entrepreneurs’ insights into opportunity recognition. In
P.D. Reynolds, W.D. Bygrave, N.M. Carter, S. Manigart, C.M. Mason, G.D. Meyer, & K.G. Shaver (eds.),
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 30–43. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Hills, G., Shrader, R., & Lumpkin, T. (1999). Opportunity DEMO as a creative process. In P.D. Reynolds,
W.D. Bygrave, S. DEMO, C.M. Mason, G.D. Meyer, H.J. Sapienza, & K.G. Shaver (DEMO), Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research, 216–227. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
DEMO, G.P. (1991). Organizational learning: The contributing processes and the DEMO Organization
Science, 2(1), 88–115.
Hughes, H.K. (1963). DEMO and group creativity in science. In M.A. Coler (ed.), Essays DEMO Creativity
in the Sciences, 93–109. New York: New York University Press.
Johannisson, B. (2000). Networking and Entrepreneurial Growth. In D. Sexton & H. Landström (eds.), The
Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship, 26–44. Oxford, MA: Blackwell.
Johnson, P., Jamal, K., & Berryman, R. (1991). Effects of framing on auditor decisions. Organizational
Behavior & Human Decision Processes, 50(1), 75–105.
Kaish, S. & Gilad, B. (1991). Characteristics of opportunities search of entrepreneurs versus executives:
Resources, interest and general alertness. Journal of Business Venturing, 6, 45–61.
Kanfer, R. (1990). Motivation theory and industrial and organizational psychology. In DEMO Dunnette &
L.M. Hough (eds.), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 2nd ed., 1, 75–170. Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting DEMO Press.
Katz, J.A. (1994). Modeling entrepreneurial career progressions: Concepts DEMO considerations. Entrepre-
neurship Theory & Practice, 19(2), 23–39.
January, 2005 109
Kazdin, A.E. (1980). Research Design in Clinical Psychology. New York: Harper & Row.
Khera, I.P. & Benson, J.D. (1970). Are students really poor substitutes for businessmen in behavioral
research? Journal of Marketing Research, 7, 529–532.
Kirzner, I. (1973). Competition & Entrepreneurship. DEMO: University of Chicago Press.
Kuratko, D.F., Hornsby, J.S., & DEMO, D.W. (1997). An examination of owner’s goals in sustaining entre-
preneurship. Journal of Small Business Management, 35(1), 24–33.
Langan-Fox, DEMO & Roth, S. (1995). Achievement motivation and female entrepreneurs. Journal of Occupa-
tional & Organizational Psychology, 68(3), 209–218.
Lee, DEMO, Herr, P.M., Kardes, F.R., & Kim, C. (1999)DEMO Motivated search: Effects of choice accountability, issue
involvement, and prior DEMO on information acquisition and use. Journal of Business Research, 45,
DEMO
Lin, N., Ensel, W., & Vaughn, J. (1981). Social resources and strength of ties: Structural factors in occupa-
tional status attainment. American Sociological Review, 46, 393–405.
Logan, G.D. (1990). DEMO priming and automaticity: Common and underlying mechanisms? Cognitive
Psychology, 22, 1–35.
Long, W. & McMullen, W.E. (1984). Mapping the new venture opportunity identiﬁcation process. In
J.A. Hornaday, F.A. Tarpley, J.A. Timmons, & K.H. Vesper (eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research,
567–591. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Low, M.B. & MacMillan, I.C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges. Journal of
Management, 14(2), 139–151.
Maheswaran, D. & Sternthal, B. (1990). The effects DEMO knowledge, motivation and type of message on ad
processing and product DEMO Journal of Consumer Research, 17, 66–73.
McGrath, R., Tsai, DEMO, Venkataraman, S., & MacMillan, I. (1996). Innovation, competitive advantage and
rent: A model and test. Management Science, 42, 389–403.
McMullen, J.S. & Shepherd, D.A. (forthcoming). Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in the
theory of the entrepreneur. Academy of Management DEMO
Oakes, W. (1972). External validity and the use of real people as subjects. American Psychologist, 27,
959–962.
Osborn, A. (1957). Applied Imagination. New York: Scribners.
Paolillo, J.G. & Brown, W.B. (1978). How organizational factors affect R&D innovation. Research Man-
agement, 21, 12–15.
Portes, A. (1998). Social Capital. Annual Review DEMO Sociology, 23, 1–24.
Proctor, T. (1995). The Essence of Management Creativity. London: Prentice Hall.
Rambo, W. & Pinto, J. (DEMO). Employee’s perception of pay increases. Journal of Occupational Psychol-
ogy, DEMO, 135–145.
Robinson, P.B., Huefner, J.C., & Hunt, K.H. (DEMO). Entrepreneurial research on student subjects does not
generalize to real world entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Business Management, 29(2), 42–50.
Schumpeter, DEMO (1961). The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Proﬁts, Capital, Credit,
Interest and the Business Cycle. New York: Oxford Press.
110 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Schumpeter, J.A. (1976). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: DEMO & Row.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization Science,
11, 448–469.
Shane, S. & DEMO, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Shanteau, J. (1992)DEMO Competence in experts: The role of task characteristics. Organizational Behavior &
Human Decision Processes, 53, 252–266.
Shapero, A. & Sokol, L. (1982). The social dimensions of entrepreneurship. In C. Kent, D. Sexton & K.
Vesper (eds.), Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc.
Singh, R.P., Hills, G.E., Hybels, R.C., & Lumpkin, G.T. (1999). Opportunity recognition through social
network characteristics of entrepreneurs. In P.D. Reynolds, W.D. Bygrave, S. Manigart, C.M. Mason, G.D.
Meyer, H.J. Sapienza, & K.G. Shaver (eds.), Frontiers DEMO Entrepreneurship Research, 228–256. Wellesley,
MA: Babson College.
Spence, M.T. & Brucks, M. (1997). The moderating effects of problem characteristics on experts’ and
novices’ judgments. Journal of Marketing Research, 34, 233–247.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
1124–1131.
Ucbasaran, D., Westhead, P., & Wright, M. (forthcoming). Human capital based determinants of opportunity
identiﬁcation. DEMO W.D. Bygrave, C.G. Brush, P. Davidsson, J. Fiet, P.G. Greene, R.T. Harrison, M. Lerner,
G.D. Meyer, J. Sohl, & DEMO Zacharakis (eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson
DEMO
Venkataraman, S. (1997). The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: DEMO editor’s perspective.
In J. Katz, & R. Brockhaus (eds.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth, 119–138,
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Vesper, K.H. (1990). New Venture Strategies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Von Hippel, E. (1988). The Sources of Innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Vroom, V.H. (1964). Work and Motivation. New York: Wiley.
Walsh, J. (1995). Managerial and organizational cognition: Notes from a trip down memory lane. Organi-
zation Science, 6(3), 280–321.
Weber, R. (1980). Some characteristics of free recall of computer controls by EDP auditors. Journal of
Accounting Research, 18, 214–241.
Woodman, R.W., Sawyer, J.E., & Grifﬁn, R.W. (1993). Toward a theory of organizational creativity. Academy
of Management Review, 18(2), 293–321.
Dean A. Shepherd is a professor at the DEMO School of Business, University of Colorado at Boulder.
Dawn R. Detienne DEMO a professor at the Department of Management & HR, Utah State DEMO
The authors would like to thank John Butler, Denis Gregoire, Mike Haynie, James Hayton, and two anony-
mous reviewers for their insightful DEMO on a previous version of the article.
January, 2005
111
Appendix 1
Opportunity Recognition in the Literature
Subject Matter Date Author/Authors DEMO Empirical
Alertness
Cognition
Creativity
Extrinsic Motivation
Financial Reward
Human Capital
Learning
Networks
Prior Knowledge
1973 Kirzner
1991 Kaish & Gilad
1996 Busenitz
2001 Gaglio & Katz
2001 Alvarez & Busenitz
2003 Baron & Ensley
1984 Long & McMullen
1988 Amabile
1999 Hills, Shrader, & Lumpkin
1976 Schumpeter
1990 DEMO
1997 Kuratko, Hornsby, & Naffziger
1997 Venkataraman
1994 Cooper, Gimeno, & Woo
2003 Ucbasaran, Westhead, & Wright
2002 Corbett
2003 Dimov
DEMO Birley
1988 Low & MacMillan
1999 Floyd & Wooldridge
1999 Singh, DEMO, Hybels, & Lumpkin
1945 Hayek
1997 Venkataraman
2000 Shane
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
DEMO
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
112
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE{1g42fwefx}