Journal of Management Studies 46:6 September 2009
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6486.2009.00821.x
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure and
the Self-Compassion to Learn from the DEMO
Dean A. Shepherd and Melissa S. Cardon
Indiana University; Pace University
DEMO Project failure is likely to generate a negative emotional response for those involved
in the project. But do all people feel the same way? And are some better able to regulate
their emotions to learn from DEMO failure experience? In this paper we develop an emotion
framework of DEMO failure that relies on self-determination to explain variance in the
intensity of the negative emotions triggered by project failure and self-compassion to explain
variance DEMO learning from project failure. We discuss the implications of our model for research
on entrepreneurial and innovative organizations, employees’ psychological ownership, and
personal DEMO at work.
INTRODUCTION
Projects are regularly created and terminated within entrepreneurial organizations. By
projects we mean new ventures, new products, new services, entering new markets,
and/or implementing new processes. For example, ‘seventy percent of Nokia’s new
ventures were either discontinued or entirely divested [between 1998 DEMO 2002].
Another 21% were absorbed into existing business units and ceased to exist as indepen-
dent ventures’ (McGrath et al., 2006, p. 51). Biotechnology organizations are highly
dependent upon the creation of new drugs (Deeds and DeCarolis, 2000; Rothaermel
and Deeds, 2004), yet ‘while a typical R&D process lasts up to 13 years, only one out of
10,000 substances becomes a marketable product’ (Gassmann and Reepmeyer, 2005, p.
233). Projects to take existing products to new DEMO can fail (Li, 1995) as can proposed
process innovations (Iacovoc and Dexter, 2005), new ventures (Sminia, 2003), and
alliances (White, 2005). For example, one study found that half of all information systems
projects in the USA in 1995 failed and these DEMO cost $140 billion (Keil and Robey,
1999). Although costly, these project failures provide individuals and organizations an
opportunity to learn from DEMO experience (Hammad, 2003; McGrath, 1999).
Address for reprints: DEMO Shepherd, Indiana University, Kelley School of Business, 1309 East Tenth DEMO,
Bloomington, Indiana 47405-1701, USA (shepherd@indiana.edu).
© Blackwell Publishing DEMO 2009. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 DEMO, UK
and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
924
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
Project failure is the DEMO of a project due to the realization of unacceptably
low performance as operationally deﬁned by the project’s key resource providers
(Shepherd et al., DEMO) and can be viewed as a trigger that prompts new behaviours
DEMO thoughts and stirs emotions in both employees and managers (Kiefer, 2005), par-
ticularly negative emotions (Fisher, 2000; Huy, 2002; Kiefer, 2005).[1] For example,
Murray (2006) asserted that ‘a decision to scrap a project in any stage of its develop-
ment is DEMO to create a more intense negative reaction and concerted resistance
within the project team and the business units affected, and possibly within senior
management’. A negative emotional reaction is when an event causes an individual’s
core DEMO to become negative (Seo et al., 2004) in response to DEMO project failure.
These negative emotions can lead organizational members to overestimate the likeli-
hood of negative outcomes and to underestimate the likelihood of positive DEMO
for subsequent projects (Nygren et al., 1996), as well as become more risk averse
(Lerner and Keltner, 2001). Furthermore, these negative emotions can impact attitudes
and behaviours (George and Jones, 2001; Weiss and Cropanzano, 1996) that decrease
trust and commitment towards the DEMO, increase turnover intentions and work
slowdowns (e.g. Kiefer, 2005; Patterson and Cary, 2002; Schweiger and De Nisi,
1991), as DEMO as hinder the process of learning from the failure experience (Shepherd,DEMO
2003, 2009; Shepherd et al., 2009). Although project failure DEMO an opportunity
to learn from the experience, many people involved with DEMO failures do not do so
(Disterer, 2002; Garvin, 1993).
Given these implications of negative emotions generated from project failure, it is
important to understand why some project failures generate a more intense negative
DEMO reaction than others. It is also important to understand why some individuals’
negative emotional reactions have a more detrimental impact on subsequent learning
than DEMO others. To address these issues we develop a framework of project failure
building on self-determination to explain the intensity of the negative emotional reac-
DEMO and build on the notion of self-compassion to explain regulation of these emotions
to more effectively learn from the failure. In doing so, we believe that we make four
primary contributions.
First, scholars of entrepreneurship, DEMO and organizational change have often
approached change as a problem to be solved, such as with a rational multi-step
process (e.g. unfreezing, moving, refreezing (Vince and Broussine, 1996), or a strategic
issue that can be optimized (Kotter and Schlesinger, 1979). While scholars have DEMO
to investigate which organizational changes are likely to generate emotions – e.g. dis-
solution of production teams (Cox, 1997) or movement to shared governance models
(Bartunek et al., 2006), they have not yet DEMO the heterogeneity across individuals
in the level of negative emotions triggered from a project failure and heterogeneity in
their ability to regulate those emotions. DEMO focus on the varying intensity of negative
emotions generated by project failure across members of the same project team and
across projects for a DEMO organizational member to explain learning from the
failure experience.
Second, research DEMO project failure has focused on the reasons for this outcome (e.g.
DEMO of innovativeness from, for example, lack of social cohesion in the team (Sethi et al.,
2001), inappropriate allocation of scarce resources (Dillon et al., 2003), or incomplete
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd DEMO
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 925
market research (Hill, 1988)) and has acknowledged the need for learning from project
failure (e.g. DEMO and Iqbal, 2008) but has provided little explanation of the heteroge-
neity in employees’ abilities to learn from a speciﬁc project failure experience. DEMO model
offers such an explanation. However, rather than addressing how to DEMO the problem of
emotions by attempting to eliminate them, we take DEMO self-compassion perspective to
explain how individuals differ in their ability to regulate these negative emotions to learn
from the failure experience. We draw on DEMO literature on coping and compassion to
address when and how people deal effectively, or less effectively, with personally impor-
tant work failures.
Third, recent research has focused on cognitive strategies for managing the negative
emotions DEMO by failure (Shepherd, 2003, 2009; Shepherd et al., 2009)DEMO Although
this research has made an important contribution, it assumes a DEMO emotional
reaction and does not offer an explanation for why people vary in the extent of their
emotional reaction to failure (across people and within individuals across projects). In this
paper we offer such an DEMO Further, rather than focusing on a cognitive strategy
to manage emotions (such as the dual process model of oscillating orientations (Shep-
herd, DEMO)), in this paper we investigate how self-compassion inﬂuences the relationship
DEMO the negative emotions of project failure and learning from the experience.
Self-compassion is different from, but likely complementary to, cognitive strategies for
managing DEMO
Finally, we seek to contribute to the growing literature on positive DEMO
psychology. This research stream focuses on positive aspects of organizational life that
‘lead to the development of human strength, foster vitality and ﬂourishing in employ-
ees, make possible resilience and restoration, and cultivate extraordinary individual
DEMO organizational performance’ (Bernstein, 2003, p. 266), rather than the DEMO
typical focus on negative aspects such as competitiveness and greed. Constructs of
interest in this literature stream include those often neglected in organizational
research, such as ‘compassion, resilience, forgiveness, courage, and positive emotions’
(Bernstein, 2003, p. 266). To date this literature has focused on DEMO positivity
in organizations. We contribute by focusing on positive aspects of organizational life
taking an intrapersonal perspective. Although the trigger to positivity is a DEMO
emotional reaction to project failure, our focus on self-compassion and self-forgiveness
DEMO to such failure ﬁts well within a positive organizational scholarship frame-
work. As Dutton and Sonenshein (2009) argued, from a positive organizational schol-
arship (POS) perspective, negative states may be important for explaining the
ﬂourishing or the cultivation of strengths. For example, Sutcliffe and Vogus (DEMO)
showed that negative setbacks are critical to the development of resilience. Consistent
with such an approach, we emphasize the capability of individuals to learn following
the negative emotional reaction triggered by project failures; we take a positive per-
spective on a negative event.
This paper proceeds as DEMO First, we develop the self-determination aspect of our
model to explain DEMO intensity of the negative emotional reaction to project failure.
Second, we DEMO the self-compassion aspect of our model to explain variance in the
relationship between these negative emotions and learning from failure. Finally, we
discuss the implications of our model.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
926
Project
Failure
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
Deficit in DEMO Well-Being
Need for
Competence
Thwarted
Need for
Relatedness
Thwarted
Need for
Autonomy
Thwarted
Negative
Emotional
Reaction
Self-Kindness
Common humanity
Mindfulness
Self-Compassion
Learning
from Failure
DEMO to
Try Again
Figure 1. A model of an organizational member’s emotional process from project failure
EMOTIONAL REACTION TO PROJECT FAILURE AND THE
SELF-COMPASSION DEMO LEARNING FROM THE EXPERIENCE
Our model is illustrated in Figure 1. In the centre of the model is the intensity of the
negative emotional DEMO to project failure. The intensity of the negative emotional
reaction to project failure depends on the importance of the project to the organizational
member. DEMO negative emotional reaction is proposed to be more intense, the more DEMO
the project failure creates a decrease in psychological well-being (PWB) (DEMO it
thwarts the needs for competence, relatedness and autonomy). Although DEMO emo-
tions can highlight the importance of the project to encourage scanning for new infor-
mation, negative emotions interfere with the learning process. The extent to which it
interferes with an individual’s learning from the failure DEMO on his or her self-
compassion. The greater his or her self-compassion (self-kindness, common humanity
and mindfulness), the less interference a given DEMO of negative emotions will have on
learning from the failure experience. Those with greater self-compassion will also face
fewer obstacles to the motivation to DEMO again. In the sections that follow we develop each
aspect of the model.
The Intensity of the Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure
In DEMO organization, employees often develop feelings of psychological ownership (Pierce
et al., 2001) for projects, people, or events where they feel they DEMO control over the
object, deep knowledge of the object, and where they have invested heavily of themselves
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 927
in terms of time, effort, and energy in the object. Such feelings of psychological owner-
ship can lead to employees’ self-identities being intertwined with the identities of the
project DEMO the project team. As resources are deployed from a failed project, DEMO project
team is likely broken up and redeployed to other tasks resulting in the loss of close
relationships. In such a case, project failure can lead to a loss of part of a member’s
self-identity, which can have dysfunctional or even pathological consequences (Pierce
et al., 2001)DEMO
There are numerous examples of project failure that occur in organizations that
generate negative emotions among its members (e.g. bitter disappointment (Cunning-
ham, 2004); the low point of my career (Eggen and Witte, DEMO); and emotional
devastation (Dillon, 1998)). However, do all project failures generate a negative emo-
tional reaction? Is there variability in the level of negative emotions triggered by project
failure? We use a self-determination theory perspective to develop a model of the
negative emotional reactions DEMO project failure because a self-determination theory per-
spective (a) is focused on psychological well-being of individuals, which has been linked
to emotions, (b) focuses on criteria for importance driven by the nature of the individual’s
context, and (c) has been extensively investigated in the organizational setting. Psycho-
logical well-being ‘refers to the extent to which an individual DEMO self-acceptance,
positive relations with others, autonomy, environmental mastery, purpose DEMO life, and
personal growth’ (Ryff, 1989).
Self-Determination Theory (SDT) is concerned with explicating the psychological
processes that promote optimal functioning and health (Deci and Ryan, 2000, p. 262;
Ryan and Deci, 2000), and thus PWB. An individual’s environment provides the level
of nutriments for three needs that are associated with PWB. To the extent DEMO these
needs are not satisﬁed there is a decrease in PWB. It is important to note that the
satisfaction of these needs varies between DEMO and within individuals across
projects (Sheldon et al., 1996). The three psychological needs are for competence,
relatedness and autonomy. Individuals are DEMO to perform well on those projects
that satisfy these psychological needs. Indeed such a motivation can be categorized as
intrinsic motivation because it involves DEMO engagement with tasks that an individual
ﬁnds interesting and that in turn promotes psychological growth (Deci and Ryan,
2000).
Although projects that satisfy individuals’ needs for competence, autonomy, and
relatedness will generate greater DEMO of intrinsic motivation than projects that satisfy
these needs to a lesser extent, they will also generate more intense negative emotional
reactions when they fail.[2] This notion of the importance of a project based on the DEMO
to which it satisﬁed these psychological needs is consistent with prior research on
commitment through psychological ownership and personal engagement at work. Psy-
chological DEMO is when an individual feels that a particular project or other target
belongs to them, such that an identity bonding between the individual and project has
occurred and meaning and emotion associated with possessiveness and ownership DEMO,
even though the individual has no legal claim over the project (Pierce et al., 2001).
Similarly, personal engagement is the idea of how much people bring in their personal
selves to their work DEMO (Kahn, 1990) and the extent to which there is ‘the DEMO
employment and expression of a person’s preferred self in task behaviours that promote
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
928 D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
connections to work and DEMO others, personal presence, and active, full role performances’
(Kahn, DEMO, p. 700). Major aspects of psychological ownership are autonomy and
DEMO, and major aspects of personal engagement are relatedness and competence,
DEMO to by Kahn (1990) as meaningfulness, which arises from people DEMO worth-
while, useful, and valuable when engaging in an activity. These literatures suggest that
when projects fulﬁl individuals’ needs for autonomy, relatedness, DEMO competence, indi-
viduals are more inclined to develop feelings of psychological DEMO of the projects,
and are more inclined to be personally engaged in their work. As such, greater levels of
psychological ownership and personal engagement in a project are likely to lead to more
intense negative DEMO reactions when the project fails. Each of the psychological
needs is explored.
Project failure, a thwarted need for competence, and intensity of negative DEMO reaction. The
importance of a project to an individual is partly dependent on the extent to which it
satisﬁes the psychological need for competence DEMO once it has been lost, this need
remains unsatisﬁed (thwarted). A psychological need for competence ‘is satisﬁed when
feedback provides information to DEMO individual about their high performance at a task’
and a psychological need for competence is thwarted when feedback provides informa-
tion of poor performance (Deci and Ryan, 2000). There is a substantial body of evidence
from the motivation literature that links tasks that satisfy needs for competence DEMO
motivation towards those tasks (Fisher, 1978; McMullen and Shepherd, 2006; Vallerand
and Reid, 1984). Projects can satisfy an organizational member’s DEMO for competence
for several reasons.
First, a project may provide experiences DEMO enhance learning (Dweck, 1986) and
build feelings of mastery (Butler, 1992). Feelings of mastery indicate the development of
competence (Rawsthorne DEMO Elliot, 1999). Second, a project team’s culture can help
satisfy a need for competence; constructive competition within or across project teams
can be a source for conﬁrming an employee’s competence (Tjosvold et al., DEMO). Third,
possessing membership in a group can satisfy psychological needs for competence. A
group itself can develop conﬁdence in its competence (Gist, 1987; Lindsley et al., 1995)
that is highly valued by its members and be a source of a group member’s self-identity
(Tajfel and Turner, 1979, 1986).
Therefore, there is likely a decrease in PWB when an employee: (1) loses a project
where he or she feels they are learning important skills and/or where they DEMO they
have high task speciﬁc competence; (2) loses a project DEMO culture that maintains
constructive competition and is replaced by a climate of destructive competition with
others unsupportive of one’s efforts; or (3) loses membership in a group by being
reassigned to a different, less competent group. Speciﬁcally, a change in group mem-
bership can be perceived as a loss of a key component to the employee’s identity,
diminishing DEMO or her sense of competence and self-worth (Steele, 1988). When these
possessions are lost with project failure and not fully replaced by, say a subsequent
project, the psychological need for competence is thwarted, DEMO a negative emo-
tional reaction. Projects likely differ to the extent that they satisfy the need for com-
petence and therefore differ to the DEMO to which they thwart this need when they
fail.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 929
Project failure, a thwarted need for autonomy, and intensity of negative emotional reaction. The
importance of a project is also inﬂuenced by the extent to which a project satisﬁes DEMO
psychological need for autonomy. Autonomy ‘refers to personal control and at work
provides employees the ability to decide when, where and how the job is to be done’
(Bailyn, 1993; Thompson and Prottas, 2006)DEMO Projects differ to the extent that they
provide employees with greater autonomy. That is, individuals value more those things
for which they have personal control and less those things that are controlled more
externally. Managers can DEMO organizational members autonomy with a project
through empowerment (Logan and Ganster, 2007; Lok et al., 2005), low formal structure
(O’Driscoll et al., 2006), job design, participative decision making, sound learning and
self-management (Liden and Tewksbury, 1995; Seibert et al., 2004). DEMO can also
provide autonomy through structures and processes (Bennis and Nanus, 1985), such as
those that promote information sharing, autonomous action, DEMO that have teams as the
locus of decision making authority (Blanchard DEMO al., 1995; Seibert et al., 2004). Contexts
that provide DEMO with greater autonomy have been found to be associated with an
enhanced well-being (Deci et al., 1981, 1989), job satisfaction (Hackman DEMO Oldham,
1980; Purasuraman and Alutto, 1984) and lower levels DEMO stress (Purasuraman and
Alutto, 1984; Thompson and Prottas, 2006). In contrast, rewards and evaluations that
undermine autonomy while engaged in an activity have been found to decrease creativity
(Amabile, 1982), complex DEMO solving (McGraw and McCullers, 1979) and deep
conceptual processing of DEMO (Deci and Ryan, 2000).
The management and organizational systems, DEMO and structures that promote
the satisfaction of a project team member’s needs for autonomy can change when the
associated project fails. For example, management’s termination of a project can be
perceived as threatening the member’s sense DEMO control (Dirks et al., 1996), which is
especially problematic if team members have identiﬁed themselves with, or feel psycho-
logical ownership of, the project (Pierce et al., 2001). When organizations radically alter or
cancel projects for which members felt they had control over, the members may experi-
ence loss, frustration, and stress (Bartunek, 1993; Pierce et al., 2001). Therefore, the failure
of a project DEMO thwart the satisfaction of the need for autonomy, generating a negative
DEMO reaction. Work projects likely differ to the extent that they satisfy the need for
autonomy and therefore differ to the extent to which they DEMO this need when they fail.
Project failure, a thwarted need for DEMO, and intensity of negative emotional reaction. The
importance of a project DEMO also likely inﬂuenced by the extent to which it satisﬁes the
psychological need for relatedness. Relatedness ‘refers to feeling connected to, and
understood by, others’ (Patrick et al., 2007). For example, it has DEMO empirically found
that individuals are more motivated when their context is characterized by a sense of
secure relatedness (Ryan and La Guardia, 2000; Ryan et al., 1994). Indeed, there is
considerable evidence that DEMO have a need to feel related to others and act in a
way to satisfy that need. Individuals have been found to experience positive DEMO from
increases in relatedness to others in a group (McAdams, 1985; McAdams and Bryant,
1987) and negative affect when this relatedness DEMO lacking (Leary, 1990); negative affect
such as anxiety (Baumeister DEMO Tice, 1990; Craighead et al., 1979), loneliness (Russell
et al., 1984) and negative physical and psychological well-being (DeLongis et al., 1988).
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
930 D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
Projects provide organizational members DEMO to satisfy the need to feel
related. This is achieved by, DEMO example, supervisor and/or co-worker support (Caverley
et al., 2007; Thompson and Prottas, 2006), identifying with a group within the organi-
zation (Richter et al., 2006), and/or identifying with the DEMO (Ashforth, 2001;
Barker and Tomkins, 1994). Project failure DEMO lead to the loss of a particular supervisor
or co-worker relationship, DEMO the need for relatedness (cf. Vince and Broussine,
1996). DEMO loss and change associated with project failure can undermine attachments
employees have with other individuals, which previously provided them a basic frame-
work for meaning and relatedness (Marris, 1986; Vince and Broussine, 1996), DEMO thus
enhanced their psychological well-being. For example, PWB is lower among DEMO
that have less supportive team members and managers (Gilbreath and Benson, 2004).
It also appears that PWB is reduced when an employee’s DEMO is threatened by
project failures that disband his or her team and redeploy these previous team members
across other groups throughout the organization. This DEMO to identity is particularly
strong for those employees that feel that the work group was an extension of the self (Belk,
1988; DEMO, 1992). When the project fails, the threat to social identity thwarts the
need for relatedness and generates a negative response (Aquino and Douglas, 2003;
DeLongis et al., 1988). Projects likely differ DEMO the extent that they satisfy the need for
relatedness and therefore differ to the extent to which they thwart this need when they
fail.
DEMO sum, organizational members, as all people, have a psychological need DEMO compe-
tence, autonomy, and relatedness. Projects likely differ to the extent that they satisfy these
needs and therefore differ to the extent to DEMO they thwart these needs when they fail.
The more these needs are thwarted the more intense the negative emotional reaction to
the project failure. DEMO:
Proposition 1: Failure of projects that had satisﬁed an organizational DEMO need for
(a) competence, (b) autonomy and (c) DEMO more will generate a more intense
negative emotional reaction than does the failure of projects that had satisﬁed the need
for competence, autonomy and relatedness less.
NEGATIVE EMOTIONS AND LEARNING
Negative emotions have been found to DEMO with individuals’ ability to process
information (Mogg et al., 1990; DEMO and Matthews, 1994), which is necessary for
learning. This is DEMO to suggest that emotions do not have some learning beneﬁts – they
do. For example, negative emotions signal that something important is in jeopardy or
been lost (Luce et al., 1997), which can be DEMO by directing attention and resources
to the event (Clore, 1992; DEMO and Raaij, 1988; Schwarz and Clore, 1988). This
allocation DEMO attention is necessary for the scanning and information processing required
to learn (Cacioppo et al., 1999; Weick, 1979) and to motivate change (Lazarus, 1993).
However, as stated above, negative emotions can DEMO interfere with learning. Negative
emotions can narrow the scanning for information (DEMO and Reilly, 1985; Staw
et al., 1981; Sutton and D’Aunno, 1989) and interfere with the processing of that
information (Matthews et al., 1990). Negative emotions can also divert scarce informa-
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 931
tion processing capacity from the DEMO to the emotions generated by the event
(Nolen-Hoeksema and Morrow, 1991). The learning beneﬁts of negative emotions are
outweighed by its costs DEMO more complex tasks (Huber, 1985).
The desired beneﬁts of learning from project failure occur when the organizational
member compares the project’s performance (where it failed) with the original plans on
that dimension of the task to increase understanding of the nature of the performance
gap and DEMO the reason for the failure (McGrath, 1999, p. 23). DEMO often
involves repeating whatever strategies, routines, or practices have been successful in the
current, or other, organizations (e.g. vicarious learning; Kim DEMO Miner, 2007). Learning
can occur equally well (or better; DEMO, 1992) from studying failures, in particular,
because failures encourage DEMO search for new actions or new business models or routines
(Kim DEMO Miner, 2007; Miner et al., 1999). When learning after DEMO failure is
effective, it can provide the organization with information about DEMO assumptions
(about product favourability, strategic direction, etc) that can help them make better
decisions going forward (McGrath, 1999). Thus learning DEMO the context of project failure
involves understanding the causes of the failure, testing out key assumptions which
guided the project that failed to see if they are worthy of retaining or need to be altered,
DEMO developing capabilities to change the processes, strategies, procedures, or actions
DEMO led to the failure. More speciﬁcally, although project failure within organizations
DEMO valuable learning opportunities (Corbett et al., 2008; McGrath, 1999; DEMO,
1992), when these failures are emotionally painful they are less likely to be discussed and
learning from these experiences is compromised (McGrath, 1999; Shepherd, 2009;
Shepherd et al., 2009).
Just DEMO we expect variance in the level of an individual’s negative emotions gener-
ated across project failures and across team members for a particular project DEMO,
we also expect variance in the way individuals respond to that negative emotional
reaction. More speciﬁcally, the question is why some individuals are better able to
overcome the negative emotional interference to learning from the DEMO experience
than others. We explore learning from project failure by proposing that self-regulation
(speciﬁcally self-compassion) is a moderator to the relationship between the DEMO of
negative emotions experienced in reaction to a project failure and learning from the
experience. Based on the insights of social psychology and the DEMO on failure, we
investigate how various attributes of self-compassion can facilitate DEMO learning
from project failure.
SELF-COMPASSION DYNAMICS AND LEARNING FROM FAILURE
There is an extensive literature on how individuals respond to negative emotions,
including DEMO on emotion regulation, coping, and compassion. In general, emotional
regulation DEMO individuals’ attempts to inﬂuence which emotions they have, when
they have DEMO, and how they are experienced or expressed (Gross, 1998). DEMO
regulation may lead to better psychological health because it may decrease the stress of
what may otherwise cause a loss of psychological well-being (e.g. Frijda, 1988; Seligman,
1991).[3] Gross (1998) argued that DEMO are two primary forms of emotion regulation, one
focused on manipulating DEMO inputs to the emotional system, such as by preventing the
© DEMO Publishing Ltd 2009
932
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
triggering of the emotion DEMO diminishing the level of emotion triggered (antecedent-
focused emotion regulation), DEMO one focused on manipulating the outputs of the emo-
tional system, DEMO as by suppressing the emotional response tendencies once the
emotion has already been generated (response-focused emotion regulation). Antecedent
focused regulation can occur in many ways, such as through approaching or avoiding
certain situations based on their likely emotional impact, turning attention towards or
away from certain things to change the emotions one experiences, and cognitive change
where an individual re-evaluates either the situation or his or her capacity to manage the
DEMO (Gross, 1998). In the case of project failure, antecedent-focused DEMO regu-
lation could involve reappraising the failure to decrease its emotional relevance to the
individual, such as by convincing oneself the project did not provide competence,
relatedness, or autonomy.
Response-focused emotion regulation can also occur in many ways. Such regulation
does not change the subjective experience of DEMO emotion (in this case, a negative one),
but would DEMO what the individual does once they experience the negative emotion
from project failure. We anticipate that individuals experiencing negative emotions will
likely want to DEMO or curtail the experience of such emotions and the associated
expression of, and physiological responses to, them. They might do this through dis-
DEMO themselves from the negative emotion or by trying to ﬁnd another project that
satisﬁes their needs for competence, relatedness, and autonomy. While reappraisal DEMO
other forms of antecedent-focused emotion regulation are often preferable to response-
focused emotion regulation (Gross, 1998) because, for example, suppression of negative
emotions typically involves high levels of personal strain (Côté, 2005), DEMO is not always
possible to prevent oneself from experiencing the emotion. This is consistent with our
arguments above that projects that do thwart an DEMO needs for competence,
relatedness, and autonomy will generate greater negative DEMO reactions, because
the failure of the project has emotional relevance to DEMO individual.
A second literature that addresses how individuals respond to negative emotions is in
the area of compassion. Perceived social support from others is DEMO with positive
well-being of individuals, and organizations can be places where DEMO is given and
received (Kanov et al., 2004). Such compassion may range from empathetic listening to
others’ troubles (Frost, 2003), DEMO sympathy (Carlo et al., 1999; Struthers et al., 2004),DEMO
and to full-scale responses to unexpected traumatic events (Dutton et al., 2006). Com-
passion is largely viewed as a positive and inﬂuential DEMO in organizations (Kanov et al.,
2004). Interestingly, compassion in organizations has been studied at a variety of levels
of analysis, including individual compassion for others (Nussbaum, 1996), compassion as
a relational DEMO occurring through connections between people (Kanov et al., 2004),
DEMO how individuals come together in providing a coordinated compassionate response
at an organizational level of analysis (e.g. compassion organizing (Dutton et al., 2006)
and emotional capability (Huy, 1999)[4]). Across these levels, however, the deﬁnition and
components of compassion are fairly consistent. Compassion is an expression of an
innate human instinct to respond to the suffering DEMO others to alleviate that suffering,
where that suffering includes the experience of pain or loss that threatens a person’s sense
of meaning about DEMO own existence (Dutton et al., 2006; Reich, 1989). Thus in this
way compassion is a response to a threat to a DEMO self-meaning or psychological
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 933
well-being. In addition, compassion involves responding to another’s suffering, so
includes action, not just emotion (Dutton et al., 2006).
Just as compassion for others involves noticing, DEMO, and responding to another’s
suffering (Dutton et al., 2006), DEMO involves ‘self-awareness that one is
experiencing a sense of loss, determination DEMO the source of that loss feeling (in this case,
project DEMO), and intention to respond to the loss by doing something about it’. A
self-compassionate individual is touched by one’s own suffering generated from DEMO
failure, is aware of one’s own pain and desires to alleviate DEMO suffering by healing oneself
rather than avoiding or disconnecting from the source of the suffering (Neff, 2003a;
Wispe, 1991). With self-compassion the individual seeks to remain connected to orga-
nizational action. Self-compassion is DEMO different from compassion for others, in
that the relational process of DEMO (Kanov et al., 2004) occurs through the inter-
action and DEMO one has with oneself. We describe three dynamics involved with
self-compassion (DEMO, common humanity and mindfulness) and link them to (1)
DEMO intensity of the negative emotional reaction to project failure, and (2) the moderation
of the relationship between negative emotions and learning from failure.
Our approach makes a number of assumptions. First, self-compassion can be learned
and develops over time. There is empirical evidence to support this assumption (Neff,
2003b; Shapiro et al., 2005). Second, self-compassion represents a necessary (but not
sufﬁcient) condition for individuals to learn from DEMO failure. Finally, while we assume
that the disparate literature stream we DEMO to develop our model (Buddhist philosophy,
psychology, and education) DEMO relevant, we also build our argument in concert with
more conventional DEMO motivation and learning literatures by offering a
compassion-based, conceptual foundation for DEMO why learning from project
failure is so difﬁcult to realize and how such difﬁculties might be attenuated.
Self-Compassion, Negative Emotions, and Learning from DEMO Failure
Self-compassion involves being caring towards oneself in the face of hardship or per-
ceived inadequacy (Bennett-Goleman, 2001; Brach, 2003; Hanh, DEMO; Neff, 2004),
which, in the context of the current research, is in the face of project failure. It involves
being touched by one’s own suffering, being aware of one’s own pain and desiring to
alleviate one’s suffering by healing oneself rather than by avoiding or DEMO from
the source of suffering (adapted from Wispe (1991) consistent DEMO Neff (2003a)). In
demonstrating self-compassion, individuals are less anxious DEMO negative events and
are able to maintain increased psychological well-being (Neff, 2004).
Our focus is on the self-regulatory mechanisms that seek to DEMO or overcome
threats triggered by project failure and that enhance the ability to learn from failure. In
the model we propose that individuals that DEMO caring to oneself in assessing project
failure (self-kindness), place project DEMO in perspective with others (common humanity)
and keep emotions in DEMO (mindfulness), generate less of a negative emotional
reaction to project DEMO and are better able to use project failure as an opportunity to
learn. In the next sub-section we describe these exemplars of self-compassion that DEMO
individuals self-regulate their negative emotional reaction to project failure in a way that
is conducive to learning from the experience. Our purpose here is DEMO to offer an
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
934 D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
exhaustive list of mechanisms DEMO which individuals promote self-kindness, common
humanity and mindfulness, but to suggest that such mechanisms likely exist and are
important in explaining why some DEMO experience weaker negative emotional
reactions to project failure and why some individuals are better able to learn from the
failure experience.
Self-kindness, negative emotions, and learning from project failure. Self-kindness ‘refers to
extending caring and understanding to oneself rather than harsh judgment and self-
criticism (Neff, 2003a, p. 89) after project failure’. Self-kindness is demonstrated, in part,
DEMO an individual (a) tries to understand and be patient towards those aspects of oneself
that he or she does not like, (b) is caring to oneself when experiencing suffering from
project failure, (c) gives oneself the tenderness needed when going through the hard times
associated DEMO project failure, (d) tolerates one’s own ﬂaws and inadequacies that DEMO to
project failure, and (e) tries to be loving towards DEMO when feeling emotional pain over
project failure (cf. Neff, 2003b). Thus individuals with high levels of self-kindness who
experience project failure are DEMO likely to harshly criticize themselves for failing to meet
ideal standards for the project.
Self-kindness does not diminish the emotional importance of the project DEMO failed but
dissuades individuals from judging themselves as ‘bad’ based on its failure. With self-
kindness, individuals are less likely to harshly criticize the self for failing to meet ideal
standards (Neff, 2003a) which creates a buffer against anxiety when considering one’s
weaknesses (Neff et al., DEMO). Along with less anxiety, self-kindness helps prevent indi-
viduals from DEMO, which leads to an escalation of negative emotions (Nolen-
Hoeksema, DEMO). Therefore by being able to divorce project failure as an event from
evaluations of the self, a self-kind organizational member can reduce the level of negative
emotional reaction to project failure. Thus:
Proposition 2a: The more self-kind an organizational member, the weaker the negative
emotional reaction to a project’s failure.
Self-kindness relies on discriminating wisdom, which ‘clearly evaluates the positive
or negative quality of actions but does so with a DEMO understanding of the
complex, dynamic situational factors that impact these actions, so that particular per-
formances are not taken as indicators of self-worth’ (Neff et al., 2005, p. 264). This
does not mean DEMO such failings go unnoticed or are passively accepted. On the con-
trary, self-kindness helps remove barriers to learning from failure. It is when one
harshly judges oneself that the protective mechanisms of the ego are activated. DEMO
mechanisms screen inadequacies from self-awareness so that self-esteem is maintained
(Horney, 1950; Neff, 2003a; Reich, 1949) but obstruct learning. Self-kindness provides
the emotional safety net to allow greater self-awareness through a more objective DEMO
spective of the failure event. That is, it prevents individuals from DEMO carried away
by their subjective reactions (Neff, 2003a), perhaps leading to ruminations (Nolen-
Hoeksema, 1991), and exacerbating negative emotions further (Nolen-Hoeksema,
1991). These exacerbated negative emotions typically interfere with the DEMO
process (Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991; Shepherd, 2003), because when negative emotions
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 935
are the focus, individuals have less attention and information processing available for
learning from the failure event. DEMO addition, awareness of one’s mistakes and weak-
nesses is an important DEMO into the learning process, and self-kindness can enhance
this awareness. By DEMO able to assess project failure divorced from overall evaluations
of self-worth, DEMO self-compassionate individual has fewer obstacles to interfere in the
learning process. Thus:
Proposition 2b: Greater self-kindness will reduce the negative impact a negative emo-
tional reaction from project failure has on learning from the experience.
DEMO humanity and learning from project failure. Common humanity ‘refers to perceiving
one’s experiences as part of the larger human experience rather than seeing them DEMO
separating and isolating’ (Neff, 2003a, p. 85). That is, an organizational member per-
ceives his or her own failure experience in DEMO of the common human experience in an
organization, acknowledging that failures DEMO part of the innovative process and that all
people – oneself included – are worthy of compassion. This allows the individual to
remain interconnected DEMO equal with others (Brown, 1999) and thus more likely to
DEMO oneself forgiveness for mistakes that lead to project failure.
These mechanisms emphasizing commonality are unlikely to diminish the importance
of any one organizational project DEMO the employee, but rather when the project fails the
subsequent feelings DEMO put in a context. That is, by recognizing that the feelings DEMO
suffering from project failure are shared with other employees, individuals are DEMO critical
of themselves (Rubin, 1975) and more likely to forgive DEMO for their mistakes (Neff,
2003a). Project failure is therefore DEMO less as a challenge to one’s self-esteem. However,
for those with less common humanity, project failure is likely to be seen as more
threatening because the individual feels isolated and therefore experiences lower relat-
edness, and the associated diminished PWB. Threatening situations are perceived nega-
tively, causing stress and anxiety (e.g. Leary et al., 2001). Thus:
DEMO 3a: The greater the common humanity of an organizational member, the
weaker the negative emotional reaction to a project’s failure.
Greater common humanity DEMO also likely to impact one’s learning from failure, because
the recognition DEMO everyone experienced the loss generated by the failure may allow the
organizational member to also share in the necessary unbiased diagnosis of the cause DEMO
potential solutions for the project failure. By lessening the degree of blame on oneself,
individuals are less likely to engage ego defensive mechanisms DEMO as arbitrary exter-
nalized attributions of blame. Externalizing causes of blame are often effective in pro-
tecting self-esteem (e.g. Brockner and Guare, 1983) but provide little scope for learning
since there is little to learn DEMO one believes a failure is caused by factors entirely beyond
the individual’s control (e.g. Diener and Dweck, 1980). Instead, the experience of
common humanity may lead to a shared desire to determine the appropriate DEMO
for the failure. Certainly an organizational member could attribute project failures to a
variety of causes (e.g. oneself, management, the economy). However, true learning from
the failure event, in terms of trying to DEMO what actually went wrong and how to
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
936 D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
prevent similar problems from DEMO in the next project, requires a fair and honest
assessment of DEMO failure’s root causes. Leary et al. (2007) refer to this as impartial
attributions rather than self-attributions. Neff (2003a) argued that self-compassion should
DEMO just as effective in protecting organizational members’ PWB from negative events
regardless of whether the event was their fault. Leary et al. (2007) DEMO found that
self-compassion led to greater effort to be kind to oneself when negative events were
attributed to oneself, but that in general self-compassion provides beneﬁts regardless of
the attribution for blame.
Common humanity is partly DEMO by an organizational member when he or
she tries to remind themselves that feelings of inadequacy are shared by most people after
project failure, tries to see one’s failings as part of the human condition in DEMO organiza-
tional context, reminds oneself that there are lots of people DEMO this organization and other
organizations that feel down and out when a project fails, and that these are difﬁculties
that everyone goes through (DEMO from Neff, 2003b). Without this connection to
others, individuals can become isolated, reducing their informal learning of skills and
access to important information, as well as make them less able to exercise initiative
(DEMO and Gardner, 1982). An organizational member with greater common
humanity DEMO longer remains connected with the failure because he or she has forgiven
oneself for making the mistakes that lead to the failure (and has also forgiven others that
may be blamed for the failure), and DEMO forgiveness ameliorates the defensive mecha-
nisms that interfere with the learning process. Thus:
Proposition 3b: Greater common humanity will reduce the negative impact a negative
emotional reaction from project failure has on learning from the DEMO
Mindfulness and learning from project failure. Mindfulness refers to ‘holding painful
thoughts and feelings in balanced awareness rather than over-identifying with them’
(Neff, DEMO, p. 85).[5] It is demonstrated, in part, through an DEMO on balance and
avoidance of over-identiﬁcation. For example, a mindful organizational DEMO keeps
emotions from project failure in balance, approaches feelings about project DEMO with
curiosity and openness and takes a balanced view of the failure event by keeping things
in perspective (adapted from Neff, 2003b). DEMO members low in mindfulness
likely become heavily inﬂuenced by their own feelings (Neff, 2003a, p. 88). For example,
when focusing on a project failure, attention can shift from the event to the negative
emotions surrounding the event, escalating the negative emotional reaction (Nolen-
Hoeksema, 1991) to the project’s failure.
This is not to suggest that a mindful organizational member does not feel emotions
from project failure, rather these emotions are put in a larger context so that their
signiﬁcance is DEMO with greater perspective (Neff, 2003a, p. 89; Teasdale et al., 2000).
This larger context does not threaten self-esteem and therefore does not trigger the
erection of ego-protective barriers to learning. Mindfulness helps break DEMO cycle of
self-absorption and avoid ruminations and over-identiﬁcation. For example, Shapiro
DEMO al. (2005) found that an eight week mindfulness-based stress reduction intervention
was effective in increasing self-compassion and lowering stress in healthcare profession-
© DEMO Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 937
als. Mindfulness makes the negative DEMO of project failure less salient and therefore
minimizes the negative emotional reaction to it. Thus:
Proposition 4a: The more mindful an organizational member, the weaker the negative
emotional reaction to a project’s failure.
Rather than focusing on the painful thoughts and feelings surrounding project failure,
a DEMO organizational member does not link the project failure to his or her self-worth
and therefore is able to avoid severe judgments and criticisms of DEMO self to accept the
experience for what it is (a learning DEMO) and to bring it into conscious awareness
(Hayes et al., DEMO). Mindfulness allows the use of emotions to signal the importance of
the event as a learning opportunity (Lazarus, 1993; Weick, 1979) but not let the gen-
eration of negative emotions consume information processing DEMO (Matthews et al.,
1990; Wells and Matthews, 1994), DEMO the individual’s ability to learn from the
experience. Balancing emotions in such a way is an important aspect of self-regulation
and the central characteristic DEMO mindfulness. For example, managing negative emotions
from an event can be DEMO by oscillation between a loss orientation – a focus on
working through and processing some aspect of the failure event – and a restoration
DEMO – distracting oneself from thinking about the loss and attending to secondary
stressor caused by the failure (Shepherd, 2003; Stroebe and Schut, DEMO). Oscillation is
a mechanism by which organizational members can keep their negative emotions from
project failure in balance to enhance the learning process. DEMO vary in their ability
to regulate emotion (Tugade and Fredrickson, 2004), and some are better at using
emotion knowledge (mindfulness) to DEMO in times of stress (Barrett and Gross,
2001).
Mindfulness DEMO ruminations and over identiﬁcations in check to allow for greater
discernment in detecting valuable information about the failure event, and then inter-
preting and learning from that information. Mindfulness can be considered at one level
a DEMO of detachment similar to the open, non-judgmental stance taken in therapist–
DEMO interactions (Bohart, 1993; Neff, 2003a). But it is not detached from the process;
rather mindfulness involves detaching the evaluation of DEMO event from the evaluation of
the self. By detaching the event from oneself, fewer barriers to learning are erected. Thus:
Proposition 4b: DEMO mindfulness will reduce the negative impact a negative emo-
tional reaction from project failure has on learning from the experience.
DISCUSSION
The purpose of DEMO model was to offer an explanation for the intensity of the negative
emotional reaction to project failure and the ability to learn from the DEMO experience.
The intensity of the negative emotional reaction to project failure depends on the extent
that the satisfaction of the psychological needs of competence, autonomy and relatedness
are thwarted by the loss of project involvement. Further, we suggested that more intense
negative emotional reactions are likely to have DEMO detrimental effect on learning from
failure unless individuals are competent self-regulators, DEMO particular having high levels
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
938
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
of self-compassion, including self-kindness, common humanity, and mindfulness. We
believe that this model has a DEMO of important implications.
First, we believe that project failure is a DEMO of change not sufﬁciently represented by
the current emotion-focused change models. This literature has focused on organiza-
tional members’ resistance to, or behaviours as a result of, organizational change. For
example, Kiefer (2005) studied DEMO negative emotions generated by perceptions of an
ongoing organizational change – perceptions of an insecure future, of inadequate
working conditions, and of treatment DEMO the organization. The outcome variables were
trust in the organization and withdrawal from the organization. Similarly, Shapiro and
Kirkman (1999) investigated the emotional response to the implementation of self-
managing work teams (organizational change) DEMO resistance to change and turnover
intentions. Our study is consistent with the above in that we also investigate psychologi-
cal consequences of a change DEMO However, our focus on project failure represents a
unique form of DEMO change experienced by a member. It is unique in that the
change was introduced by the organizational member’s (and/or his or her team’s) poor
performance at the project task. The change was not top-down induced such as with the
introduction of self-managing work teams (Shapiro and Kirkman, 1999), merger (Cart-
wright and Cooper, 1993), and downsizing (Conlon and Shapiro, 2002). Emphasis is on
managing the process DEMO change to remove resistance and ensure commitment to (and
success of) the change effort. In this paper we focused on project failure where DEMO
organizational member was the ‘cause’ of the change, and thus a DEMO relevant
outcome is individual learning from the experience. That is, the DEMO to one project
failure (a change) impacts the likelihood of subsequent project failure (additional
changes). Further, because we are looking at DEMO failures that have personal signiﬁ-
cance, or where psychological ownership exists (Pierce et al., 2001), such events are more
likely to elicit emotional reactions, based on cognitive appraisal theories of emotion (e.g.
Lazarus, 1991). We hope that future research further explores the role of DEMO and
emotion regulation from member-induced change on non-motivational outcomes.
Second, our DEMO incorporates both hedonic and eudiamonic perspectives on well-
being, both of DEMO are essential for individuals to thrive at work (Spreitzer et al., 2005).
Hedonically, ‘people seek out pleasurable experiences’, and eudaimonically, ‘indi-
viduals seek to realize their full potential as human beings’ (Spreitzer et al., 2005). When
psychological well-being is decreased, such as from DEMO failure of a project from which
organizational members previously received eudemonic pleasure (such as from a feeling
of fulﬁlment at exercising one’s competence, DEMO, and relatedness), their hedonic
well-being or simple pleasure is also DEMO to suffer resulting in negative emotions. The
combined effect is that individuals are no longer capable of thriving at work since they
are likely DEMO cognitively and affectively engaged in their work (Spreitzer et al., 2005).
Although the negative implications of organizational members not thriving at work DEMO
already well understood (e.g. Danna and Grifﬁn, 1999; Spreitzer et DEMO, 2005; Wright and
Cropanzano, 1998), our model offers an DEMO for variability in organizational
members’ thriving at work after a project failure. Of particular interest to future research
is that it is perhaps the DEMO relationship that organizational members have with their
projects that promotes their thriving at work that also means that they will experience
more intense negative DEMO reaction when that project fails. Indeed, the notion of
© Blackwell DEMO Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 939
antecedent-focused emotion regulation (Gross, DEMO) suggests that emotional reactions
will be lessened when individuals deliberately distance DEMO from things, such as
work projects, that otherwise may evoke potentially negative emotions.
Third, and related to the previous point, our model DEMO the intensity of the negative
emotional reaction to project failure provides a way to further examine the concept of
disengagement at work (Kahn, DEMO), or how people uncouple themselves from work
roles which they may have previously internalized. During the process of personal
disengagement, organizational members physically, cognitively, and/or emotionally
withdraw themselves from a work role (Kahn, 1990), which can have major implications
for attitudes and behaviours within the workplace. For example, disengaged workers
may be apathetic or detached from their work (Goffman, 1961), performing only the
minimum requirements of DEMO jobs, or they may be impersonal or emotionally unex-
pressive with DEMO and customers (e.g. Rafaeli and Sutton, 1990). Individuals who
experience strong negative emotional reactions to project failure may purposefully dis-
engage in DEMO work roles in order to protect themselves from potential future experi-
ences of project failure (or perhaps only while recovering from negative emotional
reactions). Future research that explicitly examines how people are enlivened or dead-
DEMO during role performances at work (Kahn, 1990) following project failures DEMO yield
important insights into this process. Moreover, examination of how self-compassion DEMO
thwart dis-engagement and foster re-engagement in work roles seems promising, par-
DEMO in terms of how organizations can facilitate member’s re-engagement.
Fourth, we DEMO the relationship between self-compassion and learning from
project failure as a complement to existing work on psychological well-being and positive
organizational psychology. The positive DEMO between self-esteem and psychologi-
cal well-being is important because diminished psychological well-being has been associ-
ated with elevated health problems (Buttner, 1992; Ufuk and Özgen, 2001), psychological
problems ( Jamal, 1997; Jamal and Badawi, 1995) and work dissatisfaction (Buttner, 1992;
Jamal, 1997). However, self-regulation mechanisms for building and maintaining a high
self-esteem may not be an unambiguous blessing and have been associated with narcis-
sism, self-absorption and self-centredness (Damon, 1995; Ryan and Deci, 2001; Seligman,
1995). We complement self-esteem explanations with the notion of self-compassion
DEMO a self-regulation mechanism well suited for dealing with failure experiences. Self-
compassion reduces the need for individuals to engage ego-defensive mechanisms that on
the DEMO hand protect self-esteem but on the other hand obstruct learning.
Our focus on more positive constructs such as compassion, forgiveness, and psycho-
logical DEMO are consistent with the effort of the positive organizational psychology
movement to focus on positive rather than negative aspects of organizational life. In
particular, we contribute to the stream of research called positive organizational behav-
iours (POB), which looks at positive strengths and psychological capacities of individuals
DEMO can be measured, developed, and managed in the workplace (Luthans DEMO Youssef,
2004). Both POS and POB look at positive states of individuals at work, in contrast to
personality type variables more typically investigated in positive organizational psychol-
ogy (Luthans and Youssef, 2004). DEMO POS often uses an individual, group, or orga-
nizational level of analysis, to our knowledge this research has not yet explored an
intra-individual level of analysis. Our contribution is thus to look at such intra-individual
DEMO Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
940
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
variation of both how DEMO the negative emotional reaction to project failure is for
individuals, as DEMO as how well they are able to learn from such failure, DEMO it varies based
upon the particular project that has failed and the extent to which it is experienced as a
personally meaningful loss.
Finally, the model of negative emotional reactions from work-related failure has
implications for DEMO on individuals’ roles within entrepreneurial and innovative
organizations. Entrepreneurial and innovative organizations pursue high-variance
opportunities, and while this helps improve mean performance it also means that they
are likely to experience many project failures (McGrath, DEMO). While real options
reasoning provides a mechanism for managing the uncertainty of projects, our model
suggests that project failure will generate a negative emotional reaction for those involved
in the project (although a more intense reaction for some than others and more intense
for some projects that DEMO projects). Understanding the role of project failure on the
psychological and emotional well-being of organizational members is an important
complement to research on DEMO management of entrepreneurial and innovative organi-
zations. In addition, further investigations DEMO the role that self-compassion plays in
learning from project failure will likely have important implications for the effectiveness
of real options reasoning as an DEMO strategy.
Future Research
To empirically test the proposed model, future researchers DEMO rely on well established
measures for the satisfaction of needs for competence, autonomy and relatedness (for a
review, see Deci et al., DEMO). For example, an adaptation of Vlachopoulos and Michaili-
dou (2006) could include questions on the extent to which the failed project had satisﬁed
the need for: (1) competence like ‘I felt that I make a substantial contribution towards
progressing the project’ and ‘I felt that DEMO executed very effectively the project’s tasks’; (2)
autonomy like ‘I feel that the way that I work on the project is deﬁnitely DEMO expression
of myself’ and ‘I felt very strongly that I had the opportunity to make choices with respect
to how the project was undertaken’; and (3) relatedness like ‘I felt extremely comfortable
with the other DEMO of the project team’ and ‘I felt that there were open channels of
communication with the other team members’. There are also established measures DEMO
negative emotions (Barclay et al., 2005; Chen and Spector, 1991). Using a longitudinal
design, researchers could capture the intrinsic motivation of work (satisfaction of the
needs for competence, autonomy and relatedness) pre- and post-project emotions. This
gap could be used to explain variance in DEMO intensity of the negative emotional reaction
to project failure. Empirically explaining variance in the intensity of the negative emo-
tional reaction to project failure DEMO represent an important step towards a deeper
understanding of individual differences in learning from failure.
In addition, existing scales for self-compassion can be used to measure self kindness,
common humanity, and mindfulness (SCS) (DEMO, 2003b). Leary et al. (2007) have
suggested a number DEMO other important considerations in empirically examining self-
compassion, including how it DEMO from self-esteem, its relationship to attributions for
negative events, and how it impacts self-evaluation versus other evaluations of perfor-
mance. Longitudinal research could DEMO the dynamic process of how organizational
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 941
members cope with the negative DEMO generated by project failure over time, varying
not only in whether DEMO not they recover but to what extent and how long the process takes
them, and how these are inﬂuenced by the three aspects of self-compassion. Measures of
learning from project failure also need to be developed. DEMO example, learning could be
measured by the accuracy of attributions organizational DEMO make for the failure
(self-attributions versus impartial attributions; Leary et al., 2007). Of note is that learning
is not always immediate, DEMO longitudinal research should take into account varying time
lags in collecting such data.
Third, future research could explore how other contextual variables, such DEMO the
level of perceived organizational support (e.g. Rhoades and Eisenberger, 2002), super-
visory or unit-level support and control (e.g. Bacharach and Bamberger, 2007), pro-
cedural fairness (Thibaut and Walker, 1975), or even compassion organizing (Dutton
et al., 2006) at an organizational or unit level might inﬂuence individual self-
compassion and reaction and recovery following DEMO failure. We suspect that there
will likely be dynamic joint inﬂuences of both sets of variables on individual learning
following project failure.
Fourth, we have assumed that higher levels of self-compassion are always better than
lower DEMO of self-kindness, common humanity, and mindfulness. However, excessive
levels of DEMO of these may prove detrimental rather than beneﬁcial to one’s ability to
regulate negative emotional reactions and learn following project failures. For example,
DEMO much self-kindness may lead to complacency or laziness, where organizational
members DEMO not take action to prevent future mistakes because they more easily forgive
themselves for things they do wrong (Leary et al., 2007). DEMO common humanity
may lead to an inability to form an identity distinct from one’s work group, since
common humanity involves seeing oneself as part of a broader group that shares similar
experiences. A lack of a DEMO of distinctiveness can diminish psychological well-being
– distinctiveness and belonging need to be balanced (Brewer, 1991). Extreme mindful-
ness may lead to DEMO diminished emotional reaction to events that are indeed worthy of an
extreme reaction (or total focus and immersion in a particular emotional experience),DEMO
such as the demise of an entire organization (Shepherd, 2003). Prior research has
suggested that these are not likely problems from self-compassion, since it is associated
with proactive acceptance, growth, and confronting (rather than avoiding) current
negative outcomes (Leary et al., 2007). However, further research should consider the
potential for curvilinear rather than linear relationships between these aspects of self-
compassion and the experience of negative emotional DEMO to failure, as well as the
potential learning following failure.
Finally, in this paper we categorized negative emotions together (consistent with a
number of studies on emotions at work (Cox, 1997; Fisher, 2000; Huy, 2002). However,
discrete emotion theory (Scherer et al., 2001) proposes that when we combine a number
of different emotions we lose information about the distinctive role of each emotion
(Lazarus, 2003)DEMO Future research can investigate which negative emotions are generated
from different project failures. Perhaps those project failures that thwart the need for
competence generate DEMO negative emotions than those project failures that thwart
the need for autonomy. Future research, from a discrete emotion theory perspective, can
investigate the DEMO impact that different negative emotions have on learning from
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
942
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
failure. Perhaps self-compassion is DEMO effective at diminishing the negative impact of
anger on learning from failure but not on the relationship between anxiety and learning.
CONCLUSION
Organizations want DEMO who can learn and adapt to change. A key learning
opportunity arises when projects fail (McGrath, 1999; Shepherd, 2003) due to under-
performance of individuals or teams. We suggest that individuals are better equipped DEMO
learn following negative emotional reactions to project failure when they are able to
demonstrate self-compassion in the form of self-kindness, common humanity, and DEMO
fulness. Thus organizations should seek to encourage such behaviour and even provide
developmental opportunities where employees can learn such skills. Luthans and Youssef
(2004) suggest many ways in which individuals can develop their positive psychological
capital, including their resiliency subsequent to failure experiences. More broadly, orga-
nizations DEMO work to develop self-regulation and emotional coping skills in their employ-
ees (e.g. Gross, 1998; Kerr et al., 2006), so that DEMO potentially productive beneﬁts of
negative events, such as learning from project DEMO, can be realized. We encourage
additional work on the practical and DEMO issues related to failure, negative emo-
tional reactions, and self-compassion.
NOTES
[1] Projects can also be terminated for other reasons, such as having achieved their strategic objective.
Whether the project is terminated because of poor DEMO (failure) or for other strategic reasons,
both may generate a negative emotional reaction.
[2] Negative emotional reaction refers to the experience of DEMO emotion that is negatively valent such as loss,
frustration, stress, sadness, emptiness, dejection, or fear (Bartunek, 1993; Scherer et DEMO, 2001) following
a speciﬁc event, in this case the failure DEMO a work project. We follow the assumptions of appraisal theory
(Scherer DEMO al., 2001) that emotions are triggered by evaluations of events that cause speciﬁc reactions in
different people.
[3] Others have suggested, however, DEMO suppression of emotions such as through regulation may instead
increase physical health risks (e.g. Gross and Levenson, 2007).
[4] Huy’s (1999, DEMO 325) notion of emotional capability refers ‘to an organization’s ability to DEMO,
recognize, monitor, discriminate, and attend to its members’ emotions, and it is manifested in the
organization’s norms and routines related to DEMO (Schein, 1992)’. These feelings include empathy and
sympathy. While emotional capability is an organizational level construct and empathy and sympathy
are meso-level DEMO, our focus is at the individual level and we are not DEMO on understanding
the emotions of others that are suffering (empathy) or the emotions one feels in response to others’
suffering (sympathy), but on the compassion one shows oneself when experiencing the failure of an
DEMO project.
[5] Over-identifying with negative emotions can lead to ruminations.
REFERENCES
Amabile, T. M. (1982). ‘Social psychology of creativity: a consensual assessment technique’. Journal of
Personality And Social Psychology, 43, 997–1013.
Aquino, K. and Douglas, S. C. (2003). ‘Identity threat and antisocial behavior DEMO organizations: the
moderating effects of individual differences, aggressive modeling and hierarchical status’. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 90, 195.
Ashforth, B. E. (2001). Role Transitions in Organizational Life: An Identity-Based Perspective. DEMO, NJ: Erlbaum.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 943
Bacharach, S. B. and Bamberger, P. A. (2007). ‘9/11 and New York City ﬁreﬁghters’ DEMO hoc unit support
and control climates: a context theory of the DEMO of involvement in traumatic work-related
events’. Academy of Management Journal, 50, 849–68.
Bailyn, L. (1993). ‘Patterned chaos in human resource management’. DEMO Management Review, 34, 77–83.
Barclay, L. J., Skarlicki, D. DEMO and Pugh, S. D. (2005). ‘Exploring the role of emotions in injustice perceptions
and retaliation’. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 629–43.
DEMO, J. R. and Tomkins, P. K. (1994). ‘Identiﬁcation in DEMO self-managing organization: characteristics of
target and tenure’. Human Communication Research, 21, 223–40.
Barrett, F. L. and Gross, J. J. (2001). DEMO representation and regulation: a process model of emotional
intelligence’. In Mayne, T. and Bonnano, G. (Eds), Emotion: Current Issues and Future Directions. New York:
Guilford Press, 286–310.
Bartunek, J. M. (1993). ‘The multiple cognitions and conﬂicts associated with second order organizational
change’. DEMO Murnighan, J. K. (Ed.), Social Psychology in Organizations: Advances DEMO Theory and Research.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 322–49.
Bartunek, J. M., Rousseau, D. M., Rudolph, J. W. and DePalma, J. A. (2006). ‘On the receiving end:
sensemaking, emotion, and assessments of an organizational change initiated by others’. Journal of
Applied DEMO Science, 42, 182–206.
Baumeister, R. F. and Tice, D. M. (1990). ‘Anxiety and social exclusion’. Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology, 9, 165–95.
Belk, R. W. (1988). ‘Possessions and the DEMO self ’. Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 139–68.
Bennett-Goleman, T. (2001). Emotional Alchemy: How the Mind Can Heal the Heart. New York: Three Rivers Press.
Bennis, W. and Nanus, B. (1985)DEMO Leaders. New York: Harper and Row.
Bernstein, S. S. (2003)DEMO ‘Positive organizational scholarship: meet the movement. An interview with Kim
Cameron, Jane Dutton, and Robert Quinn’. Journal of Management Inquiry, 12, 266–71.
Blanchard, K. H., Carlos, J. P. and Randolph, W. A. (1995). The Empowerment Barometer and Action Plan.
Escondido, CA: Blanchard DEMO and Development.
Bohart, A. (1993). ‘Experiencing: the basis of DEMO Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 3, 51–67.
Brach, T. (2003). Radical Acceptance: Embracing Your Life with the Heart of a Buddha. New York: Bantam.
Brewer, M. B. (1991). ‘The social self: DEMO being the same and different at the same time’. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 17, 475–82.
Brockner, J. and Guare, J. (1983). ‘Improving the performance of low self-esteem individuals: an attribu-
tional approach’. Academy of Management Journal, 26, 642–56.
Brown, B. (1999). DEMO Without Shame: A Guide to Liberating Yourself from the Judge Within. DEMO, MA: Shambala.
Butler, R. (1992). ‘What young people want to know when: effects of mastery and ability goals on interest in
different kinds of social comparisons’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 934–43.
Buttner, E. H. (1992). ‘Entrepreneurial stress: is it DEMO to your health?’. Journal of Managerial Issues, 4,
223–40.
DEMO, J. T., Gardner, W. L. and Berntson, G. G. (DEMO). ‘The affect system has parallel and
integrative processing components: form DEMO function’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76,
839–55.
Carlo, G., Allen, J. B. and Buhman, D. C. (1999). DEMO and disinhibiting prosocial behaviors: the
nonlinear interaction of trait perspective taking DEMO trait personal distress on volunteering.’. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 21, 189–97.
Cartwright, S. and Cooper, C. L. (1993). ‘The psychological impact of merger and acquisition on the
individual: a study of building society managers’. Human Relations, 46, 327–47.
Caverley, N., Cunningham, J. B. and MacGregor, J. N. (2007). ‘Sickness presenteeism, sickness absenteeism,
and health following restructuring in a public service organization’. Journal of DEMO Studies, 44,
304–19.
Chen, P. Y. and Spector, P. DEMO (1991). ‘Negative affectivity as the underlying cause of correlations between
DEMO and strains’. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 398–407.
Clore, G. DEMO (1992). ‘Cognitive phenomenology: feelings and the construction of judgment’. In Martin, L. L.
and Tesser, A. (Eds), The Construction of Social Judgments. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 133–64.
Conlon, D. E. and DEMO, D. L. (2002). ‘Employee postings and company responses to downsizing
inquiries: implications for managing and reacting to organizational change’. Advances in Qualitative
Organization Research, 4, 39–67.
Corbett, A. C., Neck, H. M. and DeTienne, D. R. (2008). ‘How corporate entrepreneurs learn from DEMO
innovation initiatives: cognition and the development of a termination script’. Entrepreneurship: Theory and
Practice, 31, 829.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
944
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
Côté, S. (2005)DEMO ‘A social interaction model of the effects of emotion regulation on work strain’. Academy of
Management Review, 30, 509–30.
Cox, J. R. W. (1997). ‘Manufacturing the past: loss and absence in organizational change’. DEMO
Studies, 18, 623–54.
Craighead, W. E., Kimball, W. H. DEMO Rehak, P. J. (1979). ‘Mood changes, physiological responses, and
self-statements during social rejection imagery’. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 47, 385–96.
Cunningham, G. (2004). Five Cities Chosen to Compete for the 2012 Summer Olympics. www.citymayors.com/
sport/2012olympics_jan04 (accessed 1 January 2006).
Damon, W. (1995). Greater Expectations: Overcoming the Culture of Indulgence in America’s Homes and Schools.New
York: Free Press.
Danna, K. DEMO Grifﬁn, R. W. (1999). ‘Health and well-being in the work place: a review and synthesis of the
literature’. Journal of Management, DEMO, 357–84.
Deci, E. L. and Ryan, R. M. (2000). ‘The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: human needs and the
self-determination of behavior’. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 227–68.
Deci, E. L., Schwartz, A. J., Sheinman, L. and Ryan, R. M. (1981). DEMO instrument to assess adults’
orientations toward control versus autonomy with children: DEMO on intrinsic motivation and
perceived competence’. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73, 642–50.
Deci, E. L., Connell, J. P. and Ryan, R. DEMO (1989). ‘Self-determination in a work organization’. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 74, 580–90.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R. and Ryan, R. M. (1999). ‘A meta-analytic review of experiments examining the
effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation’. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 627–68.
Deeds, D. L. and DeCarolis, D. (2000). ‘Dynamic capabilities and new product DEMO in high
technology ventures: an empirical analysis of new biotechnology ﬁrms’. DEMO of Business Venturing, 15,
211–29.
DeLongis, A., Folkman, S. and Lazarus, R. S. (1988). ‘The impact of daily stress DEMO health and
mood: psychological and social resources as mediators’. Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 54,
486–9.
Diener, C. I. and Dweck, C. S. (1980). ‘An analysis of learned helplessness: II. The processing of success’.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 940–52.
DEMO, P. (1998). Failure is Just Part of the Culture of Innovation: Accept It and Become Stronger. Available at:
http://www.fastcompany.com/online/20/yu.html (accessed 1 January 2007).
Dillon, R. L., Paté-Cornell, M. E. and Guikema, S. D. (2003). ‘Programmatic risk analysis for critical
engineering systems under tight resource constraints’. Operations Research, 51, 354–70.
Dirks, K. T., Cummings, L. L. and Pierce, J. L. (1996). ‘Psychological ownership in organizations: conditions
under which individuals DEMO and resist change’. In Woodman, W. W. and Pasmore, W. A. (Eds),
Research in Organizational Change and Development. Greenwich, CT: DEMO Press, 9, 1–23.
Disterer, G. (2002). ‘Management of project knowledge and experiences’. Journal of Knowledge Management, 6,
512–20.
Dittmar, DEMO (1992). The Social Psychology of Material Possessions: To Have it to Be. New York: St Martin Press.
Dutton, J. E. and DEMO, S. (2009). ‘Positive organizational scholarship’. In Lopez, S. and DEMO,
A. (Eds), Encyclopedia of Positive Psychology. Hoboken, NJ: DEMO, in press.
Dutton, J. E., Worline, M. C., Frost, P. J. and Lilius, J. M. (2006). ‘Explaining compassion organizing’.
DEMO Science Quarterly, 51, 59–96.
Dweck, C. S. (1986). ‘Motivational processes affecting learning’. American Psychologist, 41, 1040–8.
Eggen, D. and Witte, G. (2006). ‘The FBI’s upgrade that wasn’t’. Washington Post, 18 August, A01.
Fisher, C. D. (1978). ‘The effects of personal control, competence, and extrinsic reward systems on intrinsic
motivation’. Organizational Behavior DEMO Human Performance, 21, 273–88.
Fisher, C. D. (2000). ‘Mood and emotions while working: missing pieces of job satisfaction?’. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 21, 185–202.
Frijda, N. H. (1988). ‘The DEMO of emotion’. American Psychologist, 43, 349–58.
Frost, P. (2003). Toxic Emotions at Work. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Garvin, D. A. (1993). ‘Building a learning organization’. Harvard Business Review, DEMO, 78–91.
Gassmann, O. and Reepmeyer, G. (2005). ‘Organizing pharmaceutical innovation: from science-based
knowledge creators to drug-oriented knowledge brokers’. Creativity and Innovation Management, 14, 233–45.
George, J. M. and Jones, G. R. (2001). ‘Towards a process model of individual change in organizations’.
Human DEMO, 54, 419–44.
Gilbreath, B. and Benson, P. G. (2004)DEMO ‘The contribution of supervisor behaviour to employee psychological
well-being’. Work and Stress, 18, 255–66.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 945
Gist, M. E. (1987)DEMO ‘Self-efﬁcacy: implications for organizational behavior and human resource manage-
ment’. Academy DEMO Management Review, 12, 472–85.
Gladstein, D. L. and Reilly, N. P. (1985). ‘Group decision making under threat: the tycoon game’. DEMO
of Management Journal, 28, 613–27.
Goffman, E. (1961). Encounters: Two Studies in the Sociology of Interaction. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Gross, J. J. (1998). ‘Antecedent- and response-focused emotion regulation: divergent consequences for
DEMO, expression, and physiology’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 224–37.
Gross, J. J. and Levenson, R. W. (2007). ‘Emotional suppression: physiology, self-report, and expressive
behavior’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 970–86.
Hackman, J. R. and Oldham, G. R. (1980). Work Redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Hammad, A. (2003)DEMO ‘Knowledge levels and their transformation: towards the integration of knowledge
creation DEMO individual learning’. Journal of Management Studies, 40, 1997–2021.
Hanh, T. DEMO (1997). Teachings on Love. Berkeley, CA: Parallax Press.
Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., Gifford, E. V., Follette, DEMO M. and Strosahl, K. (1996). ‘Experiential avoidance
and behavioral disorders: a functional dimensional approach to diagnosis and treatment’. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 1152–68.
Hill, P. (1988). ‘The market DEMO contribution to new product failure and success’. Journal of Marketing
Management, DEMO, 269–77.
Horney, K. (1950). Neurosis and Human Growth: The Struggle Toward Self-realization. New York: Norton.
Huber, V. L. (1985). ‘Effects of task difﬁculty, goal setting and strategy on performance of a heuristic task’.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 492–504.
Huy, Q. N. (1999). ‘Emotional capability, emotional intelligence, and radical change’. Academy of Management
Review, 24, 325–45.
Huy, Q. N. (2002). ‘Emotional DEMO of organizational continuity and radical change: the contribution
of middle managers’. DEMO Science Quarterly, 47, 31–69.
Iacovoc, C. L. and Dexter, A. S. (2005). ‘Surviving IY project cancellations’. Communications of the ACM, DEMO,
83–6.
Jamal, M. (1997). ‘Job stress, satisfaction, and mental health: an empirical examination of self-employed and
non-self-employed Canadians’. Journal of Small Business Management, 35, 48–57.
Jamal, M. and Badawi, J. DEMO (1995). ‘Job stress and quality of working life of self-employed DEMO: a
study in workforce diversity’. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 12, 55–63.
Kahn, W. A. (1990). ‘Psychological conditions of personal engagement and disengagement at work’. Academy
of Management Journal, 33, 692–724.
DEMO, J. M., Maitlis, S., Worline, M. C., Dutton, DEMO E., Frost, P. J. and Lilius, J. M. (2004). ‘Compassion
in organizational life’. The American Behavioral Scientist, 47, 808–27.
Keil, M. and Robey, D. (1999). ‘Turning around troubled software projects: an exploratory study of the
deescalation of commitment to failing courses of DEMO Journal of Management Information Systems, 15,
63–87.
Kerr, R., DEMO, J., Heaton, N. and Boyle, E. (2006). ‘Emotional DEMO and leadership effectiveness’.
Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 27, 265–79.
Kiefer, T. (2005). ‘Feeling bad: antecedents and consequences of negative emotions in ongoing change’.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26, 875–97.
Kim, J.-Y. and Miner, A. S. (2007). ‘Vicarious learning from the failures DEMO near-failures of others: evidence
from the U.S. commercial banking industry’. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 50, 687–714.
Kotter, J. and Schlesinger, L. (DEMO). ‘Choosing strategic for change’. Harvard Business Review, 57, 106–14.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). ‘Progress on a cognitive-motivational-relational theory of emotion’. DEMO Psycholo-
gist, 46, 819–34.
Lazarus, R. S. (1993). ‘From psychological stress to the emotions: a history of a changing outlook’. Annual
Review of Psychology, 44, 1–21.
Lazarus, R. S. (2003). DEMO the positive psychology movement have legs?’. Psychological Inquiry, 14,
DEMO
Leary, M. R. (1990). ‘Responses to social exclusion: social DEMO, jealousy, loneliness, depression, and low
self-esteem’. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 9, 221–9.
Leary, M. R., Koch, E. and Hechenbleikner, N. (2001). ‘Emotional responses to interpersonal rejection’. In
Leary, M. R. (Ed.), Interpersonal Rejection. New York: Oxford University Press, 145–66.
Leary, M. R., Tate, E. B., Allen, A. B., Adams, C. E. and Hancock, J. (2007). ‘Self-compassion and DEMO
to unpleasant self-relevant events: the implications of treating oneself kindly’. Journal DEMO Personality and
Social Psychology, 92, 887–904.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
946
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
Lerner, J. S. and Keltner, D. (2001). ‘Fear, anger and risk’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81,
146–59.
Li, J. (1995). ‘Foreign entry and survival: effects of strategic choices on performance in international
markets’. Strategic Management Journal, 16, 333–51.
Liden, R. C. and Tewksbury, DEMO W. (1995). ‘Empowerment and work teams’. In Ferris, G. R., Rosen, S. D.
and Barnum, D. T. (Eds), Handbook DEMO Human Resources Management. Oxford: Blackwell, 386–403.
Lindsley, D. H., Brass, D. J. and Thomas, J. B. (1995). ‘Efﬁcacy-performance spirals: DEMO multilevel perspec-
tive’. Academy of Management Review, 20, 645–78.
Logan, DEMO S. and Ganster, D. C. (2007). ‘The effects of empowerment on attitudes and performance: the
role of social support and empowerment beliefs’. Journal of Management Studies, 44, 1523–50.
Lok, P., Hung, R. Y., Walsh, P., Wang, P. and Crawford, J. (2005)DEMO ‘An integrative framework for measuring
the extent to which organizational variables inﬂuence the success of process improvement pro-
grammes’. Journal of Management Studies, 42, 1357–81.
Luce, M. F., Bettman, J. R. and Payne, J. W. (1997). ‘Choice processing in emotionally difﬁcult decisions’.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 23, 384–405.
Luthans, F. and DEMO, C. M. (2004). ‘Human, social, and now positive psychological capital: investing in
people for competitive advantage’. Organizational Dynamics, 33, 1–22.
Marris, P. (1986). Loss and Change. London: Routledge.
Martinko, DEMO J. and Gardner, W. L. (1982). ‘Learned helplessness: an DEMO explanation for performance
deﬁcits’. Academy of Management Review, 7, 195–204.
Matthews, A., May, J., Mogg, K. and Eysenck, M. W. (1990). ‘Attentional bias in anxiety: selective search
or defective altering?’. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 99, 166–73.
McAdams, D. P. (1985)DEMO Power, Intimacy, and the Life Story: Personological Inquiries into Identity. DEMO, IL:
Dorsey.
McAdams, D. P. and Bryant, F. B. (1987). ‘Intimacy motivation and subjective mental health in a nationwide
sample’. DEMO of Personality, 55, 395–413.
McGrath, R. G. (1999). ‘Falling forward: real options reasoning and entrepreneurial failure’. Academy of
Management Review, DEMO, 13–30.
McGrath, R. G., Keil, T. and Tukiainen, T. (2006). ‘Extracting value fro corporate venturing’. MIT Sloan
Management Review, 48, 50–6.
McGraw, K. O. and McCullers, J. C. (1979). DEMO of a detrimental effect of extrinsic incentives on
breaking a mental set’. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 15, 285–94.
McMullen, J. S. and Shepherd, D. A. (2006). ‘Encouraging consensus-challenging research in universities’.
Journal DEMO Management Studies, 43, 1643–69.
Miner, A. S., Kim, Y.-Y., Holzinger, I. and Haunschild, P. R. (1999). ‘Fruits of failure: organizational failure
and population level learning’. In Miner, A. S. and DEMO, P. (Eds), Advances in Strategic Management:
Population Level Learning and Industry Change. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 16, 187–200.
Mogg, K., Mathews, A., Bird, C. and MacGregor-Morris, R. (1990)DEMO ‘Effects of stress and anxiety on the
processing of threat stimuli’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1230–7.
Murray, M. (2006)DEMO ‘Is it time to kill the project’. IT Manager’s Journal. Available at: http://www.
itmanagersjournal.com/feature/12315 (accessed 1 January 2006).
DEMO, K. D. (2003a). ‘Self-compassion: an alternative conceptualization of a DEMO attitude toward oneself ’.
Self and Identity, 2, 85–102.
Neff, DEMO D. (2003b). ‘The development and validation of a scale to DEMO self-compassion’. Self and Identity,
2, 223–50.
Neff, K. D. (DEMO). ‘Self-compassion and psychological well-being’. Constructivism in the Human Sciences, 9, 27–37.
Neff, K. D., Hsieh, Y. and Dejitthirat, K. (2005). ‘Self-compassion, achievement goals, and coping with
academic failure’. Self and DEMO, 4, 263–87.
Neff, K. D., Kirkpatrick, K. and Rude, S. S. (2007). ‘Self-compassion and its link to adaptive psychological
functioning’. Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 139–54.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991)DEMO ‘Responses to depression and their effects on the duration of depressive
episodes’. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 569–82.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. and Morrow, DEMO (1991). ‘A prospective study of depression a distress following natural
DEMO: the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 105–21.
Nussbaum, M. C. (1996). ‘Compassion: the basic DEMO emotion’. Social Philosophy and Policy, 13, 27–58.
Nygren, T. E., Isen, A. M., Taylor, P. J. and Dulin, J. (1996). ‘The inﬂuence of positive affect on the decision
rule in risk DEMO: focus on outcome (and especially avoidance of loss) rather than DEMO
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 66, 59–72.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 947
O’Driscoll, M. P., Pierce, J. L. and Coghlan, A. M. (2006). ‘The psychology of DEMO Group and
Organization Management, 31, 388–416.
Patrick, H., Canevello, DEMO, Knee, C. R. and Lonsbary, C. (2007). ‘The role of need fulﬁllment in relationship
functioning and well-being: a self-determination theory perspective’. Journal of Personality & Social
Psychology, 92, 434–57.
Patterson, J. M. and Cary, J. (2002). ‘Organization justice, change anxiety, and DEMO of downsizing:
preliminary tests of an AET-based model’. Motivation and Emotion, 26, 83–103.
Pieters, R. G. M. and van Raaij, W. DEMO (1988). ‘The role of affect in economic behavior’. In van DEMO,
W. F., van Veldhoven, G. M. and Warneryd, K. DEMO (Eds), The Handbook of Economic Psychology. London:
Kluwer Academic DEMO, 108–44.
Pierce, J. L., Kostova, T. and Kirks, K. DEMO (2001). ‘Toward a theory of psychological ownership in
organizations’. Academy DEMO Management Review, 26, 298–310.
Purasuraman, S. and Alutto, J. A. (1984). ‘Sources and outcomes of stress in organizational settings: toward
DEMO development of a structural model’. Academy of Management Journal, 27, 330–50.
Rafaeli, A. and Sutton, R. I. (1990). ‘Busy stores and demanding customers: how do they affect the display
of positive emotion?’. Academy of Management Journal, 33, 623–37.
Rawsthorne, L. J. and Elliot, A. J. (1999). ‘Achievement goals and intrinsic motivation: a meta-analytic
review’. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3, 326–44.
Reich, W. (DEMO). Character Analysis. New York: Orgone Institute Press.
Reich, W. T. (1989). ‘Speaking of suffering: a moral account of compassion’. Soundings, 72, 83–108.
Rhoades, L. and Eisenberger, R. (2002). ‘Perceived DEMO support: a review of the literature’. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 87, 698–714.
Richter, A. W., West, M., van Dick, R. DEMO Dawson, J. F. (2006). ‘Boundary spanners’ identiﬁcation,
intergroup contact and effective intergroup relations’. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 1252.
Rothaermel, F. T. and Deeds, D. L. (2004). ‘Exploration and exploitation DEMO in biotechnology: a
system of new product development’. Strategic Management Journal, 25, 201–21.
Rubin, T. I. (1975). Compassion and Self-Hate: DEMO Alternative to Despair. New York: D. McKay.
Russell, D., Cutrona, C. E., Rose, J. and Yurko, K. (1984). ‘Social DEMO emotional loneliness: an examination
of Weiss’s typology of loneliness’. Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 46, 1313–21.
Ryan, R. M. and Deci, E. L. (2000). ‘Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation,
social development, and well-being’. American Psychologist, 55, 68–78.
Ryan, DEMO M. and Deci, E. L. (2001). ‘On happiness and human potential: a review of research on hedonic
and eudaimonic well-being’. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 141–66.
Ryan, R. M. and La Guardia, DEMO G. (2000). ‘What is being optimized over development? A self-determination
theory perspective on basic psychological needs across the life span’. In Quails, S. and Abeles, R.
(Eds), Dialogues on Psychology and Aging. DEMO, DC: American Psychological Association,
145–72.
Ryan, R. M., Stiller, J. and Lynch, J. H. (1994). ‘Representations of relationships to teachers, parents, and
friends as predictors of academic motivation and self-esteem’. DEMO of Early Adolescence, 14, 226–49.
Ryff, C. D. (1989). ‘Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on the meaning of DEMO
well-being’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 1069–81.
Schein, DEMO H. (1992). Organizational Culture and Leadership. San Francisco, CA: DEMO
Scherer, K. R., Schorr, A. and Johnstone, T. (2001)DEMO Appraisal Processes in Emotion: Theory, Methods, Research.
New York: Free Press.
Schwarz, N. and Clore, G. L. (1988). ‘How do I feel about it? The informative function of affective
states’. In Fiedler, K. and Forgas, J. P. (Eds), Affect, Cognition, and Social Behaviors. Gottigen: Hogrefe,
44–62.
Schweiger, D. M. and DeNisi, A. S. (1991). ‘Communication with employees following a merger: a
DEMO ﬁeld experiment’. Academy of Management Journal, 31, 110–35.
Seibert, S. DEMO, Silver, S. R. and Randolph, W. A. (2004). ‘Taking empowerment to the next level: a
multiple-level model of empowerment, performance, and satisfaction’. Academy of Management Journal,
47, 332–49.
Seligman, M. DEMO (1991). Learned Optimism. New York: Knopf.
Seligman, M. E. (1995). The Optimistic Child. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin Co.
Seo, M., Barrett, L. F. and Bartunek, J. M. (2004). DEMO role of affective experience in work motivation’.
Academy of Management Review, DEMO, 423–39.
Sethi, R. and Iqbal, Z. (2008). ‘Stage-gate controls, learning failure, and adverse effect on novel new
products’. Journal of DEMO, 72, 118–34.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009
948
D. A. Shepherd and M. S. Cardon
Sethi, R., Smith, D. C. and Park, C. W. (2001). ‘Cross-functional product development DEMO, creativity, and
the innovativeness of new consumer products’. Journal of Marketing Research, 38, 73–85.
Shapiro, D. L. and Kirkman, B. L. (1999). ‘Employees’ reaction to the change to work teams’. Journal of
DEMO Change Management, 12, 51–67.
Shapiro, S. L., Astin, J. DEMO, Bishop, S. R. and Cordova, M. (2005). ‘Mindfulness-based stress reduction for
health care professionals: results from a randomized trial’. International Journal of Stress Management, 12,
164–76.
Sheldon, K. M., Ryan, DEMO M. and Reis, H. T. (1996). ‘What makes for a good day? Competence and
autonomy in the day and in the person’. Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin, 22, 1270–9.
Shepherd, D. A. (DEMO). ‘Learning from business failure: propositions about the grief recovery process DEMO the
self-employed’. Academy of Management Review, 28, 318–29.
Shepherd, D. DEMO (2009). ‘Grief recovery from family business failure: a multi- and meso-level theory’. Journal
of Business Venturing, 24, 81–97.
Shepherd, D. A., Covin, J. and Kuratko, D. (2009). ‘Corporate failure from DEMO: managing the
grief process. Journal of Business Venturing, in press.
Sitkin, S. B. (Ed.) (1992). Learning through Failure: The Strategy of Small Losses. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Sminia, H. (2003)DEMO ‘The failure of the Sport7 TV-channel: controversies in a business network’. DEMO of
Management Studies, 40, 1621–49.
Spreitzer, G., Sutcliffe, K., Dutton, J., Sonenshein, S. and Grant, A. M. (2005). ‘A socially embedded model
of thriving at work’. Organization Science, 16, DEMO
Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E. and Dutton, J. E. (1981). ‘Threat-rigidity effects in organizational behavior:
a multilevel analysis’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26, 501–24.
Steele, C. M. (1988). ‘The DEMO of self-afﬁrmation: sustaining the integrity of the self ’. Advances in
DEMO Psychology, 21, 261–302.
Stroebe, M. S. and Schut, H. (DEMO). ‘The dual process of coping with bereavement: rationale and
description’. DEMO Studies, 23, 197–224.
Struthers, C. W., Eaton, J., Ratajczak, A. and Perunovic, M. (2004). ‘Social conduct toward organizations’.
Basic & Applied Social Psychology, 26, 277–88.
Sutcliffe, K. M. and Vogus, T. J. (2003). ‘Organizing for resilience’. In Cameron, K. S., Dutton, J. E. and
Quinn, R. E. (Eds), Positive DEMO Scholarship: Foundations of a New Discipline. San Francisco, CA:
Berrett-Koehler, 94–110.
Sutton, R. I. and D’Aunno, T. (1989). ‘Decreasing DEMO size: untangling the effects of money and
people’. Academy of Management DEMO, 14, 194–212.
Tajfel, H. and Turner, J. C. (1979)DEMO ‘An integrative theory of intergroup conﬂict’. In Austin, W. and
Worchel, S. (Eds), The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Paciﬁc Grove, DEMO: Brooks/Cole, 33–48.
Tajfel, H. and Turner, J. C. (DEMO). ‘The social identity theory of intergroup behavior’. In Worchel, S. DEMO
Austin, W. (Eds), Psychology of intergroup relations, 2nd edition. DEMO, IL: Nelson-Hall, 7–24.
Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M., Ridgeway, V. A., Soulsby, J. M. DEMO Lau, M. A. (2000).
‘Prevention of relapse-recurrence in major depression by mindfulness-based cognitive therapy’. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, DEMO
Thibaut, J. W. and Walker, L. (1975). Procedural Justice: A Psychological Analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Thompson, C. A. and Prottas, D. J. (2006). ‘Relationships among organizational family support, job
autonomy, perceived control, and employee well-being’. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 11,
100–18.
Tjosvold, D., Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T. and Sun, H. (2003). ‘Can interpersonal competition be
constructive DEMO organizations?’. Journal of Psychology, 137, 63–84.
Tugade, M. M. DEMO Fredrickson, B. L. (2004). ‘Resilient individuals use positive emotions to bounce back
from negative emotional experiences’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 320–33.
Ufuk, H. and Özgen, O. (2001). ‘Interaction DEMO the business and family lives of women entrepreneurs
in Turkey’. Journal of Business Ethics, 31, 95–106.
Vallerand, R. J. and Reid, G. (1984). ‘On the causal effects of perceived competence on intrinsic motivation:DEMO
a test of cognitive evaluation theory’. Journal of Sport Psychology, 6, 94–102.
Vince, R. and Broussine, M. (1996). ‘Paradox, defense DEMO attachment: accessing and working with
emotions and relations underlying organizational change’. DEMO Studies, 17, 1–21.
Vlachopoulos, S. P. and Michailidou, S. (DEMO). ‘Development and initial validation of a measure of
autonomy, competence, and relatedness in exercise: the basic psychological needs in exercise scale’.
Measurement in Physical Education and Exercise Science, 10, 179–201.
© Blackwell Publishing DEMO 2009
Negative Emotional Reactions to Project Failure 949
Weick, K. E. (1979)DEMO ‘Cognitive processes in organization’. Research in Organizational Behavior, 1, 41–74.
Weiss, H. M. and Cropanzano, R. (1996). ‘Affective events theory: DEMO theoretical discussion of the structure,
causes and consequences of affective experiences at work’. Research in Organizational Behavior, 18, 1–73.
Wells, A. and Matthews, G. (1994). Attention and Emotion: A Clinical Perspective. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
White, S. (2005). ‘Cooperation costs, governance DEMO and alliance evolution’. Journal of Management Studies,
42, 1383–412.
Wispe, L. (1991). The Psychology of Sympathy. New York: Plenum.
Wright, T. A. and Cropanzano, R. (1998). ‘Emotional exhaustion as a DEMO of job performance and
voluntary turnover’. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 486–93.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2009{1g42fwefx}