European Journal of Operational Research 163 (2005) 545–564
www.elsevier.com/locate/dsw
DEMO Applications
Allocation of attention within venture capital ﬁrms
Dean A. Shepherd a,*, Michael J. Armstrong b, Moren Levesque c,1
a Leeds DEMO of Business, University of Colorado at Boulder, Campus Box 419, DEMO, CO 80309-0419, USA
b Sprott School of Business, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1S 5B6
c Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106-7235, USA
Received 6 May 2002; accepted 5 November 2003
Available online 28 January 2004
Abstract
In this article we use a simple queuing network to model the process through DEMO entrepreneurs receive venture
capital funding. Our model focuses in particular on the allocation of venture capitalists attention between pre- and
post-investmentactivities,andonthedegreeofselectivityindecidingwhichventurestofund.Baseduponthismodelwe
develop expressions DEMO the ﬁnancial performance of the venture capital process, both overall and DEMO from the per-
spectives of the entrepreneurs, investors, managers, and DEMO capitalists involved. For these ﬁnancial measures we
derive the optimal allocation of attention between pre- and post-investment activities, and the optimal proportion of
venture proposals to accept. Further analysis shows how these diﬀerent ﬁnancial measures and DEMO values respond
to changes in the business climate. More interestingly, our DEMO also shows where and to what extent the diﬀerent
parties could be expected to agree or disagree on how best to manage the process.
DEMO 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Human resources; Venture capital; Productivity; Allocation decision
1. Introduction
Cooperative relationships between venture capitalists (VCs) and entrepreneurs are necessary for the
success of VC backed companies (DEMO and Korsgaard, 1996; Steier and Greenwood, 1995; Cable and
Shane, 1997). Timmons and Bygrave (1986) propose that the cooperative relationship between a VC and
entrepreneur is more important to the success of DEMO business than the capital itself. While it appears that
co-operation provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts, it does not characterise all VC–entrepreneur relationships
(Sahlman,1990).ThereisadegreeofuncertaintythattheVCwillpursuehisorherownselfinterestsrather
DEMO comply with the requirements of the contract for venture capital, i.e., VCs face agency risk (adapted
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-303-7355423; fax: +1-303-4925962.
E-mail addresses: dean.shepherd@colorado.edu (D.A. Shepherd), michael_armstrong@carleton.ca (M.J. Armstrong), moren.lev-
esque@cwru.edu (M. Levesque).
1 Tel.: +1-216-368-2117; fax: +1-216-368-4785.
0377-2217/$ - see front matter  2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights DEMO
doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2003.11.006
546
D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
from Fiet (1995)). This agency perspective oﬀers a description of the risks a principal (the VC) faces when
dealing with an agent (the entrepreneur) and actions that the VC can take to ‘‘force’’ the entrepreneur to
co-operate. DEMO example, the VC can introduce penalties for defection including a dilution DEMO the entre-
preneur s equity in the venture (Sahlman, 1990), replacement of the entrepreneur with professional man-
agement (Barney et al., DEMO; Hoﬀman and Blakely, 1987) and through compensation structures (Sahlman,
1990).
Therehasbeenlessresearch,however,abouttheincentivesforVCstopursueopportunisticbehaviourat
the expense of co-operation (and at the expense of the entrepreneur). In this case the VC can be DEMO
the agent and the entrepreneur the principal (Cable and Shane, 1997). For example, VCs may act
opportunistically to harvest a venture (DEMO obtain their proﬁts) rather than reinvest in the ventures future
products DEMO development (Sahlman, 1990), they may pressure the entrepreneur to seek short-term proﬁts
(Gomez-Mejiaetal.,1990)eventothedetrimentoflong-termproﬁtabilityand/ortheVCsmayunderinvest
in the venture (Cable and DEMO, 1997; Gorman and Sahlman, 1989; Bygrave and Timmons, 1991)DEMO For
another example, VCs often face situations where they are ﬂooded DEMO entrepreneurs requests for
ﬁnancing (in the form of lengthy business plans) and simultaneously need to assist current portfolio ven-
tures in improving performance. DEMO more active VCs spend 35 hours per month per venture assisting the
management team, while less active ﬁrms spend less than 7 hours per month per investment (Elango et al.,
1995).
Therefore, it DEMO that VCs may opportunistically manage the venture capital process in a way that
advantages them and disadvantages the entrepreneur. Furthermore, entrepreneurs are not the only
stakeholders of the venture capital process and the way that it DEMO managed likely impacts the desirability of
the outcome for these other stakeholder groups. For example, scholars have relatively ignored the rela-
tionship between VC ﬁrms and their funds providers (Robbie et al., 1997).
Theimportantquestionishowshouldtime,DEMO/orresourceswithintheVCﬁrmbeallocated?The
optimal allocation likely depends on the perspective taken. What is optimal for the VC might not be
optimal for the entrepreneur or DEMO limited partners supplying the fund s capital to the VC. Therefore,
rather than focus on the control mechanisms that a VC can use DEMO ensure the entrepreneur acts in a co-
operative manner, this paper DEMO the way the VC process is managed and its impact on the
desirability of the outcome, as perceived by the diﬀerent stakeholder groups.
The above discussion leads to this paper s two key research questions. What DEMO the allocation of a VC
ﬁrms attention (time, talent, and DEMO) between pre-investment activities and post-investment activities
that is considered optimal across DEMO stakeholders? How and under what conditions is the allocation of
attentionthatisoptimalfortheprocessoverall(DEMO)diﬀerentfromwhatmight
be preferred by the various stakeholders (entrepreneurs, investors, managers DEMO employees)? We inves-
tigate these important questions by using a queuing network model. A queuing network is a system of
queues (waiting lines) where the departures from one queue become the arrivals at another. Queuing
networks are useful models of systems that involve some form ofcustomer ﬂow(DEMO, of venture proposals)
amongst various locations (e.g., stages in DEMO venture capital process) where the inherent variability of the
ﬂow can DEMO to line-ups and delays at a given location (e.g., an overﬂowing stack of proposals to review).
Despite the usefulness of this approach DEMO the investigation of the venture capital process it has yet to be
used for this purpose, though it is often used to evaluate systems of machines in a factory (e.g., Papado-
poulos et al., 1993) or the operations of health care service providers (e.g., Bretthauer and Cote, 1998).
By addressing these important issues facing VC ﬁrms, DEMO present article makes a number of contri-
butions to the literature. First, a VC ﬁrm (as all ﬁrms) has a number of stakeholders each with diﬀerent
expectations and aspirations for the ﬁrm. This article provides DEMO deeper understanding of the trade-oﬀs
amongst these stakeholder groups. Second,research on the VC process has made a signiﬁcant contribution
to the literature, in particular Tyebjee and Bruno (1984), although such process research is limited in
number. This article builds on these primarily descriptive studies, to provide a decision model with
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
547
prescriptive beneﬁts. Such beneﬁts are likely to have important practical implications for the managers DEMO
VC ﬁrms and may also beneﬁt other entrepreneurial ﬁnancing ﬁrms (e.g., the Small Business Development
Corporation).
Third,theallocationofattentionisanimportantissueasindividualVCshavelimitedtimeandenergyto
allocate among the various DEMO of the venture capital process. To VC ﬁrms, VCs represent a DEMO re-
sourcetoacquireandmaintain(i.e.,asubstantialﬁxedcostfortheVCﬁrm)andrepresentthebasisofaVC
ﬁrms competitive advantage. Thus, VCs time DEMO valuable resource that needs to be eﬀectively managed.
ThispaperprovidesprescriptionsonhowtheprocesscanbemanagedtoprovideahigherproﬁtfortheVC
ﬁrm. But the support of stakeholders is also important and this paper provides some insight DEMO the
possible reactions of diﬀerent stakeholder groups depending on how the process has been managed.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. We DEMO by reviewing the existing research on the VC
process. We then describe our assumptions about the venture capital process in terms of operations and
DEMO,weformulatemodelsofﬁnancialperformancefortheVCprocess
from the diﬀerent viewpoints of the investors, managers, and VC employees. We analyse these diﬀerent
measures of performance to investigate how they DEMO vary in response to changing business conditions,
and more interestingly how the diﬀerent entities involved would likely agree or disagree regarding the
management DEMO the process. We conclude with a discussion of the limitations of the model and suggest
possible avenues for future research. Appendix A contains the DEMO of our mathematical analysis.
2. Venture capital process
The VCprocess can bethought ofasa series ofactivities orstagesthateachnew venture works through
from the time the venture DEMO ﬁrst proposed, up until the time when the VC ﬁrm successfully DEMO from the
venture and takes its proﬁt. For example, Tyebjee and DEMO (1984) proposed a model of the venture
capital process with ﬁve such stages: deal origination, deal screening, deal evaluation, deal structuring DEMO
post-investment.Becauseofourparticularfocusinthispaper,weuseabroaderclassiﬁcationwithonlytwo
categories of VC activities that encapsulate the ﬁve stages proposed above.
The ﬁrst category, ‘‘pre-investment activities’’, refers to all VC tasks DEMO to and including the signing of
an investment contract: soliciting new DEMO proposals for submission to the VC ﬁrm, determining
whether these proposals DEMO the ﬁrms broad screening criteria, conducting due diligence (more extensive
research to determine the likely success of the venture), and then negotiating DEMO structuring a relationship
with the entrepreneur. It should be noted that in the 1980s, most proposals that the VC ﬁrm received were
referrals from third parties including other VCs and that VCs spent little time in DEMO for deals––the
task was rather passive (Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984). However, more recently the industry can be charac-
terised by greater competition between VC ﬁrms increasing the need for VC ﬁrms to be more DEMO in
this task, i.e., allocate more time to it (cf. DEMO, 1991). VCs diﬀer in the screening criteria they use to
DEMO ventures including type of industry, industry stage of development, geographic location, and size of
investment required. These are detailed in lists of VCs, for example Pratt s Guide to Venture Capital
Sources(1998).ThereisconsiderableresearchonhowVCsusetheinformationgatheredfromduediligence
tomaketheirassessmentoflikelysuccess;e.g.,VCstypicallyusedecisioncriteriasuchasentrepreneur/team
characteristics, product/service characteristics, and market and ﬁnancial DEMO (Zacharakis and
Meyer, 1998). Eventually the relationship between the VC ﬁrm and the entrepreneur needs to be developed
and formalised (i.e., DEMO terms of the venture capital contract need to be negotiated and agreed upon) in
order for the venture investment, and hence the ‘‘pre-investment DEMO, to be completed.
The second category, ‘‘post-investment activities’’, includes all DEMO by the VC ﬁrm after the initial
investment deal has been signed. In general this involves providing guidance (and possibly additional
funding)tohelpimprovetheperformanceoftheventure.Oneofthemostimportantbeneﬁtsarisingfroma
548
D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
relationship with a VC is access to their extensive network. This is often utilised to ﬁnd DEMO recruit top
quality management, to ﬁnd other co-investors for immediate or DEMO up investment, to introduce the
venture to important service providers such DEMO specialised accountants, and to help ﬁnd and develop
necessary strategic alliances (Sandberg, 1986). Furthermore, VCs often serve as sounding board for
DEMO ideas, and are a valuable source of strategic and operational advice (Lerner, 1994, 1995;
Sweeting, 1991; Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984).
Ultimately, the VCs ﬁnal action is to exit from the venture. The VC can exit from the venture using one
of ﬁve vehicles: (1) an IPO exist where after an initial public oﬀering the DEMO sells the ﬁrms shares in the
venture to the market (this DEMO occur some period after the IPO), (2) an acquisition exist where the VC,
andallotherowners,selltheentireventuretoathirdparty,(3)asecondarysalewheretheVCﬁrmssellsits
share in the venture to a third party but for this vehicle the entrepreneur and other DEMO do not sell their
shares, (4) a buyback exit where DEMO VC ﬁrm sells it shares in the venture to the entrepreneur and/or the
venture itself, and (5) a write-oﬀ exit, which DEMO involves the failure of the venture (Cumming and
MacIntosh, 2003).
3. Queuing network model and assumptions
3.1. VC process––Operations
We begin by DEMO a model of the operation of the VC process for a generic VC ﬁrm. For this
purpose we have chosen to use an open DEMO network with three nodes (labelled N1, N2, and N3; see
Fig. 1) through which ventures ﬂow. Node N1 represents the involvement of the proposed venture and a
VC ﬁrm in ‘‘pre-investment activities’’; similarly, DEMO represents the involvement of a funded venture and a
VC ﬁrm in ‘‘post-investment activities’’. Node N2 represents the development eﬀorts of a funded venture
DEMO periods that do not require the responsible VC ﬁrm to be actively involved.
Entrepreneurs with venture ideas that require ﬁnancing submit their proposals on DEMO unscheduled (i.e.,
random) basis to the VC ﬁrm for consideration; on average, we suppose that k venture proposals arrive at
nodeN1(DEMO)eachyear.Wewillphraseourdiscussionintermsofyears,butthis
choice of time units is unimportant(onecould just as well use, e.g.,months). The amountof time it takes a
VC to perform all of the pre-investment activities (e.g., screening, evaluation, structuring) varies from one
venture to another; we shall assume that on average the VC ﬁrm can deal with sa proposals per year. We
use DEMO torepresenttheproportionofVCattention(time,eﬀort,etc.)devotedtopre-investmentactivities(so s
takes values between 0 and 1), and a as the average number of ventures the VCs DEMO handle per year if
they devoted all of their attention to this category of activity. Note that depending on the rate at which
proposals DEMO and the amount of attention devoted to working with them, a DEMO proposal may have to
proposals
λ
N1
Evaluation
of New
Ventures
λ (1-p)
λp
rejections
λpnf
exit
N3
Assistance
to Funded
Ventures
λpf
N2
Ventures in
Development
λplf
λp(1-l-n)f
failures
Fig. 1. Venture DEMO process as an open queuing network.
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
549
wait (DEMO in the VCs in-basket) before being looked at by the VC. DEMO assume that the average
capacity sa is larger than the average total proposal submission rate k (otherwise work could pile-up
withoutend).Giventheseassumptions,wecanmodelN1asasingleserverqueuewithservicerate sa.Once
the VCs have ﬁnished processing a venture proposal at N1, the proposal has either successfully passed the
screeningandevaluation(withprobability p )orithasfailed (withprobability 1 DEMO ).Ventures,whichpass,
receive funding and proceed to N2; ventures, DEMO fail, are rejected by the VC and leave the system.
Ventures DEMO node N2 (‘‘ventures in development’’) are in the ﬁrms funded portfolio and are undergoing
development. This represents a period of time where the DEMO do not require a signiﬁcant assis-
tance from the VC, i.e., entrepreneurs have their funding and are working to ﬁne-tune, produce, and DEMO
theirnewproductorservice.Weassumethataventurespendsanaverageamountoftime c indevelopment
before again requiring the VCs attention. Because no signiﬁcant VC assistance is required here, there is
never a line-up of idle ventures; they are all busy with development. We can therefore model N2 as an
inﬁnite server queue with service rate 1=c.
Eventually a venture DEMO again require the attention of a VC at the ﬁrm, for DEMO of several possible
reasons. The entrepreneur may simply require some management advice or other non-monetary assistance
from the VC. The venture may be succeeding, so that the VCs attention is required to manage the exit
process (IPO or trade sale); on the other hand, the venture may be failing, so that the VC may need to
become involved in salvage eﬀorts. It is also possible that the venture may have spent DEMO of its previous
rounds of capital and needs additional funding, or DEMO the reason, at this point the venture will leave
this node DEMO and proceed to N3.
VenturesatN3(‘‘assistancetofundedventures’’)arestillinthefundedportfolio,butareeitherreceiving
assistance from the VC or are waiting their turn todo so; in either case, we DEMO that their development
eﬀortsaretemporarilyonhold.WeassumethattheVCscanhandle tb venturesperyearatthisnode.Welet
t indicate the proportion of VC attention devoted to post-investment activities (e.g., providing advice,
arrangingextrafunding,managingtheexitprocess),and b indicatetheaveragenumberofventurestheVCs
could dealwith in a year if they devoted all DEMO attention to post-investment work. Note that s þt ¼ 1.
Like N1, we can also model N3 as a single server queue with service rate tb; we again assume that the
average work capacity tb is larger than the average workload (which we later show to be kpf ). A venture
which completes service at N3 either continues with its development eﬀorts (with probability n), achieves a
successful exit (with DEMO l ), or fails outright (with probability m); note that l þm þn ¼ 1.
Aventure thatleaves N3eitherdue toasuccessful exitorbecauseithasfailed is nolonger DEMO
portfoliobutratherhasleftthesystem.Incontrast,aventurethatleavesN3toresumedevelopmentreturns
to N2 and remains in the portfolio. The returning venture then carries on with its development eﬀorts until
itonceagainneedsaVCsintervention.Werefertothisreturnpathasa‘‘feedbackloop’’,asaventuremay
cycle many DEMO between development eﬀorts (at N2) and obtaining assistance (at N3)DEMO For later calcu-
lations concerning this feedback of repeating ventures, it DEMO be convenient to deﬁne a feedback factor
f ¼ 1=ð1 nÞ. This f is the average number of times a funded venture engages in DEMO eﬀorts at
N2: one initial visit, plus (f  1)DEMO Due tothis feedback eﬀect, at anypointintimeonly some of
the ventures at DEMO of N2 and N3 are there for the ﬁrst time. A smaller number are there for their ﬁrst
repeat visit, and still smaller numbers are there for their second, third, etc. repeat visits.
Deﬁned in DEMO way our model of the VC process forms a simple Jackson open queuing network with
three nodes. This type of queuing network has a DEMO state distribution in product form, which allows the
analysisofeachnodeandtheﬂowbetweennodestobehandledinarelativelysimplemanner(e.g.,Gelenbe
DEMO Pujolle, 1987). The average ﬂows on each arc of the DEMO (in number of ventures per year) are
derived in Appendix A and are shown in Fig. 1. These ﬂow rates can in turn DEMO used to derive the average
number of ventures present at each node in the systems steady state (see Appendix A for details). The
expectednumberofventuresundergoingorawaitingVCpre-investmentprocessingatN1is V1 ¼ k=ðsa  k)
whiletheexpectedtotalnumberofventuresundergoingorawaitingVCpost-investmentassistanceatN3is
550
D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
V3 ¼ kpf =ðtb  kpf ). The expected number of ventures undergoing development (at DEMO) is given by
V2 ¼ kpfc; of this total, kpc DEMO there for the ﬁrst time, while the remaining kpcðf 1Þ are DEMO, i.e.,
this is their second or subsequent period of development DEMO
It is worth emphasising that these expressions for venture ﬂows and status are all long-run averages; the
actual number of ventures moving from N2 to N3 for example may vary greatly from year to year due DEMO
variation in arrival and service times. It is this variation (or DEMO) that causes line-ups and delays at
N1 and N3, in spite of the fact that each of these nodes has suﬃcient processing capacity DEMO handle its
average workload.
Although there is a fair amount of detail in this operating model of the VC ﬁrm and process, it is still of
course a major simpliﬁcation of reality. For example, we have not made any distinction amongst senior
VCs (partners in the ﬁrm), junior VCs (associates), and support staﬀ (such as administrative assistants) in
regards to their productivity in working with ventures. Nor have we DEMO whether individual VCs
specialiseinjust onetypeoftask(e.g.,screeningnewventureproposals)orareinsteadgeneralistswhodeal
with theentireprocess.Wesimply consider theVCs inaggregate, andassumethat theﬁrm isabletoadjust
its overall allocation of attention in some manner (by re-assignment of VCs, training and development,
hiring and ﬁring, etc.).
3.2. VC process––Revenues and expenditures
We assume that each venture DEMO successfully completes the pre-investment activities (N1) and com-
mencesdevelopment(atN2)receivesaninitial lump sumcapitalinvestmentofanaverageof I dollarsfrom
the VC investment fund. Similarly, each time a venture recommences development (at N2) after receiving
assistance from the VC DEMO post-investment (N3) it receives an additional capital investment of an
average of J dollars; we expect that typically I P J P 0. Note that this follow-on investment can occur
manytimes(sinceaventuremayvisitN2andN3manytimes)andthat J issimplytheaverageamount;DEMO
ventures that merely require management advice would not receive any additional money at this point.
A venture that successfully completes its development exits the DEMO (from N3). At this time the
venture is assumed to DEMO attained a considerable value and could be sold to provide an average capital
revenue(the‘‘proceedsfromharvest’’)of RðpÞ.Portion rRðpÞ isallottedtotheVCfund,whiletheremaining
amounttreat these as lump DEMO received at time of exit, since a VCð1 rÞRðpÞ isretainedbytheentrepreneur,whereproportion DEMO return comes primarily from the selling ofr 2½0; 1.Formodellingpurposeswe
equity in DEMO; insome cases they may representthe present value ofa futurerevenuestream(e.g., if
the entrepreneur retains her equity stake rather than selling). Here we DEMO that the average revenue per
exitis afunctionof thequality controlsthat theVCs use when they performtheir pre-investment activities.
All else being equal, we would expect that the higher the proportion p of proposals that are accepted, the
lower theaverage quality of these ventures and thus the lower theaverage revenue from DEMO eventual exit.
To model this, we assume that the average revenue DEMO RðpÞ is decreasing in p at an accelerating rate,
so RðpÞ0 6 0 and RðpÞ00 6 0. This revenue covers the investments in DEMO venture and other associated costs as
well as providing a proﬁt. Ventures that fail at N3 also leave the portfolio but provide zero revenue. DEMO
that here and in the rest of this paper for convenience we assume that all payments are measured on an
after-tax basis.
In addition DEMO these investment revenues and expenditures, the VC process involves a number DEMO other
payments amongst participants. The investment fund (i.e., the limited partners or investors) pays the VC
ﬁrm (1) a yearly management fee of proportion z 2½0; 1 of the fund s assets, and (2) a performance bonus
of proportion x 2½0; 1 of that DEMO of the fund s annual return that exceeds a set target rate (the ‘‘hurdle
rate’’)of k P 0.Forexample,thefundmaybesetupsothatanyreturnsinexcessof40%peryear(k ¼ 0:40)
are shared, with 1/4 of this excess going to the VC ﬁrm (x ¼ 0: 25) and the remaining 3/4 going to the
investors (1 x ¼ 0:75).
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564 551
In turn, the ﬁrm must pay its VC employees a total of H dollars per year in salaries and beneﬁts. In
additiontothisbasesalarycost,theﬁrmrewardstheVCswithacommissionofproportion y 2½0; x ofthat
part of the funds annual return that exceeds the set target DEMO, with x > y . Beyond paying its VCs, we
assumethattheﬁrm also must payatotalof G dollarsperyearinoverhead expenses;this couldcover such
things as rent, wages for a receptionist or accounting staﬀ, etc.
3.3. VC process––major actors
Although there may be many individuals involved in the VC process, herein we consider four main
groups:investors,managers,employees,andentrepreneurs.Investorssupplythefundstoinvestinventures;
depending on DEMO the ﬁrm is structured, these may be limited partners in the DEMO or they may be pur-
chasers of mutual fund units. By managers, we mean the general partners (if the VC ﬁrm is a DEMO),
or the major shareholders (if the ﬁrm is a corporation); these are the people who make the major decisions
and beneﬁt DEMO any residual proﬁt or loss by the company. By employees we mean the venture capitalists
who actually do the pre- and post-investment work with DEMO ventures; they may be junior associates or
employeesoftheﬁrm.Insome cases,individualinvestors(oftenreferredtoasBusinessAngels)DEMO allthree
roles simultaneously: they provide the funds, manage the investment, DEMO advise the ventures (cf. Harrison
et al., 1997). Entrepreneurs of course supply the initial venture ideas and subsequently develop them using
the DEMO funding. In the next section we consider what the objectives of these diﬀerent groups might be,
and how these objectives are aﬀected by DEMO operation of the VC process.
4. Financial objectives
In this section we combine the above ﬁnancial assumptions with our queuing network model of the DEMO
process to construct several ﬁnancial models of the VC process. The reader may ﬁnd it helpful to refer to
Table 1 for a summary DEMO the notation introduced.
4.1. Investors
4.1.1. Goals
The investors provide the funds to invest in ventures in exchange for a future return to their DEMO
They thus would clearly be interested in the performance of these venture investments, but presumably
wouldbeinterestedintherestoftheVCﬁrm(themanagersandemployees)onlytotheextentthattheﬁrm
is managingthese investmentson their behalf.Wethereforeshall assumethat the goalofthe investors isto
maximise their return on investment (ROI) from DEMO venture portfolio (Dean and Giglierano, 1990;
Zacharakis and Meyer, DEMO). ROI is calculated as an annual percentage ratio by dividing the portfolios
annual income by the amount of money invested in that portfolio.
DEMO Process
To derive the average amount invested in the portfolio, we DEMO to know when money enters the
portfolio and becomes available for investment. It is clear that funds have to be available at least some
DEMO of time before they can be provided to a venture; thus DEMO investment portfolio will consist partly
of cash (awaiting investment) and partly of actual venture investments. This would be especially true for
thoseVCﬁrmsthatruntheirportfoliosasmutualfunds;cashcouldarrive(DEMO)and
then sit idle forsometime until it is invested. Rather than trying todirectlymodelthis fund-raising process
and its time lags, we will simply choose a reasonable point in time as an approximation. We assume herein
that money DEMO invest in a venture becomes available (at least on average) at the moment that a venture
552
D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
Table 1
Eﬀect of changing parameters on ﬁnancial models
Item Brief description How does a change DEMO one parameter aﬀect each of the following?
Investor ROI Manager Employee Entrepreneur
earnings pay wait
k Proposal arrival rate ) Varies Varies +
DEMO Proposal acceptance probability ) Varies Concave +
t VC attention: post-investment DEMO Varies1 Concave Convex
s VC attention: pre-investment Quasi-concave Varies1 Concave Convex
DEMO VC productivity: pre-investment + ) + )
b VC productivity: DEMO + ) + )
c Development time ) Varies ) +
DEMO Firm overhead costs ne ) ne ne
H Employee salary ne ) +ne
I Initial investment ) Varies ) ne
J Follow-on investment ) DEMO ) ne
Rð
Þ Exit revenue function + + + ne
Exit revenue proportion to investors + + + ne
Performance bonus paid to DEMO ) +ne ne
Performance commission for ne ) +ne
employees
Management fee paid to ﬁrm ) +ne ne
Probability of successful exit + + DEMO )
Probability of continued development Varies Varies Varies +
Performance target DEMO of return + )) ne
(+)Objectiveisincreasinginthatparameter,())objectiveisdecreasinginthatparameter,ne:DEMO,objectiveisindependentofthat
parameter, varies: eﬀect on objective varies depending on values of other parameters and varies1 : concave if z < kðx yÞ, convex if
z > kðx yÞ.
proposalﬁrstarrivesattheVCﬁrm(i.e.atN1),eventhoughtheactualinvestmentwillnotoccuruntilafter
the venture successfully completes all pre-investment activities and enters the funded portfolio (at N2).
Having made this assumption about investment timing, we can calculate the average total portfolio
investment by multiplying the average number of funded ventures at each DEMO (or ‘‘to-be-funded’’ ven-
tures,inthecaseofN1)bytheaverageamountinvestedineachone.Thisleadstoanexpressionforthesize
of the investment portfolio (in dollars). Formally,
Investment ¼ I½pV1 þV2 þV3 þ Jðfkpf1Þ½V2 þV3 DEMO 1Þ
¼ I sakp k þckpf þ tb  kpf  þJðf 1Þckpf þ tb  kpf : ð2Þ
The portfolio s average gross income is the annual revenue from successful venture exits less the costs DEMO
the original and follow-up investments made. We can write this as
Gross Inc: ¼ kp½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf : ð3Þ
If the venture DEMO is proﬁtable on average, then this expression will of course be DEMO; we shall
assume this to be true in our later analysis.
DEMO divide this gross income by the size of the investment portfolio and then subtract the performance
bonus and the management fee to get investors DEMO
ð1 xÞ½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf 
½Iþ½I þ Jnf hi
ROI Gross Inc: Gross Inc:
¼ Investment x Investment k z ¼ f
sak þ tbkpf
þ xk z: ð4Þ
r
x
y
z
l
n
k
1
cf
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564 553
The behaviour of ROI with respect to changes in business conditions (i.e., individual DEMO) is
mostlystraightforward;Table1listsasummaryofsensitivityresultsforthisandotherﬁnancialexpressions
thatwederivelater.Forexample,wecanseethatROIwillincreaseiftheVCsbecomemoreeﬃcientatpre-
investmentactivities(i.e.,if a increases)butitwilldecreaseifmoreventureproposalsaresubmitted(DEMO,if k
increases).
4.1.3. Maximization of returns
More interesting is the question of how investors will want the VC process to be managed DEMO as to
maximise their ROI. In other words, from their point DEMO view what is the best allocation of attention t and
acceptance proportion p?
Maximisation of investor’s ROI with respect to attention allocation t : ROI is quasi-concave in t , so there
exists a unique optimal allocation of VC attention to post-investment activities tinv such that
a
I DEMO  atinv  ki2 ¼ðI þ Jnf Þ htinvb bf
ð5Þ
 kpf i2 :
Maximisation of investor’ s ROI with respect to acceptance proportion p : ROI is decreasing in p,so
investors would prefer DEMO have as small a proportion of ventures accepted as possible, i.e. DEMO !0.
Since the VC employees have only a ﬁxed amount of attention (time, energy, etc.) to provide, the
investors ROI can be maximised primarily by choosing the best allocation of attention between pre-
investmentactivities(DEMO,viavariable s)andpost-investmentactivities(atN3,viavariable t ).Recallthat
since s ¼ð1 tÞ, by determining the best value of t we implicitly determine the corresponding DEMO for s.
Theﬁrstresultaboveshowsthatinvestorswouldliketoseea‘‘balanced’’allocationofattentionbytheVCs
between pre- and post-investment activities. This moderate approach allows for the fastest possible ﬂow of
venturesthroughtheprocess,thusreducingtheamountofcapitaltied-upintheinvestmentpoolatanyone
time. The second result DEMO that investors would prefer to have only the highest quality ventures to
invest in; our model implicitly assumes that investors are free to put their money elsewhere if desired, so
they have no incentive to settle for anything but ‘‘the very best’’.
4.2. Management
By management, we mean the senior members of the ﬁrm who would share any residual proﬁts. DEMO the
VC ﬁrm is structured as a partnership, then these would DEMO the partners of the ﬁrm; in a corporate setting,
these DEMO instead include major shareholders and any senior managers who receive a signiﬁcant portion
oftheir remuneration through proﬁt sharing orstock options.We assume that management is DEMO
maximising the ﬁrms annual earnings; this consists of the management fee DEMO the performance bonus,
minus the overhead costs G and the salaries H of the VC employees as well as their commission from the
DEMO bonus. This gives the following expression.
Gross Inc:
Earnings ¼ z½Investment G H þðx yÞ Investment k½Investment
1
sa  k
yÞkp½lfrR
þ½I DEMO Jnf cf
ðpÞ I  Jnf 
þ tb fkpf 
G H
yÞkkp ½I þ½I þ Jnf cf þ tb fkpf 
:
sa

k

zkp ½I
þðx 
ðx 
ð6Þ
ð7Þ
DEMO

1
554 D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
As with the investors, we are interested in knowing managements view of an ‘‘optimal’’ VC process, i.e.,
one that would maximise their own gains.
Maximisation of manager’ s Earnings with respect to attention allocation t : the behaviour of DEMO
depends on the relative size of management fees versus performance bonuses.
(DEMO) If z > kðx yÞ i.e. management fees are greater than DEMO bonuses on average, then Earnings will
be convex in t , DEMO the worst possible value being t ¼ tinv as this would minimise Earnings. Instead man-
agement would prefer to have t either as low DEMO possible or as high as possible, i.e. either tmgr:lo !ða DEMO kÞ=a
or tmgr:hi ! minfkpf =b; 1g.
(b) If DEMO < kðx yÞ i.e. management fees are smaller than performance bonuses on average, then Earnings will
be concave in t , with a unique maximum tmgr:bonus ¼ tinv.
Maximisation of manager’s Earnings with respect to DEMO proportion p:
(a) Earnings from management fees are convex and increasing in p , which would encourage managers to ac-
cept as DEMO a proportion of ventures as possible.
(b) Earnings from performance bonuses are concave in p , which would encourage managers to seek some DEMO
anced’’ proportion of ventures to accept, i.e. pmgr:bonus ¼ p:DEMO
½lfrRðpÞI  Jnf þ lfrpR0ðpÞ k(½I sa  k þ½I þ Jnf cf þ tb  kpf  þ "#)h½ItbþJnf kf 2
p
f
kpf i2
1

¼ 0:
’s revenue is DEMO
(c) The behaviour of Earnings overall will depend on the relative extent to which the ﬁrm
of management fees rather than performance bonuses, and on the relative availability of high quality ven-
tures that is DEMO in the slope of RðpÞ. The acceptance proportion pmgr that would be optimal overall for
managers would be at least as great as pmgr:DEMO
These results are driven by the trade-oﬀ implied by the two forms of revenue that management receives.
A high acceptance rate coupled with fast DEMO service will provide a large pool of investments
upon which to charge management fees; on the other hand, a moderate acceptance rate and DEMO balanced
allocation of attention will provide a faster ﬂow of successful exits and thereby earn the ﬁrm higher per-
formance bonuses.
4.3. Employees
By DEMO, we mean the venture capitalists who actuallydealwith venturesduringthe pre- andpost-
investment DEMO but who would typically not share in any residual proﬁts of the ﬁrm. If the ﬁrm is
structured as a partnership, then these would be the associates of the ﬁrm (i.e., the professional workers
who DEMO not yet been admitted into the partnership). We assume that the employees as a group are
interestedin maximisingtheir annualPay,whichis a mixture ofﬁxed DEMO andbeneﬁts plus thevariable
commissions taken from the ﬁrm s performance bonus. This leads to the following expression.
Pay ¼ H y Gross Inc:
DEMO  Investment kInvestment
¼ H þykp½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf  ykkp ½Iþ½I þ Jnf cf
sa
k

f
þ tb  kpf 
:
ð9Þ
The following results show how employees could be expected to DEMO the operation of the VC process.
Maximisation of VC employee’s Pay with respect to attention allocation t : Pay is concave in t with DEMO unique
optimal value temp ¼ tinv.
1
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
555
exists a unique optimum acceptance proportion pemp ¼
lfrRðpÞ plfrR0ðpÞ I  Jnf k
DEMO of VC employee’s Pay with respect to acceptance proportion p : Pay is concave in p , so there
p such that
I
þ DEMO cf þ tb f

k þ½I
 kpf
sa 
pkf 2 
¼ 0:
ð10Þ
þ tb  kpf
The second DEMO reﬂects a trade-oﬀ for the employee: accepting more ventures leads to DEMO eventual
exits andso more commission checks; but acceptingfewer venturesmeans theventure quality DEMO higher and
so the average commission check is larger. The optimal acceptance proportion provides a balance between
these two inﬂuences.
4.4. Entrepreneurs
We assume DEMO the objective of the entrepreneur is to take the venture to a successful exit as quickly as
possible,forbothﬁnancialandpersonalreasons.Theentrepreneurwilllikelyseekashortwaitbecausethey
aremotivatedto‘‘launchtheirdream’’andforittoreachitfullpotential.Forexample,CovaandSvanfeldt
(1993) propose DEMO entrepreneurs ‘‘... create a product that ﬂows from their own internal desires and
needs.Theycreateprimarilytoexpresssubjectiveconceptionsofbeauty,emotion,orsomeaestheticideal.’’
(p. 297).
On the ﬁnancial side, DEMO entrepreneur will presumably want to maximise return on equity (ROE), DEMO
is a function of the amount of the entrepreneurs equity stake, DEMO capital revenue eventually obtained, and
the time (or wait) in DEMO from when the investment is made until when the revenue is received. Thus
ROE ¼ 1=W 1:
Equity
ð11Þ
The W th root DEMO account of compounding interest (i.e., the time value of money); e.g., if the venture
Revenue
takes two years to complete, we DEMO the square root of the term in square brackets above to get the %
rate of annual return. As previously mentioned, in our model an entrepreneur receives her capital revenue
(either in cash or marketable shares) at the same time as the VC exits, in amount ð1 DEMO We also
assume that the entrepreneurs equity investment in the venture, DEMO terms of both ﬁnancial equity and
‘‘sweat equity’’, either remains the DEMO or increases if the VC process drags on in time. Thus to maximise
ROE the entrepreneur needs to minimise the waiting time from when DEMO entrepreneur ﬁrst applies for
funding until the venture successfully exits.
The entrepreneurs average total wait W is the sum of the waits at each DEMO, each times the frequency
that this node is visited; i.e. W ¼ W1 þ fW2 þ fW3 . Therefore,
W 1 f DEMO
¼ sa  k þ fc þ tb  kpf
The following results show how entrepreneurs could be expected to view the operation of DEMO VC
:
process.
Minimisation of the entrepreneur’s wait W with respect DEMO attention allocation t:W is convex with respect to
t , so there is a unique optimal allocation of attention tent to post-investment activities DEMO that
a
bf
ha  atent  ki2 ¼ htentb  kpf i2 :
Furthermore this preferred allocation is less than that preferred by the investors, i.e. tent < tinv.
ð13Þ
The entrepreneur would prefer somewhat less attention to companies already in the portfolio, and more
attention on the initial screening process. This is because the entrepreneur has to endure DEMO full delay
556
D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
during screening, while DEMO investor is less concerned; the investor has not taken a stake DEMO the venture yet,
but the entrepreneur has.
The above results assume we take the point of view of an entrepreneur at the beginning DEMO the process,
that is, one who has not yet received DEMO Once ventures get past the screening stage (N1) and into the
portfolio, then those entrepreneurs would naturally prefer t ¼ 1 (i.e., 100% of VC attention focussed on
ventures in the portfolio) because they do not care about any other venture proposals which apply after-
wards. DEMO fact they would prefer less competition for VC attention. For similar reasons we do not consider
an entrepreneurs preference for acceptance proportion p ; DEMO principle, an entrepreneur would want p ¼ 1
for their own DEMO andcompete for the VCs attention.p ¼ 0 for all others, so DEMO no other ventures would enter the portfolio and
5. Comparison of preferences
Intheprevioussection,wedeterminedhoweachofthevariousentitiesinvolvedintheVCprocesswould
view decisions about allocation of attention (i.e., the best DEMO for t ) and acceptance control for venture
proposals (i.e., the best value of p ). In this section, we compare the DEMO to which they could be expected
to agree or disagree with each other.
5.1. The allocation of VC attention
Let us consider ﬁrst the DEMO of VC attention (as described by t ) between pre- and DEMO
activities. In the previous section we found that both investors and employees would prefer to see a
‘‘balanced’’allocationofattention tinv ¼ temp thatwouldleadtofewerdelaysintheﬂowofventuresthrough
the portfolio (from investment to harvest). In contrast entrepreneurs could be expected to DEMO somewhat
less attention on post-investment activities and more on pre-investment, since DEMO would be more con-
cerned about the total time until harvest (DEMO, they worry more about initial delays during screening).
Management s DEMO are less consistent, as they largely depend on the relative balance
DEMO management fees and performance bonuses that they receive. We can summarise these views as
follows.
Relative preferences for allocation of VC attention to post-investment DEMO (as opposed to pre-
investment activities): for a given VC DEMO, investors and employees share the same preferences for allo-
cation, and both would prefer a higher allocation than would entrepreneurs. Managers whose earnings DEMO
mostly of performance bonuses would prefer the same allocation as investors, DEMO those who rely mostly on
management fees will prefer either a much lower allocation or a much higher allocation than any of the other
DEMO Thus we have
tmgr:lo < tent < temp ¼ tinv ¼ tmgr:bonus < tmgr:hi:
ð14Þ
Therefore, we could expect investors, entrepreneurs and managers to have diverging opinions on what
constitutes ‘‘best practice’’ for allocation of attention in the VC process. The strength of this DEMO
willofcoursevarydependingontheparticularbusinesssituation;oneaspectofthisisillustratedinTable2.
For example, an increase in management fee percentage z DEMO to the ﬁrm will cause managers to become
more strongly opposed to allocating attention according to tinv (since they would have even more to gain if
they could increase the portfolio size) and thus increase investor-management tensions. On the other hand,
an increase in exit bonuses x DEMO to the ﬁrm will cause the investors to become less concerned about using
allocation tinv (a higher bonus means less revenue leftover for them, so less to be concerned about) and so
reduce tensions.
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
557
Table 2
Eﬀect of changing parameters on investor/manager disagreement
Item Brief parameter description DEMO preference in Manager preference
favor of tinv against tinv
k Proposal arrival rate + +
p Proposal acceptance probability ) +
a VC productivity: pre-investment + ne
b VC productivity: post-investment + ne
c Development time ) ne
I Initial investment ) ne
J Follow-on investment ) ne
DEMO
Þ Exit revenue function + ne
r Exit revenue proportion to investors + ne
x Performance bonus paid to ﬁrm ))
z Management DEMO paid to ﬁrm ne +
l Probability of successful exit + ne
n Probability of continued development Varies ne
k Target rate for fund DEMO ne )
y Commission paid to VC employees ne +
For DEMO whose earnings consist more of management fees than of performance bonuses. (DEMO) Strength of preference (like/dislike)
is increasing in that parameter, ()) strength of preference (like/dislike) is decreasing in that parameter, ne: no eﬀect, strength of
preference is independent of that parameter. Note: for parameters not shown, there is also no eﬀect.
DEMO can also refer back to Table 1 in this regard. For example, an increase in either the overall revenue
function Rð
Þ (i.e. DEMO that exit revenues are higher for all values of acceptance proportion p ) or the
probability of successful exit l would lead to improvements DEMO everyones ﬁnances.
5.2. The proportion of venture proposals to accept for funding
Weshowedthatfortheemployeesthereisanoptimalproportionofproposalstoaccept pemp whichgives
the best balance between accepting too many and too DEMO proposals. In contrast to this, we found that
investors would prefer DEMO accept only the best ventures for funding so that their money could earn the
highest possible return,but that managers would typically like to DEMO a large proportion of proposals so
as to create a large portfolio upon which to charge management fees. The following result summarises the
relative DEMO of these diﬀerent groups.
Relative preferences for venture proposal acceptance a.k.a. ‘‘quality control standards’’: for a given VC
process, investors would prefer a DEMO venture acceptance proportion than would employees, and employees
would prefer a DEMO proportion than would managers. Thus we have
pinv < pemp < pmgr:
ð15Þ
Above we look at the diﬀerent parties involved in the DEMO process to determine their underlying pref-
erences; one might think of DEMO as the opening oﬀers that each party would be inclined to make at the
beginning of negotiations over how the fund should run. Any DEMO agreement amongst the parties must
necessarily be a compromise of these diﬀerent (and sometimes opposing) preferences; for example, man-
agementclearlycannotexpecttogeteverythingitwants,astherewouldthenbenomotivationforinvestors
to DEMO in the fund or for VC employees to work for the ﬁrm. One of the important implications of this
model is to point out DEMO these parties may rationally disagree on the operation of the process, DEMO
in ways that are not obvious.
558
6. Discussion
D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
6.1. Summary of results
Inthisarticleweexaminedtheventurecapitalprocessbywhichnewventuresobtaininvestorfundingvia
venture capital ﬁrms. To do this, we constructed a simple Jackson queuing network with two key man-
agementparameters:theallocationofVCattentionbetweenpre-andpost-investmentinvolvementwiththe
ventures; and the proportion of venture proposals that would be accepted for funding. Using DEMO queuing
network alongwithanumber ofsimpleassumptionsconcerningtheﬁnancialaspectsoftheVCprocess,we
developed a set of expressions to describe the ﬁnancial performance of the process. These expressions al-
lowed us to DEMO how to best manage the VC process in order to optimise the process overall from the
diﬀering viewpoints of entrepreneurs, investors, VC ﬁrm DEMO, and VC workers. Our sensitivity
analysis showed (in Tables 1 and 2) how these ‘‘best practice’’ results would be aﬀected by changes in the
business environment. More interestingly, our comparative analysis showed how the diﬀerent parties could
rationally be expected to disagree in several respects over what DEMO in fact constitute ‘‘best practice’’.
With regards to the allocation of VC attention between pre- and post-investment activities, we found that
while investors would typically support a ‘‘balanced’’ allocation that would also be in the best DEMO of
the process overall, the managers of the VC ﬁrm would DEMO be diametrically opposed to this allocation.
With regards to the acceptance of proposed ventures to fund, we found that each of these groups would
have a diﬀerent view of how selective the process ought to be.
DEMO maybesigniﬁcantpotentialfor disagreements
about the proper operation of the VC process, as DEMO entity tries to maximise its own rewards at the
possible expense of each other and of the ‘‘greater good’’. We should point out here DEMO we are not
claiming that any of these three groups will always focus solely on its own performance objective and
completely disregard the needs DEMO the other groups. For example, managers would recognise that investors
must DEMO an ‘‘adequate’’ ROI, otherwise they would stop investing, and employees know that the VC
ﬁrmhastobeproﬁtableenoughtosurviveinorderforthemtoretaintheirjobs;thustherewouldinevitably
be at least some willingness to negotiate DEMO compromise on decisions about attention allocation and
acceptance proportion. What we do think our results show is how the motivation and initial bargaining
positions DEMO each group would rationally diﬀer during any such negotiations.
6.2. Limitations
In our ﬁnancial modelling, for each of the parties involved we deliberately chose a single ﬁnancial
measure (out of many possible ones) to represent DEMO group s motivation. Our models results therefore
could becriticised asbeing mere artefactsof theparticular choices we made. We wouldreply that although
our choices of measures DEMO to some extent arbitrary, they are nonetheless reasonable and are at DEMO
representative of the way these parties actually evaluate performance. Thus we believe that while our
conclusions may not be deﬁnitive, they would at least be indicative of actual behaviour.
To keep the model tractable and relatively DEMO, we have ignored some of the higher-order
interdependencies amongst parameters. For DEMO, while our revenue function R does take into account
the selectivity DEMO the VC ﬁrm in accepting proposals, it does not directly consider DEMO time lag between the
momentofinvestmentandthemomentofsuccessfulexit,ortheamountinvestedinanyparticularventure.
Wewouldarguethatthissortofsimpliﬁcationisanecessaryfeatureofmodellingwork(onecannotinclude
everything) and that DEMO have included the most important relationships; thus we believe that our DEMO
simpliﬁcation does not detract from the value of the analysis.
We also note that there are several technical assumptions inherent in our queuing model DEMO we have
madeinordertokeepthemathematicsrelativelysimple.Forexample,wehaveassumedthattheworkdone
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
559
by the VCs with the ventures can be appropriately represented by single server Markovian DEMO; while
these are rarely exact representations of reality, they are often approximately correct and are a stan-
dard assumption in the absence of DEMO data (see for example Cooper (1990) or Papadopoulos et al.
(1993)).
7. Conclusion
Thereareanumberoftasksthatventurecapitalistsmustperformwellwithintheventurecapitalprocess
in order to maximise the proﬁtability of the process. In this article we have proposed a simple model of DEMO
venture capital process that gives us some insight as to how the process might best be managed and why
there may be disagreements about DEMO ‘‘best’’ actually means. Each factor that requires consideration in
ourmodelisreadilyoperationalisedandthereforethemodelproposedherecan(andhopefullywill)provide
a basis for empirical testing.
OurworkcomplementspreviousstudieswhichhavetendedtoconcentratemoreonwhatVCsdoateach
stage of the process (thus describing the elements of current practices), rather than on how these stages DEMO
together and should best be managed (thus suggesting the development of DEMO practices). These
descriptivestudieshave made asubstantialcontribution totheliterature, butwe believe thatmore research
DEMO required into the means of improving the performance of the venture capital process. We believe that we
have taken a small but important step DEMO this direction and hope that other scholars will also focus on
improving (over and above describing) the VC process.
Appendix A. Mathematical derivations
DEMO Flow of ventures through the system
Derivation of the average rate of venture ﬂow through each arc of the network is mostly a straight-
DEMO process; begin with rate k of new proposals arriving at N1 DEMO proceed from left to right through
the network. For the ‘‘feedback loop’’ between N2 and N3 the ﬂows are derived by simultaneous solution
of DEMO ﬂow balance equations:
Flow2!3 ¼ kp þ Flow3!2 and Flow3!2 ¼ n Flow2!3:
The solutions of these ﬂows are shown along with DEMO ﬂows on the other arcs in Fig. 1.
A.2. System steady state
WemodelnodesN1andN3asM/M/1queues;thusweimplicitlyassumethatthegroupofVCsworking
at each node can reasonably be represented as DEMO single server, and that the times between arrivals and the
times DEMO service both follow exponential distributions. Given these assumptions, the expected number
DEMO ventures at each node i (either being helped or awaiting service) is calculated as
Vi ¼ðarrival rateÞ=½ðservice rateÞðarrival rateÞ. Node N2 is modelled DEMO an M/M/1 queue (hence no
line-ups and no waiting), so the expected number of ventures at that node undergoing development is
simply V2 ¼ (arrival rate)(average stay).
560
D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
A.3. Results for the investors
For optimisation of ROII with respect to t , replace s DEMO 1 t and take the ﬁrst derivative to obtain
o ROI ¼ ð1 xÞ ½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf  Ia ðI þ Jnf Þbf DEMO;
ot ½Dðt; pÞ2 "ha  at  ki2  htb  kpf i2 ðA:1Þ
where Dðt; pÞðP 0Þ represents the denominator in the ﬁrst term of Eq. (4). When this equation equals zero
we have an extreme point. To verify that this is a DEMO, take the second derivative at such a point
(where o ROI=ot ¼ 0) to obtain
o2 ROI ¼ ð1 xÞ ½lfrRðpÞ I
ot2 ½Dðt; pÞ2
 Jnf "ha 2Ia2 ki3
 at 
þ2ðI þ Jnf Þb2f #:
htb  kpf i3
ðA:2Þ
Since DEMO is negative at any such point (at least so long as DEMO VC process is proﬁtable with a positive net
income), we know that the point must be a unique maximum and thus that ROI DEMO strongly quasi-concave
in t.
Regarding acceptance probability p , we obtain a ﬁrst derivative of
o ROI ð1 xÞ (lfrR0
op ¼ Dðt; DEMO
ðpÞ½I þ½I þ Jnf
½lfrRðpÞ I  ())"#htb 
a  at  k
I þ Jnf kf22
i
k
pf
Jnf DEMO
:
cf
f
þ tb  kpf 

½
1
DEMO is negative so long as the ﬁrm is proﬁtable, and hence DEMO is decreasing in p.
ðA:3Þ
A.4. Results for the managers
Foroptimisation ofEarnings with respect to t ,substitute s ¼ 1 t andtake theﬁrst derivative toobtain
o Earnings ðI þ Jnf Þbf ):
ot ¼½z DEMO yÞkp(ha  atIa ki2 htb  kpf i2
ðA:4Þ
Note the similarity between this and oROI=ot . The second derivative is
o2 DEMO
ot2
¼½z kðx yÞkp("#
h 
i
3 þ "#)
ðI þ Jnf Þb2f
a at
k
tb
k
pf
3
DEMO
:
h   i
2
2
ðA:5Þ
Since the DEMO in braces is always positive, Earnings will be convex in t DEMO a unique minimum at tinv if
z > kðx yÞ. Conversely, DEMO will be concave in t with a unique maximum at tinv if z < kðx yÞ.
With respect to p , the ﬁrst derivative DEMO Earnings is
 þ "#)
½I þ Jnf kf 2
DEMO
k
pf
2
þ lfrpR0ðpÞ
h 
i
I þ Jnf cf þ tb f
 kpf
o Earnings
op
¼ kz(½Isa 1 DEMO þ½I þ Jnf cf
þ kðx yÞ½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf
 kkðx yÞ½( Isa 1 k þ½
f
þ tb  kpf
 þ "#)
½I þ Jnf kf 2
tb
k
pf
2
h 
i
:
ðA:6Þ
p
p
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
561
The ﬁrst part of this expression is always positive, showing that management fees are increasing in p.
Next take the second derivative and rearrange terms to DEMO
o2 Earnings
op2
¼
pk
þ tb 
2kkðx yÞ"#ðItbþJnfkpftÞkf 2
Þ
2
2k "#
I þ Jnf Þkf 2
tb
k
pf
2
ð 
Þ
1
f
kpf þ kðx yÞlfr½2R0ðpÞþ pR00 ðpÞ
DEMO þ pkf
:
tb  kpf
ðA:7Þ
z
ð
ð
DEMO(A.7)isalwayspositive,showingthatearningsduetomanagementfeesareconvexin
p ;thesecondandthirdtermsarealwaysnegative,showingthatearningsfromexitbonusesareconcavein p.
A.5. Results for the DEMO
Take the ﬁrst and second derivatives of Pay with respect to t to obtain
Ia
¼ykpk"ha  at  ki2 ðI þ Jnf DEMO #;
htb  kpf i2
þ2ðI þ Jnf Þb2f #:
¼ykpk"ha 2atIa2 ki3 htb  kpf i3
Since the second derivative DEMO always negative, Pay is concave in t.
With respect to p , take the ﬁrst and second derivatives to obtain
o Pay
op ¼ yk½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf þ plfrR0ðpÞ
 ykk(
k þ½I þ DEMO "cf
I
sa 
f
þ tb  kpf
o Pay
ot
o2 Pay
ot2
ðA:8Þ
þhtb  kpf i2 #);
pkf 2
ðA:9Þ
o2 Pay
op2
¼
yk½2lfrR0ðpÞþ plfrR00 ðpÞ  DEMO(2½I þ Jnf kf 2 p½I þ Jnf 2k2f 3 ):
htb  kpf i2 þ htb  kpf i3
ðA:10Þ
The DEMO derivative is always negative, so Pay is concave in p with DEMO unique maximum at pemp.
A.6. Results for entrepreneurs
For optimisation with respect to t , replace s by 1 t and take the ﬁrst DEMO to obtain
o W a bf
ot ¼ ha  at  ki2 htb  kpf i2 ðA:11Þ
(note the similarity between this and o Earnings=ot ). The second derivative is
o2 W 2a2 2b2f
ot2 ¼ ha  at  ki3 þhtb  kpf i3 ; DEMO:12Þ
which is always positive; hence the wait must be convex DEMO t , with a unique minimum at tent . The relation
between the size of tinv and tent is shown by comparing Eq. (A.11) to (A.1) for investors and noting that
ðIÞ < ðI þ Jnf Þ; thus the value of t that makes (A.1) equal zero will instead make (A.11) positive.
562 D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
A.7. Results for comparing preferences
Theorderingofacceptanceprobability preferencesfollowsfromacomparisonofthevarious derivatives
with respect to p . From Eq. (A.6), we see that earnings from bonuses are optimised at some point
DEMO:bonus ¼ p:
½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf þ plfrR0ðpÞ ¼ k(k þ½I þ Jnf "cf þhtb  kpf i2 #):
I f pkf 2
sa  þ tb  kpf
ðA:13Þ
DEMO this to equation (A.9) we can see that this same relation identiﬁes the optimal acceptance
proportion pemp ,so wehave pmgr:bonus ¼ pemp . Since we know that managements optimal value
pmgr > pmgr:bonus ,thenitfollowsaswellthat pmgr > pemp .Conversely, o ROI=op isnegativeforall p ,including
at DEMO ; thus investors would prefer a value of p less than pemp.
The ordering of post-investment attention allocation preferences likewise follows from a comparison DEMO
the respective derivatives with respect to t.
A.8. Results for tables
The sensitivity results in Table 1 are obtained by examining the sign of DEMO derivative of each ﬁnancial
equation with respect to that parameter. For example, to ﬁnd the eﬀect of a change in the proposal arrival
rate k on ROI (Eq. (4)), take the derivative
o ROI ¼ ð1 xÞ ½lfrRðpÞ I ½I þ Jnf pf 2 ):
DEMO ½Dðt; pÞ2  Jnf (hsa I ki2 þ htb  DEMO i2
ðA:14Þ
Since this is negative (at least so long DEMO the VC process is proﬁtable with a positive netincome), ROI must
be decreasing in k. The other listed results are obtained in similar DEMO, starting with Eqs. (4), (7), (9) or
(12)asappropriate.Fortheeﬀectofchangesinrevenuefunction RðpÞ,wetakederivativeswithrespectto R
asifitwereaparameterratherthanafunction;i.e.asif RðpÞ wereincreasingbythesamepercentageforall
p.
For Table DEMO we work with Eqs. (A.1) and (A.4) and focus on the case where managers earnings consist
more of management fees than of DEMO bonuses, thus z > kðx yÞ. Note that in both cases DEMO
location of the extreme point t (maximum ROI, minimum Earnings) DEMO determined by the expression
inv
"I þ Jnf Þ htb  DEMO i2 #:
a bf
ha  at  ki2 ðI
ðA:15Þ
Whenthisequalszero,thederivativesarezero.Whenthisisnotzero,thenthemagnitudeofeachderivative
(i.e. the marginal cost or marginal beneﬁt of not using tinv ) is determined by the magnitude (either negative
or positive) of the ‘‘multiplier’’ ½z kðx yÞkp for o Earnings=ot and
ð1 xÞ½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf 
½Dðt; pÞ2 ðA:16Þ
for o ROI=ot . The results in Table 2 are obtained by taking the partial DEMO of each multiplier with
respect to each parameter. For example, an DEMO in p causes investors to have a stronger preference for
using tinv , since of½z kðx yÞkpg=op ¼½z kðx yÞk > 0. Conversely for DEMO we have
D.A. Shepherd et al. /EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
o
op
"DEMO; pÞ2
ð1 xÞ (lfrR0ðpÞDðt; pÞ
¼ ½Dðt; pÞ3
1 xÞ½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf 
2½lfrRðpÞ I  Jnf  ðI þ Jnf DEMO 2 ) < 0
htb  kpf i2
indicating that their preference for avoiding tinv becomes weaker.
563
ðA:17Þ
ð
References
Barney, J., Busenitz, L., Fiet, J., Moesel, D., 1996. New venture teams assessment of learning assistance from venture capital ﬁrms.
Journal of Business DEMO 11 (4), 257–272.
Bretthauer, K.M., Cote, M.J., 1998. DEMO model for planning resource requirements in health care organizations. Decision Sciences 29,
243–270.
Bygrave,W.,Timmons,J., 1991.Ventureand RiskCapital:Practice andPerformance,Promisesand Policy.HarvardBusinessSchool
Press, Boston, MA.
Cable, D.M., Shane, S., 1997. A DEMO dilemma approach to entrepreneur–venture capitalist relationships. Academy of
Management Review 22, DEMO
Cooper, R.B., 1990. Queuing models. In: Heyman, D.P., Sobel, M.J. (Eds.), Stochastic Models. North-Holland, New York, pp. 469–
518.
Cova, B., Svanfeldt, C., 1993. Societal innovations and the post-modern DEMO of everyday life. International Journal of
Research in Marketing 10, 297–310.
DEMO, D.J., MacIntosh, J.G., 2003. A cross-country comparison of full and partial venture capital exits. Journal of Banking and
Finance 27, 511–548.
Dean, B.V., Giglierano, J.J., 1990. Multistage ﬁnancing of technical start-up companies DEMO Silicon Valley. Journal of Business
Venturing 5, 375–389.
Elango, B., DEMO, V.H., Hisrich, R.D., Polonchek, A., 1995. How venture capital ﬁrms diﬀer. Journal of Business Venturing 10, 157–
179.
Fiet, J., 1995. Reliance upon informants in the venture capital industry. Journal of Business DEMO 10, 195–223.
Gelenbe, E., Pujolle, G., 1987. Introduction to DEMO Networks. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Gomez-Mejia, L., Balkin, D., Welbourne, T., 1990. Inﬂuence of venture capitalists on high tech management. The Journal of High
Technology Management Research 1, 103–118.
Gorman, DEMO, Sahlman, W., 1989. What do venture capitalists do? Journal of Business Venturing 4, 231–248.
Harrison, R.T., Dibben, M.R., Mason, DEMO, 1997. The role of trust in the informal investor s investment DEMO: An exploratory
analysis. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice 21 (4), DEMO
Hoﬀman, H., Blakely, J., 1987. You can negotiate with venture capitalists. Harvard Business Review (March–April), 6–24.
Lerner, J., 1994. Venture capitalists and the decision to go public. Journal of Financial Economics 35, 293–316.
Lerner, J., 1995. Venture capitalists and the oversight of private DEMO Journal of Finance 50, 301–318.
Papadopoulos, H.T., Heavey, C., DEMO, J., 1993. Queuing Theory in Manufacturing Systems Analysis and Design. Chapman and
Hall, London.
Pratt, S.E., 1998. Pratt s Guide to Venture Capital Sources. Securities Data Publishing, New York.
Robbie, K., Wright, DEMO, Chiplin, B., 1997. The monitoring of venture capital ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice 21 (4), 9–
28.
Sahlman, W., 1990. The structure and governance of venture-capital organisations. Journal of Financial Economics 27, 473–521.
Sandberg,W.R., 1986. New Venture Performance: The Role of Strategy,DEMO Structure,and the Entrepreneur. Lexington Books,
Lexington, MA.
Sapienza, H., Korsgaard, M.A., 1996. Procedural justice in entrepreneur–investor relations. Academy of Management Journal 39 (3),
544–574.
Steier, L., Greenwood, R., DEMO Venture capitalists relationships in the deal structuring and post-investment stages of new ﬁrm
creation. Journal of Management Studies 32, 337–357.
Sweeting, R.C., 1991. UK venture capital funds and the funding of new technology-based businesses: Process and relationships.
Journal of Management Studies 28, 601–622.
564
D.A.Shepherdet al./ EuropeanJournalof Operational Research163(2005)545–564
Timmons,J., Bygrave,DEMO, 1986.Venturecapitals role in ﬁnancing innovationfor economicgrowth.Journalof BusinessVenturing1,
161–176.
Tyebjee, T.T., Bruno, A.V., 1984. A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management Science 30, 1051–1066.
Zacharakis,A.L.,Meyer,G.D.,1998.Alackofinsight:Doventurecapitalistsreallyunderstandtheirowndecisionprocesses?Journal
of Business Venturing 13, 57–76.{1g42fwefx}