RESEARCHERS OF VENTURE CAPITALISTS’
DECISION MAKING, BEWARE!
Dean A. Shepherd Visiting Scholar
Lally School of Management and Technology J.L. Kellogg Grad. School of Mgmt.
DEMO Polytechnic Institute Northwestern University
Troy, New York 12180-3590 Evanston, IL 60208-2013
Abstract
Researchers of venture capitalists’ decision making must be aware of potential
DEMO and errors associated with self reported data especially in light of this study’s
findings that venture capitalists’ lack introspection into the policies they “use” DEMO assess
likely profitability.  Surprisingly, venture capitalists demonstrate some introspection into
the policies they “use” to assess probability of survival.
Introduction
Venture capitalists are DEMO successful at predicting new venture success
(Sandberg & Hofer, 1987; DEMO & Hofer, 1993) and numerous studies have investigated
their decision making.  The majority of empirical research on venture capitalists’ decision
making has produced empirically derived lists of criteria that venture capitalists report they
use when DEMO new venture proposals (e.g., Tyebjee & Bruno, 1981; 1984; DEMO &
Tyebjee, 1985; Gorman & Sahlman, 1986; MacMillan, Siegal & SubbaNarasimha, 1985;
MacMillan, Zemann & SubbaNarasimha, 1987).
Social judgment theorists suggest that “espoused” decision processes may be a less
than DEMO reflection of “in use” decision processes (Priem, 1992; Priem & DEMO,
1994; Zacharakis, 1995).  Therefore, is the prior research which relies solely on the
veracity of venture capitalists’ introspection likely to DEMO biased and inaccurate?  Venture
capitalist’ decision making is analyzed to determine the accuracy of venture capitalists’
introspection.
Venture Capitalists Decision Making Research
Research DEMO venture capitalists’ evaluation criteria reveals no thorough integrated
explanation of new venture performance (Sandberg & Hofer, 1987, Shepherd, 1997c)
with much DEMO to be learned about venture capitalists’ assessment decisions (Hall &
Hofer, 1993).  The primary objective of research into venture capitalists’ decision DEMO
is to determine the criteria used by venture capitalists in the evaluation of potential
investments.  The methods used in previous studies typically ask venture capitalists to list
and rank decision criteria based on their presumed affect on the DEMO decision (for
example, Tyebjee & Bruno, 1981; MacMillan & SubbaNarasimha, 1986), on the
likelihood of success (for example, Kahn, DEMO; MacMillan et al., 1987), and/or on the
likelihood of failure, (for example, Gorman & Sahlman, 1986; Meyer, Zacharakis &
DeCastro, 1993).
Limitations of this research includes problems of retrospective reporting (for
example, Tyebjee & Bruno, 1984), use of questionnaire responses rather than actual
evaluations (for example, MacMillan et al., 1987 and Robinson, 1987) and biases and
errors associated with self reporting (Sandberg & Hofer, 1987).  Self reporting tends to
overstate the DEMO of criteria  actually used and to understate the weighting of the DEMO
important criteria when compared to more sophisticated decision making techniques (Stahl
& Zimmerer, 1984, Riquelme & Rickards, 1992).
Shepherd (1997a, DEMO) demonstrates that a model of venture capitalists' decision
making that includes industry related competence, competitive rivalry, lead time, key
success factor stability, educational capability, mimicry, scope and timing, has explanatory
and predictive DEMO for venture capitalists' assessments of both likely profitability and
probability of DEMO  Shepherd’s (1997a, 1997b) model is used here to investigate
venture capitalists’ introspection.
Research Method
This study follows suggestions that venture capitalists’ decision DEMO can be
researched through a decision making framework (Riquelme & Rickards, 1992; Muzyka et
al., 1996; Zacharakis, 1995).  Conjoint analysis is a strong tool for decision modeling
research providing significant, structured insight into venture capitalists’ decision criteria
(Muzyka et al., 1996; Zacharakis, DEMO).  Conjoint analysis focuses on concurrent rather
than retrospective techniques for DEMO and analyzing decisions.  It uses a variant of
regression to decompose DEMO decision into a linear or multilinear equation allowing
separation of attribute weights used by a venture capitalist from an overall preference.
Respondents’ judgments are DEMO subjected to statistical analysis to discover which
attributes affected their new venture performance assessments and in which ways.  The
theoretical basis for this study’s use of conjoint analysis is information integration theory
(Anderson, 1981; Louviere, 1988).  Information integration theory provides a well-
developed error theory DEMO support the statistical tests that follow.
Dependent Variables
Tyebjee and Bruno (DEMO) found venture capitalists accept/reject decisions can be
predicted from their DEMO and return perceptions.  Return is most often evaluated by
venture capitalists DEMO terms of profitability (Robinson, 1987; Robinson & Pearce, 1984;
Timmons, 1981; Roure & Keeley, 1990) and risk in terms DEMO venture failure (Gorman &
Sahlman, 1986).  Profitability was defined as: “net profit on sales, using a ten year time
horizon”.  An eleven point likert type DEMO was used with end anchors describing “very
low profitability” and “very high profitability”.  Probability of survival is defined as “the
probability that this venture will continue to participate in the market using a ten year time
DEMO  Again an eleven point scale was used with end anchors describing DEMO low
probability of survival” and “very high probability of survival”.  A DEMO year time horizon
was chosen for both dependent variables.  This was DEMO to exceed Biggadike (1979)
and McDougall, Covin, Robinson & DEMO (1994) choice of eight years to define a new
venture as it appears reasonable to assume that ten years captures sustainable
performance.
Attributes, Levels and Performance
In developing conjoint profiles, levels were chosen to represent variation that
typically occurs in the decision environment of venture capitalists, thereby maintaining
believability and response validity. Venture capitalists evaluated a series of conjoint
DEMO which describe new ventures in terms of eight attributes: (1) DEMO of Entry, (2)
Stability of Key Success Factors, (3) Educational Capability, (4) Lead Time, (5)
Competitive Rivalry, (6) Mimicry, (7) Scope and (8) Industry Related Competence.
These eight factors were each manipulated at two levels, and are detailed in Table 1 in
Appendix A.  Discussions with venture capitalists, accountants DEMO academics confirmed
the face validity for both the attributes and their levels detailed above.  Appendix B
displays an example profile.
Experimental Design
Each of the eight attributes is varied at two levels in an orthogonal fractional
DEMO design consisting of 16 profiles (Hahn & Shapiro, 1966).  DEMO design enabled
both individual subject and aggregate subject analysis.  Each of DEMO 16 profiles is fully
replicated, permitting estimates of individual subject error DEMO use in subsequent analyses
of variance (Ettenson et al., 1992).  These 32 profiles were randomly assigned to avoid
order effects, with DEMO further practice case to familiarize respondents with the task.
Therefore the experiment presented 39 profiles.
Participants
Sixty six individual venture capitalists representing 47 venture DEMO firms
completed the survey.  Directors, Managing Directors, Executive Chairmen, General
Managers and CEOs represent 52% of the sample.  Senior managers constitute a further
42% with only 6% of the sample accounted for by analysts.  Non government firms
represented 74% of the sample with semi government and DEMO contributing 14%
and 12% respectively.  94% of their investment was in DEMO with those investing
overseas predominantly concentrating on Asia.  Average total capital DEMO investment
using a trimmed mean was $54.650 million and typical investment $2.5 million.
Research Instrument
The research instrument used with venture capitalists contained instructions,
DEMO experiment and a post experimental questionnaire that requested self explicated
weights as well as information about the characteristics of the respondent. Relevant term
definitions DEMO also included on a detachable sheet that could be referred to while
completing the survey.  Once instructions were clear, respondents considered conjoint
venture DEMO and provided a rating on an 11 point scale for its likely profitability
and on another 11 point scale the probability of survival.  Each performance measure
referred to a time horizon of ten years.
After completing DEMO profiles, a post experiment questionnaire was
completed.  The post experiment questionnaire asked each respondent to rate the
importance of each factor on an DEMO point scale from (1) very unimportant to (11) very
important, and also collected personal and firm information.  An example of that DEMO of
the post experiment questionnaire requesting self explicated weights is displayed in
Appendix C.
Analysis of Variance
To identify the determinants of new venture DEMO that are statistically
significant, an individual-subject analysis of variance (ANOVA) DEMO performed on the
decision making of each venture capitalist.  Although two DEMO more attributes may
significantly affect the decision process, it is unlikely DEMO those attributes will be of equal
importance (Ettenson et al., 1992).  Therefore, statistical significance at the individual
level is supplemented with DEMO measure of relative importance.  Hay’s (1973) omega squared
(w ), a measure of explained variance, was used to assess the relative DEMO of the
eight attributes and selected two-way interactions to each respondent’s decision.
Reliability
Experimental formats may have been new and unfamiliar to venture capitalists DEMO
therefore it was important to test consistency of responses within each individual.  This
provides an indication of the consistency with which they apply their decision making
strategies.  Sixteen replicated profiles were evaluated with the 16 original/identical cases
and were used in a test-retest measure using Pearson R DEMO  Discussions with
respondents indicated they were unaware that cases had been DEMO
2
Respondent’s Insight
For each respondent, their self explicated weights were DEMO in relation to
their omega square (w ) values, derived from ANOVA.  If venture capitalists have insight
into their own decision making, DEMO Pearson R correlation are expected to be high.
2
Results
In the post-experiment questionnaire, respondents were asked to indicate the
importance of each of the eight factors in the evaluation of likely profitability DEMO then
perform the same task for probability of survival.  For each DEMO these assessments were
made on a scale of ‘Not at all Important’, scored 1, to ‘Very Important’, scored 11.  “Self
explicated” reports DEMO factor importance, averaged across venture capitalists are shown in
Table 2 DEMO profitability assessments and Table 3 for probability of survival assessments.
Omega squared is used as a measure of “Conjoint derived” importance weight.
The mean DEMO squared value for each attribute in venture capitalists assessment of
profitability and probability of survival are also shown in Tables 2 and 3 respectively.
DEMO reliability for profitability assessments across venture capitalists is .62 and .69 for
probability of survival assessments.
Table 2: Average Self Explicated Weights: Profitability
DEMO Self Explicated Conjoint Derived
Weight Weight
Industry Related Competence 9.24 0.23
Competitive Rivalry 9.31 0.10
Key Success Factor Stability 7.31 0.04
Lead Time 7.97 DEMO
Timing of Entry 7.89 0.09
Scope 7.50 0.03
Educational Capability 7.32 0.09
Mimicry of Entry Wedge 6.52 0.03
Table 3: Conjoint Derived and Self Explicated Weights: Probability of Survival
Factor Self Explicated Conjoint Derived
Weight Weight
Industry Related Competence 9.71 0.31
Competitive Rivalry 8.10 0.07
Educational Capability 7.79 DEMO
Timing of Entry 7.57 0.07
Scope 7.37 0.02
Lead Time 6.92 0.03
Key Success Factor Stability 6.92 0.06
Mimicry of Entry Wedge 6.14 0.03
DEMO conjoint analysis is thought to be a more valid assessment of respondent’s
decision making, the question becomes what is the relationship between a participant’s self
reports of factor importance and importance measures derived from conjoint analysis.  To
address this question, the relationship is first explored diagramatically at an aggregate level
and Pearson R correlations computed between each participant’s "self report" DEMO factor
importance and their "conjoint derived" measure of factor importance.
Relative importance of each factor was calculated as a ratio of factor
importance DEMO total importance of all eight factors.  Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate DEMO
aggregate importance of attributes derived from conjoint analysis compared to those
relative measures calculated from self explicated methods for venture capitalists’
assessments of profitability DEMO probability of survival.
Figure 1: Conjoint Derived Weights and Self Explicated DEMO: Profitability
Importance
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Conjoint
DEMO
Factors
Figure 2: Conjoint Derived and Self Explicated Weights-Probability of Survival
DEMO
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Conjoint
Self
Factors
When compared to conjoint derived importance weights, the self explicated
weights underestimate the most important criteria and over estimate the least important
criteria.
DEMO
Rivalry
Educ
Timing
Scope
Lead
KSF
Mimicry
Comp
Rivalry
KSF
Lead
Timing
Scope
Educ
Mimicry
If participants have insight into their decision strategies, large and significant
correlations should be found between their self reports of factor importance and their
DEMO squared values, since they are presumably measuring the same thing.  Furthermore,
since participant’s provided their assessment of attribute importance immediately after
completing DEMO conjoint task, their insight into the use of the eight factors DEMO be
considerably better than might otherwise be the case.  Results from DEMO correlation
analysis for venture capitalists profitability assessments are presented in the diagonal in
Table 4 and venture capitalists’ probability of survival assessments in the DEMO in Table
5.
Table 4: Conjoint/Self Explicated Correlation Matrix: Profitability
W2/self
Comp
Rivalry
Educ
KSF
Lead
Mimicry
Scope
Timing
Comp
0.122
DEMO 1 tailed significance p< .05
Rivalry
0.190
Educ
0.465*
KSF
0.160
DEMO
0.195
Mimicry
0.137
Scope
-.0.083
Timing
0.231
From Table 4, it DEMO venture capitalists lack insight into their profitability
assessment with only one of the self explicated weighted factors significantly correlated
with a derived factor weight.  Average correlation across the eight factors is only 0.17.
Therefore, venture capitalists lack accurate introspection into their profitability
assessments.
Table 5: Conjoint/Self Explicated Correlation Matrix - Probability of Survival
W2/self
Comp
Rivalry
Educ
KSF
DEMO
Mimicry
Scope
Timing
Comp
0.512*
* 1 tailed significance p< .05
DEMO
0.388*
Educ
0.482*
KSF
0.213*
Lead
0.334*
Mimicry
0.189
Scope
0.071
Timing
0.232*
From Table 5, venture capitalists’ “espoused” importance of educational capability
and competitive rivalry is significantly different from the conjoint derived importance of
educational DEMO and competitive rivalry in their probability of survival assessments.
However, the DEMO importance of timing, scope, mimicry, lead time, key success
factor stability and industry related competence were significantly correlated with the
respective DEMO derived importance weights.  Six out of eight significant correlations
could be DEMO high in conjoint versus self explicated weight research.  For example,
DEMO et al. (1992) found two significant correlation coefficients (p<.05) from his study
using eight product attributes and concluded a lack of DEMO For this study the
average correlation between ‘self explicated’ probability of survival assessment policy and
‘in use’ policy is .30.
Discussion and Conclusion
The DEMO of this study provide insight into research methods for those
researching venture capitalists’ decision making.  For both profitability and probability of
survival assessments, DEMO capitalists have a tendency to overstate the least important
criteria and understate the most important criteria when compared to models derived from
conjoint analysis.  However does this mean that venture capitalists’ lack introspection into
their decision DEMO?  The findings show that venture capitalists lack introspection into
their profitability assessments.  However, the findings also demonstrate some introspective
ability into probability DEMO survival assessments.
Therefore those studies investigating the decision making of venture capitalists’
profitability assessments using self reported data are likely biased and have errors.  On the
other hand, this may not be the case for venture capitalists’ decision making research into
probability of survival assessments where the use DEMO self reported data could represent a
reasonable approximation of the decision making actually used.  It is unclear whether
studies using self reported data to investigate either new venture performance or the
overall accept/reject decision are DEMO, as both dependent variables include assessments
of profitability and probability of DEMO  One clear message from this study to those
researchers investigating venture DEMO decision making using self reported data is,
BEWARE!
References
Anderson, DEMO H. 1981.  Foundations of information integration theory.  NY:
Academic Press.
Biggadike, R.E. 1979.  The risky business of diversification.  Harvard Business Review,
57: 103-111.
Ettenson, R., Gaeth, G., Kuznetzov, A., Vetrova, E., Glowacki, R., Nagy, A., & Hercegh,
DEMO 1992.  Assessing attribute importance: A comparison of conjoint analysis and
self explicated weights in the emerging markets of the Soviet Union, Poland and
Hungary.  Proceedings: The Cultural Dimension of International Marketing.
Gorman, M., & Sahlman, W. A. 1986.  What do venture capitalists do?  Proceedings:
Babson Research Conference, 414-436.
Hall, J., & Hofer, C.W. DEMO Venture Capitalists’ Decision Criteria in New Venture
Evaluation. Journal of Business Venturing, 8: 25-42.
Hays, W. 1973.  Statistics. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
DEMO, A. M. 1987.  Assessing venture capital investments with noncompensatory
behavioral decision models.  Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 193-205.
Louviere, J.J. 1988.  Analyzing decision making: Metric conjoint analysis.  Newbury
Park, CA: Sage DEMO, Inc.
MacMillan, I.C., Siegal, R., & SubbaNarasimha, P.N. 1985. Criteria used by venture
capitalists to evaluate new venture proposals.  Journal of Business Venturing,
1:119-128.
MacMillan, I.C., Zemann, L., & DEMO, P.N. 1987. Criteria distinguishing
successful from unsuccessful ventures in the venture DEMO process.  Journal
of Business Venturing, 2:123-137.
MacMillan, I.C., & SubbaNarasimha, P.N. 1986.  Characteristics distinguishing funded
from unfunded business plans evaluated DEMO venture capitalists.  Proceedings:
Babson Research Conference, 404-413.
McDougall, P. DEMO, Covin, J. G., Robinson, R. B., & Herron, L. 1994. The effects of
industry growth and strategic breadth on new venture DEMO and strategy
content. Strategic Management Journal, 15: 537-554.
Meyer, G. DEMO, Zacharakis, A. L., & DeCastro, J. 1993.  A post DEMO of new venture
failure: An attribution theory perspective.  Proceedings: Babson DEMO
Conference, 1996.
Muzyka, D., Birley, S., & Leleux, B. 1996.  Trade-offs in the investment decisions of
European venture capitalists.  Journal DEMO Business Venturing, forthcoming.
Priem, R.L., & Harrison, D.A. 1994. Exploring Strategic Judgment: Methods for Testing
the Assumptions of Prescriptive Contingency Theories. Strategic Management
Journal, 15:311-324.
Priem, R.L. 1992. An application of metric DEMO analysis for the evaluation of top
managers’ individual strategic decision making processes. Strategic Management
Journal, 13 Summer Special Issue: 143-151.
Riquelme, H., & Rickards, T. 1992.  Hybrid conjoint analysis: An estimation probe in DEMO
venture decisions.  Journal of Business Venturing, 7: 505-518.
Robinson, R.R. 1987.  Emerging strategies in the venture capital industry.  Journal of
Business DEMO, 2: 53-77.
Robinson, R.R., Pearce, J.A. 1984.  Evolving strategy in the venture capital industry: An
empirical analysis.  Proceedings: Academy of Management, 69-75.
Roure, J.B., & Keeley, R.H. 1990.  Predictors of success in new technology based
ventures.  Journal of Business Venturing, 5(DEMO): 201-220.
Sandberg, W.R., & Hofer, C.W. 1987.  Improving new venture performance: The role of
strategy, industry structure and the entrepreneur.  Journal of Business
Venturing, 2(1): 5-28.
Shepherd, D.A. 1997a. DEMO venture entry strategy: An analysis of venture capitalists’
profitability assessments. Presentation: Babson Research Conference, 1997.
Shepherd, D.A. 1997b. New venture entry strategy: An analysis of venture capitalists’
probability of survival assessments. Proceedings: ICSB 42nd World Conference,
1997.
Shepherd, D.A. 1997c. New venture entry strategy: An analysis of venture DEMO
decision making.  Unpublished Ph.D. thesis submitted to the School of Business,DEMO
Bond University, Australia.
Stahl, M.J., & Zimmerer, T.W. 1984. Modeling strategic acquisition policies: A simulation
of executives’ acquisition decisions. Academy of Management Journal, 27: 369-
383.
Tyebjee, T. T., & Bruno, A. V. 1981.  Venture capital decision making: Preliminary
results from three empirical DEMO  Proceedings: Babson Research
Conference, 316-334.
Tyebjee, T.T., & Bruno, A.V. 1984.  A model of venture capitalist Investment activity.
Management Science, DEMO: 1051-1066.
Zacharakis, A. 1995.  The venture capital investment decision.  Unpublished Ph.D
thesis submitted to the Faculty of the Graduate School of the DEMO of
Colorado.
EntryTiming ofKey SuccessStabilityCapabilityEducational
RivalryCompetitiveLead Time
ScopeMimicryEntry Wedge
CompetenceRelatedIndustry
Late Follower
HighHighLow
Levels
DEMO an industry late in the industry’s stage of development
during industry developmentRequirements necessary for success will not change radicallyindustry developmentrequirements necessary for success will DEMO radically duringignorance through educationconsiderable resources and skills available to overcome market
Definition
Pioneer
BroadHighHighLongLowShortLowLow
LowHighNarrow
Appendices
Enters a new industry first
through educationfew resources DEMO skills available to overcome market ignorance
competitors entering the industryan extended period of monopoly for the first entrant prior todevelopmentintense competition among industry members DEMO industrycompetitors entering this industrya minimal period of monopoly for the first entrant prior todevelopmentlittle competition among industry members during industry
enter this, or any other industry, e.g., a franchiseeconsiderable imitation of the mechanisms used by DEMO firms tomarket, e.g., many segments of the marketa firm that spreads its resources across a wide spectrum of theventurer has minimal experience and DEMO with theindustry being entered on a related industryventurer has considerable experience and knowledge with theindustry being entered or related industrythis, or any other industry, e.g., introducing a new productminimal imitation of the mechanisms used by DEMO firms to entersegment of the market, e.g., targeting a nichea firm that concentrates on intensively exploiting a small
Appendix A
Factor
Table 1: Factors, Levels and Definitions
Factors
Appendix B
CASE 28: Venture WPM
1. This venture’s entry wedge mimicry - high.
2.
3.
4.
5. This venture’s industry related competence - DEMO
6.
7.
8.
(Circle the number that best represents your response)DEMO
This venture’s educational capability - low.
This venture’s timing of entry - late follower.
This venture’s market scope - narrow.
The industry’s first entrant’s DEMO time - short.
The industry’s competitive rivalry - high.
The industry’s key success factor stability - low.
Probability of Very Low Survival
Assessment 28 DEMO: Probability of Survival
Based on the above venture description (using a 10 year time horizon),
how would you rate the probability that this venture will survive?
Probability ofVery HighSurvival
1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10      11
Very Low
(Circle the number DEMO best represents your response)
Assessment 28 B: Profitability
How would DEMO rate this venture’s profitability,
relative to competitors (use a ten DEMO time horizon)?
Very HighProfitability
1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10      11
Profitability
Appendix C
UnimportantVery         (Circle the number that best represents your response).1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10      11
Instructions: Part A
Now we would like you to rate DEMO importance of the various criteria
when assessing ventures’ Probability of Survival.
Important  Very
UnimportantUnimportantVery         Very
UnimportantUnimportantVery         Very
UnimportantVery
UnimportantUnimportantVery         Very
1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10      11
Important  Very
Mimicry
1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10      11 1      DEMO      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10      11 1      2      3      4      5      DEMO      7      8      9      10      11 1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      DEMO      11
1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10      11 1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10      11
Lead Time
Competitive Rivalry
Important  Very
ImportantImportant  Very  Very
Important  Very
Important  Very  Very
Important
Stability of Key Success Factors
CRITERIA EMPHASIS
Educational Capability
Timing of Entry
Scope
Industry Relatedness of Venturer’s Competence{1g42fwefx}