1042-2587-01-262
Copyright 2002 by
Baylor University
An Intentions-Based
E T&P Model DEMO
Entrepreneurial Teams’
Social Cognition*
Dean A. Shepherd
Norris F. Krueger
Research has identiﬁed crucial antecedents of corporate entrepreneurship. Research has
also identiﬁed crucial antecedents DEMO entrepreneurial thinking. This article uses lessons
from social cognition to explicitly link these two issues. We adapt an intentions-based model
of how to promote DEMO thinking from its original domain of individual entrepre-
neurship and translate that model to the domain of corporate entrepreneurship. From our
intentions-based model of DEMO social cognition of entrepreneurial teams, we emphasize the
importance of perceptions DEMO desirability and feasibility and that these perceptions are from
the team as well as the individual perspective. This leads to three propositions about entre-
DEMO teams and an outline of the opportunities for future research.
INTRODUCTION
In a rapidly changing world, organizations need to continually identify new oppor-
tunities beyond existing competencies (Hamel & Prahalad, 1989; Mintzberg, 1994) if
they are to survive. Therefore, organizations adopt what Covin and Slevin (DEMO) describe
as an “entrepreneurial orientation,” i.e., an orientation toward seeing (and acting on)
opportunities regardless of existing resources (Stevenson & DEMO, 1990). The resulting
innovations provide a basis for economic proﬁt (McGrath et al., 1996). Not surprisingly,
corporate entrepreneurship scholars have tried to increase our understanding of what
makes a ﬁrm entrepreneurial by DEMO the corporate environment and its impact
on corporate venturing. However, there DEMO not yet been a theory-driven model that
explicitly links our understanding of entrepreneurial thinking in this context.
While corporate entrepreneurship scholars have made a DEMO contribution to
our understanding of the corporate environmental factors that encourage an individual to
be entrepreneurial, few studies have investigated the corporate environmental factors
that encourage teams to be entrepreneurial. This is surprising for a number DEMO reasons.
First, recent research has concluded that teams are central to DEMO understanding of what
makes an organization entrepreneurial (e.g., Senge, 1990; Brown & Eisenhardt, 1995;
Anderson & West, 1998). A DEMO that is entrepreneurial is one that is focused on
Please send all correspondence to: Dean A. Shepherd, Leeds School of Business, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 82309-0419. email: Dean.Shepherd@Colorado.edu
Winter, 2002 167
Figure 1
An Intentions-Based Perspective of Entrepreneurial Teams and Social
Cognition: A Focus on the Intersection of Three Important Literatures
Cognition
Entrepreneurship
Teams
Basis DEMO an Intentions-Based
Model of Entrepreneurial
Teams’ Social Cognition
proactively and creatively seeking opportunities to bring into existence future goods and
services (cf. Stewart’s “team” [1989]). Second, as Jelinek and Litterer point out, under-
standing DEMO activity at the organization level requires “...a cognitive para-
digm which focuses on [both] individual sense-making and collective decision processes,
and on the DEMO context . . .” (1995, p. 137). This is particularly important
because information processes in a group often differ from individuals’ processes DEMO
sensemaking and enactment (cf. Weick, 1979). In particular, a DEMO model, such as a
perceived opportunity held by a team need DEMO reﬂect the models held by its members.
Given the importance of teams to entrepreneurial activity, and the inadequacy of
addressing collective decisions by simply summing the cognitions of team members, it
is important to offer a model of social cognition to the study of corporate entrepreneur-
ship. In DEMO article we develop such a model and in doing so make a number of contri-
butions to the corporate entrepreneurship literature. In particular, we show that work in
social cognition offers the researcher a way to DEMO individual-level research to more
collective settings, such as teams. The intentions-based DEMO model does adapt to
collective settings, but requires insights from social DEMO to do so.
This article focuses on the intersection of three research streams—cognition, entre-
preneurship, and teams—as represented in Figure 1. We explore DEMO aspect of cognition
that occurs in teams with regard to entrepreneurship using an intentions-based lens. An
intentions-based perspective is not the only lens from DEMO the intersection can be
viewed, and as illustrated in Figure 1, there are considerable bodies of literature that do
not occur at the DEMO intersection and therefore, will not be reviewed here.
The current article DEMO as follows. First, we investigate the intersection of entre-
preneurship and DEMO Second, we investigate the intersection of teams and cogni-
tion. Third, we explore the three-way intersection of cognition, entrepreneurship, and
teams using DEMO intentions-based perspective and offer a model with some surprising
implications. Using a different theoretical lens, or investigating the two-way intersections
168
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 1
Critical Antecedents of Corporate Entrepreneurship
Study Antecedents of Corporate Entrepreneurship
DEMO (1991) Growth-oriented strategies, environmental scanning, formal communication,
integrating venture activities, and clearly deﬁned (supportive)
organizational values
Kuratko et al. (1993) Explicit goals, feedback/positive reinforcement, individual responsibility
(trust, conﬁdence), and results-based rewards
Kuratko & Hornsby (2001) Appropriate rewards, explicit management support, resources available,
supportive organization structure, and risk-acceptance
Stewart (1989) Leadership, competitor pressure, organizational culture
Other (e.g., Jelinek & Litterer, 1995; Develop skills/routines, championing, strong customer focus, and “Buy-in”
Shane, 1994; Pinchot, 1985) across organization
of Figure 1, are also likely to advance the ﬁeld. We therefore conclude with an DEMO
discussion of where future research appears most fruitful.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND COGNITION
Table 1 details the ﬁndings of studies that are representative of research into DEMO
rate entrepreneurship. (Please see also Zahra, Jennings, & Kuratko [1999] DEMO a broader
review of corporate entrepreneurship). A common theme across these studies is that orga-
nizations differ to the extent to which they DEMO an environment that fosters entrepre-
neurial activity. Such “fostering” environments have been characterized by, for example,
appropriate reward systems and top management support (e.g., Hornsby et al., 1993),
explicit goals (e.g., DEMO et al., 1993), and appropriate organizational values (e.g.,
Zahra, 1991), to name three widely recognized characteristics. These studies have pri-
marily investigated outcomes to describe differences between more and less entrepre-
neurial DEMO We believe there is a need for more research that focuses on processes to
explain why entrepreneurial behaviors occur, and a focus on deeper cognitive processes
is a step in the right direction.
Recently, corporate entrepreneurship scholars have begun to investigate the interplay
of the corporate environment and DEMO cognition processes of individual members within
that organization, i.e., the environmental conditions that motivate the individuals within
the organization to act entrepreneurially (e.g., Kuratko, Montagno, & Hornsby, 1990).
The underlying assumption is DEMO acting entrepreneurially is something that people
choose to do and the top management of an organization can inﬂuence that choice by the
corporate environment DEMO they create. This is consistent with the view that perceiving
and acting upon opportunities is based, at least in part, on intentional behavior (Dutton,
1993).1
1. Some entrepreneurial behavior, for example, the DEMO of opportunities, can be argued to be unin-
tentional although it DEMO requires a motivated propensity activated by the promise of ﬁnancial gain (DEMO,
1979).
Winter, 2002
169
... Intentions are assumed to capture the motivational factors that inﬂuence a DEMO
ior; they are indications of how hard people are willing to DEMO, of how much of an
effort they are planning to exert DEMO order to perform the behavior.
As a general rule, the stronger DEMO intention to engage in a behavior, the more likely
should be DEMO performance (Ajzen, 1991, p. 181).
While there have been DEMO number of studies that have investigated the discovery of
opportunities using an intentions-based perspective (e.g., Krueger’s “cognitive infrastruc-
ture” model [2000]), none DEMO the authors’ knowledge have used the construct of intentions
to provide insights into corporate entrepreneurship. Furthermore, although studies have
highlighted the importance of entrepreneurial teams (e.g., Stewart, 1989; Katz, 1993), there
has been insufﬁcient research into the cognition of these entrepreneurial teams. We use an
DEMO perspective to develop a model of the social cognition of entrepreneurial
teams. Before introducing our model, however, we highlight the importance of using DEMO
social cognition approach to investigate the intentions of entrepreneurial teams.
ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAMS AND SOCIAL COGNITION
Our focus on social cognition denotes an underlying assumption DEMO teams develop
supraindividual or collective mental models. Considerable research supports this assump-
tion (Hayes & Allinson, 1998; Swieringa & Wierdsma, 1992; Whyte, 1998; Gibson, 1999;
Feltz & Lirgg, 1998). Social DEMO argues that teams are social artifacts of shared
cognitive maps or enactments of a collective mind, rarely a simple combination of the
cognition of individual members (Allaire & Firsirotu, 1984; Hayes & Allinson, 1988)DEMO
March (1991) suggests that the learning of individual members of a team accumulates
over time in a code of received truth, in other words, a shared mental model. Individuals
modify a shared mental model but are also inﬂuenced (socialized) by this shared mental
model. The approach DEMO in the present article is consistent with the above beliefs.
The pursuit of cognition at the individual level may have limits in developing an
DEMO of the social cognition at the team level (Schneider & Angelmar, 1993;
Simon, 1973; Weick, 1979). Social cognition (at DEMO the deﬁnition used here) relates to
the cognition by teams—how teams DEMO information for their members through
socially shared cognition (Moreland, Argote, & Krishnan, 1996). Such an approach is
distinct from research that DEMO how individuals process information about themselves,
the group, and its DEMO (e.g., Judd, Ryan, & Park, 1991; Allison & Messick, 1985).
While there is less known about socially shared cognition than we prefer (Moreland et al.,
1996), there has been considerable recent scholarly interest (e.g., Hayes & Allinson, 1998;
Whyte, DEMO; Gibson, 1999; Feltz & Lirgg, 1998). We believe that a social cognition
perspective can help us understand a team’s intention to DEMO entrepreneurial.
AN INTENTIONS-BASED MODEL OF ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAMS’
SOCIAL COGNITION
Based on the relationships identiﬁed in the above discussion, we use a social cogni-
tion approach to investigate an intentions-based model at the team level of analysis.
DEMO models have been successful in investigating the cognition of indivi-
duals and their resultant behavior (Ajzen, 1987; Kim & Hunter, 1993). DEMO deﬁne a team’s
entrepreneurial intention as the motivational attitudes to bring into existence future goods
and services. The intention to be entrepreneurial must be DEMO with nonmotivational
170 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
factors, such as necessary resources, in order for the intention to DEMO entrepreneur-
ial activity (Ajzen [1985] discusses nonmotivational factors). In particular, Ajzen’s
“theory of planned behavior” posits that intentions toward a given target DEMO will
depend on perceptions: the perception that the course of action DEMO within one’s compe-
tence and control (thus feasible) and is personally desirable.
Teams’ Perceptions of Feasibility and Entrepreneurial Intentions
For entrepreneurial intention to DEMO high, the team must perceive this course of action
as feasible, i.e., it can actually be implemented. The perception of feasibility reﬂects
actual ﬁnancial resources and human skills only to the degree that the team DEMO
their contributions to successful performance. Thus, the perception of feasibility has DEMO
to do with beliefs about efﬁcacy at the individual level and, DEMO argue, at the group level.
Efﬁcacy is discussed ﬁrst at the DEMO level of analysis (self-efﬁcacy) and then at the
team level (DEMO efﬁcacy).
Self-Efﬁcacy. Research into the phenomenon of self-efﬁcacy suggests that people who
believe they have the capacity to perform (high self-efﬁcacy) will DEMO (Bandura, 1991;
Eden & Aviram, 1993; Gist, 1987; Gist & Mitchell, 1992; Waung, 1995). Self-efﬁcacy
refers to the conviction that one can successfully execute the behavior required (Bandura,
1977, p. 193). Thus, it reﬂects the perception of a personal DEMO to do a particular
job or set of tasks. High self-efﬁcacy leads to increased initiative and persistence and thus
improved performance; low self-efﬁcacy reduces effort and thus performance. Indeed,
people with high self-efﬁcacy think differently DEMO behave differently than people with
low self-efﬁcacy (Bandura, 1986, 1995; Eden, 1992). It appears that self-efﬁcacy affects
the person’s choice of action and the amount of effort exerted (e.g., Waung, 1995).
Bandura (1991) proposes that self-efﬁcacy judgments are inﬂuenced by enactive mastery
DEMO, vicarious experiences, verbal persuasion, and physiological arousal.
Entrepreneurship scholars have DEMO that self-efﬁcacy is positively associated with the
creation of a new independent organization (Krueger & Brazeal, 1994).
Collective Efﬁcacy. If fellow team DEMO are needed to support an intention (such as
for entrepreneurial behaviors), perceptions of collective efﬁcacy are likely to also be
important (Bandura DEMO, 1995). Collective efﬁcacy refers to a team’s belief in their
DEMO capabilities to organize and execute the courses of action required to produce
given levels of attainments (Bandura, 1997, p. 477). In short, it is a collective belief that
the team can be effective (DEMO, 1987; Shea & Guzzo, 1987b; Lindsley, Brass, & Thomas,
1995). While research on collective efﬁcacy has chosen different ways DEMO measure it, col-
lective efﬁcacy is conceptually distinct from the aggregation DEMO the self-efﬁcacy of each
member of the team (Lee, 1992; DEMO & Madigan, 1997; Silver & Bufanio, 1996; Feltz
& Lirgg, 1998), since it is a team level attribute (Bandura, 1997). For example, each
member of the team may have relatively low self-efﬁcacy yet the team has a high col-
lective efﬁcacy towards entrepreneurship (see Feltz & Lirgg [1998] for an example of
the independence of DEMO and collective efﬁcacy).
Theoretically, it seems like group efﬁcacy is DEMO from the individual beliefs group
members hold about themselves or their group, because group efﬁcacy arises through
group interaction and the process of collective cognition. That is, group efﬁcacy
forms as group members collectively acquire, DEMO, manipulate and exchange infor-
mation about each other and about their DEMO, context, process and prior performance.
Through processes of interaction, this DEMO is combined, weighted, and inte-
Winter, 2002 171
grated to form group efﬁcacy. These same collective processes do not occur DEMO
self-efﬁcacy formation or when members form individual beliefs about their group
(DEMO, 1999, p. 138).
Research on collective efﬁcacy is less well developed than on self-efﬁcacy but is
nonetheless telling in this domain. Teams DEMO high collective efﬁcacy should perceive
their team as effective, choosing more DEMO goals (Whitney, 1994), expending
more effort, and persisting longer DEMO the face of adversity (Cannon-Bowers, Tannenbaum,
Salas, & Volpe, 1995; Hodges & Carron, 1992). Collective efﬁcacy appears to affect DEMO
team’s ability to visualize success, attributions made to the team (especially positive out-
comes), and attributions made to the environment (especially negative outcomes) (Little
& Madigan, 1997). Several studies have demonstrated a link between collective efﬁcacy
and team performance (e.g., Earley, 1993; DEMO & Carron, 1992; Little & Madigan,
1994; Prussia & DEMO, 1996). Successful performance provides positive outcome feed-
back, which in turn strengthens the initial judgment of collective efﬁcacy. The reverse
is the DEMO for a team with low efﬁcacy that spirals to lower performance and lower
efﬁcacy (Silver & Bufanio, 1996). As with self-efﬁcacy, it often becomes a self-
fulﬁlling prophecy. It is important to note that DEMO efﬁcacy is thought to be just as
context speciﬁc as self-efﬁcacy (DEMO et al., 1993; Bandura, 1986). That is, a team might
have high collective efﬁcacy toward searching for opportunities to extend their DEMO
product line, yet have low collective efﬁcacy toward the discovery of DEMO radical oppor-
tunities. Thus, any measure of collective efﬁcacy must also DEMO context speciﬁc.
As demonstrated in the literature review, summarized in Table DEMO, corporate entre-
preneurship studies have focused on aspects of actual competence (e.g., providing
speciﬁc goals and appropriate reward structures [Kuratko et al., DEMO and formal envi-
ronmental scanning [Zahra, 1991]). From our intentions-based DEMO of the social cog-
nition of entrepreneurial teams, we emphasize the DEMO of perceptions of feasibility
(subjective rather than objective) and that these perceptions are from the team (collec-
tive efﬁcacy). Thus,
Proposition 1: The higher the perceived feasibility of a team’s entrepreneurial abil-
ities, the greater that team’s entrepreneurial intention. Perceived feasibility of entre-
preneurial behavior is higher when the team’s collective efﬁcacy toward
entrepreneurial behaviors is higher.
DEMO the above proposition, an investigation of those activities that best enhance
DEMO efﬁcacy for entrepreneurial behaviors provides a basis for a deeper under-
standing of a team’s entrepreneurial intention. We begin with an adaptation of Bandura’s
(1995) work at the individual level of analysis, and investigate, at the team level of analy-
sis, the impact of various types of experience and learning on a team’s entrepreneurial
collective efﬁcacy. Enactive mastery, i.e., a team’s positive previous experience with a
task, is likely to DEMO perceptions that successfully completing such tasks is feasible.
For example, those DEMO an initial success at entrepreneurship will expect to succeed
again and therefore will have higher collective efﬁcacy than those teams that were unsuc-
cessful DEMO initial attempts who will expect to be unsuccessful again. Therefore, initial
DEMO for a team are vitally important since they could represent the start of
a self-fulﬁlling prophecy—the team succeeds; the team thinks it will succeed again;
because the team thinks it will succeed again means it DEMO have a higher probability of
succeeding, and the process continues. Weick (1979) suggests a strategy of “small wins”
wherein organizations can provide opportunities for teams to attempt innovative things
at relatively low risk (i.e., DEMO and failing is not career threatening). Providing such
172 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
experiences that demonstrate mastery (in even a limited domain) can increase DEMO
perceptions, so long as the team perceives their mastery as generalizable. DEMO, of course,
requires that the team perceives salient and credible DEMO that the skills are transferable
to newer, larger domains. Jelinek and DEMO (1995) argue that entrepreneurial organi-
zations offer exactly such cues.
We know that human judgment is also shaped by the feedback arising from DEMO above-
mentioned experiences. Feedback involves an environment that returns some measure of
the outputs of a system back to the system, which produced that output. The feedback
then allows the system to compare its present state DEMO an ideal state, to adjust itself in
light of that comparison DEMO bring itself closer to that ideal state (Doherty & Balzer, 1988,
p. 163). We propose that feedback has an important impact DEMO the team’s collective efﬁ-
cacy. For example, Krueger and Dickson (1994) found that performance feedback on sit-
uation-speciﬁc–decision-making tasks signiﬁcantly changed self-efﬁcacy, DEMO, in turn
led to higher perceptions of opportunity. While there may DEMO questions about the gener-
alizability of these results from self-efﬁcacy to collective efﬁcacy, we suggest that con-
ceptually the argument is useful. Karl, DEMO, and Martocchio (1993) suggest that
feedback in the form of DEMO reinforcement may have a positive impact on collective
efﬁcacy.
Training represents a formal process of providing/obtaining feedback. Good training
will provide important skills DEMO teams require to be entrepreneurial, which in turn may
increase the DEMO collective efﬁcacy. For example, training in self-management
increased self-efﬁcacy (Frayne & Latham, 1987). Training that incorporates techniques
to increase self-efﬁcacy has been found to lead to increased performance (Earley, 1994;
Eden & DEMO, 1993; Gist, 1987; Gist, Stevens, & Bavetta, 1991; Waung, 1995). We
propose that these ﬁndings about the relationship between training and self-efﬁcacy are
generalizable to training a team to enhance its DEMO efﬁcacy toward entrepreneurial
behaviors. It is important to note that as collective efﬁcacy is task speciﬁc, so should the
training, i.e., training in tools that assist in developing collective efﬁcacy for entrepre-
neurial behaviors.
Enhanced DEMO of task feasibility can also arise from observing the experi-
ences of others. Vicarious experience refers to a team observing another, comparable team
that is able to conduct entrepreneurial behaviors successfully. Often, this takes the form
of behavioral modeling, where the observation is planned and managed to enhance the
experience and increase the likelihood that the team will internalize the DEMO Increas-
ing the visibility of what is truly feasible is central to benchmarking, but it also increases
the credibility of what is feasible: DEMO a competent team within the organization (or even
outside the organization) can do this, so can we.” Thus,
Proposition 2: A DEMO collective efﬁcacy toward entrepreneurial behaviors is
higher when it has more entrepreneurial experiences. Entrepreneurial experiences are
enhanced by enactive mastery, feedback, training, and vicariously learning from the
experiences of others.
Teams’ Perceptions of Desirability and DEMO Intentions
Not only must the team perceive entrepreneurial behaviors as feasible for entrepre-
neurial intention to be high, the team must also perceive this course of action as desir-
able. Perceived desirability refers to the team’s DEMO toward entrepreneurial
behavior—the degree to which the team has a favorable or unfavorable evaluation of the
potential entrepreneurial outcomes. In the Fishbein-Ajzen framework (1975), personal
Winter, 2002
173
attitude depends on perceptions of the consequences of outcomes from performing the
DEMO behavior, in short, an expectancy framework. However, the model also DEMO that
these perceptions are learned. Creative actions are not likely to emerge unless they
produce personal rewards that are perceived as relatively more desirable DEMO more famil-
iar behaviors (Ford & Gioia, 1995).
Gerhart and Milkovich (1992) offer the notion of “compensation bundles,” which
comprise DEMO mix of positive, negative, and neutral consequences that result from a behav-
ior. Increasing perceived desirability requires that the team perceives (on balance) as
desirable the compensation bundles provided by a supportive culture for its entrepre-
neurial activity. Perception remains important, i.e., objectively supportive reward systems
DEMO not be perceived as desirable by the team. For example, an DEMO supportive
extrinsic reward (money for entrepreneurial outcomes) can even sometimes interfere with
intrinsic motivation (for individuals see Amabile, 1997) or formal reward systems are
overridden by informal punishments. As such, we should view the set of rewards (and
punishments), both intrinsic and extrinsic, both DEMO and informal, in terms of a com-
pensation bundle. From our DEMO cognition perspective we argue that it is a team’s per-
ception of its compensation bundle that determines the desirability of entrepreneurial
behaviors. Thus,
DEMO 3: The higher the perceived desirability of a team’s entrepreneurial
behaviors (e.g., the team’s compensation bundle is perceived as more rewarding of
entrepreneurial behaviors), the greater that team’s entrepreneurial intention.
Previous Research and Our DEMO Perspective of
Entrepreneurial Teams
Table 1 earlier demonstrates that there is some consensus about the important
antecedents of corporate entrepreneurship. Consider Table 2 below. DEMO we have taken
the key antecedents from Table 1 and analyzed them in light of the social cognition–based
intentions perspective. If there is any DEMO to believe that the intentions perspective has
merit in explaining and predicting entrepreneurial thinking, then we now have a theo-
retical basis to guide us as we explore the “black box.” We now explore further the DEMO
category and its four antecedents—develop skills/routines, championing, strong customer
focus, and “buy-in” across the organization—from our intentions-based model of an
entrepreneurial team’s social cognition.
Customer Focus. At the interface of marketing and entrepreneurship, there is a long-
running interest about the relationship between entrepreneurial orientation and DEMO
ing orientation (Miles & Arnold, 1991) with some evidence that DEMO they are not
interrelated, then successful entrepreneurs need some degree of DEMO orientations. Why
might a strong marketing orientation translate into a stronger entrepreneurial orientation?
The decision-making literature (as early as Lord Keynes) points DEMO how even the illu-
sion of more knowledge in a situation lowers the perception of risk. A team’s greater
understanding of prospective customers may DEMO invaluable in and of itself, but in terms
of this model, knowledge likely increases a team’s conﬁdence in assessing the value of
possible DEMO Thus, even if this customer focus does not increase the team’s DEMO
ceived magnitude of an opportunity’s desirability, it should reduce the inevitable DEMO
tainty associated with a novel situation, thus increasing the perceived desirability DEMO that
opportunity.
174 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 2
Possible Impact of Key Antecedents on Cognitive Infrastructure
Study Antecedent DEMO Impact on Cognitive Infrastructure
Zahra (1991) Growth-oriented strategies Sends signal that entrepreneurship is desirable and that at least
management believes it to be DEMO
Environmental scanning If the team is good at environmental scanning then this could build its
collective efﬁcacy. It might also provide information on the
DEMO of entrepreneurship.
Formal communication Depends on the content of the communication. It could send credible
cues to the team that entrepreneurship is desirable.
Norms (see also Stewart, 1989) They might indicate to the team that DEMO is desirable.
Other norms, such as punishing failure, could have the opposite
effect.
Integrating venture activities If perceived as useful by the team DEMO could increase its collective
efﬁcacy.
Clearly deﬁned supportive values Increase team’s perception of the desirability of entrepreneurship.
Kuratko et al. (1993) Explicit goals DEMO team’s perception of the desirability of entrepreneurship.
Feedback/Positive Reinforcement Signal the desirability of team entrepreneurship. It could also help
build a team’s collective DEMO
Individual responsibility Ensures that cues from management are seen as credible and builds
collective efﬁcacy.
Results-based rewards If entrepreneurship is perceived as highly likely DEMO results-based
rewards will increase the perceived desirability of entrepreneurship.
But given the uncertainty of entrepreneurship then this reward
structure may dissuade entrepreneurship.
Kuratko & DEMO Appropriate rewards Could increase perceived desirability of entrepreneurship and used as
(DEMO) feedback to build collective efﬁcacy.
Explicit support by management Demonstrates that DEMO is desirable and if resources are
(also Stewart) part of this support then it likely increases the team’s perceived
collective efﬁcacy.
Supportive structure DEMO increase both perceptions of desirability and feasibility.
Stewart (1989) Organization culture Would reinforce perceptions of supportive social norms.
Risk-acceptance Reduces fear over uncertain DEMO and therefore increases the
team’s perception of desirability.
Others Build skills/routines If perceived as useful for entrepreneurship will build efﬁcacy.
Championing Sends explicit DEMO on the desirability of entrepreneurship and if
perceived by the team to provide additional resources then increases
collective efﬁcacy.
Strong customer focus If perceived DEMO this provides information useful for entrepreneurship
then this could increase efﬁcacy.
“Buy-in” across organization Could increase both perceptions of desirability and feasibility.
“Buy In.” DEMO others, Jelinek and Litterer (1995) argue persuasively that an organi-
DEMO that is truly entrepreneurial is characterized by the visible “buy in” of its members.
(They also argue that intrapreneurs should proactively seek “buy in” from key people in
the organization.) That is, even those organization DEMO and subgroups that are not
directly involved with innovative activity will visibly support those who are. In terms of
this model the stronger the DEMO of organization-wide “buy-in,” the more likely
there will be a pervasive sense that social norms are supporting opportunity seeking by
the team (Kuratko, Montagno, & Hornsby, 1990; Pinchot, 1985). Further, if DEMO buy-in
is genuine across members of the team, there would likely DEMO an enhanced sense of col-
lective efﬁcacy and therefore, a greater DEMO intention.
Winter, 2002
175
Champions. One visible sign of organizational support for entrepreneurial activity is the
DEMO of “champions” (Pinchot, 1985; Shane, 1994). Champions tend to serve two key
functions. First, they can provide psychological support (e.g., encouragement) to nascent
and latent corporate entrepreneurs. Second, they can provide DEMO support in terms of
marshalling resources to assist the novice corporate entrepreneur. The former suggests
that the presence of champions again enhances entrepreneurial intentions DEMO enhancing
the perception of supportive social norms (and perhaps by reinforcing DEMO of
personal desirability). The latter function suggests champions increase perceptions of
collective efﬁcacy as the champion-marshalled resources provide positive performance
cues. Moreover, champions often serve an informative function, e.g., teaching the “ropes”
to prospective DEMO teams, giving them a roadmap of how to use what the
DEMO has available to support their entrepreneurial activities.
Routines. Every organization has its routines (and standard operating procedures) that
guide sensemaking (Weick, 1979)DEMO Corporate entrepreneurship is enhanced in those
organizations where even the more quotidian routines are supportive of entrepreneurial
activity (Pinchot, 1985). Certainly we DEMO argue that where “business as usual” activities
are unfriendly to new initiatives, new ventures will likely be perceived as less legitimate;
thus, DEMO norms will be perceived as less supportive. However, routines that reinforce
DEMO sense that entrepreneurial activity is “business as usual” likely increase the perceived
collective efﬁcacy of entrepreneurial teams and thus their entrepreneurial intentions.
Skills. The DEMO acquisition of a skill need not translate into perceptions of self-efﬁcacy,
let alone actual efﬁcacy (Bandura 1986, 1997). However, another function that champi-
ons and mentors can serve is to persuade prospective entrepreneurial DEMO that their
skills will indeed translate into success in the new venture. Moreover, it is not necessar-
ily enough to raise collective efﬁcacy at speciﬁc tasks needed for that venture. Champi-
ons (and mentors) can DEMO the entrepreneur identify the critical skills (and knowledge)
needed, again enhancing collective efﬁcacy at a broader level. Knowing they have the
proper DEMO set should raise the entrepreneurial team’s sense of efﬁcacy at launching a
corporate venture.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
A signiﬁcant and growing focus in the DEMO of entrepreneurship is the effort to gain
a better understanding of the genesis of entrepreneurial thinking. Nowhere should that
be more evident than in DEMO entrepreneurship (Hornsby et al., 1993; Kuratko et al.,
1993; Brazeal & Herbert, 1999). To nurture an organization where entrepreneurial think-
ing is the norm may be invaluable but requires much greater attention DEMO both the tangi-
ble infrastructure and the cognitive infrastructure that nurture and support entrepreneurial
thinking.
However, we have learned from studying corporate entrepreneurship that it is not
necessarily about the individual entrepreneur inside the organization; it is much more
about building an organization that behaves entrepreneurially (Jelinek & Litterer, 1995;
Brazeal & Herbert, 1999). We need to DEMO careful about anthropomorphizing an organi-
zation, as organizations do not “think” DEMO se. Yet, groups of individuals often think and
behave differently than DEMO be expected from simply aggregating what each individ-
ual thinks; hence, the importance of a social cognition perspective.
176
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
We have attempted here to take the insights from the past work DEMO how to success-
fully nurture and support entrepreneurial thinking in individuals (DEMO, 1982; Krueger
& Brazeal 1994; Brazeal & Herbert, 1999; DEMO, 2000) and adapt those insights at the
group level. Insights from the rich, broad social cognition literature give us several new
insights about how to develop an entrepreneurship-friendly “cognitive infrastructure”
at the collective level. For DEMO, Bandura (1986, 1995) has long argued that there is
also a perceived collective efﬁcacy to complement his widely used construct of per-
DEMO self-efﬁcacy. However, it has been challenging to identify appropriate measures
of DEMO efﬁcacy, let alone understand the role of collective efﬁcacy in promoting DEMO
perception of opportunity. As discussed above, social cognition research offers consid-
DEMO direction.
Still, how does this social cognition perspective serve to help DEMO understanding of
the entrepreneurial organization? Much of the literature on corporate DEMO
has focused on the antecedents, correlates, and consequences of intrapreneurial activity.
Relatively few of these studies have sought to pry open the “black DEMO to gain a deeper
understanding of why these antecedents enhance an organization’s entrepreneurship.2 Our
model presented in this article provides an opportunity to understand DEMO
We now have an opportunity to better understand the known antecedents of intrapre-
neurial activity by analyzing the process(es) by which their impact is realized. Consider
the diagnostic value of this approach. What if an DEMO ﬁnds that champions are
not encouraging entrepreneurial activity? This could be DEMO the champion is not
impacting perceptions of desirability and/or feasibility. For example, Carsrud et al. (1993)
found that at the individual DEMO, role models and mentors only inﬂuence entrepreneur-
ial behavior if they DEMO inﬂuence a critical attitude, such as self-efﬁcacy. We
agree with Carsrud DEMO al.’s (1993) ﬁnding but add the proviso that champions that inﬂu-
ence a team’s collective efﬁcacy may enhance entrepreneurship even if they have DEMO
impact on self-efﬁcacy.
Therefore, we can now take a much more DEMO look at how antecedents impact
the level of corporate entrepreneurship. It might be that an antecedent has no impact at
the individual level but DEMO perceived as highly important by the team, and/or an antecedent
DEMO enhance perceptions of feasibility but diminish perceptions of desirability. We can
also focus on the components of the model in light of testable implications (e.g., the role
of compensation bundles and their utility in understanding team-level perceptions of
desirability). There are a number of such implications from DEMO model for scholars of
corporate entrepreneurship and also opportunities for further theoretical development and
empirical testing that will make an important contribution to the DEMO Speciﬁcally,
the following section discusses more speciﬁc future research into the perceived desir-
ability and feasibility of entrepreneurial teams, other elements of the model, and other
research issues such as measurement.
Future Research
Research into opportunity recognition has begun to move from descriptive studies to
deeper, richer studies into the “how” and “why”—applying strong theoretical bases to
explain the DEMO ﬁndings. This article offers another step in understanding how
2. The work of Brazeal, Herbert, Jelinek, Kuratko, and Zahra have been the DEMO helpful, as they insist on
investigating how organizations can nurture entrepreneurial DEMO
Winter, 2002
177
viable opportunities are recognized (in this case, by teams within organizations) and we
anticipate that our colleagues will identify additional opportunities to enrich DEMO under-
standing of entrepreneurial thinking and how to nurture it.
Conceptual Issues. Figure 1 depicts how this analysis operates at the intersection of mul-
DEMO literatures. While this has proven fruitful, reviewers and others have continuously
DEMO the many other angles we could explore in research on innovation, DEMO entrepre-
neurship, on cognition and social cognition, and on teams. We look forward to research
that tests this model’s applicability to these different DEMO of those important domains.
For one example, there is much in DEMO vast research on teams and innovation that suggest
subtle (and not DEMO subtle) nuances that research might explore (e.g., nascent versus long-
DEMO teams; diverse versus homogeneous teams; radical versus incremental inno-
vation, DEMO so forth). Similarly, there are aspects of the social cognition DEMO (e.g.,
the seminal work of Fiske & Taylor) that could be further explored, both conceptually
and empirically, as we strive to DEMO understand how a more entrepreneurial mindset
actually operates to encourage opportunity seeking.
Empirical Testing and Measurement Issues. If our propositions are supported, then
research that extends current work on characteristics of the environment that motivate
individuals DEMO those that motivate teams will make a substantial contribution to the cor-
porate entrepreneurship literature. This requires empirical testing that introduces a number
of DEMO Let us illustrate with collective efﬁcacy. Questions remain about how the
team differs from the sum of its members; these questions are even thornier when we look
at cognitive phenomena. For example, collective efﬁcacy remains under-researched,
despite the success of studies that provide evidence of its importance (Lindsley, Brass, &
Thomas, 1995; Parker, 1993). Let DEMO consider the appropriate measurement of collective
efﬁcacy. The collective efﬁcacy literature offers more than one approach; ﬁnding the
optimal approach for studying entrepreneurship should be worth our efforts.
One approach assumes that collective cognition is the DEMO of the parts (the individ-
uals). Unfortunately, as argued in this article this is sometimes not the case due to social
dynamics (Feltz & Lirgg, 1998; Whyte, 1998). An alternative approach is to use global
measures of collective cognition. This may involve analysis of, for example, a spokesper-
son reporting on collective cognition (e.g., Namenwirth, Miller, & Weber, 1981). Or one
might analyze other reports that are the outcome of team cognition (e.g., annual reports
[Bettman & Weitz, 1983] or internal reports and minutes of meetings [e.g., Bartunek,
1984], or the investigation of team performance in cognitive tasks [e.g., Hill, 1982]).
Alternatively, each individual can respond on behalf of the team and then the average
score across individuals would represent collective DEMO (e.g., Earley, 1993), or col-
lective efﬁcacy might be DEMO by asking the team to give a consensus response to a
self-efﬁcacy instrument (e.g., Gibson, 1999).
We propose that the average score of the individuals responding on behalf of the team
is the most DEMO measure of team (social) cognition. Bandura (1997, p. 479)
himself proposes that “a group belief is best characterized by a representative DEMO for
the beliefs of its members and the degree of variability or consensus around that belief.”
Again, this merits rigorous testing. Regardless, the DEMO of entrepreneurial teams
remain an ideal domain in which to wrestle with such issues.
Given the importance of perceptions of desirability and feasibility in DEMO a
team’s entrepreneurial intention, future research could investigate the impact of DEMO
levels of objective factors on these perceptions. For example, conjoint analysis DEMO
be used to investigate which aspects of a compensation bundle are most salient to the
178 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
perception of desirability for a team. A conjoint experiment could be constructed DEMO
that a team (or members of the team responding on behalf DEMO the team) assesses the desir-
ability of a number of compensation DEMO where each compensation bundle has the
same factors but differs on the combination of the levels of those factors. This provides
the opportunity for DEMO research to infer whether an objective compensation factor impacts
perceptions of desirability for the team, plus the relative impact from each of the various
factors. (A longitudinal design that elucidates how changes in these critical attitudes
change intent would offer additional insights.) We should also seize the opportunity to
employ different methodologies that offer perhaps different insights into these phenom-
DEMO such as multiattribute utility scaling to capture both individual and collective per-
ceptions; or we might adapt social network software to exploit a graph theoretic
approach.3 Sound empirical studies will be of practical beneﬁt to organizations DEMO
ing to increase teams’ entrepreneurial intention. For example, the conjoint study DEMO
above allows organizations to optimize the perceptions of desirability and the cost of the
objective compensation factors.
Indirect Impact on Entrepreneurial Intentions. Researchers argue DEMO exogenous
factors inﬂuence intentions (and behavior) only indirectly by inﬂuencing desirability
and/or feasibility. For example, the presence of role models may or may not increase
entrepreneurial behavior, depending on whether the role models increased the team’s per-
ception of the desirability or feasibility of discovering and DEMO opportunities. (See
Krueger and Brazeal [1994] and Krueger [2000] for a DEMO detailed discussion at the
individual level of analysis.) Exogenous factors thus DEMO an impact only if they inﬂu-
ence the team’s perceptions.
It would be highly fruitful for scholars to test other demonstrated variables that are
DEMO to foster corporate entrepreneurship to see if those variables affect perceptions
of desirability or perceptions of feasibility, i.e., whether the relationship between estab-
DEMO variables in the literature and entrepreneurial outcomes are mediated by percep-
tions of desirability and/or feasibility. For example, cohesive teams seem better at
generating innovation. Does the cohesion increase perceptions of collective efﬁcacy or
increase DEMO perception that social norms are supportive—or both? Do cross-functional
teams (Senge, 1990) increase collective efﬁcacy? Furthermore, we have a substantial
literature DEMO suggests a variety of organizational characteristics that contribute to cor-
porate entrepreneurship. For example, does a ﬂat organizational structure affect teams’
perceptions of desirability? Of feasibility? Similarly, we can test the impact of personal
characteristics that seem to enhance corporate entrepreneurship. For example, if team
members are personally entrepreneurial, does that inﬂuence the team’s perceptions of
feasibility or of desirability of entrepreneurial activities?
Beyond Intentions. We used an “intentions” lens DEMO explore the three-way intersection
of cognition, entrepreneurship, and teams (illustrated DEMO Figure 1). This is not the only
perspective that could be used to explore the intersection and provide important insights.
For example, those focused on performance outcomes are likely to be more concerned
with the DEMO to which an entrepreneurial team’s perceptions match “reality,” i.e., use
DEMO measure of accuracy. Others might point out that intent means little, DEMO it does not
translate into action. While there is a strong correlation between intentions and behavior
(e.g., Kim & Hunter, 1993), exogenous factors can precipitate, facilitate, or inhibit that
3. We are indebted DEMO Kelly Shaver and Saras Sarasvathy respectively for these two suggestions.
Winter, DEMO 179
relationship. For example, consider Triandis’s (1967) perceptions of resource availabil-
ity and Shapero’s (1982) propensity to act. If decision-makers believe that the DEMO
resources needed are unavailable, intent is unlikely to become action. What DEMO
serve to crystallize beliefs and attitudes into a salient intention to be entrepreneurial or
to impede it? Does Shapero’s propensity to act (1982) help attitudes coalesce into inten-
tions or facilitate the realization of intentions? Is there a propensity to act that operates
at the team level?DEMO
Scholars of heuristics and biases could investigate the information processing by
entrepreneurial teams and compare those shared mental models with the mental models
of DEMO individual member of the team, or at least the outcomes of DEMO information pro-
cessing. For example, does the team’s shared mental model DEMO a more effective
heuristic than does each individual’s mental model? Does DEMO shared mental model of an
entrepreneurial team lead to more biases, DEMO biases, or different types of biases?
An Intentions-based perspective is DEMO of a number of lenses that could be used. We
encourage others to utilize a different lens to explore, what we argue, is DEMO important
intersection of cognition, entrepreneurship, and teams. In doing so, DEMO is the opportu-
nity to inform research at the two-way interactions and the three bodies of literature.
This is not to suggest that there DEMO not important work still to be done at the two-way
intersections. This special issue focuses on the intersection of cognition and entre-
preneurship. We DEMO added teams. There is also an opportunity for entrepreneurship
scholars to further explore the intersection of teams and entrepreneurship. There is already
a considerable DEMO of literature on, for example, innovative teams that would likely be
highly informative. For example, this model offers some insights about what might be
unique about teams that are entrepreneurial; however, as we mention DEMO the start of this
section, we look forward to research that DEMO enriched by further insights from research
into teams.
Conclusion
Given the importance of teams to entrepreneurial activity, and the inadequacy of
addressing collective decisions by simply summing the cognitions of team members, we
offer an intentions-based model of an entrepreneurial team’s social cognition to investi-
gate corporate entrepreneurship. DEMO this model we emphasize the importance of per-
ceptions of desirability and feasibility (subjective rather than objective) and that these
perceptions are from DEMO team as well as the individual perspective. This leads to a number
of propositions about entrepreneurial teams and provides the opportunity to gain a DEMO
understanding of why known antecedents impact the level of entrepreneurship. We hope
that we have highlighted an important “area” for investigation, provided some insight
through our approach, and encouraged others to use different perspectives to further
advance our understanding of the phenomenon at the intersection of cognition, entrepre-
neurship, and teams.
REFERENCES
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. Beckmann (eds.),
Action-control: From cognition to behavior,11–39. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
DEMO, I. (1987). Attitudes, traits, and actions: Dispositional prediction DEMO behavior in social psychology.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 20, 1–63.
180 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes,
50, 179–211.
Allaire, Y. & Firsirotu, DEMO (1984). Theories of organizational culture. Organization Studies, 5, 193–226.
DEMO, S. T. & Messick, D. M. (1985). The group DEMO error. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 21, 563–579.
Amabile, DEMO M. (1997). Motivating creativity in organizations: On doing what you love and loving what you
do. California Management Review, 40(1), 39–58.
Anderson, N. R. & West, M. A. (1998). Measuring climate for work-group innovation: development and
validation of the Team Climate Inventory. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 19, 235–258.
Bandura, A. (1977). DEMO: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review,
84, 191–215.
Bandura, A. (1986). The social foundations of thought and DEMO Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. (1991). Social-cognitive theory of self-regulation. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 50, 248–287.
Bandura, A. (1995). Exercise of personal and collective efﬁcacy in changing societies. In A. Bandura (ed.),
Self-efﬁcacy in changing societies. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1–45.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy: The DEMO of control. New York: Freeman.
Baron, R. (2000). Psychological DEMO on entrepreneurship: Cognitive and social factors in entrepre-
neurs’ success. Current DEMO in Psychological Science, 9(1), 15–18.
Bartunek, J. M. (DEMO). Changing interpretive schemes and organizational restructuring: An example of a
DEMO order. Administrative Science Quarterly, 29, 355–372.
Bettman, J. R. & DEMO, B. A. (1983). Attributions in the boardroom: Causal reasoning DEMO corporate annual
reports. Administrative Science Quarterly, 28, 145–183.
Bougon, M., Weick, K., & Binkhorst, D. (1977). Cognition in organizations: An analysis of the Utrecht Jazz
Orchestra. Administrative Science Quarterly, 22, DEMO
Brazeal, D. & Herbert, T. (1999). The genesis of DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
23(3), 29–46.
Brown, S. DEMO & Eisenhardt, K. M. (1995). Product development: Past research, present ﬁndings, and future
directions. Academy of Management Review, 20, 342–378.
Cannon-Bowers, J., Tannenbaum, S., Salas, E., & Volpe, C. (1995). Deﬁning competencies and establishing
team training requirements. In R.A. Guzzo & E. Salas (eds.), Team effectiveness and decision making in
organizations, 333–380. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Carsrud, A. L., Gaglio, C. M., & Olm, K. W. (1987). Entrepreneurs—mentors, networks, and successful
venture development: An exploratory study. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 12(2), 13–18.
Covin, J. & Slevin, D. (1991). A conceptual DEMO of entrepreneurship as ﬁrm behavior. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 16(1), 7–25.
Doherty, M. & Balzer, W. K. (1988). Cognitive DEMO In B. Brehmer & C. Joyce (eds.), Human judg-
ment: The SJT view, 163–197. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Dougherty, D. & Heller, DEMO (1994). The illegitimacy of successful product innovation in established ﬁrms.
DEMO Science, 5, 200–218.
Winter, 2002 181
Dutton, J. E. (1993). Interpretations on automatic: A different view of strategic issue diagnosis. The Journal
of Management Studies, 30, 339–357.
DEMO, P. C. (1993). East meets West meets Mideast: Further DEMO of collectivistic and individualis-
tic work groups. Academy of Management Journal, DEMO, 319–348.
Earley, P. C. (1994). Self or group? Cultural effects of training on self-efﬁcacy and performance. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 39, 89–117.
Eden, D. (1992). Leadership and expectations: Pygmalion effects DEMO other self-fulﬁlling prophecies in
organizations. Leadership Quarterly, 3, 271–305.
Eden, DEMO & Aviram, A. (1993). Self-efﬁcacy training to speed reemployment: DEMO people to help them-
selves. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 352–360.
Feltz, D. L. & Lirgg, C. D. (1998). Perceived team & player efﬁcacy in hockey. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 83, DEMO
Fishbein, M. & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief attitudes, intention and behavior: An introduction to theory and
research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fiske, S. T. & Taylor, S. E. (1984). Social Cognition. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Ford, C. M. & Gioia, D. A. (1995). Creativity in organizations: Ivory tower visions and real world voices.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Frayne, C. A. & Latham, G. DEMO (1987). Application of social learning theory to employee self-management
of DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 387–392.
Gerhart, B. & Milkovich, G. T. (1992). Employee compensation: Research and practice. In M.D. DEMO
& L.M. Hough (eds.), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 2nd ed., 481–569. Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Gibson, C. B. (1999). Do they do what they believe they can? Group efﬁcacy and group effectiveness across
tasks and cultures. Academy of Management Journal, 42, 138–152.
Gist, M. E. (1987). Self-efﬁcacy: Implications for organizational behavior and human resource management.
Academy of Management Review, 12, 472–485.
Gist, M. E. & Mitchell, T. R. (1992). DEMO: A theoretical analysis of its determinants and malleabil-
ity. Academy of DEMO Review, 7, 183–211.
Gist, M. E., Stevens, C. K., & Bavetta, A. G. (1991). Effects of self-efﬁcacy and post-training DEMO
tion on the acquisition and maintenance of complex interpersonal skills. Personnel Psychology, 44(4),
837–862.
Guzzo, R. A., Yost, P. R., Campbell, R. J., & Shea, G. P. (1993). Potency in groups: Articulating a construct.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 87–106.
Hamel, G. & Prahalad, C. K. (1989). Strategic intent. Harvard Business Review, May–June, 63–76.
Hayes, J. & Allinson, C. DEMO (1998). Cognitive style and the theory and practice of individual DEMO collective
learning in organizations. Human Relations, 51, 847–872.
Hill, G. DEMO (1982). Group vs. individual performance: Are N + 1 heads better than one? Psychological
Bulletin, 91, 517–539.
Hodges, L. & DEMO, A. (1992). Collective efﬁcacy and group performance. International Journal of Sport
Psychology, 23, 48–59.
182 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Hornsby, J., Naffziger, D., Kuratko, D., & Montagno, R. (1993). An interactive model of the corporate
entrepreneurship process, Entrepreneurship DEMO and Practice, 17(2), 29–37.
Jelinek, M. & Litterer, DEMO (1995). Toward entrepreneurial organizations: Meeting ambiguity with engagement.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 19(3), 137–168.
Judd, C. M., Ryan, DEMO S., & Park, B. (1991). Accuracy in the judgments DEMO in-group and out-group vari-
ability. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO, 366–379.
Karl, K. A., O’Leary, A. M., & Martocchio, J. J. (1993). The impact of feedback and self-efﬁcacy on per-
formance in training. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14, 379–394.
Katz, J. A. (1993). The dynamics of organizational emergence: A contemporary group DEMO perspec-
tive. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 17(2), 97–101.
Kim, M. & Hunter, J. (1993). Relationships among attitudes, intentions, DEMO behavior. Communication
Research, 20, 331–364.
Kirton, M. J. (1976). Adaptors & innovators: A description & measure. Journal of Applied Psychology, DEMO,
622–629.
Kirzner, I. (1979). Perception, opportunity and proﬁt. DEMO: University of Chicago Press.
Krueger, N. F. (2000) The cognitive infrastructure of opportunity emergence. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 24(3), 5–23.
Krueger, N. & Brazeal, D. (1994). Entrepreneurial potential and potential entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 18(3), 91–104.
Krueger, N. & Dickson, P. (1994). How believing in ourselves increases risk taking. Decision Sciences, 25(3),
385–400.
Kuratko, D. & Hornsby, DEMO (2001). Corporate entrepreneurship & middle managers: A model of corporate
entrepreneurial behavior. Paper presented at USASBE Conference, Reno, NV.
Kuratko, D., Hornsby, J., Naffziger, D., & Montagno, R. (1993). Implement entrepreneurial thinking in estab-
lished organizations. SAM Advanced Management Journal, 58(1): 28–39.
Kuratko, D., Montagno, R., & Hornsby, J. (1990). Developing an intrapreneurial assessment instrument for
an effective corporate entrepreneurial environment. Strategic Management Journal, 11, 49–58.
Lee, S. (1992). DEMO social cognitive approach to leadership: Application of self-efﬁcacy theory to leadership
DEMO the dyad and group level of analysis. Ph.D. dissertation, State University DEMO New York, Buffalo.
Lindsley, D., Brass, D., & Thomas, J. (1995). Efﬁcacy-performance spirals: A multilevel perspective.
Academy of Management DEMO, 20, 645–678.
Little, B. L. & Madigan, R. M. (DEMO). Motivation in work teams: A qualitative and quantitative exploration
of DEMO construct of collective efﬁcacy. Paper presented at Academy of Management Conference, DEMO
Little, B. L. & Madigan, R. M. (1997). The DEMO between collective efﬁcacy and performance in
manufacturing work teams. Small Group Research, 28, 517–534.
March, J. (1991). Exploration and exploitation in DEMO learning. Organization Science, 2, 71–
87.
McGrath, R. G. (1995). Advantage from adversity. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 121–142.
McGrath, R., Tsai, M., Venkataraman, S., & MacMillan, I. C. (1996). Innovation, competitive advantage,
and rent. Management Science, 42, 389–403.
Winter, 2002 183
Miles, M. P. & Arnold, D. R. (1991). The relationship between marketing orientation and entrepreneurial
orientation. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 15(4), 49–55.
Mintzberg, H. (1994). The Rise and Fall of DEMO Planning. New York: The Free Press.
Moreland, R. L., Argote, L. & Krishnan, R. (1996). Socially shared cognition at work: Transactive memory
and group performance. In J. L. Nye & A. M. DEMO, (eds.), What’s new about social cognition? Research
on socially DEMO cognition in small groups, 57–84. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Namenwirth, J. Z., Miller, R. L., & Weber, R. P. (1981). Organizations have opinions: A redeﬁnition of public.
Public Opinion Quarterly, DEMO, 463–476.
Parker, L. E. (1993). When to ﬁx it DEMO when to leave: Relationships among perceived control, self-efﬁcacy,
dissent, DEMO exit. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 949–959.
Pinchot, G. (1985). Intrapreneuring. New York: Harper and Row Publishers.
Prussia, G. E. & Kinicki, A. J. (1996). A motivational investigation of group effectiveness using social
cognitive theory. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 187–198.
Robinson, S. L. (1995). Violation of psychological contracts: Impact on employee DEMO In L.E.
Tetrick & J. Barling, (eds.) Changing employment relations: Behavior and social perspectives, 91–108.
Washington, D.C.: APA.
Schneider, S. DEMO & Angelmar, R. (1993). Cognition in organizational analysis: Who’s DEMO the store?
Organization Studies, 14, 347.
Senge, P. M. (1990). The ﬁfth discipline: The art and practice of the learning organization. New York:
Doubleday.
Shane, S. (1994). Are champions DEMO from non-champions? Journal of Business Venturing, 9(5),
397–422.
DEMO, A. (1982). Some social dimensions of entrepreneurship. In C. Kent, D. Sexton, & K. Vesper (eds.),
The Encyclopedia of DEMO Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Shea, G. P. & Guzzo, R. (1987a). Groups as human resources. In K. Rowland & G. Ferris, (eds.), Research
in personnel and human resources management, 323–356. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Shea, G. P. & Guzzo, R. (1987b). Group effectiveness: What really matters? Sloan Management Review, 28,
25–31.
Silver, W. S. & Bufanio, K. M. (1996). The impact of group efﬁcacy and group goals on group task
performance. Small DEMO Research, 27, 347–349.
Simon, H. A. (1973). The structure of ill-structured problems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 4, 181–201.
Stevenson, H. & Jarillo, J.C. (1990). A paradigm of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial management. Strate-
gic Management Journal, 11, 17–27.
Stewart, A. (1989). Team entrepreneurship. DEMO Park, CA: Sage.
Swieringa, J. & Wierdsma, A. (1992)DEMO Becoming a learning organization. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Triandis, H. DEMO (1967). Interpersonal relations in international organizations. Organizational Behavior and
Human DEMO, 2, 26–55.
Waung, M. (1995). The effects of self-regulatory coping orientation on newcomer adjustment and job
survival. Personnel Psychology, 48, DEMO
184 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Weick, K. (1979). The social psychology of organizing. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Whitney, K. (1994). Improving group task performance: The DEMO of groups’ goals and group efﬁcacy. Human
Performance, 7, 55–78.
Whyte, G. (1998). Recasting Janis’s groupthink model: The key role of collective efﬁcacy in decision
Fiascoes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 73, 185–209.
Zahra, S. (1991). Predictors and ﬁnancial outcomes of corporate entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Ven-
turing, 6(4): 259–285.
Zahra, DEMO, Jennings, D., & Kuratko, D. (1999) The antecedents and consequences of ﬁrm-level entrepre-
neurship: The state of the ﬁeld. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 24(2), 45–65.
Dean A. Shepherd is an assistant professor at the Leeds School of Business at the University of Colorado.
DEMO F. Krueger is an assistant professor at the College of Business at Boise State University.
The authors would like to thank. Ron Mitchell, three anonymous reviewers, Kevin Hindle, and participants
of the 2002 Victoria Conference DEMO Information Processing and Entrepreneurial Cognition for their valuable
comments on earlier drafts of this paper.
Winter, 2002
185{1g42fwefx}