140
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 49, NO. 1, MAY 2002
A Search Strategy for Assessing a
Business Opportunity
Dean A. Shepherd DEMO Moren Lévesque
Abstract—The optimal stopping model presented here explores
opportunity assessment with reference to a tradeoff between, on
the one hand, reducing decision DEMO and, on the other hand,
both increasing search costs and DEMO higher probability that the op-
portunity is grasped by a competitor. From this model we propose
a heuristic that specifies three threshold lines to DEMO four deci-
sion areas. Decision area 1 prescribes the business opportunity be
accepted, decision areas 2 and 4 prescribe that search continue,
and decision area 3 prescribes that the business opportunity be
rejected. We use DEMO simulation to investigate the robustness of the
heuristic beyond the model’s boundary conditions.
Index Terms—Decision model, dynamic programming, en-
trepreneurship, innovation, opportunity DEMO/search,
optimal stopping, sequential information gathering.
I. INTRODUCTION
UNDAMENTAL questions DEMO must be addressed to
F better understand business opportunities include: (1)
why, when and how some people can discover an opportunity
and (2) why, when and how some people can exploit these
opportunities while others cannot or do not [26]. Based on
Hayek [13], Venkataraman [30] argues that the possession of
useful knowledge varies among individuals and DEMO differ-
ences matter in the decision to exploit an opportunity as well
as the success of the exploitation process. Therefore, a key
component of the successful exploitation of an opportunity is
the accumulated information that the DEMO has at hand. This
introduces a number of important research questions: DEMO is
the nature of the search for information and the accumulation
of knowledge about the viability of an opportunity? When
should a manager stop searching for information about the
attractiveness of an opportunity and grasp it DEMO the window
of opportunity closes?
Opportunity assessment represents the use of knowledge (ac-
cumulated over time or through current information searching)
to accept or reject a specific business opportunity before the
window of opportunity DEMO Two bodies of theory are rele-
vant here—the prior learning theory considers how fast informa-
tion can be assimilated; and the neoclassical information search
theory considers how long managers may search for informa-
tion in the DEMO of time pressures to decide.
Manuscript received May 9, 2000; revised July 15, 2001. Review of this man-
uscript was arranged by Department Editor A. Marucheck.
D. A. Shepherd is with the Leeds School of DEMO, University of Colorado
at Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309-0419 USA.
M. DEMO is with the Weatherhead School of Management, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106-7235 USA (e-mail:
moren.levesque@weatherhead.cwru.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier DEMO 0018-9391(02)01596-9.
This article’s focus on how opportunity assessment comple-
ments recent research on opportunity recognition (e.g., [11]). In
one study, managers reported that “new venture ideas are a dime
a dozen. Evaluation DEMO the key” [15, p. 34]. While there has been
some research DEMO the evaluation of an opportunity and espe-
cially of firms pursuing opportunities [15], these assessments
have been static in that they often ignore the fact that windows
of opportunity can close. In contrast, our model considers two
dynamic factors: the probability that the window of opportunity
will close (so that the firm may lose a good opportunity to a
competitor) and the effects of the accumulation of knowledge
on (probabilistic) decision accuracy.
In what follows, we first investigate models of optimal search
strategies and target those that relate to the search for infor-
mation about DEMO opportunity for innovation. Second, we dis-
cuss neoclassical theory on the DEMO and costs of information
searching, and the prior learning theory that DEMO ability to assim-
ilate information is a function of the richness of one’s pre-ex-
isting knowledge. These theories lead to a number of assump-
DEMO to be included in the formulation of a model of opportunity
assessment. Third, we formulate the optimal stopping problem,
derive a heuristic decision rule, and present implications from
the model. Fourth, we conduct a DEMO and assess the per-
formance of the heuristic outside its constraining assumptions.
Finally, we offer some concluding remarks.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW AND RELATED MODELS
The economic-R&D literature offers a decision-theoretic ap-
proach to market entry DEMO best relates to our search model.1
A dynamic R&D investment problem is treated as a one-firm
optimization problem where the optimal stream of DEMO&D ex-
penditures is characterized over time and, if not already DEMO
determined, the optimal stopping time of the project is esti-
mated. DEMO, Cohen et al. [5] investigate the tradeoff be-
tween maximizing new DEMO quality and minimizing time to
market. They present a multistage model of new product de-
velopment and investigate how time to market and product DEMO
formance are affected by profit margins, length of the window
of DEMO, firm’s speed of product improvement, and com-
petitor product performance, DEMO name a few. They show that “an
improvement in the speed of product improvement does not nec-
essarily lead to an earlier time-to-market, but always leads to
1The economic-R&D literature has been categorized into game-theoretic DEMO
decision-theoretic models. In the game-theoretic literature, reviewed by Rein-
ganum [24], firms compete in the development of a new product. The deci-
sion-theoretic DEMO is used here. Kamien and Schwartz [18] and Granot
and Zuckerman [12] offer a review of this literature.
0018-9391/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE
SHEPHERD AND LÉVESQUE: A SEARCH STRATEGY FOR ASSESSING A BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 141
enhanced products” (p. 173). Lévesque [19] builds on Cohen et
al. [5] and focuses on startup firms where the flow of funding
is DEMO stochastically over time and, for a special class of
revenue functions, show that an improvement in the effect of
funding on quality does DEMO necessarily lead to an enhanced
product. Although these models parallel some of the elements
of our opportunity search model—for example, knowledge and
search expenditures—they do not incorporate the dynamics of
decision accuracy on the opportunity.
Chi, Liu, and Chen [3] present an optimal stopping formu-
lation of an investment project that takes an uncertain length
of time to develop and DEMO provide a partial return if not
completed. They also propose functional forms to characterize
the uncertainty and learning potential about the project’s
completion time. DEMO and Zuckerman [12] study R&D
projects involving choices of activities at various stages of the
development process. They incorporate aspects of learning as
DEMO as resource allocation into a basic model, and propose a
greedy-type DEMO to derive the optimal resource allocation
of a single-stage R&D project. While these models also capture
some elements of our model—for example, the search for
information—they do not incorporate the dynamics of decision
accuracy on DEMO opportunity.
Scholars have long been interested in peoples’ search for in-
formation [31]; for example, analytical models have been de-
veloped to describe DEMO individual’s search for jobs [29], [33]
and consumers’ search for products DEMO the resulting market
price dispersion [9], [14], [20], [29]. Of DEMO interest to our
model has been the modeling of demand for an innovative tech-
nology, which incorporates the dynamics of decision accuracy
([17], [21]). Olivia [22] describing McCardle [21] states: “A
firm evaluating an innovation or new technology starts out with
some information and a corresponding DEMO of the innova-
tion’s profitability. One of three conditions exists: (1) the profit
estimate is very high and the firm adopts because the potential
gains outweigh the risks; (2) the profit estimate is very low and
the firm does not adopt; and (3) the profit estimate is in between,
causing the firm to gather more information DEMO making a de-
cision” (p. 607). This process of sequentially DEMO informa-
tion and updating of prior profit estimates reduces the level of
uncertainty surrounding a decision to adopt a new technology.
An assumption of DEMO information gathering studies to
date has been that the opportunity is always available.2 While
these studies have made a substantial contribution to the liter-
DEMO, we can make a further contribution by incorporating as-
pects of DEMO decision not previously considered together: (1) that
the decision horizon DEMO be randomly truncated at any time be-
cause a competitor accepts the opportunity before the manager
makes a decision and (2) reducing the DEMO (increasing
the accuracy of the decision) regarding the expected profit of
the business opportunity by sequentially gathering information.
We now explore the search DEMO further. Neoclassical
search theory recognizes that the search for information has
both benefits and costs and thereby provides guidance on how
much time should DEMO invested in gathering information before
2For example, McCardle [21] states “the DEMO and timing of the innovation
is not of interest” (p. 1374)DEMO
making the decision to accept or reject an alternative. Fuhrer
[10] suggests that an unspecified amount of information is
necessary to ensure “model certainty,DEMO which is a necessary
condition to form rational expectations. The manager considers
the true outcome to be among a finite set of outcomes, each
of which is assigned an initial probability of being true. This
allows DEMO statistical evaluation of the benefits of additional in-
formation: more information DEMO some model uncertainty,
increasing the probability of grasping a “good” opportunity and
lowering that of choosing a “bad” one. A good opportunity is
DEMO that, if exploited by the manager, will generate gains while
a bad opportunity exploited will generate losses.
The costs of continued search include DEMO and time (both
of which represent an opportunity cost for a DEMO), not to
mention an increased probability of being pre-empted by a com-
petitor (the window of opportunity closing). Stigler [29] com-
ments that information costs are the costs of transportation from
ignorance to omniscience, and seldom can a trader afford to
make the entire trip. Search DEMO information should stop when
the costs of search exceed its benefits [16], [29]. There is evi-
dence from research on the learning curve that knowledge in-
creases with experience, but at a decreasing rate, although DEMO
exponential curve is not always smooth [27].3
Baumol [1] proposes that managers’ assessments are based
on expected payoffs. The manager has the choice to DEMO the
opportunity for exploitation, continue to search for informa-
tion that DEMO better reveal the attractiveness of the opportunity,
or reject the opportunity (do not exploit the opportunity and
cease searching). The attractiveness of the opportunity (good
or bad) is independent of the entrepreneur’s decision. DEMO,
the ability to make a decision may be lost if the window of op-
portunity closed. We propose that accepting a good opportunity
DEMO a gain while accepting a bad one generates a loss. Ad-
ditionally, when a good opportunity is rejected or lost because
the window of opportunity closed, the manager may be “penal-
ized” by losing the opportunity to a competitor. Such a penalty
represents a loss (a loss from a penalty is smaller than that from
accepting a bad opportunity which DEMO the added costs of
exploitation). Search costs are not considered in a manager’s
payoff structure but modeled separately. The existing literature
leads us DEMO the following assumptions.
Assumption 1: Knowledge increases over time yet at DEMO
stochastically decreasing rate.
Assumption 2: There is a search cost and DEMO accumulates
(at a constant rate) over time.
Assumption 3: (a) The probability that an accepted oppor-
tunity will prove good increases with knowledge. (b) The
probability that a rejected opportunity will prove good DEMO
creases with knowledge.
Assumption 4: The probability of the window of DEMO
nity closing increases over time.
Assumption 5: (a) The payoff DEMO a good opportunity
accepted is a gain. (b) The payoff from a good opportunity
rejected or lost because the window of opportunity closed
DEMO Yelle [32] for the learning curve and production costs and Besanko, DEMO
nove, and Shanley [2] for a discussion of the learning curve DEMO higher product
quality, more effective pricing decisions, and lower marketing costs.
142
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 49, NO. 1, MAY 2002
is a penalty. (c) The payoff from a bad opportunity DEMO
is a loss. (d) There is no payoff from a bad opportunity
rejected or lost because the window of opportunity closed.
III. AN DEMO STOPPING APPROACH TO OPPORTUNITY
SEARCH DECISIONS
Conventional profit maximizing models determine the best
time to stop an activity when the objective function (e.g., DEMO
imizing profits) can be expressed as a deterministic function
of time. DEMO, in many problem formulations, the objec-
tive function depends on the state of the decision system, which
evolves in a random manner over time, thus preventing it from
being a deterministic function of time. Only once the state sat-
isfies the conditions for optimality should the decision DEMO
stop the activity. These conditions for optimality are found by
formulating the opportunity assessment problem as an optimal
stopping model. In this section, we formulate the optimal stop-
ping problem, derive a search strategy for assessing a business
opportunity, and present implications of the model.
A. Problem Formulation
We formulate the business opportunity assessment problem
as a discrete-time continuous-state Markov DEMO process.
For more details on Markov decision processes, see Puterman
[23]. DEMO represent a period and the length (in number of
periods) of the planning horizon. Let 0 be the state
space where an element DEMO the level of knowl-
edge at and an upper bound on knowledge for any . Let
be the incremental knowledge at , which is DEMO nonnegative
bounded above random variable of mean that decreases
stochastically over time, that is,
for all and all .4 Therefore (e.g., [25]), is nonincreasing
over time. Knowledge at can thus be expressed as
(1)
where initial knowledge, , is (without loss of generality) zero.
By knowledge, we mean accumulated information that allows
one to recognize the value of a new opportunity, assimilate new
information about the viability of this opportunity, and apply
it to commercial ends (adapted from DEMO). Knowledge could be
measured by the total number of years experience of the man-
agerial team and/or members of the R&D DEMO (the cog-
nitive science literature suggests that experience is a good DEMO
for knowledge; [28], [4]).5 Possible operationalizations of the
model’s key parameters are offered in Appendix D (see Table
II).
Each period the manager must choose to stop or continue the
search. The manager DEMO a search cost due to continuing
the search one more period. The search cost is a fee involved
with searching or sampling to increase DEMO accuracy of one’s as-
sessment of an opportunity’s attractiveness. Examples of search
4An upper bound on k is not a real restriction since T DEMO finite and X is
bounded for any t in [0;T].
5There is the possibility of knowledge depreciation [7], e.g., from false infor-
DEMO, although in aggregate we argue (along with other sequential information
scholars) that knowledge increases with search.
costs include the financial expense involved in conducting focus
group research to try and determine whether a market exists DEMO
the opportunity; developing prototypes to indicate technological
and/or manufacturing feasibility; researching trends in demo-
graphics, psychographics, and other key market trends. DEMO
there is the possibility that in some situations previous period
search could provide an “experience effect” reducing search
costs, we argue that the information for assessing an opportunity
at a point in time is idiosyncratic and, therefore, search efficien-
cies generated from experience would be minimal. We propose
that a linear function provides a good approximation of this re-
lationship DEMO keeps the mathematics tractable.
If the manager chooses to stop at period (given that the
window of opportunity is currently open), the new venture’s ex-
pected profit will depend on expected gain at and on DEMO
lated search costs at . The portion of expected profit that is due
to expected gain (which can be a negative gain—a loss) DEMO
on the decision of accepting or rejecting the opportunity and the
accuracy of this decision. Therefore, the set of allowable ac-
tions given state is continue, accept, reject ,
where continue refers to continuing the search, accept refers
to stopping the search and accepting the business opportunity,
while reject refers to stopping the search and rejecting the busi-
DEMO opportunity. Selecting accept or reject (i.e., termination)
moves the system to state , where it remains forever with
continue ; the state DEMO is revised here to become
. A search policy specifies an action for
each state and time period .
The payoff from an opportunity DEMO depends on the entrepre-
neur’s decision and her/his state of knowledge at . We must
thus compare the expected values of accepting and DEMO an
opportunity, where the expectation is taken over the probability
distribution DEMO a good versus a bad opportunity (which distribu-
tion depends in DEMO on whether the opportunity is accepted or
rejected). Consequently, we DEMO decision accuracy by a set of
four conditional probabilities. Specifically, decision DEMO is
measured by the probability that an accepted opportunity will
prove good, which increases with knowledge and is denoted by
. We choose the functional form ,
where is the rate at which this probability increases with
knowledge and must be smaller than (to ensure that the
probability stays in ). Decision accuracy is also measured
by the probability that a rejected opportunity will prove bad,
which increases with knowledge and DEMO denoted by .
We choose the functional form , where
is the rate at which this probability increases with knowledge
and must be smaller DEMO .6
The manager’s objective is to maximize the expected total
reward (DEMO to as expected profit), which is received only
upon stopping (DEMO). The expected profit if is the
6We utilize linear functional forms for these probabilities for mathematical
tractability reasons. However, the structure of the heuristic is robust with respect
to some changes in these functional forms. DEMO instance, if p =f(k )
and p =f(k ) where f can be inverted (e.g., decision accuracy increases
with knowledge DEMO a decreasing rate with f(k )= pk ), then the heuristic takes
on a similar form. Of course, the thresholds on knowledge will take on different
values (e.g., with f(k )= pk , these thresholds would be the square of their
current expressions).
SHEPHERD AND LÉVESQUE: A SEARCH STRATEGY FOR ASSESSING A BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 143
level of knowledge at the beginning of period , and the action
DEMO to accept the opportunity is7
(2)
The manager can expect DEMO gain when a good opportunity is ac-
cepted, but expect a DEMO when a bad opportunity is accepted.
The manager thus weighs the risk of a big gain if a good oppor-
tunity is accepted against DEMO risk of a loss if a bad opportunity is
accepted; at DEMO search cost has accumulated to . When the
decision is to reject, the manager encounters a penalty when
the opportunity happens to be good, since competitors have ac-
cess to the good opportunity and will use it to increase their
market share at the manager’s expense. Therefore, when the de-
cision is to reject the opportunity, the expected profit if is the
level of knowledge at the beginning of period is
(3)
Equations (2) and (3) correspond to the value of DEMO reward
function when , and the decision is to ac-
cept and reject, respectively. Reward is zero when and
when . When the manager decides to continue one
more period rather than making a decision now, the fact that the
window of opportunity may close must be taken DEMO consid-
eration in the evaluation of the reward function. If the window
has closed, then there is no further decision to be made and the
manager is responsible for the accumulated search costs so far
and DEMO possible penalty cost for missing a good opportunity.
We denote by the probability the window of opportunity
closes, which is an increasing function of time . We choose the
functional form , where 0 is the DEMO at which
the window of opportunity closes and must be smaller than 1
(to ensure that the probability stays in 0, 1 ).
In our setting, however, the value of the reward function
from DEMO to continue cannot be easily formulated as it
depends on whether or not one is penalized from accepting
a bad opportunity, rejecting a good one, or being caught by
the window of opportunity closing on a good opportunity.
We, therefore, restrict our formulation to conditional rewards
that DEMO be shown sufficient to characterize an optimal search
strategy from applying a dynamic programming result with a
myopic property on future rewards. Hence, if the window of
opportunity is still open at , the expected profit DEMO with
continuing the search one more period and then accepting the
opportunity, given knowledge at , is expressed by
has a probability of 1 1 . (The probability the window of
opportunity closes depends on .) The expected profit associated
with continuing the search one more period and then rejecting
the opportunity, given knowledge at is
(5)
where DEMO there is a penalty from missing a good opportu-
nity, whether DEMO a good opportunity was rejected or be-
cause the window of a good opportunity closed.8
The manager’s objective is to decide when to stop DEMO
and whether or not to accept this opportunity so as to maximize
the expected profit. We utilize a standard dynamic programming
result to derive DEMO under which a relatively simple-form
policy is optimal. This dynamic programming result utilizes
conditional expectations that are taken over
and in (4) and (5) according to the proba-
bility distribution of . This result and proof of its applica-
tion are in Appendix A. In essence, this result demonstrates that
one can maximize expected profit by continuing the search DEMO
as long as the incremental expected profit of the next period is
positive, and stop just before it becomes negative. Thus, we can
DEMO the manager that it never makes sense (on average, under
the assumptions of our model) to continue searching when in-
cremental expected profit is decreasing in the hope that the sit-
uation will turn around DEMO become more profitable later.
B. Stopping Decision Rule
We propose a decision rule that has two steps:
Step 1) Has the window of opportunity closed yet? If YES
then stop (there is no additional DEMO to be made).
If NO then one moves on to Step 2.
Step 2) If
then one should stop the search now with a payoff
equal to
else one should continue the search one more DEMO
with an expected payoff equal to
(4)
where there is DEMO penalty from missing a good opportunity. The
second term in (4) is similar to the first two terms in (2), but is
diminished by the fact that the window must still be open, which
7Notice that we choose to talk about expected profit because an expected DEMO
is evaluated based on the probability distribution of accepting a bad versus a
good opportunity.
On the basis of the dynamic programming result utilized (see
Appendix A), the choice of opportunity search strategy depends
on DEMO assessment of the environment—specifically, an assess-
ment of the (observed) DEMO . Fig.1 describes an oppor-
tunity search decision for Step 2, DEMO Fig. 2 a “time slice” of the
opportunity search strategy model for that step. Since we have
8Notice that (5) is actually independent DEMO !.
144
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 49, NO. 1, MAY 2002
(1)
(2)
Fig. 1. Opportunity search decision trees (Step 2). (1) Payoff tree. (2) Knowledge-threshold tree.
assumed DEMO all but one parameter, namely the expected incre-
ment in knowledge DEMO the following period , be constant
over time, we choose to DEMO the search strategy in Fig. 2 in
a two-dimensional diagram where one dimension is represented
by while the other by . The value assigned DEMO both of
these dimensions can be plotted on Fig. 2. The corresponding
point will be located in one of the four “decision areas” defined
DEMO the three threshold lines. Fig. 1 defines each “decision area”
(with DEMO to the threshold lines in part 2) as well as the DEMO
responding search strategy (when to stop the search and whether
to DEMO or reject the opportunity).
For simplification of presentation, we define (as in Fig. 1)
(see the equation at the bottom of the following page.) Hence,
the horizontal threshold line in Fig. 2 is associated with an
upper knowledge bound corresponding to . The two DEMO
threshold lines are also associated with bounds on knowledge,
which depend on the expected increment in knowledge from
one period to the next DEMO on period . The negatively sloped
threshold line defines a condition on knowledge
that applies only when knowledge is below its upper bound
(decision areas 3 and 4), while the positively sloped threshold
line applies DEMO when knowledge is above its upper
bound (decision areas 1 and DEMO).
If knowledge at is larger than (Case a
in Fig. DEMO), then the relative benefits of waiting and continuing
to search are decreased and the relative benefits of accepting
(rather than rejecting) the DEMO are increased (represented
on Fig. 2 as decision area 1). DEMO manager should accept the
opportunity now. However, if knowledge at is DEMO than
(Case b in Fig. 1), then the relative benefits DEMO
SHEPHERD AND LÉVESQUE: A SEARCH STRATEGY FOR ASSESSING A BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 145
Fig. 2. Decision areas for a business opportunity assessment.
waiting and continuing DEMO search are decreased, and the relative
costs of accepting the opportunity DEMO higher than those of re-
jecting it (represented on Fig. 2 DEMO decision area 3). The manager
should reject the opportunity now. Otherwise, when knowledge
belongs to the interval or the interval , the relative
benefits of waiting and continuing to search are increased, and
even if the window of opportunity were to close, the lost benefit
would be minimal (represented on Fig. 2 as decision areas 2 and
4). The manager should continue the search.
We would like to point out DEMO in Fig. 2 the thresholds on
knowledge, namely and , are DEMO over time. However,
the decision boundaries associated with the diagonal lines in
Fig. 2 are not, and we next characterize how these lines move
over time (technical details are shown in Appendix B). We de-
rive a sufficient condition on the per-period search cost, namely
, under which the neg-
atively sloped line moves upward over time. Con-
DEMO, decision area 3 (stop the search and reject the op-
and
portunity) is increased over time, but decision area 4 (continue
the search) is decreased. Over time the expected increment in
knowledge, , DEMO, and it thus becomes more likely
for the manager to stop DEMO search (and reject the opportunity).
The positively sloped line rotates DEMO
over time, and hence does not allow one to conclude whether
DEMO areas 1 and 2 are increased or decreased over time.
C. Conditions for Optimality
For mathematical simplification, we have assumed that
(6)
DEMO that
(7)
Conditions (6) and (7) ensure that DEMO proposed structure for
146
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 49, NO. 1, MAY 2002
the decision rule makes sense.9 Condition (6) imposes a lower
DEMO condition on the gain from accepting a good opportunity
while Condition (DEMO) imposes an upper bound condition on the
rate over time at DEMO the window of opportunity closes.
The dynamic programming result imposes a condition [Con-
dition (2) in Appendix A] where once the manager chooses DEMO
stop the search, the expected incremental loss exceeds the ex-
pected DEMO gain at any period following the stop. Since
this dynamic programming result is based on a myopic property,
it is sufficient to verify DEMO, once the manager chooses to stop,
the expected profit associated DEMO stopping the search now ex-
ceeds that from continuing the search one more period (induc-
tion property). We show in Appendix A that (8) and (9) are suf-
ficient for optimality, where
and
(8)
(9)
Condition (8) requires that the expected DEMO in knowl-
edge from one period to the next be larger than a critical value,
while (9) imposes a lower bound on DEMO per-period search cost.
We should acknowledge that, when (6) and (8) hold, two of the
paths in Fig. 1 will never DEMO because the minimal expected in-
crement imposed on knowledge will make knowledge too large
(the bound on becomes negative).10
Condition (9) appears to be quite restrictive since if it holds
one has (technical details are offered in Ap-
pendix C). Hence, , and the
observed knowledge at any given time period should only be
compared to threshold , which is fixed over time (and thus in-
dependent of the DEMO increment in knowledge of the fol-
lowing period, ). Therefore, DEMO optimality proof in Ap-
pendix A holds for a simplified decision tree where one could
make a decision of rejecting or accepting the opportunity, but
one could never choose to continue the search. This makes sense
DEMO because our condition on the minimum per-period
search cost [(9)] is so restrictive that it would always cost too
much to continue DEMO search one additional period. Relaxing
this condition makes an analytical proof unattainable. There-
fore, we choose next to investigate how well the decision rule of
Fig. 1—which we now refer to as a heuristic—performs under
less DEMO conditions relative to a solution under perfect in-
formation.
9More specifically, DEMO conditions ensure that ( +L)  ;(+)  
L, and ( + L)   !t( + L + ) stay positive on the planning
horizon and thus, for the purpose of Fig. 1 and for any t2 [0;T];
L  !tL
 
( +L)   !t( +L +)
L  !tL L 
< < :
( +L)   !t( +L +) ( +L)  

10A DEMO form for p would not affect our decision rule per se, DEMO (7)
and (9) would read, respectively, p (T) < ( (+L) )=( (+L+))
and >( +L) +p (T)L, and !t or !(t DEMO) would be interpreted
as ! function of t or t +1, rather than ! multiplied by t or t +1.
IV. SIMULATION
Since DEMO sufficient conditions (on the model parameters) for
optimality given by (DEMO)–(9) may be highly restrictive, we under-
take a simulation analysis to study the robustness of the heuristic
proposed by Fig. 1. DEMO begin by describing how the simulation
model is built. Then, we DEMO an analysis of the robustness
of our proposed heuristic for multiple situations. Details of the
simulation analysis are available upon request.
A. The Simulation DEMO
First, we select a combination of model parameters where (6)
and (7) are always satisfied, but (8) and/or (DEMO) are sometimes vi-
olated.11 Given a combination of parameters, 1000 simulations
are run where, for periods 1 2 : (1) a Bernoulli variable
of parameter simulates whether the window of opportu-
nity has closed DEMO not, with 1 if the window has closed and
0 otherwise (we prevent the window from opening in future pe-
riods once it DEMO closed); (2) a normally distributed variable of
mean and standard deviation 1.5 simulates , where
is the increment in knowledge.12 The expected DEMO at which the
knowledge increment decreases over time is kept constant, DEMO
.13 For each simulation, knowledge is evalu-
ated, where , and expected profit are computed,
where
and
These simulations provide a stopping DEMO, a strategy to “ac-
cept” or “reject” the opportunity, and its corresponding expected
profit. When the proposed best time occurs after the window DEMO
closed, the recorded data corresponds to that for the maximal
profitability DEMO the period before the closing (we keep track of
how often DEMO occurs to ensure a selection of numerical values
for the parameters that will produce a reasonable distribution of
“accept,” “reject,” and “window DEMO). This corresponds to
a situation where the decision maker would have perfect infor-
mation on when the window closes and, therefore, represents DEMO
“solution under perfect information”.14
11Conditions (6) and (7) ensure that the proposed structure for the heuristic
makes sense. For instance it is DEMO for threshold A in Fig. 1 to be
below threshold B when (6) does not hold (more specifically one needs
> (=)L  ). Therefore, the heuristic is not applicable when these
conditions DEMO violated.
12We truncate above the random variable X to satisfy the upper bound con-
dition on knowledge K , which is used to ensure DEMO and are small enough
to keep the probabilities p (k) and p (k) in [0; 1] . This variable is also
truncated below, since negative increments in knowledge are not permitted in
our model.
13If T = 4;c = 10, and  = 160, DEMO  = 170; = 180, and
 = 190, i.e., the expected increment in knowledge from one period to the
next decreases at a rate that is equal to c.
14In this case, the decision maker never incurs a penalty from the window of
opportunity closing.
SHEPHERD AND LÉVESQUE: A SEARCH STRATEGY FOR ASSESSING A BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 147
The objective of this simulation model is to compare the
“solution under DEMO information” with the “heuristic”
decision—that is, with the decision rule of DEMO III in
circumstances where the decision-maker does not have perfect
information. Therefore, we now investigate the robustness of
the heuristic by comparing it to the “solution under perfect
information” when conditions (8) and/or (9) are violated. To
determine this heuristic decision we use a number of steps.
First, we use the simulated time for the closure of the window
of opportunity. Then, we utilize the stream of simulated
values for knowledge, , and derive the
stopping time as proposed by Fig. 1. Hence, as long
as the window of opportunity is still open, DEMO current
expected profit [ ,
as given by (2) and (3)] is compared to the
expected profit from continuing one more DEMO
[
as given by (4) and (5)]. The strategy (accept or reject) and
expected profit are then recorded for the period one chooses to
stop. If in the interim the window closes, then the recorded
decision for the heuristic is the closure of the window
DEMO opportunity, whereas for the “solution under perfect
information” the manager has DEMO knowledge and can
choose the best strategy before the window closes. Therefore,
the “solution under perfect information” always outperforms
the heuristic (with its imperfect window-information), even
when (6)–(9) are met. We DEMO to compare our heuristic to the
“solution under perfect information” policy because it is a
conservative test, and can thus argue that even a performance
of, say, 70% for the heuristic is good.
The best DEMO to stop the search for both the “solution under
perfect information” and the heuristic are then compared. In ad-
dition to keeping track of DEMO often the two approaches pro-
vide the same stopping time, we DEMO how often the strategy
selection (accept or reject, or the window closes before a deci-
sion is made) is also the same and we calculate a percentage
expected profit difference as follows: (Please see DEMO equation at
the bottom of the page.) We are interested in DEMO the magnitude
of the percentage expected profit difference and not its sign be-
cause a negative sign simply means that the expected profit for
DEMO “solution under perfect information” and the heuristic’s so-
lution were negative.15
,DEMO
B. Robustness of the Heuristic
Each measure of heuristic performance is calculated by the
average on 10 runs of the 1000 simulations for three DEMO
15For example, percentage expected profit difference might be negative when
the DEMO costs are very high and both the optimal and the heuristic models
produce losses. The biotechnology industry is one where even the successful
companies DEMO negative profits for the short to medium term because the
search and testing costs for new drugs is so expensive.
Four time periods are DEMO 4 . For each of these
three scenarios, numerical values for DEMO parameters have been
chosen so as to satisfy (6)–(9)DEMO The major differences between
the three scenarios are the values of the penalty from rejecting
a good opportunity or from the window on a DEMO opportunity
closing and the loss from accepting a bad opportunity .
In scenario 1, both and are relatively small, in scenario 2 in-
DEMO, and in scenario 3 both are relatively high. While the
change DEMO values are not as large for the following parameters,
they are also increased from scenario 1 to 3: upper bound on
knowledge , gain from accepting a good opportunity ,
search cost per period , and the smallest decrease in the
expected increment of knowledge from one DEMO to the next
.
Within each scenario, key parameters are increased DEMO test
the sensitivity of the heuristic’s performance. Heuristic perfor-
mance is captured by (1) the percentage of time the heuristic and
the “solution DEMO perfect information” times are equal (“%
time equal”), (2) DEMO percentage of time their times and deci-
sions are equal (“% DEMO and decision equal”), and (3) the per-
centage expected profit difference (“% profit difference”). The
results are reported in Table I. It must be noted that the sum-
mary proposes a trend in DEMO performance based on five
(and sometimes only four) data points across a specified range.
More simulations and a greater range could more specifically
DEMO the nature of these relationships, although for the pur-
pose of DEMO paper our analysis provides sufficient indication of
the sensitivity of heuristic performance to changes in scenarios,
parameter values, and measures of heuristic performance.
As demonstrated in Table I, when none of the conditions are
violated, the heuristic and “solution under perfect information”
produced the same stopping time, on average, 90% of the time.
It produced the same stopping DEMO and accept/reject decision
82% of the time.16 Moreover, the mean DEMO in expected
profit was only 8.25%. How does the heuristic perform when
there are changes in key parameters that cause (8) and/or (9) to
be violated? These are now explored.
Increases in the DEMO decrease in the expected increment
of knowledge from one period to the next decrease “%
time equal,” “% time and decision equal,” DEMO increases “%
profit difference” across all scenarios. Note that an increased
“% profit difference” represents a decrease in heuristic perfor-
mance for this measure. DEMO, when only (8) is violated,
the heuristic appears to DEMO even better than when no condi-
tions are violated, i.e., mean “% time equal” was 97% and 97%,
“% time and decision DEMO was 87% and 86%, and “% profit
difference” was only 3% DEMO 2% for scenarios 2 and 3, respec-
tively. It appears that DEMO the expected increment in knowledge
is so small, there is little DEMO in continuing to search and it
16Note that it is possible for the heuristic to stop on a window closing, and
thus no accept/reject decision can be made. However, the “solution under perfect
information” always stops enabling an accept/reject decision.
solution under perfect information expected profit
DEMO under perfect information
heuristic expected profit
expected profit
%
148
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 49, NO. 1, MAY 2002
TABLE I
SIMULATION RESULTS FOR TESTING THE SENSITIVITY OF THE THREE DEMO OF HEURISTIC PERFORMANCE
is, therefore, better to stop and make a decision. Despite the ex-
pectation that the “% time equal” is going DEMO be higher when the
number of relevant time periods is reduced, DEMO is encouraging to
find the heuristic performs well in selecting whether to accept
or reject the business opportunity in this situation.
Increases in the DEMO cost per period increase “%
time and decision equal” across all scenarios; increase “%
time equal” for scenarios 1 and 2, but yield DEMO U-shaped rela-
tionship for scenario 3; yield a U-shaped relationship across
DEMO scenarios for “% profit difference.” Due to higher search
costs, we DEMO expect that the manager should stop earlier
and, therefore, it is not surprising that the “% time equal” and
“% time and decision DEMO are higher. It is interesting to note
that there is a consistent U-shaped relationship for “% profit
difference” across the scenarios. A possible explanation DEMO that
when search costs are low the expected profits for both the
“solution under perfect information” and heuristic are higher
(and the denominator in calculating the percentage difference
SHEPHERD AND LÉVESQUE: A SEARCH STRATEGY FOR ASSESSING A BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 149
is higher) lowering the difference between the two expected
profit outcomes. As search costs increase, the denominator for
calculating the percentage difference decreases—this decrease
in the denominator increases the “% profit difference.” How-
ever, further increasing the search cost encourages a decision
be made earlier, thus increasing the likelihood that the same
time will be chosen and decreasing “% profit DEMO
In the following sensitivity analyses, search costs are rela-
tively low DEMO ensure variation in stopping times (i.e., high search
costs would likely lead to the decision to stop in the first period
and we DEMO know that the heuristic performs well under such
circumstances). Increases in the rate at which the probability of
an accepted opportunity being good DEMO with knowledge
increase “% profit difference” in all scenarios; and decrease
DEMO time equal” and “% time and decision equal” in scenario 1,
but yield relatively stable performances for these two measures
in scenario 2. DEMO range of values is too restrictive to determine
performance trends in scenario 3. It is possible that the range
of values used for is DEMO narrow to “detect” trends in “% time
equal” and “% time and decision equal” in scenario 2. It is inter-
esting to note an DEMO performance tradeoff in scenario 1 be-
tween, on the one hand, decreased “% time equal” and “% time
and decision equal,” and DEMO the other hand, increased “% profit
difference.” The increased value on DEMO rate at which the prob-
ability of an accepted opportunity being good increases with
knowledge encourages the manager to gain more knowl-
edge with DEMO longer search, extending the number of periods and
decreasing the likelihood DEMO the “solution under perfect informa-
tion” and heuristic prescribing the same time period. However,
given that they search for longer, there is an increased likeli-
hood that an accepted opportunity is good increasing the total
DEMO profit (an increase in the denominator decreases the
percentage difference).
DEMO in the rate at which the probability a rejected op-
portunity being bad increases with knowledge yield rela-
tively stable measures of heuristic performance DEMO all scenarios
with the possible exception that “% time and decision equal” is
decreasing in scenario 2. Again, we wish to point out that sta-
bility may be a result of the chosen range of values DEMO being
too narrow to detect changes in heuristic performance. As dis-
cussed above, simulations using a greater range of parameter
values could more specifically determine the nature of this re-
lationship.
Increases in the penalty from DEMO a good opportunity
or from the window on a good opportunity closing yield a
U-shaped relationship for “% time equal” for all scenarios, but
decrease “% time and decision equal” (at a decreasing rate) and
DEMO profit difference” for all scenarios. A consistent finding is
that a low level of appears to provide a boost to “% time and
decision DEMO although an increase in rapidly diminishes this
performance benefit with further increases in having little to
no effect. At a low , other elements DEMO the payoff structure have
more influence on the decision, but a DEMO increase in the im-
portance of increases the salience of the tradeoff between
and accepting a good opportunity and also the tradeoff within
between DEMO penalized from stopping too early to reject a good
opportunity and being penalized for searching too long and the
window of opportunity closing. Further DEMO in the impor-
tance of the tradeoff have little affect on “% time and decision
equal”.
Increases in the loss from accepting a bad DEMO de-
crease “% profit difference” in all scenarios; increase “% time
DEMO in scenarios 1 and 3, but appear to decrease this measure
DEMO performance in scenario 2; and increase “% time and deci-
sion DEMO in scenario 1, but decrease this measure of perfor-
mance in DEMO 2 and 3. It is interesting to note the apparent
tradeoff in “% time and decision equal” between scenario 1 and
scenarios 2 and DEMO It appears that increasing loss from accepting
a bad opportunity when there is a low penalty from rejecting
a good opportunity or from the DEMO on a good opportunity
closing (i.e., scenario 1) increases the DEMO of both the
“solution under perfect information” and heuristic choosing the
accept decision. is higher as we move from scenario 1 to sce-
narios DEMO and 3, and increasing only increases the salience of
the tradeoff DEMO and making the decision to accept less
obvious decreasing “% time and decision equal.”
Increases in the gain from accepting a good opportunity
decrease DEMO time equal” and “% time and decision equal” for
scenario 1; DEMO relatively stable performance for “% time
equal” and “% time and decision equal” in scenario 2; and
increase “% profit difference” in scenarios 1 and 2. There is
insufficient data for scenario 3. Similar to the DEMO for
loss from accepting a bad opportunity , these differences in
trends across scenarios might be explained by tradeoffs within
the payoff structure. In DEMO 1, there is a low value on the
penalty from rejecting DEMO good opportunity or from the window
on a good opportunity closing and the loss from accepting a
bad opportunity and, therefore, increases in DEMO
encourage both the “solution under perfect information” and
heuristic to focus less on the reject alternative. However, at
higher levels of and (in DEMO 2), increasing only
increases the difficulty for the heuristic to choose between the
alternatives.
V. CONCLUSION
“When should a manager stop searching for DEMO
about the attractiveness of an opportunity and grasp it before
the window of opportunity closes?” We propose that the answer
depends on the DEMO benefit of additional knowledge, the
possibility that the window of opportunity DEMO close, the costs
of search, and the payoffs associated with a good opportunity
accepted, and a bad opportunity rejected. Specifically, our
mathematical DEMO proposes threshold values for knowledge
that determine whether the managers should (DEMO) accept the
opportunity now, (2) reject the opportunity now, DEMO (3) con-
tinue the search for information about the opportunity. The
simulation results indicate that the model is a useful heuristic
even when DEMO of the conditions is not satisfied [i.e., (8) that
requires DEMO expected increment in knowledge from one period
to the next be larger than a critical value]. The usefulness of
the heuristic when the other DEMO is violated [i.e., (9)] that
imposes a lower bound on the per-period search cost] depends
on the cause of the violation—the parameter DEMO
A number of important industry sectors appear to satisfy Con-
dition (DEMO). For example, biotechnology is well known for its high
150
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 49, NO. 1, MAY 2002
search costs (expenditures on research and development to de-
termine the effectiveness of a drug and any possible side effects).
The opportunity DEMO strategy proposed here would be
useful for biotechnology companies in deciding whether they
should continue searching for information about the attributes of
a drug DEMO seeking Federal Drug Administration (FDA) ap-
proval, stop searching and DEMO the project, or stop searching
and submit the drug to the DEMO However, for those situations
when the relative search costs are not DEMO, the level of other
parameter values must be considered in determining DEMO useful-
ness of the heuristic.
We believe that this model makes a contribution to our under-
standing of evaluating a business opportunity, complementing
recent research on opportunity recognition, decision-theoretic
approaches to market entry, and sequential DEMO gath-
ering models. The optimal stopping approach used here reflects
the dynamic nature of the managerial process and builds on pre-
vious research that DEMO on a static perspective and/or does not
account for a window of opportunity closing.
APPENDIX A
PROOF OF OPTIMALITY[8]
Let 1 2 be DEMO sequence of -fields of a sample
with 1 2 . Let be a sequence of
random variables with measurable with respect to and
such DEMO exists and is finite for all . Let be the class of
all stopping rules such that . If there exists a stopping
rule DEMO
1)
2)
3)
when
when
for almost all
that
; and if there is some
such
for all
then
In the DEMO of the present paper, the -field is gener-
ated by . DEMO random variable is the expected
profit from stopping the search at period .17 Expected profit de-
pends on whether the manager accepts or rejects DEMO business
opportunity, and it is expressed by either (2) or (3).
Condition (1) is satisfied because we operate on a DEMO
planning horizon. Condition (3) holds since the incremental
expected profit from one period to the next is bounded.
For Condition (2) to DEMO (a unique optimal stopping time),
we verify that once the manager chooses to stop the search
(based on the decision rule offered in Fig. 1), the expected in-
cremental loss overcomes the expected DEMO gain at any
period following the stop. It is sufficient to verify that, once the
manager chooses to stop, the expected profit associated DEMO
17Please remember that we choose to talk about expected profit because an
expected value is evaluated based on the probability distribution of accepting a
DEMO versus a good opportunity.
continuing the search one more period is exceeded by the ex-
pected profit associated with stopping the search now.
A. DEMO (a), Fig. 1
First, we identify what is optimal (DEMO or reject) if the man-
ager stops the search now (period ) and, second, what is optimal
if s/he continues one DEMO period (up until ). Third, we
characterize the condition under DEMO the manager is better off
stopping the search now rather than continuing it one more pe-
riod. Fourth, we demonstrate that once the manager chooses to
stop, the expected profit associated with continuing the search
one more period is exceeded by the expected profit associated
with stopping the DEMO now (a unique optimal stopping time).
These steps allow us DEMO develop, under certain sufficient condi-
tions, an optimal opportunity search strategy as offered in Fig. 1.
In Case (a) of Fig. 1, if the manager stops the search at period
he/she maximizes expected DEMO by accepting the opportunity,
i.e., , which from (2) DEMO (3) is
equivalent to the state of the system at t satisfying
(A1)
If the manager decides to wait and stop the search one period
later, then he/she maximizes expected profit by also accepting
the opportunity in this case, i.e.,
, which from (DEMO) and (5) is equivalent
to the state of the system DEMO satisfying
One can easily verify that under (6)
(A2)
(A3)
and, therefore, (A1) is sufficient for (A2) to hold. Consequently,
under (A1), the manager accepts the opportunity whether he/she
stops the search now or next period. The next DEMO is: When
should the manager stop the search?
The manager DEMO stop the search and accept
the opportunity at, say, 1 if and only if
(there is
an incremental loss from searching one additional period, i.e.,
up until period 2), which from (2) and (4) is equivalent to
the state of the system at DEMO
(A4)
However, for 1 to be the optimal stopping time, we must
next verify that the expected profit if the manager were to stop
the search at 2 is below that from stopping the DEMO at
1; therefore there is no expected gain from continuing
the DEMO after period 1.
In this case, A1 holds at 1 . DEMO,
(A5)
SHEPHERD AND LÉVESQUE: A SEARCH STRATEGY FOR ASSESSING A BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 151
Consequently, also belongs to Case (a) (with 1)
of DEMO 1, and the expected profit associated with continuing
the search to DEMO 2 is below that from making a de-
cision at 1 as long as
, which from (2) and (4) is equivalent DEMO
the state of the system at 1 satisfying
(A6)
With DEMO nonincreasing with , it is straightforward to
verify that the right-hand side of (A4) is larger than that for
(A6). Therefore, DEMO , (A6) must hold. The above
developments still hold when period 1 is replaced by
period 2, and 2 becomes 3 (induction DEMO) and,
therefore, the manager would incur incremental losses from
continuing the search beyond period 1.
B. Case (b), Fig. 1
We utilize a similar approach to what we have demonstrated
above. In Case (b) of Fig. 1, if the manager stops the search
at DEMO he/she maximizes expected profit by rejecting the
opportunity, i.e., , which from
(2) and (3) is equivalent to the state DEMO the system at satisfying
(A7)
If the manager decides to DEMO the search one period later,
then he/she maximizes expected profit by accepting the
opportunity in this case, i.e.,
, which from (4) and (5) is equivalent
to the state of the DEMO at satisfying
(A8)
The manager should stop the search and DEMO the opportunity
at, say, 1 if and only if
, which from (2) and (4) is equivalent to the state
of DEMO system at satisfying (A9).[Please see (A9) at the bottom
DEMO the page.] However, for 1 to be the optimal stopping time,DEMO
we must next verify that the expected profit if the manager were
to stop the search at 2 is below that from stopping the
DEMO at 1; therefore there is no expected gain from
continuing the DEMO after period 1.
In this case,
(with
1) of Fig. 1. If
can belong to either Case (a) or Case (b)
satisfies Case (a), then
(A10)
The expected profit DEMO with continuing the search to pe-
riod 2 is exceeded by that from making a decision at 1
(i.e., )
as long as (A6) is satisfied. One can easily demonstrate that
under Condition (9) the right-hand side of (A6) is negative and,
therefore, (A6) holds as cannot be negative. These develop-
ments still hold when period 1 is replaced by period 2,
and 2 becomes 3 (induction proof). Therefore, the man-
ager would incur incremental losses from continuing the search
beyond period 1.
If satisfies Case (b), then
(A11)
The expected profit associated with continuing the search to pe-
riod 2 is exceeded by that from making a decision at 1
(i.e., )as
long as (A12) holds. (Please see (A12) at the bottom of the
page.) It is straightforward to verify that under (8) and (9) the
right-hand side of (A12) DEMO larger than the upper bound on
in (A11), and thus (A12) must hold. Here again, the same devel-
opments apply when DEMO 1 is replaced by period 2,
and 2 becomes 3 (DEMO proof). Therefore, the man-
ager would incur incremental losses from DEMO the search
beyond period 1.
C. Unreachable Paths, Fig. 1
For DEMO upper part of the tree in Fig. 1(1), if the manager stops
the search at period he/she maximizes expected profit by DEMO
cepting the opportunity, i.e., ,
which from (2) and (3) is equivalent to the state of the system at
satisfying
(DEMO)
(A9)
(A12)
152
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 49, NO. 1, MAY 2002
If the manager stops the search one period later, then
he/she maximizes expected profit by rejecting the op-
portunity in this case, i.e.,
, which from (4) and (5) is equivalent
DEMO the state of the system at satisfying
However, one can easily DEMO that under (6)
(A14)
(A15)
and, therefore, one can never satisfy both (A13) and (A14). This
DEMO path is unattainable under our model Conditions.
For the lower part of the tree in Fig. 1(1), if the manager
stops the DEMO at period he/she maximizes expected profit by
rejecting the opportunity, DEMO, ,
which from (2) and (3) is equivalent to the state of the system
at satisfying (A7). If the manager stops the search one period
later, then he/she maximizes expected profit by also rejecting
the opportunity in this case, i.e.,
, which from (4) and (5) is equivalent
to the state of DEMO system at satisfying (A14). It follows from
(A15) that (A14) is sufficient for (A7) to hold. Consequently,
under (DEMO) the manager rejects the opportunity whether he/she
stops the search DEMO or the following period.
We can verify in this case that the manager should stop the
search and reject the opportunity at, say, DEMO if and only if
, which from (2)
and (4) is equivalent to . However, under (8), the
right-hand side of (A14) is bounded above by
(A16)
which is negative under (6). Since knowledge cannot be nega-
tive, this decision DEMO is unattainable under our model Condi-
tions.
APPENDIX B
THRESHOLD LINES’MOVEMENTS IN FIG.2
In Fig. 2, the negatively sloped threshold line is represented
by (B1), found at the bottom of the page. This line passes
through coordinates
and
(B2)
(B3)
By using first order DEMO with respect to , it is straightfor-
ward to demonstrate that the second coordinate in (B2) increases
as is increased whenever
(B4)
and that the first coordinate in (B3) increases as is increased
DEMO no condition.
As for the positively sloped threshold line, it is DEMO
by
This line passes through coordinates
(B5)
(B6)
and
(B7)
It is also straightforward to verify that both the second coor-
dinate in (B6) and the first coordinate in (B7) DEMO as is
increased. Therefore, this line rotates over time.
APPENDIX C
DEMO OF THE KNOWLEDGE THRESHOLDS
For any period , one can verify that
whenever
(C1)
and that whenever (C1) does not hold. One can
also verify under (9) that the right-hand side of (C1) is smaller
than zero and, therefore, one can only have .
APPENDIX D
OPERATIONALIZATION OF PARAMETERS
See Table II.
(B1)
SHEPHERD AND LÉVESQUE: A SEARCH STRATEGY FOR ASSESSING A BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 153
TABLE II
OPERATIONALIZATION OF PARAMETERS
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank DEMO Laguna, A. Marucheck,
and three anonymous reviewers for their valuable DEMO on
an earlier draft of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] W. J. Baumol, Entrepreneurship, Management, and the Structure of Pay-
offs. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993.
[2] D. Besanko, D. Dranove, and M. T. Shanley, Economics of
Strategy. New York: Wiley, 1997.
[3] T. Chi, J. Liu, and H. Chen, “Optimal stopping rule for a project with
uncertain completion time and partial salvageability,” IEEE Trans. Eng.
Manage., vol. 43, pp. 54–66, Nov. 1996.
[4] F. Choo and K. DEMO Trotman, “The relationship between knowledge struc-
ture and judgments for experienced DEMO inexperienced auditors,” Ac-
count. Rev., pp. 464–485, July 1991.
[5] M. A. Cohen, J. Eliashberg, and T. H. Ho, “New product development:
Performance and time-to-market tradeoff,” Manage. Sci., vol. 42, DEMO
173–186, 1996.
[6] W. M. Cohen and D. A. Levinthal, “Absorptive capacity: A new per-
spective on learning and innovation,” Administr. Sci. Quart., vol. 35, pp.
128–152, 1990.
[7] E. D. Darr, DEMO Argote, and D. Epple, “The acquisition, transfer, and de-
preciation of knowledge in service organizations: Productivity in fran-
chises,” Manage. Sci., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 1750–1762, 1995.
[8] C. Derman DEMO J. Sacks, “Replacement of periodically inspected equip-
ment (an optimal optional stopping rule),” Nav. Res. Logist. Quart., vol.
7, pp. 597–607, 1960.
[9] A. Fishman, “Search technology, staggered price-setting, and price DEMO
persion,” Amer. Econ. Rev., vol. 82, pp. 287–298, 1992.
DEMO J. C. Fuhrer, “Information gathering and expectation formation under
model uncertainty,DEMO Southern Econ. J., vol. 53, pp. 685–701, 1987.
[11] C. DEMO Gaglio, “Opportunity identification: Review, critique and sug-
gested research directions,DEMO Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emer-
gence and Growth, vol. 3, DEMO 139–202, 1997.
[12] D. Granot and D. Zuckerman, “Optimal sequencing and resource allo-
cation in research and development projects,” Manage. Sci., vol. 37, pp.
140–156, 1991.
[13] F. A. Hayek, “The use of knowledge in society,” Amer. Econ. Rev., vol.
XXXV, pp. 519–530, 1945.
[14] J. Hey, Uncertainty in Microeconomics. New York: New York DEMO
Press, 1974.
154
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 49, NO. 1, MAY 2002
[15] G. E. Hills and R. C. Shrader, “Successful managers’ insights into op-
portunity recognition,” Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Res., pp. 30–43,
1998.
[16] J. Hirshleifer and J. G. Riley, “The analytics of uncertainty and infor-
mation—An expository survey,” J. Econ. Lit., vol. 17, DEMO 1375–1421,
1979.
[17] R. Jensen, “Adoption and diffusion of an DEMO of uncertain prof-
itability,” J. Econ. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 182–193, 1982.
[18] M. I. Kamien and N. L. Schwartz, Market DEMO and Innova-
tion. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982.
[19] DEMO Lévesque, “Effects of funding and its return on product quality in
DEMO ventures,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage., vol. 47, pp. 98–105, DEMO
2000.
[20] R. Manning and P. Morgan, Optimal Search. London, U.K.: Univ. of
Western Ontario, 1982.
[21] K. McCardle, “Information acquisition and the adoption of new tech-
nology,” Manage. Sci., vol. 31, DEMO 11, pp. 1372–1389, 1985.
[22] T. A. Oliva, “Information and DEMO estimates: Modeling the
firm’s decision to adopt a new technology,” DEMO Sci., vol. 37, pp.
607–623.
[23] M. L. Puterman, Markov DEMO Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dy-
namic Programming. New York: Wiley, 1994.
DEMO J. F. Reinganum, “The timing of innovation: Research, development,
DEMO diffusion,” in Handbook of Industrial Organization, R. Schmalensee
and R. DEMO Willig, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland,
1989, ch. 14, pp. 849–908.
[25] S. M. Ross, Stochastic Processes. New York: Wiley, 1983.
[26] S. Shane and S. Venkataraman, “The promise of entrepreneurship DEMO a
field of research,” Acad. Manage. Rev., vol. 25, pp. 217–226, 2000.
[27] D. A. Shepherd, E. J. Douglas, and M. T. Shanley, “New venture sur-
vival: Ignorance, external shocks and risk reduction strategies,” J. Bus.
Ventur., to be published.
[28] H. Simon, “What we know about the creative process,” in Frontiers in
Creative and Innovative Management, R. Kuhn, Ed. Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger, DEMO, pp. 3–20.
[29] G. Stigler, “The economics of information,” J. Political Econ., vol. 65,
pp. 213–225, 1961.
[30] S. Venkataraman, “The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research:
An editor’s prespective,” in DEMO in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emer-
gence, and Growth, J. Katz and DEMO Brockhaus, Eds. Greenwich, CT:
JAI, 1997.
[31] M. Weitzman, “Optimal search for the best alternative,” Econometrica,
vol. 47, pp. 641–654, 1979.
[32] L. Yelle, “The learning curve: Historical review and comprehensive
survey,” Decision Sci., vol. 10, pp. 302–308, 1979.
[33] B. J. Yoon, “A model of unemployment duration with variable search
intensity,” Rev. Econ. Stat., vol. 63, pp. 599–609, 1981.
Dean A. Shepherd received the B.App.Sc. degree
from the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology,DEMO
Melbourne, Australia, and the M.B.A. degree and
Ph.D. degree in strategy and entrepreneurship from
Bond University, Robina, Australia.
He is currently an DEMO Professor at the
Leeds School of Business, University of Colorado,
DEMO He has served as the Chair of the Research
Committee for the Academy of Management En-
trepreneurship Division. He has authored numerous
published articles DEMO have appeared in Management
Science, European Journal of Operational Research, Journal of Business
Venturing, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Journal of High Technology
DEMO Research and Business Ethics Quarterly. His research interests
include entry strategy, DEMO capitalists and entrepreneurial decision-making,
opportunity recognition.
Moren Lévesque received the B.Sc. degree in
mathematics and the M.Sc. degree from Université
Laval, Québec, DEMO, and the Ph.D. degree in
management science from the University of DEMO
Columbia, Canada.
She is an Assistant Professor at the Weatherhead
School DEMO Management, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, where she teaches
operational research, operations management,
statistics, and entrepreneurship at the undergraduate
DEMO graduate levels. She has taught at the Faculté
des Sciences de l’Administration of Université Laval, Québec, Canada; the
Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA; the Lally School of Management and Technology, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY; and at the DEMO
Fakultät of Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Germany. She has authored
numerous DEMO published in the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING
MANAGEMENT, European Journal of DEMO Research, Journal of
Business Venturing, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice and Business
Ethics Quarterly. Her research applies the methodologies of analytical and
quantitative disciplines DEMO the study of entrepreneurial decision-making.{1g42fwefx}