Berkeley Innovation Index*: An Approach for
Measuring and Diagnosing Individuals’ and
Organizations’ Innovation Capabilities
February	22,	2016
Ikhlaq	Sidhu,	Jean
This	paper	wauthors.	The	views	represented	are	those	of	the	authors	alone	and	do	not	reflect	those	of	the	University	of	Califoinformation	contained	in	this	paper	is	intended	to	affect	or	influence	public	relations	with	any	firm	affiliated	with	any	of	Technology	and	led	by	Prof.	Ikhlaq	Sidhu	at	UC	Berkeleyas	created	in	an	open	environment	as	part	of	a	program	within	the	Sutardja	Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	.		There	should	be	no	proprietary	information	contained	in	th
Charlotta	Johnsson-Etienne	Goubet
Authors,	Hilary	Webber,	Jan
DEMO
,	Alexander	Fredh-Ojala,
rnia	Berkeley.
is	paper.	No
the
* www.berkeleyinnovationindex.org
drive	economic	growth.	Innovation	is	also	a	relatively	vague	concept,	but	the	absence	of	it	Innovation	is	widely	recognized	as	an	important	variable	to	create	competitive	advantage	and	Abstract 2
and	executing	“innovation”	is	that	it	is	often	removed	from	actual	situations,	too	theoretical,	not	innovative,	and	is	a	characteristic	of	individuals	as	well	as	organizations.	The	issue	with	learning	results	in	stagnation	and	loss	of	competitivetime-ordered,	and	not	holistic. behaviors.	Innovation	capability	is	the	ability	to	be
measures	have	not	been	insightful	difficult	for	any	person	or	organization	to	improve	their	ability	to	be	innovativeIn	this	concept	paper,	we	contend	that	if	Innovation	cannot	be	measured,	then	it	is	inherently	.	Most	past
DEMO&D	have	not	shown	any	causality	with	organizationsor	holistic.	For	example,	the	numbers	of	patents	or	the	’ ability	to	be
ways	to	measure	innovation	capability	in	a	holistic	sense.		These	measures,	models	and	tools	are	Berkeley	Innovation	Index	(BII)	is	a	concept	and	an	open	project	to	offer	simple	yet	powerfulbased	on	previously	published	research	findings.	The	approach	is	also	intended	to	cover	layers	and	Leadership,	2)	Innovation
functions,	4)	Mindset:	The	Innovation	DNA	of	the	People,Culture	from	an	Organization’s	Viewpoint,	3)	Organizational	Operations	and	Measures	across	of	innovation	that	range	from	the	following	fields:	1)	Strategyand 5)	Tactical	measures
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
.
DEMO,	we believe	that the innovation	measurement
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
2
InnovationHistorical	Background	and	Traditional	Indicators	for	3
In	order	to	characterize	the	innovation	performance	of	a	firm,	a	broad	range	of	metrics	haand	do	not	take	into	account	the	cause	and	consequences.	Moreoverrevenues	due	to	products	launched	in	the	last	3	years.	However,	these	measures	lack	precision	been	(and	profits,	and	therefore,	they	have	not	accounted	for	innovation	(Jaffe,	1986).produced	results	showing	that	there	still	are)	used,	such	as	the	number	of	patents,DEMO,	R&D	spending,is no	significant	relation	between	R&D	expenses	and	,	many	studies	have	andve
Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
great	innovation	does	not	necessarily	require	oriented	and	a	new	technology	does	not	always	make	a	great	innovation,	the	same	way	that	a	for	a	patent	to	be	granted	is	that	the	technology	has	to	be	new.	But	patents	are	technology	Some	metrics analyze	the	number	of	patents	filed	by	companies,	arguina	major	technological	breakthroughg	that	one	of	the	criteria	.	Further,
potential	competitors.	Consequently,	there	is	no	substantive	link	between	the	number	of	patents	manyand	innovfirms	have	begun	to	adopt	a	“trolling”	strategy,	filing	large	numbers	of	patents	just	to	block	ation	in	these	cases.
A	wide	range	of	consultingmatrix-based	has	traditionally	been	used	to	approaches	.		For	example,	fhave	also	growth	of	market	share.	At	the	other	end	been	developed	to	analyze	a	company’s	rom	a	topcompare-down	financial	strategy	different	business	units
company).adopted	byof	the	spectrum,	even	product	level	designtraditional firms (cf.	McKinsey	recently	bought	Lunar,	a	large	design	consulting	-thinking	oriented	strategies	have	emerged	and	been
inherited	from	financing	methods.	Overall,	the	existing	variables	for	innovation	analysis	mostly	use	a	quantitative	approach
withinperspective,	strategy	or	to	assess	its	performancecompanies	according	to	their	expected	marketthe	BCG
due	to	the	apparition	of	new	variables.	This	has	led	to	the	creatAs innovation	is	increasing	in	importance	as	an	element	in	companies’	strategies,	the	time	to	ion	of	new	metrics	and	studies	in
Been Developed to	Take	Innovation	into	Account
company	a)	Financial	analysis:DEMO,	based	on	the	gap	between	the	expected	value	of	the	The	approaches	used	in	most	new	tools	are	derived	from:the	area	which	are	increasing	the	accuracy	as	a	general	trend:and	its	market	valuation,	is	used	to	rank	the	most	innovative	companies.	Real	option
scorecard	(from	portfolio	analysis)	are	designed	to	help	firms’	management	teams	to	improve	output	value	of	its	innovation	projects	according	to	several	scenarios.	Tools	liktheory,	which	gives	an	estimated	value	of	a	company,	is	based	on	the	aggregated	potential	e	the	balanced
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation	3
Sutardja
Tools	Have
market	is	getting	shorter	and	existing	tools	are	not	sufficiently	adaptable	to	these	rapid	changes
4
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
projects.tools	that	promotes	idea	sharimulti-project	management	methods.	This	approach	places	emphasis	on	portfolio	management
ng	between	units	in	the	company and between	different	types	of
company	to	be	considered	innovative	nowadays.	One	of	the	desired	outputs	of	any	innovative	b)	Organizational	and	culture	analysis:	Some	studies	have	shown	how	important	it	is	for	a
“full	value”	analysis	(DEMO,	2015)).project	(even	if	it	failed)	is	that	it	improves	the	image	or	brand	reputation	of	the	company	(see
management	habits,	putting	higher	value	on	the	learning	experience.	But	how	can	we	extract	c)	Knowledge	reuse	and	“Learning	by	doing”:	More	and	more,	the	“right	to	fail”	has	fostered	new
failure	of	a	previous	project	years	ago.	Many	famous	innovations	were	born	because	the	first	value	from	failed	projects?DEMO
from	previous	projects	to	use	it	in	serendipity.	Also,	larger	objective	failed	to	be	reached,	but	people	learned	how	to	use	what	they	found;	this	is	called	industrial	firmsdifferenthave	produced	innovative	results	by	reusing	technology	sectors (Chapel,	1997).	It	is	called	“multi-project
Hatchuel	et	al.,	knowledge	used	ilineage	management”	(Midler,	1995)DEMO,	some	researchers	have	managed	to	map	the	2002n	a	project	and	its	trajectory	throughout	time	(). the	Concept-Knowledge theory,
(Chesbrough,	2003)d)	Open	Innovation:	Innovation	outsourcing	has	become	a	key	variable	in	the	race	to	innovation,	as	it	illustrates	the	ability	of	a	company	to	tap	into	technology	that	emerges
facilities.	company	accepts	the	fact	that	the	best	innovation	does	not	necessarily	come	from	its	own	R&D	from	outside	its	perimeter,	such	as	startups	or	universities.	In	these	cases,	it	shows	how	the
TRIZ	or	Six	Thinking	Hats	(de	Bonomore	companies	rely	on	creativity	management	to	boost	their	“creativity	capital”.	Methods	like	e)	Considering	Creativity:	An	emphasis	on	the	role	of	creativity	has	begun	to	emerge.	More	and	,	reference)	help	teams	and	individuals	to	be more	creative
divergent	thinking	ability.	These	methods	aim	at	creativity	of	a	person,DEMO(reference)triggering	new	forms	of	creativity	and	,	which	is	based	on	a	person’s
the	social	value	of	the.g.	the	number	of	ideas	shared,	their	eccentricity	level	(see	the	Taxonomy	of	creative	design),	or	therefore,	lead	to	a	new	need	for	measurement	of	creative	capacities	based	on	various	factors,	e	ideas	(see	Csikszentmihalyi’s	Systems	Model).
DEMO,	which	is	as	complex	as	it	is	unpredictable,	we	posit	However,	even	if	riables	have	been	omitted.	Indeed,	some	variables	are	internally	or	externally	these	tools	and studies are	slowly	taking	into	account	the	specificities	of
mindsets	into	account,	which	are	needed	to	pursue	the	realization	of	new	ideas.of	a	company.	But	almost	none	of	them	take	the	individuals’	entrepreneurship	skfocused,	some	are	past	or	future	focused,	and	can	provide	a	good	insight	on	the	previous	activity	ills	and
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation	4
5
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
Using	financial	tools	to	assess	innovation	projects	leads	to	incorrect	valuation	of	these	projects.	aspects.	These	variables	omit	other	determinant	variables	such	as	creativity,	behaviors	and	variables	that	can	suffocate	innovation	projects	and	calls	out	an	overIn	“Innovation	Killers”	(Christensen,	HBR	2008),	author	Clayton	Christensen	describes	the
are	also	difficult	to	analyze	through	classical	indicators	as	they	are	closely	linked	to	the	mindset,	as	well	as	culture	(i.e.	how	people	work	innovatively	with	each	other).	These	variables	-emphasis	on	financial
collected	from	assessment	surveys	that	incorporate	the	psychological	profiles	of	individuals.	outsourced	entrepreneurs,	etc.).	This	is	why	we	propose	a	new	set	of	variables	based	on	the	data	psychological	profiles	of	stakeholders	(employees,	intrapreneurs,	Our	study	reveals	that	there	exist	another	way	of	measuring	an	ability	to	innovatesuppliers	and	partners,	,	based	on
and	Strategy	lemployees	may	be	a	complementary	level	of	analysis	to	the	Culture/Organization,	Operations	psychological	profiles	of	employees.	We	believe	that	a	psychological	analysis	of	a	company’s	evels.
DEMO
give	a	correct	overview	of	the	future	abilities	of	the	firm	to	innovate.	FutureWe	also	note	that metrics	derived	from	previous	methods	are	often	past-
be	utilized	by	venture	capitalists	or	investment	companies	that	are	focusing	on	the	longerthat	are	strongly	linked	to	the	innovative	capabilities	of	output	of	their	investments.
-term
the	Berkeley	Method	of	EntrepreneurshThe	Berkeley	Innovation	Index: An	based	on
Approach
measure	innovation	based	on	psychological	profiles	of	individualsextends	these	approaches	with	a	The	BII	project	based	on	individual	and	workgroup	surveys.organizational	cultureincludes	some	of	the	traditional	approaches	to	measuring	innovation,	however	it	.	The	BII	provides	a	quantitative	approach	to	innovation	measurement	machine	learning,	survey-based	and	dataipand	their	perceptions	of	the	-driven	approach	to
a	concept	and	an	open	project	to	offer	simple	ways	to	measure	These	measures,DEMO
innovation,	but	in	a	holistic	sense.	Berkeley	Innovation	Index is both
rangpublished	research	findings.	The	approach	is	also	intended	to	cover	layers	of	innovation	te	from	the	following:
2)	Innovation	Culture	from	an	Organization’s	Viewpoint,	1)	Strategy	and	Leadership,	(such	as	BCG) (Workgroup	Culture)
5)	Tactical	measures4)	Mindset:	The	Innovation	DNA	of3)	Organizational	Operations	and	Measures	across	functions,	(Workgroup	Culture)(situation	based	measures)the	People	(Innovation	Mindset)
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation	5
There	are	still	limitations	to	these	approaches
6
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
made	more	accurate	and	that	the	process	can	now	be	even	more	diagnosable.When	measured	and	considered	across	all	levels,	we	believe	that	innovation	measures	can	be
current	capacity	for	creativity.	We	know	that	individuals	who	expreson	Entrepreneurship	Potential,	we	want	to	look	into	the	employee’s	mindset	and	analyze	their	Based	on	previous	studies	that	resulted	in	breakthrough	findings	on	the	impact	of	Comfort	Zone	s	entrepreneurial	and
exists	between	the	creative	and	entrepreneurial	penvironments	than	the	average	population.	We	want	to	illustrate	the	strong	correlation	that	innovative	behavior	are	more	likely	to	be	successful	at	creating	innovative	outputs. sychological	profiles	of	individuals	and	their	when in	uncertain	and	risky
education	and	research.	The	BMEQAn DEMO
are	summarized	in	this	article.BMEQentrepreneurship	The Berkeley	Method	of	Entrepreneurship	questionnaire	(BMEQ-18,	the	origin	of	the	underlying	concepts,	specific	scales	and	the	pand	employs	psychological	questionnaire	scales.	The	development	of	the	-18)	is	constructed	torocess	of	item-selection	measure
enter	for	Entrepreneurship	and
New	Elements	of	BII	include	Mindset	and	Workgroup	Culture
certain	mental	aspects	that	are	relevant	to	entrepreneurs.	Sutardja	Coperationalizes	a	gameimpression	of	the	strength	and	development	fields	of	the	students	in	the	classmental	aspects	of	entrepreneurship	in	order	to	give	students	and	teaching	staff	an	-based	method	for	teaching	entrepreneurship,	as	employedTechnology	at	the	University	of	California	in	Berkeley.	The	goal	of	the	questionnaire	is	to	measure	.	The	BMEQby	the
-18
teaching	approach	is	a	vehicle	for	introducing	and	relearning	approach.	The	method	is	based	on	the	hypothesis	that	an	inductive	gameexposing	them	to	entrepreneurial	experiences.	It	is	a	holistic	The	Berkeley	Method	of	Entrepreneurship	trains	students	to	be	more	entrepreneurial	by	-enforcing	the	characteristics	of	and	student-centered	teaching	and	mindset	of	-based
views	and	acts	upon	a	situation;	the	mindset	is	reflected	in	the	person’s	attitudes.	The	Berkeley	an	entrepreneur.	Generally,	the	mindset	is	a	way	of	thinking	that	influences	the	way	someone
Method	of	EntrepreneurSilicon	Valley	area.dimensions	are	based	on	literature	review	and	extensive	interthrough	ten	dimensions	that	describe	the	typical	mindset	of	successful	entreship	conceptualizes	the	dominant	characteristics	of	entrepreneurs
action	with	entrepreneurs	in	the	preneurs.	The
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation	6
The	First
Innovation	Mindset
Berkeley	Mindset	of	an	Entrepreneur	Questionnaire	(BMEQ-18)	was	designed	for	use	in	higher
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
The	BMEQ-18	enables	students	to	explore	their	current	mindset	and	to	identify	the	fields	they	Method	of	Entrepreneurship
psychological	concepts	that	have	been	researched	that	describe	similar	have	been	translated	to.	scales.throughIn	the	second	step	psychological	thbehavioral	observation	or	experiments	have	been	excluded	from	the	development	of	the
ed on	short	scales.	Some	of	the	scales	have	been	slightly	adapted	in	order	to	fit	within the
o	measure	the	concepts.
7
DEMO
e	mindset	dimensions	have	been	matched	with
selection	of	the	psychological	concepts	was	to	work	on	the	level	of	traits	or	attitudes	and	to	to	identifyA	first	literature	review	has	been	conducted	in	the	fields	of	social- and	organizational	psychology
avoid	statethe	concepts	that	translate	to	the	mindset	dimensions.	One	of	the	main	focuses	in	the	-like	variables.	State-like	variables	are	not	suitable	for	the	education	context	in	which	that	best	matched
.
for	the	construction	of	the	questionnairethe	mindset	description	of	the	Berkeley	Method	of	Entrepreneurship	dimensions	were	the	basis	the	questionnaire	will	be	primarily	administered.	The	psychological	concepts
focussurvey	questions	that	measure	the	chosen	psychological	concepts.	The	research	was	mainly	A	second	literature	review	has	been	conducted	in	order	to	identify	carefully	constructed	sets	of
questionnaire	scales	that	were	applied	tof	the	Berkeley	Method	of	Entrepreneurship,	the	selected	psychological	constructs	and	the	context	of	the	Berkeley	Method	of	Entrepreneurship.	Table	1	presents	the	mindset	descriptions
7
ship
that	are	better studied
A	questionnaire	for	the	Berkeley	Method	of	Entrepreneur
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
TableMindset	and	Description1
expecting	anything	inFriend	or	Foe return.
S
Plan	to	Fail
Diversify
Believe
Good	Enough
perfect.
DEMO
a	workgroup.	Participating	individuals	may	be	able	to	“compare”	their	own	innovation	profiles	The	collected	data	will	lead	to	the	definition	of	the	psychological	determinants	of	success	among	Our	intent	is	to	apply	these	findings	to	workgroups	in	startups	as	well	as	in	larger	companies.	partners.
to	create	a	precise	definition	of	success	that	takes	the	control	groto	famous	entrepreneurs’	profiles.	The	machine-learning	algorithm	we	are	developing	allows	us	up	into	account.
A	second	tool	data	collection	instrument	has	also	been	included	in	the	test	suite	for	Berkeley	measured	by	the	perceptions	of	individuals	in	the	workgroup.		Innovation	Index.		This	tool	focuses	not on	an	individual,	but	on	the	culture	of	the	workgroup	as
Areas	of	measurement	that	are	included	in	this	assessment	include	the	following:Transparency	in	decision	makingWhere	ideas	originate
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation	8
ConstructPsychological
(honest	Social	cohesion,DEMO)
entrepreneurial	GritFukuyama,	1995,	resilience,
(Sarasvathy,	2001)failure
Aldrich,	1991(Social	Dubini	and	capital )
(Self(PerfectionismBandura,	1977Kawasaki,	2004-efficacy ))
2006(CoopetitionVanaelst	&	al.,	)
ScaleQuestionnaire
Trust
Resilience
Diversity
Belief
Perfection
Collaboration
8
CET	Mindset	Description	and	equivalent	psychological	constructs
If	you	can’t	tell:	Learn	to	trust	others	without
It	is	necessary	to	be	wrong	sometimes.	Plan	to
DEMO
are,	the	harder	this	is	going	to	Adapt	and	repeat.	The	smarter	you	think	you	Experiment.	Plan	to	Fail	(Fail	Fast).	Analyze,
Diversify	your	networks.	Connect	to	people	Open	Up.	And	connect	them	to	others.you	would	not	normally,	then	go	and	listen.
Perfection	is	no	good	but	good	enough	is	Believe	that	you	can	change	the	world.
Individual	vs.	team	and	competitors	vs.
•
•
The	Workgroup	Culture	Assessment:
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
Organizational	comfort	with	ambiguity	and	learningcost,	and	market	share.Cultural	understanding	about	Responses	to	organizational	failuresoperating	measures	such	as	quality,	Customer	happiness,
Culture	of	execution	and	action
better	processes.	We	believe	that	the	companies	that	will	be	most	likely	to	be	successful	are	the	improve	its	existing	workforce	to	successfully	produce	new	services,	proAs	we	consider	the	previous	success	cases	of	employees	in	the	company,	we	want	to	see	if	the	ducts	or	implement
those	who	previously	succeeded	in	risky	and	iones	where	the	psychological	profiles	of	its	employees	are,DEMO,	closest	to	the	ones	of	nnovative	projects.
accurate	the	definition	of	success	will	be.	The	macbypasses	the	hard	definition	of	success	and	its	variables.	The	more	data	we	collect,	the	more	Moreover,	this	new	approach	allows	a	measure	of	learning	through	failure.	It	additionally
the	project	itself.psychological	mindsetbetween	success	and	the	psychological	profile	of	employees,	based	on	the	characteristics	of	their
and	organizational	mindset,	not	on	the	characteristics	of	the	company	or	hine	learning	process	illustrates	the	link
and	analytic	report,	featuThe	Berkeley	Innovation	Index	aims	at	being	the	reference	baseline	for	current	creativity	ring	the	profiles	of	the	individuals	or	the	workgroups.	The	intended	use
ideally	increases	overall	innovation.expose	specific	opportunities	to	improve	creative	abilities	within	an	organization,	whof	the	BII	report	is	to	enable	strategic	action	planning	to	maximize	existing	creativity,	and	to	ich	in	turn
create	a	link	bprofiles,	focusing	mainly	on	a	larger	share	of	knowledge	workers.	Our	algorithm	uses	the	data	to	First,	we	collect	survey	data	from	individuals	or	workgroups	and	analyze	their	psychological	etween	current	creativity	levels	and	success	in	innovative	projects.
the	workgroup.	It	is	then	possible	to	combine	the	data	within	a	company’s	perimeter	The	data	collected	forms	the	basis	of	a	first	report	of	the	creativity	profile	of	the	individuals	or	to
company’s	current	ability	to	perform	on	future	innovative	products.determine	the	“aggregated	innovation	index”	of	a	company,	which	offers	a	new	view	of	the
dMoreover,	the	algorithm	sorts	and	displays	the	collected	data	in	multiple	arrays	to	give	a	etailed	and	descriptive	insight	of	the	determiners	of	success	for	a	company’s	future
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
•
DEMO
•
•
9
9
Analysis	of	Responses
newly	hired	people	are	most	likely	to	be	innovative,	or	if	the	company	is	able	to	develop	and
The	Berkeley	Innovation	Index	as	a	Process
capacity	at	the	individual	or	workgroup	level.	We	propose	a	process	that	leads	to	an	informative
10
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
function,	team	or	other	factors)	to	provide	additional	insights	as	needed.innovations.		It	will	be	possible	to	produce	specific	subsets	of	data	in	custom	reports	(e.g.	by
creativity	for	the	company’s	individuals	and	workgroups,	the	BII	can	be	recreativity.	Therefore,	once	actions	plans	have	been	determined	and	undertaken	to	improve	The	BII	results	represent	a	current	“snapshot”	view	of	a	given	organization’s	capacity	for
Innovation	Index	methodology	can	be	used	for	firmto	calibrate	the	increase	in	creative	capacity	and	potential	for	innovation	success.	The	Berkeley	-level	assessment	with	diagnostic	taken	at	a	future	date
DEMO,	consultant,	or	with	an	internal	project	manager.recommendations.	For	actionable	results,	this	must	be	done	with	the	help	of	an	independent
ECulture,	Operational	Culture,	and	Innovation	illustrationxamples	of	is	a	comparison	of	two	companies	on	the	basis	of	Industry	Position,	Innovation	visualizations	available	from	the	BII	data	analysis	are	represented	here.		This	first
Mindsets	(DNA)	of	their	employees
.
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
10
Company	and	Organization	Level	Assessment	Potential
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
11
can	assess	the	innovation	culture	and	operational	process	cultureA	second	example	graphic	data	interpretation below	shows	that
functional	levels	within	a	firm	.
also	be	possible	based	on	aggregate	At	a	company	level	and	within	industry	groups,	we	believe	that	innovation	benchmarking	will	innovation scores.
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
DEMO
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report 12
non-graphic	formats.	Below is	an	example	output of	an
algorithmWe	also	provide	w-based	text	report	geneorkgroup	reporting	in	ration:
INNOVATION	CULTURE	SCORE:
Your	Innovation	Culture	Score	for	your	workgroup	is	score	is	8.07	out	of	10.0
DEMO of	your	workgroup.	Different	people	will	have	different
perceptions	of	their	workgroup	style.	A	number	less	than	5	score	means	that	some	innovation
factors	were	low	in	your	estimation.	These	factors	might	include	an	overly	internal	focus,	low
transparency	in	decision-making,	the	organization's	reaction	to	failure,	the	groups	ability	to	work
in	new	areas,	or	the	commitment	level	of	people	to	do	what	they	say.
OPERATIONAL	CULTURE	SCORE:
Your	Operational	Culture	Score	for	your	workgroup	is	score	is	7.19	out	of	10.0
The	Operational	Culture	score	is	also	based	on	your	self	evaluation	and	perceptions.	A	score	less
than	5	in	this	category	means	that	people	are	not	generally	aware	of	the	operating	measures	of
the	firm	or	workgroup.	Examples	of	measures	might	include	market	share,	happiness	metrics	for
customers,	quality	metrics,	and	cost	metrics.	These	types	of	issues	can	be	addressed	with	the
development	and	commitment	to	processes	in	the	workgroup.
Your	perception	of	your	workgroup's	style	is	to	avoid	argument	and	yet	stay	in	dialog	during
conflicts.	This	is	a	very	healthy	behavior.	This	is	an	important	characteristics	of	your	workgroup'DEMO
culture.
Idea:	Have	a	few	people	in	your	workgroup	take	this	survey.	Then	compare	and	discuss	results
with	each	other.	Think	about	whether	your	scores	are	a	good	match	for	the	objectives	of	your
workgroup.	Do	you	want	to	improve	your	operations	focus	or	innovativeness?	More	advanced
diagnostics	should	be	done	with	an	independent	moderator	or	internal	project	manager.
Remember:	Culture	eats	strategy	for	breakfast	-- Peter	Drucker
Learn	more	and	check	for	updates	at http://berkeleyinnovationindex.org/
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
12
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report 13
These examples	illustrate	graphicLevel	Assessment	Potential: representations of	a	Mindset	for an	individual or	in	aggregate
Average Values	of	Mindset Components	for	a	group	of	Individuals
Example	Histogram	of	“resource	allocation”	scores”	for	a group	of	individuals	or
workgroup
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
13
Individual	Mindset
of	a	group	of	individuals
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
here:An	example	of	a	text	report generated	by	the	Berkeley	Innovation	Index	Algorithm	is	provided
Berkeley	Method	Multi-Facet	Algorithm,	Alpha	Release	1.3
INNOVATION	MINDSET:
Your	personal	Innovation	Mindset	Level	is	currently	7.15	out	of	10
This	is	not	a	fixed	level,DEMO
using	an	analysis	based	on	the	Berkeley	Method	for	Entreprenuership	&	Innovation,	the	Comfort
Zone	Scale,	and	fundamental	testing	methods	in	social	psychology.
The	following	factors	are	components	of	your	innovation	mindset:
TRUST	level:	6.86	of	10.	This	is	your	ability	to	trust	others.
RESILIENCE	level:	8.64	of	10.	This	is	your	ability	to	overcome	failure.
DIVERSITY	level:	8.45	of	10.	This	is	your	ability	to	overcome	social	barriers.
MENTAL	STRENGTH	level:	7.16	of	10.	This	is	a	measure	of	your	confidence	and	belief	that	you	can
succeed.
COLLABORATION	level:	3.68	of	10.	This	is	your	ability	to	work	with	everyone	including	competitors
when	needed.
RESOURCE	AWARENESS	level:	5.50	of	10.	This	is	your	ability	to	balance	your	resources	across
multiple	objectives.
INNOVATION	ZONE	level:	8.59	of	10.	This	is	a	measure	of	your	ability	to	work	in	areas	of
DEMO
14
MINDSET	ANALYSIS:
Based	on	your	comfort	with	ambiguity,	your	MINDSET	covers	both	operations	and	innovation,	but
LEANS	towards	INNOVATION.	If	you	have	interest	in	operational	innovation	and	precision,	you
should	pre-analyze	situations	and	focus	more	on	risk	mitigation.
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
14
15
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
companies	(financial	data,	HR	data)	and	TheThis	index	BII	project	opens	a	broader	field	concerning	performance	measurements	for	companies.	data	may	also	be	aggregated	with	other	information	from	various	departments	of	companies’	environment	(country	GDP,	public	policy	for
Conclusioninnovation	and	entrepreneurship…).
DEMO,	sometimes	years	before	the	success	is	made	visible.	Certainly,	the	more	data	we	as	external	and	unexpected	vexisting	methods.	It	is	difficult	to	measure	soft	assets	and	indirect	effects	of	innovation	projects	ariables	may	have	fostered	the	success	of	a	handful	of
findings.	In	have,	the	more	likely	we	will	be	able	to	define	success	and	to	increase	the	precision	of	our	any	case,	the	Berkeley	Innovation	Index	represents	the	missing	link	of	innovation
tangible	economic	impact,	that	will	synthesize	the	Berkeley	Innovation	Index	with	a	gperformance	analysis.	We	will	continue	to	develop portfolio	a	holistic	approach,	aimed	at	– strategic),	and	could	possibly	having	a	iven
DEMO(sector	company’s	existing	set	of	tools	(project	– program	–
industry).–
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
15
of	a	company.	It	provides	a	futureworkgroups	is	an	approach	that,	if	combined	with	existing	metMeasuring	innovativeness	through	the	analysis	of	the	psychological	profiles	of	individuals	or	-oriented	approach	of	valuation	that	is	complementary	to	hods,	can	offer	a	holistic	analysis
Bibliographydissertation,	Ecole	des	Mines	de	Paris.d’apprentissage	à	la	revelation	d’un	modèle	industriel	Chapel,	Vincent	(1997),	La	croissance	par	l’innovation	intensive:	de	la	d– le	cas	Téfal.	Unpublished	doctoral	ynamique	16
from	technology.	BostoChesbrough,	Henry	W.	(
tools	destroy	your	capacity	to	do	new	things.	Harvard	Business	Review,	Jan	2008.Clayton	M.	Christensen,	Stephen	P.	Kaufman	and	Willy	C.	Shih.	Innovation	Killers:	How	financial
80.	Product	Development:	Results	of	an	Industry	Practices	Study.”	R&D	Management	31	(4):	361Cooper,	Robert,	Scott	Edgett,	and	Elko	KleiFlorida,	R.,	Goodnight,	J.,	Managing	for	Creativity,	Harvard	Business	Review,	August	2005.nschmidt.	2001.	“Portfolio	Management	for	New	–
Proceedings	of	the	Herbert	Simon	International	Conference	Hatchuel	A.	& Weil	B.	(2002),	C-K	Theory:	Notions	and	Applications	of	a	Unified	Design	Theory,	on	"	Design	Sciences	"DEMO
patents,	profitsJaffe,	A.	B.	(1986).	Technological	opportunity	and	spillovers	of	R&D:	evidence	from	firms'	and	market	value	(No.	w1815).	National	Bureau	of	Economic	Research.
VEntrepreneurial	action	and	its	impact	on	R&D	project	performance,	Journal	of	Business	Malte	Brettel,	René	Mauer,	Andreas	Engelen,	Daniel	Küpper,	Corporate	effectuation:	29.	Maniak,	Rémi.	2015.	“8	Proven	principles	for	managing	innovation.”	ParisTech	Review.	January	enturing,	Volume	27,	Issue	2,	March	2012,	Pages	167-184.
Management.	ManagManiak,DEMO,	and	Christophe	Midler.	2014.	“Multiproject	Lineage	Management:	Bridging	Project	ement	and	Design-Based	Innovation	Strategy.”	International	Journal	of	Project
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
n:	Harvard	Business	School	Press.2003).	Open	Innovation:	The	new	imperative	for	creating	and	profiting
Management	for	Exploration	Projects.”	Project	Management	Journal	45	(4):DEMO,	Rémi,	Christophe	Midler,	Sylvain	Lenfle,	and	Marie	Le	Pellec-Dairon.	2014.	“Value	5–66.
2015,	Pages	407An	integration	of	research	findings,	European	Management	Journal,	Volume	33,	Issue	5,	October	Richard	M.	Walker,	Jiyao	Chen,	Deepa	Aravind,	Management	innovation	and	firm	performance:	-422
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation	16
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
17
Career	Satisfaction.	2015Sidhu,	De	l’Etraz,	Effect	of	Comfort	Zone	on	Entrepreneurship	Potential,	Innovation	Culture,	and
Entrepreneurship	Ikhlaq	Sidhu,	Ken	Singer,	Mari	Suoranta,DEMO,	“Introducing	Berkeley	Method	of	- a	game-based	teaching	approach”,	2014.
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
17
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
Appendix	A:		Protocol Examples
Full	Assessment	– Requires	Customized	Project	Development
1.
2.
electronic	form.		Collect	General	Company	Information.		This	information	will	be	collected	through	an
For	various	sized	companies,DEMO,
10	sample	interviews	across	all	functional	g
*	Size	51*	Size	10*	Size	<	10:	5	Key	employees	including	founders,	possible	all.*	Multiples	of	500:	multiples	of	40	interviews	or	*	Size:	200*	Size	100-- --199:	20	sample	interviews	across	all	functional	groups500:	35	sample	interviews	across	all	functional	groups
operations,	and	company	people	data	collection.		99:	1049:	5- -15	sample	interviews	across	all	functional	groupsroups
recommendations subset	based	on	partner
Note	that	percentages	of	employees	are	typically	representative	of	information	workers,	interviews.workers.		Example:	10,000	people,	1K	knowledgan	target	mix	would	be	8%	of	information/knowledge	workers.		0.1%	of	none,DEMO
-knowledge
input	in	to	the	electronic.	Use	Innovation	Mindset	and	Workgroup	Culture	AssessmentCollect	data	via	interview	from	each	person.		This	is	an	interview.		Ask	the	questions	to
3.
4. style	strategic	recommendation.Collect	product	and	market	share	information	that	can	be	used	to	create	a	BCG	McKinsey
5. Collect	any	information	based	on	customized	request	if	required.
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation	18
18
Sutardja Center	for	Entrepreneurship	&	Technology	Technical	Report
Medium	Assessment:	Hybrid	In	person	plus	web	based,	and	People/Org/Process,
Requires	Custom	Proposal.		Does	not	use McKinsey/BCG	Style	Report
DEMO
operations,	and	company	people	data	collection.		For	various	sized	companies,	identify	the	test	data	points	for	Innovation	culture,	BI2	creates	a	SPECIAL	CODE	for	Company.
*	Size	<	10:	5	Key	employees	incl15	sample	interviews	across	all	functional	groupsuding	founders,	possible	all.
*	Size	10*	Size:	200*	Size	100*	Size	51recommendations*	Multiples	of	500:	multiples	of	40	interviews	or	subset	based	on	partner	--99:	1049:	5--199:	20	sample	interviews	across	all	functional	groups500:	35	sample	-10	sample	interviews	across	all	functional	groups- interviews	across	all	functional	groups
3.
Mini	Assessment	–
Note	that	percentages	of	employees	are	typically	representative	of	information	workers,	interviews.workers.		Example:	10,000	people,	1K	knowledge,	9K	nonan	target	mix	would	be	8%	of	information/DEMO
Innovation	Mindset	and	Collect	data	via	interview	from	each	person.		Hybrid	of	electronic	and	in	person	data.		Workgroup	Culture	Assessment Use
19
Berkeley	Innovation	Index:	An	Approach	for	Measuring	and	Diagnosing	Innovation
19
1. Mindset	Test	OnlyCEO/HR	instructed	to	send	email	test	to	all	BI2	creates	a	SPECIAL	CODE	for	Company..
for	internal	evaluation	of	results	and	Code	specifies	firm	and	consulting	partner.		Report	delivered	to	discussion of	remedies.
3.2.
People	DNA	Only
employees’ organization.HR	or	Use	Innovation	consulting	partner{1g42fwefx}