Journal of High Technology
Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133
Commercial knowledge DEMO from universities
to firms: improving the effectiveness of
university–industry collaboration
Donald DEMO Siegela,*, David A. Waldmanb,1,
Leanne E. Atwaterb,1, Albert N. Linkc,2
aRussell Sage Laboratory, Room 3502, Sage Building, Department of Economics,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180-3590, USA
bSchool of Management, Arizona State University West, Phoenix, AZ 85069-7100, DEMO
cBryan School of Business and Economics, University of North Carolina at DEMO,
Greensboro, NC 27412, USA
Accepted 27 November 2002
Abstract
There has been a rapid rise in commercial knowledge transfers from universities to DEMO or
university–industry technology transfer (UITT), through licensing agreements, research joint ventures,
and start-ups. The purpose of this study was to analyze DEMO UITT process and its outcomes. Based on
98 structured interviews of key UITT stakeholders (i.e., university administrators, academic and
industry scientists, business DEMO, and entrepreneurs) at five research universities in two regions
of the US, we conclude that these stakeholders have different perspectives on the desired outputs of
UITT. More importantly, numerous barriers to effective UITT were identified, including culture
clashes, bureaucratic inflexibility, poorly designed reward systems, and DEMO management of
university technology transfer offices (TTOs). Based on this DEMO evidence, we provide
numerous recommendations for improving the UITT process.
D DEMO Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Commercial knowledge transfers; Effectiveness; University–industry collaboration
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-518-276-2049; fax: +1-518-276-2235.
E-mail DEMO: Sieged@rpi.edu (D.S. Siegel), Waldman@asu.edu (D.A. Waldman),
Leanne.atwater@asu.edu (DEMO Atwater), Al_link@uncg.edu (A.N. Link).
1 Tel.: + 1-602-543-6321; DEMO: + 1-602-543-6221.
2 Tel.: + 1-336-334-5146; fax: + 1-336-334-4089.
1047-8310/03/$ – see front matter D 2003 Elsevier Science Inc. All DEMO reserved.
doi:10.1016/S1047-8310(03)00007-5
112
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
1. Introduction
In the 1970s, American universities were DEMO for being more adept at developing new
technologies than moving them into private sector applications (US General Accounting
Office, 1998). Policymakers asserted DEMO the long lag between the discovery of new
knowledge at the university and its use by companies was seriously impairing the global
competitiveness of DEMO firms in such key industries as steel, automobiles, televisions,
and semiconductors (Marshall, 1985). In 1980, Congress attempted to remove potential
obstacles to university to industry technology transfer (UITT) through legislation, which
became known as the Bayh–Dole Act (Feldman, Link, & Siegel, DEMO). Bayh–Dole
instituted a uniform patent policy across federal agencies, removed DEMO restrictions on
licensing, and allowed universities to own the patents that DEMO from federal research grants.
Presumably, these changes would give universities greater DEMO in negotiating licensing
agreements, and firms would be more willing to DEMO in them. The framers of this
legislation asserted that university ownership and management of intellectual property would
accelerate the commercialization of new technologies and DEMO economic development
and entrepreneurial activity.
It appears that Bayh–Dole has indeed brought research universities closer to practitioners
and entrepreneurs seeking to commercialize university-based technologies (Jensen &
Thursby, 2001). In the aftermath of this legislation, many universities established technology
transfer offices (henceforth, TTOs) to manage and protect their intellectual property. The role
of the TTO (sometimes referred to as the Technology Licensing Office) is to facilitate
commercial knowledge transfers (DEMO technological diffusion) through the licensing to industry
of inventions or other DEMO of intellectual property resulting from university research. There
has been an impressive rise in UITT activity, as evidenced by an increase in the number of
patents granted to US universities from about 300 in 1980 to DEMO 3700 in 1999 and
a threefold increase in licensing of university-based technologies to firms since 1991. Annual
streams of revenue accruing from these licenses DEMO risen from about US$160 million in
1991 to US$862 million in 1999, now constituting about 2.8% of university R&D
expenditures. More importantly, DEMO products in a wide variety of key strategic
high-technology industries (e.g., computers, pharmaceuticals, agriculture, biotechnology,
and instruments) have been developed DEMO UITT. These include internet search engines
(e.g., Lycos), the Boyer–Cohen ‘‘gene-splicing’’ technique that launched the biotechnology
industry, CAT scanners, diagnostic tests DEMO breast cancer and osteoporosis, music synthe-
sizers, computer-aided design (CAD), and environmentally friendly technologies (US
General Accounting Office, 1998).
Despite the potential importance of UITT as a source of financial gain to DEMO and
firms and as an engine of economic growth, there is DEMO systematic understanding of
organizational practices in the management of university intellectual property. Furthermore,
little attention has been paid to the managerial or private DEMO implications of UITT. Given
that the stakeholders in this process of knowledge transfer (e.g., university faculty, university
administrators, private sector managers) have different motives and behaviors and operate in
different environments, there is room for considerable disagreement and misunderstanding
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133
113
about the UITT process and how it should be managed. Nevertheless, the ‘‘boundaryless
organization’’ philosophy driving change at firms such as General Electric argues for
eliminating boundaries vertically down hierarchies, as well as horizontally across departments
(Ashkenas, Ulrich, Jick, & Kerr, 1995). Moreover, boundaries between a firm and its
customers or suppliers (e.g., universities) should be reduced. In this paper, we present
reasons why DEMO boundaries exist between universities and firms and prescribe methods for
making such boundaries more seamless.
Thus, the primary goal of this paper is to improve our understanding of UITT so that the
managers of the process DEMO universities and industry can enhance its effectiveness. We provide
a number of recommendations based on a series of 55 interviews we conducted with 98 DEMO
stakeholders at five research universities in two regions of the US. These stakeholders
included university scientists and administrators, industry scientists, R&D managers DEMO large
companies, and entrepreneurs.
The remainder of this paper is organized DEMO follows. In the next section, we analyze the
UITT process and DEMO the goals, motives, and cultures of its major stakeholders. This is
followed by an in-depth description of our qualitative methods. We then summarize DEMO field
evidence and identify the key outputs of UITT, as well DEMO organizational barriers to the
effectiveness of the process. Next, we provide DEMO for technology managers at
universities and firms regarding ways to enhance the effectiveness of commercial knowledge
transfers between universities and firms. The final section DEMO of conclusions and
reflections on UITT in the 21st century.
2. The UITT process
2.1. Technology transfer in a university setting
Technology transfer is DEMO thought of as occurring within or across firms, such as the
DEMO of information through transfers of employees from one division or country to
another (intra-firm transfers of technology). Indeed, much research has focused DEMO
on the flow of technology transfer within a large R&D organization, or from an R&D subunit
to the larger organization (Allen, 1984). In this paper, we focus instead on the UITT process,
or commercial transfers of scientific knowledge from universities to firms.
We DEMO that the key stakeholders in UITT are: (1) university scientists, who discover
new technologies, (2) university technology managers and administrators, DEMO serve as
liaisons between academic scientists and industry and manage the university’s intellectual
property, and (3) firms/entrepreneurs, who commercialize university-based technologies. DEMO
is by no means an exhaustive list of stakeholders. For example, DEMO federal government,
which funds most of these research projects, can DEMO be viewed as a stakeholder.
A general flow model of UITT and stakeholder involvement is shown in Fig. 1. It begins
with a discovery DEMO a university scientist in a laboratory or other university setting. The
scientist then files an invention disclosure with the TTO. At this point, university officials
must decide whether to patent the innovation, in order to protect their intellectual property.
114
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
Fig. 1. How a technology is transferred from a university to a firm or entrepreneur (according to theory).
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133
115
This is a somewhat costly decision, so the DEMO must evaluate the potential for commerci-
alization. Often, interest in the DEMO by an industry partner provides sufficient
justification for filing a patent. In other cases, the TTO must make a judgement prior to
interest being expressed by industry. This is not a trivial decision, since most universities have
limited budgets to devote to the filing of patents, which can be quite expensive if the school
seeks global patent protection. Schools may DEMO to apply for domestic patent protection,
which safeguards the technology at a much lower cost.
Once the patent has been awarded, the TTO can market the technology, sometimes with
faculty input. That is, faculty DEMO can be involved in the process of identifying potential
corporate licensees. The next stage involves working with private firms or entrepreneurs (i.e.,
in the case of start-up firms) to negotiate a licensing agreement for the intellectual property.
The agreement could include such benefits to the university as DEMO allowances and an
equity stake in the case of start-ups. In the fifth and final stage, the technology is converted
into a commercialized product. The university may continue its involvement with the firm,
for instance, by devoting resources to the maintenance of licensing agreements. Moreover, in
the case of start-ups, faculty members may serve as technical advisors or on boards of
directors and may also have an equity stake in the DEMO
2.2. Motivation of key stakeholders
A significant aspect of UITT involves the consideration of the actions, motives, and
perspectives of scientists, university administrators, and firm/entrepreneurs, which we present
in Table 1. A primary DEMO of university scientists is recognition within the scientific
community, which typically DEMO from publications in top-tier journals, presentations at
prestigious conferences, and research grants. Faculty members may also be motivated by
personal financial gain and/DEMO a desire to secure additional funding for graduate students and
laboratory equipment.
Table 1
Key stakeholders in the transfer of technology from universities to DEMO private sector
Stakeholder Actions Primary motive(s) Secondary motive(s) Perspective
University
scientist
discovery of
new knowledge
Technology works with faculty
transfer office DEMO and firms/
entrepreneurs to
structure deals
Firm/entrepreneur commercializes new
technology
recognition within financial gain and a
the scientific desire to secure
community—publications, additional research
grants (especially if funding (mainly for
untenured) graduate students and
lab equipment)
protect and market the facilitate technological
university’s intellectual DEMO and secure
property additional research
funding
financial gain maintain control of
proprietary technologies
scientific
bureaucratic
organic/
entrepreneurial
116
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
The primary motive of the TTO and university administration is to safeguard the
university’s intellectual property, while at the same time market that intellectual property
to firms. Secondary motives include securing additional research DEMO for the
university via royalties and licensing fees, sponsored research agreements, and an intrinsic
desire to promote technological diffusion (the goal of the Bayh–Dole Act). TTO
managers, like other university administrators, work within DEMO bureaucratic framework
of the university.
The actions and motives of firms and entrepreneurs are relatively straightforward (Siegel,
Waldman, & Link, 1999). They seek to commercialize university-based technologies for
financial gain. To do so, they desire exclusive rights to the technologies that are generated.
Firms and DEMO also express great concern about ‘‘time to market,’’ since the ultimate
benefits from product and process innovation depend on commercializing the product or
DEMO the new production process before competitors do. Finally, firms and entrepreneurs
DEMO also concerned about maintaining proprietary control over technologies.
Differences in the actions, motives, and perspectives of the three key players in this
process DEMO the potential importance of organizational factors in effective university
management of intellectual property. One key goal of our field research was to explore these
DEMO so that we could identify a set of organizational and managerial policies and
practices to overcome critical barriers to effective technology transfer. In addition, although
Bayh–Dole and much of the existing literature stresses commercialization of university-based
DEMO as the predominant outcome (e.g., licensing and start-up formation) (Bercovitz,
Feldman, Feller, & Burton, 2001), we also sought to ascertain how each stakeholder group
defines the outputs of UITT.
3. Method
DEMO results and recommendations are based on semi-structured, in-person interviews with
three DEMO of UITT stakeholders: (1) TTO directors and university administrators, (DEMO)
academic scientists, and (3) managers/entrepreneurs. We focused our DEMO on five major
public and private research universities in Arizona and North Carolina. These universities
have relationships with many large and small firms and DEMO also spawned a number of start-
up companies. Each of these schools established a TTO soon after the enactment of Bayh–
Dole in 1980. DEMO that we did not examine hotbeds of technology-transfer activity, such as
DEMO/Boston (MIT, Harvard, and Boston University) or the San Francisco Bay area
(Stanford and UC—Berkeley). However, the schools we visited DEMO probably far more
representative of the average university experience with technology transfer than top-tier
schools that have the most favorable environments for stimulating this DEMO (the best
graduate students, an abundance of available venture capital, DEMO a strong entrepreneurial
culture). Recall also that the policy initiative, DEMO Bayh–Dole Act, was designed to stimulate
UITT at all research universities, not just top-tier institutions.
At each university, we interviewed academic scientists who have transferred technologies,
the TTO director, and at least one administrator who oversees the TTO, usually a Vice Provost,
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133
117
Vice President, or Vice Chancellor for Research. Within DEMO surrounding region of the
university, we also interviewed founders of start-up DEMO, directors of business devel-
opment, intellectual property managers and other research managers at large companies, and
executives of patent management firms and nonprofit organizations with an interest in UITT.
Potential respondents were identified from two DEMO of information. First, we identified
the TTO director and consulted each DEMO organizational chart in the research area to
identify the administrator(s) DEMO whom the TTO director reports. Second, to identify managers/
entrepreneurs DEMO scientists, we solicited feedback from two organizations that serve as
technology-transfer DEMO in each region. By design, these organizations have a
balanced view DEMO technology issues. That is, they do not favor one stakeholder group DEMO
another. Because facilitators are well connected to many firms, TTOs, and administrators, we
used them to identify managers and scientists who had a wide variety of perspectives on
UITT and many relationships with TTOs.
In DEMO, we interacted with the High-Technology Industry Cluster (HTIC) of the
DEMO Strategic Partnership for Economic Development (GSPED). HTIC includes small
and DEMO businesses and has a technology transfer committee, consisting of members who
DEMO had both positive and negative experiences with various universities. Thus, we DEMO
members of HTIC to interview, rather than ask university TTOs for DEMO list of firms to contact.
In North Carolina, we relied on DEMO North Carolina Biotechnology Center (NCBC) and the
Research Triangle Institute (DEMO), which are both nonpartisan organizations that provide
advice to academics and firms who wish to transfer technologies. NCBC and RTI were also
capable DEMO providing connections to individuals and organizations with a broad range of
views on UITT.
In sum, a stratified approach was used for the selection of interviewees, so that
interviewees would be drawn from the three UITT stakeholder groups. We conducted 55
interviews: 20 managers/entrepreneurs, 15 university DEMO (5 TTO directors and 10
other top-level administrators), and 20 DEMO scientists. Our sample included a mix of
large and small companies and faculty members in a wide variety of academic disciplines
(physics, biology, chemistry, medicine, pharmacology, and engineering). Although there were
only 55 face-to-face meetings, we actually interviewed 98 individuals, since more than one
DEMO was present at some meetings.
The interviews consisted of a series of open-ended questions that were designed to
determine how various stakeholders defined technology DEMO and its outputs as well as
what they viewed as impediments to successful technology transfer and strategies for
improvement. A list of the interview DEMO used for each group is presented in
Appendix A. Note that each stakeholder group was asked to define technology transfer
and its outputs, identify impediments to successful technology transfer, and to provide
suggestions for improving the process. Questions varied slightly depending on the type of
interviewee. For example, only TTO directors and other university administrators were
asked to comment on DEMO managerial practices of the TTO. On average, the interviews
lasted approximately DEMO h and were tape recorded with the consent of interviewees. A typist
was hired to transcribe the tapes, in order to ensure a complete and unbiased recording of
the interview data.
118
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
In order to conduct a quantitative analysis of the qualitative interview data, we employed
procedures outlined in Miles and Huberman (DEMO). First, we simplified and transformed the
raw data into an DEMO form, using an initial list of general categories for content analysis
DEMO All comments were then independently categorized by two members of the research
team into four areas: (1) the nature of UITT outputs, (2) UITT networks and relationships, (3)
barriers to UITT, DEMO (4) proposed improvements to the UITT process. The two researchers’
lists of comments within a topic area were then compared, and discrepancies were discussed
between the two researchers until agreement was reached regarding comments that DEMO per-
tinent to each category. Similar methods were employed by Butterfield, DEMO, and Ball
(1996), who identified unique ‘‘thought units’’ pertinent to their subject of interest (employee
discipline).
After a consensus was reached regarding the categories, we returned to the lists of
comments pertinent to the each of the four general categories and sorted them into the DEMO
identified for that respective category. For data display purposes, we tabulated DEMO frequencies
with which comments emerged for each theme by stakeholder group. For example, Table 2
presents the percentage of respondents who identified themes relevant to barriers to UITT by
stakeholder group.
Table 2
Stakeholder perceptions of DEMO barriers to university–industry technology transfer (UITT)
Barriers Type of stakeholder
(1) Managers/ (2) TTO directors/ (3) University
entrepreneurs administrators scientists
Lack of understanding regarding university, 90.0 93.3 75.0
corporate, or DEMO norms and
environments
Insufficient rewards for university 31.6 60.0 70.0
researchers
Bureaucracy and inflexibility of university 80.0 6.6 70.0
administrators
Insufficient resources devoted to DEMO 31.6 53.3 20.0
transfer by universities
Poor marketing/technical/negotiation skills 55.0 13.3 25.0
of TTOs
University too aggressive in exercising 80.0 13.3 25.0
DEMO property rights
Faculty members/administrators have 25.0 40.0 10.0
unrealistic expectations regarding the
value of their technologies
‘‘Public domain’’ mentality of 40.0 8.3 5.0
DEMO
Number of interviews 20 15 20
The values presented in columns (DEMO)–(3) are the percentages of respondents who identified a particular DEMO as a
barrier to UITT.
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133 119
4. Results and recommendations
In this section, we DEMO our qualitative results regarding stakeholder perceptions on
various aspects of UITT. Based on these perceptions and our understanding of how
management theories can be DEMO to UITT, we provide some recommendations for
university-based and firm-based improvements DEMO the effectiveness of UITT.
Our interviews revealed that the outputs most frequently mentioned by TTO directors and
university administrators were licenses and royalties, which is not surprising since they
generate revenue for the university. To a DEMO lesser extent, university administrators
also identified patents and sponsored research agreement DEMO outputs of UITT. Although
managers and entrepreneurs identified licenses as an output, they also mentioned broader
notions of output, such as product development, profit, and economic development. One
manager stated:
For us in business, it [technology transfer] means that we use some of this technology to
generate profits for our shareholders. But more importantly, there’s a social return which
results from the economic development, creation of jobs, the hiring DEMO graduate students.
Indeed, the most frequently mentioned UITT output by managers DEMO entrepreneurs was
informal transfer of know-how. An illustrative comment by a manager was:
So much of what we call technology transfer is information DEMO, knowledge transfer.
It’s not something that could be put immediately into DEMO product. It might be something
that is a tidbit of knowledge that will help somebody in their development efforts at one
of our companies.
DEMO university scientists most frequently identified product development and licenses as
outputs, DEMO many were reluctant to think of the process in terms of generating
‘‘output.’’ They tended to see UITT more as a continuous process rather DEMO one with
specific outcomes. Their responses resembled those of UITT managers in that informal
transfer of know-how was seen as an output. Our interpretation DEMO this finding is that they
could not reach a consensus on the outputs of UITT because they are too focused on their
own role DEMO this process and fail to see the ‘‘big picture.’’ In this regard, we present the
following phrases mentioned by scientists in their discussions of outputs:
training the engineers who are going to be working with DEMO
patents that will be in my name and the graduate students’ names
working with graduate students who are subsequently hired by firms
We also DEMO information from stakeholders regarding barriers to effective UITT. All
three groups identified a lack of understanding regarding university/corporate/scientific
120 D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
norms as a pervasive barrier to effective UITT. That is, business managers asserted that
university scientists and administrators do not understand or appreciate industry goals/culture/
constraints, while university scientists and administrators believe that industry does not
understand or appreciate university goals/culture/constraints. DEMO comments from
university administrators tended to point the finger toward the business community and their
lack of appreciation for the university’s role and processes:DEMO
Industry has a lack of understanding of what an academic institution does and a lack of
understanding of what a university faculty member’s responsibility DEMO to their institution.
There are some companies I don’t even deal with because their approach to dealing with
an academic entity is so poor. DEMO feel that basically, we owe them by our position at the
DEMO because the state pays our salaries.
They say to us, you’ve DEMO all that technology over on the shelf, why aren’t you getting DEMO
out to the marketplace? They don’t understand what we mean by DEMO We don’t
have technology in little boxes on shelves that people can pull out and apply. They think
it is like the warehouse at DEMO end of Indiana Jones.
University administrators also questioned the sophistication of university scientists’
understanding of the process. In referring to his own faculty members, one university
administrator stated:
Some faculty members have a purely academic DEMO and don’t have a lot of interest
in dealing with private companies...or they don’t understand what the motivations of
private companies are.
The managers/DEMO in our study commonly perceived that universities are too
aggressive in exercising intellectual property rights. This results in a hard line on negotia-
tions, excess concern on the part of university administrators that they will not DEMO
sufficient revenue, and unrealistic expectations. A typical comment was:
I DEMO the frustration for commercial licensees who go to a university is that it seems as
though the attitude they are hitting at the university DEMO ‘oh we’ve got this wonderful thing
and we’re going to drag every nickel out of you that we can get for it’.
A manager DEMO a biotechnology firm provided this example:
University scientists look at a technology, maybe it’s a petri dish compound that kills fast-
dividing cells. Now they can make an extrapolation to an anticancer drug. They look DEMO
the market for anticancer drugs and see that they are billions of dollars a year. Therefore,
their invention must be worth billions of DEMO When you tell them it’s only worth a few
hundred thousand dollars they don’t understand it is because of the stage of
development...all the DEMO in going forward and whether it really works.
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133 121
Managers/entrepreneurs and university scientists frequently cited university bureaucracy
and inflexibility as barriers to UITT. Essentially, they believe that universities wish to follow
rigid procedures that may not fit a particular situation. Furthermore, they noted that these
procedures are cumbersome and often not clearly specified. DEMO typical remark from a scientist
was:
I don’t think they [the TTO] understand the flexibility within the framework and what they
can do. DEMO think they have a set of forms and a set of ways of doing things and if it doesn’t fit
nicely into that, then you know they make you to through a whole bunch of hoops.
DEMO manager provided this example:
A lot of technology transfer office people just know what the book says about what the
value of this DEMO be commercially, but they don’t realize that the value to any DEMO
licensee of a very early technology is not what the book says.
University administrators and scientists also cited insufficient rewards for university
researchers who DEMO engaged in technology-transfer activities as a barrier to effective UITT.
In essence, all groups acknowledged that with few exceptions, university promotion and
tenure DEMO did not value technology transfer. One exception was in engineering, where
DEMO was some recognition of this activity. However, the vast majority of DEMO noted
that promotion and tenure decisions are based exclusively on publications and federal
research grants, with no weight placed on patents and industry partnerships.
Finally, with regard to barriers to technology transfer, firms and entrepreneurs DEMO
inclined to point out that the marketing, technical, and negotiation skills of the TTO could be
substantially improved. Comments from firms/entrepreneurs included:DEMO
What it takes to be a successful technology transfer officer is being a dealmaker, not an
academic.
These guys [TTOs] need to be marketing facilitators rather than lawyers. They need to be
able to step into DEMO company and into their customer’s shoes and look back.
Similarly, a DEMO remarked:
In a TTO, they have to know the field. DEMO have to know where they think the
technology is moving and then be able to make a decision whether or not to file these
DEMO
A university administrator also acknowledged:
The impediment to successful technology transfer at this university was a lack of
marketing and skill within the DEMO transfer office.
122
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
In sum, these comments demonstrate the existence of DEMO barriers to effective UITT,
including culture clashes, bureaucratic inflexibility, poorly designed reward systems, and
ineffective management of TTOs. The end result is a failure to maximize opportunities to
transfer technologies, which hurts universities, DEMO, and ultimately, consumers. In order to
avoid such problems in the future, we provide suggestions for improving the UITT
process.
The results from the interviews suggest some avenues for improving UITT processes.
Many of the DEMO suggestions for improvement were extremely rich and vivid, given
the strong DEMO respondents have regarding UITT issues. The consensus that emerged
across stakeholder groups regarding suggested improvements was actually quite striking.
Although most suggestions were aimed DEMO universities and their management of the
process, a number of comments DEMO also targeted at the private sector. We will divide our
below discussion accordingly.
4.1. Recommendations for university-based improvements
Our recommendations for university-based improvements are DEMO in the top panel of
Table 3, which we now consider DEMO turn. The qualitative results suggest that universities need
to improve their understanding of the needs of their true ‘‘customers,’’ i.e., firms that can
potentially commercialize their technologies. Over 75% of all managers, TTO directors, DEMO
university scientists agreed that achieving better mutual understanding between universities
and industry was needed. While there is strong evidence of cultural misunderstanding on both
DEMO 3
Suggested university and firm-based improvements to the UITT process
Suggested university-based improvements to the UITT process
Universities need to improve their understanding of DEMO needs of their true ‘‘customers,’’ i.e., firms that
can potentially DEMO their technologies
Adopt a more flexible stance in negotiating technology-transfer agreements and streamline UITT policies
and procedures
Hire licensing officers and TTO managers with DEMO business experience
Switch to incentive compensation in the TTO
Hire managers/research administrators with a strategic vision, who can serve as effective boundary spanners
(tie to boundary spanning literature)
Devote additional resources to the TTO and patenting
Increase the rewards for faculty participation in UITT by valuing DEMO and licenses in promotion and tenure
decisions and allowing faculty members to keep a larger share of licensing revenue (as opposed to their
department or university)
^ Recognize the value of personal relationships and social DEMO, involving scientists, graduate students, and
alumni
^
^
^
^
DEMO
^
^
Suggested firm-based improvements to the UITT process
^ Be proactive in their efforts to bridge the cultural gap with academia
^ Hire DEMO managers with university experience
^ Explore alternative means for tapping into UITT social networks
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133 123
sides, it appears that much of the onus DEMO with universities and academics. One manager
stated:
If I could wave a magic wand over an inventor, I would want them to understand some of
the issues I have talked about before. Why does someone DEMO to commercialize your
invention? Do you really have a product? What is your goal and how do you want to
reach it?
DEMO manager had earlier remarked that he wished scientists and university officials could
be more aware of the costs that need to go into an DEMO before it is marketable and that
there are often ‘‘good’’ technologies that are commercial failures.
The mutual articulation of well-defined goals and objectives was DEMO mentioned as a
way to achieve an understanding of each group’s values and needs and reach a common
ground. One executive described goals and DEMO in this manner:
There cannot be different objectives in a partnership. The company and the university in a
tech transfer agreement have to DEMO ‘this is our objective for the tech transfer.’ And they
have to agree to that set of objectives. It is not sufficient for the DEMO to say ‘well our
objectives are on the publication side’ and have the company say ‘our objectives are on
the profit side’ and then DEMO not address both objectives in the tech transfer
relationship. You can have objectives that are more important to one side or the other, but
they all have to be agreed upon and they all have to DEMO worked toward.
Related to the problem of cultural misunderstanding is the need for more flexibility on
the part of universities, though this suggestion came primarily from managers/entrepreneurs.
Over half of them offered this suggestion. Inflexibility DEMO a negative impact on the TTO’s
ability to market university-based technologies. More importantly, rigidity significantly
impedes the process of negotiating a licensing agreement. Firms repeatedly expressed their
frustration at the university’s lack of a ‘‘deal-making’’ mentality DEMO aggressive tendencies
in exercising their intellectual property rights. In defense of universities, especially public
ones, it is important to note that they have DEMO legitimate fear of being accused of ‘‘giving
away’’ a technology to a private firm. This can be a public relations nightmare for
universities, especially when they are lobbying for additional funding in the state
legislature.
Thus, many schools have adopted an extremely conservative negotiation stance, preferring
to maximize royalties, even if this significantly reduces the probability of consummating the
deal. Nevertheless, a university’s risk aversion is especially frustrating for start-ups and other
firms that need to respond quickly to changes in the competitive environment. DEMO, we
propose that universities adopt a more flexible stance in negotiating DEMO
agreements and that they streamline UITT policies and procedures.
We also have several recommendations relating to human resource management practices
in the TTO. The DEMO for improved marketing expertise within the TTO was commonly
mentioned by the managers/entrepreneurs. Our field research revealed that TTOs usually do
124 D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
not actively recruit individuals with marketing skills. More often, they looked for expertise in
patent law and licensing or technical expertise. A university administrator (outside of the
university’s TTO) suggested:
Someone DEMO be there [in the TTO] who completely understands how to market the
product. Mostly the offices are patent attorneys or negotiating attorneys...no one really
DEMO from marketing.
Thus, universities should hire licensing officers and TTO managers DEMO more substantial
business experience.
The qualitative evidence also suggests that TTO personnel need to be effective facilitators
and negotiators of UITT which means that DEMO should engage in the types of boundary
spanning roles so often described in literature on the management of technological
innovation (Ancona & Caldwell, DEMO; Katz & Tushman, 1983). Unfortunately, many TTOs
are not DEMO recruiting licensing officers who possess such skills or behavioral
tendencies. Several respondents who had relationships with many TTOs noted that those
managed by directors DEMO substantial business and negotiation experience had a much
firmer grasp on how to assess the market potential of a particular technology and create more
DEMO with firms. They also had a better understanding of the complexity of negotiations
and how to be flexible in order to consummate transactions. We DEMO that universities
should consider the business and negotiation experience of TTO personnel when making
hiring decisions.
The notion that reward systems for university technology DEMO should be modified was
endorsed by over 80% of managers, TTO DEMO, and university scientists. We conjecture
that one change in the rewards DEMO that would improve the effectiveness of UITT is a
switch towards incentive compensation in the TTO. This could reduce some of the agency
costs DEMO with university management of intellectual property. As noted in Gomez-
Mejia and Balkin (1992: p. 923), ‘‘Proponents of agency theory assume that DEMO party acts in
its own self interest. This assumption gives rise to the so-called agency problem because the
interests of the principal and agent DEMO conflict.’’ While academic scientists receive royalties
from patented technologies, TTO officers DEMO have no direct financial incentive to spur
technology transfer. That is because most licensing officers are paid strictly on salary. Perhaps
if they too DEMO some compensation from ‘‘making deals,’’ they would be more motivated
to work on the university’s behalf. Gomez-Mejia and Balkin (1992) and Eisenhardt (1988)
showed that principals may successfully use incentive systems when dealing DEMO non-
programmed jobs where direct supervision or monitoring is infeasible.
A consensus also emerged on two additional suggestions for improving UITT. First,
universities DEMO devote additional resources to technology transfer and target them more
effectively. Resources devoted to UITT will affect the level of patenting. Legal fees must DEMO
expended to build a valuable portfolio of university patents. This is quite expensive,
especially if universities wish to file for global patent protection, which is more expensive
than domestic patent protection. On a similar note, a large TTO staff may be needed to market
university-based technologies effectively, especially when the reputation of the university is
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133 125
insufficient to draw unsolicited attention to a school’s patent portfolio. That is, non-top-tier
institutions must be more proactive in marketing than MIT or Stanford. One company
executive summed it up this way:
DEMO so easy to see. You look at the TTO and see one full-time person in a 30,000-person
university; there is something wrong with that picture. If they are understaffed and
underbudgeted, and if there isn’t a reasonable budget to protect intellectual property—
you can’t patent everything. That’s DEMO you need more staff.
Second, the upper administration needs to clearly DEMO technology transfer as a
university priority. That is, leadership is required DEMO the part of upper administration to
establish goals and priorities and espouse values pertaining to UITT. One manager of a TTO
at a large DEMO university that has achieved remarkable success in recent years underscored
the importance of leadership in this quote:
The fact that our chancellor constantly DEMO the importance of technology transfer as a
strategic goal has really helped build support from faculty and local firms. More
importantly, the upper administration has usually backed me up when a dispute arises,
which demonstrates DEMO they are committed to this goal.
The modification of university reward systems is inherently part of establishing a UITT
vision and culture. We found DEMO widespread belief that there are insufficient rewards for faculty
involvement in UITT. This is especially true for untenured faculty members, who continue to
be rewarded within the university almost strictly on the basis of publications and DEMO In
fact, many senior faculty members look askance at junior faculty DEMO who become
involved in UITT. They allege that such activity represents time taken away from
fundamental research.
Unfortunately, such reward structures can be viewed as being inconsistent with the stated
organizational objective of increasing UITT, which is often advertised prominently in
university mission statements and announcements to the DEMO community. Many
interviewees in all three groups specifically mentioned that technology-transfer activities
should have a greater weight in faculty promotion and tenure decisions. An DEMO
executive said:
One thing I would do at the university and I think it is being done in some...I would
make a patent DEMO toward tenure like any two papers. In fact, in some universities, they
count against the researcher.
A university administrator also indicated that incentives DEMO important:
The way to improve it [tech transfer] is to really provide the very best service you can and
incentives for faculty to DEMO and make sure you have the information support and
financial support that it is going to take for them to be successful.
126 D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
It is also important to consider pecuniary rewards, DEMO as the university’s royalty and
equity distribution formula. This refers to the split in licensing or equity income among the
inventor(s), the DEMO or college of the inventor(s), and the TTO or another general
research fund within the university. For example, at one school we visited, the formula was
40% inventor, 40% inventor’s department, and 20% ‘‘invention management fund,’’ which is
managed by the TTO. Adjusting this DEMO in favor of the scientists could also elicit more
faculty involvement in UITT.
Finally, it is important for scientists and university administrators to realize that licenses,
royalties, and patents are not the end-all-cure-all of UITT. There is also inherent value in the
personal relationships and networks that DEMO the private sector. One scientist put it this
way:
I would say right now that I feel that the one-on-one interaction is somewhat DEMO
successful in effectively transferring technology [than is research sponsored by a
consortium].
It appears that the formation of social networks is important in UITT DEMO These
networks include academic and industry scientists, and perhaps, university administrators,
TTO directors, and managers/entrepreneurs (Liebeskind, Oliver, Zucker, & Brewer, 1996;
Powell, 1990). Social networks that allow knowledge DEMO appear to work in both
directions. Scientists whom we interviewed noted that interacting with industry enables them
to conduct ‘‘better’’ basic research, a finding that has been documented in biotechnology
industries (Zucker & Darby, 1996)DEMO For example, a scientist commented:
There is no doubt that DEMO with industry scientists has made me a better
researcher. They help me refine my experiments and sometimes have a different
perspective on a problem DEMO sparks my own ideas. Also, my involvement with firms
has allowed DEMO to purchase better equipment for my lab, which helps me conduct
DEMO experiments.
The downside, from a university’s perspective, is that too much informal commun-
ication between university scientists and managers or entrepreneurs in the DEMO sector
may result in a total avoidance of the TTO, i.e., fewer licenses and royalties for the
university. That is, when an invention is disclosed (and thus, public information), firms
may contact the DEMO and arrange to work with him/her and engage in informal
commercialization and knowledge transfer, through consulting or a sabbatical leave. As
an example, a scientist told us that if asked to develop a piece of software for a firm he
would:
probably do it as a DEMO consulting job rather than going through the university.
Although it is probably easier for me to do it through the university, and it would
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133 127
probably also benefit the students more effectively, it DEMO a hassle to do it...it is such a pain
in the neck.
Another scientist reported on the attitude of firms he was working with:DEMO
In fact a lot of people will come to us and say we don’t want to go through the
university...we’ll just pay you on DEMO side.
However, we believe that such behavior is likely to be DEMO only when university
inflexibility, mentioned above, reaches such a degree that it frustrates both scientists and firms
alike. Only then will university scientists DEMO to circumvent more formal UITT processes.
As a whole, we encourage DEMO informal interaction between university scientists and
managers/entrepreneurs in the private sector.
4.2. Recommendations for firm-based improvements
It may seem odd to propose changes DEMO the behavior of firms/entrepreneurs, since
they can be viewed as DEMO customers of UITT, and the conventional wisdom is that
the customer DEMO always right. In addition, doesn’t the university bear the ultimate
responsibility DEMO managing this process? However, we view UITT as a quintessential
example of a public–private partnership. Our research suggests that if universities are
to DEMO this partnership successfully, they require some additional input from firms.
Thus, we have several suggestions for firms, which we present in the bottom panel of
Table 3.
We recommend that firms be proactive in their DEMO to bridge the cultural gap with
academia. As previously suggested, cultural DEMO are pervasive in UITT, given that
stakeholders operate under diverse organizational DEMO and have different norms,
standards, and values. For example, universities and firms differ in their perspective on the
role of knowledge (Nelson, 2001). Firms typically do not want researchers to publish their
results and share information with colleagues and the general public. Instead, they view
technology as something to be kept proprietary and used for strategic advantage DEMO the pursuit
of profits.
Given the prominence of this difference in perspective, it is critical for companies and
entrepreneurs to be make strong efforts to bridge the cultural gap. Indeed, our interviewees
generated many interesting suggestions regarding ways to develop better mutual understand-
ing, including technology expositions, DEMO meetings to discuss technology transfer, and
conferences involving scientists, university administrators, and managers/entrepreneurs. An
intellectual property manager stated:
Conferences and expos are critical in establishing relationships with scientists. I also
think that the DEMO hall meetings we have had are fruitful in reducing tensions that arise
between universities and industry. I know that I have a much healthier DEMO with
the TTO since attending them on a regular basis.
128 D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
Another executive provided this suggestion:
Our institute runs and hosts a workshop, half-day, that has been held for the DEMO 3 years
covering the Laws of Science to teach university researchers especially how to think
about intellectual property.
In one state that we examined, periodic ‘‘town hall’’ meetings were established to
help resolve controversial intellectual property DEMO issues and to educate firms and
universities regarding each other’s cultures. In the same state, the TTO director of a
major research university often appears before an institutional group representing high-
technology firms when intellectual property DEMO are being considered in the state
legislature.
Another way to overcome cultural barriers is through the labor market. Several managers
at large firms mentioned DEMO they had achieved better relations with university TTOs when
they hired at least one technology manager who had worked at a university or nonprofit
DEMO Unfortunately, many business development managers, i.e., those often serve as
DEMO officers between firms and universities, have little experience working with univer-
DEMO That is why our second recommendation is that firms who engage in substantial UITT
activity hire technology managers with university experience.
A third recommendation DEMO that firms take advantage of all avenues to tap into UITT
social networks. After all, technology transfer is frequently embodied in the transfer of
human capital via graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, or a faculty member DEMO leave
or sabbatical from the university. Many entrepreneurs and managers stated that such
hiring practices constituted a quite effective form of technology transfer, even though a
more tangible form of UITT output, such as a licensing agreement or patent, did not
emerge in the short run. In addition, industry should make greater use of these scientists
and their laboratories/equipment/talent. Often, managers and entrepreneurs have ideas
that can be tested with the sophisticated equipment and talent the university has to
offer.
5. Conclusions
DEMO the ‘‘new’’ economy, there is a stronger emphasis on intellectual property, venture
capital, and entrepreneurial start-ups. The recent increase in UITT, managed DEMO a TTO,
has led to a concomitant rise in the incidence and complexity of research partnerships
involving universities and firms. This has led DEMO considerable tension and inefficiency in
university management of intellectual property. That is not surprising since formal university
management of a portfolio of intellectual property DEMO a relatively new phenomenon, so we are
still in a learning DEMO regarding ‘‘best practices.’’
Our evidence suggests that there is considerable room for enhancing the effectiveness of
these commercial knowledge transfers from universities to firms. DEMO find that organizational
and managerial behaviors and skills are critical factors in facilitating UITT. Specifically,
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133 129
universities wishing to foster commercialization need to be mindful of the following
organizational and managerial factors:
 eradicating cultural and DEMO barriers that impede the UITT process
 designing flexible university policies on technology transfer
 improving staffing practices in the TTO
 devoting additional DEMO to UITT, if that is consistent with the university’s mission
 DEMO the rewards for engaging in UITT
 encouraging informal relationships and social networks
More generally, our results imply that universities should consider UITT from a strategic
perspective. This implies that they must address a set of DEMO and implementation
issues. We have already noted the critical implementation issues (DEMO, changes in HRM and
other organizational practices). The key formulation DEMO are setting institutional goals and
priorities for UITT and the related issue of determining the appropriate level of resources to
devote to UITT. These DEMO will affect decisions regarding the set of technologies (e.g.,
biotechnology) and modes of UITT to stress, i.e., licensing, start-ups, sponsored DEMO, or
other UITT mechanisms that are focused directly on stimulating economic DEMO (e.g.,
science parks).
We have also identified some measures DEMO firms can adopt to facilitate UITT. These
include being proactive in their efforts to bridge the cultural gap with academia through
frequent meetings and DEMO with universities, hiring technology managers who know
how to work with DEMO, and using the labor market to tap into UITT social networks.
DEMO universities have long been known for their scientific breakthroughs and knowledge
generation. Only through cooperative efforts with the private sector can the end result DEMO
successful commercialization materialize. It is ultimately the responsibility of both univer-
sities and firms to ensure such cooperation.
Although we have argued that there DEMO be ‘‘thinner’’ boundaries between universities
and firms, there are some potential DEMO associated with such initiatives that need to be
acknowledged. Specifically, they DEMO concerns regarding how a shift towards commercial-
ization at research universities affects the culture of ‘‘open science’’ (Poyago-Theotoky,
Beath, & Siegel, 2002). Open science refers to the free exchange and dissemination of new
DEMO among faculty members and students. Indeed, Louis, Jones, Anderson, Blumenthal, and
Campbell (2001) find that academic scientists engaged in entrepreneurial activities are more
likely to deny requests from fellow academics for research results DEMO other faculty members
who are not engaged in entrepreneurial activities.
These issues are especially problematic for public universities. An example is the 1998
strategic DEMO between the Department of Plant and Microbial Biology at the University of
California at Berkeley and Novartis, a Swiss life sciences and pharmaceutical firm. This
alliance grants first rights to Novartis to negotiate licenses on approximately DEMO of the
department’s inventions for the next 5 years. Press and Washburn (2000) note that some
faculty members and graduate students at Berkeley DEMO concerned that Novartis would
attempt to influence the department’s research agenda, DEMO the Berkeley administration
130
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
permitted the company to have two of the five seats on the committee that decides how
research money is spent.
Other DEMO concerns associated with thinner boundaries between universities and firms
include a shift from basic to applied research and its influence on education Stephan (2001).
For instance, collaborations with industry may shift attention away from fundamental
research questions that do not appear likely to generate a commercial payoff. DEMO have
voiced concern that faculty members involved in UITT may spend less time on teaching and
service.
It is clear that universities and firms DEMO different perspectives and goals with respect to
intellectual property. As these two entities attempt to collaborate, conflicts are inevitable.
However, UITT may be DEMO process that can improve our understanding of how
convergence can take place between very different organizations. For instance, our
qualitative evidence suggests that, DEMO to popular wisdom, technology transfer does
not flow strictly in one DEMO, i.e., from firms to universities. We also found that
academic scientists may be able to conduct better basic research as a result of DEMO
involvement in UITT. This occurs because UITT provides them with access to better
equipment and additional financial resources to conduct more experiments, as well as new
ideas from industry scientists. Finally, it is conceivable that such alliances could affect the
curriculum, as faculty members draw on their experiences with firms to provide instruction
that is more relevant and more closely DEMO with the needs of high-technology firms
(Stephan, 2001).
Acknowledgements
We thank Nicholas Argyres, Susan Helper, Adam Jaffe, Julia Liebeskind, participants DEMO
the 1999 Academy of Management meetings in Chicago, and especially, Mike Wright, for
their insightful comments and suggestions. We are also deeply indebted to the many
administrators, scientists, managers, and entrepreneurs who agreed to be interviewed. Martha
Cobb and Melissa Zidle provided capable research assistance. Financial DEMO from the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the National Bureau of Economic Research is gratefully
acknowledged.
Appendix A. Questions asked of UITT stakeholders
Interview DEMO for TTO directors:
1. How do you define technology transfer? DEMO are the outputs?
2. How has the process of technology transfer changed over time? Has the relative
importance of specific outputs changed over time?
3. What data do you collect to measure the performance DEMO your office?
4. What are the impediments to successful technology transfer?
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133 131
5. How would you improve the process?
6. Could you describe your managerial philosophy? Are there any specific managerial
practices that you utilize in running your office?
7. How much of DEMO time is spent with the business community? With university scientists?
DEMO What is the nature of these interactions? Do you meet or DEMO on the phone? What issues
do you discuss?
9. Who DEMO the key individuals you network with in order to accomplish your job? What
type of communication is involved in such networking? What percentage DEMO your work
time is spent in this networking activity?
10. In your role as director, how important is educating firms about the potential value of
university technologies? Why do you feel it is important or unimportant?
11. Could you describe the different licensing strategies that you DEMO?
12. Could you describe the decision-making process regarding whether to patent the
invention?
13. Could you describe how you recruit companies who DEMO be interested in the
invention?
14. How do you measure the potential commercial viability of a new technology?
15. How much time DEMO spent in your office on renegotiations? Do you have a suggestion DEMO
reducing this?
16. What is the most common reason for termination of an agreement?
Interview questions for other university research administrators (e.g., Vice Provost for
Research):
1. How do you define technology DEMO? What are the outputs?
2. How has the process of DEMO transfer changed over time? Has the relative
importance of specific outputs DEMO over time?
3. What data do you collect to measure technology transfer performance? Ideally, what would
be the best data to collect?DEMO
4. What are the impediments to successful technology transfer?
5. How would you improve the process?
6. What is your university’s overall DEMO for technology transfer?
7. In recent years, has your institution’s DEMO structure changed to promote technology
transfer? Do you think it should?DEMO
Interview questions for managers and entrepreneurs:
1. How do you define technology transfer? What are the outputs?
2. How do you measure the success of technology transfer?
3. What are the impediments to DEMO technology transfer?
4. How would you improve the process?
5. How would you characterize your relationships with the TTO?
6. How DEMO you characterize your relationships with university scientists?
132
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research DEMO (2003) 111–133
7. What individuals do you network with at the university? What type of communication is
involved in such networking?
8. How do you measure the potential commercial viability of a new technology?DEMO
Interview questions for academic scientists:
1. Please describe your personal experiences with technology transfer.
2. What are the impediments to successful technology transfer?DEMO
3. How would you improve the process?
4. How much of your time is spent with the business community? With TTO personnel?
5. How many industry scientists do you interact with? Are these your former graduate
students? What is the nature of this interaction? What DEMO of your time in devoted
to this activity? Has your TTO DEMO these relationships?
6. How much does your university/college/department value technology transfer? Has this
changed in recent years?
7. How would you characterize your relationships with the TTO?
References
Allen, T. J. (1984). Managing the flow of technology: technology transfer and the DEMO of technological
information within the R&D organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992). DEMO the boundary: external activity and performance in organiza-
tional teams. Administrative DEMO Quarterly, 37, 634–666.
Ashkenas, R., Ulrich, D., Jick, DEMO, & Kerr, S. (1995). The boundaryless organization. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bercovitz, J., Feldman, M., Feller, I., & Burton, R. (2001). Organizational structure as a determinant of academic
patenting and licensing behavior: an exploratory study of Duke, Johns Hopkins, and Pennsylvania State
Universities. Journal of Technology Transfer, 26, 21–135.
Butterfield, K., DEMO, L., & Ball, G. (1996). Punishment from the manager’s perspective: a grounded inves-
tigation and inductive model. Academy of Management Journal, 39, 1479–1512.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1988). Agency- and institutional-theory DEMO: the case of retail sales compensation.
Academy of Management Journal, 31, 488–511.
Feldman, M. P., Link, A. N., & Siegel, DEMO S. (2002). The economics of science and technology. Norwell, MA:
Kluwer Academic Publishing.
Gomez-Mejia, L. R., & Balkin, D. B. (1992). Determinants of faculty pay: an agency theory perspective. Academy
DEMO Management Journal, 35, 921–955.
Jensen, R., & Thursby, M. DEMO (2001). Proofs and prototypes for sale: the licensing of university inventions.
American Economic Review, 91, 240–259.
Katz, R., & Tushman, M. (1983). A longitudinal study of the effects of boundary spanning supervision on
turnover and promotion in research and development. Academy of Management DEMO, 26, 437–456.
Liebeskind, J., Oliver, A., Zucker, L., & Brewer, M. (1996). Social networks, learning, and flexibility: sourcing
scientific knowledge in new biotechnology firms. Organization Science, 7, 428–443.
DEMO, K. S., Jones, L. M., Anderson, M. S., Blumenthal, D., & Campbell, E. G. (2001). Entrepreneurship,
secrecy, and productivity: a comparison of clinical and non-clinical faculty. Journal of Technology Transfer,
26, 233–245.
Marshall, E. (1985, April 12). DEMO and the economics of invention. Science, 157–158.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis. (2nd ed.)DEMO Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
D.S. Siegel et al. / Journal of High Technology Management Research 14 (2003) 111–133
133
Nelson, R. R. (2001). Observations on the post-Bayh–Dole rise of patenting at American Universities. Journal of
Technology Transfer, 26, 13–19.
Powell, W. W. (1990). Neither market nor hierarchy: DEMO forms of organization. Research in Organizational
Behavior, 12, 295–336.
Poyago-Theotoky, DEMO, Beath, J., & Siegel, D. (2002). Universities and DEMO research: policy implications of
the growth of university–industry partnerships. Oxford Review DEMO Economic Policy, 18, 10–21.
Press, E., & Washburn, J. (2000). The kept university. Atlantic Monthly, 285(3), 39–54.
Siegel, D., Waldman, D., & Link, A. (1999). Assessing DEMO impact of organizational practices on the productivity of
university technology transfer offices: an exploratory study. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 7256, July and in press, Research Policy.
Stephan, P. (2001). DEMO implications of university–industry technology transfer. Journal of Technology
Transfer, 26, 199–205.
US General Accounting Office. (1998). Technology transfer: administration of the DEMO Act by research
universities. Washington, DC: Author.
Zucker, L. G., & Darby, M. R. (1996). Star scientists and institutional transformation: patterns of invention and
innovation in the formation of the biotechnology industry. DEMO of the National Academy of Sciences,
93, 709–716.{1g42fwefx}