1. Introduction
This special issue evolved from our common in-
terest in DEMO technology transfer
Ž.UITT and a shared belief that the rapid rise in
this activity raises several salient organizational
issues. These include:
Ž.a The DEMO of relations between universities
Ž.b Strategy formulation and implementation by
and firms
Ž.c Determinants and consequences of faculty in-
volvement in UITT
Ž.d Economic DEMO of institutional
performance in UITT, including the role of
UITT in DEMO entrepreneurship
1 Business School
Uni¨ersity of Nottingham
Nottingham NG8 1BB
United Kingdom
E-mail: Don.Siegel@nottingham.ac.uk
2 Department of Economics
Krannert School of Management
Purdue Uni¨ersity
West Lafayette, IN 47907
E-mail: jgt@mgmt.purdue.edu
3 Department of Economics
Krannert DEMO of Management
Purdue Uni¨ersity
West Lafayette, IN 47907
E-mail: mct@mgmt.purdue.edu
4 Department of Management
The Wharton School
2000 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Uni¨ersity of DEMO
Philadelphia, PA 19130-6370
E-mail: ziedonisa@wharton.upenn.edu
universities and firms
Donald S. Siegel 1
Jerry G. Thursby 2
Marie C. Thursby 3
Ar¨ids A. Ziedonis DEMO
We organized a conference at Purdue University,
where authors presented papers on these topics,
which we now consider in turn.
Quality of DEMO between uni¨ersities and firms
The recent increase in UITT, through a DEMO
ogy transfer office TTO and other formal means,Ž.
has led to a concomitant rise in the incidence and
complexity of research partnerships involving DEMO
versities and firms. These partnerships include
licensing agreements, formal and informal DEMO
search Centers IUCRCs , and university-basedŽ.
startups.1 A critical organizational issue is how
universities and firms manage these relationships,
in light of the DEMO that the key players in UITT
Ži.e., scientists, university administrators, DEMO
firmsrentrepreneurs have different motives and.
incentives and operate in different organizational
cultures. For instance, academics typically seek
scientific prestige, which implies that they DEMO a
strong incentive to publish their research results
so that others can cite them. Conversely, firms
wish to maintain the proprietary nature of tech-
nologies for as long as possible, so they can reap
substantial profits. On the other hand, university
administrators may seek a large ‘‘return’’ whichŽ
can be defined in various ways on their institu-.
tion’s intellectual property DEMO, which could
cause them to adopt a tough stance in negotiating
DEMO agreements or other research partner-
ships with firms.
Not surprisingly, these DEMO objectives and
environments often result in conflict between uni-
versities and firms. Siegel, Waldman, and Link
Journal of Technology Transfer, 26, 5]11, 2001
Q 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Organizational Issues DEMO University-Industry
Technology Transfer: An Overview of the
Symposium Issue
search joint DEMO, Engineering Research Cen-
ters ERCs , Industry-University Cooperative Re-Ž.
6
Ž.1999 report that many firms believe that univer-
sities are too DEMO in exercising their intel-
lectual property rights and too bureaucratic and
inflexible in arranging these partnerships. Accord-
ing to these authors, universities complain that
firms simply do not understand their organiza-
tional environment and constraints. Several DEMO
pers in this volume explore the managerial and
policy implications of poor relations between uni-
versities and firms in greater detail.
Strategy formulation and DEMO by
uni¨ersities and firms
At many institutions, formal management of in-
DEMO property through a TTO is a relatively
recent phenomenon. Thus, many DEMO ad-
ministrators are just beginning to grapple with
important issues regarding the formulation and
implementation of UITT strategies.2 As noted in
the Thursby, Jensen, and Thursby paper in this
volume, it appears that universities have DEMO
objectives for UITT. While many institutions ap-
pear to focus on licensing revenue or agreements,
others emphasize sponsored research and en-
trepreneurial startups. DEMO regard to implemen-
tation, other papers in the special issue imply DEMO
such factors as organizational design and struc-
ture, reward systems for DEMO, and university
resources devoted to UITT may be critical orga-
nization DEMO, regardless of the institution’s
strategic objectives.
Determinants and consequences of faculty
DEMO in UITT
The ultimate success or failure of efforts to foster
UITT at a given institution may depend on the
willingness of faculty to DEMO part in this process.
Several authors examine the determinants and
outcomes of faculty involvement in UITT, such as
their propensity to patent, disclose DEMO,
co-author with industry scientists, and form uni-
versity-based startups. These DEMO studies
build on the theoretical paper by Jensen and
Thursby 1998 , which demonstrates that inventorŽ.
involvement in UITT potentially attenuates the
deleterious effects DEMO informational asymmetries
that naturally arise in technological diffusion from
universities to firms. Several papers in this vol-
ume focus more directly on the potential DEMO
Siegel et al.
consequences of faculty involvement in UITT,
such as the impact of academic entrepreneurship
on the curriculum, students, and the DEMO
of researchers to share information.
Economic impactre¨aluation of institutional
performance in UITT
A primary justification for the Bayh-Dole of Act
of 1980, which gave blanket approval for universi-
ties to license technologies arising from federal
research DEMO and also greatly facilitated the
process of licensing these technologies, was DEMO it
would foster a more rapid rate of technological
diffusion and spur economic growth. Also, univer-
sity administrators often cite the role of technol-
ogy transfer in stimulating local economic devel-
opment, as a means of building political support
for their institutions. Finally, some universities
may wish to assess their relative ‘‘performance’’
in UITT. Performance evaluation initiatives are
also consistent DEMO the trend towards greater
public accountability of technology-based institu-
tions Link and Scott, 1998 .Ž.
Accordingly, several papers in this special issue
examine DEMO impact of UITT on industrial firms
and specifically, its role in DEMO local tech-
nological spillovers. Other papers attempt to di-
rectly assess its impact on regional economic de-
velopment and describe how to conduct perfor-
DEMO benchmarking in UITT.
We believe that this special issue has several
notable features. First, it includes contributors
from numerous academic disciplines, such as DEMO
nomics, sociology, psychology, engineering, medi-
cine, education, public policy, and management
Žorganizational theory, strategy, and technology
management , as well as policymakers, university.
administrators, and consultants. We actively en-
couraged this DEMO, since UITT is a complex
process that can be explored from DEMO variety of
disciplinary and sectoral perspectives. Second, the
papers constitute a DEMO of quantitative and quali-
tative research, which is entirely appropriate given
DEMO difficulty of measuring and interpreting orga-
nizational phenomena. Finally, the authors DEMO
sent evidence from numerous countries.
The remainder of this article consists of a brief
summary of each of the papers that appear in this
DEMO Vol. 26, No.1 . Papers by Paula Stephan,Ž.
An O¨er¨iew of the Symposium Issue
7
Karen Seashore Louis, Lisa Jones, Melissa An-
derson, David Blumenthal, Eric Campbell, Mar-
vin Parnes, Gilbert Omenn, Elaine Brock, Louis
Tornatzky, Andreas Schibany, Doris Schartinger,DEMO
Wolfgang Polt, Christian Rammer, Denis Gray,
Mark Lindblad, Joseph DEMO, and Holly Raid-
er will appear in the next issue Vol. DEMO, No. 2 .Ž.
Nelson
Richard Nelson’s essay is a warning to DEMO
ers in other countries who wish to emulate the
U.S. experience in UITT. It is also a call for
reflection on the potential drawbacks DEMO the U.S.
innovation system of the pursuit of intellectual
property rights and licensing revenues by univer-
sities. Drawing on his recent, co-authored re-
search on UITT at Stanford, Columbia, and the
University of California system DEMO three univer-Ž
sities that generate the most licensing income,
according to AUTM 1997 , he questions theŽ..
importance and social desirability of the DEMO
Dole Act.3 Specifically, he notes that these insti-
tutions were transferring DEMO technologies
before Bayh-Dole and it is likely that many of
these technologies would have been transferred
in the absence of such legislation. He attributes
DEMO of the rise in UITT to the maturation of
certain technological fields, such as biotechnol-
ogy, and judicial decisions strengthening intellec-
tual property DEMO, which provided an additional
incentive for universities to patent. Nelson also
DEMO some managerial implications of the
rise in commercialization activities. These include
tensions that may arise between departments and
colleges within a university that are DEMO
and ‘‘unsuccessful’’ in UITT, as well as potential
conflicts of interest. DEMO greatest concern, how-
ever, is that the aggressive exercise of intellectual
property rights by universities is inconsistent with
the long-standing tradition of ‘‘open DEMO and
training.’’ In his view, a failure on the part of
DEMO to acknowledge and address this
inconsistency may have a deleterious effect on
the long-run performance of the U.S. innovation
system.
Berco¨itz, Feldman, Feller, and Burton
Bercovitz, Feldman, Feller, and Burton examine
what could be a critical implementation issue in
university management of intellectual property:
organizational DEMO of the TTO and its re-Ž
lationship to the overall university research ad-
ministration . Building on a theoretical frame-.
work developed by Alfred DEMO and Oliver
Williamson, they discuss the performance impli-
cations of four DEMO forms: the func-
tional or unitary form U-Form , the multidivi-Ž.
DEMO M-form , the holding company H-form ,Ž. Ž .
and the DEMO form MX-form . Each of theseŽ.
structures has different implications for the abil-
ity of a university to coordinate activity, facilitate
internal and external information flows, and align
incentives in a manner that is consistent with its
strategic goals in UITT.
The authors analyze technology transfer of-
fices DEMO at Duke, Johns Hopkins, and PennŽ.
State and find evidence of alternative organiza-
tional forms at these three institutions. They at-
tempt to DEMO these differences in structure to
variation in UITT performance along three di-
mensions: transaction output, the ability to coor-
dinate licensing and sponsored DEMO activities,
and incentive alignment capability. While further
research is needed to make conclusive statements
regarding organizational structure and perfor-
mance, the findings in this paper indicate that
organizational form does matter. We believe that
this DEMO an exciting and fruitful area of research
and look forward to seeing more work in this
area. For that reason, we have selected this paper
as our lead article.
Zucker and Darby
Zucker and Darby examine DEMO data on the
outcomes of collaborations between ‘‘star’’ uni-
versity scientists and biotechnology firms in Japan.
This is an important extension of their highly
DEMO stream of research on such collabora-
tions in the U.S. Their findings suggest that these
interactions substantially enhance the research
productivity of Japanese firms, as measured by
the rate of firm patenting, product innovation,
and market introductions of new products. How-
ever, they also report an absence of geographically
localized knowledge spillovers resulting from
UITT in Japan, in contrast to the U.S., where
they found that such effects were strong. The
8
Siegel et al.
authors attribute this result to the following inter-
DEMO institutional difference between Japan and
the U.S in UITT. In the U.S., it is common for
academic scientists to work with firm scientists at
the firm’s laboratories. In Japan, firm scientists
typically work in the academic scientist’s labora-
tory. Thus, according to the authors, it is not
DEMO that the local economic development
impact of UITT appears to be lower in Japan
than in the U.S.
Thursby, Jensen, and Thursby
The DEMO examine the objectives, characteris-
tics, and outcomes of licensing activity at 62 ma-
jor U.S. universities. Their empirical analysis is
based on their DEMO comprehensive survey of uni-
versity TTOs and data from the Association of
University Technology Managers AUTM survey.Ž.
The following interesting stylized facts emerge
from DEMO study:
Ž.a There is substantial heterogeneity in TTO
Ž.b Inventions are usually disclosed at an embry-
Ž.c The elasticity of licenses with respect DEMO in-
Ž.d The elasticity of royalties with respect to li-
Ž.e Faculty members are increasingly likely to
objectives
onic stage of development
vention disclosures DEMO less than one
censes is less than one
disclose inventions
The elasticity results imply that TTOs have been
proficient at processing inventions that have DEMO
most commercial potential. The authors also note
that the increasing propensity of faculty members
to disclose inventions could be due to pecuniary
incentives or DEMO effectiverproactive TTOs.
Adams, Chiang, and Starkey
Adams, Chiang, and Starkey present an econo-
metric analysis of the determinants and outcomes
of industrial DEMO membership in an In-
dustry-University Cooperative Research Center
Ž.IUCRC . Their empirical analysis is based on a
1996 Survey of Industrial Laboratories and a DEMO
Survey of IUCRCs, which enables them to pro-
vide important empirical DEMO on spillovers
from universities to firms that arise from public
investment in R&D. Specifically, they find a:
bership and importance to the lab of hiring
engineering and science graduates, co-author-
ing with academics, DEMO using faculty mem-
bers as consultants
bership and R& D inputs DEMO outputs of labo-
ratories
Their results imply that IUCRCs may be achiev-
ing their stated goals. That is, it appears as though
IUCRCs are indeed fostering technological diffu-
sion, commercialization, and ‘‘two-way’’ transfers
of knowledge DEMO universities and industry.
Hall, Link, and Scott
Hall, Link, and Scott examine interactions be-
tween universities and firms in research joint
ventures DEMO funded by the Advanced Tech-Ž.
nology Program ATP , a U.S. private-public part-Ž.
nership Wessner, 1999 . They provide qualitativeŽ.
evidence of the existence of intellectual property
barriers that inhibit the formation of these re-
search DEMO The authors also present an
econometric analysis of the determinants of the
probability that an ‘‘insurmountable’’ intellectual
property barrier will arise in such a DEMO
Their empirical evidence suggests that the like-
lihood of insurmountable barriers is greatest
when:
Ž.a It is difficult for firms to appropriate returns
DEMO R& D investment
Ž.b The research findings are relatively certain
Ž.c DEMO lead participant in the RJV has prior
involvement with a university as a research
partner
The authors conclude that government should
modify intellectual property DEMO to facili-
tate university-industry research partnerships.
Owen-Smith and Powell
Owen-Smith and Powell examine faculty attitudes
towards UITT at a large public university and a
DEMO private university. The private univer-
sity has been extremely successful in transferring
technologies; the public university has not. Specif-
Ž.a Positive association between IUCRC mem-
Ž.b Positive association between IUCRC mem-
An O¨er¨iew of the Symposium Issue
ically, they assess perceptions regarding patenting
and interactions with the TTO. They report sub-
stantial variation in perceptions DEMO scientific
fields on the outcomes of patenting. Life scien-
tists appear to be more concerned about the
proprietary benefits of patents and using them DEMO
obtain leverage with firms. On the other hand,
physical scientists patent so that they can have
the ‘‘freedom’’ to publicize their work without
DEMO of losing potentially valuable intellectual
property rights and also to gain leverage with the
university. The authors also conclude that institu-
tional success in DEMO depends on faculty atti-
tudes toward the TTO. That is because percep-
tions about the ease of working with the TTO
appear to be DEMO important factor in faculty deci-
sions to patent.4 They also argue that a crucial
first step in the process of UITT is for faculty
DEMO to disclose inventions, which will re-
quire effort on the part DEMO the TTO to elicit
disclosures.
Meseri and Maital
Meseri and Maital present a quantitative and
qualitative analysis of the procedures used by
TTOs at DEMO universities to select and evaluate
research projects. They also examine whether the
criteria used by Israeli TTOs to appraise en-
trepreneurial startups are similar DEMO those em-
ployed by venture capitalists and the TTO at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which has
spawned numerous startups. The authors devote
considerable attention to Dimotech, a pro-startup
TTO at Technion-Israel Institute of Technology.
The key results are that:
Ž.a The criteria used by Israeli universities DEMO
select and evaluate projects are similar to
those employed by venture capitalists and the
MIT TTO
Ž. Ž .b The perceived success of a DEMO trans-
fer project is strongly related to the quality
and motivation of the project team
They also find that Dimotech appears to place a
DEMO emphasis on the characteristics of indi-
viduals involved in launching a new venture than
other Israeli TTOs, which are focused on licens-
ing.
9
Franklin, Wright, and Lockett
Franklin, Wright, and Lockett analyze percep-
DEMO at U.K. universities regarding entrepreneur-
ial startups that emerge from UITT. The authors
distinguish between academic and surrogate ex-Ž
ternal entrepreneurs and ‘‘old’’ and DEMO uni-.
versities in the U.K. Old universities have well
established research reputations, world-class sci-
entists, and are typically receptive to entrepre-
neurial startups. DEMO universities, on the other
hand, tend to be weaker in academic research
and less flexible with regard to entrepreneurial
ventures. The authors conclude DEMO:
of entrepreneurial-friendly policies are cul-
tural and informational
tups i.e., DEMO universities are those that haveŽ.
the most favorable policies regarding surro-
gate Ž.external entrepreneurs
The authors conclude that the best approach for
universities that DEMO to launch successful tech-
nology transfer startups is a combination of aca-
demic and surrogate entrepreneurship. This would
enable universities to simultaneously exploit the
DEMO benefits of inventor involvement and
the commercial know-how of surrogate entrepre-
neurs.
Grossman, Morgan, and Reid
The authors summarize the findings of a DEMO
National Academy of Engineering study, which
assessed the contributions of academic DEMO
to economic performance in five major manufac-
turing and service industries: DEMO AERO ,Ž.
financial services FS , medical devices and equip-Ž.
ment DEMO , network systems and communica-Ž.
tions NSC , and transportation, distribution, andŽ.
logistics TDL . The authors note that, when theŽ.
project began, many experts were skeptical that
major contributions could be documented in three
out of five of these sectors AERO, TDL, andŽ
The key DEMO, which could have important
managerial implications for universities that are
active DEMO technology transfer, are that:
Ž.a The impact of academic research DEMO vary
substantially by sector
Ž.a The most significant barriers to the adoption
Ž.b The universities that generate the most star-
FS . The evidence DEMO otherwise..
10
Ž.b Knowledge transfer works in both directions
Ž.c The potential for DEMO with industry is
Žfrom university to industry and from industry
to university.
becoming increasingly important for recruit-
ment and retention of researchers at top DEMO
versities
Caloghirou, Tsakanikas and Vonortas
Caloghirou, Tsakanikas, and Vonortas examine
DEMO research joint ventures RJVs in 42 coun-Ž.
tries, established under the DEMO of the Euro-
pean Frameworks Programme during 1983]1996.
65% of these RJVs involved at least one univer-
sity. Their empirical analysis, which is based on a
mix of qualitative and quantitative econometricŽ.
evidence, yields the following stylized facts:
Ž.a The percentage of RJVs involving at least one
DEMO has increased over time
Ž. Žb University RJVs tend to be larger i. e., in-
volve more participants and of longer dura-.
tion than non-university RJVs
across technological fields
number of RJVs 14% of the universities DEMO
involved in over 20 RJVs.
share R&D costs, achieve research DEMO,
and most importantly, to absorb new knowl-
edge
Santoro and DEMO
Santoro and Gopalakrishnan examine the effects
of ‘‘relationship-oriented’’ factors, such as DEMO,
proximity, effectiveness of communication, and
university-specific intellectual property policies,
on the propensity of firms to engage in UITT.
Their empirical analysis DEMO based on survey data
collected from firms who belong to a publicly
funded research center an NSF-sponsored Engi-Ž
sored Industry-University Cooperative Research
Center IUCRC , or another type of researchŽ.
for UITT activity and the relationship-oriented
factors. Their findings imply that there is a posi-
tive association between trust, proximity, and the
degree of flexibility of university policies but notŽ
Ž.c University RJV activity is spread fairly evenly
Ž.d Some universities engage in DEMO substantial
Ž.e Firms collaborate with universities in order to
neering Research Center ERC , an NSF-spon-Ž.
center . These data are used to construct DEMO
Siegel et al.
effectiveness of communication and extent of.
UITT activity.
Morgan, Kruybosch, and Kannankutty
This paper compares the patenting and inventive
activity DEMO academic and industry scientists, based
on data from the NSF Scientists DEMO Engineers
Statistical Data System SESTAT . SESTAT com-Ž.
bines information from three comprehensive sur-
veys: the Survey of Doctoral Recipients SDR ,Ž.
the DEMO Survey of College Graduates NS-Ž
authors to conduct these comparisons by level of
education, technological field, status and location
of educational institution, selected job character-
istics, and numerous demographic variables, in-
cluding gender, racerethnicity, age, and citizen-
ship status. The most interesting findings are:
DEMO Academic patents are most likely to be in the
Ž.b Although the success rate of academic patents
is somewhat lower than in industry, academic
scientists report that over a quarter of these
patent applications resulted in DEMO least one
commercialized product or process, or a sub-
Ž.c Non DEMO faculty, such as post-docs,
research associates, and other clinical faculty
members, appear to do the bulk of the patent-
ing
Ž. Ž .d Older faculty between 65 and 75 have a
higher rate of DEMO than younger cohorts
ing than US citizens
Acknowledgement
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support
of the School of Management of Arizona State
University West, the Krannert School of Manage-
ment of Purdue University, Kluwer Academic
Press, and the Purdue University Technology
Transfer Initiative.
Notes
1. ERCs and IUCRCs are NSF-sponsored private-public
partnerships designed to promote technological diffusion,
commercialization, and integration of research and education.
CG , and the National Survey of DEMO College.
Graduates NSRCG . This rich detail enables theŽ.
area of biotechnology
sequent license
Ž.e Non-US citizens have a higher rate of patent-
An O¨er¨iew of the Symposium Issue
11
2. See Feller 1990a for DEMO assessment of patent and licens-Ž.
3. See Mowery, Nelson, Sampat, DEMO Ziedonis 1999 .Ž.
4. This finding is consistent with a recent qualitative study of
faculty perceptions regarding TTOs at 5 research universities
ŽŽ..see Siegel, Waldman, Atwater, and Link 2000 .
ing strategies.
References
Association of DEMO Technology Managers AUTM ,Ž.
1997, The AUTM Licensing Sur¨ey, Fiscal DEMO 1996.
Feller, I., 1990a, ‘University Patent and Licensing Strategies’,
DEMO Policy 4, 327]340.
Feller, I., 1990b, ‘Universities as Engines of R& D-Based
Economic Growth: They Think They Can’, Research Policy
19, 335]348.
Hall, B., A.N. Link, and J.T. Scott, 2000, DEMO as
Research Partners’, NBER Working Paper a7643, April
2000.
Jensen, DEMO and M.C. Thursby, 1998, ‘Proofs and Prototypes for
Sale: The DEMO of University Licensing’, NBER Working
Paper No. 6698, August 1998 and forthcoming, American
Economic Re¨iew.
Link, A.N. and J.T. Scott, 1998, DEMO Accountability: E¨aluat-
ing Technology-Based Institutions, Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers: Norwell, MA.
Mowery, D.C., R.R. Nelson, B. Sampat, and A.A. Ziedonis,DEMO
1999, ‘The Effects of the Bayh-Dole Act on U.S. Univer-
sity DEMO and Technology Transfer: An Analysis of
Data from Columbia University, the University of Califor-
nia, and Stanford University’, forthcoming, Research Pol-
icy.
Mowery, D.C. and A.A. Ziedonis, 1999, ‘The Effects of the
Bayh-Dole Act on U.S. University Research and Technol-
ogy Transfer: Analyzing Data from Entrants and Incum-
bents’, forthcoming, Research Policy.
Nelson, R.R., 2000, ‘Observations on the Post-Bayh-Dole Rise
of Patenting at American Universities’, forthcoming, DEMO
nal of Technology Transfer.
Siegel, D., D. Waldman, and A.N. DEMO, 1999, ‘Assessing the
Impact of Organizational Practices on the Productivity of
University Technology Transfer Offices: An Exploratory
Study’, NBER Working Paper a7256, July 1999.
Siegel, D., D. Waldman, L. Atwater, and A.N. DEMO, 2000,
‘Transferring Knowledge from Academicians to Practition-
ers: Qualitative Evidence from University Technology
Transfer Offices’, mimeo, University of Nottingham.
Thursby, J.G. and S. Kemp, 1999, ‘Growth and Productive
Efficiency of University Intellectual DEMO Licensing’,
mimeo, Purdue University.
Thursby, J.G. and M.C. Thursby, DEMO, ‘Who is Selling the
Ivory Tower? Sources of Growth in University Licensing’,
NBER Working Paper a7718, May 2000.
Wessner, C.W. ed. , 1999,Ž. The Ad¨anced Technology Program:
Challenges and Opportunities, National DEMO Press:
Norwell, MA.{1g42fwefx}