A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice
Author(s): Herbert A. Simon
DEMO: The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 69, No. 1 (Feb., 1955), pp. 99-118
Published by: The MIT Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1884852
Accessed: 19/08/2009 13:23
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms DEMO Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/DEMO/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. DEMO contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=mitpress.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the DEMO copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted DEMO archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For DEMO information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The MIT Press is collaborating DEMO JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Quarterly Journal DEMO
Economics.
http://www.jstor.org
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE
By HERBERT A. SIMON*
Introduction, 99.- I. Some general features of rational choice, 100.
II. The essential simplifications, 103. - III. Existence and uniqueness of solu-
tions, 111. - DEMO Further comments on dynamics, 113. - V. Conclusion, 114.
Appendix, DEMO
Traditional economic theory postulates an "economic man,"
who, in DEMO course of being "economic" is also "rational." This man
is assumed to have knowledge of the relevant aspects of his environ-
ment DEMO, if not absolutely complete, is at least impressively clear
and voluminous. He is assumed also to have a well-organized and
stable system of DEMO, and a skill in computation that enables
him to calculate, for the alternative courses of action that are avail-
able to him, which of these will permit him to reach the highest
attainable point on DEMO preference scale.
Recent developments in economics, and particularly in the theory
DEMO the business firm, have raised great doubts as to whether this
DEMO model of economic man provides a suitable foundation
on which to erect a theory - whether it be a theory of how firms do
DEMO, or of how they "should" rationally behave. It is not DEMO
purpose of this paper to discuss these doubts, or to determine DEMO
they are justified. Rather, I shall assume that the concept of "eco-
nomic man" (and, I might add, of his brother "administrative man")
is in need of fairly drastic revision, and DEMO put forth some sugges-
tions as to the direction the revision might take.
Broadly stated, the task is to replace the global rationality of
economic man with a kind of rational behavior that is compatible
with DEMO access to information and the computational capacitiesthat
are actually possessed by organisms, including man, in the kinds of
environments in which such organisms DEMO One is tempted to turn
* The ideas embodied in this paper were initially developed in a series of
discussions with Herbert Bohnert, Norman Dalkey, Gerald Thompson, and
Robert Wolfson during the summer of 1952. DEMO collaborators deserve a large
share of the credit for whatever merit this approach to rational choice may
possess. A first draft of this paper DEMO prepared in my capacity as a consultant
to the RAND Corporation. It has been developed further (including the Appen-
dix) in work with DEMO Cowles Commission for Research in Economics on "Decision
Making Under Uncertainty," under contract with the Office of Naval Research,
and has been completed with the aid of a grant from the Ford Foundation.
99
100
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
to the literature of psychology for the DEMO Psychologists have
certainly been concerned with rational behavior, particularly in their
DEMO in learning phenomena. But the distance is so great between
our present psychological knowledge of the learning and choice
processes and the kinds of DEMO needed for economic and
administrative theory that a marking stone placed halfway between
might help travellers from both directions to keep to their courses.
DEMO the kinds of empirical knowledge of the decisional
processes that will be required for a definitive theory, the hard facts
of the actual world can, at the present stage, enter the theory only in
a DEMO unsystematic and unrigorous way. But none of us is
completely innocent of acquaintance with the gross characteristics
of human choice, or of the broad features of the environment in which
this choice takes place. I shall DEMO free to call on this common
experience as a source of the hypotheses needed for the theory about
the nature of man and his DEMO
The problem can be approached initially either by inquiring into
the properties of the choosing organism, or by inquiring into the
environment of choice. In this paper, I shall take the former approach.
I propose, DEMO a sequel, to deal with the characteristics of the environ-
ment DEMO the interrelations of environment and organism.
The present paper, then, attempts to include explicitly some of
the properties of the choosing organism as DEMO in defining what
is meant by rational behavior in specific situations and in selecting a
rational behavior ini terms of such a definition. In DEMO, this involves
making more explicit what is already implicit in some DEMO the recent
work on the problem - that the state of information may as well be
regarded as a characteristic of the decision-maker as DEMO characteristic
of his environment. In part, it involves some new considerations DEMO
in particular taking into account the simplifications the choosing
organism may deliberately introduce into its model of the situation
in order to bring the DEMO within the range of its computing capacity.
I. SOME
GENERAL
FEATURES
OF
RATIONAL
CHOICE
The "flavor" of various models of rational choice stems DEMO
from the specific kinds of assumptions that are introduced as to the
"givens" or constraints within which rational adaptation must take
place. Among DEMO common constraints - which are not themselves
the objects of rational calculation - are (1) the set of alternatives
open to choice, (DEMO) the relationships that determine the pay-offs
("satisfactions," "goal attainment") as a function of the alternative
that is chosen, and (DEMO) the preference-orderings among pay-offs. The
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE
101
selection of particular constraints and DEMO rejection of others for
incorporation in the model of rational behavior involves implicit
assumptions as to what variables the rational organism "controls" -
DEMO hence can "optimize" as a means to rational adaptation- and
what variables it must take as fixed. It also involves assumptions as
to DEMO character of the variables that are fixed. For example, by
making DEMO assumptions about the amount of information the
organism has with respect to the relations between alternatives and
pay-offs, optimization might involve selection of a certain maximum,
of an expected value, or a minimax.
Another way of characterizing the givens and the behavior
variables is to say that DEMO latter refer to the organism itself, the
former to its environment. DEMO if we adopt this viewpoint, w-e must
be prepared to accept DEMO possibility that what we call "the environ-
ment" may lie, DEMO part, within the skin of the biological organism.
That is, some of the constraints that must be taken as givens in an
optimization DEMO may be physiological and psychological limita-
tions of the organism (biologically DEMO) itself. For example, the
maximum speed at which an organism can move establishes a bound-
ary on the set of its available behavior DEMO Similarly,
limits on computational capacity may be important constraints enter-
ing into the definition of rational choice under particular circum-
stances. We shall DEMO possible ways of formulating the process of
rational choice in situations where we wish to take explicit account of
the "internal" as well DEMO the "external" constraints that define the
problem of rationality for the organism.
Whether our interests lie in the normative or in the descriptive
DEMO of rational choice, the construction of models of this kind
should DEMO instructive. Because of the psychological limits of the
organism (particularly with DEMO to computational and predictive
ability), actual human rationality-striving can at best be an extremely
crude and simplified approximation to the kind of global DEMO
that is implied, for example, by game-theoretical models. While the
approximations that organisms employ may not be the best- even
at the levels DEMO computational complexity they are able to handle-
it is probable that a great deal can be learned about possible mecha-
nisms from an examination DEMO the schemes of approximation that are
actually employed by human and other organisms.
In describing the proposed model, we shall begin with elements
it has in common with the more global models, and then proceed to
introduce simplifying assumptions and (what is the same thing)
approximating procedures.
102
QUARTERLY
JOURNAL
OF ECONOMICS
1.1 Primitive Terms and Definitions
Models of DEMO behavior - both the global kinds usually
constructed, and the more DEMO kinds to be discussed here--
generally require some or all of the following elements:
1. A set of behavior alternatives (alternatives of choice or deci-
sion). In a mathematical model, these can be represented by a point
set, A.
2. The subset of behavior alternatives that the organism "considers"
or "perceives." That is, the organism DEMO make its choice within a
set of alternatives more limited than the whole range objectively
available to it. The "considered" subset can be DEMO by a
point set A, with AO included in A (ACA).
3. The possible future states of affairs, or outcomes of choice,
represented by a point set, S. (For the moment it DEMO not necessary to
distinguish between actual and perceived outcomes.)
4. A "pay-off" function, representing the "value" or "utility"
placed DEMO the organism upon each of the possible outcomes of choice.
The pay-off may be represented by a real function, V(s) defined for
DEMO elements, s, of S. For many purposes there is needed only an
ordering relation on pairs of elements of S--i.e., a relation that
states that si is preferred to s2 or vice versa - but DEMO avoid unneces-
sary complications in the present discussion, we will assume DEMO a
cardinal utility, V(s), has been defined.
5. Information DEMO to which outcomes in S will actually occur if a
particular alternative, a, in A (or in A°) is chosen. This information
DEMO be incomplete - that is, there may be more than one DEMO
outcome, s, for each behavior alternative, a. We represent the
DEMO, then, by a mapping of each element, a, in A upon a
subset, S - the set of outcomes that may ensue if a is the chosen
behavior alternative.
6. Information as to the DEMO that a particular outcome will
ensue if a particular behavior alternative is chosen. This is a more
precise kind of information than that postulated DEMO (5), for it asso-
ciates with each element, s, DEMO the set Sa, a probability, Pa(s) - the
probability DEMO s will occur if a is chosen. The probability Pa(s) DEMO a
real, non-negative function with I Pa(s) = 1.
Sa
Attention is directed to the threefold distinction drawn by the
definitions among DEMO set of behavior alternatives, A, the set of out-
comes or future states of affairs, S, and the pay-off, V. In the ordi-
nary representation of a game, in reduced form, by its DEMO matrix,
the set S corresponds to the cells of the matrix, the set A to the
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE
103
strategies of the first player, and the function V to the values in the
cells. The set DEMO is then the set of cells in the ath row. By keeping in
mind this interpretation, the reader may compare the present formu-
lation with "classical" game theory.
1.2 "Classical" Concepts
of Rationality
With DEMO elements, we can define procedures of rational choice
corresponding to the DEMO game-theoretical and probabilistic
models.'
A. Max-min Rule. Assume that whatever alternative is chosen,
the worst possible outcome will ensue - the smallest DEMO(s) for s in Sa
will be realized. Then select that DEMO, a, for which this worst
pay-off is as large as possible.
A
V(d) = Min V(s) = Max Min V(DEMO)
seSd
aeA
seSa
Instead of the maximum with respect to the set, A, of actual
alternatives, we can substitute the maximum with respect to the set,
A, of "considered" alternatives. The probability distribution of
outcomes, (6) does not play any role in the max-min rule.
B. Probabilistic Rule. Maximize the expected value of V(s) for
the (assumed known) probability distribution, Pa(s).
A
V(a) = I V(s)Pa(s)
seSa
= Max 2 V(s)Pa(s)
aeA
seSa
C. Certainty Rule. Given the DEMO that each a in A (or
in A) maps upon a specified Sa in S, select the behavior alternative
whose outcome has the largest pay-off.
A
V(a)
= V(Sa)
= Max DEMO(Sa)
aeA
II. THE
ESSENTIAL
SIMPLIFICATIONS
If we examine closely the "classical" concepts of rationality out-
lined above, we see immediately what severe demands they make upon
the choosing organism. The organism must be DEMO to attach definite
pay-offs (or at least a definite range of DEMO) to each possible out-
come. This, of course, involves also DEMO ability to specify the exact
nature of the outcomes - there is no room in the scheme for "unan-
ticipated consequences." The pay-offs DEMO be completely ordered -
1. See Kenneth J. Arrow, "Alternative Approaches to the Theory of Choice
in Risk-Taking Situations," Econometrica, XIX, DEMO (Oct. 1951).
104 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
it must always be possible to specify, in a consistent way, that one
outcome is better than, as DEMO as, or worse than any other. And,
if the certainty DEMO probabilistic rules are employed, either the out-
comes of particular alternatives DEMO be known with certainty, or at
least it must be possible DEMO attach definite probabilities to outcomes.
My first empirical proposition is that there is a complete lack of
evidence that, in actual human choice situations of any complexity,
these computations can be, or are in fact, performed. The intro-
spective evidence is certainly clear enough, but we DEMO, of course,
rule out the possibility that the unconscious is DEMO better decision-maker
than the conscious. Nevertheless, in the absence of evidence DEMO
the classical concepts do describe the decision-making process, it
seems reasonable DEMO examine the possibility that the actual process is
quite different from the ones the rules describe.
Our procedure will be to introduce some modifications DEMO
appear (on the basis of casual empiricism) to correspond to observed
behavior processes in humans, and that lead to substantial computa-
tional simplifications in the making of a choice. There is no implica-
tion that DEMO beings use all of these modifications and simplifica-
tions all the time. Nor is this the place to attempt the formidable
empirical task of DEMO the extent to which, and the circum-
stances under which humans DEMO employ these simplifications.
The point is rather that these are procedures which appear often to
be employed by human beings in complex choice situations DEMO find
an approximate model of manageable proportions.
2.1 "Simple" Pay-off Functions
One route to simplification is to assume that V(s) necessarily
assumes one of two values, (1, 0), or of three values, (1, 0, -1), for all
s in S. Depending DEMO the circumstances, we might want to interpret
these values, as (DEMO) (satisfactory or unsatisfactory), or (b) (win, draw
or lose).
As an example of (b), let S represent the possible positions in a
chess game at White's 20th move. Then DEMO (+1) position is one in
which White possesses a strategy leading to a win whatever Black
does. A (0) position is one DEMO which White can enforce a draw, but
not a win. A (-1) position is one in which Black can force a win.
As an example of (a) let S represent possible prices for a DEMO an
individual is selling. He may regard $15,000 as an "DEMO"
price, anything over this amount as "satisfactory," anything less as
"unsatisfactory." In psychological theory we would fix the boundary
at DEMO "aspiration level"; in economic theory we would fix the bound-
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE
105
ary at the price which DEMO indifference between selling and not
selling (an opportunity cost concept).
DEMO objection may be raised that, although $16,000 and $25,000
DEMO both "very satisfactory" prices for the house, a rational individual
DEMO prefer to sell at the higher price, and hence, that the simple
pay-off function is an inadequate representation of the choice situa-
tion. DEMO objection may be answered in several different ways, each
answer corresponding DEMO a class of situations in which the simple
function might be appropriate.
First, the individual may not be confronted simultaneously with
v-O V,0
--
_
_
____-___-------------_-___
_----
~
- u 0()
V(s)
FIGURE
I
W(s)
a number of buyers offering to DEMO the house at different prices,
but may receive a sequence of offers, and may have to decide to
accept or reject each one before he receives the next. (Or, more
generally, he may receive a sequence of pairs or triplets or n-tuples
of offers, and may have to decide whether to accept the highest of an
n-tuple before DEMO next n-tuple is received.) Then, if the elements S
correspond to n-tuples of offers, V(s) would be 1 whenever the highest
DEMO in the n-tuple exceeded the "acceptance price" the seller had
determined upon at that time. We can then raise the further ques-
tion DEMO what would be a rational process for determining the accept-
ance price.2
2. See the Appendix. It might be remarked here that the simple DEMO func-
tion, introduced in statistical decision theory within
the bounds of DEMO, by Wald to bring is an problems example of a simple DEMO function as that
term is defined here.
106
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Second, even if there were a more general pay-off function, W(s),
capable of assuming more than DEMO different values, the simplified
V(s) might be a satisfactory approximation to W(s). Suppose, for
example, that there were some DEMO of introducing a cardinal utility
function, defined over S, say U(s). Suppose further that U(W) is a
monotonic increasing function with a strongly negative second deriva-
tive (decreasing marginal utility). Then V(s) = V{ W(s) } might be
the approximation DEMO shown on page 107.
When a simple V(s), assuming only the values (+ 1, 0) is admis-
sible, under the DEMO just discussed or under other circum-
stances, then a (fourth) DEMO decision-process could be defined as
follows:
D. (i) Search for a set of possible outcomes (a subset, S' in S)
such that the pay-off is satisfactory (V(s) = 1) for all these possible
outcomes (for all s in S').
(ii) Search for a behavior alternative (an a in A) whose possible
outcomes all are in S' (such that a maps upon a DEMO, Sa, that is con-
tained in S').
If a DEMO alternative can be found by this procedure, then a
satisfactory outcome DEMO assured. The procedure does not, of course,
guarantee the existence DEMO uniqueness of an a with the desired
properties.
2.2 Information Gathering
One element of realism we may wish to introduce is that, while
V(s) may be known in advance, the mapping of A on DEMO of S
may not. In the extreme case, at the outset DEMO element, a, may be
mapped on the whole set, S. DEMO may then introduce into the deci-
sion-making process information-gathering steps that produce a more
precise mapping of the various elements of A on nonidentical DEMO
of S. If the information-gathering process is not costless, then one
DEMO in the decision will be the determination of how farthemap-
ping is to be refined.
Now in the case of the simple pay-off functions, (+1, 0), the
information-gathering process can be streamlined in an DEMO
respect. First, we suppose that the individual has initially a very
DEMO mapping of A on S. Second, he looks for an S' in S such that
V(s) = 1 for s in S'. Third, he gathers information to refine that
part of the mapping of A on S in which elements of S' are involved.
Fourth, having refined the mapping, he looks for an a that maps DEMO
to a subset of S'.
Under favorable circumstances, this procedure DEMO require the
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE 107
individual to gather only a DEMO amount of information - an insig-
nificant part of the whole mapping of elements of A on individual
elements of S. If the search DEMO an a having the desirable properties
is successful, he is certain DEMO he cannot better his choice by securing
additional information.3
It appears that the decision process just described is one of the
important means employed DEMO chess players to select a move in the
middle and end game. Let A be the set of moves available to White
on his DEMO move. Let S be a set of positions that might be reached,
say, by the 30th move. Let S' be some subset DEMO S that consists of
clearly "won" positions. From a very rough knowledge of the map-
ping of A on S, White tentatively selects a move, a, that (if Black
plays in a certain way) maps on S'. By then considering alternative
replies for Black, DEMO "explores" the whole mapping of a. His
exploration may lead to points, s, that are not in S', but which are
DEMO recognized also as winning positions. These can be adjoined to S'.
On the other hand, a sequence may be discovered that permits Black
to bring about a position that is clearly not "won" for DEMO Then
White may reject the original point, a, and try another.
Whether this procedure leads to any essential simplification of
the computation depends DEMO certain empirical facts about the game.
Clearly all positions can be categorized as "won," "lost," or "drawn"
in an objective sense. But from the standpoint of the player, posi-
tions may be categorized as "clearly won," "clearly lost," "clearly
drawn," "won or drawn," "drawn or lost," and so forth DEMO depending
on the adequacy of this mapping. If the "clearly won" positions
represent a significant subset of the objectively "won" positions, then
the combinatorics involved in seeing whether a position can be trans-
formed DEMO a clearly won position, for all possible replies by Black,
DEMO not be unmanageable.4 The advantage of this procedure over
the more common notion (which may, however, be applicable in the
opening) of DEMO general valuation function for positions, taking on
values from -1 to DEMO, is that it implies much less complex and subtle
evaluation criteria. DEMO that is required is that the evaluation func-
3. This procedure also dispenses with the necessity of estimating explicitly
the cost of obtaining additional DEMO For further discussion of this point
see the comments on dynamics in the last section of this paper.
4. I have estimated roughly the DEMO degree of simplification that might be
realized in the middle game in chess by experimentation with two middle-game
positions. A sequence of sixteen moves, eight by each player, might be expected
to yield a total of about 1024 (one septilion) legally permissible variations. By
following the general DEMO of program just described, it was possible to reduce the
number DEMO lines of play examined in each of these positions to fewer than 100
variations - a rather spectacular simplification of the choice problem.
108 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
tion be reasonably sensitive in detecting when DEMO position in one of the
three states- won, lost, or drawn - has been transformed into a
position in another state. The player, instead of seeking for a "best"
move, needs only to DEMO for a "good" move.
We see that, by the introduction DEMO a simple pay-off function and
of a process for gradually improving the mapping of behavior alterna-
tives upon possible outcomes, the process of reaching a rational deci-
sion may be drastically simplified from a computational standpoint.
DEMO the theory and practice of linear programming, the distinction is
commonly DEMO between computations to determine the feasibility
of a program, and computations DEMO discover the optimal program.
Feasibility testing consists in determining whether a program satisfies
certain linear inequalities that are given at the outset. For example,DEMO
a mobilization plan may take as given the maximum work force and
the steel-making capacity of the economy. Then a feasible program
is one DEMO does not require a work force or steel-making facilities
exceeding the given limits.
An optimal program is that one of the feasible programs which
DEMO a given pay-off function. If, instead of requiring that the
pay-off DEMO maximized, we require only that the pay-off exceed some
given amount, then we can find a program that satisfies this require-
ment by DEMO usual methods of feasibility testing. The pay-off require-
ment is represented simply by an additional linear inequality that
must be satisfied. Once this requirement DEMO met, it is not necessary
to determine whether there exists an DEMO plan with a still
higher pay-off.
For all practical purposes, this DEMO may represent a suffi-
cient approach to optimization, provided the minimum DEMO pay-
off can be set "reasonably." In later sections of this paper we will
discuss how this might be done, and we shall show also how the scheme
can be extended to vector pay-off functions DEMO multiple components
(Optimization requires, of course, a complete ordering of DEMO).
2.3 Partial Ordering of Pay-Offs
The classical theory does not tolerate the incomparability of
oranges and apples. It requires a scalar pay-off function, that is, a
complete ordering of pay-offs. Instead of a scalar pay-off function,
V(s), we might have a vector function, V(s); where V has the com-
ponents V1, V2, . DEMO . A vector pay-off function may be introduced
to handle a number of situations:
1. In the case of a decision to be DEMO by a group of persons,
components may represent the pay-off functions of the individual
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE 109
members of the group. What DEMO preferred by one may not be pre-
ferred by the others.
2. In the case of an individual, he may be trying to implement a
number of values that do not have a common denominator
prestige, etc.;
3. Where each behavior alternative, a, maps on a DEMO of n possible
consequences, Sa, we may replace the model by one in which each
alternative maps on a single consequence, but each consequence has
J\\
\
\
\SATISFACrORY \ P\\\-OFFS
- e.g., he
compares two jobs in terms of salary, climate, pleasantness of work,
DEMO
pay-off its
the
h,v
FIGUEI
PRIALODRN I'VI
n-d~~~~~~~~~imesoa FIGURE
FPYOF
II
etrwoecmoet
PARTIAL
ORDERING
OF PAY-OFFS
r
h
as its pay-off the DEMO vector whose components are the
pay-offs of the elements of Sa.
This representation exhibits a striking similarity among these
three important cases where the DEMO maximizing model breaks
down for lack of a complete ordering of the pay-offs. The first case
has never been satisfactorily treated - the theory DEMO the n-person
game is the most ambitious attempt to deal with it, and the so-called
"weak welfare principles" of economic theory are attempts to avoid
it. The second case is usually handled by superimposing a DEMO
ordering on the points in the vector space ("indifference curves")DEMO
The third case has been handled by introducing probabilities as weights
110 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
for summing the vector components, or by using principles like
minimaxing satisfaction or regret.
An extension of the notion DEMO a simplified pay-off function permits
us to treat all three cases in much the same fashion. Suppose we
regard a pay-off as satisfactory provided DEMO Vi ~ ki for all i. Then
a reasonable decision rule is the following:
E. Search for a subset S' in S such that V(s) is satisfactory for
all s in S' (i.e., V(s) ~ k).
Then search for an a in DEMO such that Sa lies in S'.
Again existence and uniqueness of solutions are not guaranteed.
Rule E is illustrated in Figure II for DEMO case of a 2-component pay-off
vector.
In the first of the three cases mentioned above, the satisfactory
pay-off corresponds to what I have called a viable solution in "A
Formal Theory of the Employment Relation" DEMO "A Comparison
of Organization Theories."5 In the second case, the components of
V define the aspiration levels with respect to several components DEMO
pay-off. In the third case (in this case it is most DEMO to assume
that all the components of k are equal), ki may be interpreted as the
minimum guaranteed pay-off - also an aspiration DEMO concept.
III. EXISTENCE AND UNIQUENESS OF SOLUTIONS
Throughout our discussion we have admitted decision procedures
that do not guarantee the existence or uniqueness of DEMO This
was done in order to construct a model that parallels as nearly as
possible the decision procedures that appear to be used by DEMO in
complex decision-making settings. We now proceed to add supple-
mentary rules to fill this gap.
3.1 Obtaining a Unique Solution
In most global DEMO of rational choice, all alternatives are
evaluated before a choice is DEMO In actual human decision-making,
alternatives are often examined sequentially. We may, or may not,
know the mechanism that determines the order of procedure. When
alternatives are examined sequentially, we may regard the first satis-
factory alternative that is evaluated as such as the one actually
selected.
DEMO a chess player finds an alternative that leads to a forced mate
for his opponent, he generally adopts this alternative without worry-
5. Econometrica, XIX (July 1951), 293-305 and Review of Economic Studies,
DEMO (1952-53, No. 1), 40-49.
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE 1ll
ing about whether another alternative DEMO leads to a forced mate. In
this case we would find it very hard to predict which alternative
would be chosen, for we have no theory that predicts the order in
which alternatives will be examined. DEMO in another case discussed
above- the sale of a house - the environment presents the seller
with alternatives in a definite sequence, and the selection of the first
satisfactory alternative has precise meaning.
However, there are certain dynamic considerations, having a
good psychological foundation, that we should DEMO at this point.
Let us consider, instead of a single static DEMO situation, a sequence
of such situations. The aspiration level, which defines a satisfactory
alternative, may change from point to point in this sequence of trials.
A vague principle would be that as the individual, in his exploration
of alternatives, finds it easy to discover satisfactory alternatives, DEMO
aspiration level rises; as he finds it difficult to discover satisfactory
DEMO, his aspiration level falls. Perhaps it would be possible
to express DEMO ease or difficulty of exploration in terms of the cost of
obtaining better information about the mapping of A on S, or the
combinatorial magnitude of the task of refining this mapping. There
are a number DEMO ways in which this process could be defined formally.
Such changes in aspiration level would tend to bring about a
"near-uniqueness" of the DEMO solutions and would also tend
to guarantee the existence of satisfactory solutions. For the failure
to discover a solution would depress the aspiration level DEMO bring
satisfactory solutions into existence.
3.2 Existence of Solutions: Further Possibilities
DEMO have already discussed one mechanism by which the existence
of solutions, DEMO the long run, is assured. There is another way of
representing DEMO processes already described. Up to this point little
use has been made of the distinction between A, the set of behavior
alternatives, and DEMO, the set of behavior alternatives that the organism
considers. Suppose now DEMO the latter is a proper subset of the
former. Then, the DEMO to find a satisfactory alternative in A may
lead to a search for additional alternatives in A that can be adjoined
to A.6 This DEMO is simply an elaboration of the information-
I have presented -
6. I might mention that, in the spirit of crude empiricism,
a number of students and friends with a problem involving a multiple pay-off
DEMO which the pay-off depends violently upon a very contingent and uncertain
event - and have found them extremely reluctant to restrict themselves to a DEMO
of behavior alternatives allowed by the problem. They were averse to an alterna-
tive that promised very large profit or ruin, where the relevant probability could
not be computed, and tried to invent new alternatives whose pay-offs were less
sensitive to the contingent event. The problem in question DEMO Modigliani's "hot-
112 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
gathering process previously described. (We can regard the elements
of A that are not in A as elements that DEMO initially mapped on the
whole set, S.)
In one organism, dynamic adjustment over a sequence of choices
may depend primarily upon adjustments DEMO the aspiration level. In
another organism, the adjustments may be primarily DEMO the set A: if
satisfactory alternatives are discovered easily, A narrows; if it becomes
difficult to find satisfactory alternatives, A broadens. The DEMO
persistent the organism, the greater the role played by the adjustment
DEMO A°, relative to the role played by the adjustment of the DEMO
level. (It is possible, of course, and even probable, that there is an
asymmetry between adjustments upward and downward.)
If the DEMO were measurable in money or utility terms, and if
the cost DEMO discovering alternatives were similarly measurable, we
could replace the partial ordering DEMO alternatives exhibited in Figure II
by a complete ordering (an ordering DEMO terms of a weighted sum of the
pay-off and the cost of discovering alternatives). Then we could
speak of the optimal degree of DEMO in behavior - we could say
that the more persistent organism was more rational than the other,
or vice versa. But the central DEMO of the present paper is that
the behaving organism does not in general know these costs, nor does
it have a set of weights for comparing the components of a multiple
pay-off. It is precisely because DEMO these limitations on its knowledge and
capabilities that the less global models of rationality described here are
significant and useful. The question of how DEMO is to behave "rationally,"
given these limitations, is distinct DEMO the question of how its capabil-
ities could be increased to permit action that would be more "rational"
judged from the mountain-top of a more complete model.7
The two viewpoints are not, of course, DEMO different, much
less antithetical. We have already pointed out that the DEMO
may possess a whole hierarchy of rational mechanisms - that, for
DEMO, the aspiration level itself may be subject to anadjustment
process that DEMO rational in some dynamic sense. Moreover, in many
situations we may DEMO interested in the precise question of whether one
decision-making procedure is more rational than another, and to
answer this question we will usually have to construct a broader
criterion of rationality that encompasses both procedures as DEMO
mations. Our whole point is that it is important to make explicit
what level we are considering in such a hierarchy of models, and that
dog stand" problem described in American Economic Review, Proceedings, XXXIX
(1949), 201-8.
7. One might add: "or judged in terms of the survival value of its choice
mechanism."
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE
113
for many purposes we are DEMO in models of "limited" rationality
rather than models of relatively "DEMO" rationality.
IV.
FURTHER COMMENTS ON DYNAMICS
The models thus far discussed DEMO dynamic only in a very special
sense: the aspiration level at DEMO t depends upon the previous history
of the system (previous aspiration DEMO and previous levels of attain-
ment). Another kind of dynamic linkage might be very important.
The pay-offs in a particular trial might depend DEMO only on the alterna-
tive chosen in that trial but also on the alternatives chosen in pre-
vious trials.
The most direct representation of DEMO situation is to include, as
components of a vector pay-off function, the pay-offs for the whole
sequence of trials. But then optimization would DEMO the selection,
at the beginning of the sequence, of a DEMO for the whole sequence
(see the Appendix). Such a procedure DEMO again rapidly complicate
the problem beyond the computational capacity of the organism. A
possible middle ground is to define for each trial a pay-off DEMO
with two components. One would be the "immediate" pay-off (con-
DEMO), the other, the "position" in which the organism is DEMO for
future trials (saving, liquidity).
Let us consider a chess game in which the players are paid off at
the end of DEMO ten moves in proportion to arbitrarily assigned values
of their pieces left on the board (say, queen, 1; rook, 10; etc.)DEMO Then
a player could adopt some kind of planning horizon and include in his
estimated pay-off the "goodness" of his position at the DEMO
horizon. A comparable notion in economics is that of the depreciated
value of an asset at the planning horizon. To compute such a value
DEMO would require the player actually to carry his strategy
beyond the horizon. If there is time-discounting of pay-offs, this has
the advantage of reducing the importance of errors in estimating these
depreciated values. (Time-discounting may sometimes be essential
in order to assure convergence of the summed pay-offs.)
DEMO is easy to conjure up other dynamic complications, which may
be DEMO considerable practical importance. Two more may be men-
tioned - without attempting to incorporate them formally. The
consequences that the organism experiences may change DEMO pay-off
function - it doesn't know how well it likes cheese until it has eaten
cheese. Likewise, one method for refining the mapping of A on S
may be to select a particular alternative and DEMO its conse-
quences. In these cases, one of the elements of DEMO pay-off associated
with a particular alternative is the information that is gathered about
the mapping or about the pay-off function.
114
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
V. CONCLUSION
The aim of this paper DEMO been to construct definitions of
"rational choice" that are modeled more closely upon the actual deci-
sion processes in the behavior of organisms DEMO definitions heretofore
proposed. We have outlined a fairly complete model for the static
case, and have described one extension of this model into dynamics.
As has been indicated in the last section, a great deal remains to be
done before we can handle realistically a more completely dynamic
DEMO
In the introduction, it was suggested that definitions of this kind
DEMO have normative as well as descriptive value. In particular,
they may suggest approaches to rational choice in areas that appear
to be far DEMO the capacities of existing or prospective computing
equipment. The comparison of the I.Q. of a computer with that of a
human being is very DEMO If one were to factor the scores made
by each on a comprehensive intelligence test, one would undoubtedly
find that in those factors on which the one scored as a genius the other
would appear a DEMO - and conversely. A survey of possible defini-
tions of rationality might suggest directions for the design and use of
computing equipment with reasonably DEMO scores on some of the
factors of intelligence in which present computers are moronic.
The broader aim, however, in constructing these definitions of
"approximate" rationality is to provide some materials for the con-
struction of a theory of the behavior of a human individual or of
groups DEMO individuals who are making decisions in an organizational
context. The apparent paradox to be faced is that the economic
theory of the firm and DEMO theory of administration attempt to deal
with human behavior in situations in which that behavior is at least
"intendedly" rational; while, at DEMO same time, it can be shown that
if we assume the DEMO kinds of rationality of the classical theory the
problems of internal structure of the firm or other organization largely
disappear.8 The paradox vanishes, and the outlines of theory begin
to emerge when we substitute for "economic man" or "administra-
tive man" a choosing organism of limited knowledge and ability.
This organism's simplifications of the real world for purposes DEMO choice
introduce discrepancies between the simplified model and the reality;
and these discrepancies, in turn, serve to explain many of the phe-
DEMO of organizational behavior.
8. See Herbert A.
pp. 39-41, 80-84, 96-102,
Simon, Administrative Behavior (Macmillan,
240-44.
1947),
A BEHAVIORAL
MODEL OF RATIONAL
CHOICE
APPENDIX
115
EXAMPLE OF RATIONAL DETERMINATION
DEMO AN ACCEPTABLE PAY-OFF
In the body of this paper, the notion DEMO introduced that rational
adjustment may operate at various "levels." That is, the organism
may choose rationally within a given set of limits postulated by the
model, but it may also undertake to set these limits rationally. The
house-selling illustration of Section 2.1 provides an example of this.
DEMO suppose that an individual is selling a house. Each day (or
DEMO unit of time) he sets an acceptance price: d(k), say, for the kth
day. If he receives one or more offers above this price on the day in
question, he accepts the highest offer; if he does not receive an offer
above d(k), he retains the house until the next day, and sets a new
acceptance price, d(k + 1).
Now, if he has DEMO information about the probability dis-
tribution of offers on each day, DEMO can set the acceptance price so that
it will be optimal in the sense that it will maximize the expected value,
V[d(k)DEMO, of the sales price.
To show this, we proceed as follows. Let Pk(y) be the probability
that y will be the highest price offered on the kth day. Then:
00
(A.1)
Pk(d) =
fPk (y)dy
d(k)
is the probability DEMO the house will be sold on the kth day if it has
not been sold earlier.
00
(A.2)
k(d)=
y p(y,k)dy
d(k)
will be the expected value received DEMO the seller on the kth day if the
house has not been sold earlier. Taking into account the probability
that the house will be DEMO before the kth day,
(A.3)
k-1
Ek(d) = Ek(d) II (1 - Pj(d))
j=1
will be the unconditional expected value of the seller's receipts on the
kth DEMO; and
116
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
(A.4)
V{d(k)} =2Ek(d)
will be the expected value of the sales price.
Now we DEMO to set d(k), for each Ic, at the level DEMO will maxi-
mize (A.4). The k components of the function DEMO(kc) are independent.
Differentiating V partially with respect to each component, we get:
(A.5)
But:
(A.6)
aEj(d) E(
ad(i)
aV
ad(i)
=v
oo
k=i
DEMO(d) E((i
ad(i)
a8i (d)i-
ad(DEMO) j=1
(1 - Pj(d)),
and
=1...,n).
(A.7)
(A.8)
aEk(d)
ad (i)
OEk(d) -0
ad(i)
k-1
Pdj(i)! P (
)dk(d) II
(1 -
j 3i
j=1
for i > DEMO
-
aPi(d)
ad (i)
for i<k
Hence DEMO a maximum:
(A.9)
aV
()
ad (i)
=
-d(i)pi(d) i-i
II (1 - Pj(d))
j=1
k-i
+
T' ek
k =i+l
(d) II (DEMO - Pi(d))
p(d)
joi
and
i
0.
DEMO out pi(d), we obtain, finally:
00
k-i
(A.10)
d(i)
=
k=i+l
j-
I (1 -
j=1
i
Pj(d))
00
2; 8k(d)
k=i+l
kk-i
II (1 - Pj(d)).
J=i+i
For the answer to be meaningful, the infinite sum in (A.10) must
converge. If we look at the definition (A.2) for 6k(d) we see this
A BEHAVIORAL MODEL OF RATIONAL CHOICE
117
would come about if the DEMO distribution of offers shifts
downward through time with sufficient rapidity. Such a shift might
correspond to (a) expectations of falling prices, or (DEMO) interpretation
of y as the present value of the future price, discounted at a sufficiently
high interest rate.
Alternatively, we can avoid the question of convergence by
assuming a reservation price a(n), for DEMO nth day, which is low enough
so that Pn(d) is unity. We shall take this last alternative, but before
proceeding, we DEMO to interpret the equation (A.10). Equation
(A.10) says that DEMO rational acceptance price on the ith day, d(i), is
DEMO to the expected value of the sales price if the house is not sold
on the ith day and acceptance prices are set optimally DEMO subsequent
days. This can be seen by observing that the right-hand side of
(A.10) is the same as the right-hand side of (A.4) but with the summa-
tion extending from k = (i + DEMO) instead of from (k = 1).9
Hence, in the DEMO where the summation is terminated at period
n - that is, DEMO house will be sold with certainty in period n if it has
not been sold previously - we can compute the optimal d(i) by
working backward from the terminal period, and without the necessity
of solving simultaneously the equations (A.10).
It is interesting to observe what additional information the seller
needs in order to determine the rational acceptance DEMO, over and
above the information he needs once the acceptance price DEMO set. He
needs, in fact, virtually complete information as to the probability
distribution of offers for all relevant subsequent time periods.
Now the DEMO who does not have this information, and who will
be satisfied DEMO a more bumbling kind of rationality, will make
approximations to avoid DEMO the information he doesn't have.
First, he will probably limit DEMO planning horizon by assuming a price
at which he can certainly sell and will be willing to sell in the nth
time period. Second, he will set his initial acceptance price quite
high, watch the distribution of offers he receives, and gradually and
approximately adjust his acceptance price downward or upward until
Darling
Journal of Operations
9. Equation
and
W.
DEMO
(A.10)
Kincaid. See
Research
to have
appears
their
Society
been
DEMO,
of America,
arrived
"An
I, 80 (Feb. 1953)DEMO
Inventory
at independently D. A.
Problem," in the
by
118
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
he receives an offer he accepts - DEMO ever making probability
calculations. This, I submit, is the kind of rational adjustment that
humans find "good enough" and are capable of DEMO in a wide
range of practical circumstances.
HERBERT A. SIMON.
CARNEGIE INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY{1g42fwefx}