Making Management Decisions: The Role of Intuition and Emotion
Author(s): Herbert A. Simon
Source: The Academy of Management Executive (1987-1989), DEMO 1, No. 1 (Feb., 1987), pp. 57-
64
Published DEMO: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4164720 .
Accessed: 05/05/2011 09:08
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's DEMO and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may DEMO obtained at .
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright DEMO that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and DEMO new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact DEMO
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and DEMO access to The Academy
of Management Executive (1987-1989).
http://DEMO
the
Making
Role
February,
The work of a manager includes making DEMO
(or participating in their making), communicating
them to others, and monitoring how they are carried
out. Managers must know a great deal DEMO the indus-
try and social environment in which they work and the
decision-making process itself to make decisions well.
Over the past 40 years, the technique of decision mak-
ing has been greatly advanced by the DEMO of a
wide range of tools-in particular, the tools of opera-
DEMO research and management science, and the tech-
nology of expert systems.
DEMO these advances have not applied to the entire
domain of decision making. They have had their great-
est impact on decision making that is DEMO,
deliberative, and quantitative; they have had less im-
pact on decision making that is loosely structured, in-
tuitive, and qualitative; and they have had the least
impact on face-to-face interactions between a manager
DEMO his or her coworkers-the give and take of every-
day work.
In this article, I will discuss these two relatively
neglected types of decision making: "intuitive" decision
making and decision making that involves interper-
sonal interaction. What, if anything, do we know about
how judgmental and DEMO processes work and how
they can be made to work better? DEMO why do manag-
ers often fail to do what they know they should
do-even what they have decided to do? What can be
done to bring action into closer accord with intention?
My article will DEMO have the form of a dip-
tych, with one half devoted DEMO each of these topics.
First, I will discuss judgmental and intuitive DEMO
making; then I will turn to the subject of the manager'DEMO
behavior and the influence of emotions on that
behavior.
Sometimes the term rational (or logical) is ap-
plied to decision making that is DEMO analytic,
the term nonrational to decision making that is intui-
tive and judgmental, and the term irrational to deci-
sion making and behavior that responds to the emo-
tions or that deviates from action chosen "rationally."
We will be concerned, then, with the nonrational and
DEMO irrational components of managerial decision mak-
ing and behavior. Our task, DEMO might say, is to dis-
cover the reason that underlies unreason.
DEMO
Management Decisions:
Intuition and Emotion
By Herbert A. Simon
Carnegie-Mellon University
Intuition and Judgment
As an appendix to the Functions of the Executive
(Harvard University Press, 1938), Chester I. Barnard
published an essay, DEMO on a talk he had given in
1936 at Princeton, entitled "Mind in Everyday Af-
fairs." 1 The central motif of that essay was a contrast
between what Barnard called "logical" and "nonlogi-
cal" processes for making decisions. He speaks of "the
wide divergence of DEMO ... as to what constitutes a
proper intellectual basis for opinion or deliberate ac-
tion." And he continues:
By "logical processes" I mean conscious
thinking which could be expressed in words
or by other DEMO, that is, reasoning. By
"non-logical processes" I mean those not ca-
pable of being expressed in words or as rea-
soning, which are only made known by a
judgment, decision or action.
Barnard's thesis was that executives, as contrasted,
say, with scientists, do not often enjoy the luxury of
making their decisions on the basis DEMO orderly rational
analysis, but depend largely on intuitive or judgmental
responses DEMO decision-demanding situations.
Although Barnard did not provide a set of formal
criteria for distinguishing between logical and judg-
mental decision making, he did provide a phenomeno-
logical characterization of the two styles that make
them easily DEMO, at least in their more extreme
forms. In logical decision making, goals and alterna-
tives are made explicit, the consequences of pursuing
different alternatives are calculated, and these conse-
quences are evaluated in terms of how close they are to
the goals.
In judgmental decision making, the response to
the need for a decision is usually rapid, too rapid to
allow for an orderly sequential analysis of the situation,
and DEMO decision maker cannot usually give a veridical
account of either the process by which the decision was
reached or the grounds for judging it DEMO Never-
57
1987
Academy
of Management
EXECUTIVE
theless, decision makers may have great confidence in
the correctness of their intuitive decisions and are
likely to attribute their DEMO to make them rapidly to
their experience.
Most executives probably find Barnard's account
of their decision processes persuasive; it captures their
own feelings of how processes work. On the other hand,
some students of DEMO, especially those whose
goal is to improve management-decision processes,
have DEMO less comfortable with it. It appears to vindi-
cate snap judgments and to cast doubt on the rele-
vance of management-science tools, which almost all
involve deliberation and calculation in decision
making.
Barnard did not regard DEMO nonlogical processes
of decision as magical in any sense. On the contrary, he
felt they were grounded in knowledge and experience:
The sources of these non-logical processes lie
in physiological conditions or factors, or in
the physical and social environment, mostly
impressed upon us unconsciously or without
conscious effort on our part. They also con-
sist of the mass DEMO facts, patterns, concepts,
techniques, abstractions, and generally what
we call formal knowledge or beliefs, which
are impressed upon our minds more or less
by conscious effort and study. This second
source of non-logical DEMO processes
greatly increases with directed experience,
study and education. (p. DEMO)
At the time I wrote Administrative Behavior
(1941-42), I DEMO troubled by Barnard's account of intu-
itive judgment (see the DEMO on p. 51 of AB),
largely, I think, because DEMO left no clues as to what sub-
conscious processes go on while judgments are being
made. 2 I was wholly persuaded, however, that DEMO theory
of decision making had to give an account of both con-
scious and subconscious processes (see the end of p. 75
to the top of p. 76). I finessed the issue by assuming
that DEMO the conscious and the unconscious parts of
the process were the same, that they involve drawing
on factual premises and value premises, and DEMO
on them to form conclusions that became the decisions.
Because I used logic (drawing conclusions from
premises) as a central metaphor to describe DEMO deci-
sion-making process, many readers of Administrative
Behavior have concluded that DEMO theory advanced
there applies only to "logical " decision making, not to
decisions that involve intuition and judgment. That
was certainly not my DEMO But now, after nearly 50
years, the ambiguity can be resolved because we have
acquired a solid understanding of what the judgmental
and DEMO processes are. I will take up the new evi-
dence in a moment; but first, a word must be said
about the "two brains" hypothesis, which argues that
58
rational and intuitive processes are DEMO different that
they are carried out in different parts of the brain.
Split Brainm
and Forms of Thought
Physiological research on "split brains"-brains
in which the corpus callosum, which connects the two
hemispheres of the cerebrum, has been severed-has
provided encouragement to the idea of two qualita-
tively different kinds of decision making-the analyti-
cal, corresponding to Barnard's "logical," and the intu-
itive or creative, corresponding to his "non-logical."
The primary evidence behind this dichotomy is that
the two DEMO exhibit a division of labor: in
right-handed people, the right hemisphere plays a spe-
cial role in the recognition of visual patterns, and the
left hemisphere in analytical processes and the use of
language.
Other DEMO in addition to the split-brain re-
search suggests some measure of hemispheric speciali-
zation. Electrical activity in the intact brain can be
measured by DEMO techniques. Activity in a brain
hemisphere is generally associated with partial or total
suppression in the hemisphere of the alpha system, a
salient brain wave with a frequency of about ten vibra-
tions per second. When DEMO hemisphere is inactive, the
alpha rhythm in that hemisphere becomes strong. DEMO
most right-handed subjects, when the brain is engaged
in a task DEMO recognition of visual pattern, the al-
pha rhythm is relatively stronger DEMO the left than in the
right hemisphere; with more analytical tasks, the alpha
rhythm is relatively stronger in the right hemisphere.
(See Doktor and Hamilton, 1973, and Doktor, 1975, for
some experiments and DEMO review of the evidence.3)
The more romantic versions of the split-brain
doctrine extrapolate this evidence into the two polar
forms of thought labeled DEMO as analytical and crea-
tive. As an easy next step, evaluative DEMO creep
into the discussion. The opposite of "creative," after
all, is "pedestrian." The analytical left hemisphere, so
this story goes, DEMO on the humdrum, practical, eve-
ryday work of the brain, DEMO the creative right hemi-
sphere is responsible for those flights of imagination
that produce great music, great literature, great art,
great science, and great management. The evidence for
this romantic extrapolation does not derive DEMO the
physiological research. As I indicated above, that re-
search has DEMO evidence only for some measure of
specialization between the hemispheres. It does not in
any way imply that either hemisphere (especially the
right hemisphere) is capable of problem solving, deci-
sion making, or discovery independent of the other.
The real evidence for two different forms of thought DEMO
essentially that on which Barnard relied: the observa-
tion that, in everyday affairs, men and women often
make competent judgments or reach reasonable deci-
sions rapidly-without evidence indicating that they
have engaged in systematic reasoning, and without
their being able to report the thought processes that
took DEMO to their conclusion.
February, 1987
There is also some evidence for the very plausible
hypothesis that some people, confronted with a partic-
ular problem, make more DEMO of intuitive processes in
solving it, while other people make relatively DEMO use
of analytical processes (Doktor, 1978).'
For our purposes, it is the differences in behavior,
and not the differences in the hemispheres, that are
important. Reference to the two hemispheres is a red
herring that can only impede our understanding of in-
tuitive, "DEMO" thought. The important ques-
tions for us are "What is intuition?" and "How is it
acccomplished?" not "In which cubic DEMO of
the brain tissue does it take place?"
New Evidence DEMO the Processes of
Intuition
In the 50 years since Barnard talked about the
mind in everyday affairs, we have learned a great deal
about the processes human beings use to solve
problems, to make decisions, DEMO even to create works
of art and science. Some of this new knowledge has
been gained in the psychological laboratory; some has
been gained through observation of the behavior of
people who are demonstrably creative in DEMO realm of
human endeavor; and a great deal has been gained
DEMO the use of the modern digital computer to
model human thought processes and perform problem-
solving and decision-making functions at expert levels.
I should DEMO to examine this body of research,
which falls under the labels of "cognitive science" and
"artificial intelligence," to see what light it casts on in-
tuitive, judgmental decision making in management.
We will see that a rather detailed account can be given
of the processes DEMO underlie judgment, even though
most of these processes are not within DEMO conscious
awareness of the actor using them.
Intuition in Chessplaying
The Expert's Intuition
One much studied class of experts is the
grandmasters in DEMO game of chess. Chess is usually be-
lieved to require a high level of intellect, and
grandmasters are normally full-time professionals who
have devoted many years to acquiring their mastery of
the game. From a research DEMO, the advantage
of the game is that the level of skill DEMO players can be
calibrated accurately from their official ratings, based
on DEMO tournament success.
From the standpoint of studying intuitive think-
ing, chess DEMO seem (at least to outsiders) an un-
promising research domain. Chess playing is thought to
involve a highly analytical approach, with players
working out systematically the consequences of moves
and countermoves, so that a single move may take as
much as a half hour's thought, or more. On the other
hand, chess professionals can play simultaneous games,
sometimes against as many as 50 opponents, and ex-
hibit only a moderately lower level of skill than in
games playing under tournament conditions. DEMO simul-
taneous play, the professional takes much less than a
minute, often only a few seconds, for each move. There
is no time for careful analysis.
When we ask the grandmaster or master how he
DEMO she is able to find good moves under these circum-
stances, DEMO get the same answer that we get from other
professionals who are questioned about rapid decisions:
It is done by "intuition," by applying one's professional
"judgment" to the situation. A few seconds' glance at
the position suggests a good move, although the player
has no awareness of how the judgment was evoked.
Even under tournament conditions, good moves
usually come to a player's mind after only a DEMO
seconds' consideration of the board. The remainder of
the analysis time DEMO generally spent verifying that a
move appearing plausible does not have a hidden
weakness. We encounter this same kind of behavior in
other professional DEMO where intuitive judgments
are usually subjected to tests of various kinds before
they are actually implemented. The main exceptions
are situations where the decision DEMO to be made before
a deadline or almost instantly. Of course we know that
under these circumstances (as in professional chess
when the allowed time is nearly exhausted), mistakes
are sometimes made.
How do we DEMO for the judgment or intuition
that allows the chess grandmaster usually to find good
moves in a few seconds? A good deal of the answer can
be derived from an experiment that is easily repeated.
First, present a grandmaster and a novice with a posi-
tion from an DEMO, but unfamiliar, chess game (with
about 25 pieces on the DEMO). After five or ten
seconds, remove the board and pieces DEMO ask the sub-
In recent years, the disciplines of cognitive sci-
DEMO and artificial intelligence have devoted a great
deal of attention to the nature of expert problem solv-
ing and decision making in professional-level tasks.
DEMO goal of the cognitive science research has been to
gain an understanding of the differences between the
behavior of experts and novices, and possibly to learn
more about how novices can become experts. The goal
of DEMO artificial intelligence research has been to build
computer systems that can perform professional tasks
as competently as human experts can. Both lines of re-
DEMO have greatly deepened our understanding of
expertise.4
59
Academy
of Management
EXECUTIVE
jects to reproduce it. The grandmaster will usually DEMO
construct the whole position correctly, and on average
will place 23 DEMO 24 pieces on their correct squares. The
novice will only be able to replace, on average, about 6
pieces.
It might seem that DEMO are witnessing remarkable
skill in visual imagery and visual memory, but DEMO can
easily dismiss that possibility by carrying out a second
experiment. The conditions are exactly the same as in
the first experiment, except that now the 25 pieces are
placed on the board at random. The DEMO can still
replace about 6 pieces and the grandmaster-about 6!
The difference between them in the first experiment
does not lie in the grandmaster'DEMO eyes or imagery, but
in his knowledge, acquired by long experience, of the
kinds of patterns and clusters of pieces that occur on
chessboards in the course of games. For the expert,
such a DEMO board is not an arrangement of 25 pieces
but an arrangement of a half dozen familiar patterns,
recognizable old friends. On the random DEMO there
are no such patterns, only the 25 individual pieces in
DEMO unfamiliar arrangement.
The grandmaster's memory holds more than a set
of patterns. Associated with each pattern in his or her
memory is information DEMO the significance of that
pattern-what dangers it holds, and what offensive DEMO
defensive 'moves it suggests. Recognizing the pattern
brings to the grandmaster'DEMO mind at once moves that
may be appropriate to the situation. It is this recogni-
tion that enables the professional to play very strong
DEMO at a rapid rate. Previous learning that has stored
the patterns and the information associated with them
in memory makes this performance possible. This,DEMO
then, is the secret of the grandmaster's intuition or
judgment.
DEMO have been made, in a variety of ways,
of the DEMO of familiar patterns (which psychologists
now call chunks) that the master or grandmaster must
be able to recognize. These estimates fall in the DEMO
borhood of 50,000, give or take a factor of two. DEMO this a
large number? Perhaps not. The natural language vo-
cabularies DEMO college graduates have been estimated to
be in the range of 50,000 to 200,000 words, nearly the
same range as the chess expert's vocabularies of pat-
terns of pieces. Moreover, when we recognize a word,
we also get access to information in our memories
DEMO the meaning of the word and to other informa-
tion associated with it as well. So our ability to speak
and understand language has DEMO same intuitive or
judgmental flavor as the grandmaster's ability to play
chess rapidly.
Intuition in Computerized Expert
Systems
A growing body of evidence DEMO artificial intelli-
gence research indicates that expert computer systems,
capable of matching human performance in some lim-
ited domain, can be built by storing in computer mem-
ory tens of thousands of productions. Productions are
DEMO
computer instructions that take the form of "if-then"
pairs. The "if"' is a set of conditions or patterns to be
recognized; the "then" is a body of information associ-
ated with the "if' and evoked from memory whenever
the pattern is recognized in the current situation.
Some of our best data about this organization of
expert DEMO come from the areas of medical diag-
nosis. Systems like CADUcEUs
large number of such if-then pairs, together with an in-
ference machine of modest powers. These systems are
capable of medical diagnosis at a competent DEMO
level within their respective limited domains. Their
recognition capabilities, the if-then DEMO, represent
their intuitive or judgmental ability; their inferencing
powers represent their analytical ability.
Medical diagnosis is just one of a number of do-
DEMO for which expert systems have been built. For
many years, electric DEMO, generators, and transform-
ers have been designed by expert systems developed by
large electrical manufacturers. These computer pro-
grams have taken over from DEMO engineers
many standards and relatively routine design tasks.
They imitate fairly closely the rule-of-thumb proce-
dures that human designers have used, the result of a
large stock of theoretical and practical information
about electrical machinery. Recognition DEMO plays a
large role in these systems. For example, examination
of DEMO customer's specifications "reminds" the program
of a particular class of devices, which is then used as
the basis for the design. Parameters for the design are
then selected to meet the performance requirements of
DEMO device.
In chemistry, reaction paths for synthesizing or-
ganic molecules can DEMO designed by expert systems. In
these systems, the process appears relatively DEMO,
for it is guided by reasoning in the form of means-ends
analyses, which work backward from the desired mole-
cule, via a DEMO of reactions, to available raw
materials. But the reasoning scheme depends DEMO a large
store of knowledge of chemical reactions and the abil-
ity of the system to recognize rapidly that a particular
substance can be DEMO as the output of one or more
familiar reactions. Thus, these DEMO synthesis pro-
grams employ the same kind of mixture of intuition
and analysis that is used in the other expert systems,
and by DEMO experts as well.
Other examples of expert systems can be cited,
and all of them exhibit reasoning or analytic processes
combined with processes DEMO accessing knowledge
banks with the help of recognition cues. This appears
to be a universal scheme for the organization of expert
systems-and of expert DEMO problem solving as well.
Notice that there is nothing "irrational" about in-
tuitive or judgmental reasoning based on productions.
The conditions in a DEMO constitute a set of
premises. Whenever these conditions are satisfied, the
DEMO draws the appropriate conclusion-it
evokes from memory information implied by these con-
ditions or even initiates motor responses. A person
learning to drive a DEMO may notice a red light, be aware
that a red light DEMO for a stop, and be aware that stop-
and MYCIN
consist DEMO a
February,
1987
ping requires applying the brakes. For an experienced
driver, the sight of the red light simply evokes the ap-
plication of DEMO How conscious the actor is of the
process inversely, how automatic DEMO response is, may
differ, but there is no difference in the logic being
applied.
Intuition in Management
Some direct evidence also suggests that DEMO intui-
tive skills of managers depend on the same kinds of
mechanisms as the intuitive skills of chessmasters or
physicians. It would be surprising DEMO it were otherwise.
The experienced manager, too, has in his or her mem-
ory a large amount of knowledge, gained from training
and experience and organized in terms of recognizable
chunks and associated information.
Marius DEMO Bouwman has constructed a computer
program capable of detecting company problems from
an examination of accounting statements." The pro-
gram was modeled on detailed thinking-aloud protocols
of experienced financial analysts interpreting such
statements, and it captures the knowledge that enables
analysts to spot problems intuitively, usually at a very
rapid rate. When a comparison is made between the re-
sponses DEMO the program and the responses of an expert
human financial analyst, DEMO close match is usually
found.
In another study, R. Bhaskar gathered DEMO
aloud protocols from business school students and ex-
perienced businessmen, who DEMO all asked to analyze a
business policy case.' The final analyses DEMO by
the students and the businessmen were quite similar.
What most sharply discriminated between the novices
and the experts was the time required to DEMO the
key features of the case. This was done very rapidly,
with the usual appearances of intuition, by the experts;
it was done slowly, with much conscious and explicit
analysis, by the novices.
DEMO two pieces of research are just drops of
water in a large bucket that needs filling. The descrip-
tion, in detail, of the DEMO of judgmental and analytical
processes in expert problem solving and decision mak-
ing deserves a high priority in the agenda of manage-
ment research.
DEMO Judgment Be Improved?
From this and other research on expert problem
solving and decision making, we can draw two main
conclusions. First, DEMO often arrive at problem diag-
noses and solutions rapidly and intuitively without be-
ing able to report how they attained the result. Second,
DEMO ability is best explained by postulating a recogni-
tion and retrieval process that employs a large num-
ber-generally tens of thousands or even hundreds DEMO
thousands-of chunks or patterns stored in long term
memory.
When the problems to be solved are more than
trivial, the recognition processes have to be organized
61
in a coherent way and they must be supplied DEMO rea-
soning capabilities that allow inferences to be drawn
from the information retrieved, and numerous chunks
of information to be combined. Hence intuition is not a
process that operates independently of analysis; rather,
the two processes are essential complementary compo-
nents of effective decision-making systems. When the
DEMO is solving a difficult problem or making a com-
plex decision, DEMO conscious deliberation may be in-
volved. But each conscious step may itself constitute a
considerable leap, with a whole sequence of automated
productions building the bridge from the premises to
the conclusions. Hence the expert appears DEMO take giant
intuitive steps in reasoning, as compared with the tiny
DEMO of the novice.
It is doubtful that we will find two types of man-
agers (at least, of good managers), one of DEMO relies
almost exclusively on intuition, the other on analytic
techniques. More DEMO, we will find a continuum of
decision-making styles involving an intimate DEMO
tion of the two kinds.of skill. We will likely also find
that the nature of the problem to be solved will be a
principal DEMO of the mix.
With our growing understanding of the organiza-
tion of judgmental and intuitive processes, of the spe-
cific knowledge that is required to perform particular
judgmental tasks, and of the cues that evoke such
knowledge in situations in which it is relevant, we have
a powerful new tool for improving expert judgment.
We can specify the knowledge and DEMO recognition ca-
pabilities that experts in a domain need to acquire as a
basis for designing appropriate learning procedures.
We can also, in more and more situations, design
expert systems capable of automating the expertise, DEMO
alternatively, of providing the human decision maker
with an expert consultant. DEMO, we will see de-
cision aids for managers that will be DEMO interactive,
with both knowledge and intelligence being shared be-
tween the human and the automated components of
the system.
A vast research and DEMO task of ex-
tracting and cataloging the knowledge and cues used
by experts in different kinds of managerial tasks lies
ahead. Much has been DEMO in the past few years
about how to do this. More needs to be learned about
how to update and improve the knowledge sources DEMO
expert systems as new knowledge becomes available.
Progress will be most rapid with expert systems
that have a substantial technical component. It is no
DEMO that the earliest expert systems were built for
such tasks as designing motors, making medical diag-
noses, playing chess, and finding chemical synthesis
paths. In the area of management, the analysis of com-
pany financial statements is a domain where some pro-
gress has been made in DEMO expert systems.
The areas of corporate policy and strategy are excellent
candidates for early development of such systems.
What about the aspects of executive DEMO that in-
volve the managing of people? What help can we DEMO
pect in improving this crucial component of the man-
agement task?
Academy of Management EXECUTIVE
Knowledge and Behavior
What managers know they should DEMO
by analysis or intuitively-is very often different from
what they actually do. A common failure of managers,
which all of us have observed, is the postponement of
difficult decisions. What is it that makes decisions DEMO
cult and hence tends to cause postponement? Often,
the problem DEMO that all of the alternatives have unde-
sired consequences. When people have to choose the
lesser of two evils, they do not simply behave like
Bayesian statisticians, weighing the bad against the
worse in the light of their respective possibilities. In-
stead, they avoid the decision, searching DEMO alterna-
tives that do not have negative outcomes. If such alter-
natives are not available, they are likely to continue to
postpone making a choice. A choice between un-
desirables is a dilemma, something to be avoided or
evaded.
Often, uncertainty is the source of the difficulty.
Each choice may have a good outcome under one set of
environmental contingencies, but a bad outcome under
another. When this occurs, we also do not usually ob-
serve Bayesian behavior; the situation is again treated
as a dilemma.
The bad consequences of a manager's decision are
often DEMO for other people. Managers sometimes have
to dismiss employees or, even DEMO frequently, have to
speak to them about unsatisfactory work. Dealing with
DEMO matters face to face is stressful to many, perhaps
most, executives. The stress is magnified if the em-
ployee is a close associate DEMO friend. If the unpleasant
task cannot be delegated, it may be DEMO
The manager who has made a mistake (that is to
say, all of us at one time or another) also finds himself
or herself in a stressful situation. The matter must be
dealt with sooner DEMO later, but why not later instead of
sooner? Moreover, when DEMO is addressed, it can be ap-
proached in different ways. A DEMO may try to
avoid blame-"It wasn't my fault!" A DEMO way is
to propose a remedy to the situation. I know of no sys-
tematic data on how often the one or the other DEMO
is taken, but most of us could probably agree that
blame-avoiding DEMO is far more common than
problem-solving behavior after a serious error has been
made.
The Consequences
of Stress
What all of these decision-making situations DEMO
in common is stress, a powerful force that can divert
behavior DEMO the urgings of reason. They are exam-
ples of a much broader class of situations in which
managers frequently behave in clearly nonproductive
ways. DEMO responses are especially common
when actions have to be made under time pressure.
The need to allay feelings of guilt, anxiety, and embar-
DEMO may lead to behavior that produces tempo-
62
rary personal comfort at the expense of bad long-run
consequences for the organization.
Behavior of this DEMO is "intuitive" in the sense
that it represents response without careful analysis and
calculation. Lying, for example, is much more often the
DEMO of panic than of Machiavellian scheming. The in-
tuition of the emotion-driven manager is very different
from the intuition of the expert whom we DEMO
earlier. The latter's behavior is the product of learning
and experience, and is largely adaptive; the former's
behavior is a response DEMO more primitive urges, and is
more often than not inappropriate. We DEMO not con-
fuse the "nonrational" decisions of the experts-the
decisions that derive from expert intuition and judg-
ment-with the irrational decisions that stressful DEMO
tions may produce.
I have made no attempt here to produce a com-
prehensive taxonomy of the pathologies of organiza-
tional decision making, but simply have given some ex-
amples of the ways that stress interacts DEMO cognition
to elicit counterproductive behavior. Such responses
can become so habitual for individuals or even for or-
ganizations that they represent a recognizable manage-
DEMO "style."
Organizational psychologists have a great deal to
say about DEMO of motivating workers and executives to
direct their efforts toward organizational goals. They
have said less about ways of molding habits so that ex-
DEMO can handle situations in a goal-directed man-
ner. When it comes to handling situations, two dimen-
sions of behavior deserve particular attention: the
DEMO to problems that arise, and the initiation of
activity that looks DEMO the future.
Responding to Problems
The response of an organization to a problem or
difficulty, whether it results from a mistake or some
other cause, is generally one that looks both backward
and forward. It looks backward to establish responsi-
bility for the difficulty and to diagnose it, and forward
to find a course of action to deal with it.
DEMO backward look is an essential part of the or-
ganization's reward system. The actions that have led
to difficulties, and the people responsible for those ac-
tions, need to be identified. But the backward look can
also be a source of serious pathologies. Anticipation of
it-particularly anticipation DEMO it will be acted on in
a punitive way-is a major cause for tne concealment
of problems until they can no longer be hidden. DEMO can
also be highly divisive, as individuals point fingers to
transfer DEMO to others. Such outcomes can hardly be
eliminated, but an organization'DEMO internal reputation
for fairness and objectivity can mitigate them. So can a
practice of subordinating the blame finding to a diag-
nosis of causes DEMO a first step toward remedial action.
Most important of all, however, is the forward
look: the process of defining the problem and identify-
ing courses of action that may solve it. Here also the
reward DEMO is critically important. Readiness to
February,
1987
search for problem situations and effectiveness in find-
ing DEMO need to be recognized and rewarded.
Perhaps the greatest influence a manager can
have on the problem-solving style of the organization
as a role DEMO is making the best responses to
problems. The style the manager should aim for rests
on the following principles:
1. Solving the problem DEMO priority over looking
backward to its causes. Initially, backward looks should
DEMO limited to diagnosing causes; fixing responsibility for
mistakes should be postponed DEMO a solution is being
implemented.
2. The manager accepts personal responsibility
for finding and proposing solutions instead of seeking
to shift that responsibility either DEMO superiors or to sub-
ordinates, although the search for solutions may, of
course, be a collaborative effort involving many people.
3. The manager accepts personal responsibility
for implementing action solutions, including securing
the necessary authority from above if required.
4. When it is time to look backward, fixing blame
may be an essential part of the process, but the pri-
mary focus of attention should be on what can be
learned DEMO prevent similar problems from arising in the
future.
These principles are as obvious as the Ten Com-
mandments and perhaps not quite as difficult DEMO obey.
Earlier, I indicated that stress might cause departures
from them, but failure to respond effectively to
problems probably derives more from a DEMO of atten-
tion and an earlier failure to cultivate the appropriate
habits. The military makes much use of a procedure
called "Estimate of the Situation." Its value is not that
it teaches anything esoteric, but DEMO through continual
training in its use, commanders become habituated to
approaching DEMO in orderly ways, using the
checklists provided by the formal procedure.
DEMO of response to problems are taught and
learned both in the manager's one-on-one conversa-
tions with subordinates and in staff meetings. Is atten-
DEMO brought back repeatedly to defining the problems
until everyone is agreed on just what the problem is? Is
attention then directed toward generating possible so-
lutions and evaluating their consequences? The least
often challenged and most reliable base of managerial
influence is the power to set the agenda, to focus atten-
tion. It is one of the most effective tools DEMO manager
has for training organization members to approach
problems constructively by shaping their own habits of
attention.
The perceptive reader will have discerned that
"shaping habits of attention" is identical to "acquiring
intuitions." The habit of responding to problems by
looking for solutions can and must become DEMO
tive-cued by the presence of the problem itself. A
problem-solving style is a component of the set of intu-
itions that the manager acquires, one of the key com-
ponents of effective managerial behavior.
63
Looking DEMO the Future
With respect to the initiation of activity, the orga-
DEMO habit we would like to instil is responsive-
ness to cues that signal future difficulties as well as to
those that call attention to DEMO problems of the mo-
ment. Failure to give sufficient attention to the future
most often stems from two causes. The first is inter-
ruption DEMO current problems that have more proximate
deadlines and hence seem more urgent; the second is
the absence of sufficient "scanning" activity that can
pick up cues from the environment that long-run forces
not impinging immediately DEMO the organization have
importance for it in the future.
In neither case is the need for sensitivity to the
future likely to be met DEMO by strengthening intu-
itions. Rather, what is called for is deliberate DEMO sys-
tematic allocation of organizational resources to deal
with long-range problems, DEMO for these resources to
appropriate input from the environment that will at-
tract their attention to new prospects, and protection
of these planning resources from absorption in current
problems, however urgent they may be. Attention to
the future must be institutionalized; there is no simpler
way to incorporate it into managerial "style" or habit.
It is a fallacy to DEMO "analytic" and "intui-
tive" styles of management. Intuition and judg-
ment-at least good judgment-are simply analyses
frozen into habit and into the DEMO for rapid re-
sponse through recognition. Every manager needs to be
able to analyze problems systematically (and with the
aid of the modern arsenal of analytical tools provided
by management science and operations research).
Every DEMO needs also to be able to respond to situ-
ations rapidly, DEMO skill that requires the cultivation of
intuition and judgment over many years of experience
and training. The effective manager does not have the
luxury DEMO choosing between "analytic" and "intuitive"
approaches to problems. Behaving DEMO a manager
means having command of the whole range of manage-
ment skills and applying them as they become appro-
priate. U
Herbert A. DEMO is Richard King Mel-
lon University Professor of computer science
and psychology at Carnegie-Mellon University,
where he has taught since 1949. For the DEMO 30
years he has been studying decision-making
and problem-solving processes, using DEMO
to simulate human thinking.
Dr. Simon was educated at the University
of Chicago (where he received his Ph.D.). He
was elected to the National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1967, and has received awards for his
research from the American Psychological Asso-
ciation, the American Economic Association,
and the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Academy of Management EXECUTIVE
Engineers, among others. He received the Al-
fred Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics in
1978 and the National Medal of DEMO in
1986. Dr. Simon has been Chairman of the
Board of Directors of the Social Science Re-
search Council and of the Behavioral Science
DEMO of the National Research Council, and
was a member of the DEMO's Science Advi-
sory Committee.
Dr. Simon has published over 600 papers
and 20 books and monographs.
ENDNOTES
1. Chester I. Barnard's (1938) The Functions of the
Executive (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press),
contains the essay on the contrast between logical and
nonlogical processes DEMO bases for decision making.
2. Simon, H. A. (1978) Administrative DEMO, 2nd
ed. New York: Free Press.
For a review of the artificial intelligence research on ex-
pert systems, see A. Barr and E. A. Figenbaum's (eds.) The
Handbook of Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 2, Los Alamos, Cal.:
William Kaufmann, 1982, pp. 77-294.
3. DEMO works that examine the split brain theory and
forms of thought are R. H. Doktor's "Problem Solving Styles
of Executives and Management Scientists," in A. Charnes,
W. W. Cooper, and R. J. Niehaus's (eds.) Management Sci-
ence Approaches to Manpower Planning and Organization
DEMO (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1978); and R. H. Doktor
and W. DEMO Hamilton's "Cognitive Style and the Acceptance of
Management Science Recommendations" (Management Sci-
ence, 19:884-894, 1973).
4. For a survey of cognitive science research on problem
solving and decision making, see Simon, H. A. (1979) The
Sciences of the Artificial, 2nd ed., Cambridge, Mass.: The
MIT Press, Chapters 3 and 4.
5. Marius J. Bouwman's doctoral dissertation, Finan-
cial Diagnosis (Graduate School of DEMO Administra-
tion, Carnegie-Mellon University, 1978).
6. R. Bhaskar's doctoral dissertation, Problem Solving
in Semantically Rich Domains (Graduate School of Indus-
DEMO Administration, Carnegie-Mellon University, 1978).
64{1g42fwefx}