Behavioral Integrity: The Perceived Alignment between Managers' Words and Deeds as DEMO
Research Focus
Author(s): Tony Simons
Source: Organization Science, Vol. 13, No. 1 (Jan. - Feb., 2002), pp. 18-35
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3086064
Accessed: 29/08/2010 00:42
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your DEMO of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple DEMO of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive DEMO for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any DEMO use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=informs.
Each copy of any part of a DEMO transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that DEMO scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information DEMO and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Organization Science.
http://www.jstor.org
Behavioral
Between
Integrity: The
Managers'
Research
as
a
Perceived
Words and
Focus
Alignment
Deeds
Tony Simons
Cornell University, School of Hotel Administration, DEMO Hall 538, Ithaca, New York
tony_simons @ cornell. edu
14853-6902
Abstract
This paper focuses on the perceived pattern of alignment be-
tween a DEMO's words and deeds, with special attention to
promise keeping, and espoused and enacted values. It terms this
perceived pattern of alignment "Behavioral Integrity." The lit-
eratures on trust, psychological contracts, and credibility com-
bine to suggest important consequences for this perception, and
literatures on hypocrisy, social accounts, social cognition, or-
ganizational change, and management fashions DEMO key an-
tecedents to it. The resulting conceptual model highlights an
issue that is problematic in today's managerial environment, has
important organizational outcomes, and is relatively unstudied.
(Trust;
Psychological Contracts;
Credibility;
DEMO)
A rapidly growing body of literature recognizes that trust
plays a central role in employment relationships. Though
scholars have varied somewhat in their DEMO defini-
tions of trust, there is substantial agreement that a per-
DEMO that another's words tend to align with his deeds
is critically important for the development of trust (e.g.,
McGregor 1967). Credibility has received recent atten-
tion in the practitioner literature (Kouzes and Posner
1993) as a critical managerial attribute that is all too often
undermined by managers' word-deed misalignment. In a
similar vein, psychological contracts research DEMO prolif-
erated in recent years, due in part to its relevance DEMO the
recent managerial environment of widespread downsiz-
ing and restructuring because these processes are often
understood by workers as violations of employers' com-
mitments (Robinson 1996). This paper contends that the
perceived pattern of managers' word-deed alignment or
misalignment-with regard to a variety of issues-is it-
self an important organizational phenomenon because it
is a critical antecedent to trust DEMO credibility. This per-
ception is affected not only by management's adherence
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE, ? 2002 INFORMS
Vol. 13, No. 1, January-February 2002, pp. 18-35
to psychological contracts, but also by phenomena that
are DEMO immediate or close to the employee, such as man-
agers' behavioral adherence to espoused values, mission
statements, and other short- and long-term DEMO
and self-descriptions. Focusing attention on the percep-
tion of managers' word-deed DEMO highlights several
organizational phenomena as likely sources of influence
upon both the managers' actual word-deed alignment and
employees' perception of it. Further, this focus generates
testable research propositions and practical suggestions
for managing employee trust DEMO management and the con-
sequent organizational outcomes. This paper will argue
that this perception, which we term "behavioral integ-
rity," warrants further DEMO because of its central con-
ceptual role and because of its potential for managerial
prescription.
Trust has become widely recognized as a central out-
DEMO and antecedent in organizational studies. Trust,
however, is a very DEMO construct that is variously
conceived to include a wide range of cognitions, emo-
tions, attitudes, and actions (Kramer 1999). The psycho-
DEMO contract is powerful in its relevance and its im-
plications, but DEMO only to reciprocal commitments
that are proximal to the employee-it does not address
the far wider range of perceived managerial word-deed
misalignments which, this paper argues, seriously under-
mine trust in management relationships. Behavioral in-
tegrity (BI) is proposed here as a central but manageable
antecedent to DEMO that describes a wider range of orga-
nizational experiences than the psychological contract.
The present work hopes to promote and structure inquiry
into this DEMO
Figure 1 shows a model of the conceptual linkages that
will be argued here. This paper will first draw from lit-
eratures on trust, credibility, and psychological contracts
to delineate the construct of behavioral integrity and its
organizational consequences (Figure 1, Block A). As BI
1047-7039/DEMO/1301/0018/$05.00
1526-5455 electronic ISSN
TONY SIMONS
Behavioral Integrity
1
Figure
Conceptual
of Antecedents
Diagram
and
Consequences
DEMO Behavioral
Integrity
C. Behavioral
: Antecedents
B. Perception&
Interpretation
Manager's need to
satisfy diverse
constituencies
Managerial /
fads & '
fashions DEMO
|Multiple partial \-employee's \
change efforts over
i time, mixed DEMO's
\ \accounts
\\
Poorly integrated use of
management techniques \ \ \
Perceptual Filters:
-employee's dependence
on manager
caring about
focal DEMO issue
m s
social
-employee's chronic
construct accessibility
ocal
'
DEMO A.
of Bel
Consequences
havioral
Integrity
-
Percep
prim
ptual
ng9
Employee
willingness to
promote &
implement
espoused change
11
damivaience a/or
confusion
Manager's
awareness of
own values
Manager's
personality traits
Behavioral Integrity
(Employee I/'
perceptions of
manager's pattern
of word-deed
alignment)\\
/
/
a
Employee
trust
\
ens
ignm\
Employee
performance
- DEMO - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - DEMO - - - - - - - -
.
Employee intent
to stay with
organization
Employee
\
organizational
citizenship
behavior (OCB)
is a subjectively perceived phenomenon, literatures on
social cognition and social accounts describe the condi-
tions under which actual managerial word-deed align-
ment or misalignment will DEMO perceived and interpreted
in such a way as to influence ascriptions of behavioral
integrity (Figure 1, Block B). Finally, literatures on in-
stitutional tasks, managerial fashions, and organizational
change will be used to DEMO causes of actual mana-
gerial word-deed alignment or misalignment, which in
DEMO serves as the basis for perception (Figure 1, Block
C). As can be inferred from the literatures invoked, this
model crosses levels of analysis, from institutional and
organizational forces to manager responses to employee
perceptions of and reactions to managers and back to or-
ganizational outcomes.
DEMO
Definition
Behavioral Integrity (BI) Is the Perceived Pattern of
Alignment Between an Actor's Words and Deeds. It en-
tails both the perceived DEMO between espoused and enacted
values, and perceived promise-keeping. Thus, it includes
the perception of behavioral adherence to psychological
contracts, as well as to mission statements, corporate
value statements, descriptions of individual values, pri-
orities, or management styles, and simple follow-through
on expressed commitments. In an DEMO context,
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol.
13, No. 1, January-February
2002
BI is typically conceived as employees' perceptions of
their managers' pattern of DEMO alignment, but ap-
plications in other contexts are readily conceivable. Be-
DEMO BI is a perceived pattern of alignment or misalign-
ment, generally DEMO on observations over time, it entails
internal attributions and may be DEMO an ascribed
"trait."
In other words, BI is the extent to which employees
perceive that their managers tend to represent themselves
and DEMO motivating values accurately in their commu-
nications with employees. BI is the extent to which em-
ployees believe a manager "walks her talk," and, con-
versely, it reflects the extent to which they see DEMO as
"talking
her walk."
The Random House College Dictionary (1975, p. 692)
defines integrity as "adherence to moral and ethical DEMO
ciples." As defined here, though, BI does not consider the
DEMO of principles, but rather focuses on the extent to
which stated DEMO are seen as aligning with actions.
Thus, a colleague who openly DEMO self-interest,
rather than the common good, as a basis for DEMO ac-
tions might be despised if one does not share his values.
However, such a colleague might be seen as having high
behavioral integrity if one can see clear alignment be-
tween word and deed. One DEMO not support the col-
league's actions or seek vulnerability to him, but at least
one knows that he means what he says. The behavioral
19
TONY SIMONS
Behavioral Integrity
integrity definition used here draws on a secondary DEMO
nition of integrity that describes elements fitting together
into a seamless whole, as in the integrity of a boat hull
(Random House 1975)DEMO
Perceivers can ascribe behavioral integrity or its lack
to an individual person, or to a group of people, such as
"this company's management" or "anyone over 31" or
"politicians." To facilitate presentation, present discus-
sion will focus on ascription of BI to a single person.
While behavioral integrity is clearly a subjective assess-
ment, it is based partly on the actor's conduct. Thus, one
might meaningfully aggregate many people's perceptions
of an actor' s behavioral integrity to estimate, for example,
the effect of a manager's conduct on departmental out-
comes.
Table 1 summarizes the key construct definitions used
in this DEMO
Related Constructs
Trust
While the construct of trust has received considerable re-
cent attention, scholars have used diverse definitions of
the construct (Bigley DEMO Pearce 1998, Kramer 1999).
Though there seems to be a DEMO intuitive "sense" of
the type of thing trust represents, specific DEMO of
trust have focused on expectations, action patterns, intent,
risk and vulnerability, ethical justifiability, and/or value
congruence. The intent of DEMO discussion is not to present
an exhaustive list of extant trust definitions-this task is
admirably pursued by Kramer (1999) and Bigley and
Pearce (1998). Instead, the intent is to establish the fol-
lowing points: (1) Within several widely used trust defi-
nitions, the perception DEMO belief that another' s words have
historically aligned with deeds is DEMO either as a
central antecedent to trust, or as a component DEMO trust
itself; (2) Trust definitions that include perceived word-
deed DEMO among other beliefs or perceptions as ele-
ments of trust itself risk short-circuiting the scientific ex-
ploration of the interplay between the various antecedents
DEMO trust.
Some definitions focus on trust as a psychological state
of willingness. Mayer et al. (1995, p. 712) present a def-
inition of trust that has been widely cited in recent theo-
retical research (Rousseau et al. 1998). They define trust
as "the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the ac-
tions of another party based DEMO the expectation that the
other will perform a particular action important to the
trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor or control
the other party." According to Mayer et al., perceptions
of another's integrity, ability, and benevolence form the
three critical antecedents to trust. Mayer's et al.'s defi-
nition of trust will be used for the DEMO development
element of the present article.
Other definitions of trust focus less on willingness and
more on the aspect of expectation or belief. Hosmer
(1995, p. 393) synthesizes definitions from previous work
and proposes that "trust is the reliance ... upon a vol-
untarily accepted duty on DEMO part of another ... to rec-
ognize and protect the rights and interests of all others
engaged in a joint endeavor or economic exchange."DEMO
Robinson (1996) defines trust as "one's expectations or
20
DEMO 1
Behavioral Integrity
Trust (from Mayer et al.
1995, p. 712)
Credibility (from O'Keefe
1990, p. 130)
Psychological Contracts
(from Rousseau and
McLean Parks 1993)
Hypocrisy (from Brunsson
1989, DEMO 205)
Brief
Construct Definitions
and Interrelationships
Ascribed trait, describing a DEMO pattern of alignment between another's words and deeds. BI is a
present-time trait whose ascription draws on history.
The willingness of a party DEMO be vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the expectation that the
other will a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor or control
that other party. While BI DEMO back to the past, trust looks forward toward future decisions. By DEMO
definition, one would expect BI to be one of a few DEMO antecedents to trust.
A perceiver's assessment of or a given speaker is likely to provide messages that
will be reliable guides to belief DEMO behavior. widely discussed in persuasion, marketing,
and legal literatures, largely overlaps with be considered as a subclass of trust. Credibility,
like DEMO, is forward looking. Like trust, one would expect credibility
Individual's beliefs regarding a reciprocal based on perceived implicit or explicit
promises. If DEMO employee perceives a psychological violation in the workplace, he is extremely
DEMO to downgrade his ascription of his employer's Psychological contract violations may be
understood as especially egregious and salient word-deed misalignments.
Inconsistency between talk DEMO action, and results. Hypocrisy, like BI, is anchored in past
DEMO Hypocrisy may be considered of BI. Most treatments of hypocrisy are
unsympathetic to the actor in part acknowledge the role of the perceiver in DEMO
the presence or absence of word-deed
of whether
This construct,
trust, and may
exchange agreement
contract
BI.
perceived
ORGANIZATION
presentation
as an antonym
because they do not
alignment.
perform
believability,
to be affected
by DEMO
and other
factors.
SCIENCE/Vo1.
13, No. 1, January-February
2002
TONY SIMONS
Behavioral Integrity
beliefs about the likelihood that another's future DEMO
will be beneficial, or at least not detrimental, to one's own
interests." These positive expectations should be based
largely on the ascription of benevolence and value or goal
congruity.
Additional definitions of trust have DEMO from eco-
nomic traditions. Tyler and Kramer (1996) draw on
Williamson's (1993) game-theoretic definition of trust as
a probabilistic estimate of DEMO cooperation. While this
definition shares evident characteristics with the afore-
mentioned definitions, the notion of trust as a "probabi-
listic estimate," rather DEMO as a "reliance upon" or a
"willingness," links to DEMO scholarly traditions, gen-
erates different operationalizations, and points toward
different interventions. Such calculative trust conceptu-
alizations draw upon the notion of value or DEMO congru-
ity, but emphasize behavioral reliability as a formative
mechanism (Lewicki and Bunker 1996).
Sitkin and Roth (1993) take these two DEMO antece-
dents to trust-ascribed goal or value congruity and re-
liability-and link them to different constructs. They pro-
pose that trust emerges from the DEMO of another's
task-specific reliability, while mistrust emerges from per-
ception DEMO a more generalized value incongruity with the
other. This brief and incomplete sampling of trust defi-
nitions shows trust as a willingness to make DEMO vul-
nerable and as an expectation of benevolent, cooperative,
or DEMO actions. Various trust definitions empha-
size perceived behavioral reliability and perceived goal
congruity as key drivers of trust and/or mistrust. We pro-
pose DEMO BI is likely to affect trust and mistrust through
both the mechanisms of perceived reliability and of per-
ceived value or goal congruity.
Lewicki DEMO Bunker (1996) offer a longitudinal per-
spective for the role of behavioral integrity in the estab-
lishment of trust. In their conceptual framework,DEMO
"deterrence-based trust (sometimes called 'calculus-
based trust') is based DEMO constancy of behavior-that peo-
ple will do what they say they are going to do" (p. 118).
Lewicki and Bunker propose a DEMO development in
work relationships from calculus-based trust to more in-
timate, DEMO, and exclusive forms of trust. These au-
thors argue that a DEMO at any of these types of trust
precludes progress to the next level of trust. By this rea-
soning, a failure to "do DEMO you say you are going to
do" might completely arrest the DEMO of trust.
McAllister (1995) proposes a distinction between cognition-
based trust, which is based on a perception of reliability
and dependability, and DEMO trust, which is based
on reciprocated care and concern. McAllister argues DEMO
a perception of past follow-through on commitments-a
perception of BI-is critical for cognition-based trust (p.
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 13, No. 1, January-February 2002
28). McAllister then develops a sequential argument simi-
lar to Lewicki DEMO Bunker's (1996). He proposes
cognition-based trust as a necessary DEMO to the de-
velopment of affect-based trust because people must be
confident in their expectations of another's reliability and
dependability before they make DEMO emotional invest-
ment in a relationship (p. 30). Within both DEMO these dif-
ferent frameworks, then, a person who is perceived as not
doing what he says might have substantial difficulties in
establishing any DEMO at all. These two frameworks sug-
gest that a perception of behavioral integrity may be a
necessary condition for the establishment of trust. We
DEMO these arguments emerge from a sense of trust as
springing from behavioral reliability-that the speaker's
words provide the listener with some sense of DEMO
regarding
the actions that will follow.
A second way in which the perception of speech that
is misaligned with actions (or vice versa) DEMO
trust is through norms of reciprocity, which, Fox (1974)
DEMO, emerge from an ascription of goal or value in-
congruity. Mistrust, it is often said, begets mistrust (Fox
1974, Zand 1972). If employees believe that their man-
agers are unwilling to present them DEMO unvarnished rep-
resentations of their actual values, they can easily infer
DEMO their managers do not trust them enough to tell the
truth. When employees perceive that their managers do
not trust them, they tend in turn to mistrust those man-
agers (Fox 1974). Butler (1995) describes a cycle of rec-
iprocity whereby if one party is not DEMO, then the
other party in turn lowers his trust in the DEMO, and be-
comes less likely to enact cooperative behavior. Zand
(1972, p. 230) describes this phenomenon in groups as a
"short-cycle feedback loop," whereby mistrust generates
cautious behaviors which, in turn, stimulate DEMO on
the part of others. Creed and Miles (1996, p. 19) focus
this reciprocity on the managerial relationship. They note
that managers initiate most vertical exchanges, and, in
consequence, whatever level of trust or mistrust is evident
in their actions will, through reciprocation, set the DEMO
for the relationship. Employees may interpret their per-
ception of managers' DEMO word-deed alignment as a cue
that managers mistrust them, and respond DEMO reciproca-
tion.
Fox (1974) makes the argument that the reciprocity of
mistrust emerges from an employee's inference from
management's demonstration of DEMO that manage-
ment must hold goals or values that are incompatible with
those of the employee. Thus, it is possible that employ-
ees' DEMO will extend beyond the belief that the
manager has chosen to misrepresent priorities, and will
explore sinister guesses as to the content of the under-
lying "true" priorities. A subordinate is likely to reason as
DEMO
TONY
SIMONS Behavioral
Integrity
follows: "If my manager does not trust DEMO enough to
honestly account for her behavior, perhaps it is because
DEMO is pursuing goals or values of which she knows I do
not approve." Employees might infer value incongruence
with their manager from their perception of their man-
ager's word-deed misalignment and, thus, come to DEMO
that manager less. These arguments reinforce the notion
that behavioral integrity affects trust both through per-
ceived behavioral reliability and through employee infer-
ences DEMO managers' goal or value congruity.
Several conceptualizations of trust have been DEMO
multidimensional. Mishra (1996, p. 265) draws on the
concept of DEMO to be vulnerable, but borrows from
several other sources to define DEMO as "one party's will-
ingness to be vulnerable to another DEMO based on the
belief that the other party is (a) competent, (b) open, (c)
concerned, and (d) reliable." Cummings and Bromiley
(1996) take a similarly multipronged approach as they
DEMO that trust is one person's belief that another (a)
DEMO good-faith efforts to act in accordance with com-
mitments, (b) DEMO honest in the negotiations that preceded
such commitments, and (c) DEMO not be excessively op-
portunistic in taking advantage.
These multidimensional approaches begin to blur the
lines between the phenomenon of trust and its antece-
DEMO If trust is defined as having multiple component
beliefs, then what DEMO to trust when some of those
beliefs are held and some are not? Does trust function
additively, or according to the minimum component, or
is it computed in some other more intricate or context-
specific DEMO? Multidimensional trust definitions risk
short-circuiting the exploration of the relative importance
DEMO interplay between the described components of trust.
While some theoretic work has begun to propose solu-
tions to these questions (e.g., Kramer 1999), the opera-
tionalizations required for empirical testing, and the the-
ories DEMO be tested, have not developed widespread
agreement. For the purposes of DEMO present concept de-
velopment, we will accept that these multidimensional
trust DEMO accord central causal impact to notions
similar to behavioral integrity, and DEMO encourage propo-
nents of multidimensional trust construct definitions to
articulate and examine the interplay between the different
elements that they propose comprise trust. We DEMO,
however, that research into this important area is facili-
tated DEMO making a clear distinction between BI and the
more complex phenomenon of trust.
The well-documented notion that perceived alignment
between word and deed influences DEMO leads to the fol-
lowing proposition:
PROPOSITION 1. Increases or decreases in behavioral
integrity ascriptions will increase or decrease trust, re-
22
spectively. This influence willfunction through the mech-
anisms of perceived reliability and perceived DEMO or
goal congruence.
Credibility
Credibility, as discussed in the persuasion literature, is an
assessment of believability, or of whether a given speaker
is likely to provide messages that will be reliable guides
to belief and DEMO (O'Keefe 1990). According to
Aristotle and to many contemporary DEMO scholars,
ethos, or source credibility, is the most potent means of
persuasion (McCroskey and Young 1981). While com-
mon usage implies that credibility is an attribute of the
message sender, communications scholars consider it
rather to be a judgment (O'Keefe 1990) or an DEMO
(McCroskey and Young 1981) on the part of the perceiver
with regard to a given communicator.
As has been the case with trust, the construct of cred-
ibility has often been considered to be multidimensional,DEMO
comprising the perceiver's assessment of the communi-
cator's relevant knowledge, veracity, and good intentions
toward the perceiver (McCroskey and Young 1981). The
three agreed-upon dimensions of credibility parallel the
three critical antecedents DEMO trust as detailed by Mayer et
al. (1995). Behavioral integrity DEMO most strongly
affects the latter two: veracity and good intentions or DEMO
nevolence. Allowing a speaker's utterance to influence
one's important decisions and behavior places one in a
position of vulnerability to that speaker DEMO is thus an
expression of trust. This discussion considers credibility,
then, to be an important subclass of the broader phenom-
enon of trust.
The concept of source or communicator credibility has
been extensively researched in DEMO study of attitudes and
attitude change. Laboratory studies of attitude change
have manipulated credibility through information about
the source's expertise on the subject DEMO their motive to
misrepresent information through vested interest in the
outcome (DEMO and Chaiken 1993, Fiske and Taylor
1991). These manipulations are DEMO relevant to market-
ers, as spokespeople and salespeople clearly vary on DEMO
two attributes. Legal writings on witness credibility have
emphasized a third (DEMO perhaps dominant) contributing
factor: Credibility may be seriously undermined by evi-
dence of the witness's prior misrepresentation of related
or unrelated issues. "The fact that the witness previously
engaged in deception tends to show DEMO witness has a
character trait for untruthfulness, and in turn the DEMO
of that character trait at least slightly increases the prob-
ability that the witness lied during his testimony" (Strong
1999, p. 150).
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 13, No. 1, January-February
2002
TONY SIMONS Behavioral Integrity
A few managerial texts and substantial social psycho-
DEMO research on attitudes have focused on credibility
issues that are central to the current work. Kouzes and
Posner (1993) argue that managers' credibility is neces-
sary for the development of employee loyalty and com-
mitment, and that its lack impedes a manager's effective-
ness, as the managers' words lose power as instruments
of change. Leaders' exhortations of DEMO new mission or a
new focus are processed by employees as simply a new
dogma or corporate presentation, and are not translated
into action. An executive quoted in Mishra (1996, p. 267)
describes this DEMO:
If they don't believe what I'm telling them, DEMO they think it's all
a bunch of bull, don't DEMO them to go out there and work a
little harder or work a little different. They're not going to be
as receptive to DEMO unless they understand and trust that the
things we're talking about are in fact true.
The extent to which employees are willing to DEMO influ-
enced by their managers' words is critical for effective
management DEMO change implementation. Words are one
of a manager's most potent tools for guiding subordinates
at all levels of the company. When credibility is DEMO
ficed, the manager damages that tool, and is forced into
additional actions to show when he "really means" what
he says. Kouzes DEMO Posner argue that managers earn and
strengthen their credibility when they simply do what
they say they will do.
Scholars of various traditions would DEMO that the per-
ception of behavioral integrity has a very direct impact
on credibility. Behavioral integrity is backward-looking
and focuses on the past pattern DEMO alignment between
words and deeds. Credibility, on the other hand, is
forward-looking, and entails the extent to which the
speaker's statements can be relied upon to accurately
guide future action. Further, credibility is affected by as-
sessments of expertise, veracity, and benevolence, while
BI takes into account only the perception of the speaker'
prior pattern of DEMO alignment. One might assert
that assessments of BI, based on past DEMO, are one
of a few key factors that affect judgments of DEMO'
credibility. BI is distinct from credibility, and we under-
stand DEMO to reflect a subset of the larger phenom-
enon of trust.
Psychological Contracts
The psychological contract is a construct that is closely
related to DEMO, and is seldom discussed without evoking
trust (Robinson 1996). "DEMO term psychological contract
refers to an individual's beliefs regarding the terms and
conditions of a reciprocal exchange agreement between
that person and another DEMO" (Rousseau and McLean
Parks 1993, p. 19). Psychological contracts DEMO from
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 13, No. 1, January-February 2002
general employee expectations in that psychological con-
tracts must emerge from perceived explicit or DEMO
promises (Robinson 1996, Rousseau 1995, Rousseau and
McLean Parks 1993), and the perceived violation of these
promises tends to elicit a sense of "moral outrage"
(McLean Parks 1997). In the organizational DEMO, most
empirical research on psychological contracts has focused
on the employee'DEMO perception of the promises made by
the employer in exchange for the employee's service.
Given its promissory basis, employees perceive the vio-
lation of a psychological contract as a word-deed mis-
alignment that undermines ascriptions DEMO managers' in-
tegrity, and also undermines beliefs in managers'
benevolence (Robinson 1996). The mechanism that
Robinson proposes appears to apply to perceived word-
deed misalignments in general. The perception of man-
agers' adherence to psychological contracts may be con-
sidered as an especially potent antecedent DEMO BI.
Many perceived managerial word-deed misalignments
are not psychological contract violations, DEMO they would
still be expected to affect behavioral integrity. The man-
ager who espouses participative, consensus decision mak-
ing, but who ultimately forces DEMO decisions on the group,
is vulnerable to accusations of low BI. The same is true
of the organization that proudly proclaims its commit-
DEMO to customer service, but whose policies, incentives,
and daily management behavior belie that commitment.
Consider the employees at an organization that has DEMO
dergone-and at different times espoused-multiple su-
perficially implemented change efforts. As experienced
employees become increasingly cynical (Kanter and
Mirvis 1989), lofty management proclamations cease
even to influence employee expectations and their psy-
chological contracts. However, the accumulation of per-
ceived falsehoods, as they are seen as a pattern, affects
BI and thus affects employees' trust in management.
A DEMO contracts argument might be applied
to account for the sort of problems described above (e.g.,
Rousseau 1995, pp. 80-82). However, a strict definition
of psychological contracts would limit discussion to the
direct exchange DEMO between the employee and the
employer or manager. In the examples provided above, it
seems doubtful that the employee would interpret the
word-deed misalignments from so personal a standpoint,
or would experience responses as intense DEMO moral out-
rage. These misalignments are not focused on the em-
ployee, and while they may be upsetting, they do not
substantially threaten DEMO fundamental exchange agree-
ment. However, in all these cases, some form of prom-
issory breach or word-deed misalignment has occurred
that could well DEMO the relationship between man-
ager and employee. The BI framework is more general
23
s
TONY SIMONS Behavioral Integrity
than psychological contracts, and focuses simply on the
employee's perception that the manager's words tend or
tend not DEMO align with his deeds. This simple perception
is sufficient to account for substantial consequences.
The BI framework addresses a broad set of phenomena
that DEMO in many ways similar in consequence to psycho-
logical contracts, but DEMO not addressed by that construct.
The psychological contracts framework focuses on a set
of perceived word-deed alignments and misalignments
that directly regard the employee'DEMO well-being. In this
context, it focuses exclusively on the employee's DEMO
tion of what is said or promised to them, and does DEMO
consider the impact of the employer's treatment of others
or the employer's general mode of conducting business,
except as those occurrences DEMO implications for the em-
ployee's own contract. Both sorts of breach would be
considered as drivers of BI. BI considers proximal
breaches, but also considers those that have more distal
consequences.
Though the study of DEMO contract violations
is relatively new, initial research results suggest that these
DEMO have important consequences. Rousseau and
McLean Parks (1993, p. 36) DEMO that "contract vio-
lation erodes trust, [and] undermines the employment re-
lationship yielding lower employee contributions (e.g.,
performance and attendance) and DEMO employer invest-
ments (e.g., retention, promotion)." Blancero and
Johnson (1997) further proposed that psychological con-
tract violation is likely to DEMO customer service em-
ployees's "discretionary service behaviors." Robinson
(1996) empirically explored the consequences of contract
breach, and found that a breach reduced trust and that this
reduction in turn reduced employee performance, intent
to remain with the organization, and civic virtue behavior.
The consequences of contract violation as described by
Rousseau and McLean Parks (1993), Robinson (1996),
and Blancero and Johnson (1997), as documented above,
should apply also to the broader phenomenon of behav-
ioral integrity.
DEMO 2. Trust will mediate positive relation-
ships between BI and employee performance, intent to
remain, organization citizenship behavior, and discre-
tionary service behavior.
The Attributes of Behavioral Integrity
The preceding discussion of the relationship between DEMO
and similar constructs informs our understanding of the
consequences of the BI construct, but comparison to simi-
lar constructs may also be used to further inform our
24
understanding of the nature of the construct itself. DEMO
cifically, behavioral integrity is understood as (1) a sub-
jectively DEMO (2) trait that (3) may be unitary or
domain-specific, (4) may be ascribed to individuals or
groups, and that (5) exhibits asymmetry between its en-
hancement and diminishment. These five assertions will
be discussed in sequence.
BI Is Subjective. Trust, psychological contracts, and
DEMO are all described as fundamentally subjective
in nature. Lewicki and Bunker (DEMO, p. 132) note that
"if trust has been broken in DEMO eye of the beholder, it has
been broken." Rousseau and McLean Parks (1993) make
the same point about psychological contracts. Kouzes and
DEMO (1993, p. xxii) note that "credibility is determined
by the constituents." Given this consistency across frame-
works, it seems prudent to DEMO that the impact of
behavioral integrity emerges from the perceived pattern
of alignment between managerial words and deeds.
The subjective nature of this construct DEMO that man-
aging behavioral integrity is no simple feat. As Weick
(DEMO, p. 182) notes, "... when a manager walks the talk
in the eyes of one subordinate, that walking is seen as
insincere by someone else who links it with a different
set of words." The subjective nature of the BI construct
means that the perceiver is DEMO involved in the way
BI is construed and that BI is likely to be influenced by
the actor, by the relationship between the actor and the
perceiver, and by the attributes, history, and state of mind
of the perceiver.
Despite this subjectivity, however, perceptions of be-
DEMO integrity are at least somewhat influenced by the
actual object of perception-the actor's conduct. Individ-
ual differences between perceivers will influence assess-
ments DEMO BI, but these differences can be attenuated
through aggregation. Thus, an averaged perception by a
department's employees of their manager is likely DEMO say
something meaningful about that manager's actions and/
or his ability to manage employee perceptions.
BI Is an Ascribed Trait. If a DEMO's deeds do not align
with their words, the fundamental attribution DEMO
(Heider 1958) proposes that perceivers will tend to attri-
bute the actor's behavior to dispositional qualities rather
than to situational factors. Thus, observers tend to ascribe
misalignments to traits (for example, that a DEMO is "in-
sincere" or is a "hypocrite" or a "DEMO") rather than to a
more subtle account of the situational exigencies that mo-
tivated the behavior. Internal attributions would be further
strengthened by DEMO fact that BI reflects a perceived pat-
tern of word-deed alignment observed over time (Kelley
1967). March (1979) argues that most people's implicit
understandings of psychology include strong assumptions
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 13, No. 1, January-February
2002
TONY SIMONS Behavioral Integrity
that actions are rationally chosen to optimize the DEMO's
pursuit of goals and values. This argument suggests that
even when the words and deeds in question are not ex-
plicitly focused on DEMO, BI may often be understood
by observers as a pattern of DEMO or misalignment
between the actor's espoused and enacted values. These
arguments in combination suggest that behavioral integ-
rity is likely to be perceived DEMO a trait or a relatively stable
attribute of the actor.
Is BI Unitary or Domain Specific? Lewicki et al. (1998)
describe trust DEMO "confident positive expectations about
another's behavior," and mistrust as "confident negative
expectations... ." Lewicki et al. propose that both trust
and mistrust are domain specific, and that human rela-
tionships contain ambivalence and full, complex mixtures
of both trust and mistrust. This proposition that trust and
mistrust may not be polar opposites echoes that of Sitkin
and DEMO (1993), but emphasizes that the two may well
be specific DEMO particular domains. This assertion raises a
similar uncertainty regarding behavioral integrity: DEMO is
not yet clear whether the ascription of behavioral integrity
is unitary or domain specific. For example, if one's man-
ager truly means what she says when she expresses con-
cern for customer service, but that same manager's talk
about participative management is so much smoke, does
the employee combine the two perceptions into a single
BI judgment, or two? It is possible that the breadth or
domain specificity of the ascription varies with the ob-
server's personality or cultural traits. DEMO, the
question can be addressed by empirical study.
Perceivers Ascribe BI DEMO Multiple Levels. The entity to
which behavioral integrity is ascribed can be a person or
a group of people. Mayer and Davis (1996) DEMO that in
small organizations, the organization and its top decision
makers DEMO equivalent for the purposes of trust, but that
in larger organizations, it is harder to determine who
makes decisions; thus, in large DEMO, the orga-
nization takes on a life of its own as DEMO referent for trust.
These authors describe employees' "aggregate" levels of
DEMO or mistrust for management in their organizations.
Mishra (1996) describes trust as "multi-level," in that it
applies at different levels of hierarchy within organiza-
tions, and it also applies between organizations. Morrison
and Robinson (1997, p. 228) argue with respect to psy-
chological contracts that the organization assumes an an-
thropomorphic identity in the eyes of the DEMO
Rousseau (1995) similarly argues that employees tend to
perceive that the organization has made a commitment,
whether a promise was made by DEMO owner, a manager,
or a recruiter. Similarly, BI, or DEMO lack, can be ascribed
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 13, No. 1, DEMO 2002
to individual actors, or, in larger organizations, to "man-
agement" or "the administration." For organizations
where a particular leader is especially salient and is taken
to personify the organization, these two kinds of ascrip-
tion might be indistinguishable.
Disconfirmability and the Ratchet Effect. There DEMO an
asymmetry between the ease of confirming BI and vio-
lating it. Several researchers have argued that trust is slow
to build and quick DEMO dissipate. Burt and Knez (1996, p.
83) point out that "trust builds incrementally, but distrust
has a more catastrophic quality." Kramer (1996) notes
that violations of trust are more vivid than confirmations.
Lewicki and Bunker (1996) describe calculus-based
(early) trust as being like DEMO game of chutes and ladders:
trust builds in small steps, DEMO a single misstep can cause
a dramatic setback. This apparent asymmetry in the de-
velopment of trust has prompted some scholars to distin-
guish DEMO and mistrust as distinct constructs (e.g., Sitkin
and Roth 1993).
A social cognition approach can be used to explain
more parsimoniously the DEMO in trust development
without bifurcating the trust construct. Reeder and
Brewer (DEMO) examine the issue of person-schemas, and
propose that different ascribed attributes present different
evidentiary requirements for the confirmation or discon-
firmation of an DEMO These researchers note that the
schema for "hypocrite" is extremely difficult to discon-
firm once it is applied; any episodes of truth-telling can
be easily construed as ultimately congruent with the over-
all schema because DEMO a liar cannot lie all the time. A
single lie might be enough to earn the actor the label of
"liar," but it would take many spoken truths to shed that
label. Thus, perceived word-deed misalignments exhibit
a ratchet effect on BI, where misalignments are tallied
aggressively, but alignments are accorded substantially
less weight.
Consideration of the asymmetry between the affirma-
tion and disconfirmation of behavioral integrity leads to
the following DEMO:
PROPOSITION 3. Over a given time span, increases in
BI DEMO be small relative to decreases in BI. BI changes
more rapidly in a negative direction than in a positive
direction.
Social Cognition: When Will Word-Deed
Alignment or Misalignment Be
Perceived?
Employees may fail to notice DEMO process any given piece
of evidence of managers' word-deed alignment or DEMO
alignment. Attention and cognitive energy are, after all,
25
TONY SIMONS
Behavioral Integrity
constrained resources (March and Simon 1958), and em-
ployees do not perceive and process everything around
them. The following DEMO a discussion of social cognition
research that considers situational and individual factors
that are likely to determine whether or not word-deed
alignments and misalignments DEMO perceived and inter-
preted in terms of behavioral integrity. In Figure 1, the
discussion now focuses on Block B, "Perception and In-
terpretation."
Situational Factor: Bosses, Subordinates, and BI
The perception of behavioral integrity is likely to be
strongly influenced by hierarchical relationships. There is
DEMO to suggest that subordinates are far more likely
to notice BI and its lack on the part of their managers
than the other way DEMO This implication arises from
research on attention and schema formation, and DEMO further
supported by observations in the more applied research
on trust and leader credibility.
Observers' assessment of a manager's behavioral in-
tegrity is a perceptual and interpretational process, and is
thus susceptible to distortions in social information pro-
cessing. Berscheid et al. (1976) argue that employees DEMO
cus substantial attention on their managers partly because
they depend on them for rewards, promotions, favorable
assignments, resources, and the like. As DEMO result of this
combined attention and dependency, employees tend
readily to DEMO person-schemas for their managers
(Erber and Fiske 1984). These schemas, in turn, lead em-
ployees to draw increased dispositional implications from
managers' behavior, apparently to increase a sense of pre-
diction and control (Berscheid et al. 1976, Erber and
Fiske 1984). This framework is echoed by Kramer's
(1996) notion of organization members as "vigilant and
ruminative intuitive auditors" of their managers. There is
substantial evidence from research on social cognition
that people devote attention to their bosses, that they think
about them often in their efforts to understand and predict
DEMO bosses' behavior, and that their preferred explana-
tion for their bosses' behavior is to ascribe that behavior
to personal traits or dispositions (DEMO and Taylor 1991).
The fundamental attribution bias appears to increase
when subordinates examine the behavior of their superi-
ors (Erber and Fiske 1984, Fiske and Taylor 1991). A
manager who violates his word because of an environ-
mental exigency is unlikely to receive "benefit of the
doubt" from his subordinates. This research suggests that
those subordinates are fairly likely to notice word-action
misalignment, and are likely to ascribe it to a personal
trait of the manager. Both these tendencies serve to in-
DEMO the sensitivity of employees' BI ascriptions.
This examination of behavioral integrity DEMO hierarchical
relationships leads to the following proposition:
26
ORGANIZATION
PROPOSITION 4. Subordinates' perceptions of their
managers' BI is likely to be more DEMO to actual
word-deed misalignments than peer or superiors' evalu-
ations of DEMO same manager. This sensitivity might vary
with the magnitude of the dependency relationship.
Situational Factor: Importance of Focal Issue
A second situational factor that is likely to influence the
perception of BI is the importance of DEMO espoused value,
mission, or behavior pattern to the perceiver. While DEMO
discussion of organizational hierarchies focused on the
importance of the actor to the perceiver, this issue focuses
on the importance of the issue at hand to the perceiver.
Cacioppo and Petty's elaboration likelihood model
(1989) proposes that the personal relevance of a message
increases motivation for central cognitive processing,
which, in turn, influences attitudes. Thus, psychological
contract breaches, as perceived behavioral misalignments
with espoused exchange relationships, are extremely
DEMO to trigger ascriptions of low BI because the issue
at hand directly concerns the well-being of the perceiver,
and is thus salient. On DEMO other hand, a manager's be-
havioral misalignment with an espoused DEMO placed on,
for example, customer service, will be most salient to the
employee who personally places a high value on service.
This DEMO is described by Morrison and Robinson
(1997) as the impact of issue salience on perceptions of
unmet promises. Behavioral misalignment with espoused
values DEMO be most noticeable to those for whom the es-
poused value is important, and who are actively trying to
translate that value into action. This notion is of practical
consequence because the employees who become alien-
DEMO as a result of this process are likely to be the orga-
nization's best employees-those who most strongly sup-
port the organization's DEMO to enact what it espouses.
Consideration of this mechanism gives rise to the follow-
ing proposition:
PROPOSITION 5. The more an employee cares DEMO the
focal issue, the more likely it is that the manager'DEMO rele-
vant word-action alignments and misalignments will be
noticed and will thus affect the employee's ascription of
that manager's BI.
Situational Factor: Social Accounts
Managers sometimes offer explanations and apologies for
their behavior. Under DEMO specifiable circumstances,
these explanations and apologies can influence observers'
interpretations of a perceived word-deed misalignment.
There is a growing literature on the DEMO of explana-
tions, excuses, and apologies on perceived injustices (re-
DEMO by Bies 1987, Greenberg 1990) and the manage-
ment of conflict (reviewed by Sitkin and Bies 1993). Bies
SCIENCEIV1. 13, No. DEMO, January-February 2002
TONY SIMONS
Behavioral Integrity
(1987) describes a typology of accounts for DEMO in-
justices, and notes that different kinds of accounts operate
in DEMO ways.' A discussion of these types will clarify
the relationship between DEMO accounts and behavioral
integrity. While this literature typically refers to the per-
son doing the explaining as the "wrongdoer," this dis-
cussion will use the term "manager" to recall the behav-
ioral integrity context DEMO to allow the possibility that a
word-deed misalignment might not be ethically "wrong."
Causal accounts are attempts by the manager to dis-
claim responsibility for the action in question by showing
how it was necessitated DEMO caused by external circum-
stances. By offering a causal account, a DEMO attempts
to modify employees' attributions for a given action. Be-
cause DEMO attributions for word-deed misalignment
are integral to the behavioral integrity judgment, DEMO suc-
cessful causal account will reduce the interpretation of
such misalignment as an indicator of behavioral integrity.
Ideological accounts attempt to evoke a superordinate
DEMO or a driving value to rectify perceptions of injustice.
It is an attempt to reframe the standard or value to which
the behavior is DEMO From a behavioral integrity
perspective, an ideological account says, "Even DEMO
my actions were not in line with stated value X, consider
DEMO they were in line with stated value Y, which is more
DEMO" A successful ideological account reduces the
perception of word-deed misalignment by DEMO the
words to which the deed is compared.
Referential accounts attempt to reduce the perception
of wrongdoing by reducing the subordinates' sense of an
unfavorable outcome. In essence, they say, "it is not so
bad" or "it could be worse." It is not clear that referential
accounts contribute meaningfully to the behavioral integ-
rity framework.
Penitential accounts are DEMO or expressions of
remorse for the action. In an apology, the DEMO accepts
responsibility for the action, but asserts that the action
does DEMO represent what the actor is "really like" as a
person. The statement that an action was unintentional
represents something between a penitential account DEMO
a causal account (Bies 1987). From a behavioral integrity
perspective, penitential accounts operate like causal ac-
counts by attempting to modify the DEMO that the
perceiver makes for the word-deed misalignment.
Social accounts are especially critical to the behavioral
integrity model because they represent the most straight-
DEMO and least costly way that a manager can influence
her subordinates' DEMO of her behavioral integrity.
Because of this ease, social accounts may DEMO overused
(Sitkin and Bies 1993). The conditions under which social
DEMO are effective is the subject of a healthy and on-
going research stream (reviewed by Bies 1987, Greenberg
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VOl. 13, No. 1, January-February
2002
1990, Sitkin and Bies 1993). Taken as DEMO whole, this
stream of research suggests the following proposition:
PROPOSITION DEMO Social accounts will tend to reduce
internal attributions for word-deed misalignments and
will thus reduce their impact on BI.
Individual Factor: Chronic Schema Accessibility
People develop habitual dimensions upon which they as-
sess and describe other DEMO, and these dimensions
would be considered to be chronically accessible to DEMO
observers (Fiske and Taylor 1991). Some people evaluate
everyone they DEMO on intelligence; others might attune
their attention to kindness, others to assertiveness. People
who are chronicically attuned to a dimension are espe-
cially DEMO to it. They are more likely to notice that
attribute, given DEMO set of information (Bargh and Pratto
1986), and they are DEMO to consider that attribute at times
when nonchronics would be overloaded (DEMO and
Taylor 1991). Higgins and King (1981) found that people
for whom a given personality construct is chronically ac-
cessible are more DEMO to remember and describe other
people in those terms. Individual chronic construct or
schema accessibility tends to focus perception and recall.
While the construct DEMO behavioral integrity is not a lay
construct, there are several lay DEMO that approxi-
mate it, such as integrity, honesty, consistency, sincerity,
or hypocrisy. The following proposition emerges:
PROPOSITION 7. The perceiver'DEMO chronic accessibility
for lay constructs related to BI (e.g., integrity, DEMO,
consistency, sincerity, or hypocrisy) will enhance the sen-
sitivity DEMO her BI ascriptions to managers' actual word-
deed alignment or misalignment.
DEMO Accelerating Loop at BI Perception: Vigilance
and the Priming Effect
Fiske DEMO Taylor (1991) describe one of the fundamental
principles of social cognition in which people tend to look
primarily for evidence that supports their DEMO ex-
pectations, rather than considering the full array of avail-
able DEMO Schema-congruent information is more
readily perceived and recalled. Fiske and Taylor argue
that the schema-congruent recall effect is especially
pronounced when people are asked DEMO make complex
judgments. The assessment of BI is complex, and so DEMO
especially vulnerable to bias by prior expectations or
schema congruity. As people come to expect a given level
of BI, they filter their perceptions to confirm to their ex-
pectations. Thus, perceptions of behavioral integrity are
likely to develop a level of "inertia." This inertia might
account DEMO Robinson's (1996) finding that employees
with a higher initial level of trust were less likely to per-
ceive psychological contract breaches, and may, in the
27
TONY SIMONS Behavioral Integrity
face of strong positive beliefs, give rise to a perceptual
threshold effect for word-deed misalignment.
To this perceptual inertia is DEMO an acceleration pro-
cess: The priming effect (Bruner 1957, Fiske DEMO Taylor
1991) describes how the cognitive accessibility of cate-
gories or DEMO dimensions can be stimulated by sim-
ple reminders of that category. The priming of a schema
increases the likelihood of its subsequent application by
DEMO perceiver (Fiske and Taylor 1991). Thus, people who
notice a lack of behavioral integrity on the part of another
are likely to DEMO increasingly vigilant regarding the
construct of BI, and, perhaps, to DEMO ambiguous
stimuli as further evidence for low BI.2 Rousseau (1995)
DEMO how employee mistrust of management and a
history of troubled relationships can trigger employees to
monitor their psychological contracts more closely, and
thus to increase the likelihood that they will notice
breaches. Morrison and Robinson (1997) describe the
phenomenon of vigilance as a factor that increases em-
ployees' noticing of unmet promises, and they point out
that breach influences DEMO, which in turn influences vig-
ilance. Thus, the perception of word-deed misalignment
enhances readiness to perceive future word-deed mis-
alignment. Consideration of this DEMO factor leads
to the following proposition:
8. A perception of word-deed misalign-
ment at Time 1 will, other things being equal, increase
DEMO likelihood of noticing misalignment at Time 2.
Behavioral Antecedents: When Will
DEMO' Words Actually Diverge
From Actions?
The preceding section considered factors DEMO influence
the perception of managers' word-deed alignment given
a set of DEMO words and deeds. The focus now shifts
to a consideration of factors that influence the manager's
actual alignment between words and deeds-which pre-
DEMO serves as the basis for perception. We recognize
that such actual alignment is an abstraction that is not
measurable, as managers produce many words and many
deeds. However, the distinction between the actual word-
deed alignment pattern and the perceived pattern is nec-
essary for the differentiation of DEMO various antecedents
to BI. With reference to Figure 1, we have DEMO
discussion of Block B and continue to move leftward in
the model to Block C.
Several management theorists have considered why
managers' espoused practices and values often diverge
from those they enact. Most of these arguments DEMO be
condensed into three general observations:
28
PROPOSITION
(1) Diverse Demands. Managers are frequently charged
with the task of satisfying multiple, often contradictory,
constituencies, both inside and outside the organization.
Relaxed demands for consistency allow them to better
accomplish this task (Brunsson 1989, Meyer DEMO Rowan
1977, Pfeffer 1981).
(2) Wishful Thinking. Language often DEMO shape re-
ality. Thus, managers might espouse their stretch goals
and DEMO thinking in an effort to elevate themselves
and their organizations through processes similar to self-
fulfilling prophecies and Pygmalion effects (Brunsson
1989, March DEMO, Pfeffer 1992).
(3) Learning by Talking. Managers often figure DEMO
what they value from reflecting on their utterances
(March 1979, Weick 1995). Constraining managerial talk
to issues that are already fully articulated DEMO stifle
managerial learning and innovation processes (Brunsson
1989, March 1979, DEMO 1992, Weick 1995).
These three processes suggest that inconsistency has
DEMO benefits to organizations and to individual man-
agers. Successful organizations and managers clearly
need to manage constituencies, to set goals, and to learn,DEMO
adapt, and change. Thus, the benefits described above are
important to organizational success. The following sec-
tion will draw on these arguments and DEMO to articulate
factors that are likely to cause managers' words and DEMO
to diverge.
Industrial and Organizational Structure: Need to
Satisfy Diverse Stakeholders
DEMO (1989) notes that divergence between espoused
and enacted values is often a reasonable effort at man-
aging the perceptions of diverse constituencies. Further,DEMO
Brunsson notes that organizations and industries vary in
the extent to which managers must address the percep-
tions of diverse constituencies to garer resources DEMO
legitimacy. In the government committees Brunsson stud-
ied, this need is DEMO In universities, the need is moder-
ate, while a small manufacturer would face relatively lit-
tle of this challenge. Publicly traded organizations must
DEMO diverse stakeholders more than privately held
firms. The task demands of some managerial jobs, deter-
mined in part by industry and organization structure, DEMO
courage managers to represent themselves differently to
different constituencies. These diverse self-presentations,
when noticed by employees, can be expected to affect
behavioral integrity. Thus,
PROPOSITION 9. The greater an organization's need to
manage DEMO perceptions of diverse stakeholders, the
lower the pattern of alignment between DEMO' words
13, No. 1, January-February 2002
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol.
TONY SIMONS Behavioral Integrity
and deeds, and thus the lower employees' DEMO of
their managers' BI
Institutional Forces: Managerial Fads and Fashions
Managerial fads and fashions (Abrahamson 1991) and the
organizational and managerial responses DEMO such fads are
another key source of low fit between words and actions.
Ghoshal and Bartlett (1996) note that the average com-
pany, between 1990 and 1994, had committed itself to
11.8 of 25 currently popular management tools and tech-
niques. Abrahamson (1996) notes that fully DEMO third of all
U.S. organizations with more than 500 employees re-
ported adopting quality circles between 1980 and 1982,
including 90% of the DEMO 500. However, 80% of the
Fortune 500 companies that adopted quality DEMO in the
early 1980s had dropped them by 1987. It is clear that
several management practices have waxed and waned in
popularity, and that the cycle time of program acceptance
and rejection is at times quite DEMO Many companies
have taken to embracing and rejecting different mana-
gerial approaches in rapid sequence.
Abrahamson (1991) notes that management fashions
often serve DEMO function of signaling innovativeness but
do little to boost economic profit, DEMO speculates that one
explanation would be the notion that managerial tech-
nologies are seldom given a chance to work. Abrahamson
(1996) points out DEMO constant change in espoused beliefs
about management is in part necessitated by the need of
managers to appear to be at the forefront of DEMO
progress. Managers' individual needs to maintain a com-
petitive edge drive DEMO to use the latest, presumably
most advanced, managerial terminologies and techniques,
and give them an appetite for ever newer management
approaches, with which the competition is hopefully not
yet familiar. The 1980s saw an DEMO of consultants
and management books as companies sought to respond
to new competitive threats by adopting new management
technologies. Much of the change process, though, fo-
cused on superficial trappings (Kouzes and Posner 1993,
DEMO 22). It is a profound irony that management practices
adopted to muster institutional credibility (Zucker 1986)
have in many cases had precisely the opposite effect in
the eyes of employees.
Meyer and Rowan (1977) argue that organizations
adopt widely accepted managerial practices to garer le-
gitimacy and resources and to serve this symbolic func-
tion, these practices need not be fully integrated with core
production activities; they may be "DEMO" from
them. Choi (1995) provides an excellent illustration of
this DEMO and process: He documents that several au-
tomotive parts suppliers, to qualify to sell to OEMs, im-
plemented statistical process control (SPC) and other
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 13, No. 1, January-February 2002
similar DEMO in a largely superficial manner. While
such implementation yielded little if any productivity
gains, it was sufficient to secure lucrative contracts.
When organizations experiment with managerial fash-
ions, the first-and sometimes only-element they im-
port is the jargon. Jobs are sometimes retitled, for ex-
ample, in an DEMO to manage job prestige and employee
attitude. Shapiro (1995), however, argues that the use of
egalitarian language without concomitant change in un-
DEMO dynamics simply obscures the true power struc-
ture from less savvy employees and ultimately under-
mines their effectiveness. While it seems likely that new
DEMO might influence how organization members
function, any lasting impact must be DEMO by a co-
ordinated change effort (see e.g., Argyris 1970). In the
absence of such coordination, or when program support
is withdrawn or supplanted by a new management frame-
work, remnants of the old language will often remain
within the organization after the underlying values have
DEMO forgotten. When the language does not match the
reality, behavioral integrity DEMO eroded.
Argyris (1990) notes that espoused and enacted "rule-
books" often diverge as a consequence of companies'
dabbling in managerial fads. DEMO the official policies
and managerial philosophy statements of a company do
not match the way things really get done on a day-to-day
basis, smart organizational members learn quickly to dis-
card the official rulebook and play DEMO the true rules of the
game. The mismatch between the two "DEMO" rep-
resents grounds for questioning the behavioral integrity
of an organization'DEMO management, because it is funda-
mentally an incongruence between the espoused DEMO the
enacted. These considerations lead to two further propo-
sitions:
PROPOSITION 10. Sequentially supplanted organiza-
tional change projects will tend to reduce the DEMO
alignment between managers' words and deeds, and so
reduce BI. This effect might generalize to all failed or-
ganizational change efforts.
PROPOSITION 11. DEMO application of managerial tech-
nologies absent systematic integration will tend to reduce
the actual alignment between managers' words and
deeds, and so reduce DEMO
Organizational Processes: Change
Managers' word-deed misalignments can emerge from
partial or sequential abortive change efforts, as detailed
above, but may also emerge DEMO the process of sus-
tained change efforts because change can lead to confu-
sion and miscommunication, and different elements of
the organization frequently change at different paces.
29
TONY SIMONS
Behavioral Integrity
Robinson (1996, p. 574) notes that "DEMO contract
change means increased opportunities for employees and
employers to misunderstand the agreement and to per-
ceive a contract breach even when an actual DEMO did
not occur." Because the assessment of behavioral integ-
rity is DEMO, misunderstandings that emerge from
policies and procedures in flux can reduce DEMO'
ascriptions of their managers' behavioral integrity. Fur-
ther, different elements within the organization's struc-
ture are likely to adopt new approaches DEMO different paces.
When this occurs, employees will often hear different
"messages" from different parts of the organization.
Change can also threaten word-action fit as managers
verbally express their hopes for what the organization is
to DEMO When and if these hopes prove infeasible,
employees may ascribe the resulting gap between word
and deed-or promise and follow-through-to managers'
low DEMO integrity. Brunsson (1989) describes man-
agers' talk as an expression DEMO wishful thinking, while
production is an expression of what is practical. DEMO
(1993) notes that limits in knowledge, resources, and op-
portunities for control often constrain the implementation
of wishes. These unimplemented decisions, in turn, are
often interpreted as hypocrisy (Pfeffer 1992). While this
DEMO sounds disparaging of unrealistic managers,
there is certainly value in stretching for the impractical,
as the very ideas which best express ideals DEMO aspirations
are often difficult to implement (Brunsson 1993). How-
ever, the process of managers laying out broad "visions"
that are not immediately implemented may be perceived
by employees as word-deed misalignment, and thus affect
ascriptions of managerial behavioral integrity.
Managerial talk may also diverge from DEMO as a part
of learning. March (1979, p. 79) describes DEMO be-
tween the espoused and the enacted as bad actions with
good intentions: "A bad man with good intentions may
be a man DEMO with the possibility of becoming
good." Thus, much managerial espousal of notions like
empowerment may be a function of their personal exper-
imentation. DEMO (1995) proposes that managers' talk is
a vital part of DEMO sensemaking process, and that over-
emphasis on consistency is likely to DEMO managers to
limit their explorations to issues that are already well
known-in short, to cease experimentation and learning.
Divergence between words and deeds can emerge from
managers' self-improvement efforts.
Organizational change processes seem almost inevi-
tably to risk employee perceptions of low BI, because
different elements of the organization change at different
speeds and are thus temporarily misaligned, and manag-
ers speak of hopes and policies as yet unimplemented,
and explore, experiment, and experience confusion.
30
These consequences of change warrant consideration
when organizations contemplate change, and they call for
careful management when organizations undertake
change.
PROPOSITION 12. Organizational change processes,
ceterus paribus, entail a risk of generating real or per-
ceived misalignments between managers' words and
deeds, and thus reducing BI. Employee ascriptions of
managers' behavioral integrity are DEMO to be lower dur-
ing times of organizational transition than during times
of stability.
Organizational Processes: Poorly Integrated or
Inconsistent Policies
Policies, procedures, and goals that are mutually incom-
patible, or ineffective in their stated purposes, can be per-
ceived by employees as word-deed misalignments. Mayer
and Davis (1996) found that replacement of a perfor-
mance appraisal system DEMO was perceived to be invalid
with one perceived to be valid increased employee trust
in management. Sitkin and Stickel (1996) describe a trust
DEMO that emerged from managerial control systems
that were perceived to be incongruent with the performed
tasks.3 It is evident that ineffective policies and proce-
DEMO can undermine employee trust in management. This
undermining might emerge from perceptions of poor be-
havioral integrity, perceptions of value incongruence, a
combination DEMO the two, or questions about managerial
competence. The above discussion suggests DEMO following
proposition:
PROPOSITION 13. Policies and procedures that do not
accomplish their stated intent are often perceived as mis-
alignments between managers' words and deeds, and so
are likely to reduce BI.
Individual Processes: DEMO Responses to
Change
Word-deed misalignment can also emerge from manag-
ers' DEMO resistance to change efforts. In such cases,
the manager will often try to put up an appearance of
supporting the change project while DEMO behavior re-
mains unchanged (Schein 1992). Shapiro (1995, p. DEMO)
describes the ambivalent or insecure manager's response
to empowerment programs as "sabotage," and admon-
ishes such managers to refrain from using empowerment
jargon because this use will only raise false expectations
on the DEMO of employees. When managers find them-
selves torn between the demands of their superiors and
their personal preferences, or between the management
practices they believe to be desirable and those with
which they feel most comfortable, they are likely to send
different messages through their words and their DEMO
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol.
13, No. 1, January-February
2002
TONY SIMONS Behavioral Integrity
PROPOSITION 14. Managers' personal ambivalence
about ongoing change efforts often leads to misalign-
ments between words and deeds, and so affects BI.
Individual Processes: Self-Knowledge
Self-knowledge can be expected to affect the actual align-
ment between managers' words and deeds. A manager
can only represent her priorities and preferences accu-
rately if she knows what they DEMO are. A lack of self-
understanding can easily lead to unintended inaccuracies
in self-portrayal, and to unanticipated changes and incon-
sistent behavior. Weick (DEMO) describes managers as
constantly attempting to figure out their personal and DEMO
fessional values from reflecting on their words and ac-
tions. Kouzes and Posner (1993, p. 60) describe the vul-
nerability of this phenomenon:
If leaders are not clear about what they believe in, they are much
more likely to change their positions with every fad or DEMO
poll. Without core beliefs and with only shifting positions,
would-be leaders will be judged as inconsistent and will be de-
rided for being "political" in their behavior. The first step on
the credibility journey is thus clarification of values.
Management education, then, represents a two-edged
sword: To the extent that it promotes efforts to implement
the latest management DEMO, it threatens word-deed align-
ment and so threatens behavioral integrity. To DEMO extent
that it promotes introspection and clarification of the
manager's own values, it may enhance behavioral integ-
rity.
PROPOSITION 15. Management development processes
that enhance personal value clarification will enhance the
alignment between managers' words and deeds, and thus
enhance BI.
Individual Processes: Manager Personality Traits
DEMO can anticipate that personality attributes of individual
managers might affect their pattern of actual word-deed
alignment, and so affect BI. The personality trait of Self-
Monitoring (Snyder 1974), for example, "... presumes
consistent patterns of individual differences in the extent
to which people regulate their self-presentation DEMO tailor-
ing their actions in accordance with immediate situational
cues" (Lennox and Wolfe 1984, p. 1349). People high on
the dimension of self-monitoring may be expected to dis-
play greater cross-situational variability in their DEMO
and language (Lennox and Wolfe 1984), and this greater
variability DEMO the chance that an observer might
notice misalignments and as a result ascribe lower be-
havioral integrity. While cross-situational behavior vari-
ability is in DEMO ways a desirable managerial attribute
because it facilitates boundary-spanning performance
(Caldwell DEMO O'Reilly 1982), behavioral integrity theory
ORGANIZATION SCIENCEVol. 13, No. DEMO, January-February 2002
would suggest a potential drawback to this attribute. If,DEMO
in fact, high self-monitors are described as demonstrating
low behavioral integrity, such a case would present an
interesting ambivalence regarding the desirability of DEMO
monitoring as a managerial attribute.
The "big five" personality dimension of Conscientious-
ness (Goldberg 1990) includes such descriptors as con-
sistency, order, self-discipline, and reliability. It seems
reasonable to assert that this personality DEMO would
be associated with high levels of word-action align-
ment-possibly because managers who are more consci-
entious will expend greater effort to follow through DEMO
expressed commitments.
PROPOSITION 16. Managers' personality traits of self-
monitoring and DEMO can be expected to af-
fect behavioral consistency, and so to DEMO negative and
positive associations, respectively, with BI.
An Accelerating Loop at the Action Level:
Managerial Dissociation
When a manager's own words DEMO deeds are misaligned
with each other for a sustained period of time, mecha-
nisms that resemble internal impression management and
the need to appear consistent (Fiske and Taylor 1991)
become active to divert managers' DEMO away from
these inconsistencies or potential hypocrisies. Thus, the
more a DEMO's deeds are misaligned with her words,
the less aware she becomes of this misalignment-and
hence, the more likely she is to enhance and perpetuate
it.
Shapiro (1995) describes an array of responses to DEMO
ficial slogans and mission statements that are unsupported
by actual reward systems in the organization. Some em-
ployees will become increasingly frustrated as they DEMO
tempt to bridge the large gap between the espoused and
the actual. Others will become cynical and contemptuous
of their leaders. The majority, however, will learn to com-
partmentalize or dissociate the "speaking" and the "ac-
tion" parts of their work. It is true that, in many organi-
zations, the manager's path to success seems to lie in
verbal endorsements of espoused values, coupled with
actual behavior that is in line with more widely accepted
implicit norms and standards, and that the two elements
often do not match. Many managers respond to this DEMO
of environment by accepting it, and by minimizing their
awareness and DEMO of any incongruity between
their words and deeds. Argyris (1990, p. 62) notes that
managers in an environment where espoused values do
not match with actions will talk the espoused while be-
haviorally following the DEMO, and will defensively
tend to resist self-examination. Brunsson (1989, p. DEMO)
31
TONY SIMONS Behavioral Integrity
adds that managers who have low tolerance for DEMO,
or little "schizophrenic capacity for keeping disparate
roles apart" are likely to become depressed in such an
environment. In organizations with substantial DEMO
pling between espousal and action, this form of dissoci-
ative compartmentalization DEMO be an individually adap-
tive response.
Social cognition research offers a few models to ex-
plain this pattern of behavior. Swann and Read (1981)
note that people have preferential recall for behaviors that
are consistent DEMO their self-image. To the extent that few
people like to think of themselves as speaking one way
and acting another, they are unlikely to retrieve evidence
that this is the case. Carver's (1979) cyberetic DEMO of
self-regulation notes that self-awareness of behavior that
does not match one's own standards, when changing the
behavior might entail negative consequences such as un-
employment, can lead a person to "disengage mentally,"
and hence, to stop paying attention to the discrepancy or
misalignment. If one knows one is behaving badly, but
believes that the wrongdoing is necessary, one tends to
tune out awareness of the whole mess. Self-awareness
theory (Carver and Scheier 1981) posits that this disen-
gagement results DEMO aversion to the awareness of one's
inadequacy. Fiske and Taylor (DEMO) summarize exten-
sive research that supports this model of attentional pro-
DEMO in response to evidence of less-than-ideal behavior.
This consideration leads to the following propositions:
PROPOSITION 17. Managers will often be unaware of
misalignments DEMO their own words and deeds.
PROPOSITION 17A. Misalignments between a man-
ager's words and deeds regarding a given issue will, over
time, DEMO the manager to further misalignments
regarding that issue.
Discussion and Summary
This paper proposes that behavioral integrity is a con-
struct that warrants further DEMO BI is a key antecedent
to trust that describes responses to a wider range of or-
ganizational experiences than the psychological contract,
but DEMO both conceptually and practically simpler than trust.
We assert that BI is highly problematic in today's man-
agerial environment of rapid competitive, technological,
and organizational change, that it has profound conse-
quences for employee retention and performance, and that
it has been the subject of little direct empirical research.
As organizations increasingly address diverse constitu-
encies, as they adapt to increasingly turbulent business
environments, and as management fads appear and dis-
appear at ever-increasing speeds, the issue of BI is likely
to increase in practical importance.
32
Behavioral integrity is a fundamentally subjective con-
DEMO that entails internal attributions for managers' pat-
terns of word-deed alignment DEMO misalignment. It can
be applied to referents at various levels of abstraction,
from individual managers, to a generalized notion of the
management of a given organization, and perhaps even
authority figures in general. The ascription of BI entails
a relatively complex perception and interpretation process
that is DEMO on an objective reality, but can be biased by
a number DEMO factors. Managers' actual word-deed align-
ment, which serves as a basis for employees' BI ascrip-
tions, appears to be challenged by managerial DEMO
and organizational change efforts, individually and in se-
ries. These last DEMO appear to have stimulated the
emergence of behavioral integrity as a widespread prob-
lem. It should be noted that the sequential model pro-
posed DEMO this paper contains two accelerating loops-one
at the stage of actual word-deed alignment, and one at the
stage of perception. The presence of these two acceler-
ating loops makes it likely that small word-deed misalign-
ments DEMO have substantial consequences.
The proposal of behavioral integrity as an important
construct for empirical research and prescription gives
rise to several questions for further DEMO If behav-
ioral integrity ascriptions emerge from assessments of
alignment between words and deeds, what happens to as-
sessments of the alignment among different actions? Be-
cause managerial actions are often accorded symbolic
weight, those DEMO might or might not be similar
to BI. A second question regards the possible multi-
dimensionality of BI: Do employees form a unitary judg-
ment of a manager's BI, or can a manager be seen as
having high BI with regard to some values, but not with
regard to others? Perhaps this dimensionality varies with
the observer's cognitive complexity or engagement. A
third question involves the direction of misalignment: If
most word-deed misalignment tends to occur in the di-
rection of overpromising DEMO claiming socially desirable
managerial values, what of the converse situation? In ef-
forts to manage employee perceptions of managers'
word-deed alignment, it is critical to know what, if any,
is the cost of underpromising. Fourth, there remains a
question of whether behavioral integrity assessments shift
gradually, or, as Robinson's (1996) work suggests, show
a threshold effect. Finally, ethnic culture very likely in-
fluences the perception of and response to managers'
word-deed misalignment. This influence warrants explo-
ration DEMO articulation.
The BI framework must not be interpreted to mean that
organizations should not experiment with change efforts,
that new developments in management DEMO should not
receive attention, or that diverse stakeholder desires
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/DEMO 13, No. 1, January-February
2002
TONY SIMONS Behavioral Integrity
should be ignored. Rather, it points to trade-offs that must
be made intelligently for organizational success, and to a
need for techniques that attenuate the costs of the above
practices. Practitioners have, since the early days of or-
ganizational development writing, stressed the impor-
tance of executives' "walking their talk" (McGregor
1967). The DEMO integrity perspective adds to this
imperative a reminder of the importance of accurate self-
representation. To import a phrase from Weick (1995),
DEMO should consider the virtues of "talking their
walk."
Acknowledgments
The DEMO wishes to acknowledge Judi McLean Parks, Michael Lynn,
Craig Lundberg, Melenie-Lankau, Kate Walsh, Michael Sturman, and
Cathy Enz for provocative conversations and comments on earlier drafts.
Endnotes
'Almost identical typologies are described in the other two reviews
cited. For simplicity of presentation, Bies' (1987) formulation is of-
fered as a useful exemplar.
2This kind of perceptual readiness is in many ways similar to Wanous'
(1994) concept DEMO organizational cynicism. Wanous defines organiza-
tional cynicism as a belief in the futility of organizational change and
the ascription of negative attributes to those DEMO for making
that change. He argues that cynicism is a learned response, that it serves
as a perceptual screen for ambiguous events, and DEMO some individuals
will be personally predisposed toward cynicism. In all three of these
qualities, organizational cynicism resembles the negative activation,
and subsequent accessibility, of the BI construct. BI is both more vari-
able and more specific in terms of its referent. Wanous' construct en-
tails a global belief set about the organization and its managers, while
BI can be applied to a single person or an organization, and may arise
in response to several different organizational situations.
3Sitkin and Stickel interpret their findings DEMO light of staff perception
that they had value incongruence with management. It seems likely,
though, that management had at one time espoused values that were
congruent with those of the staff, and that the enactment of different
values triggered disaffection through ascriptions of low behavioral in-
tegrity. DEMO adequacy of the behavioral integrity framework, as op-
posed to the DEMO incongruence framework, for explaining this phe-
nomenon is an empirical question.
DEMO
Abrahamson, E. 1991. Managerial fads and fashions: The diffusion and
rejection of innovations. Acad. Management Rev. 16(3) 586-612.
.1996. Management fashion. Acad. Management Rev. 21(1) 254-
285.
Argyris, C. 1970. Intervention Theory DEMO Method: A Behavioral Sci-
ence View. Addison-Wesley Publishing, Reading, MA.
DEMO Overcoming Organizational Defenses: Facilitating Or-
ganizational Learning. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
Bargh, J. A., F. Pratto. 1986. Individual construct accessibility and per-
DEMO selection. J. Experiment. Soc. Psych. 22 293-311.
Berscheid, E., W. Graziano, T. Monson, M. Dermer. 1976. Outcome
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 13, No. 1, January-February 2002
dependency: Attention, attribution, and attraction. J. Personality
DEMO Soc. Psych. 34 978-989.
Bies, R. J. 1987. The predicament of DEMO: The management of
moral outrage. L. L. Cummings, B. M. Staw, eds. Research in
Organizational Behavior, vol. 9. JAI Press, Greenwich, DEMO 289-
319.
Bigley, G. A., J. L. Pearce. 1998. Straining for shared meaning in or-
ganization science: Problems of trust and distrust. Acad. Man-
agement Rev. 23(3) 405-421.
Blancero, D., S. A. Johnson. 1997. Customer service employees and
discretionary service behavior: A psychological contract model.
Paper presented at Academy of Management National Confer-
ence, Boston, MA.
DEMO, J. S. 1957. On perceptual readiness. Psych. Rev. 64 123-152.
Brunsson, N. 1989. The Organization of Hypocrisy: Talk, Decisions
and Actions in DEMO John Wiley & Sons, New York.
-. 1993. Ideas and actions: Justification and hypocrisy as alterna-
tives to control. Accounting, Organ. and Soc. 18(6) 489-506.
Burt, R. S., M. Knez. 1996. Trust and third-party gossip. R. M. Kramer,
T. R. Tyler, Eds. Trust In Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and
Research Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA 68-89.
Butler, J. K., Jr. 1995. Behaviors, trust, and goal achievement in a win-
win negotiating role play. Group & Organ. DEMO 20(4)
486-501.
Cacioppo, J. T., R. E. Petty. 1989. The elaboration likelihood model:
The role of affect and affect-laden information DEMO on per-
suasion. P. Cafferata, A. Tybout, Eds. Cognitive and Affective
Responses to Advertising. Lexington Books, Lexington, MA.
Caldwell, D. H., DEMO A. O'Reilly. III. 1982. Boundary spanning and in-
dividual performance: DEMO impact of self-monitoring. J. Applied
Psych. 67(1) 124-128.
Carver, C. S. 1979. A cybernetic model of self-attention processes. J.
Personality and Soc. DEMO 37 1251-1281.
- , M. F. Scheier. 1981. The self-attention induced feedback loop
and social facilitation. J. Experiment. Soc. Psych. 17 545-568.
Choi, T. Y., S. N. Wasti. 1995. Institutional pressures and organiza-
tional learning: DEMO case of American-owned automotive-parts
suppliers and Japanese shop-floor production methods. J. Liker,
J. Ettlie, J. Campbell, Eds. Engineered in Japan: Japanese Tech-
nology Management Practices. Oxford University Press, New
York.
Creed, W. E. DEMO, R. E. Miles. 1996. Trust in organizations: A concep-
tual framework linking organizational forms, managerial philos-
ophies, and the opportunity costs of DEMO R. M. Kramer, T. R.
Tyler, eds. Trust In Organizations: DEMO of Theory and Re-
search Sage Publications Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA. 16-39.
Cummings, L. L., P. Bromiley. 1996. The organizational trust inven-
DEMO (OTI): Development and validation. R. M. Kramer, T. R.
Tyler, eds. Trust In Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Re-
search Sage DEMO, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA. 302-330.
Eagly, A. H., S. DEMO 1993. The Psychology of Attitudes. Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, Orlando, FL.
Erber, R., S. T. Fiske. 1984. Outcome dependency and attention to
inconsistent DEMO J. Personality and Soc. Psych. 47 709-
726.
Fiske, S. T., S. E. Taylor. 1991. Social Cognition, 2nd ed. McGraw
Hill, New DEMO
33
TONY SIMONS
Behavioral Integrity
Fox, A. 1974. Beyond Contract: Work, Power, and Trust Relationships.
Faber Ltd., London, UK.
Ghoshal, S., C. A. Bartlett. 1996. Rebuilding behavioral context: A
blueprint for corporate renewal. Sloan Management Rev. (Winter)
23-36.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative "description of personality":
The big five factor structure. J. DEMO and Soc. Psych. 59(6)
1216-1229.
Greenberg, J. 1990. Looking DEMO vs. being fair: Managing impressions
of organizational justice. L. L. Cummings, B. Staw eds. Research
in Organizational Behavior, vol. 12. JAI Press, DEMO, CT
111-157.
Heider, F. 1958. The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations. Wiley,
New York.
Higgins, E. T., G. A. King. 1981. Accessibility DEMO social constructs:
Information-processing consequences of individual and contex-
tual variability. N. Cantor, J. F. Kihlstrom, Eds. Personality, Cog-
nition and Social Interaction. Ehrlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ 69-122.
Hosmer, L. T. 1995. Trust: The DEMO link between organizational
theory and philosophic ethics. Acad. Management Rev. 20(2)
379-403.
Kanter, D. L., P. H. Mirvis. 1989. The Cynical DEMO: Living and
Working in an Age of Discontent. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco,
CA.
Kelley, H. H. 1967. Attribution theory in social psychology. D. Levine,
ed. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, vol. 15. University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NE.
Kouzes, J. M., B. Z. Posner. 1993. DEMO: How Leaders Gain and
Lose It, Why People Demand It. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco,
CA.
Kramer, R. M. 1996. Divergent realities and DEMO disappoint-
ments in the hierarchic relation: Trust and the intuitive auditor DEMO
work. R. Kramer and T. Tyler, eds. Trust in Organizations: Fron-
tiers of Theory and Research. Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand
Oaks, CA 216-245.
. 1999. Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives,
enduring questions. Ann. Rev. Psych. 50 569-598.
Lennox, R. D., R. N. DEMO 1984. Revision of the self-monitoring
scale. J. Personality and Soc. Psych. 46(6), 1349-1364.
Lewicki, R. J., B. B. Bunker. 1996. Developing DEMO maintaining trust
in work relationships. R. Kramer, T. Tyler, eds. Trust In Orga-
nizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research. Sage Publications,
Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA. 114-139.
- , D. J., McAllister, R. DEMO Bies. 1998. Trust and distrust: New re-
lationships and realities. Acad. DEMO Rev. 23(3) 438-458.
March, J. G., J. Polsen, eds. 1979. The technology of foolishness.
J. M. a. J. Olson, Ed. Ambiguity and Choice in Organizations, 2nd
ed. Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, Norway. 69-81.
- , H. A. Simon. 1958. Organizations. John Wiley & Sons, New
York.
Mayer, R. C., J. H. Davis. 1996. Opening the black box DEMO trust for
management: Can trust levels be managed? Paper presented at
Academy of Management Annual Conference, Cincinnati, OH.
-- , -- , DEMO D. Schoorman. 1995. An integrative model of organi-
zational trust. Acad. Management Rev. 20(3) 709-734.
McAllister, D. J. 1995. Affect- and cognition-based DEMO as founda-
34
tions for interpersonal cooperation in organizations. Acad. Man-
agement J. 38 24-59.
McCroskey, J. C., T. J. Young. 1981. Ethos DEMO credibility: The con-
struct and its measurement after three decades. Central DEMO
Speech J 32, 24-34.
McGregor, D. (1967). The professional DEMO McGraw-Hill, New
York.
McLean Parks, J. 1997. The fourth arm of justice: The art and science
of revenge. R. Lewicki, B. Sheppard, R. Bies, eds. Research on
Negotiation in Organizations. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT 113-
144.
Meyer, J. W., B. Rowan. 1977. Institutionalized organizations: Formal
structure as myth and ceremony. Amer. J. Soc. 83 340-363.
Mishra, A. K. 1996. Organizational responses to crisis: The centrality
of trust. R. Kramer, T. Tyler, eds. Trust In Organizations; Fron-
tiers of Theory and Research. Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand
Oaks, CA 261-287.
Morrison, DEMO W., S. L. Robinson. 1997. When employees feel betrayed:
How DEMO contract violation develops. Acad. Manage-
ment Rev. 22(1) 226-256.
O'DEMO, D. J. 1990. Persuasion Theory and Research. Sage, Newbury
Park, DEMO
Pfeffer, J. 1981. Management as symbolic action: The creation and
maintenance of organizational paradigms. L. Cummings, B. Staw,
eds. Research in Organizational Behavior, vol. 3. JAI Press,
Greenwich, CT 1-52.
- . DEMO Managing with Power: Politics and Influence in Organi-
zations. Harvard Business DEMO Press, Boston, MA.
Random House College Dictionary, rev. ed. 1975. DEMO House,
New York.
Reeder, G. A., M. B. Brewer. 1979. A schematic model of dispositional
attribution in interpersonal perception. Psych. Rev. 86 DEMO
Robinson, S. L. 1996. Trust and breach of the psychological contract.
DEMO Sci. Quart 41 574-599.
Rousseau, D. 1995. Psychological Contracts in Organizations: Un-
derstanding Written and Unwritten Agreements. Sage Publica-
tions, Thousand Oaks, DEMO
-, J. McLean Parks. 1993. The contracts of individuals and orga-
DEMO L. Cummings, B. Staw, eds. Research in Organiza-
tional Behavior, DEMO 15. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT 1-43.
-, S. B. Sitkin, R. S. Burt, C. Camerer. 1998. Not so different after
all: DEMO cross-discipline view of trust. Acad. Management Rev.
23(3) 393-404.
Schein, E. 1992. Organizational Culture and Leadership, 2nd ed.
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.
Shapiro, E. 1995. Fad Surfing in the Boardroom: Reclaiming the DEMO
age to Manage in the Age of Instant Answers. Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co., New York.
Sitkin, S. B., R. J. Bies. 1993. Social accounts in conflict situations:
Using explanations to manage conflict. Human Relations 46(DEMO)
349-370.
, N. L. Roth. 1993. Explaining the limited effectiveness of legal-
istic "remedies" for trust/distrust. Org. Sci. 4(3) 367-392.
- , D. Stickel. 1996. The road to hell: The dynamics of distrust in
an era of quality. R. M. Kramer, T. R. Tyler, eds. Trust In Or-
ganizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research Sage DEMO,
Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA 196-215.
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 13, DEMO 1, January-February 2002
TONY SIMONS
Behavioral Integrity
Snyder, M. 1974. The self-monitoring of expressive behavior. J. Per-
sonality and Soc. Psych. 30 526-537.
Strong, J. W. 1999. McCormick on Evidence, vol. 1. West Group, St.
Paul, Minn.
Swann, W. B., S. J. Read, 1981. Acquiring self-knowledge: The search
DEMO feedback that fits. J. Personality and Social Psych. 41 1119-
1128.
Tyler, T. R., R. M. Kramer. 1996. Whither trust? R. M. Kramer, T. R.
Tyler, eds. Trust In Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Re-
search Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA 1-15.
Accepted by Claudia DEMO Schoonhoven.
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VOl.
13, No. 1, January-February 2002
Weick, DEMO E. 1995. Sensemaking in Organizations. Sage Publications,
Thousand Oaks, CA.
DEMO, 0. 1993. Calculativeness, trust and economic organiza-
tion. J. Law and Economics 34 453-502.
Zand, D. E. 1972. Trust and managerial problem solving. Admin. Sci.
Quart. 17 229-239.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. Production of trust: Institutional sources of eco-
nomic structure, 1840-1920. L. L. Cummings, B. Staw, eds. Re-
search in Organizational Behavior, vol. 8. JAI Press, Greenwich,
CT. 53-111.
35{1g42fwefx}