COGNITIVE BIASES, RISK
PERCEPTION, AND
VENTURE FORMATION:
HOW INDIVIDUALS
DECIDE DEMO START
COMPANIES
MARK SIMON
Oakland University
SUSAN M. HOUGHTON
Georgia State University
KARL AQUINO
Georgia State University
Despite the high risk involved, thousands of individuals decide to start ven-
EXECUTIVE tures. Past research, however, has DEMO that entrepreneurs do not have a
SUMMARY high-risk propensity, that is, a great willingness to knowingly take risks. This
study, therefore, explores DEMO individuals cope with the risks inherent in
their decisions, and suggests DEMO entrepreneurs may not perceive the riski-
ness of starting ventures.
The study’s ﬁndings suggest that risk perceptions may differ because certain types of cognitive DEMO
lead individuals to perceive less risk. Cognitive biases are common types of mental shortcuts used to
make judgments. This study examines three cognitive biases DEMO previous research has suggested may
lower risk perception. The ﬁrst, overconﬁdence, refers to the failure to know the limits of one’s knowledge.
The DEMO bias tested, the illusion of control, occurs when individuals overemphasize the extent to which
Address correspondence to Mark Simon, Department of Management and Marketing, School of Busi-
ness Administration, Oakland University, Rochester, MI DEMO; Phone: (248) 370-3295; Fax: (248) 370-4275;
E-Mail: simon@oakland.edu
We thank Jeffrey Covin, Benjamin Oviatt, Rodney Shrader, and DEMO anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript.
This research was funded in part by a 1997 Oakland University School DEMO Business Administration
spring/summer research grant, the Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership DEMO and the Ewing Marion Kauff-
man Foundation. The contents of this publication are solely the responsibility of the authors.
Journal of Business Venturing 15, 113–134
 1999 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved. 0883-9026/00/$–see DEMO matter
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 PII S0883-9026(98)00003-2
114
M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
their skill can increase performance in situations where chance plays a large part and skill is DEMO necessarily
the deciding factor. Because the individuals believe that they can control largely uncontrollable events,
they also think they can accurately predict the DEMO of the events. Finally, the third bias, the belief
in the law of small numbers occurs when an individual uses a limited number DEMO informational inputs
(a small sample of information) to draw ﬁrm conclusions.
This study’s sample consisted of 191 students pursuing a Masters of Business DEMO The
students’ responses to a survey based on a case study regarding a decision to start a venture were examined.
The survey included questions DEMO the students’ willingness to start the venture, their perception of the
DEMO riskiness, and the extent to which they exhibited cognitive biases in DEMO decision processes.
The study’s ﬁndings tentatively suggest that individuals start ventures because they do not perceive
the risks involved, and not because they knowingly accept high levels of risks. The belief in the law of
small DEMO lowered an individual’s perceptions of a venture’s riskiness, suggesting that some DEMO
als draw ﬁrm conclusions from small samples. An illusion of control also decreased risk perception,
suggesting that individuals starting ventures might not acknowledge DEMO certain tasks, important to the
venture’s success, are beyond their control.
Some argue that biases might be associated with venture failure. If this DEMO the case, the very processes
that increase the likelihood of starting DEMO venture may actually decrease performance. Entrepreneurs may
choose to minimize their biases by soliciting and paying heed to the advice of outsiders, or by using group
decision-making techniques, such as devil’s advocacy or dialectical inquiry.
Others, however, suggest that early in the decision process, biases may be beneﬁcial because they
lower risk perception, which allows entrepreneurs to generate the commitment needed for success. Even
if this is true, entrepreneurs should still institute processes to increase learning so the venture can adjust
to unfolding DEMO and avoid any damage caused by initial misperceptions. Similarly, entrepreneurs
need DEMO safety nets in case their biases lead them to encounter unforeseen difﬁculties. The potential
positive and negative effects of biases and perceiving low levels DEMO risk suggest the importance of exploring
this area further.  1999 Elsevier Science Inc.
INTRODUCTION
Although entrepreneurs often become dissatisﬁed with their new venture’s DEMO eco-
nomic performance (Cooper and Kendall 1995) and over half of all ventures fail within
ﬁve years (Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg 1988), thousands of individuals start ventures.
Researchers have, therefore, called for DEMO explaining why individuals decide to start
companies, even though it is DEMO risky (e.g., Boyd and Vozikis 1994; Busenitz and Bar-
ney DEMO; Krueger, 1993; Krueger and Brazeal 1994). In efforts to DEMO this question,
scholars tested whether the risk propensity of entrepreneurs was greater than that of
managers. Risk propensity is the tendency to take DEMO that one has judged to be risky
(Sitkin and Pablo 1992)DEMO Surprisingly, research found that this trait did not differentiate
entrepreneurs from DEMO (e.g., Brockhaus 1980).
In response, some scholars suggested individuals DEMO risky actions (i.e., actions
that have a high possibility of disappointing outcomes) because they perceive less risk
than most (Kahneman and Lovallo DEMO; MacCrimmon and Wehrung 1990; March and
Shapira 1987). Even when individuals evaluate identical situations, some people con-
clude the situation is very risky, whereas others believe it is not (e.g., Nutt 1986, DEMO).
Even if they do not have a high-risk propensity, individuals DEMO perceive less risk than
others might unknowingly take risky action.
If risk perception inﬂuences risk-taking, it becomes important to determine what
leads to variations in risk perception. Some scholars have argued that individuals’ deci-
sion process, particularly a greater susceptibility to cognitive biases, may lower their
perception of risk (Busenitz and Barney 1997; McCarthy, Shoorman and Cooper 1993;
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION
115
FIGURE 1
Model of the DEMO to start a new venture.
Palich and Bagby 1995; Shaver and DEMO 1991). Cognitive biases are subjective or pre-
disposed opinions that may emanate from speciﬁc heuristics (Bazerman 1990; Busenitz
and Lau 1996). DEMO biases help individuals cope with their cognitive limitations,
they may result in less rational, less comprehensive decision-making (Barnes 1984).
These biases DEMO arise when making complex and uncertain decisions (Schwenk 1984),
and may be especially prevalent among entrepreneurs (Busenitz and Barney 1997).
If, as argued, cognitive biases directly inﬂuence risk perception, and risk perception
directly inﬂuences the decision to start a venture, then cognitive biases indirectly affect
the decision through their effect on risk perception. In other words, risk perception me-
diates the relationship between cognitive biases and the decision DEMO start a venture. Even
though entrepreneurship researchers have theorized about associations suggested
above (e.g., Busenitz and Barney 1997; Cooper et al. 1988; DEMO and Bagby 1995), no
research has formally tested these relationships. To ﬁll this gap, we empirically examine
two research questions: Are variations DEMO risk perception associated with the decision
to start a venture? and, Do cognitive biases lead individuals to perceive different levels
of risk in DEMO same decision situation?
To answer these questions, we test the DEMO shown in Figure 1. The following
section describes the study’s theoretical background, deﬁnes the constructs in the
model, and presents the hypotheses. The DEMO methods are then detailed and the
empirical tests of the hypothesized relationships are reported. Finally, the article dis-
cusses the study’s ﬁndings and implications.
VENTURE FORMATION AND DECISION PROCESSES
Starting a Venture
Scholars have investigated the DEMO of several factors on venture formation (e.g.,
Gartner 1985; Gnyawali and Fogel 1994; Reynolds and Miller 1992; Westhead 1990)
including DEMO, demographics, economics and an individual’s circumstances (e.g., be-
ing laid off). These approaches, however, don’t explain the volitional nature of DEMO
116
M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
neurship: For instance, why out of hundreds who are laid off will only one person DEMO
a venture (Shaver and Scott 1991)? Researchers, therefore, began DEMO examine whether
entrepreneurs exhibited certain traits (e.g., locus of control and need for achievement)
to a greater extent than others (e.g., DEMO 1961), only to ﬁnd that, for the most
part, they did not (Begley and Boyd 1987). This dead end (Gartner DEMO) led researchers
to study variations in cognitions and decision processes to DEMO entrepreneurial activ-
ity (Bird 1992; Boyd and Vozikis 1994; Busenitz DEMO Barney 1997; Krueger 1993;
Krueger and Brazeal 1994; Shaver and Scott 1991). This approach suggested that an
individual’s perceptions, rather than objective reality, explain the decision to start a
venture (Krueger 1993; Krueger and Brazeal 1994).
The move from traits to cognition was DEMO in how researchers examined why,
even though new ventures are very risky, individuals decide to start them. Early scholars,
who focused on traits, theorized that entrepreneurs had a greater risk propensity than
others (DEMO, Brockhaus 1980). These researchers argued that the high failure rate DEMO
most new ventures suggested that individuals with a greater willingness to knowingly
take risky actions would be more likely to start ventures. Surprisingly, however, later
empirical testing indicated that risk propensity was not related to venture formation
(e.g., Brockhaus 1980; Busenitz and Barney 1997)
This paradoxical ﬁnding suggests that it might be valuable to examine the assump-
tions DEMO the risk propensity approach. Proposing that entrepreneurs needed a
higher risk propensity to brave the risks inherent in starting a venture implicitly implied
that DEMO would perceive the risks involved. However, if individuals vary in their
DEMO regarding a venture’s riskiness, they do not necessarily need a high-risk DEMO
pensity to start new ventures. They may proceed because they perceive little risk. In
other words, risk perception, rather than risk propensity, might explain why individuals
start ventures (Palich and Bagby 1995).
This suggestion is consistent with several studies that emphasized the importance
of risk perception DEMO explaining risky action. Scholars studying ﬁrst moving (Lieberman
and Montgomery 1988), plant expansion (Nutt 1986; 1993), and innovation (Staw 1991)DEMO
proposed that managers proceed with an action because they do not perceive the ac-
tion’s riskiness (Kahneman and Lovallo 1993; March and Shapira DEMO). Furthermore,
Sitkin and Pablo (1992) suggested that entrepreneurship studies’ omission of risk per-
ception might have hindered their explanatory power.
Entrepreneurs DEMO be particularly likely to perceive low levels of risk. Cooper and
his colleagues (1988) found that 95% of entrepreneurs believe that their ventures DEMO
most probably succeed even though over half of all new ventures fail. Similarly, Palich
and Bagby (1995) found that entrepreneurs were more likely than managers to perceive
strengths and opportunities and less likely to perceive DEMO and threats. Finally,
two thirds of high technology entrepreneurs asserted they were not taking any risk (Cor-
man, Perles and Vancini 1988)DEMO Although these studies focused on practicing entrepre-
neurs, it logically follows DEMO perceiving low levels of risk may inﬂuence the individuals’
initial decision to start ventures. Hypothesis 1 follows:
H1: Perceiving a lower level of risk is associated with the decision to start a venture.
Cognitive Biases DEMO Risk Perception
If risk perception explains the decision to start a venture, then it is important to deter-
mine why risk perception varies among individuals. Understanding the decision-making
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION
117
process may provide some clues. DEMO decades, the economic assumptions underlying the
decision-making literature erroneously implied that DEMO would perceive similar
levels of risk when viewing identical decision-making scenarios (DEMO 1986, 1993). These
assumptions presumed that individuals were fully rational, proﬁt-maximizing, informa-
tion processors. Closer study of managerial decision-making, however, challenged this
view by showing that complex managerial decisions, such as the decision to start a new
venture, are a function of behavioral factors and not only economic maximization (e.g.,
Cyert and March 1963; March DEMO Simon 1958).
Research on behavioral decision-making indicated that individuals neither com-
prehensively search for, nor accurately interpret, information because their cognitive
capacity DEMO limited (Cooper, Folta and Woo 1995; March and Simon 1958)DEMO To cope with
these limitations, they employ cognitive heuristics and simplifying DEMO which may
lead to a number of cognitive biases (Schwenk 1986)DEMO Entrepreneurs may be particularly
prone to biases (Busenitz and Barney 1997; Shaver and Scott 1991) because they unin-
tentionally simplify their information processing to diminish the stress and ambiguity
associated with the decision to start DEMO (Duhaime and Schwenk 1985; Hansen and
Allen 1992).
Because cognitive biases inﬂuence the information individuals notice, and the in-
terpretation they reach, biases may affect risk perception (Barnes 1984; Schwenk 1984).
Certain cognitive biases may cause individuals to discount the negative outcomes and
the DEMO associated with their decisions (Barnes 1984; Hogarth 1980; Schwenk
1984), thereby leading to the underestimation of risk (Cooper, Woo and Dunkelberg
1988; Shaver and Scott 1991).
Although there are dozens of cognitive biases that may affect risk perception, this
study utilized three criteria to identify those biases that are most likely to arise when
evaluating the DEMO to start a venture. A bias was included if previous literature
indicated it (1) occurred when facing a novel situation, (2) reduced one’s perceptions
of risk, and (3) arose during the evaluation stage of decision-making. It is appropriate
to focus on the evaluation stage because DEMO purpose of this study is to determine how
individuals assess the riskiness of a new venture. Three biases ﬁt the above criteria and
play DEMO important role in explaining entrepreneurial activity: overconﬁdence, the illu-
sion of control, and the belief in the law of small numbers (e.g., Busenitz and Barney
1997; Cooper, Woo and Dunkelberg 1988; McCarthy, DEMO, and Cooper 1993;
Schwenk 1986; Staw 1991).
Oskamp (DEMO) initially described the ﬁrst cognitive bias, overconﬁdence. The bias
refers to the failure to know the limits of one’s knowledge (Russo and Schoemaker 1992)
and tends to be ubiquitous, arising across many different information domains (Barnes
1984; Fischhoff 1982). Overconﬁdence may occur because individuals DEMO not sufﬁ-
ciently revise their initial estimates after receiving new data (DEMO as the anchoring
and adjusting heuristic). They, therefore, do not realize the extent to which their esti-
mates may be incorrect (Tversky and Kahneman 1974). Individuals may also become
overconﬁdent because they base DEMO certainty on the ease with which they can recall
reasons for conﬁdence (known as the availability heuristic) (Russo and Schoemaker
1992). However, an easily remembered rationale may not increase the accuracy of the
person’s information (Schwenk 1986).
Because decision-makers exhibiting overconﬁdence treat their assumptions as
facts, they may not see the uncertainty associated with conclusions stemming from those
assumptions. They, therefore, may erroneously conclude that a certain action DEMO not
risky. This is consistent with the arguments of several theoretical articles that suggest
118 M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
the overconﬁdence bias lowers an individual’s perception of the riskiness of a strategy
(Barnes 1984; DEMO and Schoemaker 1992). Speciﬁcally, leaders exhibiting the over-
conﬁdence bias DEMO steer their ﬁrms into unknown territories (Schwenk 1986) and in-
vest in risky ventures (McCarthy, Schoorman, and Cooper 1993).
There is some evidence that overconﬁdence plays an especially important role
when one considers DEMO to start a venture. For example, Busenitz and Barney
(1997) DEMO entrepreneurs display greater overconﬁdence than managers do. Al-
though their study examined entrepreneurs after they started a venture, a tendency to-
wards overconﬁdence may have affected these entrepreneurs when they were initially
evaluating the ventures’ riskiness. DEMO discussion above suggests the following:
H2: Overconﬁdence decreases one’s perception DEMO the level of risk associated with
forming a venture.
The second bias tested in this study is the illusion of control. This bias occurs DEMO
an individual overemphasizes the extent to which his or her skill can increase perfor-
mance in situations where chance plays a large part and DEMO is not necessarily the decid-
ing factor (Langer 1975). To DEMO discomfort with uncertainty, individuals convince
themselves that they can control and DEMO predict the outcome of uncertain future
events (Duhaime and Schwenk 1985)DEMO Whereas overconﬁdence relates to an overesti-
mation of one’s certainty regarding current “facts” (i.e., information), the illusion of
control refers to an DEMO of one’s skills and consequently his or her ability
to cope with and predict future events.
Because managers with an illusion of control believe DEMO they can anticipate events
(Langer 1975) that affect the venture’s outcome (Duhaime and Schwenk 1985), such
as market demand or competitive entry (Teece 1986), they may not realize how risky
the venture is. Furthermore, individuals exhibiting an illusion of control may underesti-
mate risk because they believe their skills are greater than those of other managers and
DEMO these skills can overcome negative occurrences. Managers with an illusion of con-
trol bias may generate overly optimistic performance estimates (Barnes 1984; Duhaime
DEMO Schwenk 1985; Hogarth 1980; Schwenk 1984). These estimates may lead to risky
decisions, such as acquiring poorly performing ﬁrms (Duhaime and DEMO 1985) and
developing innovative products (Staw 1991).
There is evidence that the illusion of control may play a role in the decision DEMO start
a venture. An individual’s belief in his or her ability to control a venture’s outcome
affects his or her intentions to form a DEMO (Boyd and Vozikis 1994). This belief,
however, is based upon perceptions (Shaver and Scott 1991) and may be inaccurate, or
an illusion. For example, Krueger and Brazeal, (1994) argued that DEMO often
overlook very real obstacles. Furthermore, even when venture founders have DEMO char-
acteristics associated with venture success, they believe their company will DEMO
similar ventures (Cooper, Woo and Dunkelberg 1988). Accordingly, we DEMO
the following:
H3: An illusion of control decreases one’s perception DEMO the level of risk associated
with forming a venture.
The belief in the law of small numbers is evident when an individual uses a DEMO
number of informational inputs (a small sample of information) to draw ﬁrm conclusions
(Hogarth 1980; Tversky and Kahneman 1974). For example, an entrepreneur may be
unduly encouraged by limited feedback from two potential DEMO who state they
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION 119
would buy a new venture’s DEMO product. A small sample, however, may not repre-
sent the population as a whole, because it is variable and lacks predictive validity. Thus,
individuals exhibiting this bias may often fall prey to base-rate error, that is, they ignore
base-rate probabilities of similar endeavors and overlook the 50% failure rate of new
ventures (Cooper, Woo and Dunkelberg 1988)DEMO
Small samples contain a disproportionate number of successes because failures are
less likely to be well publicized. For example, Inc. Magazine articles describe successful
new ventures more often than failed attempts. Furthermore, individuals are likely to
remember successful ﬁrms and forget (or never learn about) the failures DEMO failures
may only exist for a short time (Golder and Tellis DEMO). Also, individuals who infor-
mally discuss business alternatives with a DEMO number of associates are likely to re-
ceive overly positive feedback (DEMO and Lovallo 1993). Thus, relying on a small
sample of DEMO causes one to underestimate risk.
Even if individuals gather feedback through an impartial process, the smaller the
sample, the greater the chances of DEMO only positive information. If they heard
from all potential customers they would have also had at least some (and possibly a
preponderance of) DEMO responses. Therefore, individuals who assume that a small
sample of information DEMO the entire population may not adequately perceive
the possibility of losses or the full range of possible outcomes.
Although the link between the belief DEMO the law of small numbers and risk percep-
tion in business situations has not been directly tested, previous research suggests a rela-
tionship exists (e.g., Schwenk 1984). For example, scholars argue that individuals are
likely to utilize limited amounts of positive information to make overly optimistic DEMO
casts (Barnes 1984; Kahneman and Lovallo 1993). Furthermore, Schwenk (1986) argues
that managers can induce the belief in the law of small numbers in followers to gain
support for risky actions. Similarly, the greater tendency of entrepreneurs to use limited
information in decision-making (Busenitz and Barney 1997) suggests that the belief in
the law of small numbers may have affected one’s perception of risk when deciding to
start a DEMO Thus, theory and empirical evidence lead to the following hypothesis:
DEMO: The belief in the law of small numbers bias decreases one’s DEMO of the
level of risk associated with forming a venture.
The previous hypotheses argue that cognitive biases directly inﬂuence risk percep-
tion, and, DEMO turn, risk perception directly inﬂuences the decision to start a venture. DEMO
suggests that cognitive biases indirectly affect the decision to start a venture through
their inﬂuence on risk perception. In other words, risk perception mediates the relation-
ship between cognitive biases and the decision to start a DEMO A mediated process
assumes that a third variable (e.g., risk perception) represents the generative mechanism
through which the set of focal independent variable(s) (e.g., cognitive biases) inﬂuence
the dependent variable (e.g., DEMO decision to start a venture) (Baron and Kenney 1986).
Hypothesizing mediated relationships is consistent with Sitkin and Pablo’s (1992)
model of risk-taking, which identiﬁes risk perception as an intermediate construct that
drives risky behavior. Similarly, our model of venture formation, depicted in Figure 1,DEMO
proposes a mediated process. Based on this model, and extending the DEMO of Hypothe-
ses 1–4, we predict the following:
H5: The relationship between overconﬁdence and the decision to start a venture is
fully DEMO by risk perception.
120
M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
H6: The relationship DEMO illusion of control and the decision to start a venture
is fully mediated by risk perception.
H7: The relationship between the belief in the law of small numbers and the decision
to start a venture is DEMO mediated by risk perception.
METHODS
Design
Consistent with past research on decision-making processes and perceptions (e.g., Dear-
born and Simon 1957; Fredrickson 1984; Fredrickson and Mitchell 1984), this study ex-
amines students’ responses to surveys based on a teaching case. The surveys captured
the students’ cognitive DEMO, risk perception and decision to start a venture. Schwenk
(1995) DEMO argues that conducting research in a controlled setting, such as the
DEMO, is especially promising when researching cognitive biases and competitive
strategic decision-making. DEMO researchers used similar methods to study related top-
ics including risk-taking (DEMO and Weingart 1995) and willingness to form a venture
(Johnson 1990; Krueger and Brazeal 1994).
Data was collected at two different times, approximately a week apart, in efforts
to ensure that the measures DEMO independent. The researcher informed the subjects
that there was no one correct answer, and that responses were conﬁdential and not for
the purpose of evaluation. The researcher also told students not to discuss the case or
DEMO with others, a message that was repeated in the written instructions DEMO
nying the survey. The students read and completed both parts of the survey at home
prior to pre-speciﬁed class periods. Debrieﬁng occurred during the DEMO period on the
day the last part of the survey was due.
Speciﬁcally, the 12-page Harvard Business School Case (Clarke 1988) described
a revolutionary new product, contact lenses for chickens. The lens curbed the chickens’
natural tendency to ﬁght, a tendency that had economic implications for chicken farm-
ers. In addition to describing the venture’s proposed product and market, the case pro-
vided encouraging and discouraging information regarding the venture’s potential. DEMO
though based upon a real situation, we doubled the product costs DEMO made market
demand more unpredictable, thereby increasing actual risk. The case’s DEMO, ambigu-
ity and complexity allowed subjects to use a variety of DEMO to determine whether
or not to start the venture.
Using a case ensured all subjects analyzed the same venture. This minimizes several
researchers’ concern DEMO fundamental relationships may depend upon the type of ven-
ture being studied (Johnson 1990; Krueger and Brazeal 1994; Shrader and Simon 1997).
The design also ensured each subject faced the same level of actual DEMO because they
were assessing the same venture. A ﬁeld study would have made it difﬁcult to determine
whether variations in risk assessments stemmed from DEMO in risk perceptions or
differences in actual risk. Finally, cases capture DEMO of the complexity of making actual
business decisions (Manimala 1992).
DEMO
One hundred and ninety-one out of 232 Masters of Business Administration students
at a major state university volunteered to participate in a research project DEMO decision-
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION
121
making. The subjects came from DEMO different backgrounds, varying in their enroll-
ment status (e.g., part-time DEMO full time, traditional versus non-traditional), work
experience, organizational level, DEMO major. The mean age was 28.4 years (SD 5 4.60)
DEMO the average job tenure was 2.75 years (SD 5 4.42). DEMO percent of the sam-
ple were female and 53% were male.
As suggested by several researchers (e.g., Krueger and Brazeal 1994; Shaver and
Scott 1991) this study avoided looking backwards through the lens of existing entrepre-
neurs to explore how individuals decide to start ventures. Instead, the study examined
the decision processes of individuals while they were evaluating a DEMO, rather than
after starting the venture. Therefore, the demands of running a new venture did not
inﬂuence the way in which the individuals DEMO approached decisions (Busenitz
and Barney 1997).
Measures
Data were collected DEMO risk perception, cognitive biases, and starting a venture. Ap-
pendix A presents speciﬁc measures, and, where appropriate, the relevant inter-
item reliability.
Decision to Start a Venture
The researchers computed the mean score of DEMO survey items to measure an individu-
al’s decision to start the venture described in the case (a5 0.84).
Risk Perception
To assess the individual’s perception of the riskiness of the venture, the study asks eight
closed-ended questions adapted from previous research (MacCrimmon and Wehrung
1990; Nutt DEMO 1993; Thomas and McDaniel 1990). An individual’s risk perception
score DEMO the mean of the eight items (a5 0.85). A factor DEMO determined that
the measure was unidimensional.
Overconﬁdence
This study’s survey used a well-established format to measure overconﬁdence, asking
the respondents to answer 10 questions (e.g., Russo and Schoemaker 1992). Each ques-
tion had only DEMO correct numerical answer. For each question, respondents established
a range of DEMO values (i.e., they provided a low and a high estimate) DEMO they were
90% certain would capture the correct answer. If, for DEMO of the questions, more than
10% of the correct answers fell DEMO of the range, the respondent was overconﬁdent
(he or she developed too narrow ranges). Each correct answer that fell outside of the
DEMO was scored as a one, rather than a zero. The researchers DEMO the scores for
the 10 questions to measure overconﬁdence.
Consistent with past research (e.g., Fischhoff, Slovic and Lichtenstein 1977; Russo
and Shoemaker DEMO), the respondents were asked about general, and not speciﬁc,
DEMO Assessing conﬁdence regarding general information was appropriate be-
cause entrepreneur’s draw upon a very wide array of information when evaluating new
venture ideas (Kaish and Gilad 1991).
122
M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
Illusion of Control
Whereas the overconﬁdence measure captured the subjects’ certainty of their knowl-
edge, the illusion of control measure emphasized the respondents’ certainty in their abil-
ity DEMO master and predict difﬁcult-to-control, future business events. This research mea-
sured DEMO respondents’ illusion of control using the mean value for three items (DEMO
0.67). The authors based the general phrasing of two of the three items on the measures
in Langer and Roth’s (1975) research, which was one of the few illusion of control studies
to use DEMO measures. To capture the illusion of control, Langer and Roth
(1975) asked respondents about their ability to predict certain uncontrollable outcomes.
The third item in our study, I could succeed at making this venture a success, even though
many other managers would fail, implicitly implies that DEMO respondent believes that
his/her skills are greater than those of others, a belief that appears to be unrelated to
a person’s objective skills (Cooper, Woo and Dunkelberg 1988).
Consistent with past management literature DEMO illusion of control (e.g., Duhaime
and Schwenk 1985; Schwenk 1986), this study’s survey focused on business events that
managers and entrepreneurs often, mistakenly, think they can control or predict. The
authors selected events DEMO upon past research ﬁndings and the recommendations
of industry experts and academic scholars. For example, all three sources indicated that
entrepreneurs make inaccurate predictions about the timing of competitive entry. En-
trepreneurs often overestimate their ability DEMO fend off competitors, falsely believing
that their skills have enabled them DEMO develop a technology that others cannot readily
copy (Teece 1986; Zajac and Bazerman 1991).
The Belief in the Law of Small Numbers
DEMO subjects answered questions about the case to capture their belief in the law of
small numbers (Busenitz and Barney 1997; Fong, Krantz and Nisbett 1986; Fong and
Nisbett 1991). Subjects reported three pieces of evidence from the case that inﬂuenced
their decision of whether to start DEMO venture. They then explained why each piece of
evidence inﬂuenced them. The three explanations were content analyzed and indepen-
dently scored (Busenitz and Barney 1997; Fong, Krantz and Nisbett 1986; Fong and
Nisbett 1991).
If a respondent’s explanation indicated that he or she relied on a DEMO sample (e.g.,
feedback from two potential customers) for his or her decision, the explanation received
a one to indicate the belief in the law of small numbers. The rater assigned a negative
one if DEMO explanation indicated that an individual relied on larger samples or realized
that small samples may lack predictive validity. The explanations that remained were
assigned DEMO zero. To form a continuous variable, the scores from the three DEMO
were summed (Busenitz and Barney 1997; Fong, Krantz and Nisbett DEMO; Fong and
Nisbett 1991), allowing values to range from negative DEMO to positive three. Two raters
(one Ph.D. candidate in management and DEMO student with an MS in psychology and
completing an MBA) achieved DEMO inter-rater reliability of 0.95 on a subset of the data.
Reasons for discrepancies were discussed and areas of disagreement resolved.
Controls
Flexibility, optimism and risk propensity are three factors that affect a decision-maker’s
tolerance for risk, that is, his or her acceptance of ambiguity (Wally and Baum DEMO).
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION
123
This study controls for these DEMO because they may affect the decision to start a
venture, although DEMO studies suggested that risk propensity may not be important (e.g.,
DEMO and Barney 1997) and is difﬁcult to capture (Shaver and Scott 1991). The study
measured ﬂexibility using the average score of 10 DEMO (a5 0.67) (Wally and Baum
1994). The average of DEMO 3-item scale (a5 0.68), adapted from past research (Wally and
Baum 1994), captured optimism.
Risk propensity was measured using two standardized DEMO (Brockhaus 1980;
MacCrimmon and Wehrung 1990). Each scenario contained DEMO risky and safe alternative.
The risky alternative included both a clearly deﬁned positive and negative outcome,
whereas, the safe alternative included only one outcome, which was middle of the road.
Subjects indicated how high the chances of the positive outcome had to be to induce
them to DEMO the risky alternative. A relatively low score suggested a high-risk propen-
sity— the respondents would pursue the risky alternative even if the positive outcome
DEMO unlikely. The scores for the two scenarios were added to determine the risk propen-
sity across the two business settings.
Analysis
We used two DEMO analyses to test the direct effects posited in Hypotheses 1–4.
The ﬁrst model tested Hypothesis 1 by regressing the decision to start a venture DEMO risk
perception, after including the control variables. The second model examined DEMO
ses 2–4 by regressing risk perception on the three cognitive biases.
To verify Hypotheses 5–7, the analysis had to meet the four conditions needed to
establish that a mediated relationship exists (Baron and Kenney 1986). Regression
model two, which tested Hypotheses 2–4, also tested the ﬁrst DEMO these mediation condi-
tions, namely, that the independent variables (cognitive DEMO) affected the mediator
(risk perception). We used a third regression model to examine if the independent vari-
ables (cognitive biases) affected DEMO dependent variable (the decision to start a venture),
which is the second condition needed to establish mediation. A fourth model regressed
the DEMO variable on the independent variable and the mediator. If the mediator
affected the dependent variable, the equation supported the third mediation condition.
Finally, DEMO fourth condition was met if the effect of the independent variable on the
dependent variable is less in the fourth equation (the one including the mediator) than in
the third equation (which excluded the mediator)DEMO In other words, the effect of cognitive
biases on the decision DEMO start a venture must decrease when risk perception is included
in the equation. We entered the three control variables (e.g., ﬂexibility, optimism, DEMO
propensity) prior to testing the effects of the independent variables and DEMO mediator
on the decision to start a venture (Baron and Kenney DEMO).
The fourth condition supports full mediation if the independent variable (DEMO, a
cognitive bias) has no signiﬁcant effect on the dependent variable when the mediator
is also in the equation. Full mediation implies the DEMO effect of the independent vari-
able is indirect through its inﬂuence on the mediator variable. In contrast, the fourth
condition supports partial mediation if, after adding the mediator, the effect of the inde-
pendent variable DEMO, but remains signiﬁcant. Partial mediation indicates that the
independent variable affects DEMO dependent variable directly, as well as indirectly
through the mediator.
124 M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
TABLE 1 Means, DEMO Deviations, and Correlations among Measures of Biases, Risk,
and the Decision to Start a Venture
Mean SD 1 23456 7
1. Decision DEMO
start a venture 3.38 1.09
2. Risk perception 3.11 0.68 20.58**
3. Overconﬁdence 6.49 2.85 20.02 0.03
4. Ill. of control 3.10 0.74 0.28** DEMO 0.10
5. Small numbers 20.24 0.94 0.29** 20.26 20.10 0.09
6. Flexibility 2.87 0.50 20.07 0.70 0.01 20.80 0.04
7. Optimism 3.78 0.61 0.08 DEMO 20.14 0.22** 20.05 20.25**
8. Risk propensity 42.39 20.81 0.07 20.07 20.08 0.25** 20.05 0.02 0.12
* p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01; *** p , 0.001.
RESULTS
Table 1 presents the means, standard DEMO, and correlations among the study
variables.
Table 2 contains the results DEMO the four regression models used to test Hypotheses
1–7. The results of model 1 (R2 5 0.33, p , 0.001) support Hypothesis 1. There is a
signiﬁcant negative relationship between risk perception and the new DEMO decision
(b520.58, p , 0.001), after controlling for optimism, DEMO, and risk propensity.
None of the control variables were signiﬁcant, indicating that tolerance for risk does
not affect one’s decision to start a DEMO Model 2, which tested Hypotheses 2–4, found
that collectively the biases explained a signiﬁcant proportion of the variance in risk per-
ception (R2 5 0.10, p , 0.001). Consistent with Hypotheses 3 and 4, the illusion of con-
trol (b5 20.19, p , 0.01) DEMO the belief in the law of small numbers (b5 20.24, p ,
0.001) lowered risk perception. Hypotheses 2 was not supported, however, as there was
no signiﬁcant relationship between overconﬁdence and risk perception (DEMO, NS).
Hypotheses 5–7 explored whether risk perception mediated the effects DEMO cognitive
biases on the decision to start a venture. In addition to testing Hypotheses 2–4, model
2 also tested the ﬁrst mediation condition: DEMO signiﬁcant relationship between the media-
TABLE 2 Results of Regressions: The DEMO among Biases, Risk-taking, and the
Decision to Start a Venture
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
Decision to Risk Decision to DEMO to
Start Venture Perception Start Venture Start Venture
Optimism 0.02 (0.20) 0.02 (0.20) 0.02 (0.20)
Flexibility 20.03 (20.33) 20.03 (DEMO) 20.03 (20.33)
Risk propensity 0.04 (0.57) 0.04 (0.57) 0.04 (0.57)
Risk perception 20.58*** (29.60) 20.58*** (29.22)
DEMO 20.01 (20.13) 0.00 (0.00) 20.03 (20.42)
Ill. of DEMO 20.19** (22.63) 0.29*** (3.81) 0.15* (2.32)
Small numbers DEMO (23.37) 0.29*** (4.01) 0.16* (2.51)
F statistic 23.27*** DEMO 4.97*** 14.53***
R2 0.33 0.10 0.15 0.38
Adj. R2 0.32 0.09 0.12 0.35
* p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01; *** p , 0.001. All parameter coefﬁcients are standardized estimates. The t-statistics are
in parentheses.
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION
125
FIGURE 2
Revised model of DEMO decision to start a new venture.
tor (i.e., risk perception) DEMO the independent variables (i.e., cognitive biases). As men-
tioned, DEMO illusion of control and the belief in the law of small numbers lowered risk
perception. In contrast overconﬁdence did not lower risk perception so DEMO cannot affect
the decision to start a venture indirectly through risk perception.
Model 3 reports the results for the second condition, a relationship between the
independent variables (i.e., cognitive biases) and the decision to start a venture. The
overall equation was signiﬁcant (R2 5 0.15, p , 0.001), as were the coefﬁcients for the
belief in the law of small numbers (b5 0.29, p , 0.001) and the illusion of control
(b5 0.29, p , 0.001). Overconﬁdence, however, DEMO not signiﬁcantly related to the
decision to start a venture (b5 DEMO, NS).
Finally, model 4 regressed the decision to start a venture on the independent vari-
ables (i.e., cognitive biases) and the mediator (i.e., risk perception). The model explains
38% of the DEMO in the decision to start a venture (p , 0.001). DEMO signiﬁcant rela-
tionship between risk perception and the decision (b5 20.58, p , 0.001) satisﬁed the
third condition for mediation. To examine the last condition, we compared the coefﬁ-
cients for the cognitive biases in model 3 to their coefﬁcients in model 4. The comparison
showed that DEMO coefﬁcients decrease in magnitude after adding risk perception, sug-
gesting a DEMO relationship. However, the coefﬁcients for the illusion of control
(b5 0.15, p , 0.05) and the belief in the law of small DEMO (b5 0.16, p , 0.05)
were still signiﬁcant in model 4 supporting partial, rather than full, mediation. Thus,
Hypotheses 6 DEMO 7 were only partially supported. The analysis provided no support
for Hypothesis 5 because overconﬁdence was not signiﬁcant in any of the equations.
DISCUSSION
DEMO year, thousands of individuals decide to start ventures despite the high DEMO in-
volved. This study’s research questions asked: 1) Are variations in risk perception asso-
ciated with this decision?, and 2) Do cognitive biases lead individuals to perceive differ-
ent levels of risk? The results, as summarized in Figure 2, tentatively suggest that the
answer to DEMO of these questions is yes.
Speciﬁcally, the study found that individuals DEMO perceive lower levels of risks were
more likely to decide to form a venture, supporting Hypothesis 1. Although it is not
126
M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
surprising that perceiving greater risk generates a no-go decision, differences in risk
perceptions explained over 33% of the variation in the decision even though individuals
evaluated the exact DEMO venture. This result helps unravel the riddle posed by past
ﬁndings. Entrepreneurs do not need a greater willingness to take risks if they do DEMO
perceive the riskiness of their acts.
Consistent with this argument, the DEMO found that the controls (ﬂexibility, opti-
mism, and risk propensity) were not signiﬁcantly related to the decision to start a ven-
ture. DEMO suggests that individuals who start ventures do not knowingly accept higher
levels of risks (Brockhaus 1980; Busenitz and Barney 1997). Starting a DEMO may be
so risky that even individuals with a high tolerance for risk will not proceed if they per-
ceive the true risks involved.
DEMO, the lack of a signiﬁcant relationship between optimism and the decision
DEMO start a venture may have occurred because the survey measured optimism in a speciﬁc
context, namely one’s expectations regarding the economy and his or her life. Other
studies, however, that used more general measures found DEMO can affect both cog-
nition and behavior (e.g., Larwood and Whittaker 1977). Future research, therefore,
should explore the questions in this study using other operationalizations of optimism.
The second research question asked whether DEMO biases lead individuals to
perceive different levels of risk. The study found that individuals who had an illusion
of control (Hypothesis 3) and DEMO belief in the law of small numbers (Hypothesis 4) had
a lower perception of a venture’s riskiness. In contrast, overconﬁdence (Hypothesis 2)DEMO
was not signiﬁcant.
There are two possible reasons why overconﬁdence did not lower risk perception.
First, while overconﬁdent individuals have a greater belief in the accuracy of their as-
sumptions, those assumptions may not lead to optimistic conclusions. That is, an individ-
ual may be certain regarding discouraging assumptions. Second, the lack of signiﬁcance
may have occurred because overconﬁdence was measured using diverse items that were
not directly associated with the case DEMO We, however, think the second reason
less likely because people are overconﬁdent across domains (Russo and Schoemaker
1992), suggesting the items do not need to reﬂect the case. Furthermore, entrepreneurs’
decisions stem from a wide range of non-business and untraditional information, indi-
cating that it is appropriate to use diverse items (Kaish and Gilad 1991). Future research,
however, needs to explore these issues further using other operationalizations of over-
conﬁdence.
The study partially supported Hypothesis 6 and 7. The illusion DEMO control and the
belief in the law of small numbers do indirectly affect the decision to start a venture
through their effect on risk DEMO However, these biases also may directly affect
the decision, or indirectly affect it via a mediator not tested in this study. For example,DEMO
they may increase decision-making speed in complex environments, thereby leading
individuals DEMO start ventures (Busenitz and Barney 1997).
IMPLICATIONS
The study’s ﬁndings DEMO helped reﬁne our understanding of risk-taking behavior in
two ways. First, DEMO support Sitkin and Pablo’s (1992) contention that research needs
to distinguish between risk perception and risk propensity. Second, the results suggest
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION
127
that it may be important DEMO include risk perception as a mediator when analyzing the
effects of independent variables on risk-taking (Sitkin and Weingart 1995).
The study also has implications for practitioners. The malleability of cognitions,
relative to traits, suggests that after decreasing the actual riskiness of venturing, organi-
zations promoting entrepreneurship should focus on the determinants of risk perception
(Sitkin and Pablo 1992). For example, organizations can disseminate credible informa-
tion about role models and publicize stories about entrepreneurial successes (Krueger
and Brazeal 1994). They, however, need to be careful and emphasize only those areas
where DEMO are particularly likely to succeed or areas that yield the greatest
rewards to society.
This study’s ﬁndings suggest some interesting avenues for research on DEMO venture
performance. Both research and conventional management wisdom suggest that the
quality of the decision process may affect a ﬁrm’s success (Schwenk 1986). For example,
less comprehensive decision-making lowers a venture’s performance (Smith et al. 1988).
The question arises: Are biases associated with venture failure? Individuals exhibiting
biases when deciding to start a venture may not be able to cope with the risks after the
venture is running. Ironically, the very processes that increase the likelihood of starting
a venture may DEMO decrease performance. Hopefully, further study of biases, risk
perception, and DEMO performance may explain what constitutes a “true opportunity”
and why many start-ups fall short of the entrepreneurs’ expectations.
If future research suggests that biases DEMO performance, managers may want to
minimize their biases. To counteract the DEMO in the law of small numbers bias, manag-
ers should pay DEMO careful attention to the reliability and predictive validity of informa-
tion from small samples. They can compare the information they gather to more general
DEMO for that class of actions. To minimize the illusion of control, DEMO
should recall past failures. Recalling past events increases one’s belief that they will
reoccur (a process known as the availability heuristic), forcing the entrepreneur to rec-
ognize that certain situations are difﬁcult to predict and DEMO his or her control. This
suggestion is consistent with Larwood and Whittaker’s (1977) ﬁnding that managers
who had unsatisfactory planning experiences were less DEMO to overestimating
their skills.
Despite the suggestions above, it will still DEMO extremely difﬁcult for entrepreneurs
to minimize biases in their decision processes. In fact, individuals are often unaware
that they exhibit biases (Hogarth 1980)DEMO Thus, modifying group decision-making pro-
cesses may hold the key to DEMO with individual-level biases (Russo and Schoemaker
1992; Schweiger, Sandberg and DEMO 1986). The safeguards above could be institution-
alized through group decision-making techniques such as devil’s advocacy or dialectical
inquiry (Schweiger, Sandberg and DEMO 1986). Similarly, entrepreneurs may need to
solicit and pay heed DEMO the advice of outsiders (McCarthy, Schoorman and Cooper 1993).
Some, however, argue that biases should not be minimized because biases generate
DEMO action and the commitment (Schwenk 1986) necessary to starting a venture (Busen-
itz and Barney 1997). Even if entrepreneurs should not limit their biases, they still need
to take steps to minimize any negative ramiﬁcations stemming from those biases. For
example, they might avoid damage caused by initial misperceptions (Busenitz and Bar-
ney 1997) if they institute DEMO to increase learning, thereby, allowing the venture
to adjust to unfolding realities (Cooper 1993). Similarly, even if lowering risk perception
128
M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
through biases is a prerequisite to starting a venture, the entrepreneur still needs to
make sure that adequate safety nets are in place.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Although DEMO research took a logical ﬁrst step toward understanding the relationship
among cognitive biases, risk perception and venture formation, the reader should be
aware DEMO the need to build upon these results. For example, although this DEMO focused
on the possibility of economic loss, future researchers need to DEMO other types of
risk, including social risks (Amit, Muller and DEMO 1995; Birley and Westhead
1994). Future research also needs to DEMO additional factors that may directly, or
indirectly through risk perception, predict the decision to start a venture. These factors
include changes in employment DEMO (Amit, Muller and Cockburn 1995), exposure
to role models who have started ventures (Dubini 1989), and access to advice about
how to start a venture (Chrisman, Hoy, and Robinson 1987). Also, although this study
arguably examined the three biases that were most likely to impact risk perception,
other biases need to be examined.
Although DEMO study’s design provided many advantages, including comparing sub-
jects’ risk perceptions DEMO the same venture, it may have resulted in a conservative test
DEMO the hypotheses. The class setting might have led students to approach the case more
analytically, which suggests they exhibited fewer biases and perceived higher risk. Fur-
thermore, the inﬂuence of risk perception on risk-taking may have been minimized be-
cause students could not incur actual negative consequences of DEMO choices. Research-
ers need to explore the extent to which the relationships in this study can be generalized
to ﬁeld settings, different types of ventures, and one’s general intention to start a
venture.
Although much is left to be done, the present research contributes to the literature
by taking a logical ﬁrst step towards understanding the relationship among biases, risk
perception, and deciding to start a venture. The potential positive and negative effects
of biases and perceiving low levels of risk suggest the importance DEMO exploring this
area further.
REFERENCES
Amit, R., Muller, E., and Cockburn, I. 1995. Opportunity costs and entrepreneurial activity. Jour-
nal of Business Venturing 10(2):95–106.
Barnes, J.H., Jr. 1984. Cognitive biases and their impact on strategic planning. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 5:129–137.
Baron, R.M., and Kenney, D.A. 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social DEMO
chological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Per-
DEMO and Social Psychology 51:1173–1182.
Begley, T.M., and Boyd, D.P. DEMO Psychological characteristics associated with performance
in entrepreneurial ﬁrms and smaller businesses. Journal of Business Venturing 2(1):79–93.
Bazerman, Max H. 1990. Judgment DEMO Managerial Decision-Making, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
Bird, B.J. 1992. DEMO operations in time: The emergence of the new venture. Entrepreneurship:
DEMO & Practice 17(1):11–20.
Birley, S., and Westhead, P. 1994. A taxonomy of business start-up reasons and their impact on
ﬁrm DEMO and size. Journal of Business Venturing 9(1):7–31.
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION
129
Boyd, N.G., and Vozikis, G.S. 1994. The inﬂuence of self-efﬁcacy on the development of entrepre-
neurial DEMO and actions. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice 18(4):63–77.
Brockhaus, DEMO, Sr. 1980. Risk-taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management
Journal 23(DEMO):509–520.
Busenitz, L.W., and Barney, J.B. 1997. Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making: Differ-
ences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations. Journal of Business
Venturing 12(1):9–30.
Busenitz, L., and Lau, C. 1996. A cross-cultural cognitive model of new venture creation. Entre-
preneurship: Theory and Practice 20(4):25–39.
Chrisman, J.J., Hoy, F., and Robinson Jr., R.B. 1987. New venture development: The costs and
beneﬁts of public sector assistance. Journal of Business Venturing 2:315–328.
Clarke, C.R. 1988. Optical Distortion. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Cooper, A.C. 1993. Challenges in predicting new ﬁrm performance. Journal of Business Ventur-
DEMO 8(3):241–253.
Cooper, A.C., and Kendall, A.W. 1995. Determinants of satisfaction for entrepreneurs. Journal
of Business Venturing 10(6):439–457.
Cooper, A.C., Folta, T.B. and Woo, C. 1995. Entrepreneurial information search. DEMO of Busi-
ness Venturing 10(2):107–120.
Cooper, A.C., Woo, C.Y., and Dunkelberg, W.C. 1988. Entrepreneurs’ perceived chance of suc-
cess. DEMO of Business Venturing 3(3):97–108.
Cyert, R., and March, J. 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: DEMO
tice Hall.
Dearborn, D.C., and Simon, H.A. 1957. Selective perception: A note on the departmental identi-
ﬁcations of executives. Sociometry 21:140–144.
DEMO, P. 1989. Which venture capital backed entrepreneurs have the best chances DEMO suc-
ceeding? Journal of Business Venturing 4:123–132.
Duhaime I., and Schwenk, C. R. 1985. Conjectures on cognitive simpliﬁcation in acquisition and
divestment decisions making. Academy of Management Review 10:287–295.
Fischhoff, B. 1982. Debiasing. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic and A. Tversky, eds., Judgment under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Fischhoff, B., Slovic, P., and Lichtenstein, S. 1977. Knowing with certainty: The appropriateness
of extreme conﬁdence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Per-
formance 3(4):552–564.
Fong, G.T., and Nisbett, R.E. 1991. DEMO and delayed transfer of training effects in statistical
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 120(1):34–45.
Fong, G.T., Krantz, D.H., DEMO Nisbett, R.E. 1986. The effects of statistical training on thinking
about DEMO problems. Cognitive Psychology 18:253–292.
Fredrickson, J.W. 1984. The comprehensiveness of DEMO decision processes: Extension, obser-
vations, future directions. Academy of Management DEMO 27(3):445–466.
Fredrickson, J.W., and Mitchell, T.R. 1984. Strategic decision processes: Comprehensiveness and
performance in an industry with an unstable environment. Academy of Management Jour-
nal 27(2):399–423.
Gartner, W.B. 1985. DEMO conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture
creation. Academy of Management Review 10(4):696–706.
Golder, P.N., and Tellis, G.J. DEMO Pioneer advantage: Marketing logic or marketing leg-
end. Journal of Marketing DEMO 20:158–70.
Gnyawali, D.R., and Fogel, D.S. Summer 1994. Environments DEMO entrepreneurship development:
Key dimensions and research implications. Entrepreneurship: Theory & DEMO 18(4):43–62.
Hansen, E.L., and Allen, K.R. 1992. The creation corridor: Environmental load and pre-organiza-
tion. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice DEMO(1):57–65.
Hogarth, R.M. 1980. Judgement and Choice: The Psychology DEMO Decisions. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
130
M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
Johnson, B.R. Spring DEMO Toward a multidimensional model of entrepreneurship: The case of
achievement motivation DEMO the entrepreneur. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice
14(3):39–54.
Kaish, DEMO, and Gilad, B. 1991. Characteristics of opportunities search of entrepreneurs versus exec-
utives: Sources, interest, general alertness. Journal of Business Venturing 6:45–61.
Kahneman, D., and Lovallo, D. 1993. Timid choices and bold forecasts: A cognitive perspective
on risk-taking. Management Science 39(1):17–31.
DEMO, N. 1993. The impact of prior entrepreneurial exposure on perceptions of DEMO venture
feasibility and desirability. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice 18(1):5–21.
Krueger, N.F., and Brazeal, D.V. 1994. Entrepreneurial potential and potential entrepreneurs.
Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice 18(3):91–104.
Langer, E.J. 1975. The illusion of control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
32(2):311–328.
Langer, E.J., and Roth, J. 1975. Heads I win, tails DEMO chance: The illusion of control as a function
of the sequence DEMO outcomes in a purely chance task. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 32(6):951–955.
Larwood, L., and Whittaker, W. 1977. Managerial DEMO: Self-serving biases in organizational
planning. Journal of Applied Psychology 67:194–198.
DEMO, M., and Montgomery, D. 1988. First-Mover advantages. Strategic Management Jour-
DEMO 9:41–58.
MacCrimmon, K.R., and Wehrung, D.A. 1990. Characteristics of DEMO executives. Manage-
ment Science 36(4):422–435.
Manimala, M.J. 1992. Entrepreneurial heuristics: A comparison between high PI (Pioneering-
Innovative) and low PI ventures. Journal of Business Venturing 7:477–504.
March, J., and Shapira, Z. 1987. Managerial perspective on risk and risk-taking. Management
Science 33:1404–1418.
DEMO, J., and Simon, H. 1958. Organizations. New York: Wiley.
McCarthy, S.M., Schoorman, F.D. and Cooper, A.C. 1993. Reinvestment decisions by DEMO
neurs: Rational decision-making or escalation of commitment? Journal of Business Ventur-
ing 8(1):9–24.
McClelland, D.C. 1961. The Achieving Society. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
Nisbett R., and Ross, L. 1980. Human Inference: Strategy and Shortcomings of Social Judgments.
Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Nutt, P.C. 1986. Decision style and strategic decisions of top executives. Technological Forecast-
DEMO and Social Change 30:39–62.
Nutt, P.C. 1993. Flexible decision styles DEMO the choices of top executives. Journal of Management
Studies 30(5):DEMO
Oskamp, S. 1965. Overconﬁdence in case-study judgements. Journal of Consulting Psychol-
DEMO 29:261–265.
Palich, L.E., and Bagby, D.R. 1995. Using cognitive DEMO to explain entrepreneurial risk-taking:
Challenging conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing 10(6):425–438.
Reynolds, P., and Miller, B. 1992. New DEMO gestation: Conception, birth, and implications for
research. Journal of Business DEMO 7(5):405–417.
Russo, J.E., and Schoemaker, P.J. 1992. Managing overconﬁdence. Sloan Management Re-
view 23:7–17.
Schweiger, D., Sandberg, W. and Ragan, J. 1986. Group approaches for improving strategic deci-
sion-making. Strategic Management Journal 5:111–128.
Schwenk, C.R. 1984. Cognitive simpliﬁcation processes in strategic decision-making. Strategic
Management Journal 5:111–128.
Schwenk, C.R. 1986. Information, cognitive DEMO, and commitment to a course of action. Acad-
emy of Management DEMO 11(2):298–310.
Schwenk, C.R. 1995. Strategic decision-making. Journal of Management 21(3):471–494.
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION 131
Shaver, K.G., and Scott, L.R. 1991. Person, process, choice: The psychology of new venture cre-
ation. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice 16(2):23–45.
Shrader, R.C., DEMO Simon, M. 1997. Resource, strategy, and performance differences between
corporate DEMO independent new ventures. Journal of Business Venturing 12(1):47–66.
Sitkin, S.B., and Pablo, A.L. 1992. Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior. DEMO
of Management Review 17(1):9–38.
Sitkin, S.B., and Weingart, L.R. 1995. Determinants of risky decision-making behavior: A test
of the mediating role of risk perceptions and propensity. Academy of Management Jour-
nal 38(DEMO):1573–1592.
Smith, K.G., Gannon, M.J., Grimm, C., and DEMO, T.R. 1988. Decision-making behavior in
smaller entrepreneurial and larger professionally managed DEMO Journal of Business Ven-
turing 3(3):223–232.
Staw, B.M. 1991. Dressing up like an organization: When psychological theories can explain orga-
nizational action. Journal of Management 17(4):805–819.
Teece, D.J. 1986. Proﬁting DEMO technological innovation: Implications for integration, collabora-
tion, licensing and public DEMO Research Policy 15:285–305.
Thomas, J.B., and McDaniel, R.R., Jr. 1990. Interpreting strategic issues: Effects of strategy and
the information-processing structure of top management teams. Academy of Management
Journal 33(2):286–306.
Tversky, DEMO, and Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. DEMO
ence 185:1124–1131.
Wally, S., and Baum, J.R. 1994. Personal DEMO structural determinants of the pace of strategic
decision-making. Academy of Management Journal 37(4):932–956.
Westhead, P. 1990. A typology of new manufacturing DEMO in Wales: Performance measures and
public policy implications. Journal of Business DEMO 5:103–122.
Zajac, E.J., and Bazerman, M.H. 1991. Blind spots DEMO industry and competitor analysis: Implica-
tions of interﬁrm (mis)perceptions for strategic decisions. Academy of Management Re-
view 16(1):37–56.
APPENDIX A
Survey Items
Decision to Start a Venture: Respondents had to decide whether the decision-maker
in the case, Daniel Garrison, should quit his job DEMO start a venture. The respondents were
told that they should put themselves in exactly the same situation as Daniel Garrison and
determine what they DEMO do. Responses to each of the two questions (a50.84) below
ranged from 1, indicating deﬁnitely do not start the venture, to 5, deﬁnitely start
the venture.
Should ODI go ahead and introduce the contact DEMO?
Assume that all the principals of ODI had the choice of liquidating the venture
for a modest proﬁt; what should ODI do?
Risk Perception
Using the nine items below (a50.85), respondents were asked their perceptions of the
level of risk associated with bringing the new DEMO to market and starting ODI. Re-
sponses were recorded on a scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 5
(“strongly agree”).
132 M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
I believe that . . .
The probability of ODI’s contact lens introduction doing poorly is DEMO high.
The amount ODI could lose by introducing the lens is substantial.
There is great uncertainty when predicting how well ODI will do with DEMO contact
lens introduction.
The overall riskiness of ODI’s contact lens introduction is high.
Overall I would label the option of introducing the contact lenses DEMO some-
thing negative.
I would label introducing the contact lenses as a potential loss.
Introducing the contact lenses will have negative ramiﬁcations for ODI’s DEMO
There is a high probability of ODI losing a great deal by introducing the con-
tact lenses.
Overconﬁdence
For each of the following questions, respondents provided a low and a high estimate
such that they were DEMO certain the correct answer fell within these limits. (On average,
DEMO expected to get 9 of 10 questions correct).
What percent of new car buyers use some form of ﬁnancing to buy their car?DEMO
How many of Fortune’s 1990 “Global 500,” the world’s biggest industrial corpora-
tions (in sales) were Japanese?
What percentage of adults DEMO or older, say they have made a purchase they did
not DEMO in order to get a prize offered over the phone?
What was the total audited worldwide daily circulation of the Wall Street Journal
DEMO the ﬁrst half of 1990?
What is the average price of a new car?
What was the total U.S. trade balance for DEMO goods and services for the 12-month
period ending October 1994? Indicate DEMO or deﬁcit and number.
In 1993, how many children under age DEMO needed care because their mothers
worked?
How many master’s degrees in business and management were conferred in the
United States in 1987?
DEMO is the shortest navigable distance (in statute miles) between New York City
and Istanbul?
How many German automobiles were sold in Japan DEMO 1989?
Illusion of control: Respondents were asked how well they DEMO perform on different
tasks related to the introduction of ODI’s contact lenses. Subjects reported their re-
sponses to the three questions (a50.67) on DEMO scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”)
to 5 (“strongly agree”).
I could . . .
accurately predict total market demand for DEMO contact lenses.
BIASES, RISK, AND VENTURE FORMATION 133
accurately predict when larger competitors DEMO enter the market.
succeed at making this venture a success, even DEMO many other managers
would fail.
Belief in the Law of Small Numbers: Respondents listed three important pieces of in-
formation contained in the case that inﬂuenced their decision of whether to start the
venture. They then DEMO why the information inﬂuenced them. Explanations were
content analyzed to determine the presence of the belief in the law of small numbers.
Two independent DEMO obtained an inter-rater reliability of 0.95 on a sub-sample
of data.
Flexibility
Flexibility was measured using the 10-item scale below (a50.67). A score of 1 indicated
strong agreement and a 5 indicated strong disagreement.
For DEMO questions there is just one right answer once a person is able to get all
the facts.
People would be a lot better off DEMO they would just forget about words like probably,
approximately, and DEMO
I don’t like things to be uncertain and unpredictable.
I like to have a place for everything and everything in its place.
I set DEMO high standard for myself, and I feel others should do the DEMO
*I do not always tell the truth.
I think that I am more strict about right and wrong than most other people.
Once I DEMO my mind made up, I seldom change it.
I am in DEMO of very strict enforcement of all laws.
Most of the arguments I get into are over matters of principle.
*Item with an asterisk are DEMO scored.
Optimism
A 3-item scale (50.68) measured optimism. A score of 1 indicated strong agreement
and a 5 indicated strong disagreement.
I feel DEMO economy will expand next year.
I usually expect improvement in my life and the economy.
I feel my performance will improve next year.
*Items DEMO an asterisk are reverse scored.
Risk Propensity
Respondents were directed to read and respond to scenarios. The following was one
of the two scenarios DEMO in the study.
134 M. SIMON, S.M. HOUGHTON AND K. AQUINO
Assume that you are president of a large multinational corporation, Dominion In-
tegrated. PMG Inc. has threatened to sue your company for patent violation. The case
has not DEMO been ﬁled in court, since PMG are waiting to hear your DEMO to their
offer to settle out of court. They have proposed that your company pay them $300,000
(about 6% of your company’s proﬁts). If you do not agree to this proposal, PMG will
ﬁle their suit, which would, if you lose the case, probably involve a loss of $1,100,000
in damages. If you win in DEMO, you would only incur a very small sum for legal expenses.
DEMO the chances of winning the court case were 99 out of 100, you would probably
recommend taking the case to court. On the other hand, if the chance of winning the
court case were 1 out of 100, you would probably recommend accepting the settlement.
As the chances were increased, there would be a point at which you would decide to
refuse the settlement. What is this switch-over point: that is, DEMO is the lowest chance
of winning that would prompt you to take the case to court?
Risk propensity items were reverse scored so DEMO larger numbers indicated a greater
risk propensity.{1g42fwefx}