® Academy of Management Journal
1995, Vol. 38, No. 6, 1573-1592.
A, DETERMINANTS OF RISKY DECISION-MAKING
BEHAVIOR: A TEST OF THE MEDIATING DEMO
OF RISK PERCEPTIONS AND PROPENSITY
SIM B SITKIN
Duke University
LAURIE R. WEINGART
Carnegie Mellon University
The reported research examined the usefulness of placing DEMO propen-
sity and risk perception in a more central role in models of risky de-
cision making than has heen done previously. Specifically, this arti-
cle reports on two studies that examined a model in which DEMO
propensity and risk perception mediate the effects of prohlem fram-
ing and outcome history on risky decision-making hehavior. Impli-
cations of the pattern of DEMO for future research are discussed.
Most scholars who have studied decision-making hehavior in risky
organizational situations have focused on the direct effects of one DEMO two
determinants of this hehavior. However, such an approach does not DEMO
quately reflect the complex sets of influences on risk hehavior in organ-
izations. In addition, it has led to contradictions in the literature and po-
tentially inaccurate conclusions ahout the causes of decision-making be-
havior (Sitkin & Pahlo, 1992). For example, Kahneman and Tversky's
"prospect theory" (1979) conclusion that negatively framed situations
lead to greater risk taking contradicts the results of research hy March and
Shapira (1987) DEMO Oshorn and Jackson (1988).
In an attempt to huild upon DEMO direct effects approaches, Sitkin and
Pahlo (1992) proposed a mediated DEMO ofthe determinants of risky de-
cision making, theorizing that the effects DEMO a numher of previously ex-
amined variahles on risk taking were not direct hut were instead mediat-
ed hy risk propensity and risk perception. DEMO model extended the di-
rect effects approaches and posited a direct causal effect hetween the
variahles studied and risk taking. In addition, where direct effects ap-
proaches have predicted specific choices under conditions of risk, Sitkin
and Pahlo focused on the process of making risky decisions. This article
DEMO two studies that provide initial tests of key portions of the Sitkin-
Pahlo approach.
We would like to thank Robyn Dawes, George Huber, DEMO Pablo, Gerald Salancik, David
Scbkade, Michael Hitt, and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on ear-
lier versions of tbis article.
DEMO
1574 Academy of Management Journal December
CLARIFYING KEY CONSTRUCTS AND DISTINCTIONS
Sitkin DEMO Pablo (1992) reviewed a number of potentially relevant in-
dividual, DEMO, and problem characteristics that have been iden-
tified as predictors of DEMO individual decision making. Perhaps the most
significant focus of their analysis was the previously distinct effects of out-
come history and problem framing, which they argued had been over-
looked—and sometimes unintentionally confounded—in prior work.
Specifically, Sitkin and Pablo suggested that previous contradictory find-
ings could be explained DEMO disentangling outcome history from problem
framing. Following their theoretical emphasis, we DEMO on these two fre-
quently studied predictors of risky decision making. This choice was
guided by our desire to stress variables whose effects were DEMO by
Sitkin and Pablo to be mediated by risk propensity and risk perceptions,
so as to provide an initial test of their core DEMO
Although it focuses on only a subset of the broader model. Figure 1
reflects the core ideas underlying the mediated model of the determinants
DEMO risky decision making and captures its most critical variables. First, it
DEMO antecedent characteristics as affecting decision making only in-
directly, through their DEMO on risk propensity and risk perceptions; this
is the mediated aspect DEMO the model. In addition, the paths shown in Fig-
ure 1 DEMO numerically keyed to the hypothesized bivariate relationships be-
tween the variahles of the model (discussed later in the article).
Before addressing the rationale for each relationship posited in the
model we should define several key DEMO, since these distinctions
underlie several of our arguments. Variables identifred in DEMO Sitkin and
Pablo (1992) model addressed here include their dependent variable, de-
cision risk, their proposed mediating variables (risk perception and risk
propensity), and two key exogenous predictor variables that they identi-
FIGURE DEMO
Mediated Model of the Determinants of Risky Decision-Making Behavior"
Risk
Propensity
Outcome History +
Hi • '
Risky
H3 Decision-
Making
r Bebavior
Risk
Perception
Problem Framing +
H2
»Tbe numbers sbown on the paths DEMO the model are keyed to some of the hypotheses
discussed herein. Several hypotheses are not shown here because tbey represent tbe mediation
hypotheses rather DEMO a specific hypothesized relationship. Specifically, Hypotheses 6 and 7
posit that DEMO effects of outcome history on risky decision making and risk perception are
mediated by risk propensity, and Hypotheses 8 and 9 posit that the effects of problem framing
and risk propensity are mediated by risk perception.
19g5 Sitkin and Weingart 1575
fied as characterizing the person and the DEMO: outcome history and
problem framing. Each of these five constructs is DEMO below.
Decision risk is a construct used to characterize the alternatives con-
fronting a decision maker; it can, for example, describe how undesirable
the likely effects of an alternative are and the likelihood of their DEMO
rence. Risk can also be used to characterize an overall decision—how risky
it is compared to other alternatives. Following Sitkin and Pablo, we de-
fined decision risk as "the extent to which there is uncertainty about
whether potentially significant and/or disappointing outcomes of decisions
will be realized" (1992: 10). To the extent that a decision involves high DEMO
certainty or extreme outcomes, either in terms of the choice among DEMO
natives or for individual alternatives in aggregate, the decision is charac-
DEMO as risky.
Included in the model are two direct determinants of decision risk—
risk perception and risk propensity—that also serve as mediators of an-
DEMO characteristics of the decision maker and the problem situation.
Risk perception is defined as an individual's assessment of how risky a sit-
uation DEMO in terms of probabilistic estimates of the degree of situational un-
certainty, how controllable that uncertainty is, and confidence in those es-
timates (Baird & Thomas, 1985; Bettman, 1973).
Risk propensity is defined as an individual's current tendency to take
or avoid risks. It DEMO conceptualized as an individual trait that can change
over time and thus is an emergent property of the decision maker. This de-
finition of DEMO propensity, which follows Sitkin and Pablo (1992), is re-
lated to but departs in a critical way from previous conceptualizations of
propensity DEMO a stable dispositional attribute (e.g., Fischhoff, Lichtenstein,
Slovic, Derby, & Keeney, 1981; Rowe, 1977). It is interesting to DEMO that
even critics of the predictive value of the risk propensity construct (e.g.,
MacCrimmon & Wehrung, 1990; Schoemaker, 1990) have employed the tra-
ditional conception of risk propensity as a stable individual attribute.
DEMO are contrasting the traditional conception of risk propensity as "a
stable DEMO constant" dispositional attribute (Wolman, 1989: 103) with our
conceptualization DEMO it as a changeable trait that is "persistent" (Suther-
land, 1989: 452) or "enduring" (Goldenson, 1984: 757) but DEMO be "learned
or inherited" (Corsini & Osaki, 1984: 542-543)DEMO Hair color or facial fea-
tures—frequently cited as examples of traits (DEMO, Goldenson, 1984)—il-
lustrate the concept of persistence and change in that hair color responds
to exposure to the sun and facial features DEMO be altered through cosmet-
ic surgery. Similarly, a trait-based definition of DEMO propensity conceptu-
alizes the construct as a cumulative tendency to take or avoid risks that
is simultaneously persistent and can change over time as DEMO result of ex-
perience. By focusing on the important role of past experience, this con-
ceptualization can account for the capacity for people to adapt without
denying that as individuals gain more experience, they may be less sus-
ceptible to contextual influence and more likely to exhibit cross-situational
DEMO Thus, our approach to risk propensity as "stable but change-
Academy of Management Journal December
able" both builds upon and modifies the traditional "stable and constant"
view.
Although the tendency to take risks (i.e., risk propensity) is almost cer-
tainly related causally to making riskier decisions, as we will hypothesize
and test below, the two DEMO are not synonymous because a number
of factors can impede the realization of a decision maker's tendencies in
any particular instance. Even an DEMO who consistently leans toward
seeking risks could in a specific case, DEMO as a business investment, fail
to act on this tendency, because of inadequate funding, a missed ap-
pointment, an unexpected illness, a natural disaster, or other obstruction.
We also examined two exogenous variables posited in Sitkin and
Pablo's (1992) model. Problem framing veiers to DEMO a situation is pre-
sented to a decision maker as an opportunity or a threat (e.g., Jackson &
Dutton, 1988) or in terms of gains or losses (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979).
That DEMO, the situation can be portrayed in a generally positive or negative
DEMO Outcome history, a person-situation interaction characteristic, is de-
fined as the degree to which the decision maker believes that previous risk-
related decisions DEMO resulted in successful or unsuccessful outcomes. For
our purpose, this variable DEMO an individual's overall mental repre-
sentation of how well he or she has fared in the past in similar situations
(see Sitkin [1992] and Weick [1984] for reviews).
A MEDIATED EFFECTS MODEL OF THE DEMO OF
RISK BEHAVIOR
Determinants of Risk Propensity
Outcome history. Although outcome history is posited here to affect
decision making, the role of outcome history has been notably absent in
many theories of risky decision-making behavior. Nearly DEMO studies have
focused on either individual risk orientation (MacCrimmon & Wehrung,DEMO
1986a, 1986b, 1990) or decision maker computation of risk (Dyer & Sarin,
1982; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986) while essentially ignoring the poten-
tially important role of previous decisions made and their outcomes.
DEMO ahistorical viewpoint is challenged by recent research findings
showing that prior success in taking risks can increase the propensity to
take risks. For example, the work of March and Shapira (1987), Osborn and
Jackson (DEMO), and Thaler and Johnson (1990) found that decision mak-
ers will persist in taking risks if prior risk-related actions were success-
ful.
DEMO 1: The more successful the outcomes of a de-
cision maker'DEMO risk-related decisions have been, the high-
er his or her risk DEMO
Determinants of Risk Perception
Problem framing. An important influence on a decision maker's risk
perceptions is whether a problem is framed in positive DEMO negative terms.
1995 Sitkin and Weingart 1577
In an influential study of individual risk DEMO under conditions of var-
ied problem frames, Kahneman and Tversky (1979) formulated prospect
theory, noting that positively framed situations led to the DEMO of risk-
averse decisions, v\^hereas negatively framed situations led to risk DEMO
A number of succeeding studies (e.g., Neale, Bazerman, Northcraft, &
Alperson, 1986; Singh, 1986; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986, DEMO) have
found the influence of problem framing on decision making to DEMO robust.
However, none of these studies has directly examined the causal
DEMO underlying the observed behavioral effects posited in prospect
theory. If perceptions and other omitted mechanisms are left unexam-
ined, it remains unclear how problem framing comes to affect decisions.
Followiug Sitkin and Pablo (1992), we hypothesized that framing direct-
ly affects how risky a situation is perceived DEMO be, which in turn leads to
the behavioral outcomes they observed. DEMO hypothesis implies that pos-
itive frames, which emphasize situational threats to DEMO resources, may
make the risks inherent in a situation more salient (inducing risk-averse
behavior), whereas an emphasis on the upside potential for DEMO lim-
ited holdings or recouping losses may decrease the salience of risks by in-
creasing the salience of opportunities (inducing risk-seeking behavior).
Such an explanation is consistent with the nonlinearity that lies at the
heart DEMO prospect theory and its empirical support, but it extends prospect
theory DEMO suggesting the cognitive mechanism through which observable
behavioral responses occur.
Hypothesis 2: Positively framed situations will be per-
ceived as involving higher risk than negatively framed
situations.
Risk propensity. Risk propensity influences the relative salience of
DEMO threat or opportunity and thus leads to biased risk perceptions
(Brockhaus, 1980; Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Specifically, risk-averse decision
makers (DEMO, individuals with a propensity to avoid risks) are hypothesized
to attend to and weight potentially negative outcomes more heavily than
positive outcomes (Schneider & Lopes, 1986), thus overestimating the
probability of loss relative to the probability of gain. Conversely, risk-seek-
ing decision makers are hypothesized to attend to and weight positive op-
portunities more heavily (March & Shapira, 1987), thus overestimating the
probability of gain relative to the probability of loss.
Hypothesis 3: The higher a decision maker's risk propen-
sity, the lower the level of perceived situational risk.
Determinants of Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Risk propensity. The straightforward intuitive basis for positing that
an DEMO's "willingness to take risks" (MacCrimmon & Wehrung,
1990) affects whether he or she will actually make riskier decisions makes
extensive DEMO unnecessary. Although the Sitkin-Pablo model has
not been tested previously, its DEMO (see Figure 1) concerns the notion that
1578 Academy of Management Journal . December
an individual's propensity to DEMO or avoid risks affects decision making,
an idea that is grounded in a numher of previous studies (e.g., Kogan &
Wallach, DEMO; MacCrimmon & Wehrung, 1986a, 1990). For example,
Brockhaus (1980) hypothesized that the overall orientation of an individ-
ual toward risk (risk propensity) would predispose some individuals to
make riskier decisions than DEMO individuals. Thus,
Hypothesis 4: The higher a decision maker's DEMO propen-
sity, the riskier will be his or her decision-making be-
DEMO
Risk perception. Although we have acknowledged that prospect the-
ory does not explicitly consider risk perceptions, Sitkin and Pahlo (1992)
suggested that DEMO findings of prospect theory research are consistent with
a negative relationship hetween perceived risk and making risky decisions.
That is, risk avoidance is greater when threats to assets are salient (high
risk is perceived) than DEMO is when an individual perceives little risk hecause
there is nothing to lose. It also seemed reasonahle to posit that higher lev-
els of DEMO situational risk would be negatively related to making
risky decisions since people tend to associate risk with negative outcomes
more strongly than with outcome DEMO (e.g., Levitt & March, 1988).
Given this perceptual asymmetry, we hypothesized that actions taken un-
der conditions of higher perceived situational DEMO would also he per-
ceived to have a lower expected value.
Hypothesis 5: The degree to which individuals make
risky decisions will be negatively associated with their
level of perceived risk.
The Role of Risk Perception DEMO Risk Propensity
As stated earlier, most previous research has overlooked a DEMO the-
oretical issue raised hy the Sitkin-Pahlo model—the causal mechanisms
by which a variety of exogenous variables come to affect decision-making
behavior. As shown DEMO Figure 1, they argued that the direct impact of an-
tecedent DEMO on risky decision making actually takes place only via
the mediating function of risk propensity and risk perception.
No theories prior to Sitkin and DEMO (1992) and no empirical work
has focused explicitly on the indirect effects of outcome history on risky
decision making. Nonetheless, Sitkin and Pahlo drew on the earlier work
of March and Shapira (1987), Osborn and Jackson (1988), and Thaler and
Johnson (1990) to argue that successful or unsuccessful outcome histories
affect how decision makers perceived risky DEMO and acted upon them
by influencing what kinds of information decision makers attended to and
also by influencing how much those decision makers leaned DEMO priori to-
ward or away from taking risks. Historical success or failure does not, they
suggested, direct attention toward specific risk elements of DEMO situation. In-
stead, their analysis was grounded in the familiar notion DEMO decision mak-
ers would he prone to persist in pursuing what worked in the past and to
1995
Sitkin and Weingart 1579
abandon what did not. This intuitive argument, they noted, is that outcome
history affects a decision maker's propensity to take risks, and that it is the
tendency to take or avoid risks that in turn directs attention to high- or low-
risk DEMO of a situation (i.e., risk perception) and leads to pursuing DEMO
avoiding risky behaviors.
Hypothesis 6: The effect of outcome history on DEMO de-
cision-making behavior will be fully mediated by risk
propensity.
Hypothesis 7: The effect of outcome history on risk per-
ception will be fully mediated by risk propensity.
We hypothesized that risk propensity and problem framing DEMO
risky decision making by influencing what is perceived. Risk propensity
is linked to risk perception in several ways; these include limiting what
information is attended to and limiting an individual's ability to notice and
respond DEMO risky attributes that influence how risky situations will be eval-
uated. This approach is consistent with previous work that has defined risk
perception in DEMO of situational labeling (Jackson & Dutton, 1988; Staw,
Sandelands, & Dutton, 1981) and estimates of the extent and controllability
of DEMO (Baird & Thomas, 1985; Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Thus, risk propen-
sity is not only posited to affect decision making directly, but is also
posited to have an indirect effect on risky decision making through its ef-
fect on risk perceptions (cf. Sitkin & Pablo, 1992).
Hypothesis 8: The effect of risk propensity on risky DEMO
cision-making behavior will be partially mediated by
risk perception.
Similarly, the DEMO of problem framing on risky decision making is
mediated by risk perception because framing affects the strength and clar-
ity of an individual's DEMO or negative perceptions of aspects of a sit-
uation. Thus, building DEMO the previously discussed logic of Hypotheses 2
and 5, we posit DEMO:
Hypothesis 9: The effect of problem framing on risky de-
DEMO behavior will be fully mediated by risk
perception.
The overall goal of the empirical research reported in this article was
to provide a preliminary DEMO of several key aspects of the mediated mod-
el. We describe the results of two studies, each of which tested selected
portions of the model.^ Study 1 manipulated outcome history to examine
1 We attempted during DEMO to include these separate aspects of the model in a sin-
gle experimental design. Although their reactions to each manipulated variable were distinct,
DEMO both were used simultaneously we found that subjects confused the two manipula-
tions. Therefore, we ran two experiments that presented subjects with only one manipula-
tion at a time.
Academy of Management Journal December
the hypothesized mediating role of risk propensity DEMO risk perception.
Study 2 manipulated problem framing to examine the hypothesized me-
diating role of risk perception.
Methods
STUDY 1
Subjects. Thirty-eight master's DEMO business administration students in
a required organizational behavior class participated in the study. The sub-
jects' average age was 28.3 years (ranging from DEMO to 46), and their work
experience averaged 6.2 years (ranging DEMO 0 to 25 years). Sixty-six per-
cent of the subjects were men.
Procedures and stimulus materials. The study was a class exercise.
A DEMO containing the stimulus materials and questionnafre was dis-
tributed. Subjects were asked to read through the stimulus materials and
to individually fill out an DEMO questionnaire.
A modified version of a widely used decision-making case. Carter Rac-
ing (Brittain & Sitkin, 1989), was used.^ Carter Racing places DEMO mak-
ers in a situation of risky choice. The case masks the facts of the Nation-
al Aeronautics and Space Administration's (NASA) DEMO to launch the
space shuttle Challenger in the guise of a decision about whether a race
car team should compete in the last race DEMO the season. The decision in-
volves risk in a number of domains, including business risk, personal fi-
nancial risk, and physical risk. In tbe study, we focused on the impact of
the decision about whether to race on the financial viability of the race
car team as^an DEMO is, business risk.
This particular stimulus was chosen because it avoids DEMO major prob-
lem frequently associated with experimental stimulus materials in that it
has been found to be highly realistic and quickly engaging. Since the DEMO
as originally written fosters highly skewed choice patterns, modifications
to the DEMO case were made (concerning information about the racing
team's history DEMO success and failure and the amount of money at stake)
that would lead to a more balanced distribution of decisions. The basic
case DEMO was changed so that the expected value of racing was
equal to the expected value of not racing when ambient air temperature
was not DEMO into the calculations.^
Variables
Outcome history. Outcome history was manipulated after subjects had
read the case and before tbey read the first question of DEMO questionnaire.
2 The complete text of the revised case is available from the authors.
^Air temperature was not included in developing equality across the DEMO (i e
race/not race) m our revision because it was not incorporated by the Challenger decision
makers or hy students using the DEMO in the past (Brittain & Sitkin, 1989).
Sitkin and Weingart 1581
Individuals in the unsuccessful outcome history condition read DEMO fol-
lowing:
Subjects in the successful outcome history condition read:
As Pat Carter, you have had a moderate amount of training for
and experience with this type of decision. Your previous de-
cisions have DEMO largely successful and you have always de-
rived a sense of self-assurance from your successful "track
record" in making such decisions. You feel DEMO because
of the success of those decisions you have made in the past.
As Pat Carter, you have had a moderate amount of training for
and experience with this type of decision. Your previous de-
cisions DEMO been largely unsuccessful and you have always
had a nagging worry that your poor "track record" could even-
tually have more serious consequences. DEMO feel uncertain be-
cause of the lack of success of those decisions you have made
in the past.
A three-item outcome history manipulation check ("Extent to which
problems have resulted from Pat's decisions like this in the past," "Degree
to which Pat has analyzed decisions like this correctly in the past," and
"Degree to which successful outcomes have resulted from Pat's decisions
like this in the past") DEMO found to be reliable (a = .71). The manipula-
tion DEMO was found to be significant across conditions [F^^^ = 14.68, p
< .001) and in the predicted direction (success condition, x = DEMO, s.d.
= 0.91; failure condition, x = 3.44, s.d. = 1.08).
Decision-making behavior. Immediately following the manipulation,
subjects were asked DEMO indicate whether they would race (definitely not
race, 0%; definitely DEMO, 100%). Next, a dichotomous forced-choice item
(race vs. not DEMO) was presented. The scaled format item is an indirect
measure of DEMO making that gathers data on a subject's intentions,
whereas the forced-choice item measures decision-making behavior di-
rectly. Because the scaled format allowed DEMO more response variance than
did the dichotomous choice format and the two items were highly corre-
lated [r^j = .72, p < .001), we used the scaled format item as the indica-
tor of decision-making DEMO (see the Appendix for the text of this and
subsequently described DEMO).
Risk perception. A four-item scale was adapted from MacCrimmon
and Wehrung (1985, 1986a, 1986b) and Wehrung, Lee, Tse, and Vertinsky
(1989) to measure the amount of perceived risk associated with the DEMO
sion to be made (a = .75).
Risk propensity. An DEMO five-item scale for business risk propen-
sity was employed (a = DEMO).
Results
Direct effects. The direct effects posited in Hypotheses 1,3,4, and 5
were examined through correlation and regression analyses. First, DEMO
shown in Table 1, outcome history significantly influences risk propensi-
1582 Academy of Management fournal December
TABLE 1
Study 1 Descriptive Statistics DEMO f-Test Results
Variable
Risky decision making
Risk propensity
Risk perception
58.33
3.73
3.64
Outcome History
Failure
34.00
1.23
1.28
° Failure, n = 18; success, n = 20.
* p < .05
Mean
S.d.
Condition"DEMO
Success
Mean s.d.
77.50 22.68
4.51 1.00
2.80 0.87
-
-
t
2 .06*
2 .15*
2.38*
df
ty ^^36 ~ ~2.15, p < .05). Thus, suhjects who were informed that Pat Carter
(whose DEMO they adopted as decision maker) had successfully made sim-
ilar decisions DEMO the past reported higher levels of risk propensity for Pat,
supporting Hypothesis 1. Second, risk propensity was found to he nega-
tively related to risk perception, supporting Hypothesis 3 (r = -.54 , p <
.001). That is, when suhjects reported higher levels of risk propensity, they
also reported that they perceived less risk in the situation. Finally, risky
decision making was regressed on risk propensity and risk perception to
determine the direct effects of propensity and perception on the decision
(^^ = •^^' ^2,35 = 28.80, p < .001). DEMO risk propensity did not have
a significantly positive association with the decision in the regression
analysis (p = .15, n.s.), as hypothesized DEMO Hypothesis 4, the bivariate cor-
relation between risk propensity and risky DEMO making was signifi-
cant (r = .52, p < .001). Results showed that risk perception was negatively
related to the decision, supporting Hypothesis 5 (P = -.70 , p < .001).
Mediated effects. Hierarchical regression analysis (Baron & Kenney,
1986) was used to DEMO the potential mediation effects. In the first step of
each equation, DEMO tested the direct effects model, regressing risk behav-
ior on the DEMO antecedent variables (outcome history, or risk propen-
sity, or both)DEMO In the second step, the relevant mediator (risk propensity
or risk perception) was added to determine whether it mediated any pre-
viously significant relationships.
Three tests of mediation were conducted. First, Hypothesis 6 was ex-
amined to determine if risk propensity mediated the effect of outcome his-
DEMO on decision making. A stepwise regression analysis predicting deci-
sion making was used to test this hypothesis, with outcome history entered
in step 1 and risk propensity added in step 2. The direct effects of outcome
DEMO explained a significant portion of the variance in risk behavior [R^
= .11, p < .05), and the change in R^ when propensity was added to the
equation was significant (AR^ = .19, p < .01). Results from step 1 showed
that outcome history was positively related to risky decision making (P =
.33, p < .01)DEMO When risk propensity was added to the equation, the rela-
CO DEMO CO
CO CO CO
1995
Sitkin and Weingart 1583
tionship was no longer significant (P = .17, n.s.), and risk propensity was
significantly related to decision making (P = .46, p < .01). In addition, the
change in beta associated with outcome history was significant (AP = .16,
^35 = 2.23, p < .05). Thus, Hypothesis 6 was DEMO
Second, Hypothesis 7, suggesting that risk propensity mediated the re-
lationship hetween risk outcome history and risk perception, was also test-
ed using stepwise regression. The direct effects of outcome history ex-
plained a significant DEMO of the variance in risk perception (fl^ = .14,
p < .05), and the change in R^ when propensity was added to the equa-
tion was significant [AR^ = .19,p<.01). Results DEMO step 1 showed that out-
come history was negatively related to risk perception (P = -.37, p < .05).
When risk propensity DEMO added to the equation in step 2, the effect of out-
DEMO history was no longer significant (P = -.21 , n.s.), DEMO the risk
propensity effect was significant (p = -.46, p < .01). In addition, the
change in beta associated with outcome history was significant (AP = .16,
^35 = -2.15, p < DEMO). Thus, Hypothesis 7 was supported.
Finally, Hypothesis 8 was tested to determine if risk perception par-
tially mediated the effects of risk DEMO on risky decision making. The
direct effect of propensity explained a significant portion of the variance
in risk behavior [R^ = .27, p < .001), and the change in R^ when risk per-
ception was DEMO to the equation was significant [AR^ = .35, p < .001)DEMO
Results from step 1 showed that risk propensity was positively related to
decision making (P = .52, p < .001). When risk DEMO was added to
the equation, the relationship was no longer significant (P = .15, n.s.), and
risk perception was significantly related to decision making (p = -.70, p
< .001). The change DEMO beta associated with risk propensity was signifi-
cant (AP = .47, (35 = 3.69, p < .01). Because the mediation effect DEMO full,
rather than partial. Hypothesis 8 was not supported.
Summary. Taken together, the results of study 1 demonstrate that the
effects of outcome history cascade from outcome history to risk propen-
sity to risk perception DEMO finally from risk perception to risky decision-
making behavior. These results provide support for the role of outcome his-
tory in the mediated model DEMO risky decision making while clarifying our
understanding of the path through which these effects occur.
STUDY 2
Study 2 was designed to test the DEMO of the model relating to the
framing effect—focusing on the relationships between problem framing,
risk perception, and risky decision making. Two direct-effect hypotheses
and one mediating hypothesis were tested: Hypothesis 2, positing a posi-
DEMO relationship between problem framing and risk perception. Hypoth-
esis 5, positing DEMO negative relationship between risk perception and risky
decision making, and Hypothesis DEMO, addressing the expectation ofthe me-
diating role of risk perception in DEMO relationship between framing and
risky decision making.
Academy of Management Journal December
Methods
Subjects. Sixty-three students in an undergraduate DEMO
organizational behavior class participated in the study. Subjects were on
average 20.1 years old (range = 18-26 years) and averaged 4.2 years of
DEMO experience (range = 0-9 years). Seventy-one percent of the subjects
DEMO men.
Procedures and stimulus materials. The general procedure for study
2 was similar to that described for study 1. Subjects received a packet con-
DEMO the Carter Racing scenario, the manipulation of problem framing,
and DEMO series of questions designed to assess their decisions, their percep-
tions DEMO the risk in the situation, and a problem-framing manipulation
check.
Variables
DEMO framing. All subjects were given an identical description of
the decision-making situation. This three-page description included in-
formation about both potential gains and losses. DEMO framing was ma-
nipulated after they had read the case and before they read the first ques-
tion of the questionnaire. A randomly assigned DEMO of the subjects read a
framing paragraph that selectively drew upon information from the case
to highlight the potential for losses, and the other half read a framing para-
graph that highlighted the potential for gains. DEMO in the negatively
framed condition (domain of losses) read:
As Pat Carter, you face a tough decision, because it involves
trade-offs. DEMO you race, you have a 29% chance of blowing an
engine DEMO losing all of your support for next year, including
the $500,DEMO oil and $300,000 tire sponsorships. If you do not
race, DEMO will lose the $300,000 tire sponsorship you had se-
cured for next year.
Participants in the positively-framed condition (domain of gains)
read:
As Pat Carter, you face a tough decision, because it DEMO
trade-offs. If you race, you have a 42% chance of finishing DEMO
the top 5 and winning the $300,000 tire sponsorship plus the
price money. If you do not race, you will be able to secure the
$500,000 oil sponsorship for the next season.
A three-item DEMO manipulation check was employed (a = .70) that
assessed the degree to which subjects focused on the opportunities (rather
than the threats) DEMO in the situation. Items included the following:
"Future opportunities were DEMO, even though they were uncertain," "This
was the biggest opportunity we ever had," and "We just had to go for it—
you can't win by sitting in the pits." Subjects responded on a seven-point
scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree.
Risk perception DEMO risky decision-making behavior. The measures
of perception of risk in the situation and risky decision making were the
same as used in study 1.
1995 Sitkin and Weingart 1585
Variable
Risky decision making
Risk perception
" DEMO framing, n
** p< .01
*** p < .001
Results
TABLE 2 O^
Study 2 Descriptive Statistics and f-Test Results
Problem-Framing
Negative
Mean DEMO
72.58 20.10
3.27 0.69
= 31; positive framing, n
Condition'
Positive
Mean s.d.
51.56 27.10
3.58 0.84
= 32.
t
3.44***
-2.99**
DEMO
61
61
Manipulation check. The framing manipulation was found to be ef-
fective (Fj g2 = 5.33, p < .05), with subjects DEMO the positively framed con-
dition reporting a significantly higher concern for opportunity (x = 5.10,
s.d. = 1.01) than those in the DEMO framed condition (x = 4.33, s.d.
= 1.56).
Hypothesis tests. Results supported Hypotheses 2 and 5 and partial-
ly supported Hypothesis 9. DEMO, as shown in Table 2, problem framing and
risk perception were significantly related, as predicted in Hypothesis 2 [t^^
= -2.99, p < .01). Second, risk perception and risky decision making were
negatively DEMO [r^^ = ~-^^' P < -OOl)- supporting Hypothesis 5. Fi-
DEMO, results of a regression analysis showed that the direct effects of DEMO
ing explained a significant portion of the variance in decision making (DEMO
= .16, p < .001), and the change in R^ DEMO risk perception was added to
the equation was significant (Afl^ = DEMO, p < .001). In a test of Hypothesis
9, regression results showed that the effect of framing on risky behavior
was significant (p = -.40, p < .001) when examined in isolation. When
DEMO perception was added to the equation in step 2, risk perception DEMO
significantly related to risky decision making (p = -.51 , p < .001), and
the strength of the effect of framing was reduced (fg^ = -2.98, p < .01) but
remained significant (p DEMO -.22, p < .05). These findings show that risk
perception DEMO mediated the relationship between problem framing
and risky decision-making behavior. Therefore, DEMO 9, positing
full mediation, was not supported.
Summary. The results of study 2 suggest that problem framing has
botb a direct and an DEMO effect on risky decision-making behavior. In
general, these results lend support DEMO tbe mediated model of risky deci-
sion making and clarify our understanding of the causal path through
which these influences occur.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
DEMO two studies reported here allowed us to test key portions of the
Sitkin-Pablo model. As the results summarized in Figure 2 show, all but
1586
Academy of Management Journal
December
FIGURE 2
Revised Model of the DEMO of Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Based on Combined Results of Studies 1 and 2"
ne History
(Si)
r
Risky
Decision-
Making
Behavior
Problem Framing + Risk /^,S2)
(S2) Perception
_
S2)
"Only significant relationships are shown, with the sign of the relationship DEMO
along each path. Studies from which each result was derived are indicated in parentheses (Si
for study 1 and S2 for study 2). The strength of the results is indicated by the number of plus
DEMO minus signs shown; " + " or "- " indicates significance of p < .05 or greater, whereas " + + "
DEMO " — " indicates significance of p < .01 or greater.
+
(Si) ^
Risk
Propensity
one of the causal steps hypothesized in DEMO model received support. Our
results provide support for the inclusion of risk perception and risk
propensity as mediators of effects on risky decision-making behavior. DEMO
both studies reported here, risk propensity and risk perception were found
DEMO significantly reduce the relationships between the antecedent variables
and risky decision making. In study 1, the relationship between outcome
history and decision making was mediated by risk propensity and risk per-
ception. In study 2, risk perception was found to substantially mediate the
relationship between problem framing and DEMO making, although the
results also indicated that a direct effect of DEMO framing on risky de-
cision-making behavior remained. Finally, risk propensity effects DEMO risky
decision making were found to be mediated by perceptions of risk in
study 1. Thus, our results provide preliminary support for the mediating
approach and challenge the direct effects model underlying most previous
research on DEMO behavior.
Limitations and Future Research
We view the results reported here to be but an initial test of key ele-
ments in a much DEMO model. Two limitations of the studies reported
here highlight opportunities for future research.
Omitted variahles. In the future, scholars should begin to examine the
effects of other variables that are of potential relevance to risk behavior.
DEMO example, as we noted at the beginning of the article, we have only ex-
amined a subset of the variables posited by Sitkin DEMO Pablo (1992) as af-
fecting risk behavior, and future studies DEMO begin to examine the oth-
er variables they identified, such as DEMO organization's cultural orientation
igg5 Sitkin and Weingart 1587
toward risk, role models provided by organizational leaders, reward sys-
tems, and individuals' risk preferences.
In addition, DEMO number of other variables could be fruitfully integrat-
ed into future research using the general approach taken here. For exam-
ple, although demographic variables did not affect our results, researchers
have identified important risk-related differences based on gender (Arch,
1993] and age (e.g., Hambrick & Mason, 1984; MacCrimmon & Wehrung,
1990). In addition, experience has been found to influence risk behavior
and learning from risk taking (cf. Levitt & March, 1988; Osborn & Jackson,
1988). In DEMO of future treatments of experience, researchers could draw
upon work on DEMO (Bandura, 1977) or learned helplessness (Selig-
man, 1975) to theorize about how people's past successes and failures in-
fluence their DEMO to take risks.
Experience of study sample. The range of experiential history across
the potentially relevant risk domains raised by the stimulus material was
DEMO in our samples. Although the study design and its use of experi-
mentally manipulated variables did not rely upon the personal decision-
making experience DEMO subjects, nonetheless their limited personal experi-
ence is a potential limitation DEMO be acknowledged and should be addressed
in future work, which could DEMO more experienced decision makers as sub-
jects.
Theoretical Extensions and Implications
Importance of risk propensity. Sitkin and Pablo (1992) argued that the
perceived DEMO of risk propensity as a construct has waned because of its
poor conceptualization and measurement. The results of our empirical
studies support their contention DEMO rumors of the demise of risk propen-
sity were premature.
The finding that risk propensity was negatively associated with risk
perception in study 1—that DEMO more a subject was inclined to take risks,
the less risky he or she perceived the Carter Racing scenario to be—is con-
sistent DEMO March and Shapira's (1987) finding that risk-seeking decision
makers tend to attend more to the opportunities inherent in a situation than
to DEMO threats. This finding provides additional support for the potential
value of retaining the risk propensity construct in theories and empirical
research. Thus, it appears that Sitkin and Pablo's (1992) conception of risk
propensity as DEMO current tendency based on cumulative historical outcomes
rather than a fixed dispositional characteristic (e.g., Kogan & Wallach,
1964) has merit and should be subjected to further theoretical and em-
pirical scrutiny.
Reexamining framing effects. DEMO finding in study 2 that problem
framing is partially mediated by risk perceptions is potentially important
in that it extends previous research on framing DEMO Whereas a direct
effects model was implied in the original formulation and supporting
studies of prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), our DEMO pro-
vide partial support for Sitkin and Pablo's (1992) reformulation. This sup-
1588 Academy of Management Journal December
port suggests that future work should DEMO prospect theory studies
by independently varying framing and perceptions.
Traditionally, framing DEMO have been tested in very controlled set-
tings using simple scenarios, DEMO the manipulation of gains and losses
made very salient to decision makers. These research designs have resulted
in much stronger framing effects than emerged DEMO study 2. It is possi-
ble that the complexity ofthe task materials dampened the salience ofthe
manipulation. Decision makers read a lengthy scenario and DEMO subtle ma-
nipulation and then responded to a large set of items designed to assess
multiple constructs. The large amount of information to which DEMO deci-
sion makers had to attend may have weakened the framing effect. Thus,
our findings in study 2 might help to identify a DEMO houndary con-
dition for framing effects while supporting the broad finding in the liter-
ature that they are robust.
Theoretical importance of considering decision DEMO experience.
Future research could examine the role of experience more directly
through longitudinal designs that track changes in propensity under con-
ditions in which DEMO outcome histories are systematically varied
through sampling rather than through experimental manipulation of con-
ditions. For example, future research could study populations of decision
makers whose experiential base is more varied, such as acquisition spe-
cialists, mediators, venture capitalists, or—using our stimulus—race car
team members.
It is important to highlight that such an extension is not merely
methodological. It DEMO also theoretically important in that it raises the ques-
tion of whether different models apply to experienced decision makers and
to inexperienced ones. For DEMO, it is possihle that risk propensity is
less likely to mediate DEMO history when decision makers do not have
sufficient personal experience to have developed stahle outcome histories
or propensities with respect to a specific decision DEMO made.
Studies are often criticized, especially in the organizational literature,
DEMO studying inexperienced student decision makers, but we think this crit-
icism DEMO be misplaced if made indiscriminately. Every decision maker has
had to start somewhere; thus, research on first-time decision makers is in-
deed valid DEMO long as the researchers are clear about the population to
which they can generalize. In addition, if the findings of other scholars are
correct in suggesting that experience (among other attributes) may not gen-
eralize DEMO one domain to another, even experienced decision makers may
frequently encounter DEMO situations in which they are novices. Thus,
our findings may well be far more generalizable than a narrow view of de-
cision maker DEMO might suggest. To determine whether our results
apply to all decision makers or only to those who are relatively low in do-
main-specific experience DEMO require additional empirical study. Notwith-
standing the limitations of this study, DEMO findings do provide a starting
point from which to propose a reformulation of the Sitkin-Pablo model of
the determinants of risky decision-making behavior.
19g5 Sitkin and Weingart 1589
Implications for Practicing Managers
The findings reported DEMO this article have several implications for prac-
ticing managers that can be extended in future work as well. The finding
that the mediator variables DEMO strong predictors of risky decision-making
behavior, if supported in future studies DEMO different contexts, provides
an opportunity to more efficiently predict individual risk DEMO Specif-
ically, if two mediator variables continue to show strong predictive DEMO
er, the large number of antecedent variables used in today's DEMO could
be supplanted by a much more parsimonious approach.^
Risk perception. The studies reported here provide clear support for
the importance of risk perception DEMO a crucial influence on individual risk-
taking behavior, an influence that DEMO the effects of at least several
other influences on risk behavior. This work implies that managers who
wish to either increase or decrease the DEMO taken by subordinates or oth-
ers can most effectively target their efforts toward problem framing or oth-
er determinants of risk perception. The applications DEMO such a finding are
quite broad. For example, Pablo, Sitkin, DEMO Jemison (in press) recently
examined how risk perception could affect the ways that managers ap-
proach the inherent risks involved in acquiring and DEMO another
firm. Other applications include the willingness to openly disclose sen-
sitive information, such as information about safety (Douglas & Wildavsky,
1982; Osborn & Jackson, 1988; Tamuz & Sitkin, 1992), and the willingness
to pursue high-risk corporate innovations (Van de Ven & Polley, DEMO).
Risk propensity. An area to be explored further in the future concerns
our operational definition of risk propensity as involving a cumulative ten-
DEMO to take or avoid risks. This finding and perspective have two po-
tential implications for practice. First it suggests that risk taking can be
DEMO easily influenced early in a decision maker's "domain career"—
DEMO he or she has had little experience in that domain—as risk propen-
sity will become more stable and difficult to influence as time passes. DEMO
implication fits quite nicely with the more general point made by social-
ization theorists (e.g.. Van Maanen & Schein, 1979) about the relative mal-
leability of inexperienced and experienced employees. Second, it suggests
that even once an individual's risk orientation is fixed, individual or
group decision makers can be purposively selected on the basis of their
outcome histories DEMO risk propensity to influence the likelihood that
more or less risky decisions will be made.
Domain specificity. Although these studies did not directly address
DEMO question of domain specificity, a natural extension of this work would
DEMO to focus on the conditions under which past experiences in taking risks
in one domain are generalized and thus affect perceptions and propensi-
ties DEMO undertake risks in another domain. Of even more practical value to
managers is the implication that issue definition (e.g., Dutton & Jackson,
DEMO We would like to tbank George Huber for pointing out tbis implication of our results.
Academy of Management Journal December
1987) may prove to be an effective way to influence what domain a deci-
sion is seen as relating DEMO and thus may provide the opportunity for sig-
nificant points of influence on a decision maker's risk propensity, per-
ceptions, and behavior.
DEMO
This article presented the results of a first test of the Sitkin and Pablo
model of the determinants of risk behavior and provided support DEMO the
portions of the model tested, in particular for the general DEMO that a me-
diated model of risk behavior is more powerful than one in which the di-
rect effects of a large number of DEMO antecedent variables are ex-
amined individually. Not only did the studies reported here provide gen-
eral support for a mediated model in which risk DEMO and risk
propensity are key mediators, but they also clarified some DEMO the likely
causal relationships involved. Thus, this article provides a conceptual DEMO
empirical springboard for future work on other potentially important de-
terminants of risky decision-making behavior.
REFERENCES
Arch, E. 1993. Risk taking: A motivational DEMO for sex differences. Psychological Reports,
73: 3-11.
Bandura, A. 1977. Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psycholog-
ical Bulletin, DEMO: 191-215.
Baird, I. S., & Thomas, H. 1985. Toward a contingency model of strategic risk taking. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 10: 230-243.
Baron, R. M., & Kenney, D. A. 1986. The DEMO variahle distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical DEMO Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51: 1173-1182.
Bettman, J. DEMO 1973. Perceived risk and its components: A model and empirical test. DEMO
nal of Market Research, 10: 184-190.
Brittain, J., & Sitkin, S. B. 1989. Facts, figures, and organizational decisions: Carter racing DEMO
quantitative analysis in the organizational hehavior classroom. Organizational Behav-
ior Teaching Review, 14(1): 62-81.
Brockhaus, R. H. 1980. Risk-taking propensity of DEMO Academy of Management
Joumal, 23: 509-520.
Corsini, R. J., & Osaki, B. D. (Eds.). 1984. Encyclopedia of psychology, vol. 3. New York: Wi-
ley.
Douglas, M., & Wildavsky, A. 1982. DEMO and culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dutton, JE., & DEMO, S. E. 1987. Categorizing strategic issues: Links to organizational ac-
tion. Academy of Management Review, 11: 76-90.
Dyer, J. S., & DEMO, R. K. 1982. Relative risk aversion. Management Science, 28: 875-886.
DEMO, B., Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Derby, S. L., & Keeney, R. L. 1981. Acceptable risk.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Coldenson, R. M. (Ed.). 1984. Longman dictionary of psychology DEMO psychiatry. New
York: Longman.
Hambrick, D. C , & Mason, DEMO 1984. Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its
top DEMO Academy of Management Review, 9: 193-206.
Jackson, S. E., & Dutton, J. E. 1988. Discerning threats and opportunities. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 33: 370-387.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47: 263-291.
19g5 Sitkin and Weingart 1591
Kogan, N., & Wallach, M. A. 1964. Risk taking: A study in cognition and personality. New
York: DEMO, Rinehart & Winston.
Levitt, B., & March, J. G. 1988. Organizational learning. In W. R. Scott & J. Blake (Eds.), An-
nual review of sociology, 14: 319-340. Palo Alto, CA: Annual DEMO
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1985. A portfolio DEMO risk measures. Theory and De-
cision, 19: 1-29.
MacCrimmon, K. DEMO, & Wehrung, D. A. 1986a. Takingrisks: The management of uncertainty.
DEMO York: Free Press.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1986b. Assessing risk propensity. In L. Daboni, A. Mon-
tesano, & DEMO Lines (Eds.), Recent developments in the foundations of utility and DEMO
theory: 291-309. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Press.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1990. Characteristics of risk taking executives. Man-
agement Science, 36: 422-435.
March, J. C , & Shapira, Z. 1987. DEMO perspectives on risk and risk-taking. Manage-
ment Science, 33: 1404-1418.
Neale, M. A., Bazerman, M. H., Northcraft, G. B., & DEMO, C. 1986. "Choice shift" effects
in group decisions: A decision bias perspective. International Journal of Small Group
Research, March: 33-42.
Osborn, R. N., & Jackson, D. H. 1988. Leaders, riverboat gamblers, DEMO purposeful unintend-
ed consequences in the management of complex dangerous technologies. Academy of
Management Journal, 31: 924-947.
Pablo, A. L., Sitkin, S. B., & Jemison, D. B. In press. The role of risk DEMO acquisition decision
making processess. Journal of Management.
Rowe, W. D. 1977. DEMO anatomy of risk. New York: Wiley.
Schneider, S. L., & DEMO, L. L. 1986. Reflection in preferences under risk: Who and when
may suggest why. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Per-
formance, 12: 535-548.
Schoemaker, P. 1990. Are risk attitudes related across domains and response modes? Man-
agement Science, 36: 1451-1463.
Seligman, M. DEMO P. 1975. Helplessness. San Francisco: Freeman.
Singh, J. 1986. Performance, DEMO, and risk taking in organizational decision making. Acad-
emy of Management DEMO, 29: 562-585.
Sitkin, S. B. 1992. Learning from failure: The strategy of small losses. In B. M. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 14: 231-266. Greenwich,
DEMO: JAI Press.
Sitkin, S. B., & Pablo, A. L. 1992. Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 17: 9-39.
Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, DEMO E. 1981. Threat-rigidity effects in organizational
behavior: A multi-level analysis. Administrative DEMO Quarterly, 26: 501-524.
Sutherland, S. (Ed.). 1989. International dictionary of psychology. New York: Continuum.
Tamuz, M., & Sitkin, S. DEMO 1992. The invisible muzzle: Organizational and legal con-
straints on the DEMO of information about health and safety hazards. Working pa-
per. University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston.
Thaler, R. H., & Johnson, E. J. 1990. Gambling with the house money and trying to break even:
The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice. Management Science, 36: 643-660.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1986. Rational choice DEMO the framing of decisions. In R. M.
Hogarth & M. W. Reder (Eds.), Rational choice: The contrast between economics and
psychology: 67-94. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. DEMO Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation
of uncertainty. Journal of Risk DEMO Uncertainty, 5: 297-323.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Polley, D. 1992. Learning while innovating. Organization Science, 3(1):
92-116.
Van Maanen, J., & Schein, E. H. 1979. Toward a theory of organization socialization. In B.
1592 Academy of Management fournal December
Staw & L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 1: 209-259.
Greenwich, CT: JAI DEMO
Vlek, C , & Stallen, P. J. 1980. Rational and personal aspects of risk. Acta Psychologica, 45-
273-300.
Wehrung, D. A., Lee, K., Tse, D. K., & Vertinsky, I. B. 1989. Adjusting risky situations: A the-
oretical framework and empirical test. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2: 189-212.
Weick, K. E. 1984. Small wins: DEMO the scale of social problems. American Psychol-
ogist, 39: 40-49.
Wolman, B. B. (Ed.). 1989. Dictionary of behavioral science. San Diego: Academic Press.
APPENDIX
Scale Items and Reliabilities
Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Subjects in DEMO 1 and 2 were asked: "If you were Pat Carter, DEMO is the probability
that you would decide to race/not race (DEMO 0% = definitely not race and 100% = defi-
nitely race)?" Choices were provided in increments of 10 percent.
Risk Perception
This four-item scale (a = .75) was used in studies 1 and 2. DEMO first three items reflect-
ed responses to the following question:
"DEMO would you characterize the decision faced by Pat Carter?" (1) 1 = significant op-
portunity to 7 = significant threat; (2) 1 = potential for loss to 7 = potential for gain (reverse-
scored); (3) 1 = positive situation to 7 = negative DEMO
The fourth item was a response to the following question:
"DEMO is the likelihood of the Carter Racing Team succeeding at the Pocono race?" (4)
1 = very unlikely to 7 = very likely (reverse-scored).
Risk Propensity
This five-item scale (a = .86) was used in study 1 and captured responses to the following
question:DEMO
"As Pat Carter you face a decision that affects your organization'DEMO financial future. Civ-
en this circumstance, how would you rate your DEMO to. . . (1) choose more or less risky
alternatives based on the assessment of others on whom you must rely, (2) choose more or
less risky alternatives which rely upon analyses high in DEMO complexity, (3) choose more
or less risky alternatives which could DEMO a major impact on the strategic direction of your
organization, (4) initiate a strategic corporate action which has the potential to backfire, (5)
support a decision when I was aware that relevant analyses DEMO done while missing sev-
eral pieces of information."
Sim B Sitkin is an associate professor of management at the Fuqua School of Busi-
DEMO, Duke University. He received he Ph.D. degree in organizational behavior from
DEMO Craduate School of Business, Stanford University. His research examines the
processes DEMO which organizations and their members become more or less capable
of change and innovation. More specifically, his work focuses on the effect of for-
mal and informal organizational control systems on risk taking, accountability, trust,DEMO
learning, and innovation.
Laurie R. Weingart is an associate professor of DEMO administration in the
Craduate School of Industrial Administration at Carnegie Mellon University. She re-
ceived her Ph.D. degree in organization behavior from Northwestern University. DEMO
research interests include individual and group decision-making processes, primar-
ily focusing DEMO negotiation tactical hehavior.
{1g42fwefx}