Determinants of Risky Decision-Making Behavior: A Test of the Mediating Role of
Risk Perceptions and Propensity
Sim B Sitkin; Laurie R. Weingart
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 6. (Dec., 1995), DEMO 1573-1592.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199512%2938%3A6%3C1573%3ADORDBA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
The Academy of Management Journal is currently published by Academy of Management.
Your use of DEMO JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
DEMO permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal DEMO multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the DEMO archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher DEMO any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aom.html.
Each copy of any part of DEMO JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a DEMO digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by DEMO, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Thu Jun 21 09:26:20 2007
"Academy of Management lourno1
1995, Val. 38, No. 6, 1573-1592.
DEMO OF RISKY DECISION-MAKING
BEHAVIOR: A TEST OF THE MEDIATING ROLE
OF DEMO PERCEPTIONS AND PROPENSITY
SIM B SITKIN
Duke University
LAURIE R. WEINGART
Carnegie Mellon University
The reported research examined the usefulness of placing risk propen-
DEMO and risk perception in a more central role in models of risky de-
cision making than has been done previously. Specifically, this arti-
cle reports on two studies that examined a model in which risk
propensity DEMO risk perception mediate the effects of problem fram-
ing and outcome history on risky decision-making behavior. Impli-
cations of the pattern of results for DEMO research are discussed.
Most scholars who have studied decision-making behavior in risky
organizational situations have focused on the direct effects of one or two
DEMO of this behavior. However, such an approach does not ade-
quately DEMO the complex sets of influences on risk behavior in organ-
izations. In addition, it has led to contradictions in the literature and po-
tentially inaccurate conclusions about the causes of decision-making be-
havior (Sitkin & Pablo, 1992). For example, Kahneman and Tversky's
"prospect theory" (1979) conclusion that negatively framed situations
lead to greater risk taking contradicts the results of research by March and
Shapira (1987) and Osborn DEMO Jackson (1988).
In an attempt to build upon these direct DEMO approaches, Sitkin and
Pablo (1992) proposed a mediated model of DEMO determinants of risky de-
cision making, theorizing that the effects of DEMO number of previously ex-
amined variables on risk taking were not direct but were instead mediat-
ed by risk propensity and risk perception. Their DEMO extended the di-
rect effects approaches and posited a direct causal effect between the
variables studied and risk taking. In addition, where direct effects ap-
proaches have predicted specific choices under conditions of risk, Sitkin
and Pablo focused on the process of making risky decisions. This article
reports DEMO studies that provide initial tests of key portions of the Sitkin-
Pablo approach.
We would like to thank Robyn Dawes, George Huber, Amy DEMO, Gerald Salancik, David
Schkade, Michael Hitt, and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on ear-
lier versions of this article.
1574
Academy of12.lnllagement
Jounlal
December
CLARIFYING KEY CONSTRUCTS AND DISTINCTIONS
Sitkin and DEMO (1992) reviewed a number of potentially relevant in-
dividual, organizational, and problem characteristics that have been iden-
tified as predictors of risky DEMO decision making. Perhaps the most
significant focus of their analysis was the previously distinct effects of out-
come history and problem framing, which they argued had been over-
looked-and sometimes unintentionally confounded-in prior work.
Specifically, Sitkin and Pablo suggested that previous contradictory find-
ings could be explained by DEMO outcome history from problem
framing. Following their theoretical emphasis, we focus DEMO these two fre-
q~~entlystudied predictors of risky decision making. This choice was
guided by our desire to stress variables whose effects were predicted by
DEMO and Pablo to be inediated by risk propensity and risk perceptions,
so as to provide an initial test of their core propositions.
Although DEMO focuses on only a subset of the broader model, Figure 1
DEMO the core ideas underlying the mediated model of the determinants
of risky decision making and captures its most critical variables. First, it
represents antecedent characteristics as affecting decision making only in-
directly, through their effect on risk propensity and risk perceptions; this
is the inediated aspect of the model. In addition, the paths shon~n Fig-
ure 1 are numerically keyed to the hypothesized bivariate relationships be-
tween the variables of the inodel (discussed later in the article).
Before addressing the rationale for each DEMO posited in the
model we should define several key constructs, since DEMO distinctions
underlie several of our arguments. Variables identified in the Sitkin and
Pablo (1992) model addressed here include their dependent variable, de-
cision risk, their proposed mediating variables (risk perception and risk
propensity), DEMO two key exogenous predictor variables that they identi-
in
/
FIGURE DEMO
Mediated Model of the Determinants
,
of Risky Decision-Making Behaviora
Outcome DEMO
Risk
Problem Framing
/
t
H1
Risk
Perception
/Behavior
Decision-
Making
" The numbers shown on the paths of the nlotlel are keyed DEMO some of the hypotheses
discussed herein. Several h!rpotheses are not sho~vn here because they represent the nletliation
hypotheses rather than a specific: hypothesized relationship. Specifically, Hypotheses 6 ant1 7
posit that the effects of outcome history on risky c1ec:ision making ant1 risk perception are
mediated by risk DEMO, and Hypotheses H and 9 posit that the effects of problem DEMO
ant1 risk propensity are mediated by risk perc:eption.
1995
Sitkin and Wingart
1575
fied as characterizing the person and the DEMO: outcome history and
problem framing. Each of these five constructs is DEMO below.
Decision risk is a construct used to characterize the alternatives con-
fronting a decision maker; it can, for example, describe hour undesirable
the likely effects of an alternative are and the likelihood of their DEMO
rence. Risk can also be used to characterize an overall decision-how risky
it is compared to other alternatives. Following Sitkin and Pablo, we de-
fined decision risk as "the extent to u~hich there is uncertainty about
whether potentially significant andlor disappointing outcomes of decisions
will be realized" (DEMO: 10). To the extent that a decision involves high un-
DEMO or extreme outcomes, either in terms of the choice among alter-
DEMO or for individual alternatives in aggregate, the decision is charac-
terized DEMO risky.
Included in the model are two direct determinants of decision risk-
risk perception and risk propensity-that also serve as mediators of an-
tecedent DEMO of the decision maker and the problem situation.
Risk perception is defined as an individual's assessment of hour risky a sit-
uation is DEMO terms of probabilistic estimates of the degree of situational un-
certainty, DEMO controllable that uncertainty is, and confidence in those es-
timates (Baird & Thomas, 1985; Bettman, 1973).
Risk propensity is defined as an individual's current tendency to take
or avoid risks. It is DEMO as an individual trait that can change
over time and thus is an emergent property of the decision maker. This de-
finition of risk DEMO, which follows Sitkin and Pablo (1992), is re-
lated to but departs in a critical way from previous conceptualizations of
propensity as DEMO stable dispositional attribute (e.g., Fischhoff, Lichtenstein,
Slovic, Derby, & Keeney, 1981; Rowe, 1977). It is interesting to note DEMO
even critics of the predictive value of the risk propensity construct (DEMO,
MacCrimmon & Wehrung, 1990; Schoemaker, 1990) have employed the tra-
ditional conception of risk propensity as a stable individual attribute.
We DEMO contrasting the traditional conception of risk propensity as "a
stable and DEMO" dispositional attribute (Wolinan, 1989: 103) with our
conceptualization of DEMO as a changeable trait that is "persistent" (Suther-
land, 1989: 452) or "enduring" (Goldenson, 1984: 757) but can DEMO "learned
or inherited" (Corsini & Osaki, 1984: 542-543). DEMO color or facial fea-
tures-frequently cited as examples of traits (e.g., Goldenson, 1984)-i1-
lustrate the concept of persistence and change in that hair color responds
to exposure to the sun and facial features can DEMO altered through cosmet-
ic surgery. Similarly, a trait-based definition of risk DEMO conceptu-
alizes the construct as a cumulative tendency to take or avoid risks that
is simultaneously persistent and can change over time as a DEMO of ex-
perience. By focusing on the important role of past experience, this con-
ceptualization can account for the capacity for people to adapt without
denying that as individuals gain more experience, they may be less sus-
ceptible to contextual influence and more likely to exhibit cross-situational
consistency. DEMO, our approach to risk propensity as "stable but change-
1576 Academy of Management Journal December
able" both builds upon and modifies the traditional "stable and constant"
view.
Although the tendency to take risks (i.e., risk propensity) is allnost cer-
tainly related causally to making riskier decisions, as we will hypothesize
and test below, the DEMO constructs are not synonyinous because a number
of factors can impede the realization of a decision maker's tendencies in
any particular instance. Even DEMO individual who consistently leans toward
seeking risks could in a specific case, such as a business investment, fail
to act on this tendency, because of inadequate funding, a missed ap-
pointment, an unexpected illness, a natural disaster, or other obstruction.
We also examined two exogenous variables posited in Sitkin and
Pablo's (1992) model. Problem framing refers DEMO whether a situation is pre-
sented to a decision maker as an opportunity or a threat (e.g., Jackson &
Dutton, 1988) or in terms of gains or losses (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979).
DEMO is, the situation can be portrayed in a generally positive or DEMO
light. Outcome history, a person-situation interaction characteristic, is de-
fined as the degree to which the decision maker believes that previous risk-
related DEMO have resulted in successful or unsuccessful outcomes. For
our purpose, this DEMO reflects an individual's overall mental repre-
sentation of how well he or she has fared in the past in similar situations
(see Sitkin [I9921 and Weick [I9841 for reviews).
A MEDIATED-EFFECTS MODEL OF THE DEMO OF
RISK BEHAVIOR
Determinants of Risk Propensity
Outcome history. Although outcome history is posited here to affect
decision making, the role of outcoine history has been notably absent in
many theories of risky decision-making behavior. Nearly DEMO studies have
focused on either individual risk orientation (MacCriinmon & Wehrung,DEMO
1986a, 1986b, 1990) or decision maker computation of risk (Dyer & Sarin,
1982; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986) while essentially ignoring the poten-
tially important role of previous decisions made and their outcomes.
DEMO ahistorical vien~point challenged by recent research findings
showing that prior success in taking risks can increase the propensity to
take risks. For example, the work of March and Shapira (1987), Osborn and
Jackson (1988), and Thaler and Johnson (1990) found that decision mak-
ers will persist in taking risks if prior risk-related actions were success-
ful.
Hypothesis DEMO: The more successful the outcomes of a de-
cision maker's DEMO decisions have been, the high-
er his or her risk propensity.
DEMO of Risk Perception
Problem framing. An important influence on a decision maker's risk
perceptions is whether a problem is framed in positive or DEMO terms.
is
In an influential study of individual risk behavior under conditions of var-
DEMO problem frames, Kahneman and Tversky (1979) formulated prospect
theory, noting that positively frained situations led to the making of risk-
averse decisions, whereas negatively framed situations led to risk seeking.
A number of succeeding DEMO (e.g., Neale, Bazerinan. Northcraft, &
Alperson, 1986; Singh, 1986; Tvcrsky & Kahneman, 1986, 1992) have
found the influence DEMO problem framing on decision making to be robust.
However, none of DEMO studics has directly examined the causal
mechanisms underlying the observeci behavioral effects posited in prospect
theory. If perceptions and other omitted mechanisms are left DEMO
ined, it remains rtnclear how problem framing comes to affec~ decisions.
DEMO Sitkin and Pablo (1992), we hypothesized that framing direct-
ly DEMO how risky a situation is perceived to be, m~hich in turn DEMO to
the behavioral outcomes they observed. This hypothesis implies that pos-
itive frames, which emphasize situational threats to existing resources, may
make the DEMO inherent in a situation more salient (inducing risk-averse
behavior), whereas DEMO emphasis on the upside potential for increasing lim-
ited Iioldings or recouping losses may decrease thc salience of risks by in-
creasing the salience DEMO opporttiilities (inducing risk-seeking behavior).
Such an explanation is consistent with DEMO nonlinearity that licts at the
heart of prospect theory and its empirical support. but it extends prospect
theory by suggesting the cognitive inechanisin through DEMO observable
behavioral responses occur.
Hypothesis 2: Positively frained situations will be DEMO
ceived as involving higher risk than negatively framed
situations.
Risk propensity. Risk propensity influences the relative salience of
situational threat or opportunity and thus DEMO to biased risk perceptions
(Brockhaus, 1980; Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Specifically, risk-averse decision
makers (i.e., individuals n~ith a propensity to avoid risks) are hypothesized
to attend to and mieight potentially negative outcomes more heavily than
positive outcomes (Schneider & Lopes, 1986), thus DEMO the
probability of loss relative to the probability of gain. Conversely, DEMO
ing decision makers are hypothesized to attend to and weight positive op-
portunities more heavily (March & Shapira, 1987), thus overestimating the
DEMO of gain relative to the probability of loss.
Hypothesis 3: The DEMO n decision maker's risk propen-
sity, the lower the level DEMO perceived sitllational risk.
Determinants of Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Risk propensity. The straightforward intuitive basis for positing that
an indi~~idual's "willingness to take risks" (Mac:Crimmon & Wehrung,
1990) affects whether he or she will actually make riskier decisions makes
extei~sive explanation unnecessary. Although the Sitkin-Pablo DEMO has
not heen tested previously, its core (see Figure 1)concerns the notion that
1578
Academy of Mnnagement Journal
December
an individual's propensity to take DEMO avoid risks affects decision making,
an idea that is grounded in a number of previous studies (e.g., Kogan &
Wallach, 1964; MacCrimmon & Wehrung, 1986a, 1990). For example,
Brockhaus (1980) hypothesized that the overall orientation of an individ-
ual toward risk (DEMO propensity) n~ould predispose some individuals to
make riskier decisions than other DEMO Thus,
Hypothesis 4: The higher a decision maker's risk DEMO
sity, the riskier will be his or her decision-making he-
h DEMO
Risk perception. Although we have acknowledged that prospect the-
ory does not explicitly consider risk perceptions, Sitkin and Pablo (1992)
suggested that DEMO findings of prospect theory research are consistent with
a negative relationship between perceived risk and making risky decisions.
That is, risk avoidance is greater n~hen threats to assets are salient (high
risk is perceived) than DEMO is n~hen individual perceives little risk because
there is nothing to lose. It also seemed reasonable to posit that higher lev-
els of perceived DEMO risk would be negatively related to making
risky decisions since people tend to associate risk n~ith negative outcomes
more strongly than with outcome variability (e.g., Levitt & March, 1988).
Given this perceptual asymmetry, we hypothesized that actions taken un-
der conditions of higher perceived situational risk DEMO also be per-
ceived to have a lower expected value.
Hypothesis 5: The degree to which individuals make
risky decisions will be negatively associated with their
level of perceived risk.
The Role of Risk Perception and DEMO Propensity
As stated earlier, most previous research has overlooked a critical DEMO
oretical issue raised by the Sitkin-Pablo model-the causal mechanisms
by n~hich a variety of exogenous variables come to affect decision-making
behavior. As shown in DEMO 1, they argued that the direct impact of an-
tecedent variables DEMO risky decision making actually takes place only via
the mediating function of risk propensity and risk perception.
No theories prior to Sitkin and Pablo (1992) and no empirical work
has focused explicitly on the indirect effects of outcome history on risky
decision making. Nonetheless, Sitkin and Pablo drew on the earlier work
of March and Shapira (1987), Osborn and Jackson (1988), and Thaler and
Johnson (1990) to argue that successful or unsuccessful outcome histories
affect how decision makers perceived risky situations DEMO acted upon them
by influencing what kinds of information decision inakers attended to and
also by influencing how much those decision inakers leaned a DEMO to-
ward or away from taking risks. Historical success or failure does not, they
suggested, direct attention ton~ard specific risk elements of a DEMO In-
stead, their analysis was grounded in the familiar notion that DEMO mak-
ers would be prone to persist in pursuing what worked in the past and to
an
1995 Sitkin and M'eingart 1579
abandon n~hat did not. This intuitive DEMO, they noted, is that outcome
history affects a decision maker's propensity to take risks, and that it is the
tendency to take or avoid risks that in turn directs attention to high- or low-
DEMO aspects of a situation (i.e., risk perception) and leads to DEMO or
avoiding risky behaviors.
Hypothesis 6: The effect of outcoine history DEMO risky de-
cision-making behavior will be fully mediated by risk
propensity.
Hypothesis 7: The effect of outcome history on risk per-
ception will be fully mediated by risk propensity.
We hypothesized that risk propensity and problem DEMO affect
risky decision making by influencing what is perceived. Risk propensity
is linked to risk perception in several ways; these include limiting what
information is attended to and limiting an individual's ability to notice and
DEMO to risky attributes that influence how risky situations will be eval-
uated. This approach is consistent with previous n~ork that has defined risk
perception DEMO terms of situational labeling (Jackson & Dutton, 1988; Staw,
DEMO, & Dutton, 1981) and estimates of the extent and controllability
DEMO risks (Baird & Thomas, 1985; Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Thus, risk propen-
sity is not only posited to affect decision making directly, but is also
posited to have an indirect effect on risky decision making through its ef-
fect on risk perceptions (cf. Sitkin & Pablo, 1992).
Hypothesis 8: The effect of risk propensity on DEMO de-
cision-making behavior will be partially mediated by
risk perception.
Similarly, DEMO effect of problem framing on risky decision making is
mediated by risk perception because framing affects the strength and clar-
ity of an individual'DEMO positive or negative perceptions of aspects of a sit-
uation. Thus, DEMO on the previously discussed logic of Hypotheses 2
and 5, we DEMO that:
Hypothesis 9: The effect of problem framing on risky DEMO
cision-making behavior will be fully mediated by risk
perception.
The overall goal of the empirical research reported in this article was
to provide a DEMO test of several key aspects of the mediated mod-
el. We describe the results of two studies, each of which tested selected
portions of the mode1.l Study 1 manipulated outcome history to examine
\jVe attempted during DEMO to include these separate aspects of the model in a sin-
gle experimental design. Although their reactions to each manipulated variable were distinct,
DEMO both were used simultaneously we found that subjects confused the two nlanipula-
tions. Therefore, we ran two experinlents that presented subjects with only one nlanipnla-
tion at a time.
1580
Acaderny of
Management Journal
December
the hypothesized mediating role of risk DEMO and risk perception.
Study 2 manipulated problem framing to examine the hypothesized me-
diating role of risk perception.
STUDY 1
Methods
Subjects. Thirty-eight master'DEMO of business administration students in
a required organizational behavior class participated in the study. The sub-
jects' average age was 28.3 years (ranging DEMO 23 to 46), and their work
experience averaged 6.2 years (DEMO from 0 to 25 years). Sixty-six per-
cent of the subjects were men.
Procedures and stimulus materials. The study was a class exercise.
DEMO packet containing the stimulus materials and questionnaire was dis-
tributed. Subjects were asked to read through the stimulus materials and
to individually fill out DEMO attached questionnaire.
A modified version of a widely used decision-making case, DEMO Rac-
ing (Brittain & Sitkin, 1989), was used.2 Carter Racing places decision mak-
ers in a situation of risky choice. The case DEMO the facts of the Nation-
al Aeronautics and Space Administration's (DEMO) decision to launch the
space shuttle Challenger in the guise of DEMO decision about whether a race
car team should compete in the last race of the season. The decision in-
volves risk in a number DEMO domains, including business risk, personal fi-
nancial risk, and physical DEMO In the study, we focused on the impact of
the decision DEMO ~~hether to race on the financial viability of the race
car teain as an organization-that is, business risk.
This particular stimulus was chosen because it avoids a major prob-
lein frequently associated with experimental stimulus materials DEMO that it
has been found to be highly realistic and quickly engaging. Since the case
as originally written fosters highly sken~ed choice patterns, modifications
to the original case were made (concerning information about the racing
team's history of success and failure and the amount of money at DEMO)
that would lead to a more balanced distribution of decisions. The basic
case information was changed so that the expected value of racing DEMO
equal to the expected value of not racing when ambient air temperature
was not incorporated into the calculation^.^
Variables
Outcome history. Outcome history was DEMO after subjects had
read the case and before they read the first question of the questionnaire.
The complete text of the revised case is DEMO from the authors.
Air ten~perature was not included in developing equality across the options (i.e.,
raceinot race) in our revision hecause it DEMO not incorporated by the Challenger decision
nlakers or by students using the case in the past (Brittain h- Sitkin, 1989).
1995
Sitkin and Mreingart
1581
Iildividuals in the uilsuccessful outcome history condition DEMO the fol-
lowing:
As Pat Carter, you have had a DEMO amount of training for
and experience with this type of decision. Your previous de-
cisions have been largely unsuccessful and you have alxvays
had DEMO nagging worry that your poor "track record" could even-
tually have more serious consequences. YOU feel uncertain be-
cause of the lack of DEMO of those decisions you have made
in the past.
Subjects in the successful outcome history condition read:
As Pat Carter, you have had a moderate arrlount of training for
and experience with this type of DEMO Your previous de-
cisions have been largely successf~~l
rived a sense of self-assurance from your successful "track
record" in making such decisions. You DEMO confident because
of the success of those decisions you have made in the past.
and you have always de-
A three-itern outconie history manipulation DEMO ("Extent to which
problenis have resulted froni Pat's decisions like this in the past," "Degree
to which Pat has analyzed decisioils like this correctly in the past," and
"Degree to which successful outcornes have resulted from Pat's decisions
like this in the past") was found to be reliable (a = .71). The manipula-
DEMO check was found to be significant across coilditions (F,,,, DEMO 14.68,p
< .001) and in the predicted direction (success condition, F = 4.68, s.d.
= 0.91; failure condition, Z = DEMO, s.d. = 1.08).
Decision-making behavior. Ininiediately followiilg the manipulation,
DEMO were asked to indicate whether they would race (definitely not
race, 0%"; definitely race, 10O0/u). Next, a dichotornous forced-choice DEMO
(race vs, not race) was presented. The scaled forniat item DEMO an indirect
measure of decision making that gathers data on a subject's intentions,
whereas the forced-choice item measures decision-making behavior di-
rectly. DEMO the scaled format allowed for rrlore response variance than
did the dichotomous choice format and the two itenis were highly corre-
lated (r,7 = .72, p < .001), we used the scaled format iten1 as the indica-
tor of decision-making behavior (see the Appendix for the text of this and
subsequently described items).
Risk perception. A four-itern DEMO was adapted from MacCrimmon
and Wehruilg (1985, 1986~1, 1986b) and Wehrung, Lee, Tse, and Vertinsky
(1989) to measure the aniouilt of perceived risk associated with the deci-
sion to be niade (a = .75).
Risk propensity. An original five-item scale for business risk DEMO
sity was eniployed (a = .86).
Results
Direct effects. The DEMO effects posited in Hypotheses 1,3, 4, and 5
were examined through correlatioil and regression analyses. First, as
show11 in Table 1,outconie history significantly iilfluences risk propensi-
Acrrdemy of1V1anrrgeinent
]o~irnrrl
December
TABLE 1
Study 1 Descriptive Statistics and t-Test DEMO
Variable
Risky decision making
Risk propensity
Risk perception
Outcome History Conditiona
Failure Success
Mean s.d. Mean
58.33 3 4.00 77.50
3.73 1.23 4.51
3.64 DEMO 2.80
s.d.
2 2.68
1.00
0.87
Vaiiure, n = 18;
DEMO p< .05
success, 17 = 20.
t
2.06*
-2.15*
2.38*
df
36
36
3 6
ty (t,?,= -2.15, p < DEMO). Thus, subjects who were informed that Pat Carter
(whose role they adopted as decision maker) had successfully niade sim-
ilar decisions in the past reported higher levels of risk propensity for Pat,
supporting DEMO 1. Second, risk propensity was found to be nega-
tively related DEMO risk perception, supporting Hypothesis 3 (r = .54, p <
.001). That is, when subjects reported higher levels of risk propensity, they
also reported that they perceived less risk in the situation. Finally, risky
decision making was regressed on risk propensity and risk perception to
determine the direct effects of propensity and perception on the decision
(RZ= .62, F2,35 28.80, p < .001). Although risk propensity DEMO not have
a significantly positive association with the decision in the regression
analysis (P = .15, n.s.), as hypothesized in Hypothesis 4, the bivariate cor-
relation between risk propensity and risky decision making was DEMO
cant (r = .52, p < .001). Results showed that risk perception was negatively
related to the decision, supporting Hypothesis 5 (DEMO = .70, p < .001).
Mediated effects. Hierarchical regression analysis (Baron & Kenney,
1986) was used to test the potential mediation effects. In the first step of
each equation, we tested the direct effects model, regressing risk behav-
ior on the relevant antecedent variables (DEMO history, or risk propen-
sity, or both). In the second step, the relevant mediator (risk propensity
or risk perception) was added to determine whether it mediated any pre-
viously significant relationships.
Three tests DEMO mediation were conducted. First, Hypothesis 6 was ex-
amined to determine DEMO risk propensity mediated the effect of outcome his-
tory on decision making. A stepwise regression analysis predicting deci-
sion making was used to test DEMO hypothesis, with outcome history entered
in step 1and risk propensity added DEMO step 2. The direct effects of outconie
history explained a significant portion of the variance in risk behavior (R2
= .11, p < DEMO), and the change in RZ when propensity was added to the
equation was significant (AR2 = .19, p < .01). Results DEMO step 1 showed
that outcorne history was positively related to risky decision making (P =
.33, p < .01). When risk propensity DEMO added to the equation, the rela-
=
tionship was no longer significant (P = .17, n.s.), and DEMO propensity was
significantly related to decision making (P = .46, p < .01). In addition, the
change in beta associated with outcome history was significant (Ap = .16,
t,, = 2.23, DEMO < .05). Thus, Hypothesis 6 was supported.
Second, Hypothesis 7, suggesting that risk propensity mediated the re-
lationship between risk outcome history and risk perception, was also test-
ed using stepwise regression. The direct effects of outcome history ex-
plained a significant portion of the variance DEMO risk perception (RZ= .14,
p < .05), and the DEMO in R2 when propensity was added to the equa-
tion was significant (ARZ= .19,p < .01). Results of step 1 showed that out-
come history was negatively related to risk perception (P = -.37, p < .05).
When risk propensity was added to the equation in step 2, the effect of out-
come history was no longer significant (P = -.21, n.s.), and the risk
propensity effect DEMO significant (P = -.46, p < .01). In addition, DEMO
change in beta associated with outcome history was significant (Ap = DEMO,
t,, = -2.15, p < .05). Thus, Hypothesis 7 was supported.
Finally, Hypothesis 8 was tested to determine if risk perception par-
tially mediated the effects of risk propensity on risky decision DEMO The
direct effect of propensity explained a significant portion of the variance
in risk behavior (R2= .27, p < .001), and the DEMO in R2 when risk per-
ception was added to the equation was significant (ARZ= .35, p < ,001).
Results froni step 1 showed that risk propeilsity was positively related to
decision making (P = .52, p < .001). When risk perceptioil was added to
the equation, the relationship was no longer significant (P = .15, n.s.), and
risk perception was significantly related to decision making (P = -.70, p
< .001). The change in beta associated with risk propensity was signifi-
cant (Ap = .47, t,, = 3.69, p < .01). Because the mediation effect was full,
rather DEMO partial, Hypothesis 8 was not supported.
Summary. Taken together, the results of study 1 denionstrate that the
effects of outcome history cascade froin DEMO history to risk propen-
sity to risk perceptioil and finally from risk perception to risky decision-
making behavior. These results provide support for the DEMO of outcome his-
tory in the mediated niodel of risky decision niaking while clarifying our
understanding of the path through which these effects occur.
DEMO 2
Study 2 was designed to test the portion of the model relating to the
framing effect-focusing on the relationships between problem framing,
DEMO perception, and risky decision making. TWO direct-effect hypotheses
and one mediating DEMO were tested: Hypothesis 2, positiilg a posi-
tive relationship between problem framing and risk perception, Hypoth-
esis 5, positing a negative relatioilship DEMO risk perception and risky
decision making, and Hypothesis 9, addressing the expectatioil of the me-
diating role of risk perceptioil in the relationship DEMO framing and
risky decision making.
Methods
Subjects. Sixty-three students in an undergraduate introductory
organizatioilal behavior class participated DEMO the study. Subjects were on
average 20.1 years old (range = DEMO years) and averaged 4.2 years of
work experience (range = 0-9 years). Seventy-one percent of the subjects
were men.
Procedures and stimulus DEMO The general procedure for study
2 was similar to that described for study 1. Subjects received a packet con-
taining the Carter Racing scenario, the manipulation of problem framing,
and a series of questions designed DEMO assess their decisions, their percep-
tioils of the risk in the DEMO, and a problem-framing manipulation
check.
Variables
Problem framing. All subjects were DEMO an identical description of
the decision-making situation. This three-page description iilcluded in-
forniation about both potential gains and losses. Problem framing was ma-
nipulated DEMO they had read the case and before they read the first ques-
tion of the questionnaire. A raildomly assigned half of the subjects read DEMO
franiing paragraph that selectively drew upoil information from the case
to highlight the potential for losses, and the other half read a franiing para-
graph that highlighted the potential for gains. Subjects in the negatively
framed DEMO (domain of losses) read:
As Pat Carter, vou face DEMO tough decision, because it involies
trade-offs. If you race, jou have a 29% chance of blowing an
engine and losing all of your DEMO for next year, including
the $500,000 oil and $300,000 DEMO sponsorships. If you do not
race, you will lose the $300,DEMO tire sponsorship you had se-
cured for next year.
Participants in the positively-framed conditioil (domain of gains)
read:
As Pat Carter, DEMO face a tough decision, because it involves
trade-offs. If you race, you have a 42% chance of finishing in
the top 5 and DEMO the $300,000 tire sponsorship plus the
price money. If you do not race, you will be able to secure the
$500,000 oil sponsorship for the next season.
A three-item franiing mailipulatioil check was employed (a= .70) that
assessed the degree to which subjects focused on the opportunities (rather
than the threats) inherent in the situation. Itenis included DEMO following:
"Future opportuilities were key, even though they were uncertain," "This
was the biggest opportunity we ever had," and "DEMO just had to go for it-
you can't will by sitting in the pits." Subjects responded on a seven-point
scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree.
Risk perception and risky decision-making behavior. The measures
DEMO perception of risk in the situation and risky decision making were the
same as used jn study 1.
Sitkin and M'eingnrt
Study 2
Variable
Risky decision making
Risk perception
"egative framing, n
** p < .0l
*** p < ,001
DEMO
TABLE 2
Descriptive Statistics and t-Test Results
Problem-Framing Conditiona
Negative Positive
Mean s.d. Mean
72.58 20.10 51.56
3.27 0.60
= 31: positive framing, DEMO - 3.58
32.
s.d.
2 7.10
0.84
t
3.44***
-2.90**
Manipulation check. The franiing manipulation was found to be ef-
fective (F,,,, = 5.33, p < .05), with subjects in the positively framed con-
dition reporting a significantly higher concern for opportunity (E= 5.10,
s.d. = 1.01) than those in the negatively framed condition (2 DEMO 4.33, s.d.
= 1.56).
Hypothesis tests. Results supported Hypotheses 2 DEMO 5 and partial-
ly supported Hypothesis 9. First, as shown in DEMO 2, problem framing and
risk perception were significantly related, as predicted in Hypothesis 2 (t,,
= -2.99, p < .01). Second, risk perception and risky decision making were
negatively correlated (r,, = -.59, p < .001), supporting Hypothesis 5. Fi-
nally, results of a regression analysis showed that the direct effects of fram-
DEMO explained a significant portion of the variance in decision making (RL
DEMO .16, p < .001), and the change in R2 when DEMO perception was added to
the equation was significant (ARL= .22, p < .001). In a test of Hypothesis
9, regression results showed that the effect of framing on risky behavior
was significant (P = -.40, p < .001) when exanlined in isolation. When
risk perception DEMO added to the ecluation in step 2, risk perception was
significantly DEMO to risky decision making (P = .51, p < .001), and
the strength of the effect of framing was reduced (t,, = -2.98, p < .01) but
remained significant (P = -.22, p < .05). These findings show that risk
perception partially mediated the relationship between probleni framing
and risky decision-making behavior. Therefore, Hypothesis 9, positing
full mediation, was not supported.
Summary. The results of study DEMO suggest that problem framing has
both a direct and an indirect effect on risky decision-making behavior. In
general, these results lend support for the mediated model of risky deci-
sion niaking and clarify our understanding of DEMO causal path through
which these influences occur,
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The two studies reported here allowed us to test key portions of the
DEMO model. As the results summarized in Figure 2 show, all but
DEMO
61
61
1586
Acnrlrmv of .Mnnngement lo~irnnl
December
FIGURE 2
Revised Model of the DEMO of Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Based on Combined Results of Studies 1 and 2"
Outcome History
+
(Sl)
Risk
Decisio~l-
Making
"Only DEMO relationships are sho~vn, with the sign of the relationship indicated
along DEMO path. Studies from which each result \\.as derived are indicated in parentheses [Sl
for study 1 and S2 for study 2). The strength DEMO the results is indicated by the number of plus
or minus signs shown; "+" or ~ndicatessignificance of p < .05 or greater, DEMO "+ 7''
"" '
or "
" indicates DEMO of p
.01
or greater.
c:
one of the causal steps hypothesized in the model received support. Our
results provide support for the DEMO of risk perception and risk
propensity as mediators of effects on risky decision-making behavior. In
both studies reported here, risk propensity and risk perception were found
to significantly reduce the relationships between the antecedent variables
and DEMO decision making. In study 1,the relationship between outcome
history and decision making was mediated by risk propensity and risk per-
ception. In study DEMO, risk perception was found to substantially mediate the
relationship between problem DEMO and decision making, although the
results also indicated that a direct DEMO of problem framing on risky de-
cision-making behavior remained. Finally, risk DEMO effects on risky
decision making were found to be mediated by perceptions of risk in
study 1. Thus, our results provide preliminary support for the mediating
approach and challenge the direct effects model underlying most previous
DEMO on risk behavior.
Limitations and Future Research
We view the results reported here to be but an initial test of key ele-
ments in DEMO much broader model. Two limitations of the studies reported
here highlight opportunities for future research.
Omitted variables. In the future, scholars should begin to examine the
effects of other variables that are of potential relevance to DEMO behavior.
For example, as we noted at the beginning of the DEMO, we have only ex-
amined a subset of the variables posited DEMO Sitkin and Pablo (1992) as af-
fecting risk behavior, and DEMO studies should begin to examine the oth-
er variables they identified, DEMO as an organization's cultural orientation
toward risk, role models provided by organizational leaders, reward sys-
tems, and individuals' risk preferences.
In addition, a number of other variables DEMO be fruitfully integrat-
ed into future research using the general approach taken here. For exam-
ple, although demographic variables did not affect our results, researchers
have identified important risk-related differences based on gender (Arch,
DEMO) and age (e.g., Hambrick & Mason, 1984; MacCrimmon & DEMO,
1990). In addition, experience has been found to influence DEMO behavior
and learning from risk taking (cf. Levitt & March, 1988; Osborn & Jackson,
1988). In terms of future treatments of experience, researchers could draw
upon work on self-efficacy (Bandura, 1977) DEMO learned helplessness (Selig-
man, 1975) to theorize about how people'DEMO past successes and failures in-
fluence their propensity to take risks.
Experience of study sample. The range of experiential history across
the potentially relevant DEMO domains raised by the stimulus material was
limited in our samples. Although the study design and its use of experi-
mentally manipulated variables did DEMO rely upon the personal decision-
making experience of subjects, nonetheless their DEMO personal experi-
ence is a potential limitation to be acknowledged and should be addressed
in future work, which could use more experienced decision makers as sub-
jects.
Theoretical Extensions and Implications
Importance of risk propensity. Sitkin DEMO Pablo (1992) argued that the
perceived value of risk propensity as a construct has waned because of its
poor conceptualization and measurement. The DEMO of our empirical
studies support their contention that rumors of the demise of risk propen-
sity were premature.
The finding that risk propensity was DEMO associated with risk
perception in study 1-that the more a subject was inclined to take risks,
the less risky he or she perceived DEMO Carter Racing scenario to be-is con-
sistent with March and Shapira's (1987) finding that risk-seeking decision
makers tend to attend more to DEMO opportunities inherent in a situation than
to the threats. This finding provides additional support for the potential
value of retaining the risk propensity construct DEMO theories and empirical
research. Thus, it appears that Sitkin and Pablo'DEMO (1992) conception of risk
propensity as a current tendency based on cumulative historical outcomes
rather than a fixed dispositional characteristic (e.g., Kogan & Wallach,
1964) has merit and should be subjected to further DEMO and em-
pirical scrutiny.
Reexamining framing effects. The finding in study 2 that problem
framing is partially mediated by risk perceptions is potentially important
DEMO that it extends previous research on framing effects. Whereas a direct
effects model was implied in the original formulation and supporting
studies of prospect DEMO (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), our results pro-
vide partial support for Sitkin and Pablo's (1992) reformulation. This sup-
1588
A cir dpir~y
of Mcln
t Jonrncll
December
clgeinen
port suggests DEMO future work should reexanline prospect theory studies
by independently varying framing and perceptions.
Traditionally, frarning effects have been tested in very controlled set-
tings using simple scenarios, with the manipulation of gains and losses
made very salient to decision makers. These research designs have resulted
in much stronger DEMO effects than emerged from study 2. It is possi-
ble that the complexity of the task materials dampened the salience of the
manipulation. Decision DEMO read a lengthy scenario and a subtle ma-
nipulation and then responded to a large set of items designed to assess
multiple constructs. The DEMO amount of information to which the deci-
sion makers had to attend may have weakened the framing effect. Thus,
our findings in study DEMO might help to identify a potential boundary con-
dition for framing effects while supporting the broad finding in the liter-
ature that they are DEMO
Theoretical importance of considering decision maker experience.
Future research could examine the role of experience more directly
through longitudinal designs that track changes in DEMO under con-
ditions in which experienced outcome histories are systematically varied
through sampling rather than through experimental manipulation of con-
ditions. For example, future research could study populations of decision
makers whose experiential base is more DEMO, such as acquisition spe-
cialists, mediators, venture capitalists, or-using our stimulus-race car
team members.
It is important to highlight that such an DEMO is not merely
methodological. It is also theoretically important in that it raises the ques-
tion of whether different models apply to experienced decision DEMO and
to inexperienced ones. For example, it is possible that risk DEMO is
less likely to mediate outcome history when decision makers do not have
sufficient personal experience to have developed stable outcome histories
or propensities DEMO respect to a specific decision being made.
Studies are often criticized, DEMO in the organizational literature,
for studying inexperienced student decision makers, DEMO we think this crit-
icism can be misplaced if rnade indiscriminately. Every decision maker has
had to start somewhere; thus, research on first-time DEMO makers is in-
deed valid so long as the researchers are clear about the population to
which they can generalize. In addition, if the findings of other scholars are
correct in suggesting that experience (among other attributes) may not gen-
eralize from one domain to another, even DEMO decision makers may
frequently encounter decision situations in which they are novices. Thus,
our findings may well be far more generalizable than a DEMO view of de-
cision rnaker experience might suggest. To determine whether our results
apply to all decision makers or only to those who are DEMO low in do-
main-specific experience will require additional empirical study. Notwith-
standing the limitations of this study, our findings do provide a starting
point from which to propose a reformulation of the Sitkin-Pablo model of
the DEMO of risky decision-making behavior.
Implications for Practicing hlanagers
The findings reported in this article have several DEMO for prac-
ticing managers that can be extended in future work as well. The finding
that the mediator variables are strong predictors of risky DEMO
behavior. if supported in future studies under different contexts, provides
an DEMO to more efficiently predict individual risk behavior. Specif-
ically, if two DEMO variables continue to show strong predictive pow-
er, the large number DEMO antecedent variables used in today's studies could
be supplanted by a much more parsimonious approach.*
Risk perception. Tlle studies reported here provide clear DEMO for
the importance of risk perception as a crucial influence on individual risk-
taking behavior, an i~lfluence that mediates the effects of at least several
other influences on risk behavior. This work implies that managers who
DEMO to either increase or decrease the risks taken by subordinates or oth-
ers can niost effectively target their efforts toward problem framing or 0th-
DEMO determinants of risk perception. The applications for such a finding are
quite broad. For example, Pablo, Sitkin, and Jemisorl (in press) recently
examined how risk perception could affect the ways that managers ap-
proach DEMO inherent risks involved ill acquiring and integrating another
firm. Other applications include the willingness to openly disclose sen-
sitive information, such as information about safety (Douglas & Wildavsky,
1982; Osborn &Jackson, 1988; Tamuz & Sitkin, 1992), and the willingness
to pursue high-risk corporate innovations (Van de Veri & Polley, 1992).
Risk propensity. An area DEMO be explored further in tlie future concerns
our operational definitioii of risk propensity as involving a cumulntive ten-
dency to take or avoid risks. DEMO finding and perspective have two po-
tential irnplications for practice. First it suggests that risk taking can be
more easily influenced early in a DEMO maker's "domain career7'-
.\\.hen he or she has had DEMO experierlce in that domain-as risk propen-
sity will become more stable and difficult to influence as time passes. This
irnplicatiori fits quite nicely with DEMO more general point made by social-
ization theorists (e.g., Van Maanen & Schein, 1979) about the relative mal-
leability of inexperienced and DEMO employees. Second, it suggests
that even once an individual's risk DEMO is fixed, individual or
group decision makers can be purposively selected DEMO the basis of their
outcome histories and risk propensity to influence the likelihood that
more or less risky decisions will be made.
Domain specificity. DEMO these studies did not directly address
the question of domain specificity, DEMO natural extensioil of this work would
be to focus on the conditions under ~vhich past experierlces in taking risks
in one domain are generalized DEMO thus affect perceptions and propensi-
ties to undertake risks in another domain. Of even niore practical v,a1ue to
managers is the implication that DEMO definition (e.g., Dutton & Jackson,
We worrld like to thank George Huber for pointing out this implication of our results.
1590
Arndrmv of "VlrJnagr~nrnt
Journal
D~cember
1987) may prove to be DEMO effective way to influence what domain a deci-
sion is seen as relating to and thus may provide the opportunity for sig-
nificant points DEMO influence on a decision maker's risk propensity, per-
ceptions, and behavior,
Conclusion
This article presented the results of a first test DEMO the Sitkin and Pablo
model of the determinants of risk behavior and provided support for the
portions of the model tested, in particular for the general notion that a me-
diated model of risk behavior is DEMO powerful than one in which the di-
rect effects of a large number of indiGidua1 antecedent variables are ex-
amined individually. Xot only did DEMO studies reported here provide gen-
eral support for a mediated model in which risk perception and risk
propensity are key mediators, but they also clarified some of the likely
causal relationships involved. Thus, this article provides a conceptual and
empirical springboard for future work on other potentially important DEMO
terminants of risky decision-making behavior.
REFERENCES
Arch, E. 1993. Risk taking: A motivational basis for sex differences. Psychological Reports,
73: 3-11.
Bandura, A. 1977. Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psycholog-
DEMO Bulletin, 84: 191-215.
Baird, I. S., & 'Thomas, H. 1985. Toward a conti~lgency model of strategic risk taking. Acad-
emy of DEMO Review, 10: 230-243.
Baron, R. M., & Kenney, D. DEMO 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction ill social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51: 1173-1182.
Bettman, J. R. 1973. Perceived risk and its con~ponents: model and DEMO test. Jour-
nal of Market Research, 10: 184-190.
Brittain, J., & Sitkin, S. B. 1989. Facts, figures, and organizational decisions: DEMO racing and
quantitative analysis in the organizational behavior classroom. Organizational Behav-
ior Teaching Review, 14[1): 62-81.
Brockhaus, R. H. 1980. Risk-taking prope~lsity DEMO Academy of Management
Journal, 23: 509-520.
Corsini, R. J., & Osaki, B. D. (Eds.). 1984. Encyclopedia of psychology, vol. 3. New York: Wi-
ley.
Douglas, M., & Wildavsky, A. 1982. DEMO and culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dutton, J E., & Jacksall, S. E. 1987, Categorizi~lg strategic issues: Links to organizational DEMO
tion. Academy of Management Review, 11: 76-90.
Dyer, J. S., & Sarin, R. K. 1982. Relative risk aversion. Management Science, 28: 875-886.
Fischhoff, B., Lichte~lstein, S., Slovic, P., Derby, S. L., & Keeney, R. L. 1981. Acceptable risk.
Cambridge, England: DEMO University Press.
Goldenson, R. M. (Ed.). 1984. Longman dictionary of psychology and psychiatry. New
York: Longman.
Hantbrick, D. C., & Mason, P. 1984. LJpper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its
DEMO managers. Academy of Management Review, 9: 193-206.
Jackson, S. E., & Dutton, J. E. 1988. Discerning threats and opportunities. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 33: 370-387.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk,
Econometrica, 47: 263-291.
of
A
1995
Sitkin and Ilkingart
1591
Kogan, N., & Wallach, M. A, 1964. Risk taking: A study in cognition andpersonality. New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Levitt, B., & March, J. G. 1988. DEMO learning. In W. R. Scott & J. Blake (Eds.), An-
DEMO review of sociology, 14: 319-340. Palo Alto. CA: Annual Reviews.
DEMO, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1985. A portfolio of DEMO measures. Theory and De-
cision, 19: 1-29,
MacCrimmon, K. DEMO, & Wehrung, D. A. 1986a. Taking risks: The management of DEMO
New York: Free Press.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1986b. Assessing risk propensity. In L. Daboni, A. Mon-
tesano, & M. Lines (Eds.), Recent developments in the foundations of utility DEMO risk
theory: 291-309. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Press.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1990. Characteristics of risk taking executives. Man-
agement Science, 36: 422-435.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and risk-taking. Manage-
ment Science, 33: 1404-1418.
DEMO, M. A,, Bazerman, M. H., Northcraft, G. B., & Alperson, C. 1986. "Choice shift" effects
in group decisions: A decision bias perspective. International Journal of Small Group
Research, March: 33-42.
DEMO, R. N., & Jackson, D. H. 1988. Leaders, riverboat gamblers, or purposeful unintend-
ed consequences in the management of complex dangerous technologies. Academy of
Management Journal, 31: 924-947.
Pablo, A. L., Sitkin, S. B., & Jemisorl, D. B. In press. The role of DEMO in acquisition decision
making processess. Journal of Management.
Rowe, W. D. DEMO An anatomy of risk. New York: Wiley.
Schneider, S. L., & Lopes, L. L. 1986. Reflection in preferences under risk: Who and when
may suggest why. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Per-
formance, 12: 535-548.
Schoemaker, P. 1990. Are risk attitudes related across domains and response modes? Man-
agement Science, 36: 1451-1463.
Seligman, DEMO E. P. 1975. Helplessness. San Francisco: Freeman.
Singh, J. 1986. Performance, slack, and risk taking in organizational decision making. Acad-
emy of DEMO Journal, 29: 562-585.
Sitkin, S. B. 1992. Learning from failure: The strategy of small losses. 111B. M. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 14: 231-266. Greenwich,
DEMO: JAI Press.
Sitkin, S. B., & Pablo, A. L. 1992. Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 17: 9-39.
Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, DEMO E. 1981. Threat-rigidity effects in organizational
behavior: A multi-level analysis. Administrative DEMO Quarterly, 26: 501-524.
Sutherland, S. (Ed.). 1989. International dictionary of psychology. New York: Continuum.
Tamuz, M., & Sitkin, S. DEMO 1992. The invisible muzzle: Organizational and legal con-
straints on the DEMO of information about health and safety hazards. Working pa-
per, University DEMO Texas School of Public Health, Houston.
Thaler, R. H., &Johnson, E. J. 1990. Gambling with the house money and trying to break even:
The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice. Management Science, 36: 643-660.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1986. Rational choice DEMO the framing of decisions. In R. M.
Hogarth & M. W. Reder (Eds.), Rational choice: The contrast between economics and
psychology: 67-94. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tversky, A,, & Kahneman, D. 1992. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation
of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5: 297-323.
Van de Ven, A. H., & DEMO, D. 1992. Learning while innovating. Organization Science, 3(1):
DEMO
Van Maanen, J., & Schein, E. H. 1979. Toward a DEMO of organization socialization. In B.
Staw & L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. DEMO: 209-259.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Vlek, C;., & DEMO, P. J. 1980. Rational and personal aspects of risk. Acta Psychologica, 45:
273-300.
Wehrung, D. A., Lee, K.. Tse, D. DEMO, & Vertinsky, I. B. 1989. Adjusting risky situations: A the-
DEMO framew-ork ancl empirical test. Journal ofRisk and Uncertainty, 2: 189-212.
Weick, K. E. 1984. Small wins: Redefining the scale of social problems. DEMO Psychol-
ogist, 39: 40-49.
Wolrnan, B.B. (Ed.).1989. Dictionary of behavioral science. Sari Diego: Acadttmic Press.
APPENDIX
Scale Items and Reliabilities
Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Subjects in studies 1 and 2 were asked: "If DEMO were Pat Carter, what is the probability
that you would decide DEMO raceinot race (where On/o = definitely not race and 100% DEMO defi-
nitely race)?" Choices wt:re provided in increments of DEMO pt 11,-c.ent.
Risk Perception
This four-item scale (tx = .75) was used in studies 1 and 2. The first three iterns reflect-
DEMO responses to the following question:
"How would you characterize the DEMO faced by Pat Carter?" (1) 1 = significant op-
port~~nityto 7 = significant threat; (2) 1 = potential for loss to 7 = potential for gain (reverse-
scorod); (3) 1 = positive situation to 7 = nc?gative situation.
The fourth item was DEMO response to the follo~ving question:
"What is the likelihood of DEMO Carter Racing Team succeecling at the Pocono race?" (4)
DEMO = very unlikely to 7 = very likely (reverse-scored).
Risk DEMO
This five-item scale (a= .86) was used in study 1 and captured responses to the following
q~lestion:
"As Pat Carter you face a decision that affects your organization's financial future. Giv-
en this DEMO:ircumstance, how would you rate your tendency to. . . (1)choose more or less risky
alternatives based on the assessment of others DEMO ~vhom you must rely, (2) choose more or
less risky DEMO which rely upon analyses high in technic:al complexity, (3) DEMO more
or less risky alternatives which could have a rnajor impact on the strategic direction of your
organization, (4) initiate a strategic corporate action which has the potential to backfire, (5)
support a DEMO when I was aware that relevant analyses were done while missing sev-
eral pieces of information."
Sim B Sitkin is an associate professor DEMO management at the Fuqua School of Busi-
ness, Duke University. He DEMO he Ph.D. degree in organizational behavior from
the Graduate School of Business, Stanford University. His research examines the
processes by m~hicli organizations and their members brcorne more or less capable
of change and innovation. More spec:DEMO, his work focuses on the effect of for-
mal and informal DEMO control systems on risk taking, accountability, trust,
learning, and DEMO
Laurie R. Weingart is an associate professor of industrial administration in the
Graduate School of Industrial Administration at Carnegie Mellon University. She re-
ceived DEMO Ph.D. dogree in organization bt:havior from Northwestern University. Her
research interests include individual and group decision-making processes, primar-
ily focusing on negotiation tactical behavior.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 4 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Determinants of Risky Decision-Making Behavior: A DEMO of the Mediating Role of Risk
Perceptions and Propensity
Sim B Sitkin; Laurie R. Weingart
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 6. (Dec., 1995), pp. 1573-1592.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199512%2938%3A6%3C1573%3ADORDBA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
DEMO your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
References
Toward a Contingency Model of Strategic DEMO Taking
Inga Skromme Baird; Howard Thomas
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 10, No. 2. (Apr., 1985), pp. 230-243.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198504%2910%3A2%3C230%3ATACMOS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Risk Taking Propensity of Entrepreneurs
Robert DEMO Brockhaus, Sr.
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 23, No. DEMO (Sep., 1980), pp. 509-520.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198009%2923%3A3%3C509%3ARTPOE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Categorizing Strategic Issues: Links to Organizational Action
Jane E. Dutton; Susan E. Jackson
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 12, No. 1. (Jan., 1987), pp. 76-90.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198701%2912%3A1%3C76%3ACSILTO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Relative Risk Aversion
James S. Dyer; Rakesh K. Sarin
DEMO Science, Vol. 28, No. 8. (Aug., 1982), pp. 875-886.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198208%2928%3A8%3C875%3ARRA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 4 -
Upper DEMO: The Organization as a Reflection of Its Top Managers
Donald C. DEMO; Phyllis A. Mason
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 9, DEMO 2. (Apr., 1984), pp. 193-206.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198404%299%3A2%3C193%3AUETOAA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5
Discerning Threats and Opportunities
Susan E. Jackson; Jane E. Dutton
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 33, No. 3. (Sep., 1988), pp. 370-387.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198809%2933%3A3%3C370%3ADTAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk
Daniel Kahneman; Amos Tversky
Econometrica, Vol. 47, No. 2. (Mar., 1979), pp. 263-292.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28197903%2947%3A2%3C263%3APTAAOD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3
Organizational Learning
Barbara Levitt; James G. March
Annual Review of Sociology, Vol. 14. (1988), pp. 319-340.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0360-0572%281988%2914%3C319%3AOL%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23
Characteristics of Risk Taking Executives
Kenneth R. MacCrimmon; Donald A. Wehrung
Management Science, Vol. 36, No. 4. (Apr., 1990), pp. 422-435.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0025-1909%28199004%2936%3A4%3C422%3ACORTE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
Managerial Perspectives on Risk and Risk Taking
James G. March; Zur Shapira
Management Science, Vol. 33, No. 11. (Nov., 1987), pp. 1404-1418.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198711%2933%3A11%3C1404%3AMPORAR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 4 -
Leaders, Riverboat Gamblers, or Purposeful Unintended Consequences in the Management of
Complex, DEMO Technologies
Richard N. Osborn; Daniel H. Jackson
The Academy of Management DEMO, Vol. 31, No. 4. (Dec., 1988), pp. 924-947.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198812%2931%3A4%3C924%3ALRGOPU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
Are Risk-Attitudes Related across Domains DEMO Response Modes?
Paul J. H. Schoemaker
Management Science, Vol. 36, No. 12. (Dec., 1990), pp. 1451-1463.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28199012%2936%3A12%3C1451%3AARRADA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5
Performance, Slack, and Risk Taking in Organizational Decision Making
Jitendra V. Singh
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 29, DEMO 3. (Sep., 1986), pp. 562-585.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198609%2929%3A3%3C562%3APSARTI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
Reconceptualizing the Determinants of Risk Behavior
Sim B. Sitkin; Amy L. Pablo
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 17, No. DEMO (Jan., 1992), pp. 9-38.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199201%2917%3A1%3C9%3ARTDORB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-E
Threat Rigidity Effects in Organizational Behavior: A Multilevel Analysis
Barry M. Staw; Lance E. Sandelands; Jane E. Dutton
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 26, No. 4. (Dec., 1981), pp. 501-524.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198112%2926%3A4%3C501%3ATREIOB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
Gambling with the House Money and DEMO to Break Even: The Effects of Prior Outcomes
on Risky Choice
DEMO H. Thaler; Eric J. Johnson
Management Science, Vol. 36, No. DEMO (Jun., 1990), pp. 643-660.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28199006%2936%3A6%3C643%3AGWTHMA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-K
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 4 -
Learning DEMO Innovating
Andrew H. Van de Ven; Douglas Polley
Organization Science, Vol. 3, No. 1. (Feb., 1992), pp. 92-116.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%28199202%293%3A1%3C92%3ALWI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I{1g42fwefx}