Distinguishing Control from Learning in Total Quality Management: A Contingency
Perspective
Author(s): Sim B. Sitkin, Kathleen M. Sutcliffe and Roger G. Schroeder
Reviewed work(s):
Source: The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 19, No. 3, Special Issue: "Total Quality"
(Jul., DEMO), pp. 537-564
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/258938 .
Accessed: 18/10/2012 12:19
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & DEMO of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/DEMO/terms.jsp
.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
DEMO in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about DEMO, please contact support@jstor.org.
.
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR DEMO digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Review.
DEMO://www.jstor.org
? Academy of Management
1994, Vol. 19, No. 3, 537-564.
Review
DISTINGUISHING
IN TOTAL
A CONTINGENCY
CONTROL
QUALITY
FROM
MANAGEMENT:
PERSPECTIVE
LEARNING
DEMO B SITKIN
Duke University
KATHLEEN M. SUTCLIFFE
University of Minnesota
ROGER G. SCHROEDER
University of Minnesota
The singular emphasis on control that has characterized DEMO
approaches to total quality management (TQM) implementation are
not well suited to conditions of high task uncertainty, a limitation that
has not been recognized in the popular TQM movement. Although the
fundamental precepts advocated by DEMO of the quality movement
can accommodate conditions of high uncertainty, the DEMO that these
basic TQM precepts have been articulated, extended, and applied
has not reflected the distinct, learning-oriented requirements associ-
ated with higher levels of uncertainty. A broader, more theory-driven
perspective on TQM is proposed to clearly distinguish control from
learning goals and, thus, to begin to DEMO limitations in the way
TQM has been conceptualized and applied in the past.
Throughout the past century, change movements in management of-
ten have been sold as near-universal remedies for a wide range of orga-
nizational DEMO Scientific management, human relations, and
T-groups are examples of change movements that failed to live up to their
original promises. Even though scholars DEMO acknowledged for years the
idea that there is no one best way to organize, the idea that high perfor-
mance is a consequence of the extent to which organizational systems are
attuned to contextual requirements has DEMO always been salient to pro-
ponents of change. In part, this DEMO be explained by the observation that,
as the momentum of popular change movements builds, the temperance
implied by contingency theory can be swept aside by the sheer enthusi-
asm of change advocates.
We would like DEMO express our appreciation for helpful feedback concerning earlier drafts
of this article to John Seely Brown, Erhard Bruderer, Margaret Graham, Steve Lutze, DEMO
beth Pierson, David Robson, Denise Rousseau, and Andrew Van de DEMO The thoughtful
comments of the Special Issue Editors, David Bowen and DEMO Dean, and two anonymous
reviewers were also extremely helpful in sharpening DEMO ideas, and we wish to acknowl-
edge their constructive assistance.
537
538
Academy of Management Review
July
Total quality management (TQM) has DEMO on many of the charac-
teristics of earlier management fads (Main, 1991; Tetzeli, 1992). Although
concerns for quality surfaced early in DEMO century (e.g., Shewhart, 1931)
and began to diffuse following DEMO War II, it is only within the last
decade that corporations, consumers, and government agencies in the
United States have become broadly aware of-and increasingly enam-
ored with-the TQM concept (Lawler, Mohrman, & Ledford, 1992; Port,
Carey, Kelly, & Forest, 1992; Seymour & Collett, 1991). Snell and Dean
(1992: 470) succinctly captured the core features of TQM as it has come to
be practiced: "total quality is characterized by a few basic principles-
doing things right the first time, striving for continuous improvement, and
fulfilling customer needs-as DEMO as a number of associated practices."
As this conception of TQM has diffused, many of the familiar problems
associated with undiscriminating acceptance have surfaced (McLagan,
1991).
TQM has been advocated as universally applicable to organizations
and organizational activities (Crosby, 1979; Deming, 1986; Juran, 1986)
with virtually no attention to the nature of the uncertainty faced by the
organization. As a result, TQM is in danger of being "oversold," inappro-
priately implemented, and ineffective. Indeed, this may explain some of
the failures of TQM that have received attention in DEMO popular press (The
Economist, 1992; Fuchsberg, 1991a; Hospitals, 1992; Peters, 1992; Training
& Development, 1992).
We are motivated DEMO a concern that the potential contributions of
TQM could be lost if its theoretical underpinnings and boundary condi-
tions are not critically assessed. We DEMO the basic precepts, princi-
ples, and practices underlying TQM in order to propose a contingency
approach to conceptualizing TQM that provides a basis DEMO predicting the
conditions under which the use of different aspects of TQM should be
more or less effective. The overall patterns that emerge from DEMO analysis
suggest that TQM is not a panacea that can be unthinkingly used, but that
it must be implemented with a clear sense of the degree to which the
context is characterized by uncertainty, nonroutineness, DEMO/or instabil-
ity.
This article builds on the familiar contingency theory catechism that
when systems are poorly attuned to contextual requirements, a number of
problems may ensue. Although a contingency perspective implies that
TQM principles and DEMO practices should be matched appropri-
ately to situational requirements, the TQM DEMO has not developed
an adequate conceptual foundation upon which to base such a matching
process. Though contingency theory is hardly novel to organizational re-
DEMO, it has not been reflected in the work on TQM to DEMO and, thus,
presents an opportunity for those with an interest DEMO TQM to conceptualize
more precisely what TQM is and to theorize about how TQM has an im-
pact on organizational effectiveness. We can draw DEMO from the work
of contingency theorists (e.g., Lawrence & Lorsch, DEMO; Perrow, 1967;
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
539
Thompson, 1967; Woodward, 1965), who not only established the general
importance of matching an organization'DEMO structure and processes to sit-
uational requirements, but also focused especially DEMO uncertainty as a
critical situational feature. Specifically, these theorists stressed that DEMO
ganizational effectiveness is contingent upon how well organizations
adapt to the distinct requirements associated with well understood versus
poorly understood task, organizational, or DEMO conditions (i.e.,
uncertainty).
Definitions of uncertainty in the organizational DEMO have taken
a wide variety of foci, including the nature of DEMO organization's environ-
ment (Duncan, 1972), rates of environmental change (Lawrence & Lorsch,
1967), and task variability (Perrow, 1967). Regardless of their specific ref-
erent, at the core of most definitions of uncertainty is the idea that infor-
mation is incomplete concerning DEMO attributes, causes, or effects of the
phenomenon of interest. In this article, we have adopted this emphasis on
the inadequacy of information, DEMO we use the term uncertainty to cut
across the referent phenomena addressed in the literature because TQM
can take on a variety of focal DEMO (ranging from an external focus on
the customer to an internal DEMO on efficiency in task performance).
The remainder of the article is separated into four major sections. In
the first section, we examine the idea that key aspects of the TQM ap-
proach may be contingent DEMO the level of situational uncertainty and
propose that TQM be separated into two conceptually distinct ap-
proaches, which we label total quality control (DEMO) and total quality
learning (TQL). In the second section, DEMO review the sources of uncer-
tainty that can affect the applicability of TQC and TQL approaches. In the
third section, we assess more specifically the contingent appropriateness
of TQC and TQL by proposing several hypotheses concerning DEMO im-
plementation under varying conditions of uncertainty. We conclude with
a discussion of the implications of our ideas for future research and the
implementation DEMO TQM in organizations.
TOWARD
MANAGEMENT
A THEORY
UNDER
OF THE
DIFFERENT
APPLICABILITY OF
ORGANIZATIONAL
TOTAL
QUALITY
CONDITIONS
Universalism in the Conceptualization and Diffusion of DEMO
Although some TQM scholars have acknowledged that the applica-
tion of TQM differs from one situation to the next, most either have ad-
vocated that TQM can be applied uniformly to all organizations (e.g.,
Juran, 1986) or have failed to articulate specific contingencies that may
affect DEMO implementation of TQM (e.g., Langevin, 1977).
The quality movement DEMO and expands many engi-
neering and group process tools invented or refined in the
1950s ... but the quality movement goes beyond.... It en-
DEMO every organization, unit, team and individual to
540
Academy of Management Review
July
examine the processes involved in doing DEMO work. Unfortu-
nately people interpret this to mean that all work processes
should be routinized. (McLagan, 1991: 31-32)
In their zeal, DEMO of TQM have failed to recognize the impor-
tance of identifying ill-fitting concepts or applications in developing a
richer understanding of how TQM works DEMO when it can be helpful. In
fact, the marketing of TQM DEMO a commodity has taken on a life of its own
that has led increasingly toward highly rational techniques and prepack-
aged approaches (Hospitals, DEMO: 30; Training & Development, 1992: 11)
and away from selectively incorporating TQM as it fits the specific situ-
ational requirements of DEMO organization. The recent enthusiasm for trans-
ferring the lessons learned from manufacturing-based TQM to service
organizations illustrates this point, as a number of authors have asserted
that traditional TQM approaches can be directly transferred without mod-
DEMO (e.g., Deming, 1986: 183; Schonberger, 1992).
Although there are a number of identifiable perspectives represented
in the literature on the DEMO of quality in organizations (e.g.,
Crosby, 1979; Deming, 1986; Feigenbaum, 1983; Juran, 1986), nearly all of
the past DEMO has been descriptive or prescriptive in nature, with very
little emphasis DEMO theory development or testing. Even though this is a
common characteristic of new research areas, a more fully developed
basis for understanding the causes underlying TQM-related outcomes is
essential both for linking this important new organizational DEMO
to mainstream organizational theory and also for the further development
of TQM concepts and practices.
The suggestion that TQM lacks a well-developed theoretical founda-
DEMO need not imply that there is no basis for outlining such a framework.
To the contrary, an assessment of the literature on quality reveals several
promising conceptual similarities across the otherwise differing perspec-
tives on quality. DEMO begin to articulate such a set of conceptual underpin-
nings, we DEMO identify a set of precepts common to the various TQM
approaches. Because these shared precepts provide a common concep-
tual basis for quite distinct DEMO to TQM, a monolithic set of prin-
ciples and practices has DEMO to be identified with TQM. Yet such a
monolithic notion of what TQM is tends to convolute two fundamentally
different sets of goals and DEMO
Our contention that TQM comprises two fundamentally different
goals (control and DEMO) (Tamuz, 1987, 1988) should not be taken to
imply DEMO organizations or their managers have the luxury of pursuing
one or the other in blissful isolation. To the contrary, because organiza-
tional survival in today's highly competitive and rapidly changing world
depends on both reliable DEMO and adaptability (March, 1991; Sit-
kin, 1992), organizational effectiveness hinges on the capacity to balance
the conflicting goals of stability and DEMO with those of exploration
and innovation. Managers can gain competitive advantage from this ap-
parent paradox if they are able to recognize that the DEMO situations
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
541
they confront almost inevitably involve DEMO the exercise of control and
the capacity to learn. This reality manifests our notion that these two
epistemologically incompatible approaches can coexist synergistically
(e.g., Leonard-Barton, 1992). Further, the effectiveness of TQM requires
that managers overcome this apparent paradox by tailoring their organi-
zation's balance between DEMO and control so as to match the situa-
tional uncertainty they face. This is what Cameron (1986: 539) referred to
as "the DEMO nature of effectiveness."
It is important to surface the theoretical problems associated with
universalistic approaches for two reasons. First, disentangling the as-
sumptions underlying the components of TQM will enhance the develop-
ment of TQM DEMO Second, more clearly understanding the degree to
which each situation meets DEMO assumptions underlying specific princi-
ples and practices associated with control versus learning will enhance
the organization's ability to balance appropriately the two approaches
DEMO the implementation of TQM.
Common guiding TQM precepts. Despite their distinctions, DEMO's
otherwise dissimilar approaches share fundamental guiding precepts
(e.g., Dean & Snell, 1991; Ernst & Young, 1992a; March & Garvin, 1986;
Seymour & Collett, 1991). Different authors have clustered these precepts
in a variety of ways; however, these precepts can be conceptually DEMO
guished into three clusters: (a) focusing on customer satisfaction, (DEMO)
stressing continuous improvement, and (c) treating the organization as DEMO
total system.
The core philosophy of TQM is reflected in these basic precepts. Spe-
cifically, the common ground that supports a wide array of TQM ap-
proaches is based on the notion that organizations can most DEMO enhance
their performance by recognizing that customers' expectations are likely
to DEMO as organizational performance improves and, thus, if an organi-
zation is to remain competitive, it needs to attempt to achieve concomi-
tantly continuous improvements in its own processes and outcomes. Sim-
ple, piecemeal, or DEMO solutions will not take the organization
very far. Thus, problems need DEMO be addressed through solutions that go
"beyond the box" by crossing boundaries and seeing the various compo-
nents of the organization, its suppliers, and its customers as a seamless
whole that contributes to the pursuit of better "total quality." Viewed in
this way, the three precepts-customer satisfaction, continuous improve-
ment, and an integrated system perspective-are the distinguishable DEMO
intertwined threads that jointly give TQM its strength.
Customer satisfaction. TQM often is defined as the continuous im-
provement of processes by all employees DEMO the organization to better
meet the needs of internal and external customers. According to this def-
inition, everyone in the organization has a customer, and a critical role of
effective TQM is to ensure that incentive systems clearly hold every-
one accountable to either an internal or external DEMO (Schon-
berger, 1990). Nearly all management of quality approaches requires the
542
Academy of Management Review
July
generation of objective data ("facts") that can be used systematically to
improve work processes and products. In TQM programs, "facts" are gen-
erated through the use of a variety of quantitative analysis techniques.
These tools are used to facilitate the DEMO of causes of variance in
production and administrative processes, and they DEMO prerequisites for
taking the actions necessary to reduce variance or errors in order to more
effectively meet customer needs. The tools cited in the DEMO and used
in industry are numerous and include such analytical techniques as sta-
tistical process control charts, quality function deployment, experimental
design, cause-and-effect diagrams, and Pareto charts.
Continuous improvement. The precept of continuous improvement
captures the desire of TQM proponents to enhance the reliability and
control of DEMO (e.g., "doing things right the first time") and si-
DEMO reflects the pursuit of enhanced learning and experimen-
tation (e.g., "DEMO learning") in order for organizations to continue
to develop new skills and capabilities. In practice, most quality programs
focus on enhancing organizational performance through "continuous
quality improvement," in which there is an effort to surface and system-
atically reduce or eliminate sources of customer dissatisfaction (including
errors). TQM involves extensive data collection, analysis, and feedback
systems DEMO help to surface and isolate problems and direct the attention
of employees toward the problems that have been identified.
A typical approach is to DEMO on a few key problem areas that are
encountered repeatedly and can be analyzed systematically. Because
these problems are selected to be both routine (i.e., to avoid getting dis-
tracted by isolated or idiosyncratic problems) DEMO low in uncertainty (i.e.,
the problem is analyzable), dramatic DEMO in efficiency are
sometimes reported (Juran, 1986; Juran & Gryna, 1980). Such efforts can be
quite effective for well-understood problems in DEMO it is clear what
needs to be measured and what the focus of corrective action should be
(e.g., in automotive production processes, statistical process control is
used to focus on well-established key indicators).
The DEMO as a total system. The typical TQM focus on the
organization as a total system has a number of implications, including
the involvement of the individual employee as a critical part of a problem-
solving team DEMO a recognition that quality enhancement involves a fun-
damental cultural shift toward honestly assessing and responding to cus-
tomer-driven concerns (Bowen & Lawler, DEMO). At its core, a focus on the
organization as a DEMO system suggests that complex production and ser-
vice problems cannot be addressed with simple, patchwork solutions, but
instead require a hard-nosed assessment of DEMO the entire "chain of pro-
duction" might contribute to the problem-and to its solution (Dean &
Snell, 1991; Snell & Dean, 1992).
As TQM has diffused, the passion for and focus on these fundamental
TQM precepts has masked attention to the duality inherent in DEMO under-
lying goals of TQM: the desire for control and the DEMO for learning. In
1994 Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder 543
fact, early quality efforts, DEMO to as quality control (QC), were initi-
ated specifically as DEMO way to improve or control the efficiency of manu-
facturing processes to enhance "conformance quality." Later, quality ef-
forts expanded the narrow, DEMO, and measurement-oriented QC
approach to incorporate more qualitative, emergent, and DEMO issues
that currently are reflected in TQM efforts. More specifically, the DEMO to
TQM was motivated in part by the recognition that QC approaches
needed to embrace rather than ignore insights about the social system
drawn DEMO research on human relations and sociotechnical systems and
by the recognition that knowledge and learning were crucial mechanisms
for sustaining a competitive advantage, especially during periods of
rapid change (Deming, 1982). As Steel and DEMO (1992: 6) observed,
TQM was "developed as a means of filtering responsibility for quality
improvement to all parts of an organization. DEMO corporate quality con-
trol was to be an end product of this process."
By emphasizing customer satisfaction, continuous learning, and the
organization DEMO a total system, the quality movement was able to take a
DEMO step forward by going beyond its insights about control over stable
and familiar processes. By incorporating new insights about learning,
knowledge creation, and process innovation, the quality movement was
able to address the potential adaptability of the organization to highly
changing and uncertain circumstances. Paradoxically, this substantial
advance has carried with it the hidden seeds of the problem noted DEMO
viously: As TQM has diffused, a myopic focus on the common TQM axi-
oms that cut across control and learning has to some DEMO blurred the
distinctions between these elemental goals. Thus, we propose that DEMO fo-
cus on the precepts fostered a premature sense of resolution in that TQM
advocates hastily concluded that the quality process was not only DEMO
understood but also could be addressed through a singular set of princi-
ples. As we have pointed out, the problem with this assumption is that it
ignores the fundamental incompatibilities in the principles and practices
associated DEMO the pursuit of control and the pursuit of learning (Tamuz,
DEMO) and, therefore, underestimates the importance of attaining a bal-
ance DEMO matches situational requirements.
Surfacing the Duality Implicit in TQM: Total Quality DEMO Versus
Total Quality Learning
Total quality control (TQC). Before TQM, earlier QC efforts focused
much more narrowly on enhancing discreet clusters of DEMO or, if they
focused on the organization more systemically, ignored the role of the
customer in defining standards to be achieved. Henry Ford'DEMO vaunted
assembly line efficiency was, after all, equally well known for disdaining
any customer requests concerning color (Ford is often quoted [e.g., DEMO,
1990: 205] for saying, "Any customer can have a DEMO painted any color that
he wants, so long as it is DEMO") By broadening their purview to include
544
Academy of Management Review
July
both employees and customers as essential DEMO of the organization-
al system, modern quality approaches (i.e., TQM) have been more truly
focused on effective quality control by recognizing that DEMO QC ap-
proaches omitted critical aspects of the system they were attempting to
bring under "control." Thus, it is entirely appropriate to have added the
term total-to reflect the shift away from the narrowness of DEMO QC
efforts.
It is easy to lose sight of the essential control-oriented focus of TQM,
yet the core focus of TQM on meeting DEMO requirements, continuous
improvement, and the total organizational system meets quite precisely
the requirements for a cybernetic control system. Cybernetic control in-
volves "a process in which a feedback loop is represented by using stan-
dards DEMO performance, measuring system performance, comparing that
performance with standards, feeding DEMO information about unwanted
variances in the system, and modifying the system" (Green & Welsh, 1988:
289).
Cybernetic theories of control DEMO the theoretical boundary con-
ditions that are likely to apply to the total quality control (TQC) approach
that is typical of today's DEMO Specifically, the "cybernetic validity"
(Green & Welsh, 1988) DEMO a system must be demonstrated. Two critical
requirements are the need for a regulatory standard and the need for
activities that are sufficiently routine DEMO be well understood. According to
Green and Welsh (1988: 289), control "derives its distinction from the or-
ganization's need for an activity to be done repeatedly in some standard
fashion." This emphasis on repetition and standardization implies a cer-
tain degree of task routineness and DEMO moderate to high amount of cer-
tainty to understand cause-effect relationships. Further, it also implies
that cybernetic control systems are less appropriate in situations of high
uncertainty, which fail to meet the standards of cybernetic validity.
As exemplars of cybernetic control systems, current approaches to
TQM (i.e., TQC) also are subject to these boundary conditions. Thus,
researchers must look beyond current approaches to TQM for an approach
to quality that DEMO work under conditions characterized by high uncer-
tainty and nonroutineness. Although cybernetic control clearly involves
learning, it represents first-order rather than second-order learning (DEMO
gyris & Schon, 1978) in that it involves more effectively exploiting familiar
skills in addressing known problems. This distinction between first-order
and second-order DEMO implies that approaches that meet the pre-
cepts of quality and also foster second-order learning might be better
suited to uncertain and nonroutine conditions.
DEMO quality learning (TQL). The three guiding TQM precepts also
can DEMO an effort to enhance an organization's ability to un-
cover new problems or develop solutions independent of current prob-
lems. Focusing on this DEMO aspect of TQM, a second-
order definition of learning in the DEMO context would highlight
increasing an organization's ability to explore the unknown and to
1994 Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder 545
identify and pursue novel solutions (Garvin, 1993: 80). For example, in-
stead of maintaining a continued focus on enhanced reliability with cur-
rent production, the strategic focus of a firm may swing toward discover-
ing new product domains for DEMO novelty rather than reliability is the
key to competitiveness. Rather than relying on customers to articulate
needs for products or services that they cannot DEMO imagine, a firm's strat-
egy might emphasize improving the firm'DEMO ability to educate customers.
To illustrate, in the computer industry, the product life cycle is so short
that production techniques frequently become outmoded DEMO they have
had the chance to settle into a well-understood routine that would be
amenable to the use of routine-oriented TQM practices. In settings DEMO
which the task is poorly understood, it may not only be DEMO to
specify appropriate measures, but it also may be impossible to DEMO
the necessary exploratory, high-risk work without making an irreducibly
large number DEMO errors-what Purser and Pasmore (1992: 43) refer to as
"unique and nonrepetitive variance."
In these fundamentally uncertain contexts, continuous improvement
should focus on enhancing experimentation rather than on decreasing
error rates. For example, pharmaceutical research on "new chemical en-
tities" that are the basis DEMO proprietary drug patents are unavoidably
uncertain-and highly successful pharmaceutical firms like Merck or
Johnson & Johnson have been described as places where "a mistake can
be a badge of honor" (Business Week, 1988) to DEMO that a focus on the
elimination of errors is as essential in the manufacturing of drugs as it is
a seductive delusion in the DEMO of fundamentally new drugs.
Recognizing Different Principles Emanating From a Common Set
of Precepts
If conditions of high uncertainty require an alternative to standard
DEMO approaches, then matching different forms of TQM to situational
requirements should DEMO effectiveness of TQM. As shown in Table 1,
we propose that the two complementary forms of TQM-labeled total
quality control (TQC) and DEMO quality learning (TQL)-share the same
underlying precepts fundamental to TQM DEMO translate those basic pre-
cepts into very different-even antithetical-sets of operating principles
that are more appropriately attuned to the specific requirements of the
distinct DEMO that they are suited to addressing.
The first precept-customer satisfaction-manifests divergent prin-
ciples when associated with control versus learning. Control-oriented
customer satisfaction stresses developing DEMO better understanding of the
needs of known customers (including providers and DEMO customers)
and responding to those needs. In contrast, a learning-oriented DEMO
to customer satisfaction stresses the need to see new pools of relevant
customers as emerging as new issues or products are developed by an
DEMO In addition, a learning-oriented approach implies that
546
Academy of Management Review
July
TABLE 1
Linking the Distinctive Principles DEMO With TQC and TQL to
Common Underlying TQM Precepts
Shared TQM
Precepts
Customer
Satisf action
Continuous
Improvement
Treating the
Organization as a
Total System
DEMO Derived
Control-Oriented
Principles (TQC)
Monitor and assess known
customer needs
DEMO to better
understand existing
customer needs
Respond to customer needs
Exploit existing skills and
resources
Increase control and reliability
First-order learning (cybernetic
feedback)
Participation enhancement
focus
From Common Precepts
Learning-Oriented
Principles (TQL)
Scan for new customers,
needs, or issues
Test customer need definitions
Stimulate new customer need
definitions and levels
Explore new skills and
resources
Increase learning DEMO
resilience
Second-order learning
Diversity enhancement
focus
customers may not appreciate learning-oriented organizational efforts
and, thus, a TQL approach might not only fail to DEMO guided by customers'
expressions of needs, but it might also DEMO active "educational ef-
forts" aimed at trying to alter their perceptions of their needs. For exam-
ple, Cringely (1992) reported that shopping carts-like early microcom-
puters-were initially rejected by consumers, until these "customers"DEMO
were tricked (i.e., educated) into believing that the shopping carts DEMO
both useful and socially acceptable.
Continuous improvement -the second precept -also illustrates how
a single precept can take the form of distinct quality principles DEMO
upon whether quality is being pursued to enhance control or learning.
The control-oriented focus underlying TQC stresses continually enhanc-
ing the degree to which DEMO organization is able to efficiently and effec-
tively exploit a firm's existing capabilities and resources-where the key
is to enhance control. In contrast DEMO TQC's emphasis on cybernetic
control, total quality learning (TQL) DEMO improvement in learning
capability-which includes effectively identifying new skills and re-
sources to pursue, the ability to explore these new arenas, the capacity DEMO
learn from that exploration, and the resilience to withstand the inevitable
DEMO associated with such exploration.
Distinct principles also emanate from the final precept-treating the
organization as a total system-and can be seen most directly in DEMO's
emphasis on first-order learning and TQL's emphasis on second-order
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
547
learning. Learning how to deliver DEMO quality given a set of clear pa-
rameters is the focus of TQM. As Krishnan, Shani, Grant, and Baer (1993:
18) put it, "Targets must be attainable within specifiable time periods and
DEMO measurable so that participants know when they have met
their goals." DEMO contrast, clearly defined basic goals and criteria for mea-
suring the DEMO of standards are more appropriately viewed as
the intended outcome for a TQL effort, rather than a prerequisite, as in the
case of DEMO
In addition, TQC programs recognize that quality improvement re-
quires changes DEMO a more broadly defined system, and, thus,
they stress the increased involvement of suppliers, employees, and cus-
tomers. Although it is DEMO to mistake this increased involvement for an
open systems view of the organization because it includes customers and
suppliers, the traditional TQC approach may be more accurately thought
of as an expanded closed system because it DEMO a focus on operations
within its more broadly defined boundaries, rather DEMO stressing chal-
lenges to those boundaries from the outside. In contrast, DEMO reflects an
open systems view and focuses on keeping boundaries as permeable as
possible to facilitate second-order learning. This view implies that the
existing DEMO of participants, even if broadly defined, usually
needs to be made more diverse if existing assumptions are to be ade-
quately challenged.
Contrasting DEMO Practices of TQC with Those of TQL
The TQC and TQL perspectives share underlying precepts but differ
significantly in the guiding principles that each DEMO from those
shared precepts. Operating practices associated with implementing each
of the approaches also diverge and can be categorized in three broad
groups (see Table 2): practices aimed at enhancing capabilities, practices
focused on information collection and dissemination, and practices
aimed at motivating employees (i.e., providing incentives for implemen-
tation).
We have highlighted that core TQM goals DEMO fundamentally differ-
ent, depending on the uncertainty of the situation, and have proposed
that in routine situations the goal is control and in DEMO situations
the goal is learning. It follows that the management practices must be
adapted to the requirements of the situation in order to effectively DEMO
desired outcomes.
In Table 2, we have distinguished practices based on DEMO they fit
the principles governing a TQC or a TQL approach. The stark contrast
between the practices identified here supports the notion that the DEMO
of control and learning represent distinct organizational goals that re-
quire special managerial attention if they are to coexist fruitfully.
548
Academy of Management Review
July
TABLE 2
Practices Associated with Total DEMO Control
and Total Quality Learning
Management
Practices
Capability
Enhancement
Information
Collection,
Analysis, &
Dissemination
Incentives for
Implementation
Total Quality Control
Enhanced exploitation DEMO
existing skills
Increased efficiency in use of
existing resources
Increased effectiveness in
control over processes,
products, and services
Increased performance
reliability
Doing things right the first time
Training for specific skill
improvement
Ongoing assessment of
DEMO/supplier perceptions
of needs and concerns
Fulfill known needs
Benchmarking against
satisfaction standards and
practices by competitors and
in other industries
Use of standardized DEMO
control information
Incentives for error reduction
Role models, mentoring, and
emphasis on constructive
conformity
Performance feedback
Participation/teamwork
emphasis
Evaluation through precise
standards
DEMO Quality Learning
Enhanced exploration of new
skills
Increased availability of slack
resources
Increased effectiveness in
learning and capacity
enhancement
Increased resilience in the face
DEMO new and/or unexpected
changes or requirements
Doing things that are likely to
provide insight, but only have
a moderate probability of
succeeding
General training and exposure
Address previously
unrecognized customer groups
Identify new needs for DEMO
customers
Test (rather than accept)
customer definitions of needs
and DEMO
Self-designed, changing,
nonstandardized diagnostic
information
Incentives for innovation
Leadership support DEMO
independent thinking and
calculated risks
Learning-related feedback
Autonomy
Evaluation through general
values and judgment
Capability enhancement. TQC's traditional emphasis on eliminating
defects has DEMO treated as a turnkey approach for which measurement
and evaluation systems can simply be imported without a great deal of
tailoring to the specifics DEMO the organization's situation.'
1 Surgery is often cited as a model for industry to follow in overcoming the tendency to
accept high DEMO rates, because surgery is supposedly a situation in which mistakes are DEMO
tolerated. Yet this analogy is an oversimplified and misleading characterization (Bosk,
1994 Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder 549
Consider the automobile production process. DEMO production is char-
acterized by high volume runs, stable production processes, well-known
technology, and routine tasks. Processes are highly automated and, in
DEMO cases, include statistical monitoring and control of the process it-
self. DEMO statistical process controls include many measurements made
at various points in the process concerning the degree to which cars are
being assembled according to DEMO specifications. The underlying
system of production is stable and repetitive, with DEMO 500 cars
being produced per eight-hour shift, and successful implementation of
DEMO practices have led to low variance and high quality (Ernst &
Young, 1992b). In fact, failures have become so rare for DEMO automobile
components (e.g., measured in defects per million parts) that DEMO a
failure does occur it is in fact treated as a "DEMO" Indeed, in this
industry, the processes used are so well DEMO that failures can be
readily identified and causes can be traced to specific internal or external
aspects of the production process, and, thus, the process can be relatively
easily maintained in a state of statistical DEMO If the processes were not
so well understood, the adoption of DEMO ideas among U.S. auto manu-
facturers could not have led to recent dramatic product and service im-
provements.
In contrast to the broad applicability DEMO TQC principles in the case of
automobile manufacturing, consider the situation DEMO the computer indus-
try, where even relatively stable products are subject DEMO rapidly evolving
process engineering advances. Under these conditions, the capacity of
DEMO to effectively utilize the routine aspects of TQC systems is
diminished because the firms may never achieve the stable process that
is prerequisite to DEMO validity. For example, portable computers
are rapidly changing, as new models are introduced every 6 to 12 months.
In this environment, quality yields may be as low as 60 percent when the
product is first DEMO into production, and quality is maintained by discard-
ing the defective DEMO Even when quality improvements lead to process
yields as high as 90-99 percent, these higher yield ranges barely become
available in time as new products come on line and yield rates drop
to the lower range DEMO again. The learning associated with the process
of enhancing yield rates may be beneficial, even if the yield-rate
1979). A closer examination suggests that it is easy to gloss over the distinction between
experimental procedures DEMO may take many years to achieve even modest success levels.
Although these procedures may subsequently achieve remarkable levels of reliability, once
the procedure is more fully understood (e.g., eye surgery), the quality-enhancement pro-
cesses DEMO at the experimental versus the routine operation stages are quite different. An
implication of this observation is that control versus learning-oriented approaches may be
DEMO at different stages of the life cycle of an organization, a DEMO, or a process. In
early stages, a TQL approach may be more appropriate. In middle stages, as the process
begins to become more fully understood, a transition period will require a more balanced
approach. Finally, as knowledge becomes more complete, a heavier emphasis on TQC may
DEMO more appropriate.
550
Academy of Management Review
July
improvements cannot actually be put into DEMO However, under conditions
of such rapid change, the adoption of prepackaged, stringent systems-
such as those that stress the pursuit of zero defects (e.g., Crosby, 1979)-
can undermine the experimentation essential to the pursuit of innovation
at the heart of industry competitiveness.
Illustrating the TQL DEMO to capability enhancement, Chaparral
Steel has been characterized as an organization DEMO operates its factory
operations as a learning laboratory. Although at this firm TQ principles
have infused organizational activities so pervasively that they are no
DEMO conspicuous (Francis, 1992), Chaparral does not view its advan-
tage over its competitors in terms of either its products or its production
DEMO Instead, it views its competitive advantage as resting on its
ability DEMO "outlearn competitors" (Leonard-Barton, 1992: 32). Because of its
DEMO on TQL, Chaparral has stressed the importance of focusing atten-
tion DEMO uncertain, cutting-edge innovations within its factory operations.
When dealing with highly DEMO, innovative activities it relaxes the
typical TQC focus on error reduction DEMO pervades its routine manufac-
turing operations.
TQM training to enhance employees' DEMO of and commitment
to a quality initiative is often beneficial for employees (Ernst & Young,
1992a). However, educational efforts (e.g., DEMO technical training in
the use of teamwork or statistical tools such as control charts) have been
predicted to be most beneficial for employees working in highly or mod-
erately routine situations and less beneficial for employees DEMO in
nonroutine situations where task analyzability, variety, and predictabil-
ity are low. Under conditions of high uncertainty, educational programs
targeting general "human DEMO" (i.e., employee) enhancement are
likely to be beneficial in the long run (Snell & Dean, 1992). The simpler the
task, the more abbreviated the training would need to be, just as the less
stressful the performance conditions, the less the training would have to
provide the opportunity for what Weick (1985) referred to as overlearned
DEMO More generally, even standardized training programs (includ-
ing methods, tools, and practices) may require attention to the customi-
zation, balancing, and sequencing of training experiences to match the
specific situational uncertainty levels involved.
DEMO collection, analysis, and dissemination. The contingent
applicability argument applies to information collection, analysis, and
dissemination involving employees, customers, and suppliers (Tamuz &
Sitkin, 1993). When tasks are routine, criteria for monitoring and feedback
can be more easily established, agreed upon, and measured. DEMO, when
tasks and expectations are clear, employee performance and motivation
are aided by increased feedback (Hackman & Oldham, 1980).
The situation, however, is quite different for conditions of high un-
certainty. According to the vice president for petroleum and synthetic
fuels research at Exxon Research DEMO Engineering Company (Eidt, 1992:
26), "It is not DEMO all clear that the basic processes through which major
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
551
innovations occur are very well DEMO" Thus, it is not clear what
information should be collected or disseminated. In assessing the appli-
cability of typical TQM practices for Exxon'DEMO efforts, he drew upon Exxon's
experience in using quality techniques DEMO managing research activities
and concluded that the "application of quality tools DEMO techniques to
work processes in this area [R&D] is considerably less straightforward,
especially in the early invention stage."
Even though the DEMO of the customer or supplier is a crucial driver
of quality improvements when highly routine tasks are involved, uncer-
tain or nonroutine activities may even be detrimentally affected by such
input. According to Ernst & Young (1992a: 36), to the extent that there is a
focus "DEMO innovative new products in higher-performing organizations,
direct customer participation can limit the development effort if it does
not represent a broad enough view DEMO the potential marketplace." Even
when input is broadly representative, it can nonetheless dampen inno-
vation because it may not reflect the hard-to-imagine possibilities DEMO
tific innovation can sometimes offer. In a "technology push" environment,
effort is focused on "building a better mousetrap," regardless of custom-
ers' needs at the time. This idea is reflected by the computer scientist who
expressed frustration in applying "customer-based tests" to his futuristic
DEMO&D efforts by stating: "I can't ask my customers what they want. They
haven't been born yet" (Sitkin, In press). Ultimately, such technology push
efforts can lead to new products and even new customers. In contrast,
when the technology is well known DEMO adaptations are being consid-
ered, then a customer-driven approach may be DEMO appropriate to define
what is needed.
When customers' definitions of need DEMO from current product or
service conceptions, TQC and TQL imply very DEMO responses. TQC
focuses on benchmarking as a means of examining processes and stan-
dards used by other companies to establish expectations of achievable
excellence DEMO provides a source of ideas for potential changes. Similar
firms can be drawn from inside an organization's industry or by identify-
ing other DEMO using similar suppliers, customers, or processes. In addi-
tion, nontraditional DEMO can be used for benchmarking when the goal is
to leapfrog the competition or to gain a radically different perspective on
familiar problems. For DEMO, the Square D Company corporate tech-
nology center has been experimenting DEMO adapting the quality para-
digm to its own R&D needs since 1990. According to the corporate vice
president and chief technical officer (Francis, 1992), the key to Square D's
approach is the adaptation of what he refers to as quality tenets to match
R&D DEMO requirements. At Square D, the control-oriented focus on bench-
marking and DEMO establishment of baselines have been replaced by a
broader perspective on R&D investments and long-range payoffs, tech-
nology road maps, and technology DEMO
When the goal is to learn, as in TQL, practices should not be aimed
at meeting current standards because new products or services DEMO not
552
Academy of Management Review
July
yet be imaginable to customers. In DEMO, if the focus is on that which
is truly new, reliability standards that make sense for well-honed TQC
tasks are likely to be DEMO for TQL activities, but they may well be
"required" by DEMO who are basing their judgments on less experi-
mental goods. Thus, DEMO for TQL may need to focus on shifting the
customer's perceptions, rather than on finding new ways to meet these
perceptions.
Like the other quality practices, in-process feedback does not take the
same form for control-oriented and learning-oriented quality efforts
(Tamuz, 1988). For example, three requirements must be met for statistical
control charts to be useful in DEMO and improving organizational
processes. First, at least one measurable quality characteristic DEMO needed
that is of importance to the customer. Second, the use DEMO control charts
requires a stable underlying system of production. In other words, the
statistical distribution of the underlying quality characteristics) that is
(are) being sampled must not vary over time. Third, the use of DEMO
charts rests on the assumption that a repetitive process or product is
being analyzed and, thus, is useful in mass production systems (e.g.,
automobile assembly factories) where these requirements are met. Auto-
mobile production has many measurable quality characteristics related
to the function and fit of DEMO product, and it utilizes a stable process based
on high volume, repetitive assembly lines.
In contrast, control charts are not useful to the same extent in custom
production systems, R&D, and service systems DEMO some or all of the
previous requirements are not met. In some custom production, the prod-
uct or process is not repetitive. In R&D contexts and service contexts,
some or all three requirements often DEMO violated. For example, research
organizations lack measurable quality characteristics in the DEMO stages
of research, when underlying scientific knowledge is being discovered.
Also, because spontaneous and creative discovery (rather than process
stability) is being DEMO in such research processes, the research
process lacks stability or consistency (McGrath, Martin, & Kukla, 1982)-
basic requirements for the use of control charts.
Implementation incentives. The applicability of TQM-related re-
wards and DEMO also are hypothesized to be contingent on the extent
of situational uncertainty. More specifically, it is the target of the incen-
tive that would vary in these situations-with error-reduction incentives
matching more certain situations and experimentation DEMO innovation
incentives matching less certain ones. Under more certain conditions, for
DEMO, performance improvements and learning occur through incen-
tives that stress the DEMO of errors and variance and "small wins"
(Weick, 1984)DEMO In contrast, in more uncertain situations, learning occurs
through error-induced discoveries and incentive systems that reward
thoughtfully planned, well-executed, but inherently risky DEMO, which
are more likely to foster both learning and innovation (Sitkin, 1992;
Tamuz, 1994). For example, in basic research, DEMO quality "products"
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
553
often can only be produced DEMO unpredictable
ing.
trial-and-error learn-
It is one thing to exhort an assembly line crew to "do it right
the first time" but quite DEMO to give the same signal to an
exploratory researcher whose work inevitably involves learn-
ing from failed experiments. (Eidt, 1992: 28)
In such situations, where the nature of the task is not well under-
stood, a high tolerance for errors is necessary because the state of knowl-
edge is not well understood (Wildavsky, 1988) and must be continuously
discovered (rather than continuously improved). Whereas in novel situa-
tions (e.g., research) defects and errors are not well defined in advance,
more certain activities (e.g., production) occur in a context that is better
understood and in which knowledge has become more codified. As DEMO
noted previously, because few situations are likely to represent pure
types, even in situations that require a substantial emphasis on reliabil-
ity, some learning-oriented mechanisms will need to be developed. The
recognition that pure types DEMO rare suggests that it is the complemen-
tarity of and balance between control and learning that constitutes the
critical design factor for TQM designers DEMO managers.
Unfortunately, the TQM literature does not reflect a sensitivity to DEMO
issue. For example, Berry and Parasuraman (1992: 9) rebuffed the mere
suggestion of the appropriateness of errors: They noted that "we DEMO
times hear managers say that it is not practical to try to eliminate mis-
takes" and unequivocally reject such complaints as excuses to let man-
agers "off the hook," which they see as an easy avoidance of "boldness
and creativity." Given the focus of TQM on DEMO improvement, it is
ironic that objections to TQM seem to reinforce DEMO than mitigate the
faith of TQM adherents. Such a response typifies the "self-sealing" logic
described by Argyris (1985) and Janis (1972), in which individuals (or
groups) who believe strongly in a particular DEMO of doing things can come
to see contrary information as erroneous and challenges as defensive-
thus creating a belief system that is virtually immune DEMO refutation.
Turnkey TQM systems represent well-established ways of enhancing
processes through which employees can be reasonably expected to re-
duce errors, and, therefore, they also can be expected to reap rewards for
diligently pursuing zero DEMO rates. However, turnkey TQM systems are
not only ineffective for handling DEMO and emergent situations, but they
can actually exacerbate problems in accountability DEMO they fail to realis-
tically reflect the uncertainty associated with the tasks being performed
(Beer, Eisenstadt, & Spector, 1990; Tamuz, 1988)DEMO A question raised by this
research is: When rewards are keyed DEMO the elimination of errors, how can
individual employees or subunits be DEMO to actively pursue risky
innovations, which will (by definition) increase DEMO than decrease er-
rors?
Team rewards may be more applicable in highly or moderately
554
Academy of Management Review
July
certain situations (e.g., many manufacturing, custom production, or de-
velopment settings). In contrast, teams are DEMO to be less useful
in nonroutine situations, such as basic research DEMO, which are not
only more ill-defined, but also frequently involve disjunctive tasks more
suited to individual rather than group problem solving (Thibaut & Kelley,
1959). For example, there is still a role in research for the lone inventor or
single entrepreneur (Van de Ven, DEMO, & Poole, 1989). Further, as Van de
Ven and DEMO (1992) noted, a team approach may adversely affect inno-
vation DEMO obstructing learning.
In this section, we have suggested how two distinct DEMO to
implementing TQM share three guiding precepts but differ fundamentally
in how those precepts are manifest under varying conditions of uncer-
tainty and vary DEMO the way they are translated into operating principles
and practices. In the next section, we discuss how situational uncertainty
is the crucial causal variable that determines the contingent appropriate-
ness of the TQC versus TQL approaches DEMO the implementation of TQM.
An Uncertainty-Based
Contingency Perspective on TQM Effectiveness
If we are to begin to develop a theoretical model of the control!
DEMO distinction, it is essential to make explicit the underlying situ-
ational DEMO that drives the contingent appropriateness of the as-
sumptions and needs underlying TQC and TQL. We have suggested that
the theoretical basis for that DEMO rests on the level of uncertainty
with the situation in which TQM is being applied. That is, when uncer-
tainty is low, control DEMO cybernetically valid (Green & Welsh, 1988), and
the assumptions and practices associated with a TQC approach make
sense. In contrast, when uncertainty is high (e.g., because the organiza-
tion is engaged in novel DEMO complex efforts), the only reasonable goal may
be to try to do a good job of exploration and learning (March, 1991; Sitkin,
1992; Tamuz, 1988) through the use of a TQL approach. Finally, we have
noted that most situations include mixtures of subtasks that vary in their
level of certainty and, thus, mandate that the DEMO distinct approaches be
used simultaneously in some appropriately balanced way.
The contingency perspective we have outlined contrasts with the uni-
versalistic perspective on TQM DEMO that has typified most past
work on quality. As we have suggested, proponents of the universalistic
approach have implicitly assumed that the diligent implementation of
standard TQM prescriptions (usually operationalized in terms of what we
have referred to here as TQC) is sufficient to ensure effectiveness. In
contrast, a contingency perspective stresses the importance not only of
the shared precepts that bind different TQM approaches together, but
also the fundamentally different principles and practices that distinguish
TQC and TQL and make them complementary.
According DEMO the contingency-based model of TQM we propose (see
Figure 1), DEMO principles and practices adopted by an organization will
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
FIGURE 1
Contingency Model Of TQM DEMO
Sources of
Uncertainty
Task Uncertainty
Product/Process
Uncertainty
Organizational
Uncertainty
Effectiveness
TQM Implementation
TQM Principles
(Control vs. Learning)
555
TQM Practices
a The dashed line in this figure depicts previously hypothesized direct effects, which we
have challenged. The solid lines represent the interaction effect that we have DEMO
enhance effectiveness only to the extent that they match the level of sit-
uational uncertainty. That is, we have argued that the effectiveness of
TQC or TQL is fully contingent on the degree of situational uncertainty DEMO
which it is being used. Thus, we are arguing that the DEMO of
TQM will not exhibit a main effect on indicators of outcome effectiveness.
We do not hypothesize the existence of a simple, noncontingent effect on
effectiveness because excessive reliance on either form of quality (TQC or
TQL) would, we suggest, turn from having a beneficial impact on out-
comes to having a negative effect once reliance on that aspect DEMO quality
exceeded situational requirements. These arguments can be specified in
the form of the following hypotheses and associated corollaries.
Hypothesis 1: When task, DEMO/process, or organiza-
tional uncertainty is low, practices associated with
the implementation of TQC will increase outcome
556
Academy of Management Review
July
effectiveness. [Corollary: Outcome effectiveness will de-
crease when practices associated with TQL are imple-
mented under highly certain DEMO
Hypothesis 2: When task, product/process, or organiza-
tional uncertainty DEMO high, practices associated with the
implementation of TQL will increase outcome DEMO
ness. [Corollary: Outcome effectiveness will decrease
when practices associated with TQC DEMO implemented
under highly uncertain conditions.]
To illustrate these propositions, consider the DEMO singular reli-
ance on TQC. We have noted that TQC appears to be highly beneficial
when applied to conditions of low uncertainty. Thus, it has a positive
relationship with outcome effectiveness. However, we also have sug-
gested that when TQC is emphasized under highly uncertain conditions,
the DEMO of the outcome is affected negatively. This example fits
our more general hypothesis because the effect of TQC is purely contin-
gent: It is positive up to a situationally determined level and then turns
negative. A DEMO case can be made for an excessive reliance on TQL
under conditions that require control.
DISCUSSION
Much of the TQM research to date has DEMO broadly focused on de-
scriptions of practice rather than on the development of a coherent mid-
dle-range theory of use to managers and scholars. DEMO may explain some
of the TQM failures reported in the popular press in recent years (The
Economist, 1992; Fuchsberg, 1992a, 1992b; DEMO & Katel, 1992). Per-
haps if TQM had been implemented DEMO in more nonroutine situations
(e.g., uncertain environments such as R&D) rather than in more routine
ones (e.g., manufacturing), the movement may have encountered difficul-
ties early in its history rather than diffusing DEMO it has. Although the idea
of a universally applicable TQM approach may have been instrumental
in fostering its acceptance, it also may be a root cause of many of today's
TQM problems. We offer a DEMO basis for examining these prob-
lems, and, thus, the contingency DEMO discussed in this article pro-
vides a framework f or understanding the effectiveness of TQM in different
situations. In addition, the approach proposed here provides theoretical
and practical links to several existing streams of organizational research.
DEMO links are discussed more fully in the following sections.
Links to Organizational
Theory
Organizational learning. We have focused explicitly on the concep-
tion of DEMO as a strategy for enhancing both organizational learning and
control. One direction for future work that builds on our analysis is to
more explicitly DEMO the competency, investment, and performance
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
557
trade-offs suggested by a control DEMO a learning approach. For exam-
ple, under stable contextual conditions, rapid learning (associated with
learning-curve advantages) can lead to a strategic advantage DEMO firms
further along the learning curve. Also, TQC's emphasis on DEMO exist-
ing competencies is well suited for such conditions because TQC prac-
tices should accelerate first-order learning. However, under conditions of
more rapid change, the tendency of TQC to exploit existing strengths
rather than develop new ones can put the fast-learning firm at a disad-
vantage by foreclosing "the experimentation necessary for discovering
good alternatives" (Levinthal & March, 1981; March, 1988: 10). That is,
while reliance on existing competencies certainly leads to more reliable
short-term performance, it does so by underinvesting in the development
of new competencies for the future.
Organization design DEMO requisite variety. Research on TQM also
may be linked to research on organization design and requisite variety. In
fact, the major theme underlying this article, that TQM elements be
matched to the situational requirements, is DEMO by existing theory
on the concept of requisite variety. The concept of requisite variety (Co-
nant & Ashby, 1970), put succinctly, is that "only variety can regulate
variety" (Buckley, 1968: 495). This idea is supported by Weick (1979: 189),
who suggests that "organizational processes that are applied to equivo-
cal inputs must themselves be equivocal." The implication of requisite
variety for TQM is that organizations be flexible in their adoption of TQM
methods by tailoring TQM to DEMO the distinct design requirements of
each organizational subunit.
Tailoring TQM to subunit requirements in more traditional vertically
integrated firms may be relatively easy, as control over TQM implemen-
tation is likely to be relatively centralized. However, the tailoring of TQM
methods to the requirements imposed by network organizations (e.g.,
Snow, Miles, & Coleman, 1992) or firms that DEMO temporary or contract
workers (e.g., Pfeffer & Baron, 1991) may present a set of different chal-
lenges. For example, in network organizations control is more diffuse,
because networks generally spread asset ownership and DEMO across sev-
eral independent firms. A potentially interesting question to be answered
by future research is whether firms operating in networks are embracing
TQM, and if they are, to what extent is TQM adopted differentially by
different members of the network? Furthermore, to the extent that firms
DEMO in networks have adopted TQM programs, how are the dual
goals DEMO control and learning addressed (and with what degree of success)
DEMO network systems? Though the use of temporary or contract workers may
DEMO benefits from diverse perspectives and new ideas, such fluid
organizational participation DEMO pose roadblocks not only to enhancing
quality control, but especially for DEMO learning because fluid partici-
pation incurs severe process costs and contributes to losses of organiza-
tional memory (Van de Ven & Polley, 1992)DEMO
High reliability organizations in fast velocity environments. A rising
558
Academy of Management Review
July
area of interest among organizational scholars DEMO the capacity of
organizations to function with remarkable reliability in highly uncertain
situations (see Roberts, 1993). For example, researchers with this focus
have examined how organizations confronting complex or rapidly chang-
ing technologies (e.g., nuclear power plants, aircraft carriers, air trans-
portation systems) are DEMO to sustain almost failure-free operations when
they have little experience or information and compressed time within
which to make high-consequence decisions (March, Sproull, & Tamuz,
1991; Roberts, 1990; Tamuz, 1987; Weick, DEMO). One interesting avenue for
future research could be to systematically compare the similarities and
differences between TQM approaches and the effective approaches used
DEMO these "high-reliability" organizations.
Eisenhardt (1993) has extended this line of work by focusing on situ-
ations in which situational uncertainty is derived DEMO high rates of con-
textual change (e.g., due to rapid product life cycles or to the highly
interdependent and shifting strategies of competitors) rather than task
complexity. Even though Eisenhardt focused on "contextual factors" DEMO
we were only able to touch upon, it is interesting to DEMO that in her work
on the computer industry (which we refer DEMO as an exemplar of our hy-
pothesis), she identified a set of effectiveness-enhancing conditions-
including decentralization, allowing mistakes and actively "processing"
DEMO errors, allowing for practice in anticipating, recognizing and resolv-
ing problems-that are quite similar to those we proposed for uncertain
settings. Future work DEMO examine the degree to which what she iden-
tified as effectiveness-enhancing activity patterns (e.g., rapid recognition
of contextual change, speedy decisions, and DEMO over time) become
synonymous with practices that facilitate learning-oriented quality in DEMO
ganizations.
Implications for Future Research
This article points to the general importance of considering the con-
ditions under which TQC or TQL approaches are DEMO or less applicable
and highlights the need for empirical research on the ideas proposed
here. Specifically, it would be beneficial to conduct field research that
more systematically investigates the extent to which TQM practices and
success DEMO as a consequence of differing levels of task uncertainty.
Such a study could be done not only within the same firm (as it is likely
that task uncertainty varies across departments), but also across different
DEMO and different industries. For example, a natural follow-up study is
to DEMO systematically investigate TQM practices being used in different
situations such as research, development, custom production, and repet-
itive production. The research could verify, or refute, the theory proposed
here and might suggest more precisely DEMO TQM practices vary depend-
ing upon the nature of the task and other situational variables. Such
empirical work could provide fruitful insights about the DEMO
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
559
appropriateness of TQM and may DEMO to clarify and refine the ideas
presented here.
Second, our approach DEMO could be extended based on the recent
findings reported in Ernst & Young's study (1992a), which highlight how
firms at different stages of TQM adoption benefit differentially from the
use of various elements of DEMO Thus, our contingency analysis and Ernst
& Young's analysis could DEMO combined to examine the joint effects of task
characteristics and the firm's place on the TQM learning curve.
A third research implication highlights DEMO value of inductively re-
viewing the rich body of literature on TQM practices to extract the theories
that might be implicit. As part of DEMO effort, longitudinal research exam-
ining the effects of TQM interventions on DEMO outcomes is
sorely needed (Steele & Jennings, 1992).
In summary, we have described a three-pronged research approach.
One approach is to conduct empirical research guided by existing theory.
The second approach is to use DEMO from existing organization literature
and to translate TQM approaches into that literature. The third approach
is to develop theories more inductively from TQM practices DEMO from exist-
ing prescriptions about TQM.
Implications for Practice
Our analysis of TQM elements provides a starting point for managers
who wish to "unbundle" and critically examine prepackaged TQM pro-
grams, so that the most DEMO parts of these approaches are used
reflectively in each situation. Different TQM approaches in various com-
binations can be used within different industries, within different parts of
an organization, and for different functions within a small unit, although
there are likely to be some common elements that cut across the entire
organization.
In short, there is no substitute for managerial analysis and judgment.
Practitioners should not presume that uncertainty is always high DEMO R&D
(Graham & Pruitt, 1990) and low in production (Leonard-Barton, 1992).
Instead, organizational members should examine each situation for DEMO
particular tasks and contextual requirements before deciding which spe-
cific TQM approach is most appropriate. The most important implication
for practitioners is the idea DEMO the effectiveness of TQM can be enhanced
by tailoring the particular type of TQM approach to the requirements of
the task and context.
One DEMO of our separate examination of each feature of the
typically integrated TQM program is that a "turnkey" approach to the
adoption of TQM DEMO likely to be problematic. Those who implement TQM
packagese" that represent DEMO single approach should expect pockets of
resistance from managers and staff who find that the specifics of the
approach simply do not fit their DEMO requirements.
As we have noted previously, though proponents of TQM historically
DEMO dismissed the validity of such resistance (because TQM was
560
Academy of Management Review
July
presumed to be universally applicable), DEMO implication of the ideas dis-
cussed here is that, in this DEMO, TQM proponents are wrong. To the
contrary, the absence of such resistance, rather than its presence, should
be viewed as problematic for DEMO reasons. First, it may suggest that
employees are being less than DEMO Second, it may suggest that em-
ployees are being uncritical in DEMO acceptance of TQM. Third, it could
suggest that the TQM program DEMO not being pushed far enough. That is, if
TQM is actually DEMO taken seriously, experimental implementation will
be tried even in situations in DEMO its applicability is unclear, and some-
times the result will be DEMO when it turns out to have crossed the
applicability limits of TQM; If there are no failures or resistance to bring
these misapplications to light, TQM has not been pushed as far as it could
be. Thus, we are making a seemingly counterintuitive argument: that
unless the DEMO of TQM are recognized, the use of TQM cannot begin to
DEMO those limits.
As TQM has spread, its adoption has begun to DEMO driven increasingly
by concerns for managerial and firm legitimacy, rather than DEMO instru-
mental task requirements. Even though this scenario is quite typical of
the later stages of the diffusion of any innovation (Rogers & Shoemaker,
1971), it also is likely to lead to the rapid DEMO of support for the basi-
cally sound ideas represented by TQM. In this article, we have argued
that it is necessary to avoid the "faddish" elements of TQM and to think
through the primary purpose DEMO which TQM is being adopted. This is true
before implementing TQM, DEMO it is also true in adjusting the approach
used as the organization changes and matures. By carefully analyzing the
task and context and then DEMO the particular TQM approaches used,
researchers should improve the effectiveness of TQM. Put differently, by
allowing organizational theory to guide and ground managerial practice,
researchers may enhance the effectiveness of TQM practices. Thus, the
more qualified and tentative endorsement of TQM implicit in a contin-
gency DEMO is likely to foster the persistence of TQM rather than to
hasten its demise.
REFERENCES
Argyris, C. 1985. Strategy. change, and defensive routines. DEMO, MA: Pitman.
Argyris, C., & Schon, D. A. 1978. DEMO learning: A theory of action perspective.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Baida, P. 1990. Poor Richard's legacy: American business values from Ben Franklin to
Michael Milken. New York: Morrow.
Beer, M., Eisenstat, R. DEMO, & Spector, B. 1990. The critical path to corporate renewal. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.
Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. 1992. Prescriptions for a service quality revolution in Amer-
ica. Organizational Dynamics, 20(Spring): 5-15.
Bosk, C. L. 1979. Forgive and remember: DEMO medical failure. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Bowen, D. E., & Lawler, E. E. III 1992. Total quality-oriented human resources management.
Organizational DEMO 20(Spring): 29-41.
1994 Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder 561
Buckley, W. F. 1968. Society as a complex adaptive system. In W. Buckley (Ed.), Modern
systems research for the behavioral scientist: 490-513. Chicago: Aldine.
Business Week. 1988. DEMO & Johnson: A mistake can be a badge of honor. September DEMO:
126.
Cameron, K. S. 1986. Effectiveness as paradox: Consensus and conflict in conceptions of
organizational effectiveness. Management Science, 32: 539-553.
Conant, R. C.. & Ashby, R. W. 1970. Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that
system. International Journal of Systems DEMO, 1(2): 89-97.
Cringely. R. X. 1992. Accidental empires. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Crosby, P. B. 1979. Quality is free. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Dean. J. W., & Snell. S. A. 1991. Integrated manufacturing and job design: Moderating ef-
fects of organizational inertia. Academy of Management Journal, 34: 776-804.
Deming, W. E. 1982. Quality, productivity, and competitive position. Cambridge: Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology, Center for Advanced Engineering DEMO
Deming, W. E. 1986. Out of the crisis. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Center for Advanced Engineering Study.
Duncan, R. B. 1972. Characteristics of organizational environments and perceived environ-
mental uncertainty. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17: 313-327.
The Economist. 1992. The cracks in quality. April 18: DEMO
Eidt, C. M. 1992. Applying quality to R&D means "learn-as-you-go." Research * Technology
Management, 35(4): 24-31.
Eisenhardt, K. M. 1993. High reliability organizations meet high velocity environments:
Common dilemmas in DEMO power plants, aircraft carriers, and microcomputer firms.
In K. H. Roberts (Ed.). New challenges to understanding organizations: 117-135. New
York: Macmillan.
Ernst & Young. 1992a. International quality study: Best practices report. New York: American
Quality Foundation.
Ernst & Young. 1992b. International quality study: Automotive DEMO report. New York:
American Quality Foundation.
Feigenbaum, A. V. 1983. DEMO quality control: Engineering an'1 management (3rd ed.). New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Fortune. 1992. Making quality more than a fad. May 18: DEMO
Francis, P. H. 1992. Putting quality into the R&D process. DEMO * Technology Manage-
ment, 35(4): 16-23.
Fuchsberg, G. 1992a. Quality programs show shoddy results. Wall Street Journal, May 14:
B1.
Fuchsberg, G. 1992b. "Total quality" is termed only partial success. Wall Street Journal,
October 1: B 1.
Garvin. D. A. 1993. Building a learning organization. Harvard Business Review, 71(4): 78-91.
Graham, DEMO B. W.. & Pruitt, B. H. 1990. R&D for industry: A century of technological change
at ALCOA. Cambridge. England: Cambridge University Press.
Green. S. G.. & Welsh, M. A. 1988. Cybernetics and dependence: DEMO the control
concept. Academy of Management Review, 13: 287-301.
Hackman, DEMO R., & Oldham, G. R. 1980. Work redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Hospitals. 1992. TQM backlash prompts questions. June 5: 30.
Janis, DEMO L. 1972. Victims of groupthink. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
562
Academy of Management Review
July
Juran, J. M. 1986. The quality trilogy: A universal approach to managing for quality. Quality
Progress, 19(DEMO): 19-24.
Juran, J. M., & Gryna, F. M. 1980. DEMO planning and analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Krishnan, R., Shani, A. B., Grant, R. M., & Baer, R. 1993. In search DEMO quality improvement:
Problems of design and implementation. Academy of Management Executive, 7(4): 7-20.
Langevin, R. L. 1977. Quality control in DEMO industries. New York: American Management
Association.
Lawler, E. E. III, DEMO, S., & Ledford, G., Jr. 1992. Employee involvement and total
quality management: Practices and results in Fortune 1,000 companies. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Lawrence, P. R., & Lorsch, J. W. 1967. Organization and environment. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Leonard-Barton, D. 1992. The factory DEMO a learning laboratory. Sloan Management Review,
34(1): 23-38.
Levinthal, D., & March, J. G. 1981. A model of adaptive organizational search. Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 2: 307-333.
Lewin, K. 1951. Field theory in social science: Selected theoretical papers. New York: DEMO
Brothers.
Main, J. 1991. Is the Baldridge overblown? Fortune, July DEMO: 62-65.
March, A., & Garvin, D. A. 1986. A note on quality: The views of Deming, Juran, and Crosby.
Boston: DEMO Business School.
March, J. G. 1988. Decisions and organizations. New York: Blackwell.
March, J. G. 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization
Science, 2(1): 71-87.
of one or fewer.
7: 48-49.
DEMO Hills, CA:
McLagan, P. 1991. The dark side of quality. Training, 28(11): 31-33.
Perrow, C. 1967. A framework for DEMO comparative analysis of organizations. American
Sociological Review, 32: 194-208.
Peters, DEMO 1992. There's more to a successful company than zero defects. San Jose Mercury
News, July 20: 2F.
Pfeffer, J., & Baron, J. N. 1991. Taking the workers back out: Recent trends in the structuring
of employment. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational
behavior, vol. 10: 257-303. Greenwich, CT: DEMO Press.
Port, O., Carey, J., Kelly, K., & Forest, S. A. 1992. Quality: Small and midsize companies
seize the challenge-not DEMO moment too soon. Business Week, November 30: 66-72.
Purser, R. DEMO, & Pasmore, W. A. 1992. Organizing for learning. Research in organizational
change and development, vol. 6: 37-114. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
DEMO, K. H. 1990. Some characteristics of one type of high reliability DEMO Orga-
nization Science, 1(2): 160-176.
Roberts, K. H. (DEMO). 1993. New challenges to understanding organizations. New York: Mac-
millan.
DEMO, E. M., & Shoemaker, F. F. 1971. Communication of innovations: A cross-cultural
approach. New York: Free Press.
March, J. G., Sproull, L. S., & Tamuz, M. 1991. Learning from samples
Organization Science, 2(1): 1-13.
Mathews, J., & Katel, P. 1992. DEMO cost of quality. Newsweek, September
J. E., Martin, J., & Kukla, R. A. 1982. Judgment calls in research.
McGrath,
Sage.
1994
Sitkin, Sutcliffe, and Schroeder
563
Schonberger, R. J. 1990. Building a chain of customers: Linking business functions to create
the world class company. New York: Free Press.
Schonberger, R. J. 1992. Total quality DEMO cuts a broad swath-through manufac-
turing and beyond. Organizational Dynamics. 20(Spring): 16-28.
Seymour, D., & Collett, C. 1991. Total quality management in higher education: A critical
assessment (Application Report 91-01). Methuen, MA: GOALIQPC.
Shewhart, W. Q. 1931. Economic control of quality of DEMO product. Princeton, NJ:
Van Nostrand. [Reprinted by ASQC, Milwaukee, DEMO
Sitkin, S. B 1992. Learning through failure: The strategy of small losses. In B. M. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 14: 231- 266. Greenwich, CT:
JAI Press.
Sitkin, S. B In press. Mismatches between control systems and task requirements as deter-
minants of trust: The dynamics of distrust in an era of quality. In R. M. Kramer & T. R.
Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Snell, S. A., & Dean, J. W. 1992. Integrated manufacturing and human resource manage-
DEMO: A human capital perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 35: 467-504.
DEMO, C. C., Miles, R. E., & Coleman, H. J. DEMO Managing 21st century network organiza-
tions. Organizational Dynamics, 20(Winter): DEMO
Steel, R. P., & Jennings, K. R. 1992. Quality improvement DEMO for the 90s: New
directions for research and theory. In R. DEMO & W. Pasmore (Eds.), Research in
organizational change and development, vol. 6: 1-36. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Tamuz, M. 1987. DEMO impact of computer surveillance on air safety reporting. Columbia
World Journal of Business, 22(1): 69-77.
Tamuz, M. 1988. Monitoring dangers in DEMO air: Studies in information and ambiguity. Un-
published doctoral dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Tamuz, M. 1994. Developing organizational safety information systems for monitoring po-
tential dangers. In G. E. Apostolakis & T. S. DEMO (Eds.), Proceedings of PSAM II, vol 2
(Section 71): 7-12. Los Angeles: University of California.
Tamuz, M., & Sitkin, S. B 1993. The invisible muzzle: Organizational and legal constraints on
the disclosure of information about health and safety hazards. Unpublished manuscript,
School DEMO Public Health, University of Texas, Houston, TX.
Tetzeli, R. 1992. Making quality more than a fad. Fortune, May 18: 12-13.
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. 1959. The social psychology of DEMO New York: Wiley.
Thompson, J. D. 1967. Organizations in action. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Training & Development. 1992. The downside of quality. March: DEMO
Weick, K. E. 1979. The social psychology of organizing. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Weick, K. E. 1984. Small wins: Redefining the scale of social problems. American Psychol-
ogist, 39(1): 40-49.
Weick, K. DEMO 1985. A stress analysis of future battlefields. In J. G. Hunt & J. D. Blair (Eds.),
Leadership on the future battlefield: 32-46. McLean, VA: Pergamon Press.
Weick, K. E. 1987. Organizational culture as a source of high reliability. California Man-
agement Review, 29(2): 112-127.
Wildavsky, A. 1988. Searching for safety. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Press.
Woodward, J. 1965. Industrial organization: Theory and practice. London: Oxford University
Press.
564
Academy of Management Review
July
Van de Ven, A. H., DEMO, H. L., & Poole, M. S. 1989. Research on the DEMO of inno-
vation. New York: Harper & Row.
de Ven, A. H., & Polley, D. 1992. Learning while innovating. Organization Science, 3(1):
92-116.
Van
Sim B Sitkin is associate professor of management at the Fuqua School of Business,
Duke University. He received his DEMO in organizational behavior from the Gradu-
ate School of Business, Stanford DEMO His research focuses on the effect of
formal and informal organizational control systems on risk taking, accountability,
trust, learning, and innovation.
Kathleen M. Sutcliffe is assistant professor of organizational behavior and human
resource management, School of Business Administration, University of Michigan.
She received her Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Austin and was on the faculty
of DEMO Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota when this paper was
DEMO Her research interests include top-management team perception, interpre-
tation, and sensemaking processes, organizational learning and adaptation, and
organizational responsiveness to environmental change.
DEMO G. Schroeder is professor of operations management and Co-Director of the
Quality Leadership Center, Carlson School of Management, University of Minne-
sota. He DEMO his Ph.D. from Northwestern University. His current research in-
terests are in quality management, world class manufacturing, manufacturing strat-
egy, and technology management.{1g42fwefx}