Determinants of Risky Decision-Making Behavior: A Test of the Mediating Role of Risk
Perceptions and Propensity
Author(s): Sim B Sitkin and Laurie DEMO Weingart
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. DEMO (Dec., 1995), pp. 1573-1592
Published by: Academy of Management
DEMO URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/256844 .
Accessed: 26/09/2011 14:00
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of DEMO Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/DEMO/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide DEMO of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more DEMO about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of Management is collaborating with DEMO to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management DEMO
http://www.jstor.org
? Academy of Management Journal
1995, Vol. 38, No. 6, 1573-1592.
DETERMINANTS OF RISKY DECISION-MAKING
BEHAVIOR: A TEST OF THE MEDIATING ROLE
OF RISK PERCEPTIONS AND PROPENSITY
SIM B SITKIN
Duke University
LAURIE R. WEINGART
DEMO Mellon University
The reported research examined the usefulness of placing risk propen-
sity and risk perception in a more central role in models of DEMO de-
cision making than has been done previously. Specifically, this arti-
DEMO reports on two studies that examined a model in which risk
propensity and risk perception mediate the effects of problem fram-
ing and outcome DEMO on risky decision-making behavior. Impli-
cations of the pattern of results for future research are discussed.
Most scholars who have studied decision-making behavior in DEMO
organizational situations have focused on the direct effects of one or two
determinants of this behavior. However, such an approach does not ade-
quately reflect the complex sets of influences on risk behavior in organ-
izations. DEMO addition, it has led to contradictions in the literature and po-
DEMO inaccurate conclusions about the causes of decision-making be-
havior (Sitkin & DEMO, 1992). For example, Kahneman and Tversky's
"prospect theory" (1979) conclusion that negatively framed situations
lead to greater risk taking DEMO the results of research by March and
Shapira (1987) and Osborn and Jackson (1988).
In an attempt to build upon these direct effects approaches, Sitkin and
Pablo (1992) proposed a mediated model of the determinants of risky de-
cision making, theorizing that the effects of a number of previously ex-
amined variables on risk taking were not DEMO but were instead mediat-
ed by risk propensity and risk perception. Their model extended the di-
rect effects approaches and posited a direct causal DEMO between the
variables studied and risk taking. In addition, where direct DEMO ap-
proaches have predicted specific choices under conditions of risk, Sitkin
DEMO Pablo focused on the process of making risky decisions. This article
reports two studies that provide initial tests of key portions of the Sitkin-
DEMO approach.
We would like to thank Robyn Dawes, George Huber, Amy Pablo, Gerald Salancik, David
Schkade, Michael Hitt, and three anonymous DEMO for their helpful comments on ear-
lier versions of this article.
1573
1574 Academy of Management Journal December
CLARIFYING KEY CONSTRUCTS AND DISTINCTIONS
Sitkin DEMO Pablo (1992) reviewed a number of potentially relevant in-
dividual, DEMO, and problem characteristics that have been iden-
tified as predictors of DEMO individual decision making. Perhaps the most
significant focus of their analysis was the previously distinct effects of out-
come history and problem framing, which they argued had been over-
looked-and sometimes unintentionally confounded-in prior work.
Specifically, Sitkin and Pablo suggested that previous contradictory find-
ings could be explained DEMO disentangling outcome history from problem
framing. Following their theoretical emphasis, we DEMO on these two fre-
quently studied predictors of risky decision making. This choice was
guided by our desire to stress variables whose effects were DEMO by
Sitkin and Pablo to be mediated by risk propensity and risk perceptions,
so as to provide an initial test of their core DEMO
Although it focuses on only a subset of the broader model, DEMO 1
reflects the core ideas underlying the mediated model of the determinants
of risky decision making and captures its most critical variables. First, it
represents antecedent characteristics as affecting decision making only in-
directly, through their effect on risk propensity and risk perceptions; this
is the mediated aspect of the model. In addition, the paths shown in Fig-
ure 1 are numerically keyed to the hypothesized bivariate relationships be-
tween the variables DEMO the model (discussed later in the article).
Before addressing the DEMO for each relationship posited in the
model we should define several key constructs, since these distinctions
underlie several of our arguments. Variables identified in the Sitkin and
Pablo (1992) model addressed here include their dependent DEMO, de-
cision risk, their proposed mediating variables (risk perception and DEMO
propensity), and two key exogenous predictor variables that they identi-
FIGURE 1
Mediated Model of the Determinants of Risky Decision-Making Behaviora
Risk
Propensitysk
DEMO
H1
Outcome History
\
~H4^
Risky
H3 - Decision-
Making
Behavior
>DEMO
v _
Risk H5
Perceptionsk
H2 +
Problem Framing
a The numbers shown on the paths of the model are keyed to some of DEMO hypotheses
discussed herein. Several hypotheses are not shown here because they represent the mediation
hypotheses rather than a specific hypothesized relationship. Specifically, Hypotheses 6 and 7
posit that the effects of outcome history on risky decision DEMO and risk perception are
mediated by risk propensity, and Hypotheses 8 DEMO 9 posit that the effects of problem framing
and risk propensity are mediated by risk perception.
1995
Sitkin and Weingart
1575
fled as characterizing the person and the DEMO: outcome history and
problem framing. Each of these five constructs is DEMO below.
Decision risk is a construct used to characterize the alternatives con-
fronting a decision maker; it can, for example, describe how undesirable
the likely effects of an alternative are and the likelihood of their DEMO
rence. Risk can also be used to characterize an overall decision-how risky
it is compared to other alternatives. Following Sitkin and Pablo, we de-
fined decision risk as "the extent to which there is uncertainty about
whether potentially significant and/or disappointing outcomes of decisions
will be realized" (1992: 10). To the extent that a decision involves high DEMO
certainty or extreme outcomes, either in terms of the choice among DEMO
natives or for individual alternatives in aggregate, the decision is charac-
DEMO as risky.
Included in the model are two direct determinants of decision risk-
risk perception and risk propensity-that also serve as mediators of an-
DEMO characteristics of the decision maker and the problem situation.
Risk perception is defined as an individual's assessment of how risky a sit-
uation DEMO in terms of probabilistic estimates of the degree of situational un-
certainty, how controllable that uncertainty is, and confidence in those es-
timates (Baird & Thomas, 1985; Bettman, 1973).
Risk propensity is defined as an individual's current tendency to take
or avoid risks. It DEMO conceptualized as an individual trait that can change
over time and thus is an emergent property of the decision maker. This de-
finition of DEMO propensity, which follows Sitkin and Pablo (1992), is re-
lated to but departs in a critical way from previous conceptualizations of
propensity DEMO a stable dispositional attribute (e.g., Fischhoff, Lichtenstein,
Slovic, Derby, & Keeney, 1981; Rowe, 1977). It is interesting to DEMO that
even critics of the predictive value of the risk propensity construct (e.g.,
MacCrimmon & Wehrung, 1990; Schoemaker, 1990) have employed the tra-
ditional conception of risk propensity as a stable individual attribute.
DEMO are contrasting the traditional conception of risk propensity as "a
stable DEMO constant" dispositional attribute (Wolman, 1989: 103) with our
conceptualization DEMO it as a changeable trait that is "persistent" (Suther-
land, 1989: 452) or "enduring" (Goldenson, 1984: 757) but DEMO be "learned
or inherited" (Corsini & Osaki, 1984: 542-543)DEMO Hair color or facial fea-
tures-frequently cited as examples of traits (DEMO, Goldenson, 1984)-il-
lustrate the concept of persistence and change in that hair color responds
to exposure to the sun and facial features DEMO be altered through cosmet-
ic surgery. Similarly, a trait-based definition of DEMO propensity conceptu-
alizes the construct as a cumulative tendency to take or avoid risks that
is simultaneously persistent and can change over time as DEMO result of ex-
perience. By focusing on the important role of past experience, this con-
ceptualization can account for the capacity for people to adapt without
denying that as individuals gain more experience, they may be less sus-
ceptible to contextual influence and more likely to exhibit cross-situational
DEMO Thus, our approach to risk propensity as "stable but change-
1576 Academy of Management Journal December
able" both builds upon and modifies the traditional "stable and constant"
view.
Although the tendency to take risks (i.e., risk propensity) is almost cer-
tainly related causally to making riskier decisions, as we will hypothesize
and test below, the DEMO constructs are not synonymous because a number
of factors can impede the realization of a decision maker's tendencies in
any particular instance. Even DEMO individual who consistently leans toward
seeking risks could in a specific case, such as a business investment, fail
to act on this tendency, because of inadequate funding, a missed ap-
pointment, an unexpected illness, a natural disaster, or other obstruction.
We also examined two exogenous variables posited in Sitkin and
Pablo's (1992) model. Problem framing refers DEMO whether a situation is pre-
sented to a decision maker as an opportunity or a threat (e.g., Jackson &
Dutton, 1988) or in terms of gains or losses (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979).
DEMO is, the situation can be portrayed in a generally positive or DEMO
light. Outcome history, a person-situation interaction characteristic, is de-
fined as the degree to which the decision maker believes that previous risk-
related DEMO have resulted in successful or unsuccessful outcomes. For
our purpose, this DEMO reflects an individual's overall mental repre-
sentation of how well he or she has fared in the past in similar situations
(see Sitkin [1992] and Weick [1984] for reviews).
A MEDIATED-EFFECTS MODEL OF THE DEMO OF
RISK BEHAVIOR
Determinants of Risk Propensity
Outcome history. Although outcome history is posited here to affect
decision making, the role of outcome history has been notably absent in
many theories of risky decision-making behavior. Nearly DEMO studies have
focused on either individual risk orientation (MacCrimmon & Wehrung,DEMO
1986a, 1986b, 1990) or decision maker computation of risk (Dyer & Sarin,
1982; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986) while essentially ignoring the poten-
tially important role of previous decisions made and their outcomes.
DEMO ahistorical viewpoint is challenged by recent research findings
showing that prior success in taking risks can increase the propensity to
take risks. For example, the work of March and Shapira (1987), Osborn and
Jackson (DEMO), and Thaler and Johnson (1990) found that decision mak-
ers will persist in taking risks if prior risk-related actions were success-
ful.
DEMO 1: The more successful the outcomes of a de-
cision maker'DEMO risk-related decisions have been, the high-
er his or her risk DEMO
Determinants of Risk Perception
Problem framing. An important influence on a decision maker's risk
perceptions is whether a problem is framed in positive DEMO negative terms.
1995 Sitkin and Weingart 1577
In an influential study of individual risk DEMO under conditions of var-
ied problem frames, Kahneman and Tversky (1979) formulated prospect
theory, noting that positively framed situations led to the DEMO of risk-
averse decisions, whereas negatively framed situations led to risk DEMO
A number of succeeding studies (e.g., Neale, Bazerman, Northcraft, &
Alperson, 1986; Singh, 1986; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986, DEMO) have
found the influence of problem framing on decision making to DEMO robust.
However, none of these studies has directly examined the causal
DEMO underlying the observed behavioral effects posited in prospect
theory. If perceptions and other omitted mechanisms are left unexam-
ined, it remains unclear how problem framing comes to affect decisions.
Following Sitkin and Pablo (1992), we hypothesized that framing direct-
ly affects how risky a situation is perceived DEMO be, which in turn leads to
the behavioral outcomes they observed. DEMO hypothesis implies that pos-
itive frames, which emphasize situational threats to DEMO resources, may
make the risks inherent in a situation more salient (inducing risk-averse
behavior), whereas an emphasis on the upside potential for DEMO lim-
ited holdings or recouping losses may decrease the salience of risks by in-
creasing the salience of opportunities (inducing risk-seeking behavior).
Such an explanation is consistent with the nonlinearity that lies at the
heart DEMO prospect theory and its empirical support, but it extends prospect
theory DEMO suggesting the cognitive mechanism through which observable
behavioral responses occur.
Hypothesis 2: Positively framed situations will be per-
ceived as involving higher risk than negatively framed
situations.
Risk propensity. Risk propensity influences the relative salience of
DEMO threat or opportunity and thus leads to biased risk perceptions
(Brockhaus, 1980; Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Specifically, risk-averse decision
makers (DEMO, individuals with a propensity to avoid risks) are hypothesized
to attend to and weight potentially negative outcomes more heavily than
positive outcomes (Schneider & Lopes, 1986), thus overestimating the
probability of loss relative to the probability of gain. Conversely, risk-seek-
ing decision makers are hypothesized to attend to and weight positive op-
portunities more heavily (March & Shapira, 1987), thus overestimating the
probability of gain relative to the probability of loss.
Hypothesis 3: The higher a decision maker's risk propen-
sity, the lower the level of perceived situational risk.
Determinants of Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Risk propensity. The straightforward intuitive basis for positing that
an DEMO's "willingness to take risks" (MacCrimmon & Wehrung,
1990) affects whether he or she will actually make riskier decisions makes
extensive DEMO unnecessary. Although the Sitkin-Pablo model has
not been tested previously, its DEMO (see Figure 1) concerns the notion that
1578
Academy of Management Journal
December
an individual's propensity to take DEMO avoid risks affects decision making,
an idea that is grounded in a number of previous studies (e.g., Kogan &
Wallach, 1964; MacCrimmon & Wehrung, 1986a, 1990). For example,
Brockhaus (1980) hypothesized that the overall orientation of an individ-
ual toward risk (DEMO propensity) would predispose some individuals to
make riskier decisions than other DEMO
Thus,
Hypothesis 4: The higher a decision maker's risk DEMO
sity, the riskier will be his or her decision-making be-
havior.
DEMO perception. Although we have acknowledged that prospect the-
ory does not explicitly consider risk perceptions, Sitkin and Pablo (1992)
suggested that the DEMO of prospect theory research are consistent with
a negative relationship between perceived risk and making risky decisions.
That is, risk avoidance is greater when threats to assets are salient (high
risk is perceived) than it DEMO when an individual perceives little risk because
there is nothing to lose. It also seemed reasonable to posit that higher lev-
els of perceived DEMO risk would be negatively related to making
risky decisions since people tend to associate risk with negative outcomes
more strongly than with outcome variability (e.g., Levitt & March, 1988).
Given this perceptual asymmetry, we hypothesized that actions taken un-
der conditions of higher perceived situational risk DEMO also be per-
ceived to have a lower expected value.
Hypothesis 5: The degree to which individuals make
risky decisions will be negatively associated with their
level of perceived risk.
The Role of Risk Perception and DEMO Propensity
As stated earlier, most previous research has overlooked a critical DEMO
oretical issue raised by the Sitkin-Pablo model-the causal mechanisms
by which a variety of exogenous variables come to affect decision-making
behavior. As shown in DEMO 1, they argued that the direct impact of an-
tecedent variables DEMO risky decision making actually takes place only via
the mediating function of risk propensity and risk perception.
No theories prior to Sitkin and Pablo (1992) and no empirical work
has focused explicitly on the indirect effects of outcome history on risky
decision making. Nonetheless, Sitkin and Pablo drew on the earlier work
of March and Shapira (1987), Osborn and Jackson (1988), and Thaler and
Johnson (1990) to argue that successful or unsuccessful outcome histories
affect how decision makers perceived risky situations DEMO acted upon them
by influencing what kinds of information decision makers attended to and
also by influencing how much those decision makers leaned a DEMO to-
ward or away from taking risks. Historical success or failure does not, they
suggested, direct attention toward specific risk elements of a DEMO In-
stead, their analysis was grounded in the familiar notion that DEMO mak-
ers would be prone to persist in pursuing what worked in the past and to
1995 Sitkin and Weingart 1579
abandon what did not. This intuitive argument, they noted, is that outcome
history affects a decision maker's propensity to take risks, and that it is the
tendency to take or avoid risks that in turn directs attention to high- or low-
risk DEMO of a situation (i.e., risk perception) and leads to pursuing DEMO
avoiding risky behaviors.
Hypothesis 6: The effect of outcome history on DEMO de-
cision-making behavior will be fully mediated by risk
propensity.
Hypothesis 7: The effect of outcome history on risk per-
ception will be fully mediated by risk propensity.
We hypothesized that risk propensity and problem framing DEMO
risky decision making by influencing what is perceived. Risk propensity
is linked to risk perception in several ways; these include limiting what
information is attended to and limiting an individual's ability to notice and
respond DEMO risky attributes that influence how risky situations will be eval-
uated. This approach is consistent with previous work that has defined risk
perception in DEMO of situational labeling (Jackson & Dutton, 1988; Staw,
Sandelands, & Dutton, 1981) and estimates of the extent and controllability
of DEMO (Baird & Thomas, 1985; Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Thus, risk propen-
sity is not only posited to affect decision making directly, but is also
posited to have an indirect effect on risky decision making through its ef-
fect on risk perceptions (cf. Sitkin & Pablo, 1992).
Hypothesis 8: The effect of risk propensity on risky DEMO
cision-making behavior will be partially mediated by
risk perception.
Similarly, the DEMO of problem framing on risky decision making is
mediated by risk perception because framing affects the strength and clar-
ity of an individual's DEMO or negative perceptions of aspects of a sit-
uation. Thus, building DEMO the previously discussed logic of Hypotheses 2
and 5, we posit DEMO:
Hypothesis 9: The effect of problem framing on risky de-
DEMO behavior will be fully mediated by risk
perception.
The overall goal of the empirical research reported in this article was
to provide a preliminary DEMO of several key aspects of the mediated mod-
el. We describe the results of two studies, each of which tested selected
portions of the model.1 Study 1 manipulated outcome history to examine
1 We attempted during DEMO to include these separate aspects of the model in a sin-
gle experimental design. Although their reactions to each manipulated variable were distinct,
DEMO both were used simultaneously we found that subjects confused the two manipula-
tions. Therefore, we ran two experiments that presented subjects with only one manipula-
tion at a time.
1580
Academy of Management Journal
December
the hypothesized mediating role of risk DEMO and risk perception.
Study 2 manipulated problem framing to examine the hypothesized me-
diating role of risk perception.
STUDY 1
Methods
Subjects. Thirty-eight master'DEMO of business administration students in
a required organizational behavior class participated in the study. The sub-
jects' average age was 28.3 years (ranging DEMO 23 to 46), and their work
experience averaged 6.2 years (DEMO from 0 to 25 years). Sixty-six per-
cent of the subjects were men.
Procedures and stimulus materials. The study was a class exercise.
DEMO packet containing the stimulus materials and questionnaire was dis-
tributed. Subjects were asked to read through the stimulus materials and
to individually fill out DEMO attached questionnaire.
A modified version of a widely used decision-making case, DEMO Rac-
ing (Brittain & Sitkin, 1989), was used.2 Carter Racing places decision mak-
ers in a situation of risky choice. The case DEMO the facts of the Nation-
al Aeronautics and Space Administration's (DEMO) decision to launch the
space shuttle Challenger in the guise of DEMO decision about whether a race
car team should compete in the last race of the season. The decision in-
volves risk in a number DEMO domains, including business risk, personal fi-
nancial risk, and physical DEMO In the study, we focused on the impact of
the decision DEMO whether to race on the financial viability of the race
car team as an organization-that is, business risk.
This particular stimulus was chosen because it avoids a major prob-
lem frequently associated with experimental stimulus materials DEMO that it
has been found to be highly realistic and quickly engaging. Since the case
as originally written fosters highly skewed choice patterns, modifications
to the original case were made (concerning information about the racing
team's history of success and failure and the amount of money at DEMO)
that would lead to a more balanced distribution of decisions. The basic
case information was changed so that the expected value of racing DEMO
equal to the expected value of not racing when ambient air temperature
was not incorporated into the calculations.3
Variables
Outcome history. Outcome history was DEMO after subjects had
read the case and before they read the first question of the questionnaire.
2 The complete text of the revised case DEMO available from the authors.
3 Air temperature was not included in developing equality across the options (i.e.,
race/not race) in our DEMO because it was not incorporated by the Challenger decision
makers or by students using the case in the past (Brittain & Sitkin, 1989)DEMO
1995
Sitkin and Weingart
1581
Individuals in the unsuccessful outcome history condition DEMO the fol-
lowing:
As Pat Carter, you have had a DEMO amount of training for
and experience with this type of decision. Your previous de-
cisions have been largely unsuccessful and you have always
had DEMO nagging worry that your poor "track record" could even-
tually have more serious consequences. You feel uncertain be-
cause of the lack of DEMO of those decisions you have made
in the past.
Subjects in the successful outcome history condition read:
As Pat Carter, you have had a moderate amount of training for
and experience with this type of DEMO Your previous de-
cisions have been largely successful and you have always de-
rived a sense of self-assurance from your successful "track
record" DEMO making such decisions. You feel confident because
of the success of those decisions you have made in the past.
A three-item outcome history manipulation DEMO ("Extent to which
problems have resulted from Pat's decisions like this in the past," "Degree
to which Pat has analyzed decisions like this correctly in the past," and
"Degree to which successful outcomes have resulted from Pat's decisions
like this in the past") was found to be reliable (a = .71). The manipula-
DEMO check was found to be significant across conditions (F1 36 = DEMO, p
< .001) and in the predicted direction (success condition, x = 4.68, s.d.
=0.91; failure condition, x = 3.44, DEMO = 1.08).
Decision-making behavior. Immediately following the manipulation,
subjects were asked to indicate whether they would race (definitely not
race, 0%; definitely race, 100%). Next, a dichotomous forced-choice item
(race vs. not race) was presented. The scaled format item is an indirect
measure of decision making that gathers data on a subject's intentions,
DEMO the forced-choice item measures decision-making behavior di-
rectly. Because the scaled format allowed for more response variance than
did the dichotomous choice format and DEMO two items were highly corre-
lated (r37 = .72, p < .001), we used the scaled format item as the indica-
tor DEMO decision-making behavior (see the Appendix for the text of this and
DEMO described items).
Risk perception. A four-item scale was adapted from MacCrimmon
and Wehrung (1985, 1986a, 1986b) and Wehrung, Lee, Tse, and Vertinsky
(1989) to measure the amount of perceived risk associated DEMO the deci-
sion to be made (oa = .75).
Risk DEMO An original five-item scale for business risk propen-
sity was employed (DEMO = .86).
Results
Direct effects. The direct effects posited in Hypotheses 1, 3, 4, and 5
were examined through correlation and regression analyses. First, as
shown in Table 1, outcome history significantly influences DEMO propensi-
1582
Academy of Management Journal
December
TABLE 1
Study 1 Descriptive Statistics DEMO t-Test Results
Outcome History
Failure
Variable Mean s.d.
Risky decision making 58.33 34.00
Risk propensity 3.73 1.23
Risk perception 3.64 1.28
Conditiona
Success
Mean
DEMO
4.51
2.80
s.d.
22.68
1.00
0.87
t
-2.06*
-2.15*
2.38*
a Failure, n = 18; success, n = 20.
*
p< .05
DEMO
36
36
36
ty (t36 = -2.15, p < .05). Thus, subjects who were informed that Pat Carter
(whose role they DEMO as decision maker) had successfully made sim-
ilar decisions in the DEMO reported higher levels of risk propensity for Pat,
supporting Hypothesis 1. Second, risk propensity was found to be nega-
tively related to risk perception, supporting Hypothesis 3 (r = -.54, p <
.001)DEMO That is, when subjects reported higher levels of risk propensity, they
also reported that they perceived less risk in the situation. Finally, risky
decision making was regressed on risk propensity and risk perception to
determine DEMO direct effects of propensity and perception on the decision
(R2 = DEMO, F2,35 = 28.80, p < .001). Although risk propensity did not have
a significantly positive association with the decision in the DEMO
analysis (P = .15, n.s.), as hypothesized in Hypothesis 4, the bivariate cor-
relation between risk propensity and risky decision making was signifi-
cant (r = .52, p < .001). Results showed DEMO risk perception was negatively
related to the decision, supporting Hypothesis 5 (P = -.70, p < .001).
Mediated effects. Hierarchical regression analysis (Baron & Kenney,
1986) was used to test the potential DEMO effects. In the first step of
each equation, we tested the DEMO effects model, regressing risk behav-
ior on the relevant antecedent variables (outcome history, or risk propen-
sity, or both). In the DEMO step, the relevant mediator (risk propensity
or risk perception) was DEMO to determine whether it mediated any pre-
viously significant relationships.
Three tests of mediation were conducted. First, Hypothesis 6 was ex-
amined to determine if risk propensity mediated the effect of outcome his-
tory on decision DEMO A stepwise regression analysis predicting deci-
sion making was used to test this hypothesis, with outcome history entered
in step 1 and risk propensity added in step 2. The direct effects of outcome
history explained a DEMO portion of the variance in risk behavior (R2
= .11, p < .05), and the change in R2 when propensity was added DEMO the
equation was significant (AR2 = .19, p < .01). Results from step 1 showed
that outcome history was positively related to DEMO decision making ( =
.33, p < .01). When risk DEMO was added to the equation, the rela-
1995
Sitkin and Weingart
1583
tionship was no longer significant (3 = .17, n.s.), and risk propensity was
significantly related to decision making (P = .46, p < .01). In addition, the
change in beta associated with outcome history was significant (A3 = .16,
t35 = 2.23, p < .05). Thus, Hypothesis 6 was DEMO
Second, Hypothesis 7, suggesting that risk propensity mediated the re-
lationship between risk outcome history and risk perception, was also test-
ed using stepwise regression. The direct effects of outcome history ex-
plained a significant DEMO of the variance in risk perception (R2 = .14,
p < .05), and the change in R2 when propensity was added to the equa-
tion was significant (AR2 = .19, p < .01)DEMO Results of step 1 showed that out-
come history was negatively related to risk perception (P = -.37, p < .05).
When DEMO propensity was added to the equation in step 2, the effect DEMO out-
come history was no longer significant (p = -.21, n.s.), and the risk
propensity effect was significant (P = -.46, DEMO < .01). In addition, the
change in beta associated with DEMO history was significant (AP = .16,
t3 = -2.15, p < .05). Thus, Hypothesis 7 was supported.
Finally, Hypothesis 8 DEMO tested to determine if risk perception par-
tially mediated the effects of risk propensity on risky decision making. The
direct effect of propensity explained DEMO significant portion of the variance
in risk behavior (R2 = .27, p < .001), and the change in R2 when risk per-
DEMO was added to the equation was significant (AR2 = .35, p < .001).
Results from step 1 showed that risk propensity was DEMO related to
decision making (p = .52, p < .001). When risk perception was added to
the equation, the relationship was no longer significant (p = .15, n.s.), and
risk perception was DEMO related to decision making (3 = -.70, p
< .001). The change in beta associated with risk propensity was signifi-
cant (Ap = .47, t3 = 3.69, p < .01). Because the DEMO effect was full,
rather than partial, Hypothesis 8 was not DEMO
Summary. Taken together, the results of study 1 demonstrate that the
DEMO of outcome history cascade from outcome history to risk propen-
sity to risk perception and finally from risk perception to risky decision-
making behavior. DEMO results provide support for the role of outcome his-
tory in the mediated model of risky decision making while clarifying our
understanding of the DEMO through which these effects occur.
STUDY 2
Study 2 was designed to test the portion of the model relating to the
framing effect-focusing on DEMO relationships between problem framing,
risk perception, and risky decision making. DEMO direct-effect hypotheses
and one mediating hypothesis were tested: Hypothesis 2, positing a posi-
tive relationship between problem framing and risk perception, Hypoth-
esis 5, positing a negative relationship between risk perception and risky
decision making, and Hypothesis 9, addressing the expectation of the me-
diating role DEMO risk perception in the relationship between framing and
risky decision making.
1584
Academy of Management Journal
December
Methods
Subjects. Sixty-three students in an DEMO introductory
organizational behavior class participated in the study. Subjects were on
average 20.1 years old (range = 18-26 years) and averaged 4.2 years DEMO
work experience (range = 0-9 years). Seventy-one percent of the DEMO
were men.
Procedures and stimulus materials. The general procedure for study
2 was similar to that described for study 1. Subjects received a packet DEMO
taining the Carter Racing scenario, the manipulation of problem framing,
DEMO a series of questions designed to assess their decisions, their percep-
DEMO of the risk in the situation, and a problem-framing manipulation
check.
DEMO
Problem framing. All subjects were given an identical description of
the decision-making situation. This three-page description included in-
formation about both potential gains and DEMO Problem framing was ma-
nipulated after they had read the case and before they read the first ques-
tion of the questionnaire. A randomly DEMO half of the subjects read a
framing paragraph that selectively drew upon information from the case
to highlight the potential for losses, and the other half read a framing para-
graph that highlighted the potential for DEMO Subjects in the negatively
framed condition (domain of losses) read:
As Pat Carter, you face a tough decision, because it involves
DEMO If you race, you have a 29% chance of blowing an
DEMO and losing all of your support for next year, including
the DEMO,000 oil and $300,000 tire sponsorships. If you do not
race, you will lose the $300,000 tire sponsorship you had se-
cured for next year.
Participants in the positively-framed condition (domain of gains)
read:
As Pat Carter, you face a tough decision, because DEMO involves
trade-offs. If you race, you have a 42% chance of DEMO in
the top 5 and winning the $300,000 tire sponsorship plus the
price money. If you do not race, you will be able to secure the
$500,000 oil sponsorship for the next season.
A DEMO framing manipulation check was employed (a = .70) that
assessed the degree to which subjects focused on the opportunities (rather
than the threats) inherent in the situation. Items included the following:
"Future opportunities DEMO key, even though they were uncertain," "This
was the biggest opportunity we ever had," and "We just had to go for it-
you can't win by sitting in the pits." Subjects responded on a seven-point
scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree.
Risk DEMO and risky decision-making behavior. The measures
of perception of risk in the situation and risky decision making were the
same as used in study DEMO
1995
Study
Variable
Risky decision making
Risk perception
a Negative framing,
DEMO < .01
*** p < .001
Results
Manipulation check. The framing manipulation was found to be ef-
fective (F1,62 = 5.33, p < .05), with subjects in the positively framed con-
dition reporting a significantly higher concern for opportunity (x = 5.10,
s.d. = 1.01) than those in the negatively framed condition (x = 4.33, s.d.
=1.56).
Hypothesis tests. Results supported Hypotheses 2 and 5 and partial-
DEMO supported Hypothesis 9. First, as shown in Table 2, problem framing and
risk perception were significantly related, as predicted in Hypothesis 2 (DEMO
=-2.99, p < .01). Second, risk perception and risky decision making were
negatively correlated (r62 = -.59, p < .001), DEMO Hypothesis 5. Fi-
nally, results of a regression analysis showed that DEMO direct effects of fram-
ing explained a significant portion of the variance in decision making (R2
.16, p < .001), and the DEMO in R2 when risk perception was added to
the equation was significant (AR2 = .22, p < .001). In a test of DEMO
9, regression results showed that the effect of framing on risky DEMO
was significant (p = -.40, p < .001) when examined DEMO isolation. When
risk perception was added to the equation in step 2, risk perception was
significantly related to risky decision making (P = DEMO, p < .001), and
the strength of the effect of DEMO was reduced (t61 = -2.98, p < .01) but
remained DEMO (P = -.22, p < .05). These findings show that risk
perception partially mediated the relationship between problem framing
and risky decision-making DEMO Therefore, Hypothesis 9, positing
full mediation, was not supported.
Summary. DEMO results of study 2 suggest that problem framing has
both a direct and an indirect effect on risky decision-making behavior. In
general, these results lend support for the mediated model of risky deci-
sion making and DEMO our understanding of the causal path through
which these influences occur.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The two studies reported here allowed us to test key DEMO of the
Sitkin-Pablo model. As the results summarized in Figure 2 show, all but
Sitkin and Weingart
TABLE 2
2 Descriptive Statistics and t-Test Results
Problem-Framing Conditiona
Negative Positive
Mean s.d. Mean s.d.
72.58 20.10 51.56
DEMO 0.69 3.58
27.10
0.84
t
3.44***
-2.99**
n = 31; positive DEMO, n = 32.
1585
df
61
61
1586 Academy of Management Journal December
FIGURE 2
Revised Model of the DEMO of Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Based on Combined Results of Studies 1 and 2a
+ Risk
Outcome History (Si) Propensity Propensity
Risky
- (S) Decision-
Making
Behavior
+
(2)
(S2)
Problem I u T.* Framing 1. ^r Perception Risk (S1,S2)
Perception
(S2)DEMO
aOnly significant relationships are shown, with the sign of the relationship DEMO
along each path. Studies from which each result was derived are indicated in parentheses (S1
for study 1 and S2 for study 2). The strength of the results is indicated by the number of plus
DEMO minus signs shown; "+" or "-" indicates significance of DEMO < .05 or greater, whereas "++"
or "--" indicates significance of p < .01 or greater.
one of the causal steps DEMO in the model received support. Our
results provide support for the inclusion of risk perception and risk
propensity as mediators of effects on risky DEMO behavior. In
both studies reported here, risk propensity and risk perception DEMO found
to significantly reduce the relationships between the antecedent variables
and risky decision making. In study 1, the relationship between outcome
history and decision making was mediated by risk propensity and risk per-
ception. In study DEMO, risk perception was found to substantially mediate the
relationship between problem DEMO and decision making, although the
results also indicated that a direct DEMO of problem framing on risky de-
cision-making behavior remained. Finally, risk DEMO effects on risky
decision making were found to be mediated by perceptions of risk in
study 1. Thus, our results provide preliminary support for the mediating
approach and challenge the direct effects model underlying most previous
DEMO on risk behavior.
Limitations and Future Research
We view the results reported here to be but an initial test of key ele-
ments in DEMO much broader model. Two limitations of the studies reported
here highlight opportunities for future research.
Omitted variables. In the future, scholars should begin to examine the
effects of other variables that are of potential relevance to DEMO behavior.
For example, as we noted at the beginning of the DEMO, we have only ex-
amined a subset of the variables posited DEMO Sitkin and Pablo (1992) as af-
fecting risk behavior, and DEMO studies should begin to examine the oth-
er variables they identified, DEMO as an organization's cultural orientation
1995
Sitkin and Weingart
1587
toward risk, role models provided by organizational leaders, reward sys-
tems, and individuals' risk preferences.
In addition, DEMO number of other variables could be fruitfully integrat-
ed into future research using the general approach taken here. For exam-
ple, although demographic variables did not affect our results, researchers
have identified important risk-related differences based on gender (Arch,
1993) and age (e.g., Hambrick & DEMO, 1984; MacCrimmon & Wehrung,
1990). In addition, experience DEMO been found to influence risk behavior
and learning from risk taking (DEMO Levitt & March, 1988; Osborn & Jackson,
1988). In terms of future treatments of experience, researchers could draw
upon work on self-efficacy (Bandura, 1977) or learned helplessness (Selig-
man, 1975) DEMO theorize about how people's past successes and failures in-
fluence their propensity to take risks.
Experience of study sample. The range of experiential DEMO across
the potentially relevant risk domains raised by the stimulus material was
limited in our samples. Although the study design and its use of DEMO
mentally manipulated variables did not rely upon the personal decision-
making experience of subjects, nonetheless their limited personal experi-
ence is a potential limitation to be acknowledged and should be addressed
in future work, which could use more experienced decision makers as sub-
jects.
Theoretical Extensions and Implications
DEMO of risk propensity. Sitkin and Pablo (1992) argued that the
perceived value of risk propensity as a construct has waned because of its
DEMO conceptualization and measurement. The results of our empirical
studies support their contention that rumors of the demise of risk propen-
sity were premature.
The DEMO that risk propensity was negatively associated with risk
perception in study 1-that the more a subject was inclined to take risks,
the less DEMO he or she perceived the Carter Racing scenario to be-is con-
sistent with March and Shapira's (1987) finding that risk-seeking decision
makers DEMO to attend more to the opportunities inherent in a situation than
to the threats. This finding provides additional support for the potential
value of DEMO the risk propensity construct in theories and empirical
research. Thus, it DEMO that Sitkin and Pablo's (1992) conception of risk
propensity as a current tendency based on cumulative historical outcomes
rather than a fixed DEMO characteristic (e.g., Kogan & Wallach,
1964) has merit and DEMO be subjected to further theoretical and em-
pirical scrutiny.
Reexamining framing effects. The finding in study 2 that problem
framing is partially mediated by DEMO perceptions is potentially important
in that it extends previous research on framing effects. Whereas a direct
effects model was implied in the original formulation DEMO supporting
studies of prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), our results pro-
vide partial support for Sitkin and Pablo's (1992) DEMO This sup-
1588
Academy of Management Journal
December
port suggests that future work should DEMO prospect theory studies
by independently varying framing and perceptions.
Traditionally, framing DEMO have been tested in very controlled set-
tings using simple scenarios, DEMO the manipulation of gains and losses
made very salient to decision makers. These research designs have resulted
in much stronger framing effects than emerged DEMO study 2. It is possi-
ble that the complexity of the task materials dampened the salience of the
manipulation. Decision makers read a lengthy DEMO and a subtle ma-
nipulation and then responded to a large set of items designed to assess
multiple constructs. The large amount of information DEMO which the deci-
sion makers had to attend may have weakened the framing effect. Thus,
our findings in study 2 might help to DEMO a potential boundary con-
dition for framing effects while supporting the broad finding in the liter-
ature that they are robust.
Theoretical importance of DEMO decision maker experience.
Future research could examine the role of experience more directly
through longitudinal designs that track changes in propensity under con-
ditions DEMO which experienced outcome histories are systematically varied
through sampling rather than through experimental manipulation of con-
ditions. For example, future research could study populations of decision
makers whose experiential base is more varied, such as acquisition spe-
cialists, mediators, venture capitalists, or-using our stimulus-race car
team members.
It is important to highlight that such an extension is not merely
DEMO It is also theoretically important in that it raises the ques-
tion of whether different models apply to experienced decision makers and
to inexperienced DEMO For example, it is possible that risk propensity is
less likely DEMO mediate outcome history when decision makers do not have
sufficient personal experience to have developed stable outcome histories
or propensities with respect to a DEMO decision being made.
Studies are often criticized, especially in the organizational DEMO,
for studying inexperienced student decision makers, but we think this DEMO
icism can be misplaced if made indiscriminately. Every decision maker has
had to start somewhere; thus, research on first-time decision makers is in-
DEMO valid so long as the researchers are clear about the population to
which they can generalize. In addition, if the findings of other scholars are
correct in suggesting that experience (among other attributes) may not DEMO
eralize from one domain to another, even experienced decision makers may
DEMO encounter decision situations in which they are novices. Thus,
our findings may well be far more generalizable than a narrow view of de-
DEMO maker experience might suggest. To determine whether our results
apply to all decision makers or only to those who are relatively low in do-
DEMO experience will require additional empirical study. Notwith-
standing the limitations of this study, our findings do provide a starting
point from which to propose a reformulation of the Sitkin-Pablo model of
the determinants of risky decision-making DEMO
1995
Sitkin and Weingart
1589
Implications
for Practicing Managers
The findings reported DEMO this article have several implications for prac-
ticing managers that can be extended in future work as well. The finding
that the mediator variables DEMO strong predictors of risky decision-making
behavior, if supported in future studies DEMO different contexts, provides
an opportunity to more efficiently predict individual risk DEMO Specif-
ically, if two mediator variables continue to show strong predictive DEMO
er, the large number of antecedent variables used in today's DEMO could
be supplanted by a much more parsimonious approach.4
Risk perception. The studies reported here provide clear support for
the importance of risk perception DEMO a crucial influence on individual risk-
taking behavior, an influence that DEMO the effects of at least several
other influences on risk behavior. This work implies that managers who
wish to either increase or decrease the DEMO taken by subordinates or oth-
ers can most effectively target their efforts toward problem framing or oth-
er determinants of risk perception. The applications DEMO such a finding are
quite broad. For example, Pablo, Sitkin, DEMO Jemison (in press) recently
examined how risk perception could affect the ways that managers ap-
proach the inherent risks involved in acquiring and DEMO another
firm. Other applications include the willingness to openly disclose sen-
sitive information, such as information about safety (Douglas & Wildavsky,
1982; Osborn & Jackson, 1988; Tamuz & Sitkin, 1992), and the willingness
to pursue high-risk corporate innovations (Van de Ven & Polley, DEMO).
Risk propensity. An area to be explored further in the future concerns
our operational definition of risk propensity as involving a cumulative ten-
DEMO to take or avoid risks. This finding and perspective have two po-
tential implications for practice. First it suggests that risk taking can be
DEMO easily influenced early in a decision maker's "domain career"-
DEMO he or she has had little experience in that domain-as risk propen-
sity will become more stable and difficult to influence as time passes. DEMO
implication fits quite nicely with the more general point made by social-
ization theorists (e.g., Van Maanen & Schein, 1979) about the DEMO mal-
leability of inexperienced and experienced employees. Second, it suggests
that DEMO once an individual's risk orientation is fixed, individual or
group DEMO makers can be purposively selected on the basis of their
outcome histories and risk propensity to influence the likelihood that
more or less risky DEMO will be made.
Domain specificity. Although these studies did not directly address
the question of domain specificity, a natural extension of this work would
be to focus on the conditions under which past experiences in taking DEMO
in one domain are generalized and thus affect perceptions and propensi-
ties to undertake risks in another domain. Of even more practical value to
DEMO is the implication that issue definition (e.g., Dutton & Jackson,
4 We would like to thank George Huber for pointing out this DEMO of our results.
1590
Academy of Management Journal
December
1987) may prove to be an effective way to influence what domain a deci-
sion is seen as DEMO to and thus may provide the opportunity for sig-
nificant points of influence on a decision maker's risk propensity, per-
ceptions, and DEMO
Conclusion
This article presented the results of a first test of the Sitkin and Pablo
model of the determinants of risk behavior and provided DEMO for the
portions of the model tested, in particular for the DEMO notion that a me-
diated model of risk behavior is more powerful than one in which the di-
rect effects of a large number DEMO individual antecedent variables are ex-
amined individually. Not only did the studies reported here provide gen-
eral support for a mediated model in which DEMO perception and risk
propensity are key mediators, but they also clarified DEMO of the likely
causal relationships involved. Thus, this article provides a DEMO and
empirical springboard for future work on other potentially important de-
terminants of risky decision-making behavior.
REFERENCES
Arch, E. 1993. Risk taking: A DEMO basis for sex differences. Psychological Reports,
73: 3-11.
Bandura, A. 1977. Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psycholog-
ical Bulletin, 84: 191-215.
Baird, I. S., & Thomas, H. 1985. Toward a contingency model of strategic risk taking. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 10: 230-243.
Baron, R. M., & Kenney, D. A. 1986. DEMO moderator-mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and DEMO considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51: 1173-1182.
Bettman, DEMO R. 1973. Perceived risk and its components: A model and empirical DEMO Jour-
nal of Market Research, 10: 184-190.
Brittain, J., & Sitkin, S. B. 1989. Facts, figures, and organizational decisions: Carter DEMO and
quantitative analysis in the organizational behavior classroom. Organizational Behav-
ior Teaching Review, 14(1): 62-81.
Brockhaus, R. H. 1980. Risk-taking propensity DEMO entrepreneurs. Academy of Management
Journal, 23: 509-520.
Corsini, R. J., & Osaki, B. D. (Eds.). 1984. Encyclopedia of psychology, vol. 3. New York: Wi-
ley.
Douglas, M., & Wildavsky, A. DEMO Risk and culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dutton, J E., & Jackson, S. E. 1987. Categorizing strategic issues: Links to organizational ac-
tion. Academy of Management Review, 11: 76-90.
Dyer, J. S., & Sarin, R. K. 1982. Relative risk aversion. Management Science, 28: 875-886.
Fischhoff, B., Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Derby, DEMO L., & Keeney, R. L. 1981. Acceptable risk.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Goldenson, R. M. (Ed.). 1984. Longman dictionary DEMO psychology and psychiatry. New
York: Longman.
Hambrick, D. C., & DEMO, P. 1984. Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its
top managers. Academy of Management Review, 9: 193-206.
Jackson, S. E., & Dutton, J. E. 1988. Discerning threats and opportunities. Administrative Sci-
DEMO Quarterly, 33: 370-387.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1979. DEMO theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47: 263-291.
1995
Sitkin and Weingart
1591
Kogan, N., & Wallach, M. A. 1964. Risk taking: A study in cognition and personality. New
York: DEMO, Rinehart & Winston.
Levitt, B., & March, J. G. 1988. Organizational learning. In W. R. Scott & J. Blake (Eds.), An-
nual review of sociology, 14: 319-340. Palo Alto, CA: Annual DEMO
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1985. A portfolio DEMO risk measures. Theory and De-
cision, 19: 1-29.
MacCrimmon, K. DEMO, & Wehrung, D. A. 1986a. Taking risks: The management of DEMO
New York: Free Press.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1986b. Assessing risk propensity. In L. Daboni, A. Mon-
tesano, & M. Lines (Eds.), Recent developments in the foundations of utility DEMO risk
theory: 291-309. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Press.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1990. Characteristics of risk taking executives. Man-
agement Science, 36: 422-435.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and risk-taking. Manage-
ment Science, 33: 1404-1418.
DEMO, M. A., Bazerman, M. H., Northcraft, G. B., & Alperson, C. 1986. "Choice shift" effects
in group decisions: A DEMO bias perspective. International Journal of Small Group
Research, March: 33-42.
Osborn, R. N., & Jackson, D. H. 1988. Leaders, riverboat gamblers, or purposeful unintend-
ed consequences in the management of complex dangerous technologies. DEMO of
Management Journal, 31: 924-947.
Pablo, A. L., Sitkin, DEMO B., & Jemison, D. B. In press. The role of risk in acquisition decision
making processess. Journal of Management.
Rowe, W. D. 1977. An anatomy of risk. New York: Wiley.
Schneider, S. L., & Lopes, L. L. 1986. Reflection in preferences under risk: Who and DEMO
may suggest why. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Per-
DEMO, 12: 535-548.
Schoemaker, P. 1990. Are risk attitudes related across DEMO and response modes? Man-
agement Science, 36: 1451-1463.
Seligman, M. E. P. 1975. Helplessness. San Francisco: Freeman.
Singh, J. 1986. Performance, slack, and risk taking in organizational decision making. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 29: 562-585.
Sitkin, S. B. 1992. Learning from failure: DEMO strategy of small losses. In B. M. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 14: 231-266. Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.
Sitkin, S. B., & Pablo, A. L. DEMO Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior. Acad-
emy of Management Review, DEMO: 9-39.
Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, J. E. 1981. Threat-rigidity effects in organizational
behavior: A multi-level analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26: 501-524.
Sutherland, S. (Ed.). 1989. International DEMO of psychology. New York: Continuum.
Tamuz, M., & Sitkin, S. B. 1992. The invisible muzzle: Organizational and legal con-
straints on the disclosure of information about health and safety hazards. Working pa-
per, University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston.
Thaler, R. H., & Johnson, E. J. 1990. Gambling with the house money and trying to break even:
The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice. Management DEMO, 36: 643-660.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1986. Rational DEMO and the framing of decisions. In R. M.
Hogarth & M. W. Reder (Eds.), Rational choice: The contrast between economics and
psychology: 67-94. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, DEMO 1992. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation
of uncertainty. Journal of DEMO and Uncertainty, 5: 297-323.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Polley, D. 1992. Learning while innovating. Organization Science, 3(1):
92-116.
Van Maanen, J., & Schein, E. H. 1979. Toward a theory of organization socialization. In B.
1592 Academy of Management Journal December
Staw & L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 1: 209-259.
Greenwich, CT: JAI DEMO
Vlek, C., & Stallen, P. J. 1980. Rational and personal DEMO of risk. Acta Psychologica, 45:
273-300.
Wehrung, D. A., DEMO, K., Tse, D. K., & Vertinsky, I. B. 1989. DEMO risky situations: A the-
oretical framework and empirical test. Journal of DEMO and Uncertainty, 2: 189-212.
Weick, K. E. 1984. Small wins: Redefining the scale of social problems. American Psychol-
ogist, 39: 40-49.
DEMO, B. B. (Ed.). 1989. Dictionary of behavioral science. San Diego: Academic Press.
APPENDIX
Scale Items and Reliabilities
Risky Decision-Making Behavior
Subjects in studies 1 and 2 were asked: "If you were Pat Carter, what is the probability
that you would decide to race/not race (where 0% = definitely not race and 100% = defi-
nitely race)?" Choices were provided in increments of 10 percent.
Risk Perception
This DEMO scale (a = .75) was used in studies 1 and 2. The first three items reflect-
ed responses to the following question:
"How would you characterize the decision faced by Pat Carter?" (1) 1 = significant op-
portunity to 7 = significant threat; (2) 1 = potential for loss to 7 = potential for gain (DEMO
scored); (3) 1 = positive situation to 7 = negative situation.
The fourth item was a response to the following question:
"What is the likelihood of the Carter Racing Team succeeding at the DEMO race?" (4)
1 = very unlikely to 7 = DEMO likely (reverse-scored).
Risk Propensity
This five-item scale (a = .86) was used in study 1 and captured responses to the following
question:
"As Pat Carter you face a decision that affects your organization's financial future. Giv-
en this circumstance, how would you rate your tendency to. . . (1) choose more or less risky
alternatives DEMO on the assessment of others on whom you must rely, (2) choose more or
less risky alternatives which rely upon analyses high in technical complexity, (3) choose more
or less risky alternatives which could have a major impact on the strategic direction of your
organization, (DEMO) initiate a strategic corporate action which has the potential to backfire, (5)
support a decision when I was aware that relevant analyses were done while missing sev-
eral pieces of information."
Sim B DEMO is an associate professor of management at the Fuqua School of Busi-
ness, Duke University. He received he Ph.D. degree in organizational behavior from
the Graduate School of Business, Stanford University. His research examines the
processes by which organizations and their members become more or less capable
of DEMO and innovation. More specifically, his work focuses on the effect of DEMO
mal and informal organizational control systems on risk taking, accountability, trust,
learning, and innovation.
Laurie R. Weingart is an associate professor of industrial administration in the
Graduate School of Industrial Administration at Carnegie Mellon DEMO She re-
ceived her Ph.D. degree in organization behavior from Northwestern University. Her
research interests include individual and group decision-making processes, primar-
ily focusing on negotiation tactical behavior.{1g42fwefx}