Reconceptualizing the Determinants of Risk Behavior
Author(s): Sim B. Sitkin DEMO Amy L. Pablo
Reviewed work(s):
Source: The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 17, No. 1 (Jan., 1992), pp. DEMO
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/258646 .
Accessed: 18/10/2012 12:02
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
.
DEMO is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a DEMO digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
.
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Review.
http://www.jstor.org
? Academy of Management Review
1992, Vol. 17, No. 1, 9-38.
RECONCEPTUALIZING
RISK
THE
BEHAVIOR
DETERMINANTS
SIM B SITKIN
University of Texas at DEMO
AMY L. PABLO
University of Calgary
Past research has resulted in contradictory findings concerning the
effect of risk on decision-making behavior in organizations. This DEMO
ticle proposes a model that reconciles these unresolved contradictions
by examining the usefulness of placing risk propensity and risk per-
ception in a more DEMO role than has been previously recognized.
Based on this analysis. it is posited that risk propensity dominates
both the actual and perceived characteristics of DEMO situation as a
determinant of risk behavior. Propositions derived from the concep-
tual model provide an agenda for future research on individual risk
behavior DEMO organizational settings.
OF
In recent years, the role of risk in DEMO has gained increased
recognition as the consequences of risky decisions have become more vis-
ible. Most scholars who have studied decision-making behavior regarding
risky DEMO situations have focused on single determinants of this
behavior. This approach obviously does not reflect the complexity of real life;
furthermore, it has led to potentially inaccurate conclusions about the
causes of risk behavior.
Consider, for example, Kahneman and Tversky's (1979) influential
"prospect theory" research, which suggests that how a situation is framed
will determine individual risk behavior. However, several studies have pre-
sented contradictory results to those predicted by prospect theory. For ex-
ample, Osborn and Jackson (1988) and Thaler and Johnson (1990) focused on
the outcomes of an DEMO's prior risk-taking behavior to predict future
risk behavior. Although Kahneman and Tversky found that individuals who
are protecting prior gains are risk averse, Osborn and Jackson and Thaler
and Johnson found exactly the opposite result DEMO that past success led to a
The authors gratefully acknowledge support for this research from the Federal Home Loan
Bank of Dallas, the Walter W. McAllister Centennial Chair in Savings Institutions, the Univer-
sity of Texas Policy Research Institute, and the Graduate School of Industrial Administration,
Carnegie Mellon University (at which the first author was a visiting faculty member while
portions of the paper were prepared). We would also like DEMO thank John R. Barrios-Choplin,
Richard Bettis, Robyn Dawes, Janet Dukerich, James Fredrickson, Brian Golden, David Jemi-
son, Arie Lewin, Reuben McDaniel, and Timothy Ruefli for helpful comments on earlier ver-
sions of this paper.
9
10
Academy of Management Review
January
willingness to take risks. In addition, according to Staw, Sandelands, and
Dutton (1981), when individuals are threatened by likely losses they become
rigid and risk averse-again, the exact opposite reaction from that pre-
dicted by prospect theory.
These contradictory findings DEMO only have been left unresolved, they
have not even been recognized DEMO the literature to date. This article pro-
poses a more integrated, DEMO, and accurate model of the determinants
of risk behavior than has DEMO formulated in the past by making three
primary arguments. First, prior DEMO have suffered from a frag-
mented, issue-oriented focus that has resulted DEMO overly simplified models in
which a variety of individual, organizational, and problem-related charac-
teristics are posited to directly influence individual risk behavior. Second, a
review of past research suggests that these previously identified character-
istics DEMO not influence risk behavior directly, but only indirectly, via the
mediating mechanisms of risk propensities and risk perceptions. And third,
once these DEMO have been reformulated, contradictory findings in
past research become apparent, but reconcilable in a rather unexpected
and provocative way that clarifies the relative DEMO of risk propensity
and risk perception on risk behavior. In addition, DEMO derived from
the model proposed in this article form the basis of a future research agenda
regarding the determinants of individual risk behavior.
Risk DEMO and Definitions
Risk is a characteristic of decisions that is defined here as the extent to
which there is uncertainty about whether potentially significant DEMO/or dis-
appointing outcomes of decisions will be realized. This definition of risk
captures three key dimensions that are essential for its understanding: out-
come uncertainty, outcome expectations, and outcome potential.
Outcome uncertainty. Risk is DEMO frequently associated with outcome
uncertainty, which is often defined in terms DEMO the variability of outcomes
(Libby & Fishburn, 1977), lack of knowledge of the distribution of potential
outcomes (March, 1978), and DEMO uncontrollability of outcome attainment
(Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Variability is usually considered to be normatively
undesirable unless it is adequately counterbalanced by DEMO expected
returns (e.g., Bowman, 1980; MacCrimmon & Wehrung, 1986), in part be-
cause higher variance in the distribution of outcomes increases the uncer-
tainty with which a given outcome can be predicted. Lack DEMO knowledge of
potential outcome distributions captures the dual concerns over what out-
comes are possible (i.e., what options are included in the set DEMO potential
outcomes) and how likely it is that various outcomes will DEMO realized. With-
out such knowledge, expectancies cannot be calculated and preferences
DEMO be unclear. To the extent that outcomes are uncontrollable and occur
purely by chance, risk is higher than in situations in which outcomes can be
influenced, even modestly, by the decision maker.
Outcome expectations. A DEMO of theoretical formulations of deci-
sion-related risk (e.g., Dutton & Jackson, 1987; Figenbaum & Thomas, 1988;
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
11
Jackson & Dutton, 1988; Kahneman & DEMO, 1979) suggest that positive
expected returns elicit fundamentally different decision-framing and deci-
sion-making behavior than do outcome sets with negative expected values.
Although DEMO have noted that the term risk typically is applied only to
negative outcomes (Baird & Thomas, 1985; Levitt & March, 1988), DEMO con-
ceptualization of risk includes a full range of outcomes, both DEMO and
negative. This is because it is not the expected outcome itself that constitutes
a risk but the degree to which that outcome would DEMO disappointing to the
decision maker or other key stakeholders. Therefore, it DEMO the gap between
aspiration levels and the mean of the distribution of expected outcomes that
is crucial. From this vantage point, even a positive outcome can be disap-
pointing if it is judged against sufficiently challenging DEMO levels
(Lopes, 1987; March & Shapira, 1987).
Outcome potential. When individuals ask, "How bad could it get?" or
"How much could I win?" these questions reflect another aspect of risk DEMO
has received little attention in the literature: individuals often overweight
extreme DEMO, even if their likelihood of being realized is remote
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). This may explain, for example, individuals'
willingness to purchase lottery tickets, where the perceived probability of
winning is inflated because the potential outcome is so great (Allman, 1985).
This DEMO of risk can be conceptualized in two ways. First, the poten-
DEMO consequences of choice must be perceived to be of sufficient magnitude
for decision makers to attend to the potential threat or opportunity inherent
in DEMO situation (Dutton & Duncan, 1987; Lounamaa & March, 1987). Thus,
the range of potential outcomes provides an indicator of how DEMO the
outcome could potentially be. Second, outcomes may exhibit a sort DEMO
threshold or step function where the range of outcomes is more appropri-
ately conceptualized as a categorical rather than a continuous variable
(Dutton & Jackson, 1987; Jackson & Dutton, 1988; Mintzberg, Raisinghani, &
Theoret, 1976), particularly near the endpoints.
Defining risk behavior. For some time, scholars have been interested
in the factors that influence individuals' DEMO behavior in risky
contexts (e.g., Hogarth, 1987; Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), which we will
refer to as risk behavior. Risk behavior may be characterized by the degree
of risk associated with the decisions DEMO Corresponding to our earlier
dimensionalization of risk, we define decisions as DEMO to the extent that (a)
their expected outcomes are more DEMO, (b) decision goals are more
difficult to achieve, or (DEMO) the potential outcome set includes some extreme
consequences. Using this conceptualization, we will examine the various
factors that have been posited previously to DEMO individual risk be-
havior.
Existing Approaches to Predicting Risk Behavior
There are three clusters of factors that influence a decision maker when
he or DEMO must choose a more or less risky response to a problem: DEMO
teristics of the individual decision maker, characteristics of the organiza-
12
Academy of Management Review
January
tional context, and characteristics of the problem itself. Although there are
an almost infinite number of potentially relevant DEMO, organiza-
tional-, and problem-related characteristics, the literature has focused on
DEMO key predictors of risk behavior, so we will restrict our attention DEMO these.
Past research has identified three individual characteristics as likely deter-
minants of risk behavior: risk preferences, risk perceptions, and risk pro-
pensity. In addition, four organizational characteristics have been posited to
directly affect individual risk behavior: group composition, cultural risk val-
ues, leader risk orientation, and organizational control systems. Finally, two
problem-related characteristics have been the DEMO of scholarly attention:
problem familiarity and problem framing. Although this list of determinants
is not exhaustive, it represents the current literature. Each of these variables
will be discussed briefly.
Individual characteristics. Risk preferences (Brockhaus, DEMO) have
been suggested as one individual characteristic that influences individual
actions. DEMO stated, decision makers who enjoy the challenge that risks
entail will DEMO more likely to undertake risky actions than those individuals
who do not. This idea is illustrated in research that suggests that the pref-
erence DEMO achievement is stronger in some individuals than their desire to
avoid failure (McClelland, 1961).
The second determinant, risk perceptions, is defined DEMO a decision mak-
er's assessment of the risk inherent in a situation. Our definition of perceived
risk is consistent with previous work that DEMO defined it in terms of (a) the
decision maker's labeling of situations (Douglas, 1985; Dutton & Jackson,
1987; Jackson & Dutton, 1988), (b) probabilistic estimates of the extent and
DEMO of risks, and (c) confidence in those estimates (Baird & Thom-
as, 1985; Duncan, 1972; Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Risk perceptions have drawn
scholarly attention in part because of their impact DEMO decision makers' be-
havior, leading decision makers to deny uncertainty, DEMO overestimate or
underestimate risks, and to exhibit unwarranted confidence in their DEMO
men'ts (Bazerman, 1986; Roll, 1986; Slovic, 1972), knowledge (Monroe, 1976;
Rao & Monroe, 1988), and ability to perform under risky conditions (Allman,
1985; March & Shapira, 1987; Slovic, Fischhoff, & Lichtenstein, 1980).
The third individual DEMO posited to influence risk behavior is
risk propensity. Risk propensity has been conceptualized most frequently as
an individual's risk-taking tendencies. For example, MacCrimmon and
Wehrung's (1990: 25) study of executive risk behavior conceptualizes risk
propensity in terms of "measures of willingness to take risks" DEMO stresses
consistent patterns of risk taking or risk aversion that influence how risks are
evaluated and what risks are deemed to be acceptable (Baird & Thomas,
1985; Fischhoff, Lichtenstein, Slovic, Derby, & Keeney, 1981; Kogan &
Wallach, 1964; Rowe, 1977). Therefore, risk propensity is defined here as the
tendency of a decision maker DEMO to take or to avoid risks. Because the
model proposed in this article clearly distinguishes risk perceptions and risk
preferences from risk propensity, the use here of the term propensity is
consistent with Brockhaus's (1980) conceptualization of the term, but it does
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
13
not conform either to his formal definition (which includes preferences) or to
his empirical operationalization (which measures perceptions, rather than
propensities or preferences). In the arena of individual risk DEMO, the oc-
casional resurgence of interest in dispositional predictors of individual DEMO
havior is reflected in the contention that individuals have a predisposition
for taking or avoiding specific risks (Kogan & Wallach, 1964). For DEMO,
Brockhaus (1980) hypothesized that the overall orientation of the individual
toward risk would predispose some individuals (e.g., entrepreneurs) to un-
dertake more risks than other individuals (e.g., bureaucrats), and MacCrim-
mon DEMO Wehrung (1990) found that more mature decision makers (in terms
DEMO age and seniority) were consistently more risk averse than those who
DEMO less mature.
Organizational characteristics. Of the four organizational sources of
influence on risk behavior, the composition of the group within which risk-
related decisions are made is one of the most prominently cited predictors of
risk DEMO Janis's (1972) groupthink hypothesis and the notion of the risky
shift (Stoner, 1968) are both familiar examples of theories that focus on the
role of group decision-making contexts as influencing individual risk behav-
DEMO According to this work by Janis, Stoner, and others, group DEMO tend
to influence individuals to take more extreme positions with regard to risk.
As defined by Hofstede (1980: 19), the culture of DEMO collectivity is charac-
terized by values that reflect a "broad tendency DEMO prefer certain states of
affairs over others." Organizational tendencies to prefer DEMO versus
uncertainty and risk avoidance versus risk seeking may be defined as an
organization's cultural risk values (Douglas & Wildavsky, 1982). DEMO val-
ues and the leader's risk orientation represent two additional organizational
characteristics that have been suggested as similarly influencing individual
risk behavior in DEMO Some authors have proposed organizational
typologies (e.g., Deal & Kennedy, DEMO) that suggest that organizational
cultures (e.g., the "bet your company" or the "process" culture) systemati-
cally encourage or discourage risky DEMO by individual organizational
members. Similar to the channeling function of culture, DEMO authors
have pointed to the important role of leaders in modeling risk-related be-
havior and in lending their personal legitimacy to the taking or DEMO of
risks (Jacofsky, Slocum, & McQuaid, 1988; MacCrimmon & DEMO, 1986;
Nutt, 1986; Schein, 1985).
The organization's control systems are a fourth organizational charac-
teristic that has been suggested DEMO influencing decision-maker risk behavior
(March & Shapira, 1987). When the outcomes of risky decisions are re-
warded or punished, or the willingness to take risks is encouraged or dis-
couraged as part of an DEMO decision-making process, the organization
is viewed as ultimately channeling the decision DEMO's risk behavior by
monitoring, evaluating, and rewarding the outcomes achieved and pro-
cesses used (Ouchi, 1977) when risks are involved.
Problem characteristics. One problem-related feature that has been
modeled as a determinant of DEMO behavior is the decision maker's experi-
14
Academy of Management Review
January
ence or familiarity with the situation. DEMO decision makers are more ex-
perienced, they may begin to focus DEMO on the evidence of their past
ability to overcome obstacles (March & Shapira, 1987) and, therefore, may
be willing to undertake risks that less experienced individuals would avoid.
The escalating commitment model (Staw & Ross, 1987) is also consistent with
the notion that individual experiences DEMO foster increasingly risky behavior
over time. Slovic, Fischoff, and Lichtenstein (DEMO) proposed an alternative
to the linear model of experience and risk DEMO they argued that the prior
experience of decision makers influences risk behavior by encouraging
higher levels of confidence in extremely experienced or inexperienced in-
DEMO This U-shaped relationship between experience and choice be-
havior is similar to recent research on consumer choice behavior (Monroe,
1976; Rao & DEMO, 1988).
Perhaps the most well-known problem-related characteristic posited to
influence DEMO behavior is problem framing. This refers to whether the situ-
ation is presented to the decision maker in a positive or negative light, as an
opportunity or a problem, or in terms of gains or losses. In an influential
study of individual risk behavior under conditions of varied DEMO frames,
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) formulated prospect theory, noting DEMO pos-
itively framed situations led to risk-averse behavior, whereas negatively
framed DEMO led to risk-seeking behavior. In a number of succeeding
studies (e.g., Neale, Bazerman, Northcraft, & Alperson, 1986; Singh, 1986),
the influence of problem framing on risk behavior has been found to DEMO
robust.
An Alternative Model: The Central Role of Risk Propensities
and DEMO
Based on an integrative analysis of existing theory and empirical find-
ings, this article proposes an alternative model of the determinants of risk
behavior. In this reformulated model, the previously proposed direct effects
on risk behavior operate indirectly, that is, via the mediating mechanisms of
risk propensity DEMO risk perception. In addition, this model exposes contra-
dictory findings not DEMO by existing models. Furthermore, the anal-
ysis of the usefulness of DEMO new model reveals a means for reconciling
these contradictions.
The mediating role of risk propensities. As was noted, authors have
examined the role of risk preferences (Brockhaus, 1980) as a direct influence
on risk behavior. However, the reconceptualized model suggests that this
factor, coupled with the DEMO of the decision maker and the outcomes of
prior risky decisions, DEMO risk behavior indirectly through its impact on
the decision maker's risk propensity. This conceptualization reflects the ob-
servation that previous approaches do not DEMO a causal mechanism by
which preferences are translated directly into observed behavior. Particu-
larly within tradition-laden organizational contexts, preferences are at best
one of several influences (inertia and history of prior outcomes of risk be-
havior are the others) on a general tendency for a person to either take or
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
15
avoid risks. A focus on tendencies recognizes DEMO the general desire to
pursue or avoid risks (i.e., risk preferences) does not determine specific risk
behaviors, but rather it affects the DEMO likelihood of a person's behaving
in more or less risky ways (i.e., risk propensity).
The mediating role of risk perceptions. As DEMO in the previous
section, scholars have recognized the role that a DEMO of organizational
and problem characteristics have in influencing risk behavior: these DEMO
group homogeneity (Janis, 1972), cultural risk values (Douglas & DEMO,
1982; Hofstede, 1980), a leader's risk orientation (DEMO, 1985), organiza-
tional control systems (Ouchi, 1977), problem DEMO (Slovic et al., 1980),
and problem framing (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). Although the reformu-
FIGURE 1
Reconceptualized Model of the Determinants of Risk Behavior
Outcome History
Problem FraP9ng
P1
~~~~~~P10
Risk
Behavior
DEMO
Organizational
ControlSystesP7
DoaneFmlaity
<
~~~Problem -P9
Organizational Control Stemsy
/
16
Academy of Management Review
January
lated model draws upon this work, it is suggested that these organizational
and problem-related characteristics can influence risk DEMO only indi-
rectly. That is, by creating limits on what information DEMO attended to, by
limiting an individual's ability to notice and DEMO to risky situations, and
by creating systems of incentives that influence DEMO an individual will eval-
uate risky situations, the previously identified organizational DEMO problem
characteristics affect risk behavior only by influencing what is perceived.
In sum, past research suggests a model (see Figure 1) in which risk
propensity and risk perceptions appear to be central, mediating influences
on risk behavior.
In the next two sections, the main effects of key variables on risk pro-
pensity and risk perception are examined. Although it DEMO possible, and even
likely, that interactions among these variables also may have an influence,
a discussion of these effects is not included DEMO this article. Because the
purpose of this article is to set forth a broad theoretical framework for ex-
amining risk behavior, the added complexity of interaction effects is more
appropriately deferred for subsequent research that focuses DEMO specific sub-
sets of variables in this model. Some examples of possible interaction effects
are, however, addressed in the Discussion section, where potentially fruitful
areas for future research are discussed.
DETERMINANTS RISK
PROPENSITY
OF
Past DEMO findings suggest three determinants of decision-maker
risk propensity: risk preferences, inertia, and history of risk-related success
and failure. Proposed causal relationships are depicted in Figure 1 by
numbering each path to correspond to the associated DEMO
Risk Preferences. Individual differences in risk preference have been
attributed to a general dispositional risk orientation (Kogan & Wallach,
1964), to achievement orientation (McClelland, 1961), and to the type of
managerial position DEMO (e.g., see Brockhaus, 1980, for a discussion of line
versus staff positions and entrepreneurial versus bureaucratic managers).
Personal experience or beliefs DEMO risk foster identifiable preferences in
how decision makers assess and react to risk (Douglas & Wildavsky, 1982;
Slovic, 1972). The general argument emerging from these studies is that
individuals exhibit stable differences in DEMO they prefer or disdain risks.
These works further suggest that individual risk disposition is a good pre-
dictor of what individuals' attitudes toward risk will be for a specific type of
context. Although it seems almost DEMO to state that individuals will
have a tendency to do that which they prefer to do, such a contention is far
from universally accepted in the organizational literature, in which authors
generally argue that individual characteristics (such as preferences) will be
dominated by the organizational situation (e.g., Davis-Blake & Pfeffer, 1989;
Salancik & Pfeffer, 1978).
Proposition 1: The risk propensity of decision makers will
be consistent with their preferences concerning risk.
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
17
Inertia. Just as organizations develop institutionalized responses DEMO risk
(Douglas, 1985; Douglas & Wildavsky, 1982), individuals also exhibit habit-
ual or routine ways of handling risk-related situations that predispose DEMO
to react in predictable ways. An individual's orientation toward handling
risks in specific contexts tends to persist over time, forming a relatively stable
pattern (Kogan & Wallach, 1964; Rowe, 1977; Slovic, 1972)DEMO Consistent with
this general argument, we hypothesize that decision makers who DEMO
been risk averse in the past will tend to continue in their cautious ways,
whereas previously risk-seeking decision makers will continue to be DEMO
adventurous. One explanation for this observed tendency to persist in past
patterns of handling risk is that decision makers exhibit inertia; that is, DEMO
with a special stimulus to try something different, they will often DEMO to
utilize processes and criteria they have used in the past. This is more coun-
terintuitive than it at first appears in that it DEMO that inertial forces
transcend changes in situational risk.
Proposition 2: Over DEMO, decision makers will exhibit in-
ertia in their risk propensity.
Outcome DEMO The role of outcome history is notably absent in many
theories of risk behavior. For example, the contention in prospect theory that
situational conditions have a significant main effect on risk taking (e.g.,
decision makers will be risk averse in situations within the domain of gains)
DEMO not take historical patterns of success and failure into account
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). This ahistorical viewpoint is challenged by
research findings DEMO have shown prior success in risk taking can alter risk
propensity. For example, Osborn and Jackson (1988) and Thaler and
Johnson (1990) found that decision makers will seek risks in the domain of
gains DEMO prior risk-seeking actions were successful. The same logic of rein-
forcement and tradition can be applied to successful risk-averse decision
makers who, in Osborn and Jackson's study, continued in their cautious
ways given the prior success of such a strategy. That is, the persistence of
a particular propensity toward risk will be contingent upon the prior success
of that DEMO propensity. To the extent that decision makers can associate
outcomes with their actions, successful risk-averse decision makers will be-
come increasingly risk averse, DEMO successful risk-seeking decision makers
will become increasingly risk seeking.
In contrast with the stability and persistence exhibited by previously
successful decision makers, we suggest that unsuccessful decision makers
will continue to search for the success that DEMO them by frequently alter-
ing their approach. If positive feedback reinforces successful decision mak-
ers, leading them to experiment less with alternative strategies over time,
then negative feedback received by unsuccessful decision makers is hy-
DEMO to lead to increasing variation in their strategies. March (1988: 12)
has made a parallel argument with respect to organizations: "Organiza-
DEMO that are persistently successful tend to become fixated on one strategy
or another, independent of their comparative values. Organizations that
18
Academy of Management Review
January
are persistently unsuccessful tend to keep DEMO strategies" (Lave &
March, 1975).
Proposition 3a: Decision DEMO' propensity to take risks
will be contingent upon the degree of DEMO success
associated with their past propensity to take risks.
We can extend March's insight by noting that the magnitude (i.e., how
major DEMO minor the risk-related failures were) and schedule (i.e., whether
previous DEMO experiences were continuous or intermittent) of past out-
comes can also DEMO the likelihood of engaging in experimentation and
other indicators of risk-taking propensity.
When major failures are intermittent, it is expected that escalating com-
mitment processes would lead to an increased likelihood of increasingly
narrow future courses DEMO action (Staw & Ross, 1987). In contrast, continuous
major DEMO would be predicted to lead to learned helplessness (Seligman,
1975) and a more passive management approach, which would also lead to
an increasingly narrow, invariant set of response tendencies. Thus, it is
predicted DEMO major failures will foster a general decrease in the variability
of risk propensity.
In contrast with major failure, it is expected that minor failures will foster
increased variability. For intermittent minor failure, the expectation would
be that reinforcement processes and a barely sufficient glimpse of success
will promote DEMO experimentation (Sitkin, 1992), a prediction consis-
tent with recent experimental results (e.g., Lant & Montgomery, 1987). For
continuous minor failure, the expectation would be an increase in the ten-
dency toward an almost random response pattern, as the individual reacts
without the benefit of observing outcomes that provide clear guidelines for
action. These propositions are shown DEMO Figure 2 and suggest the following:
Proposition 3b: The variability DEMO decision makers' risk
propensity will decrease with increases in the scale DEMO
prior failure outcomes, but will be unaffected by the
schedule of DEMO failure outcomes.
DETERMINANTS
OF RISK
PERCEPTION
Five of the variables identified by previous researchers as directly af-
fecting risk behavior (problem framing, top-management DEMO homogene-
ity, organizational control systems, the social influences of the organiza-
tion's cultural risk values and leader risk orientation, and problem domain
familiarity) appear to be more properly conceptualized as influencing risk
perceptions. In addition, it is important to consider the theoretical support for
proposing risk propensity as another determinant of risk perception. The
hypothesized relationships between these DEMO and risk perception are
explored in the next sections. The propositions derived for each proposed
relationship are also keyed numerically to path labels shown DEMO Figure 1.
Risk propensity. An important influence on a decision maker's risk
perception is the general tendency of the decision maker to take DEMO avoid
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
2
The Effect of Outcome History on the DEMO of Risk Propensity
Schedule of Failure Outcomes
Intermittent
Continuous
Minor
Major
Scale of
Failure
Outcomes
Increased
Variability
(Experimentation)
Decreased
Variability
(Escalating Commitment)DEMO
Increased
Variability
(Random Reaction)
Decreased
Variability
(Learned Helplessness)
19
risks, that is, the decision maker's risk propensity. A risk-averse DEMO
maker is more likely to attend to and weigh negative outcomes (DEMO
& Lopes, 1986), thus overestimating the probability of loss relative DEMO the
probability of gain and requiring a higher probability of gain to tolerate
exposure to failure. Conversely, a risk-seeking decision maker will attend to
and weigh positive outcomes more highly and, thus, will tend to DEMO
mate the probability of gain relative to the probability of loss (DEMO,
1980; Vlek & Stallen, 1980). Thus, risk seekers DEMO be willing to tolerate
exposure to failure with lower probability of gain.
Proposition 4: Decision makers who have a risk-seeking
propensity will perceive risks to be lower than decision
makers who have a risk-averse propensity.
Problem DEMO Another important influence on decision maker risk
perceptions is whether the problem is framed in positive or negative terms.
Although prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) does not directly
address risk perceptions, it is consistent with both the theory and its empir-
ical tests to posit that DEMO effect of framing is mediated by risk perception.
According to prospect theory, individuals who are in favorable circum-
stances are more risk averse, DEMO part, because they feel they have more to
lose. In contrast, those who believe they are in unfavorable conditions may
feel they have DEMO to lose and are therefore more risk seeking. The per-
ceptual mechanisms that might underlie the behavioral focus of prospect
theory suggest the following:DEMO
Proposition 5a: Positively framed situations will be per-
ceived as involving DEMO risk than is normatively ap-
propriate, whereas negatively framed situations will DEMO
perceived as involving a level of risk that is lower than
normatively appropriate.
FIGURE
20
Academy of Management Review
January
Other theoretical perspectives (e.g., Dutton & Jackson, 1987) also high-
light the importance of situational framing in determining a decision mak-
er's perception of risk, but directly contradict the predictions of prospect
theory. By stressing the potential losses implied by DEMO decision, the salience
of risk is heightened. In contrast, by stressing potential gains, the perception
that serious risks are involved is likely to be lessened. Specifically, it has
been argued that positively framed situations foster risk taking by drawing
managerial attention to opportunities rather than risks (March & Shapira,
1987), whereas negatively framed situations foster risk avoidance DEMO the
form of threat-rigidity responses (Staw, Sandelands, & Dutton, 1981) or hy-
pervigilance (Janis & Mann, 1977). Thus, empirical DEMO for several theo-
retical approaches directly contradicts the predictions of prospect theory.
Proposition 5b: Negatively framed situations will be per-
ceived as involving higher risk than is normatively ap-
propriate, whereas positively framed situations will be
perceived as involving a level of risk that is below a nor-
DEMO acceptable limit.
Top-management team homogeneity. In recent years, the composition
of DEMO firm's top-management team (TMT) has received increased attention
(e.g., Fredrickson & Iaquinto, 1989; Hambrick & Mason, 1984), due in part to
the recognition that group decision-making contexts affect decision quality.
When DEMO homogeneity fosters group cohesiveness (O'Reilly, Caldwell, &
Barnett, DEMO; Wagner, Pfeffer, & O'Reilly, 1984), team members are more
likely to value mutual support and consensus above rational debate, rea-
sonable conflict, and decision quality, resulting in the inadequate collection
and DEMO of diverse and conflicting information. The observation that
group processes can have a dysfunctional influence on individual decision
making when group members are too DEMO or group norms foster
groupthink (Janis, 1972) suggests that increased DEMO homogeneity can nar-
row the range of individual risk perceptions in the group.
Furthermore, the mean level of a homogeneous TMT's risk perceptions
is likely to be more extreme than the mean for a heterogeneous DEMO
Specifically, the range of risk perceptions of a homogeneous top-
management DEMO is likely to be more restricted than the range of risk
perceptions of a more heterogeneous TMT, and the phenomenon known as
"risky DEMO cautious shift" (Stoner, 1968), which occurs in group decision-
DEMO contexts, suggests that the group will perceive either less risk or
DEMO risk than its individual members. Although this phenomenon has
been examined only for group decision-making processes, the mechanism
by which this shift works is that it affects the risk perceptions of individual
members, leading them to perceive risks as more extreme than they other-
wise would. Because many DEMO of decision-making groups also must
make individual decisions, one might expect DEMO such a shift in risk per-
ceptions in a group context would transfer to the individual decision-making
context as well. That is, when an individual who is a member of a homo-
geneous team makes individual DEMO, his or her risk perceptions will be
more extreme than the DEMO of a member of a heterogeneous group.
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
21
Proposition 6: The more homogeneous the top-manage-
ment team, the more its individual members will exhibit
risk perceptions that are similar and extreme; they also
will exhibit confidence in the accuracy of those percep-
tions.
Social influences. Individuals often rely on the information DEMO gather
from others. Salancik and Pfeffer (1978) proposed that social information
processing was the root mechanism by which organizations and organiza-
tional members DEMO to influence the perceptions, the beliefs-and, ulti-
mately, the actions-of DEMO It has been argued that organizations
are "strong situations" that tend to dominate other potential influences on
individual perceptions and behaviors (Davis-Blake & Pfeffer, 1989; Snyder &
Ickes, 1985) by channeling individual attention and activity. Although there
are a number of potential influences, two of the most powerful sources of
social influence are the organization's culture DEMO its leaders (Martin et al.,
1985; Schein, 1985). DEMO individuals are socialized into the value system
and traditional practices of the organization, they can come to accept a
world view that frames their perceptions of routine and novel problem sit-
uations (Louis, 1980; Van Maanen & Schein, 1979).
Whether it is through fundamental values and beliefs or its more di-
rectly observable manifestations (e.g., risk-related rituals, stories, heroes),
the cultural risk values of an organization-which may DEMO be a re-
flection of broader societal attitudes toward uncertainty-provide important
guidelines for decision makers who find themselves confronting potentially
risky situations (Douglas & Wildavsky, 1982; Hofstede, 1980). Organizational
members come to view their world through the lens of their organization's
culture, which can distort their perceptions of situational risks, sometimes by
overemphasizing or underemphasizing risk. For example, Deal and
Kennedy's (1982) typology of organizational cultures distinguishes organi-
zations based on their orientation toward risk taking. Their description of DEMO
"process" culture epitomizes bureaucratic risk aversion, which downplays
or even DEMO the significance of risk, and is illustrated with examples
drawn from DEMO agencies or large, conservative corporations. In
contrast, Deal and Kennedy's "bet-your-company" culture (1982: 116-119)
fosters risk seeking by focusing DEMO risk and encouraging individuals to ac-
tively seek out and identify potential risks. For example, 3M's emphasis on
continually trying out new and risky ideas is a core tenet of the firm's cul-
tural DEMO system and, as a result, this emphasis influences risk percep-
tions throughout the organization. Thus, for employees in which extreme
Also, Janis'DEMO (1972) groupthink hypothesis suggests that there is a ten-
dency in more homogeneous groups to perceive consensual judgments as
correct. Although this idea DEMO received extensive attention as a group
phenomenon, it has not received DEMO as a characteristic of individuals
making individual decisions who happen to be located in more or less
homogeneous work groups. Thus, it can be argued that the implications for
individual decision makers of past research on DEMO decision making are
that:
22
Academy of Management Review
January
risk seeking or risk aversion are DEMO favored, situational risk will be
perceived automatically and unthinkingly, as the culture has, in effect,
pre-processed situational information. In contrast, when DEMO culture's risk
orientation is more moderate, the individual decision maker DEMO carefully
sort through the data, thus resulting in a more slowly DEMO, but more
accurate perception of situational risk.
Proposition 7a: Decision makers in organizations with
more moderate cultural risk values will perceive risks
more DEMO but more accurately than decision makers in
organizations with more extreme cultural risk values.
Decision makers' perceptions of risk, as with other assessments DEMO the
organizational context, are influenced by a number of additional aspects DEMO
the social situation. Leaders are one of the most often cited sources of such
influence. Organizational decision makers know quite well who controls
access DEMO the "fast track" and who makes critical judgments about candi-
dates for advancement opportunities, and this knowledge can affect deci-
sion makers' DEMO perception by drawing attention to some aspects of risk,
while reducing the attention paid to other aspects. There are three ways that
leaders DEMO as role models for those who must judge how to approach
risky situations: by continuously directing attention to selected situational
attributes that are associated with high or low risk, by modeling how risky
situations should be handled, and by labeling or filtering information.
Nutt (1986), for DEMO, reported that when executives exhibit specu-
lative decision-making styles, their actions provide a vivid demonstration
for others that such behavior is possible and DEMO in the organization.
Various studies have suggested that higher level executives are not only
able to, but are also inclined to influence others to take risks (MacCrimmon
& Wehrung, 1986; Shapira, 1986). By DEMO articulating personal prefer-
ences or by framing cultural traditions, a leader DEMO signal what will and
what will not be rewarded. Even subtle cues from leaders about their pref-
erences regarding risk can powerfully affect the DEMO perceptions of other
decision makers. If subtle influence attempts can be so effective, it is not
surprising that decision makers can be induced to advocate normatively
inappropriate levels of risk when the reward message is clear, and they
believe that such an approach is consistent with the organization'DEMO cultural
risk values (Douglas & Wildavsky, 1982) and leader expectations (Schein,
1985; Wildavsky, 1988), or will enhance their career DEMO (Gaertner,
1988; Grey & Gordon, 1978).
Proposition 7b: Decision makers' perceptions of risk will
be consistent with the risk-related role models provided
by their leaders.
Problem domain familiarity. As opposed to risk DEMO, which focuses
on outcomes, the familiarity that results from increased levels of past
experience in a given problem domain can affect risk perceptions DEMO
dent of what outcomes resulted. Decision makers primarily learn through
experience (DEMO & March, 1988), and the lessons learned are reflected in
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
23
both their standardized responses to routine stimuli DEMO in their responses
to new stimuli (Mintzberg et al., 1976). Evidence suggests that individuals
often interpret new problems in terms of familiar DEMO categories
(Cohen, March, & Olsen, 1972; Dearborn & Simon, 1958) and unthink-
ingly utilize preexisting solution routines (Langer, 1978; DEMO & Simon,
1958).
Although the learning and efficiency-related benefits of problem do-
main familiarity are clear, experience is helpful only up to a point. As
experience increases, decision makers are more likely to focus on their own
abilities and past successes rather than on current situational DEMO
As a result, they may simultaneously underestimate the actual risks in-
DEMO in achieving success and overestimate their abilities to overcome
unforeseen problems (DEMO & Sitkin, 1986; March & Shapira, 1987). When
experienced DEMO makers overlook the inherent (Lewin, 1989) or under-
lying risks (Baird & Thomas, 1985) associated with a particular decision, they
can more easily attach unwarranted certainty to their understanding of
choice-specific risks (Slovic et al., 1980). That is, as experience levels rise,
DEMO and a failure to appreciate the limitations of relevant com-
petencies and available data may result in an illusion of control (Langer,
1975; Lefcourt, 1973).
A lack of experience can also have a DEMO of detrimental effects. For
example, when a manager takes over an DEMO in an unfamiliar busi-
ness area, he or she may apply DEMO procedures and criteria,
even if they are largely irrelevant for or counterproductive in the new situ-
ation (Jemison & Sitkin, 1986). DEMO, because experience informs
decision makers about information needs, a lack of relevant experience can
lead to incorrect assumptions or diagnoses. This reliance on DEMO or
incomplete information will cause decision makers to be poorly calibrated
in their assessments of risk. Though some inexperienced decision makers
are likely to DEMO less confidence in their assessments of risk, others will
naively exhibit DEMO in those same judgments. In addition, when
decision makers lack prior DEMO, even modest additions to their data
bases can lead to dramatic DEMO in their risk perceptions. That is, individ-
uals with limited experience DEMO be more likely to hold risk perceptions that
are strongly influenced by information that is available because it is the only
data point in DEMO domain, it is recent, or it is vivid (Tversky & DEMO,
1973).
Proposition 8b: Decision makers with moderate or high
DEMO of domain familiarity will have more stable per-
ceptions of risk than will decision makers with low levels
of domain familiarity.
Proposition 8a: Decision makers with moderate levels of
domain familiarity will have more accurate estimates DEMO
risk and more moderate levels of confidence in the accu-
racy of those estimates than will decision makers with
high or low levels of DEMO familiarity.
24
Academy of Management Review
January
Organizational control systems. Organizational control systems DEMO
foster perceptions of either high or low risk in a given situation because
what they reward and punish focuses attention on different aspects of DEMO
decision-making process. Drawing upon Ouchi's (1977) conceptualization of
organizational control systems, two types of risk-related reward systems can
be distinguished: those DEMO prescribe appropriate decision-making pro-
cesses (process control) and those that reward outcomes by ignoring how
the decision was made, basing rewards only on how well the decision
turned out (outcome control).
Ouchi (1977) conceptualized process-oriented systems as focusing on
the evaluation and monitoring of ongoing DEMO without regard for the
outcomes of that behavior. Under process controls, DEMO long as a carefully
prescribed decision-making process is followed, no risk DEMO involved for the
individual, even though the decision may involve risk DEMO the organization.
Thus, it can be argued that control systems that DEMO the process by
which decisions are made will lead to perceptions of lower risk, at least
lower risk for the individual making the decision. Further, because institu-
tionalized process controls tend to imbue decision-making procedures with
an aura of legitimacy and infallibility, it can be argued that individuals in
a process-controlled organization will perceive lower risks.
Outcome-oriented control systems, on the other hand, are hypothesized
to lead to perceptions of higher risk, at least for the individual making the
decision, because of the DEMO for both large individual rewards and
punishments. Because organizations, at least DEMO, can either em-
phasize or de-emphasize the use of one or DEMO of these control criteria, we
propose that:
Proposition 9a: The greater the emphasis on process con-
trols in organizations, the lower the level of risk perceived
by decision makers.
Proposition 9b: The greater the emphasis on outcome
controls in organizations, the higher the level of risk per-
ceived by decision makers.
RISK
PERCEPTIONS
AND
RISK
OF RISK
PROPENSITY
DEMO
AS DETERMINANTS
Our review of previous work led us to suggest that risk perceptions and
risk propensity may best be viewed as mediating the DEMO of a variety of
other variables on risk behavior (see Figure DEMO). To this point, we have re-
viewed work that supports DEMO these other variables as determinants
of risk perceptions and risk propensity (DEMO than as determinants of risk
behavior). In this section, we DEMO examine theories and empirical results
that can help us theorize about the determinants of risk behavior-first by
examining the likely effects of risk perceptions DEMO then by examining the
effects that risk propensity has on risk behavior.
The view that risk behavior is ultimately determined by the label at-
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
25
tached to a risky situation (i.e., DEMO perception) is informed by a number of
extant theories. For example, the major objective of prospect theory
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) is to predict an individual decision maker's
behavioral responses to different objective DEMO characteristics (de-
fined by how the problem situation is labeled). DEMO, Kahneman and
Tversky and other researchers who have pursued this theoretical DEMO
(e.g., Singh, 1986) have found that situations which decision makers label
as positive (domain of gains) lead to conservative, risk-averse behavior,
whereas situations which decision makers label as negative (domain of
losses) lead to risk-seeking behavior. Empirical tests of prospect theory have
shown that positively labeled situations lead to more risk-averse behavior
than do negatively labeled DEMO
As noted in our previous discussion of the determinants of risk percep-
tion, some studies have contradicted the theory and findings of Kahneman
and Tversky. Although no studies in the literature have reported a lack of
DEMO between risk perceptions and risk behavior, studies have been
inconsistent concerning DEMO sign of the relationship. Some scholars who
have focused on risk behavior in negatively labeled situations have not
observed the risk-seeking behavior predicted by DEMO theory, but its
opposite. Even though some of these studies are DEMO influential, they have
not been previously juxtaposed against studies supporting prospect DEMO
and, as a result, the contradiction has not been recognized. One example of
results and theory that contradict prospect theory is the threat-rigidity DEMO
pothesis developed by Staw, Sandelands, and Dutton (1981). In DEMO devel-
opment of their hypothesis at the individual level, Staw, Sandelands, and
Dutton (1981: 506) suggest that the presence of threat DEMO in cognitive and
motivational manifestations, such as reliance upon prior expectations, at-
tention to dominant cues, and a tendency to emit well-learned responses
all of which are consistent with conservative, risk-averse behavior. Another
example is provided in Janis and Mann's (1977) identification of the hyper-
DEMO response, a form of risk-averse behavior that results when deci-
sion DEMO perceive their situation in negative, threatening terms.
Examining positively labeled decision DEMO, other scholars also
have come to conclusions that are the opposite DEMO those posited in prospect
theory. For example, March and Shapira (1987) suggested that when con-
ditions are perceived positively (e.g., when performance is well above a
target level), individual decision makers will focus DEMO the opportunities in-
herent in those situations and, thus, will tend to be more risk seeking be-
cause their attention will be directed DEMO opportunities as a result of their
good fortune. March and Shapira's notions received empirical support in
Osborn and Jackson's (1988) study DEMO the management of complex, danger-
ous technologies. Osborn and Jackson found DEMO executives of utilities with
heavy investments in nuclear technology were more willing to take risks in
violating regulatory stipulations under conditions of gain (i.e., a history of
increasing prior earnings), than under conditions of loss (i.e., a history of
decreasing prior earnings). Similarly, based on their experimental finding
26
Academy of Management Review
January
of increased risk-seeking behavior in the DEMO of prior gains, Thaler
and Johnson (1990: 659) suggested that "managers of profitable enterprises,
flush with initial success, will be DEMO risk seeking."
Taken together, even this brief discussion of the DEMO literature high-
lights an apparent fundamental disagreement over the effect that risk per-
ception can have on risk behavior: Prospect theory and its proponents pro-
vide support for a negative relationship between perceived risk and risk
DEMO, whereas other scholars suggest support for a positive relationship. Is
this DEMO contradiction real or is it an illusion? Also, if it is real, can the
inconsistencies be reconciled?
One possibility is that the inconsistency is an artifact of the research
methods used. There are two DEMO that the inconsistency cannot be dis-
missed so easily. First, the DEMO cannot be explained by separating
laboratory results from results obtained outside the lab, because support for
prospect theory has included both laboratory (e.g., Kahneman & Tversky,
1979) and archival studies (e.g., Singh, DEMO). Second, this is not merely a
distinction based on variations DEMO empirical results-prominent theories re-
late to these two positions. Thus, it DEMO that these studies represent a
potentially important difference that will need to be resolved theoretically.
One theoretical approach for reconciling such apparent contradictions
(that also may avoid the need to reject one or more of these DEMO and
frequently cited theories) is to identify previously unrecognized variables
that DEMO help to explain the apparently contradictory results. There are two
general forms such a relationship can take. One possibility is to argue that
the DEMO perception/risk behavior relationship is contingent, in that hidden
moderator variables DEMO the relationship between perceptions and behav-
ior. Another possibility is that risk perceptions are correlated with a previ-
ously unexamined variable that is actually DEMO the relationship.
We propose that the missing variable in this case is risk propensity. In
Figure 3, a way of reconciling the apparently contradictory results is illus-
trated by juxtaposing risk propensity (risk-averse behavior versus risk-
seeking behavior) with risk perceptions (positive situation versus negative
situation) to create four cells in which we put each set of research results.
DEMO 1 and 4 in Figure 3 are consistent with prospect theory, DEMO Cells
2 and 3 are consistent with its competing alternatives. The two essential
points here are: (a) that variation in perceptions of situational risk were
confounded in past work with risk propensity and (b) DEMO more clearly dis-
tinguishing the perception and propensity dimensions, researchers can DEMO
oncile earlier findings. The accusation of confounded results obviously re-
quires some explanation because some of these studies involved random
assignment, and the ideas presented here are speculative and have not yet
been subjected to empirical DEMO
Consider first the characterization of prospect theory (Cells 1 and 4)DEMO It
is suggested that the findings of this research can be reconceptualized by
accounting for the risk propensity of the decision maker. Specifically, risk-
averse decision makers are likely to exhibit low risk behavior under condi-
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
27
FIGURE 3
Juxtaposing Extant Theoretical Models and DEMO of Risk Behavior
Situational Characteristics
(Objective or Perceived)
Risk
Averse
DEMO
Prospect Theory-
Conservation of Prior
Gains (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979)DEMO
Loss Prevention Bias
(Jackson & Dutton, 1988)
Prediction: Low
DEMO Behavior
Negative
Threat Rigidity
(Staw, Sandelands,
Dutton, 1981)
DEMO
(Janis & Mann, 1977)
Prediction: Low
Risk Behavior
&
Risk
Propensity
Cell 1
Cell 2
Attention
Opportunities
(March & Shapira, DEMO)
to
Prospect
Going for Broke
(Kahneman & Tversky,
1979; Singh, 1986)
Theory
Prediction: High
Risk Behavior
Prediction: High
Risk Behavior
Cell 3
Cell 4
tions of low perceived risk (i.e., DEMO the situation is characterized posi-
tively, as in prospect theory's DEMO of gains).
But how can we suggest that risk propensity would have varied in
experiments in which subjects were randomly assigned to different DEMO
tions? The key lies in the conceptualization of risk propensity: In this article
it is not conceptualized as a stable trait of an DEMO, but rather it is
explained as a current tendency that results DEMO outcome history, inertia,
and personal risk preferences. The critical element DEMO the prospect theory
studies, for the purposes of this article, is that they manipulated outcome
history, which it is argued is a key determinant of risk propensity. Thus,
these studies inadvertently confounded risk propensity (as an unmeasured
variable) and risk perception-an idea that helps to explain the seemingly
contradictory results, but has yet to be tested empirically. Furthermore,
prospect theory studies are consistent with the previous arguments concern-
ing DEMO effect that outcome history has on risk propensity (see Proposition 3)DEMO
and with other theoretical work on the effect of positive and negative out-
comes. Specifically, prospect theory studies provide subjects in the "domain
DEMO losses" with small failure experiences that have been argued to lead DEMO
Risk
Seeking
28
Academy of Management Review
January
increased experimentation and risk taking (Sitkin, 1992); they also provide
subjects in the "domain of gains" with small success experiences that have
been argued to foster risk-averse persistence (Sitkin, 1992; Weick, 1984).
Thus, the use of random DEMO is irrelevant to avoiding the problem of
confounded variables because it was the manipulation itself that simulta-
neously varied risk perceptions and risk propensity.
DEMO placement of prior research into Cells 2 and 3 is also consistent with
characteristics of those earlier studies, even though risk propensity was not
the focus (or even explicitly considered) in all of the studies. DEMO simply,
studies that found low risk behavior (Cell 2) tended to examine more bu-
reaucratic, risk-averse contexts, whereas studies that identified DEMO risk
behavior (Cell 3) tended to focus on more entrepreneurial settings.
Those scholars who have studied responses to negative, high-risk sit-
uations (DEMO 2) have tended to look at decision makers in government or-
DEMO (e.g., Janis & Mann, 1977), which have often been DEMO as
predominantly "risk averse" in orientation. Staw, Sandelands, and Dutton
(1981) focused in their research on studies conducted in similar organiza-
DEMO settings, including government agencies, universities, and large pub-
lic companies. DEMO addition, when looking at organizational settings, it is
quite likely that the three proposed determinants of risk propensity will be
congruent. That is, it is likely that in organizations that are risk averse in
orientation, large past failures (outcome history), historical use of inflexible
and risk-averse routines (inertia), and personnel-screening criteria (risk
preferences) converge, with DEMO result that the subjects studied in such set-
tings are more likely to have a risk-averse than a risk-seeking propensity.
The descriptions of the DEMO studied by scholars who are represen-
tative of Cell 3 (see DEMO and Shapira, 1987, for a review) imply a focus
on DEMO makers with a risk-seeking propensity. For example, the man-
agers described DEMO March and Shapira (1987: 1408) felt that an integral "part
of the business" of managing was the taking of risks and, DEMO, high-level
managers encouraged others to take such risks. Though March and DEMO
pira (1987) theorized about situations with high opportunities and suggested
why these opportunities would draw decision makers to be more willing to
take DEMO, their ideas and the research they review seems to apply most
DEMO to those who were more risk seeking to begin with.
It is acknowledged that the ideas just outlined amount to reasoned
speculation in that DEMO focus on omitted variables in many of these studies.
However, we DEMO argue that the interpretation of the theories and the
empirical results presented in this article is more consistent with the entire
body of work, taken as a whole, than are the interpretations offered in each
of the individual articles, taken in isolation. The overall implication of this
analysis can be summarized by referring to Figure 3 and noting that the
DEMO for the four cells suggests that there is a main effect of risk pro-
pensity on risk behavior, but that there is no main effect for risk perceptions
(i. e., shown in Figure 3 as DEMO characteristics). This conclusion is also
reflected in Figure 1, in DEMO the causal arrow from risk perception to risk
1992
Sitkin and Pablo
29
behavior is a dashed one. A dashed DEMO is used to indicate that this
relationship is suggested by past research, but it is one that (based on the
present authors' analysis) appears to be fallacious.
Although the analysis presented here highlights the problems associ-
ated with positing that perceptions affect risk behavior directly, the possi-
bility of indirect influences of risk perceptions on risk behavior has not DEMO
explicitly addressed. Although the review and reanalysis of past research
concerning risk perception (see Figure 3) may suggest that the present au-
thors DEMO unsympathetic to interaction effects, the analysis provides no rea-
son to DEMO the possibility that risk perception moderates the effect of risk
propensity on risk behavior. To the contrary, the general argument made
here is quite consistent with the idea that the main effect of risk propensity
on DEMO behavior might well be strengthened as the level of perceived risk
rises. For example, individuals with a propensity to avoid risks are likely to
exhibit increasingly risk-averse behavior as perceived situational risk rises.
Conversely, individuals who are prone to seek risks might be expected to
exhibit riskier behavior DEMO their perceptions of situational risk rise. However,
as opposed to risk-averse individuals (for whom it is predicted that the
exacerbating influence of risk perceptions would be monotonic), for risk-
seeking individuals it is expected DEMO the link between propensity and be-
havior would be strengthened by higher perceived risk only up to a point.
The strengthening effect of risk DEMO on the propensity/behavior link
will disappear when the level of perceived risk surpasses some threshhold
level. This threshhold will be defined by the DEMO maker's risk prefer-
ences, inertia as an obstacle to exceeding DEMO or her pattern of past risk-
taking behavior, and the level DEMO risk implied by the outcomes of prior
risk-taking behavior. Thus, although DEMO analysis supports rejecting the di-
rect causal link between risk perceptions and risk behavior that has been
suggested in past work, it is suggested that perceptions may nonetheless be
an important influence on risk behavior through DEMO moderating effect on
the relationship between risk propensity and risk behavior.
The proposed reconciliation of the dilemma of inconsistent results can
be summarized in DEMO of four components. First, apparently inconsistent
findings and theories can be DEMO as explanations for different condi-
tions; therefore, these theories/results are not inconsistent, but complemen-
tary. Second, risk propensity represents a key DEMO variable that has
been overlooked in most of the previous research on determinants of risk
behavior. Third, interpretations of previous studies in this area erroneously
concluded that risk perceptions and risk behavior were causally related,
DEMO their association was due to their shared association with risk pro-
pensity, an unmeasured third variable. Finally, risk perception is still an
important DEMO variable because it can help to explain variation in
individual risk behavior within the bounds generally defined by risk pro-
pensity. These four points DEMO be summarized in the last propositions:
Proposition 10: Decision makers' risk behavior will be con-
sistent with their risk propensities.
30
Academy of Management Review
January
Proposition 11: The higher the level of perceived risk, the
stronger the association between risk propensity and risk
behavior, except that for risk-seeking decision makers
this effect will reach a limit defined by their propensity.
DISCUSSION
Contributions
Perhaps the most important contribution DEMO this article is that, through a
simultaneous examination of previously unrelated DEMO of research, con-
tradictory findings in the literature were identified that DEMO not heretofore
been recognized. Although the preexisting fragmented state of research on
risk behavior was not conducive to readily identifying or resolving this co-
DEMO, by juxtaposing these contradictory findings in a reformulated
model, the contradictory findings were reconciled and a more complete and
parsimonious theoretical model was DEMO The analysis presented in
this article thus advances the understanding of risk behavior by suggesting
that previous conclusions may have been incorrect and by DEMO to the
potential importance of risk propensity.
Drawing together previously unrelated research streams. The model
of risk behavior proposed here builds directly on current DEMO of risk in
explaining individual risk behavior. Scholars have previously noted the
roles of problem framing (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), cultural risk DEMO
(Douglas & Wildavsky, 1982), leadership (Schein, 1985), group homogeneity
(Janis, 1972), problem familiarity (Slovic et al., 1980), and risk preferences
(Brockhaus, 1980) as direct influences on risk DEMO Therefore, one con-
tribution of this article is that it draws DEMO these previously unrelated
streams of research and shows how they provide the foundation for a theo-
retical model of risk behavior that is more DEMO and accurate than
previous models.
A critical reappraisal of the role of risk perceptions and risk propen-
sity. The proposed theoretical model argues for DEMO in how manage-
ment researchers should theorize about and study risk. Previous work has
been criticized for positing associations among variables without presenting
adequate DEMO mechanisms. In response, this article is an attempt to move
theorizing DEMO risk behavior forward by reconceptualizing the determi-
nants of risk so as to make explicit and testable the underlying mechanisms
by which various organizational, situational, and individual factors could
come to cause risk behavior. More specifically, the list of factors that were
previously considered to have a direct influence on risk behavior are hy-
pothesized instead to influence risk perception DEMO risk propensity. This
implies that, in the future, scholars who wish to explore whether risk be-
havior is influenced by objective or perceived DEMO characteristics
need to take into account (or at least control for) the effects of risk propensity,
a criterion against which most past DEMO does not measure favorably.
1992
Sitkin and Pablo
31
Identification of determinants of risk behavior not DEMO recog-
nized in the literature. In addition to suggesting a basic reconfiguration of
our theories of the determinants of risk behavior, two new determinants of
risk propensity and two new determinants of risk perception have been
DEMO: First, it is proposed that inertia and outcome history be included
as additional influences on risk propensity. Second, it is also suggested that
organizational control systems and risk propensity be considered as addi-
tional determinants DEMO risk perception. Although all of these factors have
received attention in the organizational literature, a preliminary conceptual
foundation for their inclusion in future research on risk has been provided.
Empirical Implications of the Proposed Causal Model DEMO Risk Behavior
One of the reasons for formalizing the proposed theory in the form of a
causal model is to facilitate cumulative empirical research DEMO this area. In
part, this is in response to the observation DEMO a great deal has been
learned within relatively narrow specialized subareas of risk behavior, but
that there has been relatively little integration across the historically discrete
theoretical perspectives. The ideas proposed in this article are meant DEMO
provide preliminary evidence of the value of such cross-speciality research,
and it is hoped that this framework can stimulate additions, revisions, and
DEMO to this analysis. For example, a great deal of prior work DEMO used
risk propensity, risk perceptions, risk preferences, and other terms DEMO a
nonsystematic manner. Some empirical research (Brockhaus, 1980) has
used DEMO constructs for definitions, theories, and operationalizations
within a single study. By attempting to delineate more explicitly the different
constructs and theorize about their DEMO relationships, the goal here is to
provide a broader and more DEMO framework for designing empirical
research on risk behavior that can clearly and effectively distinguish these
important variables.
The juxtaposition of different theoretical perspectives (e.g., Kahneman
& Tversky, 1979; March & Shapira, 1987) implies that future empirical re-
search should not simply look at isolated cells in DEMO two-by-two matrix, but
should vary fully both situational and dispositional dimensions DEMO provide a
test of the ideas proposed here as well as the theories and empirical findings
on which they are based. As such, this paper responds to the call for the
development of models that can DEMO examine the effects of both
dispositions and situations (Davis-Blake & Pfeffer, 1989). In addition, it is
important for future empirical studies to reflect the operational complexity of
the construct of risk propensity proposed here, taking into account the im-
portance of historical performance, inertial pressures, DEMO individual pref-
erences in a more systematic and valid way.
Future research at the organization level of analysis. There is another
promising extension that DEMO be made from the framework proposed here.
We have focused on risk at the individual level of analysis and have derived
our propositions from DEMO theories and empirical research. How-
32
Academy of Management Review
January
ever, many of the arguments developed here may be equally applicable to
organizations as decision-making entities. Thus, for example, one could draw
upon the work of Meyer (1982), DEMO and Snow (1978), or Miller and Friesen
(1984) to DEMO the risk propensity of different types of organizations.
Future research on interaction terms. We could not examine in any
depth (nor could we even enumerate) the many plausible interaction effects
suggested by the model proposed in this article. This limitation, however,
suggests another way by which researchers could extend the ideas pro-
posed here-through the theoretical evaluation and empirical DEMO of
possible interaction effects among the independent variables included in
our model. Researchers interested in specialized subareas of risk behavior
may wish to focus DEMO smaller sets of variables so as to address the possible
interaction effects among them, thus adding complexity and richness to the
understanding of risk behavior.
To illustrate how the proposed framework could be extended by such
DEMO effort, the following section provides several illustrative examples by
focusing on DEMO potential interactive effects of organizational control system
characteristics and the three determinants of risk propensity included in this
model (i.e., risk preferences, outcome history, and inertia). First, consider
predictions that could be developed DEMO an interactive relationship be-
tween control systems and risk preferences in influencing risk propensity.
Organizational settings in which outcome controls are emphasized will be
DEMO first. Individuals in organizations that use outcome-oriented con-
trol systems should exhibit a strengthened relationship between their risk
preferences and risk propensity. For those DEMO risk-seeking preferences, a
focus on the opportunity to obtain greater rewards DEMO successful outcomes
should fuel their inclination to take risks. However, for DEMO with risk-averse
preferences, their tendency to avoid risks could be exacerbated DEMO a system
that focuses on outcomes as a measure of performance. A different pattern
would be expected to emerge in organizations that emphasize process DEMO
trol, such that the relationship between risk preferences and risk propensity
DEMO be dampened. That is, risk-seeking individuals have little incentive
for taking DEMO when large organizational payoffs do not yield large indi-
vidual returns. Similarly, risk-averse individuals would be expected to have
a greater tendency to take risks when organizational failures are less likely
to result in individual sanctions.
DEMO relationship between control systems and outcome history also pro-
vides an opportunity for further work. For example, it would be expected
that there would be a moderating effect of control system characteristics on
the relationship between DEMO history and risk propensity. The basic
logic is quite straightforward-control systems that focus on outcomes
should strengthen the influence of outcome history on risk DEMO be-
cause this type of control system would continually draw attention to, and
reward or punish, the successes or failures resulting from a DEMO risk
propensity. In contrast, control systems that emphasize process criteria
should DEMO this effect.
Finally, it could be argued that the effect of DEMO on risk propensity is
1992
Sitkin
and Pablo
33
influenced by control system characteristics. Specifically, we would antici-
pate that process-oriented controls, with their emphasis on the use of tradi-
tional procedures and routines, would be likely to reinforce the effect of
inertia by making it more likely that past patterns persist. DEMO contrast, the
effect of outcome-oriented control systems is less clear. In DEMO, the impact of
outcome controls will depend on the degree to DEMO such controls repre-
sent a continuation of (or a departure from) past routines. If outcome controls
are inconsistent with traditions, then they are likely to weaken the effect of
inertial pressures on risk propensity because DEMO energize new activity and
shift attention away from tradition and toward outcome-related influences
(e.g., outcome history).
Design guidelines for future empirical research. DEMO article claims
that there are several attributes that comprise risk propensity and that these
attributes dominate situational features that were studied by Kahneman
and DEMO (1979), Staw, Sandelands, and Dutton (1981), and others. Fur-
thermore, it suggests that the earlier findings were correct but misinter-
preted because the contexts within which they were studied were too lim-
DEMO This overall argument implies that management researchers need to
design more complex experiments to either capture or control risk prefer-
ences, outcome history, DEMO inertia (i.e., the proposed determinants of risk
propensity) in order DEMO simultaneously replicate these earlier studies while
testing the proposition that they attributed the differences incorrectly to per-
ceived situational characteristics.
For example, a series of experiments could replicate the earlier studies,
but it could also DEMO manipulate the valence and scale of historical
experience, independent of perceived DEMO risk. It is unlikely that suf-
ficient control of these naturally covarying factors could be obtained in the
field. Therefore, initial studies should involve controlled laboratory experi-
ments, and field tests should probably be deferred at least until the patterns
of relationships have been clarified. In addition, future studies should also
vary the dispositional risk features of participants, to test whether or not
these features need to be retained in further work. DEMO additional benefit of
including trait-like variables is that it would permit a test of whether our
conception of propensity as a current period tendency DEMO is strongly influ-
enced by history and inertia is, in fact, more useful than conceptualizing
propensity in more trait-like terms.
Promising Application Areas DEMO Future Empirical Research
Two areas of application that have received a substantial amount of
attention in the existing research on risk are strategic management DEMO
safety issues.
Application to strategic management research. By drawing attention
to historical patterns of organizational risk activity and the values of key
organizational decision DEMO (and of the organization's culture) with re-
spect to risk, the proposed model could form the basis for useful departures
from past strategic management research, which has emphasized objective
measures of financial risk (DEMO, Bettis, 1982; Shapira, 1986) and has ne-
34
Academy of Management Review
January
glected the impact of behavioral or DEMO aspects of risk. One of the
most prominent topics of concern to strategic management researchers in
this area has been to understand the determinants DEMO merger and acquisi-
tion activity. For example, risk propensity has been DEMO neglected as a
predictor of how an organization approaches the potentially risky merger
and acquisition process. In addition, the theoretical framework proposed
here offers a number of mechanisms by which the merger process itself
(Jemison & Sitkin, 1986) could influence how risks are perceived and how
they DEMO acted upon during the course of a merger or acquisition.
Application to safety research. Much of the work to date on individual
risk behavior DEMO focused on how individuals respond to potentially unsafe
conditions (e.g., Fischhoff et al., 1981; Kahneman & Tversky, 1984). How-
ever, DEMO substantial body of work has focused attention on the role of
individual perceptions and preferences, with only limited consideration of
the potentially important impact of organizational context (e.g., Douglas &
Wildavsky, 1982) and personal and organizational risk history (Osborn &
Jackson, 1988). One potential contribution of this article to future work on
safety-related matters is to DEMO an expanded theoretical framework
within which to study these previously underemphasized determinants of
risk behavior.
Application to research on other issues. Although the bulk DEMO past work
on risk in organizations has focused on strategic and safety-related risks,
there are other potential research domains that have not been DEMO by
risk researchers to the same extent. For example, the theoretical DEMO
proposed here could easily be applied to understanding the degree to
which organizational decision makers pursue more radical or more incre-
mental innovations (Cardinal, 1990), depending upon their perceptions
about and propensity toward the risks involved. A second area of potential
application concerns how organizations handle sensitive DEMO, by
exploring the influence of risk propensity and perceptions on the DEMO
of organizational policies and practices concerning secrecy and disclosure
(Sitkin & DEMO, 1991). Note that these two areas illustrate that risk can
DEMO both positive (i.e., innovation) and negative (i.e., the loss DEMO secrets)
risk-related behaviors.
CONCLUSION
A sizeable body of prior theoretical and empirical research appeared to
support the primary influence of objective or perceived DEMO charac-
teristics on risk behavior. Yet the reconceptualization presented in this ar-
ticle suggests that this earlier work and the seemingly contradictory results
it DEMO can be explained by a theory in which risk propensity has a
dominant influence on risk behavior. By providing a single, integrated
model of the determinants of risk behavior, this article not only draws to-
gether and challenges the conclusions of a number of theories that have not
DEMO been compared, but also highlights opportunities for future theo-
retical and DEMO work.
1992 Sitkin and Pablo 35
REFERENCES
Allman, W. F. 1985. Staying alive in the 20th century. Science 85, October: 30-37.
Baird, I. S., & Thomas, H. 1985. Toward a contingency model of strategic risk DEMO Academy
of Management Review, 10: 230-243.
Bazerman, M. 1986. Judgment DEMO managerial decision making. New York: Wiley.
Bettis, R. A. 1982. Risk considerations in modeling corporate strategy. Academy of Manage-
ment Proceedings: 22-25.
Bowman, E. H. 1980. A risk/return paradox for strategic management. Sloan Management
Review, Spring: 17-31.
Brockhaus, R. H. 1980. Risk-taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management
Journal, 23: 509-520.
Cardinal, L. B. 1990. Implementing strategy through organization control mechanisms:
Transforming strategic intent into innovation in DEMO pharmaceutical industry. Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.
DEMO, M. D., March, J. G., & Olsen, J. P. DEMO A garbage can model of organizational
choice. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17: 1-25.
Davis-Blake, A., & Pfeffer, J. 1989. Just a mirage: DEMO search for dispositional effects in orga-
nizational research. Academy of Management Review, 14: 385-400.
Deal, T. E., & Kennedy, A. A. 1982. Corporate cultures: The rites and rituals of corporate life.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Dearborn, D. C., &. Simon, H. A. 1958. Selective DEMO: A note on the departmental
identification of executives. Sociometry, 21: DEMO
Douglas, M. 1985. Risk acceptability according to the social sciences. New DEMO: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Douglas, M., & Wildavsky, A. 1982. Risk and culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Duncan, R. B. 1972. DEMO of organizational environments and perceived environ-
mental uncertainty. Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO: 313-327.
Dutton, J. E., & Duncan, R. B. 1987. The creation of momentum for change through the process
of strategic issue diagnosis. DEMO Management Journal, 8: 279-295.
Dutton, J. E., & Jackson, DEMO E. 1987. Categorizing strategic issues: Links to organizational ac-
tions. Academy DEMO Management Review, 11: 76-90.
Figenbaum, A., & Thomas, H. DEMO Attitudes toward risk and the risk-return paradox: Prospect
theory explanations. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 31: 85-106.
Fischhoff, B., Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Derby, S. L., & Keeney, R. L. 1981. Acceptable risk.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Frederickson, J. W., & Iaquinto, DEMO L. 1989. Inertia and creeping rationality in strategic decision
processes. Academy of Management Journal, 32: 516-543.
Gaertner, K. N. 1988. Managers' careers DEMO organizational change. Academy of Manage-
ment Executive, 2(4): 311-318.
DEMO, R. J., & Gordon, G. G. 1978. Risk-taking managers: Who gets the top jobs? Management
Review, 67(11): 8-13.
Hambrick, D. C., & Mason, P. A. 1984. Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its
top managers. Academy of Management Review, 9: 193-206.
Hofstede, G. 1980. Culture's consequences: International differences in work-related values.
London: Sage.
36 Academy of Management Review January
Hogarth, R. 1987. Judgement and choice (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Jackson, S. E., & DEMO, J. E. 1988. Discerning threats and opportunities. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 33: 370-387.
Jacofsky, E. F., Slocum, J. W., & McQuaid, S. J. 1988. Cultural values and the CEO: Alluring
companions? Academy of Management Executive, 11(1): 39-49.
Janis, I. L. 1972. DEMO of groupthink. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Janis, I. L., & Mann, L. 1977. Decision making. New York: Free Press.
Jemison, D. B., & Sitkin, S. B. 1986. Corporate acquisitions: A process perspective. Academy DEMO
Management Review, 11: 145-163.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. DEMO Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econo-
metrica, 47: 263-291.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1984. Choices, values, DEMO frames. American Psychologist, 39:
341-350.
Kogan, N., & Wallach, M. A. 1964. Risk taking: A study in cognition and personality. New
York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Langer, E. J. 1975. The DEMO of control. journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32:
311-328.
DEMO, E. J. 1978. Rethinking the role of thought in social interaction. DEMO J. Harvey, W. Ickes, &
R. F. Kidd (Eds.), New directions in attribution research, 2: 35-58. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
DEMO, T. K., & Montgomery, D. B. 1987. Learning from strategic DEMO and failure. Journal of
Business Research, 15: 503-517.
Lave, C. DEMO, & March, J. G. 1975. An introduction to models in the social sciences. Philadel-
phia: Harper & Row.
Lefcourt, H. M. 1973. DEMO function of the illusion of control and freedom. American Psycholo-
gist, DEMO: 417-425.
Levitt, B., & March, J. G. 1988. Organizational learning. Annual Review of Sociology, 14:
319-340.
Lewin, A. Y. 1989. DEMO design and auditing: An agenda for research. Paper pre-
sented at DEMO Audit Judgment Symposium, Newport Beach, CA, February 20-21.
Libby, R., & Fishburn, P. C. 1977. Behavioral models of risk taking in DEMO decision: A
survey and evaluation. Journal of Accounting Research, 15: DEMO
Lopes, L. 1987. Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology, 20: 255-295. San Diego: Academic Press.
Louis, M. R. 1980. Surprise and DEMO: What newcomers experience in entering unfa-
miliar organizational settings. Administrative Science DEMO, 25: 226-251.
Lounamaa, P. H., & March, J. G. DEMO Adaptive coordination of a learning team. Manage-
ment Science, 33: 107-123.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1986. Taking risks: DEMO management of uncertainty.
New York: Free Press.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. 1990. Characteristics of risk taking executives. Man-
agement DEMO, 36(4): 422-435.
March, J. G. 1978. Bounded rationality, DEMO, and the engineering of choice. Bell Journal
of Economics, 9: DEMO
March, J. G. 1988. Decisions and organization. London: Basil Blackwell.
1992
Sitkin and Pablo
37
Schein, E. H. 1985.
Schneider, S. DEMO, &
suggest why. Journal
12: 535-548.
Seligman, M. E. P. 1975.
Shapira, Z. 1986.
Singh, J. 1986.
emy of Management Journal, 29:
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking. Manage-
ment Science, 33: 1404-1418.
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. 1958. Organizations. New York: Wiley.
Martin, J., Sitkin, S. B., & Boehm, M. 1985. Founders and the elusiveness of a cultural legacy.
In P. J. Frost, L. F. Moore, M. R. Louis, C. C. Lundberg, & J. Martin (Eds.), Organizational
culture: 99-124. Beverly Hills: Sage.
McClelland, D. DEMO 1961. The achieving society. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
Meyer, A. D. 1982. Adapting to environmental jolts. Administrative Science Quarterly, 27:
515-537.
Miles, DEMO E., & Snow, C. C. 1978. Organization strategy, structure, and process. New York;
McGraw-Hill.
Miller, D., & Friesen, P. 1984. A longitudinal study of the corporate life cycle. Management
Science, 30: DEMO
Mintzberg, H., Raisinghani, D., & Theoret, A. 1976. The DEMO of "unstructured" decision
processes. Administrative Science Quarterly, 25: 246-275.
Monroe, K. B. 1976. The influence of price differences and brand familiarity on brand prefer-
ences. Journal of Consumer Research, 3: 42-49.
Neale, M. A., Bazerman, M. H., Northcraft, G. B., & Alperson, DEMO 1986. "Choice shift" effects in
group decisions: A decision bias DEMO International journal of Small Group Re-
search, 2: 33-42.
Nutt, DEMO C. 1986. Decision style and strategic decisions of top executives. Technological Fore-
casting and Social Change, 30: 39-62.
O'Reilly, C. A., DEMO, D. F., & Barnett, W. P. 1989. Work group demography, social inte-
gration, and turnover. Administrative Science Quarterly, 34: 21-37.
Osborn, R. N., & Jackson, D. H. 1988. Leaders, riverboat gamblers, or purposeful unintended
consequences in the management of complex dangerous technologies. Academy DEMO Man-
agement Journal, 31: 924-947.
Ouchi, W. G. 1977. The DEMO between organizational structure and organizational con-
trol. Administrative Science Quarterly, 22: 95-113.
Rao, A. R., & Monroe, K. B. 1988. The moderating effect of prior knowledge on cue utilization
in product evaluations. journal of DEMO Research, 15: 253-264.
Roll, R. 1986. The hubris hypothesis of DEMO takeovers. Journal of Business, 59: 197-216.
Rowe, W. D. 1977. DEMO anatomy of risk. New York: Wiley.
Ruefli, T. W. 1990. The mean-variance approach to risk: Paradox lost. Management Science,
36: 218-229.
DEMO, G. R., & Pfeffer, J. 1978. A social information processing DEMO to job attitudes
and task design. Administrative Science Quarterly, 23: 224-253.
Organizational culture and leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lopes, L. L. 1986. DEMO in preferences under risk: Who and when may
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
Helplessness. San Francisco:
Risk in managerial DEMO Working
Performance,
slack, and risk
562-585.
taking
Freeman.
paper, Hebrew University.
in organizational decision making. Acad-
38 Academy of Management Review January
Sitkin, S. B. 1992. Learning through failure: The strategy of small losses. In B. M. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, 14: 231-266. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.
Sitkin, S. B., & Sutkliffe, K. M. 1991. Dispensing legitimacy: The influence of professional,
organizational, and legal DEMO on pharmacist behavior. In P. S. Tolbert & S. R. Barley
(DEMO), Research in the sociology of organizations, 8: 269-295. Greenwich, DEMO: JAI Press.
Slovic, P. 1972. Information processing, situation specificity, and generality of risk-taking be-
havior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 22: 128-134.
Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., & Lichtenstein, S. 1980. DEMO versus fears: Understanding perceived
risk. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heu-
ristics and biases: 463-489. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Snyder, M., & Ickes, W. 1985. Personality and social behavior. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson
(Eds.), Handbook of social pychology (3rd ed.), 2: 883-947. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Staw, B. M., & Ross, J. 1987. DEMO in escalation situations: Antecedents, prototypes, and
solutions. In B. M. DEMO & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, 9:
39-78. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, J. E. 1981. Threat-rigidity effects in organizational
DEMO: A multilevel analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26: 501-524.
Stoner, J. 1968. Risky and cautious shifts in group decisions. Journal of Experimental and
DEMO Psychology, 4: 442-459.
Thaler, R. H., & Johnson, E. DEMO 1990. Gambling with the house money and trying to break even:
The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice. Management Science, 36: DEMO
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1973. Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and prob-
ability. Cognitive Psychology, 5: 207-252.
Van Maanen, J., & Schein, E. H. 1979. Toward a theory of organizational DEMO In B. M.
Staw (Ed.), Research in organizational behavior, 1: 209-264. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Vlek, C., & Stallen, DEMO J. 1980. Rational and personal aspects of risk. Acta Psychologica, 45:DEMO
273-300.
Wagner, W. G., Pfeffer, J., & O'Reilly, DEMO A. 1984. Organizational demography and turnover
in top-management groups. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48: 138-149.
Weik, K. E. 1984. Small wins: Redefining the DEMO of social problems. American Psychologist,
39: 40-49.
Wildavsky, A. 1988. Searching for safety. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Sim B Sitkin DEMO his Ph.D. from Stanford University. He is currently an assistant
professor in the Graduate School of Business, University of Texas at Austin. His re-
search focuses on the effect of legalistic influences and organizational control systems
DEMO risk taking, learning, and adaptability.
Amy L. Pablo received her Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Austin. She is cur-
rently an DEMO professor in the Faculty of Management at the University of Cal-
gary. Her current research interests focus on managerial and organizational decision
making, risk taking and organizational performance, and mergers and acquisitions.{1g42fwefx}