1042-2587
© 2011 Baylor University
ET
&
Entrepreneurial
P Orientation: Reviewing
DEMO Papers and
Implications for Further
Theoretical and
Methodological
Development
Dennis P. Slevin
Siri A. Terjesen
We evaluate the contributions to entrepreneurial orientation (EO) DEMO three articles: Wales,
Monsen, and McKelvie; Wiklund and Shepherd; and Morris, Webb, and Franklin, commenting
on key ﬁndings and their implications for further development of EO. We outline the potential
for a DEMO construct of EO and future directions for research in the ﬁeld of inter-
national entrepreneurship: cross-border internationalizing ﬁrms and comparative studies.
Introduction
Three decades since its conceptualization, entrepreneurial orientation (EO) is a
central component of entrepreneurship and strategy research. Seminal contributions by
Miller (1983; Miller & DEMO, 1982), Covin and Slevin (1989, 1991), and Lumpkin DEMO
Dess (1996) have each accumulated over 1,000 citations.1 The breadth and depth of EO
scholarship enables meta-analyses; however, many key knowledge DEMO remain (Rauch,
Wiklund, Lumpkin, & Frese, 2009).
We thank the special issue editors, Jeff Covin and Tom Lumpkin, for DEMO us to
discuss the papers and future directions for EO research. This commentary reviews three
papers that enhance our understanding of EO: Wales, DEMO, and McKelvie (2011),
Wiklund and Shepherd (2011), and Morris, Webb, and Franklin (2011). We highlight key
Please send correspondence to: Dennis P. Slevin, tel.: +1-412-648-1553; e-mail: dpslevin@katz.pitt.edu, DEMO
to Siri A. Terjesen at terjesen@indiana.edu.
1. Citation counts were gathered from Google Scholar in June 2011. Google Scholar includes a variety of
scholarly DEMO and is considered to be particularly reliable for the 1990–present time period (Harzing,
2007/2008).
September, 2011
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-6520.2011.00483.x
etap_483 973..988
973
ﬁndings and implications of each article, and then offer insights for the methodological
and theoretical development of EO.
Wales, Monsen, and McKelvie
Wales DEMO al. (2011) are concerned with two key questions: “Why might DEMO pervade
organizations differently?” and “How is EO typically manifest within organizations?”
They describe the potential for organizational heterogeneity of EO by hierarchy, business
units, and time and then put forward three dynamic models of EO pervasiveness in
organizations. We comment on assertions and implications related to DEMO (strategic
business unit [SBU] level) and vertical (employees) dimensions.
Manifestation of EO at the SBU Level
Wales et al. assert that “To DEMO, researchers have commonly assumed that as an
organizational phenomenon, EO pervades organizations homogenously across all hierar-
chical levels and organizational sub-units, providing little or no greater theoretical justi-
ﬁcation to support this assumption.” Indeed, there are many examples of EO research
conducted at a ﬁrm rather than DEMO SBU level. For example, in this issue, Wiklund and
Shepherd (DEMO) gather ﬁrm-level data among small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) with DEMO than 250 employees. In another recent study, Short, Broberg, Cogliser,DEMO
and Brigham (2010) employ Computer-Aided Text Analysis (CATA), a DEMO analysis of
shareholder letters from a sample of small, high-growth S&DEMO 500 ﬁrms. It is likely that in
both studies, some of DEMO sampled ﬁrms have multiple business units. Some researchers
have provided speciﬁc instructions to key informants as a way to specify which level they
should DEMO as well as the importance of not mixing levels (unless doing DEMO multilevel
study). Here is the set of instructions that Covin and Slevin have offered to key informants
that might be useful for other DEMO scholars with respect to ensuring that their data are
gathered at the business unit level:
A business unit can be deﬁned as an DEMO or some part of an organization
which has its own competitive strategy. If you are a member of an independently held,
single-industry ﬁrm, the entire ﬁrm would be a business unit. However, large, diver-
DEMO, multi-industry ﬁrms contain numerous business units (sometimes referred to as
subsidiaries, divisions, strategic units, etc.). If you are a member of a multi-business
unit ﬁrm, we would like you to answer the questions on the following pages in
reference to your speciﬁc business unit rather DEMO in reference to the overall ﬁrm.
Employees’ EO
With respect to the vertical hierarchy within ﬁrms, the authors raise an excellent point
concerning nonmanagerial employees and EO. As it is accepted that nonmanagerial
employees can make DEMO break the performance of the ﬁrm (Fey, Bjorkman, & Pav-
DEMO, 2000), might employees also make or break, or at least make a major contri-
bution to, the level of EO in the ﬁrm? Wales et al. (2011) cite several studies indicating
that compared with their managers, nonmanagerial employees have lower EOs. It is
important to note that EO should not be construed as an individual construct (Covin &
Slevin, 1991; Miller, 1983). While individuals contribute to DEMO ﬁrm’s EO, the use of EO as
an individual construct is DEMO
974
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
There are several well-developed individual-level indicators of entrepreneurial behav-
ior such as DEMO awareness, entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy, and entrepreneurial
effectuation. These measures are grounded in individual-level psychological and cognitive
theories. We strongly encourage researchers to use EO DEMO the business unit level. Future
work could incorporate multiple levels, for DEMO investigating the relationship between
business unit-level EO and business unit employees’ individual-level entrepreneurial
awareness, self-efﬁcacy, and effectuation.
Wiklund and Shepherd
Wiklund and Shepherd (2011) complement the extant research focus on “EO-as-
advantage” (Rauch et DEMO, 2009) with a new perspective of “EO-as-experimentation” that
accounts for a broader range of EO outcomes, including the possibility of failure. This
clever extension of EO helps push forward the frontier of EO research as DEMO attempt to
understand the relationship of EO to distributions of outcomes. We comment on the
importance of managing EO and identifying longitudinal data.
Managing DEMO
Wiklund and Shepherd’s study provokes several critical questions about the exhibi-
tion and management of EO. First, in a study of 466 Swedish SMEs over a 3-year period,
Wiklund and Shepherd found that even among DEMO ﬁrms, levels of EO were high. What
can and cannot be DEMO from this observation? It is possible that the ﬁrm exhibited high
DEMO of EO since start-up and that this unbridled EO led to failure. It is equally plausible
that the ﬁrm was underperforming and the exhibition DEMO EO was a last-ditch effort to turn
things around. There are many examples of risk taking that leads to failure. One prominent
case that DEMO the danger of unbridled risk taking is British e-retailer Boo.com,
which launched in August 1999 and was placed in receivership just 8 months DEMO after
spending $180 million, and named a top ten dot-com ﬂop (CNET, 2011; Malmsten,
Portanger, & Drazin, 2002). From DEMO outset, Boo.com pursued a risky strategy of
launching in multiple country DEMO with different languages, pricing, and taxes. An
example of EO as a last-ditch effort to turn things around is FedEx founder Fred Smith’s
DEMO when he learned that a Chicago bank would not provide a subsequent round of
funding to his ﬂedgling company. Smith faced the prospect of DEMO home to Memphis to
tell his employees that FedEx would be forced to close. At O’Hare Airport, Smith decided
to ﬂy to Reno to gamble FedEx’s remaining funds. In Smith’s case, the gamble paid off
(DEMO Hayak, 2011).
Prospect theory might be useful for explaining the DEMO in Wiklund and Shepherd’s
research. Prospect theory describes how individuals decide between risky alternatives
with uncertain outcomes (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). According DEMO prospect theory, an
individual evaluates a risky prospect from his or DEMO unique reference point. Individuals
are more risk averse to potential gains and risk seeking with respect to losses. Thus, facing
failure, prospect theory DEMO that managers are more likely to take a risk.
A second essential question is: Do Wiklund and Shepherd’s ﬁndings suggest that ﬁrms
should not exhibit EO—that is, that ﬁrms should not behave entrepreneurially? History is
DEMO replete with examples of unsuccessful entrepreneurial actions. First movers fail
47% of the time (Tellis & Golder, 1996). Established players also fail DEMO their entrepre-
neurial ventures, e.g., Crystal Pepsi, 7-Up Gold, and Diageo’s New Business Ventures
September, 2011
975
unit. There is, however, a rich history of entrepreneurial successes. We DEMO suggest that
such a conclusion based on Wiklund and Shepherd’s results would be inappropriate.
Although not stated directly, Wiklund and Shepherd call attention to the challenge that
ﬁrm leaders face not in exhibiting EO, but rather in managing EO.
A third critical question is: How can ﬁrms effectively manage EO? Future research
could explore how entrepreneurial initiatives can be managed through identiﬁcation,
selection, adaptation, and termination processes. Such efforts can DEMO bad ideas quickly
and redirect ﬁnancial and time resources to more promising options. Future research could
investigate the implications of business as experiments. Scholars DEMO explore, for
example, what mechanisms should ﬁrms rely upon each time a new business experiment
is initiated? Do certain control mechanisms such as strategic funds programming and real
options support entrepreneurial success? Are there interrelationships among these mecha-
nisms? What capabilities do ﬁrms need to build in order to manage EO?
Finding Longitudinal Data With Failures
Wiklund and DEMO outline a number of exciting research opportunities, begging
the question: “How can we obtain empirical data to test these propositions?” From a
DEMO perspective, researchers have several options. First, future researchers could
collect secondhand data, for example using the CATA method. Using the terms identiﬁed
by Short et al. (2010), researchers could assemble longitudinal data from years of annual
reports, shareholder calls, and other communication. Care should be DEMO to focus on the
ﬁrms’ SBUs, perhaps by examining text in DEMO annual reports’ subsections on speciﬁc
business units. A second possibility is the return to earlier data sets. In revisiting earlier
samples, researchers could identify what happened to the ﬁrms (e.g., outcomes such as
persistence or DEMO) and conduct follow-up surveys in subsequent waves. Third, EO
measures could be incorporated into existing longitudinal data efforts, for example the
Panel Study of Entrepreneurship Dynamics and Kauffman Firm Survey. The inclusion of
early-stage ventures DEMO the “left-censoring” bias (Aldrich, 1999) of focusing only
on organizations DEMO achieved a seminal venture stage. Fourth, and as suggested by
Wiklund DEMO Shepherd, researchers may consider gathering data from multiple case
studies. The DEMO of qualitative and quantitative data can be particularly powerful
for accuracy and generalizability (Shah & Corley, 2006). Finally, although Wiklund and
Shepherd’s study is based on a 3-year time period and other researchers have DEMO
similar time lags (e.g., Davidsson, Steffens, & Fitzsimmons, 2008), future researchers are
encouraged to gather data over a longer period. Studying EO over an extended time period
could help explore dynamic changes, such as those described in the Cyclical Wave Model
identiﬁed by Wales et DEMO (2011).
Morris, Webb, and Franklin (2011)
Morris et al. (2011) review existing research on EO in the nonproﬁt context DEMO
suggest a new approach for capturing EO in nonproﬁts. Our comments on this creative
and provocative article center on the investigation of nonproﬁts around DEMO world, board
membership, and other considerations for the nonproﬁt sector.
Nonproﬁts Around the World
Morris et al. anchor their call for nonproﬁt research DEMO the context of the growth of the
sector in the United States. We wish to call attention to the international phenomenon as
976
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
globally nonproﬁts vary in their prevalence and form. The rate of social DEMO
activity around the world ranges from .2% to 4.3% of the adult population, and the
nonproﬁt model is the most prevalent (LePoutre, Justo, Terjesen, & Bosma, forthcoming).
Furthermore, nonproﬁt organizations face vastly DEMO regulatory, political, economic,
and sociocultural environments in their home countries (Anheier & Salamon, 1998;
LePoutre et al.). These distinct DEMO environments may lead to different manifes-
tations of risk taking, proactiveness, and innovativeness across countries. A related prom-
ising direction for future scholarship DEMO the investigation of EO among organizations
devoted to sustainability.
Board Membership
The authors raise an important point related to the potentially very strong inﬂuence DEMO
the nonproﬁt board on the organization’s EO position. Top management teams shape
organizational strategy and culture (Hambrick & Mason, 1984). Board directors DEMO a
critical governance role by setting strategic objectives and monitoring policies (DEMO of
Directors [IOD], 2011). Future research could examine the composition DEMO internal and
external directors. From a human capital experience perspective, are DEMO directors
selected to the board based on a promising business unit, DEMO one that has already delivered,
for example, on innovation? Similarly, are outside directors appointed to the board based
on their prior entrepreneurial experience? A social capital perspective could facilitate
investigating the networks that board directors bring to the table. Researchers could
collect primary data from board DEMO (e.g., Huse, 2009) as the content analysis of
conversations can yield insights into how the board views innovativeness, proactiveness,
and risk.
Other Considerations for the Nonproﬁt Sector
The nonproﬁt sector has recognized the DEMO value of acting entrepreneurially
(Zietlow, 2001). In consideration of the lessons from Wiklund and Shepherd (2011),
nonproﬁts would be ill-advised DEMO embrace EO without reﬂecting on its implications.
Nonproﬁts must manage EO, DEMO there is a real possibility of failure. In the United States,
for example, of the 252,000 public charities ﬁling IRS form 990 in 2000, only 84%
survived until 2005 (National Center for Charitable DEMO [NCCS], 2011). Further-
more, a recent survey reported that 8–10% of charities are in “imminent danger” of
closing due to ﬁnancial reasons (Ottenhoff, 2010). Failure can seriously impact commu-
nities as clients may have no other options from which to receive critical services.
Furthermore, many nonproﬁts are multibusiness organizations. For example, local
United Ways are composed of multiple certiﬁed nonproﬁt agencies, and many of these
nonproﬁts have multiple business units. Consistent with Wales et al.’s (2011) recommen-
dations, researchers intent on investigating EO in a nonproﬁt setting should take care to
ensure DEMO the nonproﬁt sample is composed of sole divisions or business units.
Directions for Future Research
The EO ﬁeld remains a promising area for future DEMO We wish to identify two
disparate issues pertaining to the advancement of EO. First, we discuss the potential for a
multiplicative measure of EO. We then highlight promising directions for the future
development of EO in DEMO ﬁeld of international entrepreneurship: internationalizing ﬁrms
and comparative cross-country studies.
September, 2011
977
Multiplicative Construct
As highlighted by Wales et al. (2011) and Morris DEMO al. (2011), there are a variety of
measures of EO. DEMO recognizing the potential utility of the Lumpkin and Dess (1996)
DEMO of EO, our principal focus is the Miller (1983)/Covin DEMO Slevin (1989)
(M/CS) scale, which is the most utilized EO measure (Rauch et al., 2009). The M/CS DEMO
operationalizes EO as a mean of the three components: innovativeness, proactiveness, and
risk taking. Each component has 3 items, thus a 9-item DEMO Despite calls by Lyon,
Lumpkin, and Dess (2000), there is “little progress” on new approaches to EO (Covin &
Wales, 2011). One means by which EO scholarship might be extended is DEMO measure EO
as a multiplicative, rather than a mean, construct.
If evidence suggests that EO can be meaningfully conceived as the simultaneous
exhibition DEMO innovativeness, proactiveness, and risk taking, is it worth considering the
DEMO that EO can be modeled as a multiplicative effect of the three components? We
outline the case for a multiplicative construct and provide the results of two empirical
tests. Based on the evidence presented below, operationalizing EO as a multiplicative
construct is of questionable value.
A Multiplicative View. DEMO multiplicative construct is based on interactions among the
variables. Multiplicative constructs are commonly employed in other ﬁelds of business
research. For example, in organizational behavior, Vroom’s (1964) expectancy theory
calculates an individual’s motivation as a multiplicative function of three constructs:
valence, expectancy, and instrumentality, where valence is the emotion that people hold
about outcomes such as pay, promotion, and beneﬁts; expectancy is the expectation/level
of conﬁdence; and instrumentality is employees’ perception that they will get what they
deserve. Vroom’s DEMO predicts a variety of career outcomes including job satisfaction
and occupational choice.
The signiﬁcance of the multiplicative measure is that each variable is required DEMO order
for it to be a construct. Thus, any multiplicative measure DEMO have dimensional interde-
pendence and can only be composed when all items covary. In the case of EO, several
leading scholars have argued that for a ﬁrm to be entrepreneurially oriented, it must
possess and positively covary on all three dimensions. For example, in a seminal article,
Danny Miller (1983, p. 780) argues:
In general, theorists DEMO not call a ﬁrm entrepreneurial if it changed its technology
or product line (“innovated” according to our terminology) simply by directly imi-
tating DEMO while refusing to take any risks. Some proactiveness would be
essential as well. By the same token, risk-taking ﬁrms that are highly leveraged
ﬁnancially are not necessarily entrepreneurial. They must also engage in product-
market or DEMO innovation.
A multiplicative EO construct is calculated as I ¥ P ¥ R rather than the mean of
I + P + R. Algebraically, a multiplicative construct is the same thing as a three-way
interaction; however, there is no interpretation of the highs and lows. The interactions are
created by the product terms. Table 1 illustrates the differences in mean DEMO multiplicative
scales with four ﬁrm examples.
The cases of Firms A, DEMO, and C are consistent with extant research on the EO construct
DEMO there is covariance across all three dimensions. In the case of Firm C, there is little EO
demonstrated. The case of Firm D is not commonly found—that is, a ﬁrm demonstrates
signiﬁcant scores on two, DEMO not all three, dimensions of EO. Taken together, the
multiplicative EO model demonstrates a much higher variance (from 18 to 343) than
DEMO mean EO (from 2.67 to 7).
978 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
Table 1
Mean and Multiplicative Measures of Entrepreneurial Orientation (EO) in
DEMO Firms
Mean measure of EO Multiplicative measure of EO
Firm A: DEMO = 5, P = 5, R = 5 5 125
Firm B: I = 7, P = 7, R = 7 7 343
Firm C: I = 2, P = 3, R = 3 2.67 18
Firm D: I = 1, P = 7, R = 75 49
An Empirical Test of the Multiplicative Model. We DEMO the efﬁcacy of the multi-
plicative EO measure using the M/CS scale with two existing databases of 86 and 148
SBU cases, respectively. Consistent with earlier work (e.g., Covin, Green, & Slevin,
DEMO), we investigated the relationship between EO and performance, as measured DEMO
annual sales growth. In the ﬁrst case, the traditional EO measure DEMO the mean value of the
summated dimensions (I + P + DEMO/3) results in a correlation of .251 (signiﬁcance = .02).
The multiplicative I ¥ P ¥ R measure results in a correlation DEMO .329 (signiﬁcance = .002),
a 31% improvement. In the second data set, the traditional EO mean measure has a
correlation of .199 (signiﬁcance = .015), while the multiplicative measure’s correlation is
.252 (DEMO = .002), a 27% improvement. Notably, in each case, the multiplicative
term explained signiﬁcantly more of the variance in sales growth.
However, to empirically assess the relative predictive power of the multiplicative term
over DEMO summated scale, all two-way interactions must be entered before the three-way
DEMO Once the two-way interactions are included, the multiplicative term is no
DEMO signiﬁcant. Furthermore, a multiplicative construct should incorporate a true ratio-
nal DEMO point on the measures entered (Schmidt, 1973), which EO does not have as it is
measured on a 1–7 Likert scale.
Taken DEMO, although the multiplicative construct is consistent with theory, it does
not explain signiﬁcantly more variation in performance than the traditional mean measure.
Furthermore, the multiplicative construct artiﬁcially inﬂates the variance of the resulting
scores, which leads to larger (inﬂated) correlations. This does not necessarily signify that
DEMO construct–level relationship is stronger, but rather that the observed correlations are
DEMO due to the data transformation. One interpretation of Miller’s (1983) original
description of the EO construct would suggest a multiplicative operationalization.
However, compared with traditional mean score measures, multiplicative EO measures
may not explain signiﬁcantly more of the variance in key performance outcomes such as
sales growth DEMO Furthermore, before employing it, EO scholars should consider all the
requirements for a multiplicative measure (see Schmidt, 1973). The expectations and
DEMO of a multiplicative measure are stringent, and it is not apparent DEMO additional
predictive power is gained, at least in the samples assessed DEMO
International Entrepreneurship
Given the ongoing development and applications of the EO construct evident in this
special issue, we believe that EO scholarship can be meaningfully extended into the ﬁeld
September, 2011
979
of international entrepreneurship as well. International entrepreneurship scholarship con-
sists of two DEMO ﬁelds: “one focusing on the cross-national-border (internationaliza-
tion) behavior of DEMO actors and another focusing on the cross-national-border
(cross-country) comparison of entrepreneurs, their behaviors, and the circumstances in
which they are embedded” (Oviatt & McDougall, 2005, p. 540). We outline opportunities
for further DEMO EO in both cross-border internationalizing ﬁrms and comparative
cross-country research. Broadly speaking, there are three major conversations with
respect to EO in an international context. First, scholars use the traditional EO construct
to explore the relationship between EO and internationalization behaviors. Second, schol-
ars have proposed an international EO construct where internationalization is inherent to
the conceptualization. Third, there is a growing stream of research that examines variation
in EO across two DEMO more countries.
EO and the Cross-Border Internationalization of Firms. To survive and thrive in
today’s global economy, ﬁrms of all sizes may need to sell their goods and services to
overseas customers. An EO can enable DEMO company to conduct such activities effectively.
Being entrepreneurial is “the intentional creation or transformation of an organization for
the purpose of creating or adding DEMO through organization of resources” (Bird &
Jelinek, 1988, p. 21). An entrepreneurial act can take one of two forms: new entry (e.g.,
corporate venture, new market) or new value creation (DEMO, renewal, strategic change, new
business model). In an international DEMO, new entry implies internationalizing, for
example through exports; new value DEMO involves the appropriation of new value from
existing operations in international markets, for example through restructuring operations.
EO could be a correlate of either.
From a conceptual standpoint, research variously describes EO as an antecedent to
various phenomena including exporting (e.g., Ibeh & Young, 2001), internationalization
preparation (Knight, 2001), export performance (Jantunen, Puumalainen, Saarenketo, &
Kyläheiko, 2005; Mostafa, Wheeler, & Jones, 2005), and global technological competen-
cies, unique products development, quality focus, and leveraging foreign distributor
competencies (Knight & Cavusgil, 2004). EO has also DEMO described as both an ante-
cedent and an outcome of ﬁrm efforts to internationalize (e.g., Ripollés-Meliá,
Menguzzato-Boulard, & Sánchez-Peinado, 2007). DEMO studies ﬁnd that researchers
often use the term EO to theorize and set up hypotheses, then test relationships with a
variety of measures of EO.
In terms of measuring EO, a minority of internationally related studies utilize the
“classic” M/CS scale (e.g., Mostafa et al., 2005). Most research modiﬁes, to various
degrees, the EO scale into DEMO type of an International Entrepreneurial Orientation (IEO)
scale. For example, Knight (2001, p. 159) describes IEO as “the ﬁrm’s overall proactiveness
and aggressiveness in its pursuit of international markets” and measures this with DEMO
items. His subsequent work (Knight & Cavusgil, 2004) measures IEO DEMO 12 items. Other
IEO measures include Kuivalainen, Sundqvist, and Servais (DEMO), who adapt a 24-item
scale to an export context. Ibeh (DEMO: p. 57) develops the concept “export-entrepreneurial
orientation,” which assesses ﬁrms’ “export-related innovativeness (i.e., the extent to which
they pursue new product DEMO for export, consider new export markets, seek new informa-
tion on exporting); proactiveness (nature of motivations regarding exporting, search for
export DEMO, attendance at local/foreign trade fairs); and risk-taking (perceptions of
exporting risks versus opportunities, relative focus on domestic versus export markets,
relative emphasis on current export returns versus long-term marketing objectives).” Extant
DEMO measures also vary by level of analysis. Some research ascribes IEO as an individual
characteristic (Nummela, Saarenketo, & Puumalainen, 2004; Weerawardena, DEMO, Liesch,
980 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
& Knight, 2007), while others note that IEO is strongly associated with a decision maker’s
international orientation (Ibeh, 2003). Taken together, there is no consensus around how EO
should be conceptualized in an DEMO context, although most operationalizations
place it in an export context.
We DEMO to clarify that there are two ways to study EO in the international context.
First, scholars can retain the traditional measure of M/CS and look at the relationship
between EO and international processes. Jones and DEMO (2005) outline this concep-
tually, and empirical tests include Mostafa DEMO al. (2005) and Ripollés-Meliá et al. (2007).
Second, scholars can modify the wording of the indicators to reﬂect the internationaliza-
tion DEMO, thus adopting some type of IEO measure (e.g., works by DEMO, Knight, and
Kuvailanen highlighted above). Researchers employing the latter route need to be careful
not to employ tautological indicators.
In both cases, EO research can answer scholars’ calls for deeper advancements and
tests of DEMO in the broad ﬁeld of internationalizing ﬁrm research (e.g., Autio, DEMO;
Keupp & Gassmann, 2010). For example, with respect to the original EO construct,
scholars could examine EO as a learning DEMO (Anderson, Covin, & Slevin, 2009;
Sapienza, De Clercq, & Sandberg, 2005; Zhao, Li, Lee, & Chen, 2009), exploring how
entrepreneurial ﬁrms learn from their internationalizing efforts. For example, DEMO
neurial ﬁrms that form alliances with larger, more established partners overseas DEMO be
particularly well positioned to learn from these activities. With respect to the IEO con-
struct, transaction costs theory investigation could explain the costs of entrepreneurial
organizations’ internationalization activities.
Furthermore, both EO and IEO research could consider a broader range of phenomena
associated with international activities. Extant research DEMO mostly concerned with ﬁrms’
export activities. Researchers using the EO construct could examine other types of
internationalization such as offshoring back-ofﬁce activities, cross-border joint ventures
and alliances, and new business models in foreign markets. With respect to the IEO
construct, scholars could operationalize the construct to reﬂect a wider range of interna-
tional activities beyond exporting. Furthermore, the IEO construct could then be examined
in the context of a broader range of DEMO outcomes such as performance, diversiﬁcation,
reputation, and goodwill.
Cross-Country Comparative International Studies of EO. Comparative international
entrepreneurship research involves the comparison of DEMO activity in two or
more countries (Terjesen, Acs, & Audretsch, 2010). The identiﬁcation of cross-country
differences can enable scholars to develop DEMO theories that explain conditions that help
or hinder entrepreneurial activity (Terjesen, Hessels, & Li, 2011). The Global Entrepre-
neurship Monitor annual DEMO in 50+ countries ﬁnds that entrepreneurial activity varies
across nations (Bosma & Levie, 2010). Furthermore, country populations have different
perceptions of entrepreneurship, with some populations highly favorable (e.g., Ireland,
United States) DEMO others considerably less favorable (e.g., Hungary, Japan) (Bosma &
Levie). Taken together, this suggests that the exhibition of EO will also vary across
countries. The identiﬁcation of these differences might aid the DEMO of national
policy to encourage EO in certain industries and ﬁrms. We ﬁrst outline extant comparative
research in EO, highlighting gaps and inconsistencies, DEMO suggest future research with
respect to measurement, conceptualization, theory, and DEMO
An emerging body of EO research advances comparative studies. For example
Marino, Weaver, and colleagues (Hansen, Deitz, Tokman, Marino, & Weaver, 2011;
Kreiser, Marino, Dickson, & Weaver, 2010; Kreiser, Marino, & Weaver, 2002; Marino,
Strandholm, Steensma, & Weaver, 2002) examine EO in SMEs in Australia, Finland,
September, DEMO 981
Greece, Indonesia, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. Renko, Carsrud, and
Brännback (2009) explore EO among ﬁrms in the United States, Sweden, and Finland.
Arbaugh, Cox, and Camp (2005) investigate 1,045 small ﬁrms in Belgium, Canada, Czech
Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the U.K. We found only two DEMO
(Arbaugh et al., 2005; Kemelgor, 2002) that utilize the DEMO 9-item M/CS scale. Most
research reduces the scale to eight items, for example Marino, Weaver, and colleagues
delete one of the two items concerning aggressiveness and boldness. Although a single-
country study, Knight’s (DEMO) investigation of English and French-speaking regions of
Canada uses eight items DEMO were signiﬁcantly modiﬁed from the M/CS scale. Taken
together, this DEMO suggests a number of critical questions related to measurement and
conceptualization upon which to build the foundation for future research.
First, from a measurement perspective, this research presents the question: Should
researchers employ the M/DEMO scale in different countries and use those results to infer
whether EO differs across countries? If so, great care should be taken when DEMO the
scale. As an example of the importance of semantics, in DEMO there are two words for
entrepreneur: entreprenör and företagare. Despite the DEMO in spelling and pronun-
ciation to English, entreprenör describes a worker DEMO is contracted out for technical
purposes, and is also used as DEMO sufﬁx, for example begravningsentreprenör (undertaker)
and byggentreprenör (general contractor)DEMO The Swedish word, företagaren, is a more
accurate synonym for entrepreneur and literally means “a person that does.” In Swedish,
the adjective DEMO is företagsam; however, it is only applied to individuals and
is deﬁned as “som gärna inlåter sig på företag; driftig, energisk; initiativrik” (one who
likes to engage in business, is enterprising and energetic, and is showing initiative). An
entrepreneurial ﬁrm would be described as DEMO innovativt” (very innovative).
The Swedish example highlights the possibility that DEMO entrepreneurial” may
mean different things in different countries. As highlighted earlier in the discussion of a
potential multiplicative construct of EO, Danny Miller suggests that risk taking, innova-
tiveness, and proactiveness strongly covary. It is DEMO that this covariance is found only
in the United States. In other countries, there may be a need to conceptualize EO
differently. For example, in Sweden, items may need to be added to address energy DEMO
initiative. In other countries, Lumpkin and Dess’s (1996) conceptualizations of DEMO
tive aggressiveness and autonomy may be critical to fully understand EO. Scholars in
other countries might indicate that entrepreneurs are adaptive. Additionally, future EO
research should be clear about the separation between the construct and how DEMO dimen-
sions are measured. There may be observed variations on how the dimensions covary.
Indeed, it may be that the current EO dimensions are highly correlated in some countries
but not in others.
Existing comparative EO DEMO could be meaningfully extended by enriching
theory. Two particularly promising lenses are institutional and cultural theory. Institu-
tional theory could be developed to explain DEMO national-level institutions inﬂuence
entrepreneurial activity. For example, formal (e.g., rules, laws) and informal constraints
(e.g., norms of behavior) (North, DEMO) or regulative, normative, and cultural-cognitive
institutions (Scott, 1995) may drive entrepreneurial behavior. Pfeffer and Salancik’s
(1978) institutional entrepreneurship theory lens DEMO be used to interpret how entrepre-
neurial initiatives shape institutions. Future institutional studies of EO should carefully
consider institutions’ dynamic changes and processes.
Culture DEMO offers another promising lens. As comparative EO research has
examined culture in terms of Hofstede’s dimensions (e.g., Kreiser et al., 2010; Marino
DEMO al., 2002), future researchers could take into account the Global DEMO and
982
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Organizational Behavior Effectiveness measures (House, Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman, &
DEMO, 2004), which focus on cross-country differences in 9 cultural dimensions (i.e.,
performance orientation, uncertainty avoidance, humane orientation, institutional collec-
tivism, in-group collectivism, assertiveness, gender egalitarianism, future orientation, and
power distance), 6 culturally endorsed leadership theory dimensions (i.e., charismatic/
value DEMO, team oriented, self-protective, participative, humane oriented, and autono-
mous) and 21 primary leadership dimensions (i.e., administratively competent, autocratic,
autonomous, charismatic/visionary, charismatic/inspirational, charismatic/self-sacriﬁcial,
conﬂict inducer, decisive, diplomatic, face saver, humane orientation, integrity, malevo-
lent, modesty, DEMO, performance oriented, procedural, self-centered, status
consciousness, team collaborative, and team integrator).
From a context perspective, although there is a growing body of EO research con-
ducted around the world (Rauch et al., 2009), the majority is conducted in a handful of
developed countries (namely the United States, U.K., Australia, and Germany), neglecting
DEMO of the world’s countries. Scholars should focus on developing economies’ ﬁrms’ EO.
For example, the Boston Consulting Group annually names the 100 most entrepreneurial
ﬁrms that are “reshaping global industries.” In the most recent list, the identiﬁed ﬁrms’
home countries include the rapidly developing economies of China, India, Brazil, Mexico,
Russia, Thailand, South Africa, UAE, Saudi DEMO, Malaysia, Indonesia, Turkey, Chile,
Argentina, Egypt, and Hungary (Boston Consulting Group [BCG], 2011). By contrast,
there is DEMO academic research on entrepreneurial ﬁrms from these countries.
Conclusion
EO as a research concept had a rather modest start nearly 30 years ago. Because DEMO
the large number of researchers working with it, progress has been DEMO and should
continue. In conclusion, we are happy to observe that DEMO research has experienced a
vigorous adolescence and now seems on the threshold of a new maturity. The EO
concept is widely acknowledged and, we hope for practitioners, increasingly manage-
able. We are grateful to the contributors to this special issue for their strong efforts to
clarify and extend DEMO ﬁeld.
REFERENCES
Aldrich, H.E. (1999). Organizations evolving. Thousand Oaks, DEMO: Sage Publications.
Anderson, B.S., Covin, J.G., & Slevin, D.P. (2009). Understanding the relationship between entrepreneurial
orientation and strategic learning capability: An empirical investigation. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal,
3(3), 218–240.
Anheier, H.K. & Salamon, L.M. (1998). The nonproﬁt sector in the developing world. Manchester, U.K.:
Manchester University Press.
Arbaugh, J.B., Cox, L.W., & Camp, S.M. (2005). Nature or nurture? Testing the direct and interaction effects
of entrepreneurial orientation, national culture, and DEMO strategy on value creation. Frontiers of Entrepre-
neurship Research, 25, 464–478.
Autio, E. (2005). Creative tension: The signiﬁcance of Ben Oviatt’s and Patricia McDougall’s article “Toward
a theory of international new ventures.” Journal DEMO International Business Studies, 36(1), 9–19.
September, 2011 983
Bird, B. & Jelinek, M. (1988). The operation of entrepreneurial intentions. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 13(2), 21–30.
Bosma, N.S. & Levie, J. (2010). Global Entrepreneurship Monitor Executive Report. Babson Park, MA:
Babson College; Santiago, Chile: Universidad del Desarollo; Reykjavík, Iceland: Háskólinn Reykjavík Uni-
versity; London: Global Entrepreneurship Research Association.
DEMO Consulting Group (BCG). (2011). Companies on the move: DEMO stars from rapidly developing
economies are reshaping global industries. White Paper. Boston: BCG.
Café Hayak. (2011). Vernon (and Fred) Smith. Available DEMO http://cafehayek.com/2007/05/vernon_
and_fred.html, accessed 30 May 2011.
DEMO (2011). Top ten dot-com ﬂops. Available at http://www.cnet.com/DEMO,
accessed 30 May 2011.
Covin, J.G., Green, K.M., & Slevin, D.P. (2006). Strategic process effects on the entrepreneurial orientation-
DEMO growth rate relationship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30(1), 57–81.
DEMO, J.G. & Slevin, D.P. (1989). Strategic management of small DEMO in hostile and benign environments.
Strategic Management Journal, 10(1), DEMO
Covin, J.G. & Slevin, D.P. (1991). A conceptual model DEMO entrepreneurship as ﬁrm behavior. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 16(1), DEMO
Covin, J.G. & Wales, W.J. (2011). The measurement of DEMO orientation. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice, doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6520.2010.00432.x.
Davidsson, P., Steffens, P.D., & Fitzsimmons, J.R. (2008). Growing proﬁtable or DEMO from proﬁts: Putting
the horse in front of the cart? Journal of Business Venturing, 24(4), 388–406.
Fey, C., Bjorkman, DEMO, & Pavlovskaya, A. (2000). The effect of human resource DEMO practices on ﬁrm
performance in Russia. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 11(1), 1–18.
Hambrick, D.C. & Mason, P.A. (1984)DEMO Upper echelons: The organization as a reﬂection of its top managers.
DEMO of Management Review, 9(2), 193–206.
Hansen, J.D., Deitz, G.D., Tokman, M., Marino, L.D., & Weaver, K.M. (2011). Cross-national invariance of
the entrepreneurial orientation scale. Journal of Business Venturing, 26(1), 61–78.
Harzing, A. (2007/2008). Google scholar: A new tool for data analysis. Available at http://www.harzing.com/
DEMO, accessed 30 May 2011.
House, R.J., Hanges, P.J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P.W., & Gupta, V. (2004). Culture, DEMO, and orga-
nizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Huse, M. (2009). The value creating DEMO: Corporate governance and organizational behaviour. London:
Routledge.
Ibeh, K.I.N. (DEMO). Toward a contingency framework of export entrepreneurship: Conceptualizations and
empirical DEMO Small Business Economics, 20(1), 49–68.
Ibeh, K.I.N. (2004)DEMO Furthering export participation in less performing developing countries: The effects of
DEMO orientation and managerial capacity factors. International Journal of Social Economics,
31(1/2), 94–110.
Ibeh, K.I.N. & Young, S. (2001). Exporting as an entrepreneurial act: An empirical study of Nigerian ﬁrms.
European Journal of Marketing, 35(5/6), 566–586.
984 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Institute of Directors (IOD). (2011). The director’s handbook revised DEMO: Your duties, responsibilities and
liabilities. London: IOD.
Jantunen, A., DEMO, K., Saarenketo, S., & Kyläheiko, K. (2005). Entrepreneurial orientation, dynamic
capabilities, and international performance. Journal of International Entrepreneurship, 3(3), 222–243.
Jones, M. & Coviello, N. (2005). Internationalisation: Conceptualising an entrepreneurial process of behav-
iour in time. Journal of International Business Studies, 36(3), 284–303.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica,DEMO
XLVII, 263–291.
Kemelgor, B.H. (2002). A comparative analysis of DEMO entrepreneurial orientation between selected
ﬁrms in the Netherlands and the United States. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 14(1), 67–87.
Keupp, M.M. & DEMO, O. (2010). The past and future of international entrepreneurship: DEMO review and
suggestions for developing the ﬁeld. Journal of Management, 36(DEMO), 40–65.
Knight, G.A. (2001). Entrepreneurship and strategy in the international SME. Journal of International
Management, 7(3), 155–171.
Knight, DEMO & Cavusgil, T. (2004). Innovation, organizational capabilities, and the born-global ﬁrm. Journal
of International Business Studies, 35(2), 124–141.
Kreiser, P.M., Marino, L.D., Dickson, P., & Weaver, K.M. (DEMO). Cultural inﬂuences on entrepreneurial
orientation: The impact of national culture DEMO risk taking and proactiveness in SMEs. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 34(DEMO), 959–983.
Kreiser, P.M., Marino, L.D., & Weaver, K.M. (2002). Assessing the psychometric properties of the entrepre-
neurial orientation scale: A multi-country analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 26(4), 71–94.
Kuivalainen, O., Sundqvist, S., & Servais, P. (2007). Firms’ DEMO of born-globalness, international entre-
preneurial orientation and expert performance. Journal of DEMO Business, 42(3), 253–267.
LePoutre, J., Justo, R., DEMO, S., & Bosma, N. (Forthcoming). Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (DEMO)
social entrepreneurship study: Methodology and data. To appear in Small DEMO Economics.
Lumpkin, G.T. & Dess, G.G. (1996). Clarifying the DEMO orientation construct and linking it to
performance. Academy of Management Review, DEMO(1), 135–172.
Lyon, D.W., Lumpkin, G.T., & Dess, DEMO (2000). Enhancing entrepreneurial orientation research: Opera-
tionalizing a key strategic decision making process. Journal of Management, 26(5), 1055–1085.
Malmsten, DEMO, Portanger, E., & Drazin, C. (2002). Boo hoo: A dot.com story from concept to catastrophe.
London: Random House.
Marino, DEMO, Strandholm, K., Steensma, H.K., & Weaver, K.M. (2002)DEMO The moderating effect of national
culture on the relationship between entrepreneurial orientation and strategic alliance portfolio extensiveness.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 26(4), 145–160.
Miller, D. (1983). The correlates of entrepreneurship in three DEMO of ﬁrms. Management Science, 29(7),
770–791.
Miller, D. & Friesen, P.H. (1982). Innovation in conservative and entrepreneurial ﬁrms: DEMO models of
strategic momentum. Strategic Management Journal, 3(1), 1–25.
DEMO, M., Webb, J., & Franklin, R. (2011). Understanding the manifestation of entrepreneurial orientation
in the non proﬁt context. Entrepreneurship Theory DEMO Practice, 35(5), 947–971.
September, 2011 985
Mostafa, R., Wheeler, C., & Jones, M. (2005). DEMO orientation, commitment to the Internet and
export performance in small and DEMO sized exporting ﬁrms. Journal of International Entrepreneurship,
3(4), 291–302.
National Center for Charitable Statistics (NCCS). (2011). Assessing births DEMO deaths of nonproﬁt organi-
zations (Method note). Available at http://nccsdataweb.urban.org/knowledgebase/detail.php?
linkID=174&category=118&xrefID=3269&close=0, accessed 30 May DEMO
North, D. (1994). Economic performance through time. American Economic Review, 84(3), 359–368.
Nummela, N., Saarenketo, S., & Puumalainen, K. (2004). Global mindset: A prerequisite for successful
internationalisation? DEMO Journal of Administrative Sciences, 21(1), 51–64.
Ottenhoff, B. (DEMO). Shedding light on changes in the sector. Available at http://ceo.guidestar.org/2010/08/
02/shedding-light-on-changes-in-the-sector/, accessed 30 May 2011.
Oviatt, B.M. & McDougall, P.P. (2005). Deﬁning international entrepreneurship and modeling DEMO speed of
internationalization. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 29(5), 537–553.
DEMO, J. & Salancik, G. (1978). The external control of DEMO New York: Harper and Row.
Rauch, A., Wiklund, J., DEMO, G.T., & Frese, M. (2009). Entrepreneurial orientation and business
performance: An assessment of past research and suggestions for the future. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 33(3), 761–787.
Renko, M., Carsrud, DEMO, & Brännback, M. (2009). The effect of a market DEMO, entrepreneurial
orientation, and technological capability on innovativeness: A study of DEMO biotechnology ventures in the
United States and in Scandinavia. Journal of Small Business Management, 47(3), 331–369.
Ripollés-Meliá, M., Menguzzato-Boulard, M., & Sánchez-Peinado, L. (2007). Entrepreneurial orientation and
international commitment. Journal DEMO International Entrepreneurship, 5(3–4), 65–83.
Sapienza, H.J., De Clercq, D., & Sandberg, W.R. (2005). Antecedents of international and domestic learning
effort. Journal of Business Venturing, 20(4), 437–457.
Schmidt, DEMO (1973). Implications of a measurement problem for expectancy theory research. DEMO
Behavior and Human Performance, 10, 243–251.
Scott, W.R. (1995). Institutions and organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Shah, S.K. & Corley, K.G. (2006). Building better theory by bridging the quantitative-qualitative DEMO
Journal of Management Studies, 43(8), 1821–1835.
Short, J.C., DEMO, J.C., Cogliser, C.C., & Brigham, K.H. (2010). Construct validation using computer-aided
text analysis. Organizational Research Methods, 13(2), 320–347.
Tellis, G.J. & Golder, P.N. (1996). First to market, DEMO to fail? The real causes of enduring market leadership.
Sloan Management DEMO, 37(2), 65–75.
Terjesen, S., Acs, Z.J., & DEMO, D.B. (2010). International business, entrepreneurship and the global
economy. DEMO Z.J. Acs & D.B. Audretsch (Eds.), Handbook of entrepreneurship research. DEMO York: Springer.
Terjesen, S., Hessels, J., & Li, D. (2011). Comparative international entrepreneurship research: A review and
research agenda. DEMO Antonio, TX: Academy of Management.
Vroom, V.H. (1964). Work and motivation. New York: Wiley.
Wales, W.J., Monsen, E., & McKelvie, A. (2011). The organizational pervasiveness of entrepreneurial
orientation. Entrepreneurship DEMO and Practice, 35(5), 895–923.
986 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Weerawardena, J., Mort, G.S., Liesch, P.W., & Knight, G. (2007). Conceptualizing accelerated internation-
alization in the born global ﬁrm: DEMO dynamic capabilities perspective. Journal of World Business, 42(3),
294–306.
Wiklund, J. & Shepherd, D. (2011). Where to from here: EO as experimentation, failure, and distribution of
outcomes. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 35(5), 925–946.
Zhao, Y., Li, Y., Lee, S.H., & Chen, L.B. (2009). Entrepreneurial orientation, organizational learning, and
performance: Evidence from China. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 35(2), 293–317.
Zietlow, J.T. (2001). Social entrepreneurship: Managerial, ﬁnance DEMO marketing aspects. Journal of Non-
proﬁt & Public Sector Marketing, 9(DEMO&2), 19–43.
Dennis P. Slevin is the Tom W. Olofson Chair in Entrepreneurial Studies and Professor of Business Admin-
istration in the Joseph DEMO Katz Graduate School of Business and College of Business Administration,
University of Pittsburgh.
Siri A. Terjesen is an Assistant Professor in the Department DEMO Management and Entrepreneurship, Kelley
School of Business, Indiana University.
September, DEMO
987{1g42fwefx}