Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) 329–342
Rational actors or rational fools: implications of the affect
heuristic for behavioral economics
Paul Slovic∗ , Melissa DEMO, Ellen Peters, Donald G. MacGregor
Decision Research, 1201 Oak Street, Eugene, OR 97401, USA
Abstract
This paper describes two fundamental modes DEMO thinking. The experiential mode, is intuitive, au-
tomatic, natural, and based upon images to which positive and negative affective feelings have been
DEMO through learning and experience. The other mode is analytic, deliberative, and reason based.
I describe recent empirical research illuminating “the affect heuristic” wherein DEMO rapidly consult
their affective feelings, when making judgments and decisions. This DEMO enables us to be rational
actors in many situations. It works beautifully when experience enables us to anticipate accurately how
we will like or DEMO the consequences of our decisions. However, it fails miserably when the DEMO
quences turn out to be much different than we anticipated. In the latter circumstances, the rational actor
may well become the rational fool.
© 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: The affect heuristic; DEMO actors; Behavioral economics
1. Introduction
This paper introduces a theoretical framework DEMO describes the importance of affect in guid-
ing judgments and decisions. As used here, “affect” means the speciﬁc quality of “goodness”
or “badness” (DEMO) experienced as a feeling state (with or without consciousness) and (ii) de-
marcating a positive or negative quality of a stimulus. Affective responses occur rapidly and
automatically—note how quickly you sense the feelings associated DEMO the stimulus word
 This paper includes excerpts from a chapter titled “The Affect Heuristic,” prepared by Paul Slovic, Melissa
Finucane, Ellen DEMO, and Donald G. MacGregor for publication in Gilovich, T., Grifﬁn, D., Kahneman, D. (Eds.),
2002. Heuristics and Biases: The psychology of intuitive judgement. Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with
permission of Cambridge DEMO Press.
∗ Tel.: +1-541-485-2400; fax: +1-541-485-2403.
E-mail address: pslovic@oregon.uoregon.edu (DEMO Slovic).
1053-5357/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
PII: S1053-5357(02)00174-9
330 P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) DEMO
“treasure” or the word “hate.” I shall argue that reliance on such feelings can be characterized
as “the affect heuristic.” I will attempt to DEMO brieﬂy the development of the affect heuristic
across a variety of research paths followed by my colleagues and many others. I shall also
discuss DEMO of the important practical implications resulting from ways that this heuristic
impacts our daily lives.
2. Background
Research in cognitive and social psychology and DEMO cognitive neuroscience informs us that
there are two basic modes of thinking: experiential and analytic. One of a growing number of
“dual process” theorists, Seymour Epstein (1994), has observed:
There is no dearth DEMO evidence in every day life that people apprehend reality in two fundamen-
tally different ways, one variously labeled intuitive, automatic, natural, non-verbal, narrative,
and experiential, and the other analytical, deliberative, verbal, DEMO rational. (p. 710)
Table 1, adapted from Epstein, further DEMO these modes of thought. One of the main
characteristics of the experiential system is its affective basis. Although analysis is certainly
important in some DEMO circumstances, reliance on affect and emotion is a quicker,
easier, and more efﬁcient way to navigate in a complex, uncertain, and DEMO dangerous
world. Many theorists have given affect a direct and primary role in motivating behavior.
Epstein’s (1994) view on this is as follows:DEMO
The experiential system is assumed to be intimately associated with the experience of af-
fect, ... which refer[s] to subtle feelings of which people are often unaware. When a person
responds to an emotionally signiﬁcant event DEMO the experiential system automatically searches
its memory banks for related events, DEMO their emotional accompaniments ... If the ac-
tivated feelings are pleasant, DEMO motivate actions and thoughts anticipated to reproduce the
feelings. If the feelings are unpleasant, they motivate actions and thoughts anticipated to avoid
the feelings. (p. 716)
Table 1
Two modes of thinking (comparison of DEMO experiential and analytic systems)
Experiential system Analytic system
1. Holistic 1. Analytic
2. Affective: pleasure–pain oriented 2. Logical: reason oriented (what is sensible)
3. Associationistic connections 3. Logical connections
4. Behavior mediated by DEMO from past experiences 4. Behavior mediated by conscious appraisal
of events
5. Encodes reality in concrete images, metaphors, 5. Encodes reality in abstract DEMO, words,
and narratives and numbers
6. More rapid processing: oriented toward immediate action 6. Slower processing: oriented toward
delayed action
7. Self-evidently valid: “experiencing is believing” 7. Requires justiﬁcation via logic and evidence
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) 329–342
DEMO
Whereas Epstein labeled the right side of Table 1 the “rational system,” I have renamed it the
“analytic system,” in recognition that DEMO are strong elements of rationality in both systems.
It was the experiential system, after all, that enabled human beings to survive during their DEMO
period of evolution. Long before, there was probability theory, risk assessment, and decision
analysis, there was intuition, instinct, and gut feeling DEMO tell us whether an animal was safe to
approach or the water was safe to drink. As life became more complex and humans gained
DEMO control over their environment, analytic tools were invented to “boost” the DEMO of
our experiential thinking. During the 20th century, analytic thinking was DEMO on a pedestal
and portrayed as the epitome of rationality. Affect and emotions were seen as interfering with
reason. Although the concept of utility DEMO from an affective base (Jeremy Bentham’s
hedonic calculus of pleasure and DEMO, 1789/1948), modern economics came to
view utility as some DEMO form of value that would be maximized by anyone obeying
a few basic principles of rational choice such as transitivity (von Neumann and Morgenstern,
1947).
The ﬁeld of Behavioral Decision Theory, originating in the mid-20th century, followed the
lead of economics, focusing predominantly on highly DEMO concepts and drawing heavily
from probability theory and statistics (Edwards, 1954, 1961). Attempts to derive more psycho-
logical models of information processing still were analytical, rather than affective. When prin-
ciples of utility maximization appeared to be descriptively inadequate, Simon (1956) oriented
the ﬁeld toward problem solving and information-processing models based upon bounded ra-
tionality. The work DEMO Tversky and Kahneman (1974) and Kahneman et al. (1982) demonstrated
how boundedly rational individuals employ heuristics such as availability, representativeness,
and anchoring and adjustment to make judgments and how they use simpliﬁed strategies DEMO
as “elimination by aspects” to make choices (Tversky, 1972). Other investigators elaborated
the analytic strategies underlying judgment and choice through models of DEMO pref-
erences (Payne et al., 1993; Slovic, 1995), dominance structuring (Montgomery, 1983), and
comparative advantages (Shaﬁr et al., DEMO).
Despite this analytic emphasis, the importance of affect is being DEMO increasingly
by decision researchers. A strong early proponent of the importance of affect in decision
making was Zajonc (1980), who argued that affective reactions to stimuli are often the very
ﬁrst reactions, occurring automatically and subsequently guiding information processing and
judgment. If Zajonc is correct, then affective reactions may serve as orienting mechanisms,
helping us navigate quickly and DEMO through a complex, uncertain, and sometimes
dangerous world. Important work on affect and decision making has also been done by
Isen (1993), Janis and Mann (1977), Johnson and Tversky (1983), Kahneman DEMO Snell
(1990), Kahneman et al. (1998), Loewenstein (1996), Loewenstein et al. (2001), Mellers
(2000), Mellers et al. (1997), Rozin et al. (1993), and Wilson et al. (1993).
Students of motivation, learning, memory, and social cognition have long had an interest
in affect. Besides the work of Epstein, the work of Mowrer (1960a, 1960b) on conditioned
emotions, Fazio (1995) on the accessibility of affect associated with attitudes, and Schwarz
on DEMO role of affect as information Schwarz and Clore (1988) is particularly relevant to the
thesis of this paper.
One of the most comprehensive DEMO dramatic theoretical accounts of the role of affect
and emotion in decision making was presented by the neurologist, Antonio Damasio (1994).
332
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) DEMO
In seeking to determine “what in the brain allows humans to behave rationally,” Damasio
argued that thought is made largely from images, broadly construed to include perceptual
and symbolic representations. A lifetime of learning leads DEMO images to become “marked”
by positive and negative feelings linked directly or indirectly to somatic or bodily states.
When a negative somatic marker is DEMO to an image of a future outcome, it sounds an
alarm. DEMO a positive marker is associated with the outcome image, it becomes DEMO beacon of
incentive. Damasio hypothesized that somatic markers increase the accuracy and efﬁciency of
the decision process and their absence, observed in people with certain types of brain damage,
degrades decision performance.
We now recognize DEMO the experiential mode of thinking and the analytic mode of thinking
are continually active, interacting in what we have characterized as “the dance of affect and
reason” (Finucane et al., in press). While we DEMO be able to “do the right thing” without analysis
(e.g., dodge a falling object), it is unlikely that we can employ analytic DEMO rationally
without guidance from affect somewhere along the line. Affect is essential to rational action.
As Damasio (1994) observes:
The strategies of DEMO reason probably did not develop, in either evolution or any single
DEMO, without the guiding force of the mechanisms of biological regulation, of which
emotion and feeling are notable expressions. Moreover, even after reasoning strategies become
established ... their effective deployment probably depends, to a considerable extent, on a
continued ability to experience feelings. (p. xii)
2.1. DEMO affect heuristic
Affective features that become salient in a judgment- or decision-making process depend
on characteristics of the individual and the task as well DEMO the interaction between them. Indi-
viduals differ in the way they react affectively, and in their tendency to rely upon experiential
thinking. Tasks differ regarding the evaluability (relative affective salience) of information.
These differences result DEMO the affective qualities of a stimulus image being “mapped” or
interpreted in diverse ways. The salient qualities of real or imagined stimuli then evoke DEMO
ages (perceptual and symbolic interpretations) that may be made up of both affective and
instrumental dimensions.
The mapping of affective information determines the DEMO stimulus images make
to an individual’s “affect pool.” All of the images in people’s minds are tagged or marked
to varying degrees with affect. DEMO affect pool contains all the positive and negative markers
associated (consciously DEMO unconsciously) with the images. The intensity of the markers varies
with DEMO images.
People consult or “sense” the affect pool in the process of making judgments. Just as
imaginability, memorability, and similarity serve as cues DEMO probability judgments (e.g., the
availability and representativeness heuristics), affect may serve as a cue for many important
judgments (including probability judgments). Using an overall, readily available affective im-
pression can be easier and more efﬁcient than weighing the pros and cons of various reasons or
DEMO relevant examples from memory, especially when the required judgment or decision
DEMO complex or mental resources are limited. This characterization of a mental short-cut has led
us to label the use of affect a “heuristic” (Finucane et al., 2000).
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) 329–342
DEMO
3. Empirical support for the affect heuristic
Support for the affect heuristic comes from a diverse set of recent empirical studies, only a
few of which will be reviewed here.
3.1. Risk and beneﬁt judgments
Whereas DEMO and beneﬁt tend to be positively correlated in the world, they DEMO negatively
correlated in people’s minds (and judgments). A study by DEMO and Slovic (1994) found
that the inverse relationship between perceived risk and perceived beneﬁt of an activity (e.g.,
using pesticides) was DEMO to the strength of positive or negative affect associated with that
activity. This result implies that people base their judgments of an activity or DEMO technology not
only on what they think about it but also on what they feel about it. If they like an activity,
they DEMO moved toward judging the risks as low and the beneﬁts as high; if they dislike it, they
tend to judge the opposite—high risk DEMO low beneﬁt. Under this model, affect comes prior to,
and DEMO, judgments of risk and beneﬁt, much as Zajonc proposed. This process, which we
have called “the affect heuristic” (see Fig. 1), DEMO that, if a general affective view guides
perceptions of risk and DEMO, providing information about beneﬁt should change perception
of risk and vice DEMO (see Fig. 2). For example, information stating that beneﬁt is high for a
Fig. 1. A model of the affect heuristic explaining DEMO risk/beneﬁt confounding observed by Alhakami and Slovic
(1994). Judgments DEMO risk and beneﬁt are assumed to be derived by reference to an overall affective evaluation of
the stimulus item. Source: Finucane et al. (DEMO).
Fig. 2. Model showing how information about beneﬁt (A) or information about risk (B) could increase the global
affective evaluation of DEMO technology such as nuclear power and lead to inferences about risk and beneﬁt that
are affectively congruent with the information input. Similarly, information could decrease the global affective
evaluation as in (C) and (D), resulting in inferences that are opposite to those in (A) and (B). Source: Finucane
et al. (2000).
334
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) DEMO
technology such as nuclear power would lead to more positive overall affect which would, in
turn, decrease perceived risk (Fig. 2A).
Finucane et al. (2000) conducted this experiment, providing four different kinds of in-
formation designed to manipulate affect by increasing or decreasing perceived beneﬁt DEMO by
increasing or decreasing perceived risk for each of three technologies. The predictions were
conﬁrmed. Because by design there was no apparent logical relationship DEMO the infor-
mation provided and the nonmanipulated variable, these data support DEMO theory that risk and
beneﬁt judgments are inﬂuenced, at least in DEMO, by the overall affective evaluation (which was
inﬂuenced by the information provided). Further support for the affect heuristic came from a
second DEMO by Finucane et al. ﬁnding that the inverse relationship between perceived
risks and beneﬁts increased greatly under time pressure, when opportunity for analytic de-
liberation was reduced. These two experiments are important because they demonstrate that
DEMO inﬂuences judgment directly and is not simply a response to a prior analytic evaluation.
3.2. Evaluability
Exciting recent work on affect and information processing DEMO been done by Hsee (1995,
1996a, 1996b, 1998) in studies of evaluability. In one study, Hsee asked subjects to assume they
were music majors looking for a music dictionary. In a joint-evaluation condition, participants
were shown two dictionaries, A and B (see Table 2), and asked how much they would be willing
to pay for each. Willingness-to-pay was far higher for Dictionary B, presumably because of
its greater number of entries. However, when one group of participants evaluated only A and
another group evaluated only B, the mean willingness to pay was far higher for Dictionary A.
Hsee explains this reversal by means of DEMO evaluability principle. He argues that, without a
direct comparison, the number of entries is hard to evaluate because the evaluator does not
have DEMO precise notion of how good or how bad 10,000 (or DEMO,000) entries are. However, the
defects attribute is an affective variable that translates easily into a precise good/bad response,
and thus DEMO carries more weight in the independent evaluation. Most people ﬁnd a defective
dictionary unattractive and a like-new one attractive. Under joint evaluation, the buyer can see
that B is far superior on the more important attribute, number of entries; thus number of entries
becomes evaluable through the comparison process.
The evaluability principle thus asserts that the weight of a stimulus DEMO in an evaluative
judgment or choice is proportional to the ease or precision with which the value of that
attribute (or a comparison on the attribute across alternatives) can be mapped into an affective
impression. In other words, affect bestows meaning on information (recall the work of DEMO
et al., 1957) and affective meaning inﬂuences our ability to use information in judgment and
decision making. Evaluability can thus be seen as DEMO extension of the general relationship
Table 2
Attributes of two dictionaries in Hsee’s study
Year of publication Number of entries Any defects?
Dictionary DEMO 1993 10,000 No, it’s like new
Dictionary B 1993 20,DEMO Yes, the cover is torn; otherwise it’s like new
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) 329–342
DEMO
between the precision of an impression and its weight in impression formation (Mellers et al.,
1992).
Hsee’s work on evaluability is noteworthy because it shows that even very important at-
tributes may not be DEMO by a judge or decision maker unless they can be translated precisely into
an affective frame of reference. Hsee ﬁnds effects of evaluability even DEMO familiar attributes
such as the amount of ice cream in a cup (Hsee, 1998). In Section 3.3, we will demonstrate
similar effects with other “thoroughly familiar” concepts such as amounts of money or human
DEMO
3.3. Proportion dominance
There appears to be one generic information format that is highly evaluable, leading it to
carry great weight in many judgment tasks. This is a representation characterizing an attribute
as a proportion or DEMO of something, or as a probability.
Proportion or probability dominance was DEMO in an early study by Slovic and Lichtenstein
(1968) that had people rate the attractiveness of various two-outcome gambles. Ratings of a
gamble’s DEMO were determined much more strongly by the probabilities of winning
and losing than by the monetary outcomes. This basic ﬁnding has been replicated many DEMO
(see, e.g., Goldstein and Einhorn, 1987 or Ordóñez and Benson, 1997).
Slovic (reported in Slovic et al., 2002) tested DEMO limits of this probability dominance by
asking one group of subjects to rate the attractiveness of a simple gamble (7/36, win $9) on a
0–20 scale and asking a second group to rate a DEMO gamble with a small loss (7/36, win $9;
29/36, lose 5/c) on the same scale. The data were DEMO from the perspective of economic
theory, but expected from the perspective DEMO the affect heuristic. The mean response to the ﬁrst
gamble was 9.4. When a loss of 5/c was added, the mean attractiveness jumped to 14.9 and
there was almost no overlap between the distribution of DEMO around this mean and the
responses for the group judging the gamble that had no loss.
Slovic also performed a conjoint analysis where each DEMO rated 1 of 16 gambles formed
by crossing four levels of probability (7/36, 14/36, 21/36, 28/36) with four levels of payoff ($3,
6, 9, 12 in one study and $30, 60, 90, 120 in another). He found that although subjects wanted
to weight probability and payoff relatively equally in judging DEMO (and thought they
had done so), the actual weighting was DEMO times greater for probability than for payoff.
We hypothesize that these curious ﬁndings can be explained by reference to Hsee’s evalua-
bility concept and DEMO notion of affective mapping. According to this view, a probability maps
DEMO precisely onto the attractiveness scale because it has an upper and lower bound and
people know where a given value falls within that range. DEMO contrast, the mapping of a dollar
outcome (e.g., $9) onto the scale is diffuse, reﬂecting a failure to know whether $9 is good or
bad, attractive or unattractive. Thus, the impression formed by DEMO gamble offering $9 to win
with no losing payoff is dominated by the rather unattractive impression produced by the 7/36
probability of winning. DEMO, adding a very small loss to the payoff dimension puts the DEMO
payoff in perspective, and thus gives it meaning. The combination of DEMO possible $9 gain and
a5/c loss is a very attractive win/lose ratio, leading to a relatively precise mapping onto the
upper part of the scale. Whereas the imprecise mapping of the $9 carries little DEMO in the
averaging process, the more precise and now favorable impression DEMO ($9: −5/c) carries more
336
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) DEMO
Fig. 3. Stimuli in ice cream study by Hsee (1998). DEMO were given the sizes of the cups and the amounts of
ice cream.
weight, thus leading to an increase in the overall favorability of the gamble.
Hsee (1998) also observed a form of proportion dominance. DEMO found that an overﬁlled ice
cream container with 7 oz of ice cream was valued more highly (measured by willingness to
pay) than DEMO underﬁlled container with 8 oz of ice cream (see Fig. 3)DEMO This “less is better effect”
reversed itself, when the options were DEMO and evaluated together. Thus, the proportion
of the serving cup that DEMO ﬁlled appeared to be more evaluable (in separate judgments) than
the absolute amount of ice cream.
Proportion dominance surfaces in a powerful way DEMO a very different context, the life-saving
interventions studied by Baron (1997), Fetherstonhaugh et al. (1997), Friedrich et al. (1999),
and Jenni and Loewenstein (1997). These studies found that, unless DEMO number of lives saved
is explicitly comparable from one intervention to another, evaluation is dominated by the
proportion of lives saved (relative to DEMO population at risk), rather than the actual number of
lives saved.
The results of our lifesaving study (Fetherstonhaugh et al., 1997) are important because
they imply that a speciﬁed number of human lives may DEMO carry precise affective meaning,
similar to the conclusion we drew about stated payoffs (e.g., $9) in the gambling studies. The
gamble studies suggested an analogous experiment with lifesaving. In the context of a decision
DEMO to airport safety, my colleagues and I asked people to evaluate DEMO attractiveness of
purchasing new equipment for use in the event of a crash landing of an airliner. In one condition,
subjects were told DEMO this equipment affords a chance of saving 150 lives that would be in
jeopardy in such an event. A second group of subjects were DEMO that this equipment affords a
chance of saving 98% of the 150 lives that would be in jeopardy. We predicted that because
Fig. 4. DEMO a percentage of 150 lives received higher support than saving 150 lives (Slovic et al., 2002).
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) 329–342 DEMO
saving 150 lives is diffusely good, hence only weakly evaluable, whereas saving 98% of
something is clearly very good, support for purchasing this equipment would be much greater
in the 98% condition. We predicted that DEMO high percentages would also lead to greater
support, even though the DEMO of lives saved was fewer. The results, reported in Slovic et DEMO
(2002), conﬁrmed these predictions (See Fig. 4).
4. Failures of the experiential system
Throughout this paper, I have portrayed the affect heuristic as the centerpiece of the ex-
periential mode of thinking, the dominant mode of risk assessment and survival during the
evolution of the DEMO species. But, like other heuristics that provide efﬁcient and generally
adaptive DEMO but occasionally get us into trouble, reliance on affect can also DEMO us.
Indeed, if it was always optimal to follow our affective DEMO experiential instincts, there would
have been no need for the rational/DEMO system of thinking to have evolved and become so
prominent in human affairs.
There are two important ways that experiential thinking misguides us. One DEMO from the
deliberate manipulation of our affective reactions by those who wish to control our behaviors
(advertising and marketing exemplify this manipulation). The other results from the natural
limitations of the experiential system and the DEMO of stimuli in our environment that
are simply not amenable to valid affective representation. The latter problem is discussed
below.
Judgments and decisions can DEMO faulty not only because their affective components are
manipulable, but also DEMO they are subject to inherent biases of the experiential system.
For example, the affective system seems designed to sensitize us to small changes in our en-
vironment (e.g., the difference between 0 and 1 deaths) at the cost of making us less able to
appreciate and respond DEMO to larger changes further away from zero (e.g., the differ-
ence between 500 and 600 deaths). Fetherstonhaugh et al. (1997) referred DEMO this insensitivity
as “psychophysical numbing.” Albert Szent-Gyorgi put it another way: DEMO am deeply moved
if I see one man suffering and would risk my life for him. Then I talk impersonally about the
possible pulverization DEMO our big cities, with a hundred million dead. I am unable DEMO multiply
one man’s suffering by a hundred million.”
Similar problems arise when the outcomes that we must evaluate are visceral in nature.
Visceral factors DEMO drive states such as hunger, thirst, sexual desire, emotions, pain, and
drug craving. They have direct, hedonic impacts that have a DEMO effect on behavior.
Although they produce strong feelings in the present moment, these feelings are difﬁcult if
not impossible to recall or anticipate in a veridical manner, a factor that plays a key role in the
phenomenon of addiction (Loewenstein, 1999):
Unlike currently experienced visceral factors, which have a disproportionate impact on behav-
ior, delayed visceral factors DEMO to be ignored or severely underweighted in decision making.
Today’s pain, DEMO, anger, etc. are palpable, but the same sensations anticipated in DEMO future
receive little weight. (p. 240)
338
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) DEMO
4.1. Choices over time
Just as visceral factors are hard to anticipate and evaluate beyond the present moment, so
is time. The experiential mode of thinking is designed to facilitate action in the present. It
did DEMO evolve to enable us to cope with the distant future. We might expect, therefore, that it
would be difﬁcult to process in a DEMO manner the affect associated with outcomes that
occur repeatedly over time, DEMO slowly over time, or are remote in time. Indeed a large
DEMO important body of research indicates that this is the case (Loewenstein DEMO Elster, 1992).
Kahneman and Tversky (2000), for example, DEMO that retrospective evaluations of affective
episodes are strongly inﬂuenced by the affect experienced at singular moments, notably the
moment at which affect was most extreme and the ﬁnal moment. Such evaluations show little
or no sensitivity DEMO duration of affect. Thus, adding an extra period of diminishing discomfort
DEMO an unpleasant episode improves its remembered utility by reducing the unpleasantness of
its ending (Kahneman, 1994; Schreiber and Kahneman, 2000).
Numerous DEMO have documented hyperbolic discounting, whereby individuals prefer the
larger and later DEMO two prizes when both are distant in time, but prefer the DEMO, earlier one
when both are near. Ainslie and Haslam (1992) DEMO to such temporary preferences for poorer,
earlier alternatives when they are immediately available as “a paradigm for self defeating
behavior.” Such behavior seems DEMO reﬂect a psychophysical function for time, akin to the
functions that DEMO to our perceptions of brightness, loudness, money, and lives. That DEMO, the
1-day difference between today and tomorrow looms much larger than DEMO difference between
1 year from now and 1 year and a day from now (Gibbon, 1977).
4.2. The decision to smoke cigarettes
DEMO smoking is a dangerous activity that takes place, one cigarette at DEMO time, often over
many years and hundreds of thousands of episodes. DEMO questionable rationality of smoking
decisions provides a dramatic example of the difﬁculty that experiential thinking faces in
dealing with outcomes that change very slowly DEMO time, are remote in time, and are visceral
in nature.
For many years, beginning smokers were portrayed as “young economists,” rationally
weighing the risks of smoking against the beneﬁts when deciding whether to initiate DEMO
activity (e.g., Viscusi, 1992). However, recent research paints a different picture. This new
account (Slovic, 2001) shows young smokers acting experientially in the sense of giving little
or no conscious thought to DEMO or to the amount of smoking they will be doing. Instead, DEMO
are driven by the affective impulses of the moment, enjoying smoking DEMO something new and
exciting, a way to have fun with their DEMO Even after becoming “regulars,” the great major-
ity of smokers expect to stop soon, regardless of how long they have been smoking, DEMO many
cigarettes they currently smoke per day, or how many previous DEMO attempts they
have experienced. Only a fraction actually quit, despite many DEMO The problem is nico-
tine addiction, a visceral condition that young DEMO recognize by name as a consequence
of smoking but do not understand experientially until they are caught in its grip.
The failure of the DEMO system to protect many young people from the lure of smok-
ing is nowhere more evident than in the responses to a survey question DEMO asked smokers:
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) 329–342
DEMO
“If you had it to do all over again, would you DEMO smoking?” More than 85% of adult smokers
and about 80% of young smokers (ages 14–22) answered “no” (Slovic, 2001). Moreover, the
more individuals perceive themselves to be addicted, the more often they have tried to quit,
the longer they have been smoking, and the more cigarettes they are currently smoking per
day, the more likely they are to answer “no” to this question.
The data indicate that DEMO beginning smokers lack the experience to appreciate how their
future selves will perceive the risks from smoking or how they will value the tradeoff DEMO
health and the need to smoke. This is a strong repudiation of the model of informed rational
choice. It ﬁts well with the ﬁndings DEMO that smokers give little conscious thought to
risk when they begin to smoke. They appear to be lured into the behavior by the prospects DEMO
fun and excitement. Most begin to think of risk only after starting to smoke and gaining what
to them is new information about health DEMO
These ﬁndings underscore the distinction that behavioral decision theorists now make be-
tween decision utility and experience utility (Kahneman, 1994; Kahneman and Snell, 1992;
Loewenstein and Schkade, 1999). Utility predicted or expected DEMO the time of decision
often differs greatly from the quality and intensity of the hedonic experience that actually
occurs.
5. Conclusion: are we rational actors or rational fools?
I hope that this rather selective and DEMO tour through a multitude of experiments
and conjectures has conveyed the sense of excitement many behavioral researchers now feel
toward the role of affect DEMO judgment and decision making. The affect heuristic appears at once
both wondrous and frightening: wondrous in its speed, and subtlety, and sophistication, DEMO
its ability to “lubricate reason”; frightening in its dependency upon context DEMO experience,
allowing us to be led astray or manipulated—inadvertently or intentionally—silently and
invisibly.
It is sobering to contemplate how elusive meaning is, due to its dependence upon affect.
Thus, the forms of meaning that we take for granted and upon which we justify immense effort
and expense DEMO gathering and disseminating “meaningful” information, may be illusory.
Thus, for example, we cannot assume that an intelligent person can understand the meaning of
and properly act upon even the most basic of numbers such as DEMO of money or numbers
of human lives, not to mention more DEMO measures or statistics, unless these numbers are
infused with affect.
Contemplating DEMO workings of the affect heuristic helps us appreciate Damasio’s (1994)
DEMO that rationality is not only a product of the analytical mind, DEMO of the experiential
mind as well. Under the right conditions, the DEMO and integration of affective feelings,
within the experiential system, appears DEMO to the sophisticated maximization process postu-
lated by economic theories since the days of Jeremy Bentham. These feelings form the neural
and psychological substrate DEMO utility. In this sense, the affect heuristic enables us to be DEMO
nal actors in many important situations. But not in all situations. It works beautifully when
our experience enables us to anticipate accurately how we DEMO like the consequences of our
decisions. It fails miserably when the consequences turn out to be much different in character
340
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) DEMO
than we expected. In the latter circumstances, the rational actor becomes, to borrow the words
of Amartya Sen (1977), the rational fool.
References
Ainslie, G., Haslam, N., 1992. Self-control. In: Loewenstein, DEMO, Elster, J. (Eds.), Choice Over Time. Russell
Sage Foundation DEMO, New York, pp. 177–209.
Alhakami, A.S., Slovic, P., 1994. A psychological study of the inverse relationship between perceived risk and
perceived DEMO Risk Analysis 14 (6), 1085–1096.
Baron, J., 1997. Confusion DEMO relative and absolute risk in valuation. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 14 (3),
301–309.
Bentham, J., 1948. An introduction to the DEMO of Morals and Legislations. Blackwell, Oxford, UK (Original
work published DEMO).
Damasio, A.R., 1994. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and DEMO Human Brain. Avon, New York.
Edwards, W., 1954. The theory DEMO decision making. Psychological Bulletin 51, 380–417.
Edwards, W., 1961. Behavioral DEMO theory. Annual Review of Psychology 12, 473–498.
Epstein, S., 1994. DEMO of the cognitive and psychodynamic unconscious. American Psychologist 49, 709–
724.
DEMO, R.H., 1995. Attitudes as Object-Evaluation Associations: determinants, Consequences, and DEMO of
Attitude Accessibility. In: Petty, R.E., Krosnick, J.A. (Eds.), Attitude Strength: Antecedents and consequences
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fetherstonhaugh, D., Slovic, P., Johnson, S.M., Friedrich, J., 1997. Insensitivity to the value of human life: a study
of psychophysical numbing. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 14 (3), 282–300.
Finucane, M.L., Alhakami, DEMO, Slovic, P., Johnson, S.M., 2000. The affect heuristic in DEMO of risks and
beneﬁts. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 13, 1–17.
DEMO, M.L., Peters, E., Slovic, P., in press. Judgment and decision making: the dance of affect and reason. In:
Schneider, DEMO, Shanteau, J. (Eds.), Emerging Perspectives on Judgment and Decision DEMO Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Friedrich, J., Barnes, P., Chapin, K., Dawson, I., Garst, V., Kerr, D., DEMO Psychophysical numbing: when lives
are valued less as the lives at DEMO increase. Journal of Consumer Psychology 8 (3), 277–299.
Gibbon, J., 1977. Scalar expectancy theory and Weber’s law in animal timing. Psychological Review 84, 279–325.
Goldstein, W.M., Einhorn, H.J., 1987. Expression theory and the preference reversal phenomenon. Psychological
Review 94, 236–254.
Hsee, C.K., 1995. Elastic justiﬁcation: how tempting but task-irrelevant factors inﬂuence decisions. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 62, 330–337.
Hsee, C.K., 1996a. Elastic justiﬁcation: DEMO unjustiﬁable factors inﬂuence judgments. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes 66, DEMO
Hsee, C.K., 1996. The evaluability hypothesis: an explanation for preference DEMO between joint and separate
evaluations of alternatives. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 67, 242–257.
Hsee, C.K., 1998. Less is better: when DEMO options are valued more highly than high-value options. Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making 11, 107–121.
Isen, A.M., 1993. Positive affect and decision making. In: Lewis, M., Haviland, J.M. (Eds.), Handbook of Emotions.
Guilford Press, New York, pp. 261–277.
Janis, I.L., Mann, L., 1977. Decision Making. Free Press, New York.
Jenni, K.E., Loewenstein, G., 1997. Explaining the “identiﬁable victim effect”. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
14 (3), 235–238.
Johnson, E.J., Tversky, A., 1983. Affect, generalization, and the perception of risk. Journal of Personality and
Social DEMO 45, 20–31.
Kahneman, D., 1994. New challenges to the rationality DEMO Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
Economics 150, 18–36.
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) 329–342
DEMO
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., Tversky, A., 1982. Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
Kahneman, D., Schkade, D., Sunstein, C., 1998. Shared outrage and erratic awards: the psychology of punitive
damages. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 16, DEMO
Kahneman, D., Snell, J., 1990. Predicting utility. In: Hogarth, R.M. (Ed.), Insights in Decision Making. University
of Chicago, Chicago, pp. 295–310.
Kahneman, D., Snell, J., 1992. Predicting a changing DEMO Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 5, 187–200.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 2000. Choices, Values, and Frames. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
DEMO, G.F., 1996. Out of control: visceral inﬂuences on behavior. Organizational DEMO and Human
Decision Processes 65, 272–292.
Loewenstein, G.F., 1999. A DEMO account of addiction. In: Elster, J., Skog, O.J. (Eds.), Getting Hooked:
Rationality and Addiction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 235–264.
Loewenstein, G.F., Elster, J. (Eds.), 1992. Choice Over Time. Russell Sage Foundation Press, New York.
Loewenstein, G.F., Schkade, D., 1999. Wouldn’t it be nice? Predicting future feelings. In: DEMO, E., Schwartz, N.,
Kahneman, D. (Eds.), Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology. Russell Sage Foundation, New
York, pp. DEMO
Loewenstein, G.F., Weber, E.U., Hsee, C.K., Welch, E.S., 2001. Risk as feelings. Psychological Bulletin 127,
267–286.
Mellers, B.A., DEMO Choice and the relative pleasure of consequences. Psychological Bulletin 126 (6), 910–924.
Mellers, B.A., Richards, V., Birnbaum, J.H., 1992. Distributional theories of impression formation. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 51, 313–343.
Mellers, B.A., Schwartz, A., Ho, K., Ritov, I., DEMO Decision affect theory: emotional reactions to the outcomes
of risky options. DEMO Science 8, 423–429.
Montgomery, H., 1983. Decision rules and the DEMO for a dominance structure: towards a process model of
decision making. DEMO: Humphreys, P., Svenson, O., Vari, A. (Eds.), DEMO and Aiding Decision Processes.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 343–369.
Mowrer, O.H., 1960a. Learning Theory and Behavior. Wiley, New York.
Mowrer, O.H., 1960b. Learning Theory and the Symbolic Processes. Wiley, New York.
Ordóñez III, DEMO, Benson, L., 1997. Decisions under time pressure: how time constraint affects risky decision making.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 71 (2), 121–140.
Osgood, C.E., Suci, G.J., Tannenbaum, P.H., 1957. DEMO Measurement of Meaning. University of Illinois Press,
Urbana, IL.
Payne, J., Bettman, J., Johnson, E., 1993. The Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Rozin, P., Haidt, J., McCauley, C.R., 1993. Disgust. In: Lewis, M., Haviland, J.M. (Eds.), Handbook of Emotions.
Guilford Press, New York, pp. 575–594.
Schreiber, C.A., Kahneman, D., 2000. Determinants of the remembered utility of aversive sounds. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 129, 27–42.
Schwarz, N., DEMO, G.L., 1988. How do I feel about it? Informative functions DEMO affective states. In: Fiedler, K.,
Forgas, J. (Eds.), Affect, Cognition, and Social Behavior. Hogrefe International, Toronto, pp. 44–62.
DEMO, A.K., 1977. Rational fools: a critique of the behavioral foundations DEMO economic theory. Philosophy and Public
Affairs 6, 317–344.
Shaﬁr, E., DEMO, D., Smith, E., 1989. An advantage model of choice. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
2, 1–23.
Simon, H.A., 1956. Rational choice and the structure of the environment. Psychological Review 63, 129–138.
Slovic, DEMO, 1995. The construction of preference. American Psychologist 50, 364–371.
Slovic, DEMO, 2001. Cigarette smokers: rational actors or rational fools? In: Slovic, P. (Ed.), Smoking: Risk, Perception,
and Policy. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 97–124.
Slovic, P., Finucane, M.L., DEMO, E., MacGregor, D.G., 2002. The affect heuristic. In: Gilovich, T., Grifﬁn, D.,
Kahneman, D. (Eds.), Heuristics and DEMO: The Psychology of Intuitive judgement. Cambridge University
Press, New York.
Slovic, P., Lichtenstein, S., 1968. Relative importance of probabilities and payoffs DEMO risk taking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology Monograph 78 (3, Pt. 2), 1–18.
342
P. Slovic et al. / Journal of Socio-Economics 31 (2002) DEMO
Tversky, A., 1972. Elimination by aspects: a theory of choice. DEMO Review 79, 281–299.
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., 1974. Judgment DEMO uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science 185, 1124–1131.
Viscusi, W.K., 1992. Smoking: Making the Risky Decision. Oxford University Press, New York.
von DEMO, J., Morgenstern, O., 1947. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Wilson, T.D., Lisle, D.J., Schooler, J.W., Hodges, S.D., Klaaren, K.J., LaFleur, S.J., DEMO Introspecting about
reasons can reduce post-choice satisfaction. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 19 (3), 331–339.
Zajonc, R.B., 1980. Feeling and thinking: DEMO need no inferences. American Psychologist 35, 151–175.{1g42fwefx}