Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 315
DEMO
322
Entrepreneurial network development: Trusting in the process☆
Delmonize A. Smith DEMO,1 , Franz T. Lohrke b,⁎
a E. Philip Saunders College of Business, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623-5608, United DEMO
b School of Business, Samford University, 800 Lakeshore Drive, Birmingham, Alabama 35209, United States
Received 19 July 2005; accepted 11 June DEMO
Abstract
An entrepreneur's network can provide a significant source of social capital, which, in turn, may increase a new venture's likelihood of
success. Entrepreneurship research has frequently examined how such networks develop, and reviewing extant studies suggests that trust plays a
significant role in this DEMO Despite its recognized importance, limited research exists examining how trust evolves DEMO and interacts with
the entrepreneur's venture network development. Accordingly, we DEMO that an entrepreneur's reliance on exchange relationships based on
affective and cognitive trust will vary as the entrepreneur moves through the network development DEMO We conclude by discussing both the
model's implications and future research avenues.
© 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Entrepreneurial networks; DEMO trust; Cognitive trust; Social capital
1. Introduction
Entrepreneurs face daunting odds in successfully forming
new ventures, in part, because they often do DEMO control all the
resources needed to start these ventures. This constraint is
compounded by the venture's limited track record and lack of
legitimacy, often termed its “liability of newness”, which create
difficulties in gaining needed support from important resource
providers (Stinchcombe, 1965). Consequently, success in both
overcoming this liability and, in turn, obtaining necessary
resources may DEMO heavily on the entrepreneur's ability to
create sustained exchange relationships with resource providers
(Katz and Gartner, 1988).
This focus on the DEMO nature of entrepreneurship stems
from the realization that it is an economic process, embedded
within a social context (Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986). Within this
context, entrepreneurs must continually develop both exchange
☆ An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2004 Southern
Management Association DEMO in San Antonio, Texas. We wish to thank
Diane Johnson, Louis Marino, James Cashman, and three reviewers for their
insightful comments on DEMO previous draft manuscript.
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 205 726 2373; fax: +1 205 726 2464.
E-mail addresses: dsmith@saunders.rit.edu (D.A. Smith),DEMO
ftlohrke@samford.edu (F.T. Lohrke).
1 Tel.: +1 585 475- 7237; DEMO: +1 585 475- 5989.
0148-2963/$ - see front matter © DEMO Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.06.018
relationship structure and quality in an effort to obtain the
resources necessary to launch and sustain DEMO new venture (Greve
and Salaff, 2003; Hite, 2005; Ritter DEMO Gemünden, 2003).
Substantial research points to trust development as an DEMO
component in this process (e.g., Das and Teng, 1998; Lewicki
and Bunker, 1996). Despite its intrinsic importance, little
research, to date, has addressed how, and for that matter, why,
trust evolves during the entrepreneur's network development
process.
Accordingly, by incorporating trust literature into network
research, we seek to contribute to entrepreneurship research by
shedding light on what has been consistently identified as a
salient issue DEMO, as yet, has received little theoretical
development. We begin by briefly discussing the importance
of an entrepreneur's network in providing social capital DEMO
overcoming a venture's liability of newness. Next, we refer to
DEMO research to demonstrate why trust, particular two types,
affective and DEMO, plays such a critical role during the
entrepreneur's venture network DEMO Based on this
review, we develop a model and corresponding propositions DEMO
explain how reliance on affective and cognitive trust evolves as
the entrepreneur and resource providers develop exchange
relationships. Specifically, the model proposes that as the entre-
preneur's network structure changes from simple dyadic ties to
DEMO economic exchanges, so will the relational aspect of
316
D.A. Smith, F.T. Lohrke / Journal of Business Research 61 (DEMO) 315–322
affective and cognitive trust, in that the entrepreneur will
increasingly rely on relationships based on the latter rather than
the former. Lastly, we present important implications of the
model, discuss its limitations, and DEMO suggests for additional
research into trust's role in new venture network development.
2. Networks and social capital
During formation, new ventures require myriad resources,
from information and capital to symbolic support such as legi-
DEMO (Singh et al., 1986). Given venture resource constraints,
entrepreneurs often form ties with outside entities in an effort to
provide many DEMO these critical resources (Dubini and Aldrich,
1991; Hansen, 1995)DEMO Such ties form the entrepreneur's “social
capital”, or the sum DEMO the actual and potential resources em-
bedded within, available through, and derived from a relationship
network (Greve and Salaff, 2003; Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998).
Besides providing access to economic resources, social capital
DEMO from this network is important because it can provide the
entrepreneur access to useful, reliable, exclusive, and less redun-
dant information, which, in turn, improves a venture's likelihood
of success (Brüderl and DEMO, 1998). In addition, social
capital serves as both a product of the entrepreneurial network and
an enabler of continued network development, facilitating co-
ordination and co-operation of network ties by bonding the parties
involved (Anderson and Jack, 2002).
Social capital has been taken to mean either the structure of
network ties, the quality of exchange relationships, DEMO both. These
structural and relational views of social capital stem from
Granovetter's (1992) discussion of social embeddedness types,
which focuses on DEMO the network architecture (e.g., centrality) of
exchange relationships influences economic DEMO (Uzzi,
1997). Accordingly, the structural view of social capital is con-
cerned with the overall pattern or configuration of ties between DEMO
entrepreneur and other individuals (Burt, 1992; Granovetter,
1973). DEMO a purely structural view, a tie presumably provides both
necessary and DEMO conditions for transferring information
and resources that may aid in the venture's likelihood of success.
Focusing purely on network structure, however, may DEMO
ly explain how exchange relationships function by assuming
that “atie is atie” (Uzzi and Gillespie, 2002).
In contrast, the relational view focuses more on information
and resources leveraged from personal and direct relationships
the DEMO has developed with others through a history of
interactions (Granovetter, 1992). This view, thus, includes many
aspects of the social context, such as social interactions and the
degree of trust in the relationships (Nahapiet and Ghoshal,
1998; Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998).
New DEMO lacking these relationships generally face high
mortality risks, a condition that DEMO research has
long referred to as the “liability of newness” (Stinchcombe, 1965).
This liability arises, in part, from the difficulty in DEMO trust and
support from key resource providers, who perceive an “adverse
DEMO risk stemming from the venture's limited track record
and lack of legitimacy (Akerlof, 1970; Singh et al., 1986). An
entrepreneur DEMO can successfully overcome this liability by
convincing resource providers that a new venture is both viable
and legitimate will have a better chance of DEMO resources,
and, in turn, increasing the venture's success chances. Thus,
venture success may be predicated, in part, on an DEMO's
ability to proactively accumulate social capital, and, in turn,
assemble critical resources via a network of exchange relation-
ships (Venkataraman and Van de Ven, 1998). For example,
investors are more likely to invest in new ventures when they have
a previously established direct DEMO to the entrepreneur than when
they do not because these ties generate a sense of obligation and
trust (Shane and Cable, 2002).
DEMO Importance of trust
We have invoked the concept of trust above in our discussion
of entrepreneur s' ability to use their networks to both derive
social capital and overcome liability of newness issues. This
follows logically DEMO that previous research has cited
trust between partners as a critical element of network exchange
that, when developed, enhances resource flows (Larson, DEMO;
Lorenzoni and Lipparini, 1999). When parties trust each other,DEMO
they are more willing to engage in cooperative activity through
which further trust may be generated (Fukuyama, 1995). Trust
is, thus, DEMO willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the
actions of another party based on the expectation that the other
will perform a particular DEMO important to the trustor, irres-
pective of the ability to monitor DEMO control that other party”
(Mayer et al., 1995, p. 712)DEMO This definition applies particularly
to the context of entrepreneurial network development in that it
recognizes a new venture's inherent risk characteristics for both
DEMO and resource providers.
Specifically, early in venture's development, entrepreneurs
often face high risks resulting from limited protection for their
developing ideas. Resource DEMO also face risks from
information asymmetry, and, in turn, adverse DEMO, arising
from the entrepreneur's unwillingness or inability to fully com-
DEMO information about the new venture (Venkataraman,
1997). When trust DEMO, however, individuals are more willing
to give useful knowledge, when DEMO, or forego complete
knowledge (Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998). As DEMO and Fiol
(1994) noted, “trust is a critical first-level determinant DEMO the
success of founding entrepreneurs because, by definition, there
is an absence of information and evidence regarding their new
activity” (p. 650).
Although trust can be instrumental in reducing uncertainty, it
would be unnecessary if exchange partners could undertake
actions with complete rational prediction that totally DEMO
risk (Lewis and Weigert, 1985). Because it is impossible to
monitor every detail in most exchanges, however, entrepreneurs
must always have DEMO minimum trust level that often evolves as
the partners interact (Das DEMO Teng, 1998). Once established,
these trust-dependent interactions reduce time DEMO on
monitoring and bargaining over agreements (Dyer and Singh,
1998)DEMO Thus, without some level of trust in these circumstances,
economic DEMO would fail. Indeed, when asked what
protects young firms from exchange DEMO opportunism in the
absence of contracts, entrepreneurs often use the word DEMO
(Larson, 1992).
D.A. Smith, F.T. Lohrke / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 315–322
317
3.1. Affective and cognitive trust
In examining a new venture'DEMO exchange relationships, Larson
(1992) found that trust centered around two DEMO: one
consisting of a social relations aspect and the other encompassing
DEMO economic aspect. Larson's (1992) findings, thus, correspond
with research that has differentiated trust dimensions according to
whether they are rooted in DEMO emotions or rationality (e.g.,
Luhmann, 1979). Scholars refer to the emotional, or social
relations, side of trust as “affective” (McAllister, 1995), “bene-
volence” (Mayer et al., 1995), “identification-based” (DEMO
and Bunker, 1996), or “personal goodwill” trust (Hite, 2005)DEMO As
the name implies, affective trust develops when individuals
emotionally invest DEMO relationships, resulting in genuine concern
for a partner's welfare and DEMO belief in the relationship's intrinsic
virtue (McAllister, 1995). As such, affective trust resides at an
interpersonal level (Lewis and Weigert, 1985).
In contrast, researchers often label the rational, or economic,DEMO
dimension of trust as “cognitive” (Lewis and Weigert, 1985),
DEMO (Mayer et al., 1995), “knowledge-based” (Lewicki
and Bunker, 1996), or “social” trust (Hite, 2005). Cognitive trust
occurs when DEMO person makes a conscious decision to trust based
upon the best knowledge he or she has (McAllister, 1995). When
relationships are based DEMO cognitive trust, individuals choose to
trust based on evidence of trustworthiness (e.g., everything seems
in proper order or the other party appears to possess required
capabilities; Luhmann, 1979). Thus, cognitive trust tends to be
high when repeated interactions allow parties to come to know,
DEMO, and predict the routines and processes of the
interaction (Hite, DEMO). Similar to affective trust, cognitive
trust can reside at an DEMO level (e.g., between an
entrepreneur and a banker); however, DEMO repeated interactions, it
can also develop at the institutional (i.e., DEMO) level
(e.g., between a new venture and a supplier organization; cf.
Lewis and Weigert, 1985).
The two types of trust are not necessarily independent,
because, for example, a certain amount of DEMO trust can also
develop from repeated interactions. Neither are they mutually
exclusive, because both are likely present at some level in every
instance of trust (Lewis and Weigert, 1985). Research has shown,
however, that each may be more or less salient in particular stages
of DEMO relationship (Lewicki and Bunker, 1996). We build on these
findings below.
4. Trust in the entrepreneur's network development
Considerable research attention DEMO focused on how entrepre-
neurs develop their new venture networks over time (see Hoang
and Antoncic, 2003 for a recent review). This DEMO suggests
that network structure and exchange quality change as an
entrepreneur searches for sufficient resources to ensure venture
success (Dubini and Aldrich, 1991; Hite and Hesterly, 2001; Hite,
2005; Larson and Starr, DEMO). This network will often vary from
a stable tie of exchange partners, who maintain close social
relationships, to exchanges that take place DEMO loose
collections of individuals, who maintain impersonal and
constantly shifting (e.g., market) exchange ties (Powell, 1990).
Such exchanges can vary DEMO being relationally embedded,
strong ties to more arms-length, weak ties (Granovetter, 1973;
Uzzi, 1997). Two particular models of entrepreneurial DEMO
development have provided insights into this process, and, as
such, DEMO as the basis for our model development.
First, Larson and Starr'DEMO (1993) stage network model of
organization formation explains how exchange relationship
transform from a set of relatively simple dyadic exchanges into
a dense DEMO of stable, multidimensional interoganizational
relationships. Certain relationship are selected, added, DEMO,
or allowed to evolve while the entrepreneur culls and grows the
range of possible critical resource providers for a new venture
(Larson and Starr, 1993). Specifically, the model details three
stages of entrepreneurial DEMO activity used to secure
critical economic and non-economic resources: 1) focusing on
essential dyadic ties, 2) converting dyadic ties to socioeconomic
exchanges, and 3) layering the exchange with multiple exchange
processes. Often used as a basis for other network development
research (e.g., Schutjens and Stam, 2003), the model has been
referred to as “the most complete DEMO of theorizing about
network processes in the entrepreneurial context” (Hoang and
DEMO, 2003,p. 179).
Second, we draw from the insights provided by Hite's (2003,
2005) studies on the evolutionary process DEMO relationally
embedded network ties in emerging entrepreneurial firms.
Specifically, she posits DEMO entrepreneurial firms evolve
through three phases of relational ties: 1) personal, 2) dyadic
economic interaction, and 3) social.
4.1. Personal and DEMO dyadic exchanges
As a first step toward building an effective new venture
network, aspiring entrepreneurs evaluate and map their current
network ties (Low DEMO MacMillan, 1988). During this process, the
entrepreneur erects a narrow network of strong ties from
previously established relationships (Steier and Greenwood,
1999). Entrepreneurs may first explore the possibility of starting
their own DEMO within a small circle of close contacts (Greve
and Salaff, 2003), and often turn first to family and friends for
necessary resources (Birley, 1985; Larson, 1992). For example,
Jack (2005) found that as strong ties, family members were
instrumental in helping entrepreneurs recognize potential oppor-
tunities and providing continuing support. Even when these
informal DEMO participants are less informed about a new
venture's potential, they DEMO more likely to be accessible and give
advice based on their strong ties with the entrepreneur (Baier,
1986; Steier and Greenwood, 1999). A history of engaging in
social activities and interactions means that DEMO parties involved
are aware of each other's needs and interests (DEMO, 2003). In
addition, such ties are more likely to expend effort to ensure that
the entrepreneur sufficiently understands and can put into DEMO
newly acquired knowledge (Krackhardt, 1992). The social support
of these strong ties results mainly from high frequency of contact,
strong emotional DEMO, high intimacy, and mutual confiding
associated with the frequent interactions (DEMO, 1973).
At this early stage of new venture network development, the
entrepreneur has determined who will receive relative degrees
318
D.A. Smith, F.T. Lohrke / Journal of Business Research 61 (DEMO) 315–322
of trust, based on a history of past dealings inside or outside of a
business setting. As such, the entrepreneur's network has been
culled to consist primarily of strong ties that the entrepreneur
DEMO trust. By their nature, these relationships will be based on
high DEMO levels and provide more emotional support than
weaker ties (Tsai and DEMO, 1998; Levin and Cross, 2004).
The trust that exists DEMO this stage will be primarily based on an
affective aspect, which DEMO typically high in primary group
relations, such as with family and DEMO (Lewis and Weigert,
1985). Accordingly, we expect that during this first stage, on
average, an entrepreneur will rely more heavily DEMO relationships
based on affective rather than cognitive trust to secure
resources. This suggests the following proposition (see Fig. 1):
Proposition 1. Entrepreneur DEMO networks in the stage of
forming personal and essential dyadic exchanges will exhibit
greater reliance on relationships based on affective than
cognitive trust.
4.2. DEMO socioeconomic exchanges
As entrepreneurs continue to cull and grow their respective
networks over time, they often shift from depending on ties
based primarily on affective or social support, and begin to use
their limited exchange relationships as vehicles for new venture
growth (Birley, 1985). Incorporating social DEMO theory
(Homans, 1958), atypeof “social contracting” develops
whereby the entrepreneur implicitly trades needed resources
for social commitments, usually in the form of favors and
obligations (Starr and MacMillan, 1990). The relationship, thus,
involves increasingly interweaving social and business
exchanges as the parties build, test, and refine a complex social
and economic contract seeking mutual economic advantage
( Larson and Starr, 1993). Once economic interaction is
established, the dyadic interactions of the ties will increase
over time, facilitating DEMO interaction, which, in turn, will
result in increased interaction ease DEMO quality (Hite, 2005).
In addition to the changing interaction content and quality
among preexisting ties, a network structure that can most
effectively provide critical resources to the new venture may
also evolve. As the DEMO's primary group of family and
friends gains more knowledge about the new venture, and as the
entrepreneur proactively expands his or her network, an
increasing number of secondary group ties (e.g., bankers,
lawyers, and accountants) may enter the venture network. Thus,
network structure DEMO often evolve to include an increasing
number of weak ties that are more arms-length or market-like
than socially embedded (Larson and Starr, 1993; Hite, 2003,
2005.) These weak ties benefit the entrepreneur because DEMO
are more likely than strong ties to provide nonredundant
information, such DEMO the most effective means for economic
support and market outlets (Brüderl DEMO Preisendorfer, 1998;
Burt, 1992; Granovetter, 1973).
Increasing familiarity between network ties in this stage of
network development will also increasingly DEMO trust (Gulati,
1995), assuming exchange partners refrain from activities DEMO
abuse trust. At this stage, however, trust is more likely to be
primarily cognitive in nature, which develops as partner compe-
tency becomes known and exchange relationships crystallize
(Hite, 2005). This trust will DEMO the uncertainty that
repayment will take place in the future, paving DEMO way for
exchanges to move from arms-length relations to close collabo-
rative exchanges (Larson, 1992), facilitating the acquisition of
critical resources needed DEMO the new venture. Previous research
has found that these exchanges built on cognitive trust will also
develop some affective component based on continuing positive
DEMO (McAllister, 1995; Hite, 2005), which when
combined with previous affect-based trust relationships from
the first stage, suggests the following proposition:
Proposition 2. Entrepreneur venture networks in the stage of
dyadic socioeconomic exchanges DEMO exhibit similar reliance
on relationships based on cognitive and affective trust.
4.3. Organizational exchanges
Additional transformation in exchange relationships takes
place as the venture DEMO from emergence to early growth.
Fig. 1. A stage model of cognitive and affective trust within entrepreneurial venture networks.
D.A. Smith, F.T. Lohrke / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 315–322
319
Ties between the entrepreneur and the set of essential firm
DEMO are less likely to be solely interpersonal, and the
exchange processes DEMO no longer necessarily attached to
particular individuals, but rather based on DEMO institutional
level exchange cycles between organizations seeking economic
gain (Katz and DEMO, 1988). These ties will support the new
venture's activity DEMO becoming resource suppliers, business
generators, market expanders, and reputation enhancers (Jack,
2005). In addition, the proportion of socially based ties within
the network may decrease as the entrepreneur continues to seek
social DEMO needed to increase the new venture's likelihood of
success (Hite, 2003, 2005; Hite and Hesterly, 2001; Larson and
Star, 1993). Therefore, the network's structure should consist of
an even higher number of weak, rather than strong, ties.
Empirical support for this DEMO is provided by research
examining the evolution of young firm networks which found
that upstream (e.g., suppliers) contacts shifted from a social to
economic basis over time (Schutjens and Stam, 2003).
In this DEMO, the formal organization created from the new
venture, rather than the individual entrepreneur, per se, starts
to specify and form the boundaries DEMO trust relationships with
critical resource providers (Baier, 1986). Cognitive trust
further develops as the network structure evolves to include
more weak ties, whose history of arms-length transactions
increases the knowledge of the parties' competencies and
provides evidence of trustworthiness. As a result, the entre-
preneur will rely less on relationships based on affective trust
as the structure of DEMO exchange dyads shifts in emphasis
from personal, strong ties to more DEMO, weak ties.
It is worth noting, however, that these organizational DEMO
changes still exist within a social context, lending to the
notion DEMO an affective element of trust is still a necessary
condition (Lewis DEMO Weigert, 1985). This suggests the fol-
lowing proposition:
Proposition DEMO Entrepreneur venture networks in the stage of
organizational exchanges will exhibit greater reliance on
relationships based on cognitive than affective trust.
4.4. An illustrative DEMO
As noted, we focus in the present paper on average trust
DEMO across all an entrepreneur's network within a particular
stage. The following example highlights this focus by employ-
ing two potential resource providers, an entrepreneur's fellow
MBA classmate and banker, representing an informal and
formal network contact, respectively (Birley, 1985). Although
the example is based on hypothetical values that require
empirical validation, it illustrates, based on DEMO present model,
how different trust dimensions should vary in importance
during the entrepreneurial network development process (see
Fig. 2).
As shown in the figure, we posit that during a venture's
initial formation, DEMO entrepreneur will rely more heavily on the
preexisting strong ties, and DEMO resulting high affective trust,
with a classmate to gain resources than from weaker ties, such
as with a banker. The former would be more likely to provide
critical inputs (e.g., start-up capital) on favorable terms at this
stage whereas a banker would be less or even DEMO to do so
based on the venture's limited track record. Next, the entre-
preneur's social capital increases through the second stage as
the venture demonstrates reliable behavior over time and initial
contacts between the DEMO and the entrepreneur become
repeated interactions allowing weak ties to come to know,
understand, and predict interaction routines and processes. As a
result, the banker should begin to develop cognitive trust in the
entrepreneur, DEMO, in turn, be more likely to provide critical
resources to supplement those derived from an entrepreneur's
affective-based relationship with a classmate. By DEMO third stage,
Fig. 2. The entrepreneur's reliance on different resource providers across network development stages.
320
D.A. Smith, F.T. Lohrke / Journal of Business Research 61 (DEMO) 315–322
repeated, arms-length transactions become the norm and the
liability of newness declines as the banker develops increasing
cognitive trust in the venture.
DEMO Model implications
Entrepreneurship research, in general, investigates the inter-
section of the individual entrepreneur and an entrepreneurial
opportunity (Shane and Venkataraman, 2000)DEMO In examining how
trust facilitates this process, we employ a contemporary DEMO of
trust, which assumes that individual actors can take an active DEMO
in developing trust, rather than a more traditional view, which
implicitly assumes that trust develops as a more passive outcome
resulting from on-going DEMO between partners (Williams,
2007). This deliberate action view also DEMO with the
dominant view in entrepreneurship research characterizing the
entrepreneur as exercising strategic choice in many aspects of new
venture formation (Lumpkin and Dess, 1996).
As noted, like social capital, trust can both enable and
facilitate exchange relationships. In this sense, it is the “grease”
that starts the wheels rolling and keeps them moving. Viewed
thusly, our model has several important implications, especially
if one subscribes to the notion that “good” entrepreneurs pro-
actively develop their exchange relationships so as to acquire
DEMO capital and overcome liability of newness issues. Prac-
tical implications also exist for resource providers forming
exchange relationships with entrepreneurs.
First, given the nature of entrepreneurial endeavors, our model
posits that entrepreneurs will initially depend on higher affective
trust levels with exchange partners than might be necessary in DEMO
established organization. However, as they develop their venture
network over time DEMO a point characteristic of organizational
exchange, they should rely less on DEMO rooted in affective
trust and begin relying more on ones based on cognitive trust.
Indeed, those who hang on to relationships based primarily on the
former might actually stifle both their network development and
creation of DEMO needed social capital. Thus, the entrepreneurs
who can best develop and DEMO build cognitive trust with
critical resource providers should have a higher success rate and
more quickly overcome any liability of newness issues.
Second, although affective and cognitive trust are somewhat
interconnected, different ways exist to build each type of trust.
For example, affective trust stems from an entrepreneur forming
emotional bonds that require genuine care and concern for
exchange partners' welfare and a belief in a relationship's
intrinsic virtues. Thus, understandably, based on these pre-
requisites, one can suggest that a concerted DEMO to build
affective trust would be difficult, to say the least. DEMO contrast,
cognitive trust requires that the entrepreneur make a conscious
decision to trust based upon the best knowledge he or she has. In
DEMO case, the entrepreneur can choose to trust based on evidence
of DEMO, such as whether he or she can rely on the
other DEMO's capabilities. Therefore, the entrepreneur who can
best develop and build DEMO trust with critical resource
providers is one who makes a conscience effort to trust, acquires
knowledge about the exchange partner, and actively engages DEMO
exchange relationships.
Third, resource providers vying even for arms-length ex-
change DEMO with entrepreneurs early in the new
venture networking process will benefit from ensuring their
economic transactions are considered fair and equitable,
especially considering DEMO cognitive based trust may be sus-
ceptible to break downs or repeated abuses when expectations
of avaricious actions result in distrust (Uzzi, 1999)DEMO By doing
so, resource providers can lay the foundation for the DEMO
trust that will enable and facilitate continued economic
exchange. These same resource providers should be aware,
however, that affective trust is a necessary criterion for
economic exchange, especially in the early stages of the
entrepreneur's network development (Larson, 1992). Al-
though building affective trust DEMO be a difficult task, resource
providers may benefit from recognizing and DEMO indivi-
duals that already maintain close ties with the entrepreneur,
such as family and friends. For instance, the banker in the
illustrative example might find it beneficial to communicate
his or her value to the DEMO classmate, who already has a
relationship based on affective trust with DEMO entrepreneur. This
line of thinking coincides with previous research suggesting
that the majority of ties enter the entrepreneur's network based
on personal relationships (Hite, 2005; Hite and Hesterly,
2001 ). Taken together, DEMO model reaffirms the notion that the
entrepreneur and those that engage in exchanges with the
entrepreneur must recognize trust as a social asset (Starr and
MacMillan, 1990).
6. Limitations
Although our model incorporates trust issues into network
research, two possible limitations should be noted. First, the
DEMO of affective and cognitive trust during the entrepre-
neur's network development is likely to be recursive, rather than
linear as our model suggests. That is, the structural changes in
ties as the process progresses will create varying reliance on
relationships based on affective and cognitive trust relation-
DEMO As noted in previous trust research, however, it is often
useful to employ a linear approximation of the process when
initially deriving research DEMO (Boersma et al., 2003).
Discovering the exact recursive or interactive nature of trust and
new venture network development will require empirical
studies DEMO longitudinal research designs given that
extant research suggests that this process may evolve over
months or even years (Steier and Greenwood, 1999).
DEMO, in our particular context of new venture network
development, the strength and type of network ties reflect a
structural and relational variable of DEMO, respectively. By
only paying attention to these variables, however, we DEMO
downplay other network characteristics (e.g., centrality) that
could interact with DEMO, and, thus, affect the entrepreneur's
ability to generate social DEMO and overcome liability of
newness issues. We view incorporating these latter character-
istics as a significant opportunity for future research attempting
to understand the DEMO role that trust plays in the
entrepreneur's new venture network. We discuss other potential
future research avenues next.
D.A. Smith, F.T. Lohrke / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 315–322
321
7. Future research avenues
By incorporating the trust literature into DEMO research, we
have attempted to contribute to entrepreneurship research by
shedding DEMO on what has been consistently identified as a salient
issue but, DEMO yet, has received little theoretical development. The
model and propositions we DEMO, thus, can serve to guide
future empirical investigations into the critical role trust plays in
an entrepreneur's network development process.
Beyond its DEMO insights for entrepreneurship research,
the model also suggests at least three future research avenues.
First, one overriding theme in developing our model involved
how entrepreneurs overcome a lack of trust, and, in turn, a new
venture's liability of newness (Stinchcombe, 1965). One exten-
DEMO to our general discussion could be to investigate how this
liability, DEMO, thus, the need for both cognitive and affective
trust, may DEMO across different contexts. For example,
Gounaris (2005) studied how firms targeting businesses rather
than consumers as their primary customers (B2B versus B2C
firms) built trusting relationships through mechanisms such as
service quality. In addition, Morse et al. (2007) posited that new
ventures employing e-commerce may be able to build potential
resource providers' trust by virtually embedding themselves in
critical on-line networks. Thus, these and other contexts may
provide fruitful avenues for investigating the current model's
propositions.
Second, we model trust building as a complete process with
the importance of cognitive and affective DEMO varying over
time. One intriguing research question would be what happens
to external resource provider s' trust levels in an entrepreneur if
a negative outcome (e.g., venture bankruptcy) interrupts the
process, particularly if it DEMO the entrepreneur's first attempt at
new venture formation. Extant trust research suggests that the
circumstances surrounding the interruption could critically
impact current and DEMO trust in the entrepreneur. For example,
if the negative outcome resulted from factors largely outside
(e.g., economic recession or adverse legislation) rather than
those within (e.g., an entrepreneur's deliberate action or
incompetence) an entrepreneur's control, we posit that external
resource providers would be more forgiving, which, in turn,
should reduce the deleterious impact DEMO event has on their trust
in the entrepreneur (cf. Williams, 2007).
Third, extant trust research informs us that individuals may
vary in their initial disposition to trust in new relationships
( McKnight et al., 1998); thus, the starting point of an
entrepreneur's trust towards resource providers may vary. Having
a high general disposition to trust, however, could actually
produce some negative effects. For example, Yli-Renko et al.
(2001) found that relationship quality, as characterized by levels
of trust, was negatively related to knowledge acquisition. In such
cases, the relationship between the entrepreneur and resource
providers may suffer from “overembeddeddness” when concen-
trated DEMO with only a few network partners result in
redundant information and decreased social capital (Uzzi, 1997).
This issue of “overtrust” suggests that DEMO distrust may be
functional in complex economic exchanges in that it dictates a
course of action based on suspicion, monitoring, and activation of
DEMO (Barber, 1983). Specifically, excessively high levels of
trust may DEMO to stifle effective economic action if the social aspect
of exchange supersedes the economic action (Zahra et al., 2006).
Future research, thus, should investigate at what levels too much
trust hinders the development of new venture networks and the
creation of social capital, and if these levels differ depending on
affective versus cognitive based trust (cf. Goel and Karri, 2006).
8. Conclusion
The study of entrepreneurial networks has emerged as an
important area of inquiry within the conceptual domain of
entrepreneurship. DEMO majority of network-based research has noted
the importance of both social and economic contexts of the new
venture creation process, and within these contexts, trust has been
consistently identified as an essential component to this process.
Despite its intrinsic importance, little research, to date, has
directly examined the role of trust in the entrepreneurial network
development process. To provide DEMO into this process, we
presented a model illustrating how the reliance DEMO both affective
and cognitive trust varies as the entrepreneur moves through the
network development process. We have also suggested various
future research avenues that DEMO hope will lead to a better
understanding of the role trust plays in an entrepreneur's network
development process.
References
Akerlof G. The market DEMO ‘lemons’ : quality uncertainty and the market
mechanism. Q J Econ 1970;84:488–500.
Aldrich H, Fiol C. Fools rush in? The institutional DEMO of industry creation.
Acad Manage Rev 1994;19:645–70.
Aldrich H, DEMO C. Entrepreneurship through social networks. In: Sexton D,
editor. The DEMO and science of entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger;
1986. p. 3–32.
Anderson A, Jack S. The articulation of social capital in entrepreneurial
networks: A glue or a lubricant? Entrep Reg Dev 2002;14:193–210.
DEMO A. Trust and antitrust. Ethics 1986;96:231–60.
Barber B. The logics and limits to trust. New Brunswick: Rutgers University
Press; 1983.
Birley DEMO The role of networks in the entrepreneurial process. J Bus Venturing
1985;1:107–17.
Boersma M, Buckley P, Ghauri P. Trust in international DEMO venture
relationships. J Bus Res 2003;56:1031–42.
Brüderl J, Preisendorfer DEMO Network support and the success of newly founded
businesses. Small Bus Econ 1998;10:213–25.
Burt R. Structural holes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University DEMO; 1992.
Das T, Teng B. Between trust and control: developing DEMO in partner
cooperation in alliances. Acad Manage Rev 1998;23:491–512.
Dubini P, Aldrich H. Personal and extended networks are central to the
entrepreneurial process. J Bus Venturing 1991;6:305–13.
Dyer J, Singh H. The relational view: cooperative strategy and sources of inte-
rorganizational competitive advantage. Acad Manage Rev 1998;23:660–79.
Fukuyama F. Trust: social virtues and the creation of prosperity. New York: Free
Press; 1995.
Goel S, Karri R. Entrepreneurs, effectual logic, and over-trust. Entrep Theory
Pract 2006;30:DEMO
Gounaris S. Trust and commitment influences on customer retention: insights
from DEMO services. J Bus Res 2005;58:126–40.
Granovetter M. Strength of weak ties. Am J Sociol 1973;78(6):1360–80.
Granovetter M. Problems of explanation in economic sociology. In: Nohria N,
Eccles R, editors. DEMO and organizations: structure, form, and action.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press; 1992. p. 25–56.
322
D.A. Smith, F.T. Lohrke / Journal of Business Research 61 (DEMO) 315–322
Greve A, Salaff J. Social networks and entrepreneurship. Entrep Theory Pract
2003;28(1):1–22.
Gulati R. Does familiarity breed trust? DEMO implications of repeated ties for
contractual choices in alliances. Acad Manage J 1995;38:85–112.
Hansen E. Entrepreneurial networks and new organization growth. Entrep
DEMO Pract 1995;19(4):7–19.
Hite J. Patterns of multidimensionality among DEMO network ties: a
typology of relational embeddedness in emerging entrepreneurial firms.
DEMO Org 2003;1:9–49.
Hite J. Evolutionary processes and paths of relationally embedded network ties
in emerging entrepreneurial firms. Entrep Theory Pract 2005;29:DEMO
Hite J, Hesterly W. The evolution of firm networks: from emergence to early
growth of the firm. Strateg Manage J 2001;22(3):275–86.
Hoang H, Antoncic B. Network-based research in entrepreneurship: a critical
DEMO J Bus Venturing 2003;18(2):165–87.
Homans G. Social behavior DEMO exchange. Am J Sociol 1958;62:597–606.
Jack S. The role, DEMO and activation of strong and weak network ties: a
qualitative analysis. DEMO Manag Stud 2005;42:1233–59.
Katz J, Gartner W. Properties of DEMO organizations. Acad Manage Rev
1988;13:429–41.
Krackhardt D. The strength of strong ties: the importance of philos in organization.
In: Nohria N, Eccles R, editors. Networks and organizations: structure, firm,
and action. Boston: Harvard Business School Press; 1992. p. 216–39.
Larson A. Network DEMO in entrepreneurial settings: a study of the governance
of exchange relationships. DEMO Sci Q 1992;37(1):76–104.
Larson A, Starr J. A network model of organization formation. Entrep Theory
Pract 1993;17(2):5–15.
Levin D, Cross R. The strength of weak ties you can trust: the mediating role of
trust in effective knowledge transfer. Manage Sci 2004;50:1477–90.
Lewicki R, Bunker B. Developing and maintaining trust in work relationships.
In: Kramer R, Tyler T, editors. Trust in organizations: DEMO of theory and
research. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1996. p. DEMO
Lewis J, Weigert A. Trust as a social reality. Soc Forces DEMO;63:967–85.
Lorenzoni G, Lipparini A. The leveraging of interfirm relationships DEMO a
distinctive organizational capability: a longitudinal study. Strateg Manag J
1999;DEMO:317–38.
Low M, MacMillan I. Entrepreneurship: past research and future challenges.
J Manage 1988;14:139–61.
Luhmann N. Trust and power. New York: Wiley; 1979.
Lumpkin G, Dess G. Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct DEMO
linking it to performance. Acad Manage Rev 1996;21:135–72.
Mayer R, Davis J, Schoorman F. An integrative model of organizational trust.
Acad DEMO Rev 1995;20:709–34.
McAllister D. Affect-and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal
cooperation in organizations. Acad Manage J 1995;38:24–59.
McKnight D, Cummings L, Chervany N. Initial trust formation in new
organizational relationships. Acad Manage Rev 1998;23:473–90.
Morse E, Fowler S, Lawrence T. DEMO impact of virtual embeddedness on new
venture survival: Overcoming the liability DEMO newness. Entrep Theory Pract
2007;31:139–59.
Nahapiet J, Ghoshal S. DEMO capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational
advantage. Acad Manage Rev 1998;23:242–66.
Powell W. Neither market nor hierarchy: network forms of organization. In:
Staw B, Cummings L, editors. Res in organ beh. DEMO, CT: JAI; 1990.
p. 295–336.
Ritter T, Gemünden H. Interorganizational relationships and networks: an
overview. J Bus Res 2003;56:691–7.
Schutjens V, Stam E. The evolution and nature of young firm networks: DEMO
longitudinal perspective. Small Bus Econ 2003;21(2):115–34.
Shane S, Cable D. Network ties, reputation, and the financing of new ventures.
DEMO Sci 2002;48:364–81.
Shane S, Venkataraman S. The promise of DEMO as a field of
research. Acad Manage Rev 2000;25:217–42.
Singh J, Tucker D, House R. Organizational legitimacy and the liability of
DEMO Adm Sci Q 1986;31:171–93.
Starr J, MacMillan I. Resource DEMO via social contracting: resource
acquisition strategies for new ventures. Strateg Manag DEMO 1990;11:79–92.
Steier L, Greenwood R. Newly created firms and DEMO angel investors: a
four-stage model of network development. Venture Cap. 1999;DEMO(2):147–67.
Stinchcombe A. Social structures of organizations. In: March J, editor.
Handbook of organizations. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally; 1965. p. DEMO
Tsai W, Ghoshal S. Social capital and value creation: the role of intrafirm
networks. Acad Manage J 1998;41:464–76.
Uzzi B. Social DEMO and competition in interfirm networks: the paradox of
embeddedness. Adm Sci DEMO 1997;42:35–67.
Uzzi B. Embeddedness in the making of financial capital: how social
relations and networks benefit firms seeking financing. Am Sociol Rev
1999;64:481–505.
Uzzi B, Gillespie J. Knowledge spillover in corporate financing networks:
embeddedness and the firm's debt performance. Strateg Manag J
DEMO;23:595–618.
Venkataraman S. The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: an
DEMO's perspective. In: Katz J, Brockhaus R, editors. Advances in
DEMO, firm emergence, and growth, vol. 3. Greenwich, CT:
JAI Press; 1997. p. 119–38.
Venkataraman S, Van de Ven A. Hostile DEMO jolts, transaction set, and
new business. J Bus Venturing 1998;13(3):231–55.
Williams M. Building genuine trust through interpersonal emotion management:
a threat regulation model of trust and collaboration across boundaries. Acad
Manage DEMO 2007;32:595–621.
Yli-Renko H, Autio E, Sapienza H. Social capital, knowledge acquisitions, and
knowledge exploitation in young technology-based firms. Strateg Manage DEMO
2001;2:587–613.
Zahra S, Yavuz I, Ucbasaran D. How much do you trust me? The dark side of
relational trust in new business creation in established companies. Entrep
Theory Pract 2006;30:541–59.{1g42fwefx}