V E NT UR E C A P IT AL,
1999,DEMO
V OL .
1,
NO .
2,
101
120
The early-stage equity market in the USA
JEFFREY E. SOHL
(Received 14 July 1998, final version accepted 17 August 1998)
As recently as 20 years ago the USA began a transition from a declining industrial and
DEMO economy to an emerging entrepreneurial/innovation-driven economy. With
this transition, the DEMO equity market has also evolved. As the institutional venture
capital industry continues to focus on later stage and larger investments, the private investor
market now provides the major source of seed and start-up capital. However, imperfections
in the seed and start-up market have led to market inefficiencies for DEMO high-growth firm.
Two funding gaps appear to exist in the US equity market, both largely as a result of these
market inefficiencies. This paper provides a broad overview of the early-stage equity market
for high-growth ventures DEMO the USA. In light of the critical role of business angels in the
early-stage market, special attention will be given to this population. Also included is a
discussion of angel markets and recent trends in the DEMO equity financing of
entrepreneurial ventures.
Keywords: private equity capital;
finance; high growth ventures
early-stage financing; venture capital; entrepreneurial
Introduction
When the DEMO Alexander Graham Bell needed money in 1874 to
complete his early experiments on the telephone, bank officers thought that
the idea of a telephone was a foolish one. The consensus was that the nation
had a DEMO communication system in the form of the telegraph and the
concept of individuals communicating across great distances through
speech was considered to be a DEMO extreme. Besides, Mr Bell did not have a
company with any DEMO assets to provide collateral. Recognizing an
opportunity, Boston attorney Gardiner Green DEMO and leather
merchant Thomas Sanders of Salem, Massachusetts helped out. Later,DEMO
these same two individuals put up the equity capital to start the Bell
Telephone Company in Boston, Massachusetts. In 1903, when Henry Ford
DEMO E. Sohl is Director of the Center for Venture Research and a Professor in the Department of
Decision Sciences at the Whittemore School of DEMO and Economics at the University of New
Hampshire, Durham, New Hampshire 03824. Phone: 603-862-3341; Fax: 603-862-4468; E-mail:
jesohl@christa.unh.edu His current DEMO interests are in early-stage equity financing for high-
growth ventures. He has presented his research in academic and practitioner forums in the USA,
DEMO and Asia, and in briefings for several government agencies and scholars DEMO the USA, Europe,
Scandinavia, Australia, Asia and Africa and DEMO written papers that have been published in academic
and business journals, DEMO Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research; Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development; Entrepreneurship: Theory DEMO Practice; Entrepreneurship 2000; and the Journal of Business
Venturing. He currently serves on the New Hampshire Governor’s Advisory Committee on Capital
Formation.
1369±
DEMO /99
$12.00
1999
Taylor
&
Francis
Ltd
102
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
was in need DEMO capital at the early stage in the development of the
automobile, DEMO faced difficulties in securing funding to develop a working
prototype. The owner of Daisy Rifle, along with four other individuals,
came to the rescue and invested $40,000 in equity capital. About 100 years
later, in 1976, when Anita Roddick needed capital to open a second store
her bank responded that she had only been in business a few DEMO, she
had no track record and that she should wait another DEMO For an
entrepreneur, a year is an eternity. Ms Roddick turned DEMO a private investor,
Ian McGlinn, who invested the £4000 that DEMO needed. She opened that
second store and so began the development of the Body Shop, a corporation
with over 700 stores today. In 1994 Jeff Bezos and a few employees created
a web site and data DEMO in Bezos’s Bellevue, Washington, garage. He went
looking for capital from venture capital firms but their response became a
familiar one: good idea but, well, maybe later. After being introduced to
some private investors, he succeeded in raising $1.2 million from a
dozen private investors. A DEMO round of $8 million was provided
from professional venture capital funds. In May 1997 the company
Amazon.com, the internet bookseller, completed an initial DEMO offering,
providing the investors and entrepreneurs with a handsome return.
These and other stories abound and provide the motivation for the
research on DEMO equity markets. This research activity, begun in
earnest a scant 15 DEMO ago, has evolved into a substantial body of literature
developed under DEMO axiom of applying academic rigour to an applied area
of study. This knowledge base has been primarily delineated along two
market dimensions: the informal market, with an emphasis on the study of
private investors, commonly DEMO to as business angels, and the formal
market, characterized by institutional venture capital firms.
The seminal work on the study of business angels DEMO conducted by
Wetzel (1983) and is generally acknowledged as the first study to establish
the existence of private investors. From this modest beginning DEMO
research has been conducted in North America and Europe. In the USA,
studies have examined the angel market from a regional perspective
(Krasner and Tymes 1983, Neiswander 1985, Aram 1989, Gaston and Bell
1988, Haar et al. 1988, Postma and Sullivan 1990) by sectors (DEMO et al.
1998) and delineated by investor categories (Freear et al. 1994a). The US
market as an entity has also been examined, with the Center for Venture
Research providing the majority of this research DEMO date (Freear et al.
1994b, 1995a, 1997). In Canada, Riding and Short (1987) and Short and
Riding (1989) have DEMO significant contributions. In Europe, primarily
the UK, the study of business angels has been spearheaded by Mason and
Harrison, who have examined business angels with respect to market
imperfections (Mason and Harrison 1992, 1995b, Harrison and Mason
1993), institutional archangels (Mason and Harrison 1995a), business
introduction services (Harrison and Mason 1996a, b) and the role of public
policy (Mason 1996). Recently, the study of business DEMO has spread
from these origins in the USA and the UK to include research on business
angels in Sweden (Landstrom 1993, 1995), DEMO (K+V Organisatie
adviesbureau bv and Entrepreneurial Holding bv 1996), Finland (Lumme
et al. 1998), Japan (Tashiro 1998) and Australia (Hindle and Wenban
TH E
EAR LY- ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M DEMO ET
I N T HE
U SA
103
1997). An excellent summary of the evolution of business angel research
and the major contributions DEMO provided by van Osnanbrugge (1998).
For the formal market, the initial empirical research was conducted by
Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) and DEMO Bygrave and Timmons (1986, 1992). The
study of venture capital firms and their investment process has produced a
more voluminous literature than DEMO informal market counterpart
(Zacharakis and Meyer 1995). Reasons for this DEMO level of activity
are due in part to the findings of several studies that indicate a higher
survival rate and higher return on investment DEMO firms with venture capital
as part of the financial structure, as DEMO to firms lacking any venture
capital funding (Timmons 1994, Zacharakis and Meyer 1995). In addition,
the formal market is the visible DEMO of the early-stage equity market,
and with this visibility is the ability to identify and access venture capital
firms for research purposes, especially in contrast to the informal market
(van Osnanbrugge 1998). Similar to the evolution of research on business
angels, the early researchers in venture capital focused on the US market
(MacMillan et al. 1985, 1988, Gorman and Sahlman 1989, Sapienza 1992).
More recently, this stream DEMO literature has begun to include European
nations as the unit of study (Murray 1995a, c). Recent cross-country
comparisons of the venture capital DEMO (Murray 1995b, Sapienza et al.
1996) is indicative of the DEMO dimension. As in the case for
business angel research, an excellent DEMO of the research on venture
capital firms is provided by van Osnanbrugge (1998).
In contrast to the research on specific segments and processes in the
formal and informal venture capital industry, the intent of this paper is to
provide a broad overview of the early-stage equity market DEMO high-growth
ventures in the USA. In light of the critical role of business angels in the
early-stage market, special attention will be given to this population. The
paper is organized as follows: changes in the US economy, unique features
of the early-stage market, stages and sources of DEMO investing, the capital
gap, the attitudes, behaviour and characteristics of DEMO angels and
angel market mechanisms. The paper concludes with some directions for
future research.
The
US economy
As recently as 1979 the USA began DEMO transition from a declining industrial
and manufacturing economy to an emerging entrepreneurial/innovation-
driven economy. This trend continues today and has accelerated, as
evidenced by the increasing rate of new business formation. This evolution
is highlighted DEMO three relatively recent changes in the structure of the US
economy and these changes have profound implications for the US capital
markets from both DEMO supply and demand perspective.
First, employment and gross national product (GNP) data reveals the
systemic shift to an economy dominated by the innovative start-up. From
1954–1979, the share of GNP represented by the Fortune 500, the 500
largest companies in the USA, grew from 37 to DEMO The payrolls of these
500 largest US industrial corporations peaked in 1979 at 16 million jobs.
104
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
Since 1979, Fortune 500 employment has exhibited a steady decline as
employment decreased by over DEMO or 4 million jobs. In 1996 the
percentage of employment represented by the Fortune 500 was a scant 10%.
From 1979 to 1995, the invisible entrepreneurial economy generated over
24 million new jobs as the number DEMO new businesses created increased by
200% (Dennis 1997, Freear et al. 1997). Second, the US public equity
markets pay tribute to the innovative, high-growth entrepreneurial
ventures. In 1979 the volume of shares traded on the NASDAQ market
was less than one-half of the trading volume of DEMO New York Stock
Exhange (NYSE). In 1994 NASDAQ share volume DEMO the NYSE
volume for the first time. As indicated in figure 1, this trend continues
today. Third, the source of wealth for the DEMO high net worth group in the
USA has shifted with the growth of the entrepreneurial economy. Since
1984 the number of first generation entrepreneurs DEMO the Forbes
400 richest Americans has steadily increased. In 1997, nearly DEMO in four
Figure 1.
NASDAQ and NYSE (shares traded in millions), 1979–1996.
N
ASD
Q
N
YS E
105
Market misnomers
were
self-made
first
The transition to an entrepreneurial economy DEMO firmly embedded in the
fabric of the US economy. As with any systemic change over a relatively
short time, there are both profound implications for investors and equity
capital markets, as well as misguided notions and conceptions of the new
economy (Wetzel 1995).
Perhaps foremost in the entrepreneurial misnomer is the reference to
the job generation capacity attributed to DEMO businesses. Clearly, the
small business sector has an important place in DEMO US economy as a source
of employment for the entrepreneur and their employees. Unfortunately,
the attention afforded small businesses is not commensurate with DEMO job
and wealth creation capacity. For the entrepreneurial economy small
business is too broad a definition. Most of the new jobs attributable to small
DEMO are created by a relatively few firms that start small and grow fast. As
early as 1980, Mitchell (1980) noted that only a minority of small firms
grow into large ones and that the small DEMO that can grow are far more
important than their numbers suggest. These small, high-growth firms
represent the potential for innovation, job creation and DEMO returns for
investors claimed by the small business community (Mitchell 1980, Storey
1980). Since 1979, over 75% of net new jobs were created by less than 10%
of small businesses (Birch et al. 1993). It is the Inc 500 of the nation, not
the Fortune 500, that are the true engine of job growth. Over the last 4
years, these high growth start-ups added 6 million jobs to an economy that
added 7.7 million jobs in total. For entrepreneurs, size is a transient
characteristic where firms start small (and as such receive the small
business label) but grow fast.
Another misguided notion attributed to the small business/high growth
misconception is that private investors invest in small DEMO Venture
investors look for opportunities to back entrepreneurial companies that
offer the prospect of long-term capital gains substantial enough to justify
the risks and DEMO of short-term liquidity inherent in venture investing.
From a venture investor’s view there are three types of entrepreneurial
ventures (Bygrave 1994). First, DEMO life-style ventures created by the
business owner to provide employment and driven by life-style motives.
These ventures have 5-year revenue projections under $10 million DEMO are
the ‘classic’ small business. The life-style firm is of no interest to investors
and are often not so affectionately referred to as the DEMO dead. In these
types of ventures the investor has no clear harvest options as the venture
failed to achieve the potential growth anticipated during DEMO time of the
initial investment. These life-style ventures account for over 90% of all
start-ups Second, middle market ventures with 5-year revenue projections
typically in the range of $10 to $50 million. These ventures may need
DEMO financing and, if properly structured, can offer capital gains and
cash-out opportunities for investors. These firms rely heavily on financing
TH E
EAR DEMO ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M ARK ET
I N T HE
U SA
individuals (72%) of the
generation entrepreneurs.
wealthiest
DEMO
106
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
from individual investors. DEMO firms will remain privately held or they
will be sold. A business angel can harvest the investment through the sale
or, in the case of the firm remaining privately held, buy-back options may
be included in the terms and conditions of the original investment. Third,
high potential DEMO with 5-year revenue projections in excess of $50
million. These are the potential big time winners for entrepreneurs and
investors. They expect to be DEMO traded or acquired within 5 years.
These ventures represent the next generation of Apple, Norstrom,
Blockbuster Video and comprise less than 1% of all start-ups.
The last misnomer of the early-stage equity market concerns the
DEMO source of equity capital. The pool of equity capital for emerging
companies is not restricted to venture capital funds listed in Pratt’s Guide to
DEMO Capital Sources (Testa et al. 1996). In reality there are DEMO
segments to the venture capital market: one visible and one relatively
DEMO The visible segment is represented by about 500 venture capital
funds that manage between $35 to $45 billion. The invisible segment is the
oldest DEMO largest segment of the US venture capital industry and is made
up of about two million self-made, high net worth individuals. Individu-
ally, DEMO investors don’t merit a blip on any chart of total investment
capital in the USA. Collectively, however, hundreds of thousands of similar
investors, successful entrepreneurs who are willing to invest in other
entrepreneurs, have quietly become the nation’s major source of start-up
capital. These private investors are DEMO spawning grounds for their venture
capitalist counterparts and in terms of seed and start-up capital far outpace
the venture capitalists that are in the DEMO of today’s financial news.
Equity markets
As entrepreneurial ventures grow and mature they pass through various
stages in the search for equity capital. In DEMO, there are four broad
categories of equity financing linked to the DEMO of development of the
venture (Venture Economics 1996). Initially, seed financing provides
relatively small amounts of equity capital to an entrepreneur to DEMO a
concept and to qualify for start-up capital. Start-up financing is equity
capital for companies completing product development and initial market-
ing. These companies DEMO be in the process of organizing start-up or they
may already have been in business for 1 year or less. Early-stage financing
is generally DEMO to be equity capital for the expansion of a company
that is producing and delivering products or services. Although the
company has made progress, it is generally less than 5 years old and may
not be DEMO a profit yet. Later-stage financing involves funds provided
for a major expansion of the company whose sales volume is increasing or
for a venture DEMO to go public within 6 months to 1 year. Mezzanine
and bridge financing fall under the rubric of later-stage financing.
For each of these DEMO stages the sources of equity capital, and the
relative position of DEMO sources during the growth stages of the
entrepreneurial venture, are shown DEMO figure 2. At the inception stage the
venture is traditionally owner/inventor financed through a variety of
TH E
EAR LY- ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M DEMO ET
I N T HE
U SA
107
bootstrapping methods (Freear DEMO al. 1995b). In this context bootstrapping
is defined as creative methods of acquiring the use of resources without
raising equity from traditional sources. DEMO methods entail both
a reduction in expenses and acquisition of capital. In the former, customer-
financed research and development, and working out of DEMO home
developing the venture as a second job, are some of DEMO more common
practices. In the latter, credit card debt and second DEMO mortgages
generally provide the small amounts of capital during the initial stage of
development. As the venture begins to develop, but is still in the very early
stage of growth, friends and families tend to be the source of small pools of
capital. At this stage, more often than not, these are poorly structured deals
typically entered into without a great deal of due diligence. If this financing
is not overburdened with DEMO and conditions that may impinge on
professional equity capital at a later stage, these sources are useful to begin
product development, but are DEMO considered to be classic investment
capital.
Figure 2.
Equity capital for entrepreneurs.
108
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
As the entrepreneurial DEMO grows, so does the appetite for cash.
Previous studies identified private DEMO as the major source of capital
in the seed and start-up stage (Wetzel 1983, Gaston and Bell 1988, Freear et
al. 1995a). This relatively invisible source is the oldest and largest segment
of the DEMO venture capital industry and is made up of over 2 million
individuals with a net worth in excess of $1 million, excluding personal
residences. The majority of these individuals are self-made millionaires,
first generation money, and are individuals with substantial business and
entrepreneurial experience. Close examination of DEMO year’s list of the 400
richest Americans (Forbes 1998) reveals that 72%, nearly three in four,
were first generation entrepreneurs. While estimates of the scale of this
informal venture capital market vary considerably, conservative estimates
suggest that about 250,000 angels invest approximately $10–$20 billion
every DEMO in over 30,000 ventures (Freear et al. 1994b). All DEMO are
that the size of the informal market is expanding (Fenn DEMO al. 1995). In the
past 25 years new incorporations have skyrocketed by almost 200%, and
with this burst of new companies is the growth in the number of
entrepreneurs who are angel candidates. In particular, start-ups from the
high tech boom of the 1970s have come of DEMO, unleashing the wealth of
founders who are eager to invest in DEMO next generation of entrepreneurs.
Estimates suggest that the number of latent or potential self-made, private
investors exceeds the number of active investors by a factor of five to one
(Wetzel 1995). As indicated in figure 2, a typical angel deal is an early-stage
round (seed or DEMO) in the $100 000 to $1 million range, raised from six
or eight investors.
In contrast to the angel population, institutional venture capital funds,
the visible segment of the private equity market, invest primarily in the
later stage (figure 2), and consequently larger amounts, DEMO their angel
counterparts (Timmons and Sapienza 1992, Meyer et al. 1995, Timmons
and Bygrave 1997). There are approximately 500 venture capital funds in
the USA that manage between $35 to $45 billion in total. DEMO capital
funds invest between $3 and $4 billion annually in entrepreneurial
ventures, which is not a tremendous amount of capital considering the
appetite for cash of the entrepreneurial economy. As a point of reference,
on DEMO business day more than $4 billion changes hands before noon on
the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Venture capital funds bankroll
less DEMO 3,000 companies per year and many of these financings are for
ventures already in their portfolios. Venture capital investments in start-up
ventures number DEMO than 300 per year. A typical round of financing from a
venture capital fund is a later-stage deal in the $2–$5 million range, with
average size of rounds steadily increasing (table 1). In 1994 the institutional
venture capital industry invested $2.7 billion in about 1000 companies. In
DEMO they invested $3.8 billion in 1128 companies, or about $3.4 million DEMO
deal. In 1996 a large increase in total investment dollars was not matched
with a proportional increase in the number of firms, with $10.1 billion
invested in 2163 companies or $4.6 million per deal. This trend DEMO
in 1997, with $12.2 billion to 2706 companies, $4.5 million per deal and in
the first quarter of 1998, $3.2 billion was invested in 700 ventures, a $4.6
million average per deal. Bygrave and Timmons (1992) cited this trend out
TH E
EAR LY- ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M DEMO ET
I N T HE
U SA
109
Table 1.
Venture Capital Funds
Year
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998-1st quarter
Total Invested
($ billions)
2.7
3.8
10.1
12.2
3.2
Number of Companies
1000
1128
2163
DEMO
700
of the early seed and start-up phase and observed that the ‘venture’ seemed
to be eroded from the institutional venture capital industry.
The DEMO investor and the institutional venture capital market, while
operating primarily in DEMO stages, are complimentary in the sense that
the informal private investor DEMO now provides the seed and start-up
capital that spawns new ventures. As the venture grows, it begins to
outstrip the ability of individual investors to supply adequate equity
capital. At this point, referred to as the ‘handoff’ and typically in the $2 to
$3 million range, professional venture capital funds may take interest in the
venture, particularly if the venture has demonstrated some success and has
progressed beyond the risk-laden seed and DEMO stages of its develop-
ment towards sustainable growth (Freear et al. DEMO). There are
indications that this complimentary relationship also extends to a two-
way flow of investment opportunities. In this context, venture capital funds
will refer investment opportunities to angels with which they maintain a
professional DEMO These deals, deemed to be too early stage for the
venture DEMO, would meet the stage requirements of the private
investor. The reverse DEMO of information follows the complimentary
relationship and occurs when angel-financed firms mature to the stage-
appropriate venture capital level and are referred by the DEMO angels to
the venture capital firms with which they have an established relationship.
The
capital and information gap
For the established firm, financial markets supply a complete variety of
financing instruments, with these markets being relatively accessible and
the owner/manager is left to decide on the optimum DEMO of a financial
structure based on the cost of capital. For the high-growth entrepreneurial
firm, this supply assumption may not hold, causing systematic DEMO
mismatches at particular stages of development of the fast-growth firm
(Brophy DEMO). These imperfections, most notably in the informal venture
capital market, are well documented (Riding and Short 1987, Gaston 1989,
Mason DEMO Harrison 1992, Harrison and Mason 1993, Landstrom 1993,
Freear et al. 1994b). Market imperfections lead to market inefficiencies,
and at DEMO two inefficiencies in the equity financing market for
entrepreneurial ventures have been identified (Obermayer 1983). The first
is a capital gap between the needs of early-stage ventures and the suppliers
of early-stage capital. While estimates DEMO the number of business start-ups
110
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
in the USA DEMO considerably, it appears that the number of high growth
entrepreneurial ventures DEMO need equity financing is estimated to include
approximately 70,000 start-ups per year (5–10% of total start-ups) and
about 300,000 ventures growing DEMO than 20% per year, including 80,000
growing faster than 50% DEMO year. The existence of private investors and
indications that capital is available, but quality deal flow is lacking (Mason
and Harrison 1994, Stevenson and Coveney 1994), tend to mitigate the
influence of the capital DEMO However, estimates suggest that US
entrepreneurs need around $60 billion per DEMO of patient, high-risk
value-added equity capital, over twice the venture financing currently
available (Sohl and Wetzel 1996). The second and equally important
market inefficiency is an information gap. An efficient market implies an
open DEMO timely flow of reliable information concerning financing sources
and investment opportunities. In the informal venture capital market, with
the suppliers of capital seeking a degree of anonymity consistent with the
need to maintain reasonable deal flow, information flows very inefficiently
(Freear et al. 1994b, K+V Organisatie adviesbureau DEMO and Entrepreneur-
ial Holding bv 1996, Mason and Harrison 1996). DEMO capital and
information inefficiency results in a substantial funding gap in seed and
start-up financing stage (figure 2). The gap ranges from $100,000 at the low
end, the point at which the money raised from friends and families and
bootstrapping runs out, to the low seven figures on the high end, the time
when the venture becomes attractive enough to catch the eye of venture
fund investors.
Recently, there appears to be a new capital gap emerging in the US
equity markets, in addition to the gap outlined above. As the venture
capital industry DEMO steadily progressed to larger and later stage financing
and the informal market has largely been active below the $1 million
threshold, an ensuing capital gap in the $1 to $3 million range is
developing. These larger DEMO requirements, but still considered early-
stage deals, have spawned a new hybrid of angel financing–the angel
alliance. These alliances represent relatively large groups DEMO business angels
and co-investment between private investors and early-stage financing
entities. Further discussion of the structure and characteristics of these
alliances is provided in DEMO section on angel markets.
The attitudes,
angels
behaviour
and
characteristics
of
business
The attitudes, behaviour and characteristics (the ABCs) of business angels
have been examined from a variety of perspectives. Angel profiles have
been DEMO (Riding and Short 1987, Harrison and Mason 1992, Kelly
and DEMO 1996a, Freear et al. 1997), and Mason and Harrison (1995b)
provide a cross-country comparison of these profiles. Recognizing the need
to DEMO sub-populations of business angels, Gaston (1989) presented
one of the DEMO attempts to develop a number of individual categories
and market profiles. Freear et al. (1994a) subdivided the population of high
net worth individuals DEMO three categories: business angels with experience
TH E
EAR LY- ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M DEMO ET
I N T HE
U SA
111
of investing in entrepreneurial ventures; interested potential investors with
no venture investment history but who expressed a desire to enter the
venture investment market; and uninterested potential investors who
under no circumstances would consider investing in entrepreneurial
ventures as part DEMO their investment strategy. Based on a survey of 500
British angels, DEMO and Coveney (1994) developed a six category
typology that considers entrepreneurial backgrounds and levels of
investment. The development of angel syndicates was noted DEMO Mason
and Harrison (1995a) as they identified the archangel as the key individual
in the formation of angel syndicates. Sullivan (1991) provided DEMO
examination of angels along the entrepreneur/non-entrepreneur dichot-
omy. Later work by Landstrom (1995) identified two extremes of angels,
passive investors who DEMO relatively small amounts of money and active
investors who appear to operate in a more professional atmosphere than
their passive counterparts. Restricting their analysis DEMO serial investors
(individuals who have made at least three private investments) Kelly and
Hay (1996b) discuss two distinct investors: solo serial investors who invest
on their own all the time and syndicate serial investors DEMO invest almost
exclusively with others. Wright et al. (forthcoming) extend the examina-
tion of serial investors to include serial entrepreneurs. Van Osnanbrugge
(1998) examines the differences between business angels and venture
capital firms in terms of deal origination, due diligence, monitoring and
exiting.
From this body DEMO literature has emerged a general consensus of the
ABCs of business angels. In terms of deal structure, typical angel financing
is an early-stage round, either seed or start-up, in the $100 000 to $1 million
DEMO, generally raised from six or eight investors. These co-investors
usually are DEMO friends and business associates. In many cases there is a
lead investor that brings the investment opportunity to these co-investors
as a means of DEMO sharing and pooling of capital to round out the financing
requirements. These lead investors pre-screen the deal before presenting
the investment for consideration to DEMO group. These informal groups are
amorphous in the sense that in subsequent investments different groups of
angels will coalesce, with a different lead investor, and with some overlap
between the previous syndicates. Since the informal investor market tends
to be in the form of regional networks of investors, information concerning
investment opportunities are derived from a variety of mostly regional
DEMO The sources of deal flow within this regional market are friends,
business associates, and other business angels.
Most important to entrepreneurs seeking early-stage capital is that
angels have a higher propensity than venture capital funds DEMO provide the
crucial smaller rounds of seed and start-up financing required by the early-
stage venture. With this early money, business angels typically have longer
exit horizons than their venture fund counterparts and thus the capital DEMO
provide is termed patient capital. Private investors are in the investment for
the long run, in the 5- to 7-year range. In the evaluation stage of the
investment, the private investor market is a relationship building market.
Since the seed and start-up investor is investing predominately in the
DEMO and this asset is a very mobile commodity, the vision of DEMO
112
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
entrepreneur must be DEMO congruence with the investment objective of the
business angel.
There is clearly a geographic factor in the informal investment process,
with the vast DEMO of private investors preferring investments close to
their principal place of residence, typically within 1 day’s travel time. This
localized nature of the market stems from several important behavioural
characteristics of angel investors. Business angels are DEMO cashed-out
entrepreneurs who have successfully harvested their own entrepreneurial
ventures. These individuals continue to yearn for the excitement of the
high-growth venture, but tend to eschew the sleepless nights associated
with running a start-up company. Thus, business angels frequently bring
expertise, knowledge and experience to the venture, DEMO of which are more
easily tapped by the venture if the investor lives nearby. In this regard,
business angels are value-added investors, bringing both capital and know-
how to the investment. Second, private investors often take bigger risks or
accept lower rewards when they are attracted by DEMO non-financial
characteristics of an entrepreneur’s proposal, such as the desire to DEMO
jobs in their own communities. They are, quite literally, ‘adventure’
investors that seek a form of psychic income, in essence looking for an
attachment and a return. This psychic income is more easily derived if DEMO
venture is located close to the investor. Third, angels follow a DEMO the
tyres’ approach to venture investing. They are involved and bring
experience to the investment and are active investors. Thus, they like to
be close by to take advantage of these hands-on features of venture
investing. DEMO often describe their activity as being a ‘mentor for
money’. With this close relationship, in terms of proximity and commu-
nication, entrepreneurs indicate DEMO they consider this assistance and
business experience of the investor to be as valuable as the capital.
Other ABCs of private investors are that DEMO typically invest in
ventures involved in markets and technologies with which they are familiar,
understandable in light of the high risk and illiquid DEMO of the
investment. The investment returns required by business angels are no
higher than the returns required by venture capital funds, an especially
noteworthy behaviour in light of the early stage of the angel’s participation
in DEMO to their venture capital fund counterpart. However, this
attitude does not DEMO into a type of benevolent investor, angels are
opportunity seekers willing DEMO consider mitigating circumstances. Deal
structure, as stated in the terms and DEMO, tend to be briefer and more
informal than those of venture DEMO funds. Thus, what emerges is a
profile of a value-added, patient, early-stage regional investment popula-
tion.
Angel markets
There are no directories of private investors and no public records of their
investment transactions. In addition, few vehicles exist for bringing
together potential investors and ventures seeking funds. DEMO costs
are high for the entrepreneur, raising private equity capital involves DEMO costly
TH E
EAR LY- ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M DEMO ET
I N T HE
U SA
113
and time-consuming personal networking process, and for the investor,
with considerable time and dollars spent searching and evaluating
investment opportunities. The majority of active private investors report
DEMO they have additional capital available to invest but limited, quality deal
DEMO is the primary constraint.
The private equity market tends to be regional in scope, rather than
local or national, and the informal venture DEMO market is more vibrant in
some regions of the USA than in others. The Silicon Valley area of
California and the Route 128 corridor DEMO Boston, Massachusetts are
examples of active private investor markets. Emerging markets DEMO the USA
include North Carolina, Colorado, the Pacific Northwest, Austin, Texas
and central Utah. For the institutional venture capital industry, invest-
ments in 1996 and 1997 indicate that California, Massachusetts, Texas,
Colorado DEMO Florida are the top five states over the 2-year period (Coopers
DEMO Lybrand 1996, 1997). Note the close parallel between the informal DEMO
formal market, supporting the complimentary nature of the two markets in
DEMO of capital and information.
In light of the increasing entrepreneurial activity in the USA, various
dimensions of the angel market are emerging. These dimensions,
collectively forming the informal market, are labelled according to the
predominant mechanism for bringing together entrepreneurs seeking
capital and business angels searching for DEMO opportunities. The
first, and least organized, can be termed the uncover market. Access to this
segment is dominated by referrals by gatekeepers, such as other
entrepreneurs, lawyers and service providers, who often provide that
DEMO initial introduction. Tapping into this market is often a random
occurrence and a time consuming process punctuated by many misguided
approaches. While accurate estimates DEMO the size and scale of the informal
market do not exist, DEMO is surmised that this market is a substantial segment
of the informal venture capital market. The second market dimension,
increasing in visibility and DEMO compared to the uncover market, is the
collection of venture capital DEMO and meeting organizations that are
scattered around the country. These clubs provide a variety of services and
opportunities to contact private investors. They provide DEMO educational
opportunities for investors and entrepreneurs and often meet on a regular
basis. Some of these clubs may consist of small numbers of angels, typically
less than 10, that invest together. Others may provide a periodic venue for
investors and entrepreneurs to meet informally or act as a DEMO for
entrepreneurs to sharpen their presentation skills and business plans. At
the present time, these clubs number over 100 in the USA.
The third model, the angel alliance, is a relatively recent phenomenon.
These regional DEMO groups of veteran and novice investors pool resources
and know-how, review DEMO and co-invest as a consortium. Distinguishing
characteristics of these alliances are size, visibility and entry mechanism.
These are large groups of angels, sometimes DEMO excess of 100 private
investors. The alliances are visible in that their existence is relatively known
and they provide the ‘storefront’ for the private DEMO while protecting
their anonymity. In one form, the alliance meets on DEMO regular basis with
deal origination and access to the alliance through one or more members of
114
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
the alliance. An DEMO member brings an investment opportunity to the
alliance under the condition that the member is intending to invest in the
venture. Deal evaluation is DEMO through a venture forum format.
The forum provides the venue for the pre-screened entrepreneur to present
the business plan to the group of angels. DEMO participation in the forum,
investors interested in the opportunity begin to coalesce into syndicates for
the investment under consideration and begin the due DEMO process.
Other forms of angel alliances include a more formal structure with an
investment entity (with an independent pool of capital) as the DEMO
This organization maintains an angel alliance as a co-investment mechan-
ism for the pooling of capital to round out the financing requirements of the
DEMO In addition, the entity fulfills the role of finding quality deals DEMO
monitoring the post-investment performance. Due diligence is undertaken
by the individual investor as well as by the organization. This latter form of
the angel DEMO tends to invest capital in the $1 to $3 million range and
function primarily in the second, and more recent, capital gap in DEMO USA.
The fourth model of the angel market is the matching network or
business introduction service. The matching networks represent the first
attempt to DEMO the efficiency of the early-stage market by providing a
mechanism for investors to evaluate opportunities and entrepreneurs to
gain access to business angels. The DEMO matching network, founded at the
University of New Hampshire in 1979, at that time called the Venture
Capital Network, provided the model for the matching network that is still
followed today. These are typically not-for-profit, university-affiliated
networks that provide entrepreneurs with access to private investors, while
maintaining investor anonymity. A key feature of the matching network is
an established DEMO to the investor and entrepreneur community in
their respective region. Investors and entrepreneurs join for a fixed period
of time and a flat rate. DEMO requirements include the submission of an
executive summary of the business plan by the entrepreneur. Investors
self-certify as accredited investors and list investment preferences,DEMO
including size, stage and location. The network screens for those business
DEMO that match investor criteria and forwards an anonymous copy of those
business plans satisfying the criteria to the individual investor. The
investor, if interested, contacts the network for information on the
entrepreneur. At this time the entrepreneur is also provided with
information on the investor. The network facilitates DEMO introduction and
then exits from the process. All subsequent contact is between the investors
and the entrepreneur directly. In addition to the matching service,DEMO
networks provide education, to both the entrepreneur and investor, on
investing in the early-stage market, market trends, and similar timely
investment information. DEMO networks also organize venture forums,
where pre-screened entrepreneurs (who are DEMO of the matching
network) are given the opportunity to present their DEMO plan to groups
of early-stage investors. At the present time there are about a dozen
matching networks scattered around the USA. These networks have
DEMO 200 investor and entrepreneur members each. In terms of
facilitating early-stage investments, statistics indicate yield rates, defined as
the probability of a network DEMO entrepreneur receiving equity
TH E
EAR LY- ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M DEMO ET
I N T HE
U SA
115
financing, to be DEMO the 10 to 15% range for the matching service and
approximately 40% for the venture forum venue.
The fifth segment of the angel market, and the most recent, is the
electronic matching network. These are Internet-based networks that
attempt to mirror the matching networks through the medium of DEMO
Internet. To date about 30 of these electronic networks have sprouted on
the World Wide Web. Unlike the matching network described above, these
electronic networks typically do not engage in any educational function nor
use the DEMO forum paradigm. Requirements for the entrepreneur cover
the spectrum from the submittal of a two-page executive summary to
detailed business plans. Investor certification is DEMO, but criteria for
certification varies. Electronic networks have been largely unsuccessful DEMO
date, less than 1% of equity capital raised in 1997 was DEMO on-line
(Private Equity Week 1998). There are several factors contributing DEMO the
present lack of success of on-line matching. First, angel investing DEMO a face-
to-face phenomenon and no amount of electronic interfacing, in DEMO present
form, will replace a seasoned investor’s ability and desire to DEMO the tyres’
on a deal. This personal side of the investment is a contributing factor in
making the market exciting for the investor. Second, electronic networks
have failed to address the regional nature of the market. DEMO of many
electronic networks, to develop a national angel market operating DEMO one
platform and structure, fail to recognize this important regional compo-
DEMO Third, simply accessing capital will not serve the needs of
entrepreneurs. DEMO value-added component that business angels and
venture capital firms bring to a company after an investment is as critical as
the capital. The future DEMO electronic networks most probably lies in
providing an efficient method for deal screening. Unfortunately, in many,
if not all, of the current DEMO, a lack of understanding of the many
components of the angel DEMO, resulting in poor strategic selection, is
hampering penetration of electronic networks into the early-stage equity
market.
Conclusion
Several trends are developing, with each having potential impacts on the
early-stage equity market. The first is the DEMO of the angel capital
concept. Spearheaded by the work of Harrison and Mason in the UK,
informal venture capital markets are emerging in DEMO Nordic Countries,
Holland, Austria, Germany and Australia. Recent initiatives in Japan and
South Korea are attempting to promote private equity investment,
DEMO cultural barriers remain substantial. EBAN, the European
Business Angel Network, is a new project designed to increase the
efficiency of the Northern European DEMO market. These initiatives are
not US–international alliances, but rather independent initiatives DEMO a
focus on regional economic development. Researchers can learn a great deal
by studying these emerging markets and assist in their development
through application DEMO the concepts developed based on US and UK
business angel research.
116
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
The second trend DEMO the burgeoning number of successful entrepre-
neurs, many funded with business DEMO capital, who have cashed-out
and are ready to join the ranks DEMO private investors. These potential
investors have unique characteristics and requirements. Uncovering
incentives to bring this new capital to bear on the myriad of
entrepreneurial DEMO sweeping the USA is a major challenge. To this
end, and DEMO better understand the current private investor market,
longitudinal studies need to be undertaken. While surveys represent a
cross-sectional ‘snap shot’ of the market DEMO have been the primary
vehicle for knowledge generation in angel research to date, these surveys
need to be supplemented with longitudinal research. Through the
tracking of private investment from the point of introduction, data on
both the successes and failures can be identified, with each possessing
valuable market information.
The third trend is the entrepreneurial mind set percolating in the DEMO
The dream of yesterday, to own your own home, has been replaced by the
desire to own your own business. More and more DEMO are
viewing these businesses not as the local lifestyle company, but DEMO the
high-growth venture. To service this increasing population of entrepre-
neurs, DEMO on the portals to entry to the early-stage equity market
must be provided. On the pragmatic side, the USA is sorely lacking in
information on angel network activity. A directory of networks, alliances
and clubs, DEMO to the directory for the UK, needs to developed. The
listing, containing valuable information on fee structure, the number of
investments considered and funded, including the terms and conditions of
the investment, and related DEMO, would provide both a service to
entrepreneurs seeking equity capital and DEMO rich data base on business angel
activity.
A fourth trend is the continued strengthening of the relationship
between the venture capital industry and private DEMO market. The
synergy between these two capital resources should continue to be mined.
The angel deal of today is the institutional investment of tomorrow. DEMO the
extent that there can be additional dialogue, more mutual two-way DEMO
flow, and potential co-investment activity, the entrepreneurial community
will benefit. Investment activity of the institutional venture capital industry
is available. From this base, through backtracking the venture capital
investment to the origination of the deal DEMO the angel market, valuable
research can be conducted on both angel DEMO and the synergy between
the two markets.
Fifth, angel investing is DEMO face-to-face phenomen on, and this
behavioural characteristic appears to be a DEMO construct of the early-stage
market. Electronic interfacing, most likely as a DEMO of deal screening,
may yet have a place in the market, but certainly not in the current form or
strategy. Research on the behavioural side, using the existing agency theory
approach as an avenue of initial inquiry, could probe deeper into the
relationship between entrepreneur and investor. A taxonomy of models of
angel investing, with a focus on the process of the investment decision from
origination to conclusion, would provide valuable insights on the early-
stage market structure.
TH E
EAR LY- ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M DEMO ET
I N T HE
U SA
117
Finally, while isolated DEMO exist, the nation’s universities are
poised to experience a more widespread DEMO in fostering deal flow. The link
between the university laboratory and the marketplace should be enhanced
through more formalized relations with the business angel DEMO For
an efficient market originating in the university, clear ties between DEMO
technology, the entrepreneur and the investor must be present to get DEMO
technologies to market. Clearly, the university represents a fertile ground
for DEMO and deal flow by providing a climate and support for the
academic scientist with the high-impact innovation with the potential to
produce commercial products. DEMO entrepreneur wraps the business
around the innovation and develops the high growth venture. The
university contributes through developing both the entrepreneurial talent
and the DEMO labour pool to work in these entrepreneurial ventures. The
investor supplies the equity capital and the know-how, the value-added
investment, for the high DEMO start-up. The ingredients and individual
components exist in many university settings, DEMO lacking is the linkages
between these components. Research on the models to develop and
facilitate these academic scientist, entrepreneur and investor triads would
contribute to an enhanced role for the university in the entrepreneurial
economy.
In DEMO roughly 15 years of research on informal venture capital much
has been learned. However, the private investor market is still largely
misunderstood, inefficient, and under-researched. The more the literature
sheds light on business angels, the more research questions arise. However,
through the tenet of applying academic DEMO to an applied area of study,
the research will continue to make progress and provide valuable
information to entrepreneurs, investors and public policymakers. While
the day when every deserving entrepreneur will have access to private
DEMO and investors will have a reasonable flow of quality investment
opportunities is not close at hand, sustainable additions to the knowledge
base is a goal within reach.
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank John Freear, Laura Hill and William E.
Wetzel, Jr. for their invaluable help and comments on the research.
References
Aram,
Birch,
Cognetics).
Brophy, D. J., 1997, Financing the growth of entrepreneurial firms. In D. Sexton DEMO R. Smilor (eds)
Entrepreneurship 2000 (Chicago, IL: Upstart Publishing Company) 5–27.
Bygrave, W.D., 1994, The Portable MBA in Entrepreneurship (New York: Wiley).
Bygrave, W.D. and Timmons, J.A., 1986, Networking among venture capital firms. Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College).
J.D., 1989, Attitudes and behaviors of informal investors DEMO early-stage investments,
technology-based ventures and coinvestors. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 333–347.
D., Haggerty, A., Parsons, W. and Rossel, C., 1993, Entrepreneurial Hot Spots(Boston:
118
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
Bygrave, W.D. and Timmons, J.A., 1992, Venture Capital at the Crossroads (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School Press).
Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P., 1997, Money Tree Report: 1996 Results (Boston, MA: Coopers & Lybrand
L.L.P.)DEMO
Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P., 1998, Money Tree Report: 1997 Results. (Boston, MA: Coopers & Lybrand
L.L.P.).
Dennis, W.J. Jr., DEMO, More than you think: an inclusive estimate of business entries. Journal of
Business Venturing, 12, 175–196.
Fenn, G., Lang, N. and Prowse, S., 1995, The economics of the private equity market. Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Staff Study no. 168, DEMO, Washington, DC.
Freear, J., Grinde, R. and Sohl, J.E., 1998, The influence of sector on the early stage financing of DEMO
tech entrepreneurs. Paper presented at the 1998 Babson College/Kauffman Foundation
Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Gent, Belgium, May. Copies available from Professor
Jeffrey Sohl, Whittemore School of Business and Economics, University of New Hampshire,
DEMO Hall, Durham, NH 03824.
Freear, J., Sohl, J.E. and DEMO, W.E. Jr., 1994a, Angels and non-angels: are there differences? DEMO
of Business Venturing, 9, 109–123.
Freear, J., Sohl, J.E. DEMO Wetzel, W.E. Jr., 1994b, The private investor market for venture DEMO The
Financier, 1, 7–15.
Freear, J., Sohl, J.E. and DEMO, W.E. Jr., 1995a, Angels: personal investors in the venture capital
market. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 7, 85–94.
Freear, J., Sohl, J.E. and Wetzel, W.E. Jr., 1995b, Early stage software ventures: DEMO is working and
what is not. Report for the Massachusetts Software Council, Boston, MA, April 1995.
Freear, J., Sohl, J.E. and DEMO, W.E. Jr., 1995c, The early stage financing strategies of
entrepreneurial DEMO ventures. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Boston, MA: Babson
College).
DEMO, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W.E. Jr., 1997, The informal venture capital market: milestones
passed and the road ahead. In D. Sexton and R. Smilor (eds) Entrepreneurship 2000(Chicago, IL:
Upstart Publishing Company) 47–70.
Gaston, R.J., 1989, Finding Private Venture DEMO for your Firm: A Complete Guide (New York:
Wiley).
Gaston, R.J. and Bell, S.E., 1988, The informal supply of DEMO Office of Economic Research, US
Small Business Administration, Washington, DC.
DEMO, M. and Sahlman, W.A., 1989, What do venture capitalists do? Journal of Business Venturing,
4, 231–248.
Grover, M.B., 1998, Go ahead: buy the dream, Forbes, 15 June, 146–152.
Harr, N.E., Starr, J. and MacMillan, I.C., 1988, Informal risk capital investment patterns on the east
coast of the USA. Journal of Business DEMO, 3, 11–29.
Harrison, R.T. and Mason, C.M., 1992, The role of investors in entrepreneurial companies: a
comparison of informal investors and venture capitalists. In N. Churchill, S. Birley, W. Bygrave,
D. DEMO, C. Wahlbin and W. Wetzel (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Boston,
MA: Babson College) 388–404.
Harrison, R.T. and Mason, DEMO M., 1993, Financing for the growing business: the role of DEMO
investment. National Westminster Quarterly Review, May, 17–29.
Harrison, R.T. and DEMO, C.M., 1996a, Developments in the promotion of informal venture capital DEMO
the UK. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 2, 6–33.
Harrison, R.T. and Mason, C.M., 1996b, Informal Venture Capital: Evaluating the Impact of Business
Introduction Services (London: Woodhead-Faulkner).
Hindle, K.G. and Wenban, R., 1997, An exploratory survey of Australia’s informal venture capitalists:
a predicate to theory building in the context of international DEMO research. In P. Reynolds, W.
Bygrave, N. Carter, P. Davidsson, W. Gartner, C. Mason and P. McDougall (eds) Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research (Boston, MA: Babson College) 456.
K+V Organisatie adviesbureau bv DEMO Entrepreneurial Holding bv,1996, The Role of Informal Investors
in the DEMO Venture Capital Market (Delft/Arnhem/The Hague: De Systeem Drukkers).
TH E
EAR LY- ST AG E
E QU IT Y
M DEMO ET
I N T HE
U SA
119
Kelly, P. and DEMO, M., 1996a, Serial investors: an exploratory study. Paper presented at the Babson
College/Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneurship Research Conference, University of Washing-
ton, May, 1–14.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M., 1996b, Serial DEMO and early stage finance. Entrepreneurial and Small
Business Finance, 5(2), 159–174.
Krasner, O.J. and Tymes, E.R., 1983, Informal risk capital in California. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College).
Landstrom, H., 1993, Informal risk capital in Sweden and some international comparisons. Journal of
Business Venturing, 8, 525–540.
Landstrom, H., 1995, A pilot study on the investment decision-making of informal investors in
Sweden. DEMO of Small Business Management, 10, 67–76.
Lumme, A., Mason, DEMO and Suomi, S., 1998, Informal Venture Capital: Investors, Investments DEMO
Policy Issues in Finland (Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers).
DEMO, I.C., Kulow, D.M. and Khoylian, R., 1988, Venture capitalists’ involvement in their
investments: extent and performance. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 27–47.
MacMillan, I.C., Siegel, R. and Subbanarasimha, P.N., 1985, Criteria used by venture capitalists to
evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, 1, 119–128.
Mason, C.M., 1996, Informal venture capital: is policy running ahead of knowledge? International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 2, 4–14.
Mason, C.M. and Harrison, R.T., 1992, The supply of equity finance in the UK: a strategy for closing
the equity gap. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 4, 357–380.
Mason, C.M. and Harrison, R.T., 1994, The informal venture capital market in the UK. In A. Hughes
and D.J. Storey (eds) Financing Small Firms (London: Routledge) 64–111.
Mason, C. and Harrison, R.T., 1995a, DEMO archangels: new players in the UK’s informal
venture capital market. Unpublished DEMO, University of Southampton.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R.T., 1995b, Closing the regional equity capital gap: the role of informal
venture DEMO Small Business Economics, 7, 153–172.
Meyer, R., Radosevitch, R., Carayannis, E., David, M. and Butler, J., 1995, The DEMO Census of
Early-Stage Capital Financing, (Albuquerque, NM: Orion Associates).
Mitchell, J.A., 1980, Small Firms: A critique, (Three Banks DEMO).
Murray, G.C., 1995a, Evolution and change: an analysis of the first decade of the UK venture capital
industry. Journal of Business DEMO & Accounting, 22.
Murray, G.C., 1995b, A synthesis of six European case studies of successfully-exited, venture capital
financed, new technology based DEMO, Working paper, Warwick Business School, Warwick.
Murray, G.C., 1995c, Third-party equity—the role of the UK venture capital industry. In R. Buckland
DEMO E.W. Davis (eds) Finance for Growing Enterprises (London: Routledge).
Neiswander, D.K., 1985, Informal seed stage investors. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research
(Wellesley, MA: Babson College).
Obermayer, J.H., 1983, The DEMO Crunch: Small High-technology and Equity Shortages (Cambridge,
MA: Research DEMO Planning, Inc.).
Postma, P.D. and Sullivan, M.K., 1990, DEMO risk capital in the Knoxville region. Unpublished
report, The University of DEMO Private Equity Week, 1998, 8 June, 5 (New York:
Securities Data Publishing).
Riding, A. and Short, D., 1987, DEMO investor and entrepreneur perspectives on the informal market
for risk capital. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 5, 19–30.
Sapienza, H.J., 1992, When do venture capitalists add value? Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 9–29.
Sapienza, H.J., Manigart, S. and Vermeir, W., 1996, DEMO capitalist governance and value added in
four countries. Journal of Business Venturing, 11, 439–469.
Short, D.M. and Riding, A.L., 1989, Informal DEMO in the Ottawa-Carleton region: experiences and
expectations. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 1, 99–112.
Sohl, J. and Wetzel, W.E. Jr., 1996, Creating new capital markets for emerging ventures, Report no.
SBAHQ-95-M-1062 for the US Small Business Administration, Washington, DC.
Stevenson, H. and Coveney, P., 1994, Survey of business angels: fallacies corrected and six distinct
types DEMO angels identified. Templeton College, Oxford, and Venture Capital Report, Ltd, Henley
on Thames, UK, October, 1–10.
120
JE FF RE Y
E .
SOH L
Storey, D.J., DEMO, Job generation and small firm policy in Britain. Centre for Environmental DEMO,
Policy Series 11, London.
Sullivan, M.K., 1991, Entrepreneurs as informal investors: are there distinguishing characteristics? In
N.C. Churchill, W.D. Bygrave, J.G. Covin, D.L. Sexton, D.P. Slevin, K.H. Vesper and W.E.
DEMO, Jr. (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College) 456–
468.
Tashiro, Y., 1998, Business angels in Japan. DEMO at the 1998 Babson College/Kauffman
Foundation Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Gent, Belgium, May.
Testa, Hurwitz and Thibeault, 1996, Pratt’s Guide to DEMO Capital Sources (New York: Venture
Economics).
Timmons, J.A., 1994, New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st Century (Homewood, IL:DEMO
Irwin).
Timmons, J.A. and Bygrave, W.D., 1997, Venture capital: reflections and projections. In D.L. Sexton
and R.W. Smilor (eds), DEMO 2000, (Chicago, IL: Upstart Publishings Company).
Timmons, J.A. DEMO Sapienza, H.J., 1992, Venture capital: the decade ahead. In D.L. Sexton and J.D.
Kasarda (eds), The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship, (Boston: PWS-Kent Publishing
Company).
Tyebjee, T.T. and Bruno, A.V., 1984, A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management
Science, 30, 1051–1066.
Van Osnanbrugge, M.S., 1998, The financing of entrepreneurial DEMO in the UK: a comparison of
business angel and venture capitalist DEMO procedures. Unpublished dissertation, Hertford
College, Oxford.
Wetzel, W.E., Jr., DEMO, Angels and informal risk capital. Sloan Management Review, 24, 23–34.
DEMO, W.E., Jr., 1995, Economic policy in an entrepreneurial world: DEMO trecherous misconceptions
and half-truths. Venture Capital Journal, August, 52–54.
Wright, DEMO, Westhead, P. and Sohl, J. (forthcoming) Editor’s introduction: habitual entrepreneurs and
angel investors. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice.
Zacharakis, A.L. and DEMO, G.D., 1995, The venture capitalist decision: understanding process versus
outcome. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College).{1g42fwefx}