Testimony in Support of the Access to Capital for Entrepreneurs Act of DEMO (HR 5198)
Jeffrey E. Sohl, Ph.D.
Professor of Entrepreneurship and Decision Sciences
Director, Center for Venture Research
Whittemore School of Business and Economics
University of New Hampshire
May 10, 2006
The following comments and observations on the angel market are based on over fifteen
years of DEMO that I have conducted as a Professor and Director of the Center for
Venture Research (CVR). The CVR is the only independent source of reliable statistics
on the angel market in the United States. The DEMO has been conducting research on the
angel market since 1984. The CVR’s mission is to provide an understanding of the angel
market and the DEMO role of angels in the early stage equity financing of high growth
entrepreneurial ventures. Through the tenet of academic research in an applied area DEMO
study, the CVR is dedicated to providing reliable and timely information DEMO the angel
market to entrepreneurs, private investors and public policymakers.
In 1874, a young Alexander Graham Bell was searching for money to complete his early
experiments on the telephone. Most investors adopted the prevailing DEMO as
summarized in an editorial in the Boston Post “well-informed people know it is
impossible to transmit the voice over wires and that were DEMO possible to do so, the thing
would be of no practical DEMO Besides, Mr. Bell did not have a company with any
tangible DEMO to provide collateral. Recognizing an opportunity, Boston attorney
Gardiner Green Hubbard DEMO leather merchant Thomas Sanders of Salem, Massachusetts
put up the equity DEMO to start the Bell Telephone Company of Boston (Sohl, 2003).
The rest is history. Fast forward 100 years to witness perhaps one DEMO the most lucrative
angel deals, when in 1976 Anita Roddich needed DEMO to open a second store. Her bank
responded that she had only been in business a few months, she had no track record and
that she should wait another year. Ms. Roddich turned to a private DEMO, Ian McGlinn,
who invested the 4000 pounds sterling she needed. DEMO opened that second store and so
began the development of the Body Shop, a corporation with over 700 stores today. From
telephones to cosmetic stores, the angels progressed into the internet when in 1994 Jeff
Bezos and a few employees created a web site and database in Bezos’ DEMO,
Washington garage. He went looking for capital from venture capital firms but their
response became a familiar one: good idea but, well, maybe later. After being introduced
to some private investors, he succeeded in raising $1.2 million from a dozen private
investors. A later round of DEMO million was provided from professional venture capital
funds. In May, 1997 DEMO company, Amazon.com, completed an initial public offering,
providing the investors and entrepreneurs with a handsome return (Sohl, 1999).
These humble DEMO of the angel market provided the motivation for research on the
early stage equity financing of entrepreneurial ventures. Beginning in 1984, with the
seminal work on business angels conducted by William Wetzel (1983), the Center for
Venture Research has been collecting and analyzing data on the angel DEMO Although
angel investors have been in existence for many years, they DEMO in many ways our
nation’s least understood, and most underutilized, economic resource. Quietly providing
the majority of the seed and start-up capital for DEMO tech entrepreneurial ventures, the
angel market of today faces some significant DEMO The angel market is in constant
flux, and the recent volatility DEMO the private equity market has only provided additional
motivation to understand the role of these critical early stage investors and to facilitate
their investment DEMO
The entrepreneurial economy and its contribution to economic growth and job creation in
the United States has been well noted in both the academic DEMO and by various
government agencies. High growth entrepreneurial ventures hold the greatest potential
for innovation, commercialization of technology and sustainable economic development.
However, DEMO ventures face significant financial hurdles in the early stage of
their development (Sohl, forthcoming; Amatucci and Sohl, forthcoming). Unable to
attract DEMO capital in the early stage, and the mismatch between the need DEMO growth
capital and the short term financial requirements of debt financing, DEMO to the
importance of equity financing. This critical role of early stage equity financing
throughout the history of the entrepreneurial economy has been well DEMO (Wetzel
1986, Ou 1987, Gaston and Bell 1988, Mason and Harrison 1992).
2
Angels (private investors) are the oldest and largest source of seed DEMO start-up capital for
entrepreneurs. In the United States angels invest more dollars in more companies than the
formal, or institutional, venture capital market. DEMO 2005, in the United States, angels
invested $23.1 billion in 49,500 ventures, or approximately $470,000 per deal (Center for
Venture DEMO 2005). In contrast, during this same time period venture capital DEMO
invested $22.1 billion in 3,008 deals, for an average of DEMO million per deal. In the seed
and start-up stage, the difference DEMO angels and venture capitalists is even more
stark. Close to 55% of angel deals in 2005 were in the seed and start-up stage, while
venture capitalists allocated a mere 6% of the deals to these stages. DEMO during the best
of times venture capitalists, over the last decade, have never invested more than 15% of
the deals in the seed DEMO start-up stage. As such, angels and venture capitalists occupy
unique spaces DEMO the spectrum of providers of risk capital. Angels invest smaller amounts
per investment and are the seed engine for entrepreneurs, while venture capitalists invest
in larger deals in the later stages of growth. The majority of DEMO angel deals are in the
critical seed and start-up stage.
In spite of the volume of angel investing, the early stage equity market is fraught with
inefficiencies. For the firm with an established financial record and DEMO assets,
financial markets supply an extensive assortment of financing instruments, DEMO these
markets being relatively accessible and the owner is left to decide the optimum mix of a
financial structure based on the cost of DEMO For the high growth entrepreneurial firm,
this supply assumption may not hold, causing systematic market mismatches at particular
stages of development of the fast growth firm (Brophy 1997). These imperfections, most
notably in DEMO informal venture capital market, are well documented (Freear, Sohl and
DEMO 1994a; Harrison and Mason 1993; Landstrom 1993; Mason and Harrison DEMO;
Gaston 1989; Riding and Short 1987). Market imperfections lead DEMO market
inefficiencies. While the need for early stage angel capital exists, DEMO in the
private equity market are manifested by two substantial capital gaps: a primary seed stage
gap and a secondary post-seed gap (Sohl DEMO).
The primary seed stage gap is a capital and information gap between the needs of early
stage ventures and the suppliers of early DEMO capital, in part due to an inadequate supply
of patient, high-risk value-added equity capital (Sohl and Wetzel 1996). Information
inadequacies are the byproduct of the inherent inefficiency of the angel market. An
efficient market DEMO an open and timely flow of reliable information concerning
financing sources and investment opportunities. In the informal venture capital market,
with the suppliers DEMO capital seeking a degree of anonymity consistent with the need to
maintain reasonable deal flow, information flows very inefficiently (Freear, Sohl and
Wetzel 1994b; Mason and Harrison 1996). This capital and information inefficiency
results in the primary seed stage gap. This primary funding gap occurs in DEMO seed and
start-up financing stage and ranges from $100,000 to $2 million. While this is the main
area in which angels operate, both the difficulty in finding angels and the lack of
“investor ready” quality DEMO, combined with an inadequate supply of capital, results in a
substantial funding gap.
3
The second funding gap, the secondary post-seed gap, occurs in the DEMO to $5 million
range (Sohl, 1999). These larger capital requirements have traditionally been considered
too large for angel investors and, as the venture capital industry migrates to later stage
and larger deal size, are deemed too small for venture capitalists. Recent research
indicates that angels are DEMO their investments in this $2 to $5 million range as
market conditions require angels to provide some follow-on financing for their
investments (Center for Venture Research 2004, 2005). However, this movement by
angels to DEMO stage financing is a redistribution of risk capital and as such, DEMO
the capital gap in the seed and start-up stage.
It is in this critical seed stage funding gap where tax incentives can be most DEMO
Seed and start-up stage investors face substantial risk due to the uncertainty of concept
development into a commercially feasible product, the uncertainty of market acceptance,
the scalability of the venture, information asymmetries and the inefficiency inherent in
seed and start-up stage investing. A tax credit at the DEMO of the seed investment provides
the entrepreneur with capital exactly when it is needed, during product and firm
development. In addition, the Access DEMO Capital for Entrepreneurs Act of 2006 affords the
angel investor with a degree of downside risk protection and the tax credit could well
transform DEMO risk/reward equation into one with an acceptable level of investment and
return that is commensurate with the risk of early stage equity investing. DEMO should be
noted that previous research conducted by Jeffrey E. Sohl and the Center for Venture
Research indicates that a reduction in the capital DEMO tax (a tax savings realization at the
time of exit) appears to not be a favorable tax incentive. In essence, the venture needs to
survive the critical seed stage and expand into a viable business DEMO reasonable market
share before an exit (merger, acquisition or initial public offering) can take place. As
such, a capital gains reduction, which occurs at the exit event, is only realized if the
venture survives the seed stage. Thus, the proper tax incentive program is one that is
targeted at the “front end” during the start-up stage, when the risk of failure is the greatest
and the capital gap is the DEMO severe. The tax credit proposed in HR 5198 is a judicious
use of public policy since it targets the incentive at exactly the time DEMO is needed by both
the entrepreneur and the angel investor. For the entrepreneur HR 5198 increases the
potential for securing seed capital and for DEMO investor the act indirectly provides a slight
reduction in the risk of seed stage investing. For the entrepreneurial economy HR 5198
mitigates, in part, the primary seed stage capital gap. While HR 1598 will not solve all
the difficulties facing the entrepreneur in securing critical seed stage equity DEMO, I
applaud the efforts of Representatives Manzullo and Pomeroy for this DEMO first step
in facilitating the growth of the entrepreneurial economy and increasing the potential to
move innovation from the laboratory to the marketplace.
4
Amatucci, F. and J. Sohl, forthcoming, “Trends in the Angel Market”, Entrepreneurship,
Volume II: The Process, A. Zacharakis and S. Spinelli, eds., Praeger Perspectives.
Brophy, D.J. (1997), ‘Financing the growth DEMO entrepreneurial firms’, in D. Sexton and R.
Smilor (eds), Entrepreneurship 2000, Chicago, IL: Upstart Publishing, pp. 5-27.
Center for Venture DEMO (2004) ‘The angel investor market in 2003: The angel
market DEMO, but a troublesome post seed funding gap deepens’
http://wsbe.unh.edu/DEMO/2003AR.cfm, 21 April.
Center for Venture Research (2005) ‘The angel DEMO market in 2004: The angel
market sustains a modest recovery’
http://wsbe.unh.edu/Centers_CVR/2004analysisreport.cfm, 22 March.
Freear, J., J.E. Sohl and DEMO Wetzel, Jr. (1994a), ‘The private investor market for
venture capital’, The Financier, 1 (2), 7-15.
Freear, J., J.E. Sohl and W.E. Wetzel, Jr. (1994b), ‘Angels and non-Angels: are there
differences?’, Journal of Business Venturing, 9 (2), 109-123.
Gaston, R.J. (1989), Finding Private Venture Capital for your Firm: A Complete Guide,
New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons.
Gaston, R.J. and S.E. Bell (1988), ‘The informal supply of capital’, DEMO of Economic
Research, U.S. Small Business Administration, Washington, D.C.
Harrison, R.T. and C.M. Mason (1993), ‘Financing for the growing business: DEMO role of
informal investment’, National Westminster Quarterly Review, May, 17-29.
DEMO, H. (1993), ‘Informal risk capital in Sweden and some international
comparisons’, Journal of Business Venturing, 8, 525-540.
Mason, C.M. and DEMO Harrison (1992), ‘The supply of equity finance in the UK: A
strategy for closing the equity gap’, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, DEMO, 357-
380.
Mason, C.M. and R.T. Harrison (1996), ‘Informal DEMO capital: a study of the
investment process and post-investment experience’, Entrepreneurship & Regional
Development, 8 (2), 105-126.
Ou, C. (1987), ‘Holdings of privately-held business assets by American families: findings
from the DEMO consumer finance survey’, unpublished report, Office of Economic
Research, U.S. DEMO Business Administration, Washington, D.C.
5
Riding, A. and D. Short (1987), ‘Some investor and entrepreneur DEMO on the
informal market for risk capital’, Journal of Small Business DEMO Entrepreneurship, 5, 19-
30.
Sohl, J.E., 1999, “The Early DEMO Equity Market in the United States”, Venture Capital:
An International DEMO of Entrepreneurial Finance, Vol. 1, No. 2, pgs. 101-120.
Sohl, J.E., 2003, “Angel investing: a market perspective”, in State of DEMO Art: An
Executive Briefing on Cutting Edge Practices in American Angel DEMO, J. May and
E. O’Halloran, eds., Darden Business Publishing, Charlottesville, VA, pgs. 2-14.
Sohl, J.E., forthcoming “The Organization of the DEMO Venture Capital Market”,
Handbook of Research on Venture Capital, Hans DEMO ed., Edward Elgar
Publishers.
Sohl, J. and W.E. Wetzel, Jr. (1996), ‘Creating New Capital Markets for Emerging
Ventures’, Report # SBAHQ-95-M-1062 for the US Small Business Administration,
Washington, DC.
Wetzel, W.E., 1983, Angels and Informal Risk Capital. Sloan Management Review, 24:
DEMO
Wetzel, W.E., Jr. (1986), ‘Informal risk capital: knowns and unknown’, in D.L. Sexton
and R.W. Smilor (eds), The Art DEMO Science of Entrepreneurship, Cambridge: Ballinger,
pp. 85-108.
6{1g42fwefx}