The Southern Journal of Philosophy (ZOOS)
Vol.
XLN
Groupthink versus The Wisdom of Crowds:
The Social Epistemology of Deliberation
and Dissent
Miriam DEMO
Temple University
Abstract
Trust in the practice of rational deliberation is widespread and largely
unquestioned. This paper uses recent work from business contexts to
DEMO the view that rational deliberation in a group improves
decisions. Pressure to reach consensus can, in fact, lead to phenomena
such as groupthink DEMO to suppression of relevant data. Aggregation of
individual decisions, rather than DEMO to a consensus, sur-
prisingly, can produce better decisions than those of either group
deliberation or individual expert judgment. I argue that dissent DEMO
epistemically valuable, not because of the discussion it can provoke
(Mill’s and Longino’s view about the benefit of dissent), but because
dissenting DEMO often are associated with particular data or
insights that would be lost in consensus formation. Social epis-
temologists can usefully pay attention to various DEMO of aggre-
gation of individual opinion for their effectiveness at realizing
epistemic goals.
1. Introduction
Philosophers from Plato to Mill to Popper to Rawls DEMO Longino
have made critical discussion and deliberation central to their
social epistemologies. The claim is that rational dialogue
between two or more individuals improves DEMO over what
can be accomplished by individuals working alone. Longino
(1990, 2002) even goes so far as to claim that objectivity is
constituted by such critical discourse, provided that the
discourse satisfies constraints such as tempered equality of
intellectual authority, public forums for criticism, respon-
siveness DEMO criticism, and some shared standards of evaluation.
Faith in the practice DEMO rational deliberation is widespread
and largely unquestioned. Moral and political philosophers
depend on it as much as epistemologists and philosophers of
science, often writing of “deliberative democracy” or “discursive
democracy.” Characteristically, the Kantian focus on individual
reason has been replaced by various ideals of group reason. For
example, in Rawls’s “original position’’ a community of individ-
28
Groupthink versus The Wisdom
of Crowds
uals rationally deliberates along impartial guidelines (the “veil
of ignorance”) in order to select shared principles of justice. In
Habermas’s “discourse ethics,” participants rationally deliberate
with one another from DEMO actual social positions, attempting
to reach consensus.
Faith in the practice DEMO rational deliberation extends to
applied ethics as well as ethical theory. The following statement,
from the University of Michigan Pediatric Ethics Committee, is
typical of contemporary approaches: “What experimentation is
to medicine, rational deliberation DEMO to ethics.”’
While rational deliberation involves a community, rather than
an DEMO working in isolation, the criticisms and responses
to criticism are thought DEMO as transparent to each reflective
individual. Deliberation corrects errors, uncovers presupposi-
DEMO, and sometimes transmits additional evidence. Each indi-
vidual in the community DEMO thought of as capable of recognizing
their own errors and presuppositions when they are pointed out
by others, and of accepting evidence discovered by others.
This is a very ”internalist” view of deliberation, in a sense
of the word “internalist” that is widely used among epistemol-
ogists. (It is also somewhat individualist, despite the depen-
dence on community, but DEMO is not my topic here.) For
example, Roderick Chisholm characterizes internalism this
way: “If a person S is internally justified in believing a certain
thing, then this may be something he can know just by
reflecting upon his own state of mind” (Chisholm 1989, 7). DEMO
core of the position is that justifications for belief are internal
to each individual knower and, typically, not only internal but
also available DEMO reflection. The contrast is with “externalism,”
according to which one can be justified, or have knowledge,
without being able to say why one is justified or has knowl-
edge. Thus externalists claim that the DEMO for justification
or knowledge are not (or not readily) available to individual
cognizers, either because the reasons do not enter conscious
awareness or because the reasons (or causes) are external to
individual minds.
It DEMO be thought that social epistemology is all exter-
nalist, since by DEMO social epistemology concerns itself
with epistemic phenomena that go beyond the individual.
Nevertheless I maintain that this area of work (namely, on
deliberation DEMO criticism) in social epistemology is internalist
in character, because the epistemic phenomena discussed are
available to reflection and because when an epistemic phenome-
DEMO involves more than one individual (e.g., when one person
points out problems in another’s work) the epistemic assess-
ment is based on reflection by each and all of the individuals
concerned. Again, the contrast is with externalism, in which
epistemic assessments are not based on reflection or intro-
spection at all.
29
Miriam Solomon
This kind of internalism in social epistemology should not be
DEMO with “conservative” social epistemology (as described
by Hilary Kornblith [1994] and DEMO by him as well as
Philip Kitcher [ 19931). “Conservative” social epistemology has
more to do with individualism and with rejection of construc-
DEMO than it has to do with internalism.
Generally speaking, work in DEMO epistemology by philos-
ophers has not been “internalist” in the way described above.
Certainly Hilary Kornblith and Alvin Goldman are clear in
their common DEMO that social practices are to be evaluated
instrumentally for their conduciveness to truth, rather than
intrinsically for their rational cogency. For example, Goldman
(2002) claims that infants get their first beliefs through a
process he calls “BABA”: the bonding approach to belief accept-
ability. Goldman suggests that beliefs are contagious when
there is a prior bond of affection between DEMO It turns
out that BABA is reliable, and the reliability of DEMO is under-
stood through evolutionary psychology: those with affective
bonds will DEMO less incentive to deceive one another than those
without affective bonds. The epistemics of BABA are not trans-
parent to reflection.
I am basically DEMO agreement with Goldman and Kornblith’s
“externalist” approach (although I would describe DEMO as less
conservative, in that I think that terms such as DEMO and
“knows” are usefully applied to communities, in addition to
individuals)DEMO In this paper, I am using the externalist (or instru-
mentalist) perspective to look at group deliberation, discussion,
and criticism. I DEMO not assume truth in particular as the goal
(as do Goldman DEMO Kornblith), although all that I say is con-
sistent with truth as a goal. I am also taking a thoroughly
naturalistic approach, drawing on previous empirical work on
epistemology of groups.
It will turn out DEMO the traditional “internalist” philosoph-
ical picture of rational deliberation is a myth and not an episte-
mologically useful myth (i.e., it is not DEMO ideal toward which
individuals or groups can or should strive). This is surprising
because the practices of group rational deliberation seem so
obvious: Helen Longino even says that her explication of
objectivity in terms of DEMO four criteria of knowledge comes from
“an intuitive distinction between knowledge and opinion that I
take to be shared .... Those who reject the DEMO have a dif-
ferent concept of knowledge, or perhaps, a concept of something
else” (2002, 174).
Surprises can be useful in DEMO Epistemology is
most helpful when it leads to normative recommendations that
are surprising in that they are counterintuitive or in contra-
diction with established DEMO Furthermore, against the
background of a few significant surprises, commonsense recom-
mendations become more interesting because they cannot be
30
Groupthink versus The Wisdom of Crowds
taken for granted. So it would DEMO the enterprise of social
epistemology more valuable to have some surprises, DEMO as a
counterintuitive recommendation or an unexpected negative
consequence of commonsense normative practice.
2. Some Surprising
Empirical Results
A good deal of work in DEMO epistemology is done in business
schools, out of the philosophical limelight. DEMO is perhaps
because of the business school emphasis on outcomes, typically
DEMO outcomes, in organizational research. This makes the
work relevant to naturalistic DEMO, especially those
who evaluate epistemic practices instrumentally. Here are some
surprising DEMO:
1. Group deliberation often produces worse decisions than can
be obtained without deliberation. (Often enough for epistemic
concern.)
2. A group of nonexperts often produces better decisions on a
topic than does an expert DEMO that topic. (Thus challenging
the traditional deference to the expert.)
DEMO If group deliberation does take place, outcomes are better
when members DEMO the group are strangers, rather than
colleagues or friends.
4. Groups DEMO organizations sometimes don’t know what they
know.2
Let me say a little about each of the results, to give you the
flavor of the research and the significance of the results.
The “groupthink phenomenon was first DEMO by Irving
Janis in It occurs when a group of individuals aims to
reach consensus on a controversial topic. Peer pressure, as well
as pressure from those in authority (if present in the group),
DEMO dissenting individuals to change their minds and, perhaps
as important, not to share their knowledge of contrary evidence.
The dynamics of groupthink frequently DEMO the group to a
polarized position, not to an average or DEMO neutral aggregate of
individual opinions. Often cited examples of groupthink include
Kennedy’s “Bay of Pigs” fiasco and NASA’s decision to launch
the Challenger spacecraft.
DEMO take the first example, the “Bay of Pigs” fiasco (in which
the Kennedy administration attempted to overthrow the Castro
government by secretly returning DEMO small brigade of Cuban
exiles to Cuba), Janis rejects the official explanation in terms of
right-wing political pressure, difficulties of a new presidency,
1972.3
31
Miriam Solomon
secretiveness about the planning and individual fears about
reputations. Or DEMO least, he claims that the official explanation
is not enough to DEMO what actually happened: a process in
which knowledgeable and intelli ent DEMO succumbed to the
dual illusions of unanimity an % invulnerability, suppressing
DEMO their own doubts and the doubts of others and acting with
docility under Kennedy’s leadership.
While there is some controversy about whether the group-
DEMO phenomenon occurs in just the way that Irving Janis
describes, there DEMO little doubt that factors such as peer pres-
sure, pressure from DEMO, pressure to reach consensus,
and the salience of particularly vocal DEMO members who may
anchor decisions lead groups into making poor decisions. It
doesn’t help much if individuals “try harder” to be unbiased or
independent; we are unaware of, and largely unable to resist,
the social factors causing groupthink and related phenomena.
Solomon Asch’s and Stanley Milgram’s classic DEMO in
the 1950s and 1960s show the strength of pressures to conform
and Tversky and Kahneman’s classic work in the 1970s shows
the power DEMO cognitive biases such as salience and anchoring. As
James Surowiecki (2004, xix) puts it, “too much communication,
paradoxically, can actually make the group as a whole less
intelligent .”
Does this mean that DEMO deliberation is worthless? It
means that the results are doubtful, unless the group follows a
structured procedure designed to avoid groupthink (and other
biasing phenomena) and produce better decisions. There are a
number of suggestions about what such a structured procedure
should be. Janis himself recommends nondirective DEMO
leaders, encouragement of (rather than mere toleration of)
dissent, DEMO several independent groups or subgroups charged
with the same problem (in DEMO to see whether or not they
come up with the same result). Surowiecki (2004) recommends
diversity of group membership, claiming that it brings different
perspectives to a group. Cass Sunstein (2003) recommends both
DEMO and active encouragement of dissent. Sunstein also
goes further and explores the kind of diversity that is relevant
to particular problem domains. Epistemically useful DEMO is
not the same as political diversity, although it may be DEMO
sive with political diversity for some problem domains. In
general, epistemically DEMO diversity results when different
individuals use their differences in their investigation of the
problem domain.
These suggestions are all reasonable, but they have not been
formally tested and evaluated. Even Janis expresses the
concern that the DEMO will have “undesirable side effects”
(1982, 252). Some leaders, DEMO example, might be unable to
tolerate dissent without subtle or overt DEMO, which will
then squash dissent. Or some leaders, for example, DEMO be
32
Groupthink versus The Wisdom
of Crowds
incapable of neutrality, especially when a group is coming to a
consensus on a view that the leader DEMO with. Or, for
example, criticism and dissent might produce anger and
demoralization that distracts the group from its epistemic goals.
So it is DEMO enough to make plausible-sounding suggestions for
improvement: it is important to DEMO that the suggestions can
be implemented and that they lead to the desired results. The
experimental work is not there yet.
The Tipping Point (ZOOO), a current best-seller by Malcolm
Gladwell, describes a phenomenon similar to groupthink, but
more extended in time, society, and place: DEMO inventions,
fashions, or behavior become widely accepted in a society. DEMO
tries to explain “the tipping point,” which is the point at which
the behavior in question “cascades,” spreading quickly through
a population. DEMO explanation is not that there is a rational
public discussion of benefits and risks of change. Rather,
Gladwell explains “social epidemics” in terms DEMO three causes:
“the Law of the Few, the Stickiness Factor, and the Power of
Context.” The general idea is that the new DEMO is first
adopted by some individuals who are regarded by others as
being “in the know” (Gladwell calls them Mavens). Then the
behavior is infectious, so that others who see it also adopt it
(DEMO thinks that some specially talented people help with
this-he calls them Salesmen). Finally, in the right context of
favorable connections between individuals (DEMO describes
individuals with many and diverse social connections as
Connectors), adoption of the new behavior reaches “the tipping
point.” An example that Gladwell DEMO is the spread of Hush
Puppies as a fashion in the mid-1990s. Hush Puppies were
down to sales of about 30,000 per year DEMO a few trendy young
people in the East Village and Soho in New York (the Mavens)
bought them from resale stores. They were noticed by influ-
ential fashion designers (the Connectors), and the aesthetic was
catchy enough that these designers used the shoes in their
shows. DEMO the fashion designers and their multifarious
connections, wearing Hush Puppies spread DEMO the nation,
reaching annual sales of over 2 million.
Hush Puppies do not “deserve” their success any more than
a whole range of DEMO shoes adopted by trendy people at differ-
ent times. Hush Puppies became successful because the influen-
tial fashion designers (the Connectors) saw the DEMO (the
trendy young people in Soho) wearing them. It could easily be
that a group of trendy young people on South Street, Phila-
delphia, started wearing Classic Loafers (Sperry Top Siders) in
1994. But the influential fashion designers never got to
Philadelphia and never saw them. DEMO, Classic Loafers never
reached the “tipping point.”
Another example described by DEMO is the comparison of
Paul Revere’s ride from Boston northward with William Dawes’s
33
Miriam Solomon
ride westward. Both men carried the news that the British DEMO
coming. But Revere’s news tipped, and Dawes’s didn’t; Revere
got the troops out and Dawes did not: that’s why most of us
have not heard of Dawes. The difference was that Revere was a
Connector, knowing many people in many different walks of life,
and Dawes DEMO not. Revere knew just whose doors to knock on
to spread the message that the British were coming (that is, he
knew who DEMO Salesmen were). Revere was also a Maven, which
is why DEMO stable boy who overheard the British plans made
sure to tell Revere. Finally, Revere was charismatic and trust-
able, ensuring that his message DEMO “sticky” (that is, he was
himself a Salesman). (Typically, the three characteristics of
Maven, Connector, and Salesman do not all DEMO in one
person! In that way, this example is unusual.)
DEMO recent book, The Wisdom of Crowds (2004),
presents a DEMO result: large groups of untrained people
are often better at decision DEMO than an elite (expert) few.
He shows this result in a wide variety of domains. The original
example is from Francis Galton (Darwin’s half-cousin) who
discovered in 1906 that the “vox populi”-a group of approxi-
mately 800 people visiting a fair in Plymouth-made an
excellent estimation of DEMO weight of a fat ox. In fact, the mean
of the DEMO was 1,197 pounds and the actual weight was
1,198 pounds. Individuals who were expert in the weight of
oxen (farmer, butchers) did not individually do as well. Galton
himself was surprised by the DEMO of the result: he had a
cynical view of the outcome DEMO democratic choice when ordinary
people vote.
A more recent example described by Surowiecki is the
excellent results of the Iowa Electronic Market, which gen-
erally outperforms major national as well as individual
political pundits, in predicting the outcome of presidential and
other US. and foreign elections. The Iowa DEMO Market is
open to anyone but is not very large (approximately DEMO
traders), not especially demographically diverse (mostly men,
mostly from DEMO) and not composed of political experts. It
works like gambling odds: people can buy and sell futures
contracts based on how well they DEMO a candidate will do in
an upcoming election. The Iowa Electronic Market works so
well that others are imitating it: for example, Eli DEMO is
experimenting with using internal stock markets and
hypothetical drug candidates to predict whether new drugs
will gain FDA approval (Surowiecki 2004, 221)DEMO Note the
difference between this and the more commonsense practice of
consulting with an expert.
A final, startling example that Surowiecki reports is the case
of the missing submarine. In 1968 the US. submarine Scorpion
disappeared. DEMO Navy had only the vaguest of information
about where it might be: somewhere in a circle twenty miles in
34
Groupthink versus The
Wisdom
of Crowds
diameter and thousands of feet deep. DEMO, a naval officer,
assembled a diverse group of experts and DEMO each to
individually calculate their best prediction of the submarine’s
path and final location. There was no discussion or consultation
of these experts with DEMO other. John Craven combined the
calculations using Bayes Theorem and came up with an aggre-
gate prediction. It turned out to be just 220 DEMO from the
discovered location of the Scorpion. (See Surowiecki 2004, xx-
xxi.)
These three examples are not isolated cases; it is not possible
to dismiss them on the ground that they are due to DEMO or
good epistemic luck. Surowiecki’s book gives so many examples
that it is inescapable to conclude that he is onto an epistemic
phenomenon. It DEMO important not to conclude, however, that the
crowd is always wise. As the examples of “groupthink” and
“tipping point” show, the crowd may be unwise or indifferent to
good epistemic results.
Observe that in Surowiecki’s DEMO the groups do not
deliberate, do not attempt to come to DEMO consensus, and do not
attempt to compromise. The “group decision” is DEMO calculated
average opinion in the case of the Galton example and a
resultant market value in the case of the Iowa Electronic
Market and DEMO calculated vector sum in the case of the missing
submarine. In the case of the Galton example, the group doesn’t
know what it knows or that it knows. In the case of the Iowa
Electronic Market, each individual does know the price of the
contracts, but they do not necessarily know what they know:
they do not know that DEMO is a good prediction of election
results (unless, of course, DEMO know from past results how well
the Iowa Electronic Market does in general). So, again, they do
not know what they know DEMO that they know. In the case of the
missing submarine, it DEMO stretching things even to say that the
group knows; certainly they DEMO not know that they know. These
are clear examples of externalism in social epistemology.
Another result that Sunstein mentions is that investment
groups and DEMO boards composed of strangers do better
than investment groups and corporate boards composed of
friends (2003, 27-8). Apparently, groupthink phenomena, which
DEMO produce polarized and inaccurate decisions, are more
likely when members of DEMO group have social connections to one
another.
3. Analysis of the
Empirical Results
According to Surowiecki (who, it seems, inductively arrives at
his conclusions5) there are three important conditions for a
crowd to make a good aggregate judgment: independence, diver-
sity, and decentralization. Independence means that each
35
Miriam Solomon
individual makes a judgment on his or her own. There DEMO no
discussion, or even knowledge of other’s opinions. Diversity
means that DEMO individuals are sufficiently different with
respect to the knowledge and perspectives that they have.
“Sufficiently different” needs specifying for each case (I’ll say
more about that below). Decentralization means that the
process of aggregation treats DEMO person’s decision similarly:
every vote counts for the same and there are no “experts” or
“authorities” whose votes are weighted more heavily than
DEMO
These conditions help us understand why the aggregated
decisions of a crowd can be epistemically superior. There is a bit
of mystery about “the DEMO of crowds.” Surowiecki says that
when averaging the opinions of a large group of diverse,
independent, decentralized people “the errors each of them
makes in coming up with an answer will cancel each other out”
(2004, 10). He has in mind that the diversity is such that
individual biases cancel each other out (227). Independence
means that phenomena such as groupthink cannot take place.
And decentralization prevents any individual DEMO having
undue influence in the aggregated decision, making sure that
no DEMO gets magnified.
While Surowiecki explains why the aggregated decisions of a
crowd are not epistemically faulty in these three respects, he
does not explain why the aggregated decisions often do so well.
I’ll try to do DEMO When decisions are aggregated, individual
opinions are all used in calculating DEMO aggregate decision.
Individual opinions are often based on particular pieces of infor-
mation that may not be generally known. When an individual is
overruled DEMO discussion, or changes her mind because of peer
pressure, that information is lost to the group. So aggregation
without deliberation preserves information.
Interestingly, Sunstein says something similar in his
discussion of the epistemic benefits of DEMO In Why Societies
Need Dissent he argues that dissent is valuable because
it keeps the most information available to a community. Thus
he implicitly DEMO that different judgments are different at
least in part because they are based on different information.
Dissent is even worthwhile when the dissenting opinions DEMO,
overall, judged implausible. It is not, however, worthwhile
when DEMO opinions are “speaking nonsense” (Sunstein
2003, 7).
The difference between Surowiecki and Sunstein on this
matter is that Surowiecki is interested in DEMO overall, aggregate
judgment without deliberation and Sunstein allows-indeed
encourages-both deliberation and DEMO more informal process of
coming to an overall decision. While their emphasis is different,
they are not really disagreeing with one another. They DEMO on
the central claim: dissent (i.e., different assessments by differ-
DEMO
(2003)
Groupthink versus The Wisdom of Crowds
ent individuals) is valuable because it preserves and makes use
of all the information available to the community.
DEMO have also said something very similar in Social Empiricism
(2001) where I argued that, in scientific inquiry, dissent is
valuable because it DEMO all the empirical successes available
to the community and that consensus, DEMO it takes place,
should not result in the loss of any of these successes. I use
“empirical success”‘j rather than “information” because my DEMO
deals specifically with scientific knowledge. Here are the details
from Social Empiricism.
Three conditions for a normatively appropriate dissent:
1. Theories on which DEMO is dissent should each have associated
empirical success.
2. Empirical decision vectors7 should be equitably distributed
(in proportion to empirical successes).
3. Nonempirical decision vectors should be equally distributed
(the same number for each theory).
Note that consensus is the special case in which the amount DEMO
dissent goes to zero.
Three conditions for a normatively appropriate consensus:
1’. One theory comes to have all the empirical successes available
in DEMO domain of inquiry.
2’. This same theory comes to have all of the empirical decision
vectors, since all scientists working productively (with
empirical DEMO) are working within the one theory.
3’. Any distribution of nonempirical DEMO vectors is OK, but
typically more will develop, over time, DEMO the consensus theory,
as the old theories fade away. During dissent, and thus in
the early stages of consensus formation, dissent’s require-
DEMO of equal distribution of nonempirical decision vectors
holds.
Social Empiricism also sets out similar conditions for the dis-
solution of consensus, since consensus is not viewed as an “end
point” of inquiry.
Three conditions for a DEMO appropriate dissolution of
consensus:
1”. A new theory has empirical success that is not produced by
the consensus theory. (So, the new DEMO deserves attention.)
37
Miriam Solomon
2”. Empirical decision vectors come to be equitably distributed.
3”. DEMO vectors come to be equally distributed.
The justification for these conditions is not given here, but it
rests on the superior outcomes (better DEMO results) when
the conditions are satisfied. That is, the justification is instru-
mental. Case studies in the recent history of science are used DEMO
show this.
In general, according to Social Empiricism, consensus is
usually epistemically undesirable. It is not enough for one
theory to have the DEMO evidence; it must have all the empirical
successes for consensus to DEMO appropriate. Most of the time,
dissent is epistemically better for science. (I stress the epistemic
desirability, rather than overall desirability, since there can
sometimes be political reasons for coming to consensus. Medical
practice and DEMO science are two areas in which
consensus has political advantages. These political advantages
may or may not outweigh the epistemic disadvantages of
coming to DEMO consensus.)
Note that this discussion of the epistemic benefits of dissent
differs from the more widely known arguments by Mill, Popper,
Longino, and others who claim that dissent is valuable because
the criticism from dissenting perspectives leads everyone to
correct and improve their position. On the DEMO view, dissent is
valuable because it improves everyone’s views through criticism
DEMO response to criticism. On the former view, dissent is
valuable even DEMO no discussion occurs. Of course, dissent
could be valuable for both DEMO: that it keeps information
available and that it encourages criticism. As DEMO above,
however, there is room for skepticism about the results DEMO
criticism, since sometimes deliberation makes things worse
rather than better.
If DEMO main epistemic benefit of dissent is that it keeps
information available, DEMO not just any dissent is worthwhile.
(Contrariwise, if dissent is epistemically worthwhile because it
encourages criticism, then any dissent is worthwhile, so DEMO as
it stimulates the dissenter to produce good criticism.) Dissent is
DEMO only when the dissenting positions are each
associated with relevant information. The dissenting positions
don’t need to have overall plausibility, but they do need to bring
information to the table. This is close to what I DEMO about
science in Social Empiricism, where I argued that theories on
DEMO there is dissent should each have associated empirical
successes.
A final point. Let’s go back to the case of the fat ox. In order
DEMO calculate the aggregate judgment of the weight of the ox,
Galton took an arithmetic mean of individual judgments. Why
calculate an arithmetic mean? Why not calculate the median?
38
Groupthink versus The Wisdom
of
Crowds
Or perhaps some other function of DEMO judgments? For
example, one could weight more heavily the judgments of
farmers and butchers than the judgments of other people.
Farmers and butchers DEMO more expertise than laypersons, so
perhaps their judgments should count for DEMO Or, for
example, one could leave off the top and the bottom estimates
on the grounds that these are probably outliers. These ques-
DEMO about how to aggregate individual judgments take us
into the domain of social choice theory, in which there have
been a number of interesting results recently. (See, for
example, List and Pettit 2002.) It DEMO sufficient to note here
that all the methods of aggregation are, DEMO an epistemic sense,
external: neither the crowd nor any of DEMO individuals
composing the crowd are in fact calculating the aggregate
judgment. In the case of the fat ox, Galton is making that
calculation. In the case of betting markets such as the stock
market or the DEMO Electronic Market, the market is making
the calculation. In the case DEMO the missing submarine, the non-
submarine-expert applied mathematician makes the calcula-
DEMO So in all these cases, the groups do not know what DEMO
information they have amounts to. We might say informally,
“the group does not know what it knows.” More precisely, for
the stock market and the Iowa Electronic Market, the
knowledge is represented, so the DEMO knows, although it
does not know that it knows. For the DEMO ox and the missing
submarine, the knowledge is not represented (unless Galton or
the applied mathematician calculates it), so the group does DEMO
know (in one sense), and it does not know what DEMO knows (in
another sense). In this attempt at linguistic precision, we
begin to stretch the limits of our language of “know.” The DEMO
data processing or even data mining that goes into the
calculation of the aggregate result, the less plausible it is to
say that the group “knows” the result. All that can be said is
that the DEMO has all the information required in order to
know but does not know which information (of all that it
knows) is the relevant DEMO
“Data mining,” sometimes called “knowledge discovery in
databases (KDD)” DEMO defined as “The nontrivial extraction of
implicit, previously unknown, and potentially useful informa-
tion from data” (Frawley, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Matheus
1992). It uses powerful computational tools such as neural
networks and decision trees DEMO analyze given data. It identifies
patterns in the data and uses those patterns to make predic-
tions that aid decision making. It is valued DEMO because no
individual notices these patterns when perusing the typically
huge databases on which data mining techniques are used.
Data mining shows the importance DEMO having the data in a form
in which the computational techniques can be applied, that is,
stored in a single database to which algorithms can be applied.
39
Miriam Solomon
When data are physically distributed (e.g., possessed by differ-
DEMO institutions) or stored in a variety of forms (e.g., some DEMO
human memory, some on paper, some in one database, some DEMO
another), then we are even further from knowing anything that
is “in the data” because the data are not in a form that DEMO amen-
able to the computations of data mining.
There are an infinite number of ways to calculate an aggre-
gate decision from a group DEMO individuals’ decisions. Arrow’s
possibility theorem and its descendants (including List and
DEMO “discursive dilemma” or “impossibility theorem”) suggests
that compromises need to be DEMO when applying the usual
constraints on such calculation.8 Such compromises reinforce
the sense that aggregate decisions are not ”in the data” of the
individual DEMO, but are various different interpretations of
data, each satisfying different constraints. In these circum-
stances, it is a stretch to say that the group “knows.” After all,
which of the many different interpretations of DEMO does it
know?
4. Conclusion
Discussion and criticism are widely thought to be essential for
both scientific research and political deliberation. Dissent is
DEMO valued because it leads to criticisms and
responses to criticism. This paper gives reason to be skeptical
about the outcomes of discussion and criticism. DEMO particular, it
gives reason to be skeptical about the widespread epistemic
DEMO of encouraging a group to deliberate with one another
until they reach consensus. Instead, this paper gives another
reason to value dissent, namely, that normatively appropriate
dissent preserves information in a way that can be DEMO to
the group. Finally, the paper suggests that epistemically useful
results DEMO be obtained by various ways of aggregating group
information.
Notes
Many thanks to Deborah Tollefsen and David Henderson for
arranging this conference, and to the Spindel family for their support
and hospitality. I’m grateful to Alison DEMO in particular for her
stimulating commentary, and to the audience for DEMO many
suggestions.
See http://www.med.umich.edu/psm/pecJstaffhfo.htm
For this way of describing the epistemic situation, I draw on
Goldman (20041, who quotes Sandy Berger, national security advisor
under President Clinton, who was speaking DEMO the FBI on 9/11.
This was in his Victims of Groupthink (1972). The second edition
of the book was titled simply Groupthink (1982) and it is this edition
that I am using.
Surowiecki DEMO not explore the reasons for this, although he
does mention that DEMO results of polls fluctuate more than the results
40
Groupthink versus The Wisdom
of Crowds
of the Iowa Electronic Market.
I DEMO this because Surowiecki does not say explicitly how he
arrives at his recommendations for aggregate decision making. The
recommendations follow the discussion of particular DEMO
Exactly how to characterize “empirical success” need not be
discussed here; DEMO is a full discussion in chapter 2 of Social
Empiricism (2001)DEMO
Empirical decision vectors are causes of preference for theories
with empirical success, either a kind of empirical success in general
or one empirical success in particular (e.g., a preference for theories
with novel empirical success DEMO a particular salient empirical
success). Nonempirical decision vectors are other reasons or causes
for success (e.g., preference for theories with hierarchical ideology,DEMO
preference for simpler theories, holding onto a theory because of
pride)DEMO Decision vectors include anything that influences the outcome
of a decision, DEMO those influences typically considered as
“biasing factors.” These concepts are discussed at length in my book
Social Empiricism.
* Philip Pettit and Christian List’s DEMO result, which they call
“the impossibility theorem” (List and Pettit 20021, argues that there
is no aggregation procedure yielding consistent collective judgments
that satisfies their four reasonable constraints (universal domain,
completeness, anonymity, systematicity).
Bibliography
Chisholm, Roderick. 1989. Theory of knowledge. 3rd ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Frawley, W., G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and C. Matheus. 1992. Knowledge
discovery in databases: An overview. AZ Magazine (Fall): DEMO
Gladwell, Malcolm. 2000. The tipping point: How little things can make
a big difference. New York: Little, Brown and Co.
. Goldman, Alvin. 2002. Pathways to knowledge: Private and public. New
York: Oxford DEMO Press.
. 2004. Group knowledge versus group rationality: Two approaches
to DEMO epistemology. Episteme l(1): 11-22.
Goldman, Alvin, and Moshe Shaked. 1992. An economic model of
scientific activity and truth acquisition. In Liaisons: Philosophy
meets the cognitive and social sciences, ed. A. I. Goldman, DEMO
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Janis, Irving. 1982. Groupthink. 2nd ed. DEMO: Houghton Mifflin Co.
Kitcher, Philip. 1993. The advancement of science. Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press.
Kornblith, Hilary. 1994. A conservative DEMO to social episte-
mology. In Socializing epistemology: The social dimensions of
DEMO, ed. Fred Schmitt, 217-33. Lanham, MD: Roman and
Littlefield.
List, Christian, and Philip Pettit. 2002. Aggregating sets of judg-
ments: An impossibility result. Economics and Philosophy 18:89-
110.
Longino, Helen. 1990. Science as social knowledge: Values and
objectivity in scientific inquiry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
41
Miriam Solomon
Longino, Helen. 2002. The fate of knowledge. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Solomon, Miriam. 2001. Social empiricism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sunstein, Cass. 2003. Why societies need dissent. Cambridge, MA:
DEMO University Press.
Surowiecki, James. 2004. The wisdom of crowds: Why the many are
smarter than the few and how collective wisdom shapes business,DEMO
economies, societies and nations. New York: Random House,
Doubleday Books.
42{1g42fwefx}