Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
Complexity, networks and knowledge ﬂow
Olav Sorenson a,∗, Jan W. Rivkin b, Lee Fleming c
a DEMO Business School, Sussex Place, Regent’s Park, London NW1 4SA, United Kingdom
b Morgan Hall 239, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA 02163, USA
c Morgan Hall T95, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA DEMO, USA
Received 13 April 2005; received in revised form 29 April 2006; accepted 3 May 2006
Available online 15 June 2006
Abstract
Because knowledge plays an important role in the creation of wealth, economic actors often wish to skew the ﬂow of knowledge
in their favor. We DEMO, when will an actor socially close to the source of some DEMO have the greatest advantage over distant
actors in receiving and building on the knowledge? Marrying a social network perspective with a view of knowledge transfer as a
search process, we argue that the value of social proximity to the knowledge source depends crucially on the nature of the DEMO
at hand. Simple knowledge diffuses equally to close and distant actors because distant recipients with poor connections to the source
of the knowledge can DEMO for their limited access by means of unaided local search. Complex knowledge resists diffusion
even within the social circles in which it originated. With DEMO of moderate complexity, however, high-ﬁdelity transmission
along social networks combined with local search allows socially proximate recipients to receive and extend knowledge generated
DEMO, while interdependencies stymie more distant recipients who rely heavily on unaided DEMO To test this hypothesis, we
examine patent data and compare citation DEMO across proximate and distant actors on three dimensions: (1) the DEMO collaboration
network; (2) ﬁrm membership; and (3) geography. We ﬁnd robust support for the proposition that socially proximate actors have
the DEMO advantage over distant actors for knowledge of moderate complexity. We discuss the implications of our ﬁndings for
the distribution of intra-industry proﬁts, the geographic agglomeration of industries, the design of social networks within ﬁrms, and
DEMO modularization of technologies.
© 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: DEMO; Information; Knowledge; Social networks; Competitive advantage
The ﬂow of knowledge plays a central role in a wide
variety of ﬁelds (for a review, see Rogers, 1995). Soci-
ologists began investigating diffusion processes DEMO and
the importance of social structure to those processes –
to understand the adoption patterns of agricultural and
medical innovations (Ryan and Gross, DEMO; Coleman
et al., 1957). To students of technology management,
knowledge ﬂow ﬁrst arises as an important issue in the
∗ Corresponding DEMO
E-mail addresses: osorenson@london.edu (O. Sorenson),
jrivkin@hbs.edu (J.W. Rivkin), lﬂeming@hbs.edu (L. Fleming).
0048-7333/$ – see front matter © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.respol.2006.05.002
context of technology transfers DEMO the ﬁrm (Allen,
1977; Teece, 1977), but questions DEMO diffusion also arise
when technology scholars ask whether incumbent ﬁrms
or upstarts ﬁrst develop and commercialize new inven-
tions (Reinganum, 1981; Tushman and Anderson, 1986).
Both students of organizational learning (for a review,DEMO
see Argote, 1999) and industrial economists (Griliches,
1957; Zimmerman, 1982; Irwin and Klenow, 1994) study
how knowledge moves through DEMO and how it spills
over to other ﬁrms. In short, a DEMO array of scholars
shares an interest in knowledge diffusion processes.
The normative interpretation given to diffusion, how-
ever, differs dramatically across ﬁelds. Economists DEMO
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
995
DEMO tend to focus on the societal beneﬁts of
spillovers (i.e. the DEMO of knowledge across actors, usu-
ally ﬁrms). The generation of DEMO knowledge often
requires substantial investment in research and devel-
opment, but DEMO repeated application of this knowledge,
once produced, entails little if DEMO incremental cost
(Arrow, 1962). Knowledge diffusion, therefore, engen-
ders scale economies and stimulates economic devel-
opment by allowing several ﬁrms to DEMO from the
R&D activities undertaken by a single ﬁrm (Marshall,DEMO
1890; Scherer, 1984; Romer, 1987). Management schol-
ars, DEMO contrast, note that when knowledge escapes to
competing ﬁrms the returns DEMO innovation become ﬂeet-
ing at best. As rivals imitate new products and processes,
the degree of differentiation or cost advantage accru-
ing to DEMO innovator erodes. The business literature thus
urges managers to defend against spillovers (Lippman
and Rumelt, 1982; Kogut and Zander, 1992).
Though DEMO prescriptions differ, economists, soci-
ologists, strategists, and students of technology man-
agement all seek a better understanding of why some
knowledge disperses DEMO while other knowledge does
not. In this quest, some scholars have DEMO on the
attributes of the knowledge itself. For example, highly
speciﬁc DEMO may ﬂow slowly because few parties
other than the initial innovator either have the base-
line knowledge and skills necessary to absorb it (Cohen
and Levinthal, 1990) or can beneﬁt from its appli-
cation (Henderson and Cockburn, 1996; McEvily and
Chakravarthy, 2002). Other studies focus on how social
networks structure the ﬂow of knowledge (e.g., Coleman
DEMO al., 1957; Hansen, 1999; Singh, 2005), implicitly
attributing DEMO rate of diffusion to the locus of innovation
in the network.
This paper seeks to augment our understanding of
knowledge ﬂow by examining the DEMO between
two features: social proximity and the complexity of the
underlying DEMO Social proximity here refers to
the distance between two parties in a social network; for
example, one would consider those who have a DEMO
relationship to each other to be closer than those who
have a mutual acquaintance but have never met. We
meanwhile deﬁne complexity in terms DEMO the level of
interdependence inherent in the subcomponents of a
1 Hansen (1999) also focuses on the interplay between social rela-
tions and DEMO ﬂow. His research differs from ours in three
respects: (1) DEMO does not explore the issues related to recipient search as
a mechanism for the interplay; (2) it focuses on the strength of the con-
nection between inventors rather than social proximity in a network;
DEMO (3) it analyzes the effects of a portfolio of relations rather than the
characteristics of a connection in a dyad.
piece of knowledge (Simon, 1962; Kauffman, 1993; cf.
Zander and Kogut, 1995). Interdependence arises when
a subcomponent signiﬁcantly affects the contribution of
one or DEMO other subcomponents to the functionality of
a piece of knowledge. When subcomponents are inter-
dependent, a change in one may require the adjustment,
inclusion or replacement of others for a piece of knowl-
edge to DEMO effective.
Consider then an actor who is a source of knowledge
and two potential recipients of that knowledge—one
socially close to the source and DEMO further away. When
does the proximate actor have the greatest advantage over
the distant in receiving and building on the knowledge?
We argue DEMO the advantage should peak when the under-
lying knowledge is of moderate complexity. Our expec-
tation emerges from the recognition that receiving and
building DEMO knowledge frequently requires the recipient
to engage in search to ﬁll in gaps and correct transmis-
sion errors in the knowledge conveyed—the cost and
DEMO of which increase with knowledge complexity.
Social proximity reduces the need for search by facilitat-
ing high-ﬁdelity transmission (i.e., complete information
with negligible DEMO). On the other hand, as the social
distance separating the DEMO and the would-be receiver
grows, unaided search plays an increasingly important
DEMO in diffusion. Under such conditions, simple knowl-
edge should ﬂow universally DEMO to actors near and far
– because search can easily substitute for high-ﬁdelity
transmission. Highly interdependent knowledge mean-
while deﬁes diffusion, regardless of whether one relies
on search or social proximity. For knowledge of mod-
erate DEMO, however, a gap emerges between the
ability of close actors, DEMO to that of distant actors, to
receive and build on knowledge. DEMO transmis-
sion gives proximate actors sufﬁcient insight that they
can succeed in receiving and building on knowledge,
even where more distant actors, who rely more heavily
on search, fail.
We analyze patent data to test our thesis empirically.
Citation patterns across patents offer something of a fos-
DEMO record for the ﬂow of knowledge—providing a lasting
reﬂection of ephemeral interactions. Using this record,
we estimate the effect of knowledge complexity on DEMO
likelihood of future citations as a function of the social
proximity of future inventors to the inventor of the orig-
inal piece of knowledge, comparing those socially close
to and far from the source. To assess DEMO proxim-
ity, we calculate the geodesic length between patents’
inventors in DEMO collaboration network. We also supple-
ment this metric with indicators of geographic proxim-
ity and employment within the same organization. To
gauge complexity, we develop a measure that reﬂects
996
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
DEMO historical interdependence of a patent’s subcompo-
nents with other subcomponents. The ﬁndings provide
strong support for our core hypothesis: the higher like-
lihood of citation among proximate inventors peaks for
knowledge of an intermediate level of DEMO (inter-
dependence).
This work contributes to the literature in several DEMO
First, from the perspective of social networks, it identiﬁes
one condition under which social proximity should prove
especially important to knowledge ﬂow: for knowledge
of intermediate complexity. Though social scientists
have usefully demonstrated that networks DEMO for the
diffusion of knowledge, relatively little research consid-
ers precisely DEMO those networks should matter most
(Strang and Soule, 1998; Baker DEMO Faulker, 2004). By
synthesizing the social network perspective with work DEMO
conceptions of knowledge receipt as search, we identify
scope conditions on DEMO relevance of social connections
to the diffusion process. Second, with respect DEMO evolu-
tionary economics, our work highlights social connec-
tions as an DEMO channel through which “insiders”
gain superior access to knowledge. Extant work asserts
that insiders – deﬁned usually as those within the same
ﬁrm as DEMO source – have better access to an original suc-
cess, which DEMO as a template in efforts to transfer and
extend that knowledge (DEMO and Winter, 1982: 119;
Rivkin, 2001). Yet this DEMO fails to establish the source
of this preferential access. Does it come from incentives
that reward transfer, from the conﬁdentiality agreements
that employees sign, or from some other source? Our
research points to direct social DEMO as a critical
factor differentiating these internal parties from those
outside the ﬁrm.
1. The ﬂow of complex knowledge
Our discussion begins with the DEMO common ﬁnd-
ing of classic diffusion studies: the S-shaped cumula-
tive DEMO curve (Ryan and Gross, 1943; Griliches,
1957; Rogers, DEMO, provides an excellent review).
Researchers consistently ﬁnd that the adoption DEMO an
innovation over time follows a common pattern: grow-
ing slowly DEMO ﬁrst, then accelerating rapidly, and ﬁnally
slowing to reach some asymptotic saturation level.
These dynamics resemble that of an epidemic spread-
ing through DEMO population; the innovation ﬁrst ‘infects’
those most at risk of exposure DEMO actors closest to the
original source (Hagerstrand, 1953¨ ) – and those most
susceptible to infection – those most prepared to accept
the DEMO associated with an untested technology
(Mansﬁeld, 1968) or whose idiosyncratic DEMO
make the innovation appear most attractive (Griliches,
1957). Over DEMO, awareness of the innovation spreads,
uncertainty ebbs, and the economics of the invention
become favorable to a larger share of the population.
DEMO then takes off. In this classic perspective, new
knowledge resembles a DEMO thrown into a calm pond,
its ripples moving steadily across the entire surface.
Though this pattern accurately describes the diffusion
of a wide DEMO of innovations and knowledge, critics
have faulted this focus on the DEMO for several rea-
sons (cf. Mahajan et al., 1990; Hargadon, 1998). Two
of these critiques have particular relevance here. First,
DEMO classic diffusion literature typically depicts knowl-
edge as moving unaltered as it passes from one actor to
the next. Contrary to this depiction, in reality transmis-
sion rarely occurs with perfect ﬁdelity. Both gaps in the
DEMO sent and errors in its interpretation typically
require the receiver to reconstruct portions of the orig-
inal knowledge. This process occurs so commonly that
DEMO even forms the basis of amusement in the children’s
game of telephone.2 Most knowledge, therefore, requires
effort to acquire and transmutes to some DEMO as actors
strive to receive and build upon it; recipients assimilating
DEMO knowledge must actively process it by experiment-
ing with its application to new problem domains and
environmental contexts. Witness, for instance, the efforts
DEMO American automakers as they struggled to digest the
knowledge embodied in Japanese lean production tech-
niques (Womack et al., 1990) or the labors of computer
makers as they sought to imitate Dell’s direct distribu-
tion DEMO (Porter and Rivkin, 1999). In both cases, the
receipt DEMO knowledge required years of trial, error, reﬂec-
tion, and adjustment DEMO, arguably, remains incomplete.
Even within the supportive infrastructure of an orga-
nization, receiving and building on new knowledge can
prove difﬁcult. Teece (DEMO), for example, reports that
the transmission and assimilation of technical DEMO
accounted for 19% of project costs, on average – run-
ning DEMO high as 59% in one case – in 26 international
technology transfer projects. Chew et al. (1990) ﬁnd the
internal transfer of best DEMO so incomplete in multi-
plant commercial food operations that, within a DEMO,
the best plants produce twice as efﬁciently as the worst,
even after controlling for differences in processing tech-
nology, location, and DEMO size (Szulanski, 1996, offers
additional evidence). Hence, we regard the act of receiv-
ing and building on knowledge not as the DEMO of a
2 In this game, one child whispers a message DEMO the ear of another,
who then whispers what she heard into the ear of a third child and so
forth. At the end, the ﬁnal person announces the message he heard and
the ﬁrst person DEMO the message that she originally whispered; the
two usually differ dramatically.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
997
DEMO, well-packaged gift, but rather as the beginning
of a trial-and-error process.
Our second concern regarding the simple S-curve
characterization of diffusion arises from DEMO inattention
to the crucial role that social networks play in diffusion.
Several studies, largely out of sociology, demonstrate
that knowledge spreads from its DEMO not in concentric
circles, but along conduits deﬁned by social connections
(Lazarsfeld et al., 1944; Coleman et al., 1966; Burt, 1987;
see Marsden and Friedkin, 1993, for a review). Consider
DEMO of the relevant ﬁndings: Hedstrom (1994)¨ discov-
ered that network density and geographic proximity can
explain most of the spread of the DEMO of unionization in
Sweden. In an analysis of adoption patterns for “poi-
son pills” and “golden parachutes,” Davis and Greve
(1997) offered DEMO evidence that information about
these policies travelled through corporate board inter-
locks. And Hansen (1999) found that strong ties best
conveyed complex knowledge DEMO product develop-
ment teams within a ﬁrm. A growing literature thus
points to the importance of social networks as pathways
that channel the ﬂow DEMO knowledge among actors.
We synthesize these two perspectives – knowledge
receipt as an active process of experimentation and
search, and an appreciation for the role of social networks
– into a model of knowledge ﬂow. The DEMO offers
unique predictions regarding how knowledge complex-
ity inﬂuences patterns of success among efforts to receive
and extend knowledge.
1.1. Knowledge receipt as search
DEMO on the intellectual scaffolding of evolution-
ary economics, our perspective conceptualizes DEMO piece
of knowledge as a recipe (Nelson and Winter, 1982).3
The list of potential ingredients encompasses both phys-
ical components and processes. DEMO recipe details how
to combine these ingredients – in which proportions,
in what order, under what circumstances – to achieve a
desired end. For instance, a recipe for a McDonald’s out-
let might read something like: “When a customer places
a special order, the counter clerk DEMO the order into the
register, which causes the order to show DEMO on the com-
puter screen in the kitchen, which induces the DEMO to put
a raw hamburger on the grill...” or “when opening a new
3 This assumption limits the applicability of our theory to innovations
DEMO involve multiple components. This restriction should not severely
constrain its scope, DEMO; few innovations do not involve the com-
bination of multiple physical DEMO or processes. For example,
even the synthesis of nylon, a DEMO, involved the integration of
several distinct processes (Smith and Hounshell, DEMO).
outlet, a manager in the real estate department secures a
DEMO while the franchising ofﬁce identiﬁes a franchisee.
Next, the franchisee contacts DEMO contractors
while hiring shift managers....” Though these recipes
may appear in writing, they more commonly reside in
the form of behavioral routines, individual DEMO, or
technology (March and Simon, 1958).
The conceptualization of DEMO as a recipe
leads naturally to thinking of innovation as a process
of searching for new recipes. Following a long tradi-
tion (Schumpeter, DEMO; Gilﬁllan, 1935; Usher, 1954),
Nelson and Winter (1982) explicitly treat innovation as
a search process; inventors explore the space DEMO pos-
sible combinations of ingredients, or recipes, for new
and better alternatives. This exploration involves not just
the search for the best combinations DEMO ingredients but
also the quest for the most effective methods of inte-
grating them. Researchers who conceptualize innovation
as search frequently exploit a landscape DEMO as
a means of providing an intuitive understanding of the
search process (Levinthal, 1997; Rivkin, 2000; Fleming
and Sorenson, 2001). DEMO – depicted as myopic in
their awareness of the terrain – search these landscapes
for peaks, which represent good recipes or useful inven-
tions.
Once a useful innovation has been located, transfer-
ring its recipe, DEMO between cooperative actors, can fail
for two reasons. First, the recipient rarely grasps the
original recipe completely, due to imperfections in the
transfer process. Gaps emerge in what the sender con-
veys – perhaps the DEMO forgets an ingredient or skips
a step – and the receiver may misinterpret some of the
information that is transmitted. And, unless the recipient
understands perfectly the recipe that generated the suc-
cess – an unlikely DEMO – she must engage in search
to ﬁll the gaps and correct the errors in her version of the
recipe. Any attempt to receive DEMO extend a recipe in new
settings will likewise require the recipient to rediscover
the original combination, or some variant of it better
suited to the new context.
Second, the local ingredients and cooking experience
of the receiving chef rarely match identically those of
the sender. Research on absorptive DEMO (Cohen and
Levinthal, 1990) emphasizes that successful knowledge
diffusion requires DEMO receiver to possess a base of knowl-
edge and skills to assimilate new information. Without
this baseline, the transmission of new discoveries would
often entail the communication of exorbitant amounts
of data; imagine how long a recipe would become if
one needed to detail every step of the DEMO
to chop vegetables, how to boil water, etc. These two
factors imply that knowledge recipients rarely, if ever,
998
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
DEMO merely as passive beneﬁciaries; they actively search,
recreate, and build upon the original recipes.
In this process, certain types of recipes prove particu-
larly tricky to transfer because the sender ﬁnds it difﬁcult
to DEMO and communicate precisely where the origi-
nal combination resides in the combinatorial space of
ingredients; on the ﬁgurative treasure map, it is hard DEMO
place the “X” that “marks the spot.” This communica-
tion difﬁculty could arise as a result of causal ambigu-
ity (Lippman and Rumelt, DEMO; Reed and DeFillippi,
1990): the innovator might not fully DEMO the
connection between actions and outcomes so the roots
of the original success remain unclear. It could also
occur because the production process calls DEMO tacit per-
sonal skills or connections among individuals that the
involved parties themselves do not consciously under-
stand (Polanyi, 1966; von Hippel, DEMO), or that eludes
codiﬁcation (Zander and Kogut, 1995). These factors
essentially increase the likelihood that the knowledge
transmitted has gaps. The DEMO of the recipe itself
can also impair knowledge ﬂow by increasing the difﬁ-
culty for the recipient of ﬁlling these gaps and correcting
transmission DEMO
As noted above, complexity refers to the degree to
which the DEMO in a recipe interact sensitively
in producing the desired outcome. Our deﬁnition here
closely follows Simon (1962), who classiﬁes a piece of
knowledge as complex if it comprises many elements
that interact richly (see also Kauffman, 1993; cf. Zander
and Kogut, 1995). We adopt Simon’s deﬁnition, but pay
particular attention to the intensity of interdependence
among the ingredients in the recipe. A high degree of
interdependence indicates that many DEMO inﬂu-
ence the effectiveness of others so that a change in one
may dramatically reduce the usefulness of the recipe.
Replicating the functionality of DEMO original recipe often
requires adjustments in the set of other ingredients or
the processes for combining them. Low interdependence
implies small cross-component effects and DEMO correspond-
ing opportunity to adapt and change ingredients indepen-
dently.
Discovering, DEMO rediscovering, a complex piece of
knowledge poses a stiff challenge. Interdependence DEMO
duces two effects that undermine the recipient’s attempts
to receive and build on the original. First, small errors
in reproduction cause large problems when ingredients
cross-couple in a rich manner. In highly interdepen-
dent systems, implementers often realize no value from
adopting a set of practices unless each-and-every DEMO
ponent ﬁts into place perfectly; a single error threatens
the effectiveness DEMO the entire system. An American
automaker that attempts to adopt lean production tech-
niques, for instance, may alter its human resource prac-
tices DEMO inventory policies, yet see no beneﬁt because
it failed to invest DEMO in ﬂexible production
equipment. The fragility of such tightly coupled sys-
tems has been well documented (Weick, 1976; Perrow,
1984). Second, interdependence leads to a proliferation
of “local peaks.” These internally consistent – though
not necessarily optimal – ways of combining ingredients
elude improvement through DEMO search because
altering any single element degrades the quality of the
outcome (Kauffman, 1993). Such local peaks would pose
no problem to DEMO actors, who could assess the
entire space of possibilities, but for individuals with ﬁnite
cognitive abilities and a limited purview of the landscape,DEMO
such search proves difﬁcult; in the face of high interde-
pendence, searchers frequently ﬁnd themselves trapped
on local peaks. Moreover, these local peaks tend to cor-
respond to poor recipes precisely when interdependence
creates a DEMO web of potentially conﬂicting constraints.
1.2. Complexity and access to a template
Success in receiving and building on complex knowl-
edge depends crucially on DEMO to the original recipe,
which serves as a template (Nelson DEMO Winter, 1982:
119–120; Winter, 1995). For reasons explored DEMO,
individuals differ in their access to the template. Supe-
rior access facilitates the knowledge recipient’s search
in at least two ways. First, the recipient begins searching
in closer proximity to the ultimate target—as a result DEMO
either fewer errors in the interpretation of the transmis-
sion or smaller gaps in the information sent. Second,
superior access allows the recipient DEMO solicit advice
when problems arise, helping the recipient to home in
DEMO the desired knowledge more efﬁciently.
Consider two actors both trying to receive and build
on a valuable piece of knowledge but who differ in DEMO
access to the template. The ﬁrst has superior, though
admittedly still DEMO, access to and understanding
of the original, successful recipe. The second has far
poorer access. To what degree does the ﬁrst actor’s supe-
DEMO but imperfect access to the template have value, in
the sense DEMO it enables the actor to receive and build
upon the original recipe more effectively? We contend
that the value of this access depends on the complexity of
the underlying knowledge in an inverted U-shaped rela-
tionship; that is, intermediate levels of interdependence
maximize the value of preferential access.
Suppose ﬁrst that the ingredients of the knowledge
do not interact; getting one element in the recipe wrong
diminishes that component’s contribution to the DEMO,
but it does not undermine the other components. In this
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
situation, the ﬁrst actor’s access to the template does not
educe a persistent DEMO Through routine, incre-
mental search efforts, the second actor can reconstruct
the recipe. Few local peaks threaten to trap the poorly
informed recipient. DEMO a result, both actors eventually
fare equally well; search on the part of a recipient can
easily substitute for high-ﬁdelity transmission.
Next consider DEMO with an intermediate degree
of interdependence. Local peaks now appear, but DEMO
remain relatively few in number. The well-informed
actor begins its search near, but not precisely at, the orig-
inal combination of ingredients. Through DEMO
search, and with recourse to the template, it can assem-
ble the proper combination of ingredients. The second
actor, who likely begins search farther from the target
and receives less guidance about the direction in DEMO
to explore, more likely becomes ensnared on some local
peak, away from and inferior to the original success.
Here superior access to the DEMO gives the ﬁrst actor
an advantage that the second cannot recreate through
search.
Finally, imagine a piece of maximally interdepen-
dent knowledge: ingredients DEMO on one another in an
extremely delicate way, and none produces DEMO ben-
eﬁt unless all align perfectly. Local peaks now pervade
the landscape and neither actor’s incremental search will
likely reproduce or build upon the DEMO knowledge
with any success. The ﬁrst actor’s superior access to the
template thus has little value beyond the second’s highly
imperfect access.
Taken together, these arguments imply that the advan-
tage of superior but imperfect access DEMO the template
reaches its peak at moderate levels of interdependence
between knowledge components. With moderate inter-
dependence, the smoothness of the landscape allows a
party that begins its search near the desired peak to redis-
cover DEMO through local search. Yet the landscape also has
sufﬁcient ruggedness that an actor that begins search
far from the target likely ﬁnds itself trapped DEMO a lower
peak. In contrast, the single-peaked landscape that comes
with DEMO components allows both parties to suc-
ceed in receiving and building on the source knowledge
through local search. The highly rugged landscape pro-
duced DEMO extreme interdependence meanwhile stymies
both parties thoroughly. (For a more formal DEMO,
see the simulation in the Appendix A.)
1.3. Social networks and template access
The quality of an actor’s access to the template DEMO
depend on many factors. One crucial factor is the nature
of the actor’s social relations, which provide conduits
999
through which valuable information travels (Homans,
1950; Hagerstrand, 1953¨ ). In particular, we claim that
the quality of an actor’s access to a template declines
with DEMO distance—that is, the number of nodes that
separate the actor from DEMO source of the knowledge in a
social network. Direct, single-step connections DEMO
the most obvious and valuable links between inventors
and those attempting to receive and build on knowledge
because they permit two-way communication. The recip-
DEMO can therefore interactively query the original source
of the knowledge to correct errors or to ﬁll gaps in the
original transmission.4
Short, indirect paths – for example with one or two
intervening steps – can also DEMO beneﬁcial access to
the template, as even second-hand information provides
important DEMO about how to reconstruct and build on
new knowledge. Mutual acquaintances may also allow
for direct communication with the source if they will
introduce DEMO vouch for a potential knowledge recipient
(Burt, 1992). Moreover, DEMO removed by only a few
steps from the knowledge source will share more back-
ground knowledge, a larger proportion of specialized
language, and DEMO wider range of beliefs with the source
(for a review, see McPherson et al., 2001). All of these
facilitate high-ﬁdelity transmission (DEMO, 1912;
Arrow, 1974; Cohen and Levinthal, 1990). The qual-
ity of template access, however, undoubtedly declines
rapidly as the DEMO of actors between the innovator
and the would-be receiver increases; as DEMO the game of
telephone, each step in the path between the DEMO parties
offers an opportunity for errors and omissions to creep
into the transmission.
The previous subsection argued that superior access to
the template creates DEMO greatest advantage in knowledge
diffusion with knowledge of intermediate complexity
(interdependence)DEMO Combining that idea with the notion
that social proximity provides superior access to the tem-
plate, we arrive at the central proposition of our paper:
Hypothesis. In attempts to receive and build on knowl-
edge, actors who are socially close to the source of
the knowledge have DEMO greatest advantage over distant
actors when the knowledge is of intermediate interde-
pendence.
In sum, we view knowledge diffusion as a search
to receive and build on an effective recipe. Recipients
4 Though not considered here, one might also consider the impor-
tance of tie “strength.” Weak ties DEMO long reach but low bandwidth;
thus, they operate most prominently DEMO the diffusion process when
transferring only short, simple messages (Hansen, DEMO).
1000
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
DEMO proximate to the source of the knowledge have
superior, though still DEMO, access to the original
recipe. This advantage in access translates into DEMO
ﬁdelity reproduction that beneﬁts the actor most signiﬁ-
cantly when the ingredients of the recipe display moder-
ate interdependence. Simple recipes spread through the
DEMO network thoroughly, placing recipients both near
and far on equal footing. DEMO intricate recipes resist
diffusion to even nearby actors. But for recipes of inter-
mediate interdependence, nearby actors receive enough
guidance from the template that local search delivers
them an effective replica of the original knowledge on
DEMO they can build, while distant actors begin their
search processes from DEMO ﬂawed starting points that
subsequent efforts to receive and build on the interde-
pendent recipe tend to fail.
2. Empirical corroboration
To test our DEMO, we analyzed prior art citations
to all U.S. utility patents granted DEMO May and June of
1990 (n = 17,264).5 The DEMO came from the Micro Patent
database and NBER public access data on patents (Hall
et al., 2001). Following much previous research, we view
a prior art citation as evidence of knowledge diffusion:
the DEMO has successfully assimilated the knowledge
underlying the original patent to a new setting and built
upon it. Our statistical approach is to estimate the DEMO
hood that a focal patent receives a citation from a future
patent as a function of several factors: the interdepen-
dence of the knowledge underlying the focal patent, the
proximity of the inventors of the focal and citing patent
in a social network, the interaction of interdependence
and social proximity, and a set of control variables. The
results of the estimation allow us to examine how the
likelihood of citation by a DEMO proximate inventor
compares to the likelihood of citation by a distant inven-
tor as a function of knowledge interdependence. The
crucial test of our DEMO is whether the gap between
the two probabilities peaks when the focal patent embod-
ies moderately interdependent knowledge.
2.1. Patents and the meaning of DEMO
Patents and their citation patterns provide an attrac-
tive test bed for our hypothesis for several reasons.
First, these citations have been carefully assigned. The
U.S. Patent Ofﬁce requires all applicants to demonstrate
5 We constructed DEMO dataset in the course of prior research. For
details on its construction, see Fleming and Sorenson (2001).
awareness of their invention’s precedents DEMO citing sim-
ilar “prior art” patents. Patent examiners in each techno-
logical domain review and supplement the prior art ref-
erences to ensure accurate DEMO comprehensive citations.
Second, consistent with our ontology of knowledge,
technology DEMO have demonstrated that one can
conceptualize patented inventions as combinations of
pre-existing technological components (Basalla, 1988).
The process of invention therefore involves DEMO the
replication of prior discoveries and the extension of those
discoveries to new applications and in new combina-
tions. When a citation to prior DEMO emerges on a new
patent, it suggests that the inventor has DEMO success-
fully received and built upon the knowledge underlying
the earlier patent. Third, Fleming and Sorenson (2001)
have developed a technique for DEMO the interde-
pendence among the components of an invention. The
technique draws on information uniquely available for
patents and potentially difﬁcult to duplicate in DEMO set-
tings.
This setting nevertheless also has its limitations. First,
our analysis rests on the assumption that some potential
knowledge recipients have better DEMO to the template
than others. If every patent fully revealed the inventor’s
underlying knowledge of the invention, this assumption
would not hold. Inventor’s incentives, however, mini-
mize the likelihood of this problem. Patent applicants
prefer DEMO disclose as little as possible to limit their com-
petitors’ ability to beneﬁt from their disclosure (Lim,
2001). Indeed, conversations with DEMO U.S. Patent Ofﬁce
indicate that applicants often intentionally obfuscate
their descriptions to diminish the value of the knowledge
revealed (Stern, 2001).
Second, the use of citations as an indicator of knowl-
edge ﬂows has DEMO cast into doubt recently by the work
of Alcacer and Gittelman (DEMO press), who ﬁnd that exam-
iners add 40% of the citations found on U.S. patents.
On the one hand, this ﬁnding is comforting as it sug-
gests that examiners actively work to prevent applicants
from DEMO citations to relevant prior art for strategic
reasons, such as those DEMO above. It is nonethe-
less potentially problematic for our study to the extent
that examiners most frequently insert socially proximate
citations to patents of DEMO interdependence. The
few studies that analyze the characteristics of examiner-
added citations, however, show no evidence of such a
bias (Alcacer and Gittelman, in press; Sampat, 2004).
Indeed, self-citations – which almost DEMO reﬂect
true knowledge ﬂows – as frequently come from examin-
ers as from inventors. This suggests to us that, on balance,
examiner intervention improves the quality of patent data
for our purposes and cannot account DEMO our results.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1001
DEMO with this conclusion, Duguet and MacGarvie
(2005) ﬁnd that ﬁrms’ DEMO citation patterns match their
survey responses regarding technology acquisition and
dispersion. At worst, if examiners add citations that do
not reﬂect true knowledge ﬂows and do so in an unbiased
way, this should only add noise, increasing the difﬁculty
of ﬁnding statistical support for our hypothesis.
Third, DEMO admittedly offer imperfect measures of
invention. Inventors may limit their patent applications
to a subset of their discoveries, and one must ask whether
this selection process biases our results. Inventors most
likely seek legal protection when DEMO patent raises a mean-
ingful barrier to imitation (e.g., when inventing around
the patent proves difﬁcult), when the invention will not
quickly DEMO obsolete, and when few alternative “nat-
ural” defenses protect the knowledge (Levin et al., 1987).
Of these conditions, the last seems DEMO germane to our
study. It implies that our sample may under-represent
inventions that involve highly tacit, causally ambiguous
and complex knowledge. Empirical research, DEMO,
suggests that this selection bias may not exist: Cohen et
DEMO (2000), for example, ﬁnd that ﬁrms in industries with
complex products disproportionately choose to patent.
Finally, we recognize that patents represent but one
embodiment of knowledge. Though we have no reasons
to expect a DEMO that they should differ from other pieces
of knowledge, they may. DEMO this potential limitation
on the scope of the applicability of our results, patents
offer an excellent ﬁrst test bed for our ideas for the rea-
sons noted above.
2.2. Case-control design
Our unit of analysis is DEMO patent dyad, one patent
issued in May or June of 1990 DEMO one issued later
that may or may not cite the ﬁrst. Hence our approach
conceptually follows that of other studies of the likeli-
hood DEMO tie formation—in this case, the likelihood that
a future patent builds DEMO the knowledge embodied in
one of our focal patents. These studies have typically
estimated tie formation on the entire matrix of possi-
ble relations (e.g., Podolny, 1994; Gulati, 1995). This
approach has two DEMO With large numbers of
nodes, in this case patents, it can generate enormous,
sparse matrices, increasing the difﬁculty of estimation
and variable construction. In our situation, this method
would generate nearly 20 billion dyads with only around
60,000 realized citations. In addition, this approach
raises questions regarding network autocorrelation and
the non-independence of repeated observations on the
DEMO patents across multiple observations in the error
structure.
Instead, our analysis DEMO Sorenson and Stuart
(2001) in adopting a case-control approach to analyz-
ing the formation of ties (see Sorenson and Fleming,
2004, DEMO an earlier application to patents). The case-
control sampling procedure works as follows. We begin
by including all cases of future patents, from July 1990
to June 1996, that cite any of our 17,268 focal patents:
60,999 in total. Since these citations occur, the depen-
dent variable Citeij takes a value of “1” for these cases DEMO
denote a realized citation. In addition, we pair each focal
patent DEMO four future patents that do not cite it (but that
could DEMO).6 We set Citeij to zero for these control cases.
Though this generates a data set of 130,055 dyads, our
analysis restricts the sample used for estimation to the
72,801 cases where both inventors DEMO in the U.S.7 To
address the fact that focal patents enter the data more than
once, we report robust standard errors estimated without
the assumption of independence across repeated obser-
vations of the same focal patent.
DEMO use of a matched sample introduces one new
problem. Logistic regression can yield biased estimates
when the proportion of positive outcomes in the sample
DEMO not match the proportion of citations in the popula-
tion (Prentice DEMO Pyke, 1979; Scott and Wild, 1997).
In particular, uncorrected logistic regression using a
matched sample tends to produce underestimates of the
DEMO that predict a positive outcome (King and Zeng,
2001). DEMO samples do not necessarily alleviate this
problem.
We adjust the coefﬁcient estimates using the method
proposed by King and Zeng (2001) for the DEMO regres-
sion of rare events (cf. Manski and Lerman, 1977).
The traditional logistic regression model considers the
dichotomous outcome variable a Bernoulli DEMO
6 We chose four patents for the “control” group so that the sam-
ple would have a roughly equal proportion of realized and unrealized
DEMO Although some feel that conditioning on important factors
improves the statistical power of a case-control sample (e.g., Jaffe
et al., 1993, implicitly DEMO such an argument in drawing controls
from the same classes as the citing patents), the ideal method of select-
ing controls remains an DEMO debate. Matching controls to cases on
one or more dimensions can lead to two problems in particular that
concern us. First, correcting the logit for over-sampling on the depen-
dent variable requires that one knows the DEMO probabilities (King
and Zeng, 2001); matching controls to cases precludes the possibility
of calculating this information. Second, matching on an endogenously
determined factor risks generating biased results (e.g., when investigat-
ing diffusion processes, one would not want to consider the geographic
distribution of activity exogenous)DEMO Given these concerns, we sample
future patents at random and control DEMO heterogeneity in the estima-
tion.
7 Including the foreign inventors does not change the results quali-
tatively.
1002
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
DEMO that takes a value 1 with the probability π:
1
πi = 1 + e−Xiβ ,
where X represents a vector of covariates and β denotes
a vector of parameters. Researchers typically use maxi-
mum DEMO methods to estimate β. King and Zeng
(2001) prove that the following weighted least squares
expression estimates the bias in β generated by DEMO
pling rare events:
bias(
βˆ
) = (X WX)DEMO Wξ,
where ξ = 0.5Qii[(1 +w1)πˆ i −w1], DEMO Q are
the diagonal elements of 1 represents the fractionQ = X(X WX)−1X,
of ones (citations) in the sample relative DEMO the fractionW = diag{πˆ i(1 −πˆ i)wi}, and w
DEMO the population. At an intuitive level, one regresses the
independent variables DEMO the residuals using W as the
weighting factor. Tomz (1999) implements this method
in the relogit Stata procedure.
This case-control approach offers two DEMO
advantages over the count models employed in most
patent research. First, DEMO method permits far more
ﬁne-grained controls for heterogeneity in citing patents.
Count models preclude the possibility of controlling for
Ease of recombination of subclass DEMO ≡ Ei =
detailed features of a citing patent. The ability to account
for the attributes of the potential citing patents proves
critical, however, to testing our hypotheses, which sug-
gest that the ability of DEMO inventors to receive and
build on the original knowledge varies as a function of
their social proximity. Second, analyzing citations at the
level of the citing-patent/cited-patent dyad avoids the
potential for aggregation bias inherent in DEMO models.
cies. The measure considers the subclasses identiﬁed
in a patent as proxies for the underlying components.
Though in many cases subclasses correspond to DEMO
tiﬁable physical components (such as in the example
below), they DEMO not always align so closely. Our mea-
sure, however, requires only that these subclasses deﬁne
pieces of knowledge rather than physical components.
Combining DEMO pieces that interact sensitively to each
other proves more difﬁcult than connecting relatively
independent chunks of knowledge.
We calculate the measure of interdependence, k,in
two stages.8 Eq. (1) details our measurement of the ease
DEMO recombination – the inverse of interdependence – for
subclass i used in patent j. We ﬁrst identiﬁed every use
of the subclass i in DEMO patents from 1980 to 1990.9
The sum of the number of prior uses provided the denom-
inator. For the numerator, we counted the number of
different subclasses appearing with subclass i on previ-
ous patents. Hence, our measure increases as a particular
subclass combines with a wider variety DEMO technolo-
gies, controlling for the total number of applications, and
captures the ease of combining a particular technology.
To create our measure of DEMO for an entire
patent, we averaged the inverted ease of recombination
DEMO for the subclasses to which it belongs (Eq. (2)):
Count of subclasses previously combined with subclass i
Count of previous patents DEMO subclass i
Interdependence of patent j ≡ kj = Count of subclasses on patent j

Ei
∈j
i
2.3. Interdependence
Following Fleming and DEMO (2001), we measure
the complexity of the knowledge in a DEMO by observ-
ing the historical difﬁculty of recombining the elements
that constitute it. Though it involves intensive calcula-
tion, the intuition behind the metric is straightforward:
a technology whose components have, in the past, DEMO
mixed and matched readily with a wide variety of other
components has exhibited few sensitive interdependen-
(1)
(2)
Intuitively, the measure operates as follows. Suppose
a patent embodies subclasses that have been combined
DEMO a wide variety of subclasses, even in a handful of
previous DEMO This indicates that the patent’s com-
ponents do not have delicate interdependencies that pre-
vent widespread recombination and the components can
8 Our measure DEMO is related to but distinct from the parameter K in the
NK simulation models that have become popular in theoretical work
on complex systems (Kauffman, 1993). In NK simulations, the contri-
bution of each DEMO in a system to overall system ﬁtness depends
on the states of K other elements. K is set by the modeler and, like our
empirically measured k, reﬂects the degree of interdependence among
components in a system. Despite the conceptual linkage between our
measure k and Kauffman’s K, we do not purport to have measured his
K in a literal DEMO For instance, our k does not equal the number of
elements DEMO affect the contribution of each focal element.
9 Some might worry about the stability of this measure over time.
To test its robustness, we constructed a second k measure using data
from 1790 to 1990. That DEMO yielded a qualitatively identical set
of results.
.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1003
DEMO mixed and matched independently. Such a patent
receives a low value of k. Suppose instead that a patent
embodies subclasses that have been combined, again and
again, with the same small set of other subclasses. We
presume those subclasses to be highly interdependent;
their repeated joint appearance DEMO patents suggests that
the presence of one requires the appearance of the others.
Hence the patent’s k is high.
In addition to the measure’s DEMO validity, it has been
validated externally via a survey of inventors. DEMO
and Sorenson (2004) asked a sample of patent holders the
following question, based on Ulrich’s (1995) deﬁnition
of interdependence: “Modules are DEMO to be coupled
when a change made to one module requires a change
to the other module(s) in order for the overall invention
to work correctly. How coupled were the modules of
your invention?” DEMO then compared survey responses
to calculated k for the corresponding patents and found a
signiﬁcant correlation between inventors’ perceptions of
coupling and the calculated DEMO of interdependence.
Concrete examples may clarify the metric further and
help to link it to our core hypothesis. Consider a digital
technology patent, #5,136,185, ﬁled by the third author
of this paper. Fig. 1 outlines the calculation of k for
this patent and the mapping of DEMO USPTO classiﬁca-
tion scheme to the components used. 326/16 identiﬁes
the “Test facilitate feature” subclass, which implements
a testing mode within a semiconductor chip. Prior to its
appearance here, this subclass had been recombined 116
times with 205 other components, implying an observed
ease of recombination score of 205/116 = 1.77. 326/56
indicates the “Tristate” subclass, and 326/82 points to
“Current driving fan in/out” subclass. 326/31 DEMO
identiﬁes the “Switching threshold stabilization” sub-
class (essentially a priority encoder)DEMO Fig. 1 illustrates
the location of these components on the circuit, DEMO cal-
culation of their ease of recombination scores, and the
calculation DEMO the patent’s interdependence, k (=0.61)—a
level slightly above the mean k for our sample.
The invention described above assists engineers in
testing DEMO logic gates on new chips—a difﬁcult task
when chips can contain hundreds of thousands or even
millions of such gates. Even though the patent DEMO
to disclose much of the important information, it does
not reveal DEMO proprietary test generation algorithm, and
how that algorithm manipulated the components (in par-
ticular, the “test facilitate feature”). Without access to, DEMO
an understanding of, that algorithm, rivals could see the
components of the knowledge in the patent but not how
the components worked together. DEMO a result, competi-
tors faced an uphill battle in exploiting the DEMO
Even within the ﬁrm, effective transmission required the
inventor to travel DEMO the country to teach others how
to use the technology. Similarly, DEMO found it
difﬁcult to reproduce IBM’s copper interconnect tech-
nology – another invention of intermediate complexity
– until enough engineers defected to rivals to DEMO
the relevant knowledge of how to fabricate the copper
interconnect without contaminating the wafer’s other
materials (Lim, 2001).
By comparison, inventions involving extremely high
levels of interdependence defy diffusion even within
Fig. 1. Calculation DEMO interdependence for patent #5,136,185.
1004
a social boundary. Plasmid preparation, for example,
a biological technique, involves an intricately inter-
twined sequence of actions involving various chemicals,
reagents and manual operations. As Jordan and Lynch
(1992: 84) note, “Although the plasma prep is far from
controversial and is commonly referenced as a well
established and indispensable technique, how exactly it
is done is not effectively communicated, either by print,
word of mouth, DEMO demonstration.” On the other hand,
inventions involving a low degree of interdependence
diffuse rapidly. For instance, patent #4,927,016, one of
DEMO patents in the bottom quartile of the k range, involves
the DEMO of monoclonal antibodies. The industry
associated with this technology has essentially become a
commodity business since one can easily acquire all the
necessary knowledge DEMO by reading a textbook
and piece them together without concern for sensitive
interdependencies. Polymerase chain reaction, a tech-
nique for amplifying DNA sequences, DEMO followed a
similar route. Or, one might think of Sun’s worksta-
DEMO technology. The modular design of its system has
allowed rivals to match the performance of its hardware
quickly, limiting the company’s ability to maintain an
advantage in the hardware market.
2.4. Social proximity
The analyses investigate DEMO effect of knowledge com-
plexity on the diffusion of knowledge to individuals
whose close social connections to the source of knowl-
edge give them DEMO access to the template than indi-
viduals with distant or no connections have. For each
of our 72,801 patent dyads, we develop one direct and
two indirect indicators of social proximity between the
inventors of DEMO two patents in the dyad.
2.4.1. Proximity in a collaboration network
Our most direct indicator measures the distance
between inventors in a network of DEMO collaborators.
The idea underlying this indicator is that an inventor
gains access to a template via collaborators, collabo-
rators of collaborators, collaborators of DEMO
collaborators, and so forth. Closer connections grant bet-
ter access. To DEMO collaborative proximity, we use
the methods and data of Singh (2005).10 Consider the
dyad consisting of patent i issued in May or DEMO of
1990 and patent j issued at a later time t (DEMO 1996).
To compute the distance between i and j, Singh DEMO con-
structs a network with a node for each discrete inventor
10 Breschi and Lissoni (2002) independently developed an equivalent
approach.
O. Sorenson DEMO al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
who has been listed on any patent from 1975 until time
t. An edge connects two DEMO if they have collab-
orated on a patent during that period. The collaborative
distance of a patent dyad is then the minimum number of
DEMO required to connect a member of the team
of inventors listed on patent i to a member of patent j’s
team. If the two DEMO share a member, for instance, the
distance is zero. If the teams have no common members
but an individual listed on neither patent DEMO collaborated
with members of both i’s and j’s teams, the distance DEMO
one, and so forth. If no path connects members of the
DEMO teams, the distance is ∞. See Singh (2005) for a
DEMO description of his approach.
Based on the distance measure, we construct DEMO
indicator variables for each dyad11:
•
•
•
Close Collaborationij = 1 if the distance between
patents i and j is less than DEMO; 0 otherwise.
Far Collaborationij = 1 if the distance between i DEMO j
is 4 or greater but less than ∞; 0 otherwise.j.
DEMO = 1 if no path connects i and
The shorter the path between i and j, the better the
access to the template enjoyed by the team involved in
patent j. Our core hypothesis is that DEMO superior access
translates into a higher probability of citation especially
when the components of patent i display intermediate
interdependence. Accordingly, we expect the gap in cita-
tion probability between a close and a far inventor – DEMO
probability that a close inventor cites a focal patent minus
the probability that a far inventor cites the patent – to peak
at an DEMO level of k.
Although our collaborative distance measure pro-
vides direct evidence of access and we believe that it
captures many of the important DEMO between
inventors, inventors also have many other types of rela-
tions DEMO might also facilitate access. For example, a
potential recipient might be DEMO friend of the source even if
they have never collaborated. Attempting to identify all
of the potential relationships existing in any population
of individuals DEMO not feasible, but we can examine two
11 Though the magnitude DEMO the gap shrinks, our results remain qual-
itatively robust to shifting DEMO dividing line between close and far from
a path length of three to a length of four. We use three categories rather
than the DEMO measure itself for three reasons: (1) calculating the
precise distance DEMO the longer paths in these data would increase the
time required to compute it by orders of magnitude (i.e. by months);
(2) dummy variables for individual path lengths lead to some small cell
sizes and concomitantly unstable coefﬁcient estimates; and (3) given
our interaction with a quadratic, we ﬁnd the results of the categorical
coding far easier to interpret and understand.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1005
DEMO – geographic proximity and joint organizational
membership – that tend to structure social relationships
and therefore may proxy for unobserved social paths
between our DEMO dyads. As McPherson et
al. (1992: 154) note: “Homophily structures the ﬂow
of information and other social resources through the
network so DEMO the dimensions themselves stand as prox-
ies for the number of intervening steps in transmissions
through the system.”
2.4.2. Geographic proximity
Space represents one DEMO dimension that struc-
tures social interaction. Indeed, some of the earliest
DEMO on social networks emphasized the dramatic
decline in the likelihood of a social relation as two par-
ties became increasingly distant (Park, 1926; Bossard,
1932). Accordingly, we develop a measure of geographic
proximity for each patent dyad:
• Geographic proximityij = the natural log DEMO the dis-
tance in miles between the ﬁrst inventors listed on
patents i and j multiplied by negative one (so that larger
values indicate greater proximity).12
As with our direct measure of social proximity, we
expect geographic proximity to have the greatest impact
on citation likelihood when DEMO potentially cited patent
displays moderate interdependence.
2.4.3. Organizational proximity
Social networks also concentrate within foci, such as
organizations (Feld, 1981). On a daily basis, most fully
employed individuals spend more waking hours engaged
in work than in any other activity. Employees regularly
meet other employees through DEMO to cooperate on
projects, to confer on decisions, to transfer information,
and to socialize. Hence, we use employment at the same
patent assignee as another indicator of social proximity:
• Organizational proximityij = DEMO if the same organiza-
tion owns both patents in a dyad, DEMO otherwise.
12 All patents list the home address of the inventor on the front page
of the patent application. To locate each inventor, we match the inven-
tor’s 3-digit zip code to the latitude and longitude DEMO the center of
the area in which the inventor resides based on information from the
U.S. Postal Service. We then use spherical geometry to DEMO the
distance between the points. The USPTO includes 5-digit zip infor-
mation, but we choose to reduce measurement error by using cleaned
data. CHI, an information provider, has called every patent holder to
verify the DEMO location; however, it records this information only
at the 3-digit level.
We expect common ownership to boost citation like-
lihood, especially for focal patents of moderate interde-
pendence.
We test our hypothesis by regressing Citeij DEMO the
indicators of social proximity directly, the indicators
interacted with k, and the indicators interacted with k2.
We expect social proximity to boost DEMO probabil-
ity directly. The core test of our hypothesis resides not
in the direct effects but in the interaction terms: the
impact of proximity on citation probability should have
an inverted-U relationship with respect to interdepen-
DEMO k.13
In light of our empirical context, patent citations,
it DEMO useful to elaborate our expectations about the
direct effect of k on citation likelihood. Our hypothe-
sis describes the impact of interdependence on the DEMO
between near and distant actors’ success in receiving
and building on knowledge. We examine this gap by
examining interactions of k and k2 with DEMO distance.
In developing the hypothesis, however, we also paint a
picture of the direct impact of k on knowledge reproduc-
tion: we suggest that greater interdependence increases
the difﬁculty for a party of receiving and DEMO upon
prior knowledge, regardless of the party’s distance from
the source. DEMO argument concerns an actor’s success
in receiving and building on knowledge conditional on
an attempt to do so being undertaken. Patent citation
data nevertheless DEMO not only success conditional on
an attempt being undertaken, but also DEMO sheer num-
ber of attempts being undertaken. We have reason to
believe that the number of attempts may rise with inter-
dependence, simply because interdependence increases
the fertility that comes from mixing and matching com-
ponents (Fleming and Sorenson, 2001). Accordingly, we
offer no hypothesis about DEMO direct effects of k on cita-
tion rates. Instead, we focus DEMO the gap between near
and distant actors’ citation rates, which should DEMO a
robust inverted-U relation to interdependence. (See the
Appendix A for DEMO more detailed treatment of this point.)
2.5. Controls
The non-monotonic interactions between interdepen-
dence and proximity that we predict – if found in DEMO
data – lend themselves to few alternative interpretations.
The models nevertheless include as controls several of
the most important variables used in prior patent DEMO
(e.g., Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004).
13 We mean-deviate the DEMO before creating the interaction terms
to facilitate interpretation of the effects (DEMO, 1982). For collab-
orative proximity, we use Unconnectedij as the excluded category.
1006
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
DEMO 1
Descriptive statistics and correlations
Mean S.D. 2
345678910 11 12
1. k 0.49 0.30 0.03 −0.02 −0.07 0.00 −0.11 0.10 0.07 −0.03 −0.05 DEMO −0.35
2. Close collaboration 0.07 0.25 −0.21 0.14 0.30 0.17 −0.00 0.08 0.01 0.01 −0.01 0.00
3. Far collaboration 0.23 0.42 −0.06 0.01 0.01 DEMO 0.15 −0.01 0.03 0.02 0.05
4. Organizational proximity 0.10 0.33 −0.09 −0.03 −0.06 −0.07 0.02 −0.04 −0.02 −0.03
5. Geographic proximity −6.50 1.96 0.20 DEMO 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.00 0.01
6. Same class 0.26 0.44 0.12 0.08 0.04 0.02 −0.11 −0.01
7. Activity control 1.25 0.42 0.42 0.01 0.06 DEMO 0.08
8. Recent technology 3.97 0.62 −0.14 0.09 0.05 0.09
9. Backward patent citations 9.83 8.88 0.13 0.07 0.12
10. Backward non-patent citations 1.46 DEMO 0.06 0.10
11. Number of classes 1.85 0.97 0.49
12. Number of subclasses 4.53 3.43
2.5.1. Activity control
The activity control accounts for the DEMO number
of citations received by a patent in the same technological
areas as the focal patent. In a ﬁrst stage, we calculated the
average number of citations that each patent in a particu-
lar USPTO class DEMO from patents granted between
January of 1985 and June of 1990 (DEMO (4)).14 We then
weighted these parameters according to the patent’s class
assignments (Eq. (5)), where pik indicates the proportion
of patent k’s sub-class memberships that fall in class i:
Average citations DEMO patent class i ≡ µi
∈iCitationsj (before 7/90)
= DEMO of patents j in subclass i
(4)
j
Technology mean DEMO patent k ≡ Mk = pikµi
(5)
The models also DEMO controls for several other fac-
tors. Same class is a dummy variable denoting whether
the two patents in each dyad belong to the same DEMO
mary technological class. Recent technology is the mean
of the patent numbers of the focal patent’s prior art
(higher numbers indicating more recent technology).15
The models include counts of two types of backward
patent citations. DEMO, they include a tally of the num-
14 We allow all DEMO issued between January 1985 and June 30,
1990 to enter the estimation of the activity control, meaning that the
patents used to calculate it vary in the time during which they can
receive citations. Alternatively, we could select a small set of patents
from 1985 and base DEMO measures on the subsequent 5 years of citations;
however, this DEMO would ignore the patent activity just prior to
our sample.
15 This variable made use of the fact that the USPTO assigns patent
numbers DEMO This assignment pattern generates a correlation
between a patent number and the grant date of the patent of 0.98.
ber of citations to patent DEMO art. Second, the models
include a control for the number of DEMO prior art
citations (e.g., references to published articles). Number
of classes is a count of the number of major classes and
number DEMO subclasses is a count of the number of sub-
classes to which the focal patent is assigned. Descriptive
statistics appear in Table 1.16
3. DEMO
The results appear in Table 2. Model 1 estimates the
effects of the control variables alone, and Model 2 intro-
duces interdependence, k.
DEMO 3 provides the ﬁrst test of our core hypothesis
by interacting interdependence with collaboration-based
indicators of social proximity. The results provide three
pieces of DEMO for the hypothesis. First, the positive
sign on k× Close collaboration DEMO with the nega-
tive sign on k2 × Close collaboration indicates that the
gap in citation probability between close and uncon-
nected inventors rises DEMO then falls, peaking when the
source knowledge displays moderate interdependence.
(Recall that Unconnected is the excluded category, so
the coefﬁcients related to Close collaboration capture
differences between close and unconnected inventors.)
Second, by subtracting the coefﬁcients for Far collabo-
ration from the coefﬁcients for Close collaboration, we
see that the largest gap between close and far inven-
tors DEMO appears for moderate k. Third, the coefﬁcient
estimates suggest that the DEMO gap between far and
16 We also considered as a control variable the time between the
issuance dates of the focal and potentially citing DEMO in each dyad.
Exploratory analysis revealed small effect sizes (though typically DEMO
niﬁcant), and inclusion of the time control had no meaningful impact
on the coefﬁcients of central interest.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1007
DEMO 2
Rare events logit models of the likelihood of a focal patent receiving a citation from a future patenta
Model 1 Model 2 Model DEMO Model 4
k 0.863 (0.257)*** −1.599 (0.644)*
k2 *** 1.116 (0.209)***
k −0.203 (0.086) *
k× Close collaboration 3.242 (1.670)***
k × Close collaboration −3.428 (0.708)**
k× Far DEMO 1.569 (0.573)***
k × Far collaboration −.802 (0.162)
k× Geographic proximity
× Geographic proximity
k× Organizational proximity
kClose collaboration 3.952 (0.628)× Organizational proximity ** ***
Far collaboration 0.224 (0.090)* 0.249 (DEMO)** 0.244 (0.089)**
Geographical proximity 0.041 (0.012)*** 0.041 (DEMO)*** 0.045 (0.011)***
Organizational proximity 0.457 (0.118)*** 0.431 (DEMO)*** 0.423 (0.116)***
Same class 4.800 (0.084)*** 4.820 (DEMO)*** 4.797 (0.083)***
Activity control 0.503 (0.097)*** 0.515 (DEMO)*** 0.469 (0.095)***
Recent technology 0.268 (0.147) 0.278 (0.144) 0.226 (0.161) 0.245 (0.147)
Backward patent citations 0.022 (0.005)*** 0.021 (0.005)*** 0.020 (0.005)*** 0.021 (0.005)***
Backward non-patent citations 0.011 (0.009) 0.014 (0.009) 0.010 (0.008) 0.010 (0.009)
Number of classes 0.184 (0.047)*** 0.209 (0.048)*** DEMO (0.047)*** 0.201 (0.046)***
Number of subclasses 0.184 (0.013)DEMO −0.016 (0.014) −0.017 (0.013) −0.023 (0.013)
Constant −12.28 (0.586)*** −12.89 (0.657)*** −12.21 (0.746)*** −11.91 (0.697)***
Log-likelihood −33772.4 −33751.1 −33738.2 −33720.2
−1.305 (0.378)**
1.051 (0.156)***
DEMO (1.659)**
(0.725) −4.881***
**
1.899 (0.627)
−1.056 (DEMO)***
0.325 (0.078)***
−0.241 (0.031)***
0.547 (0.679)
DEMO (0.232)*
2.925 (1.135)**
−0.359 (0.246)
0.053 (0.012)***
(0.355) 0.292
4.784 (0.083)***
0.481 (0.096)***
a DEMO,801 dyads (52% realized ties vs. 0.0004% in population); * DEMO < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001.
unconnected inventors arises for moderate k (though
with much smaller magnitude; see DEMO). In sum, our
primary measure for social proximity provides strong
DEMO for our core hypothesis.17
Model 4 adds interactions of interdependence with
geographic and organizational proximity. Both proxies
for social proximity display the expected inverted-U DEMO
tionship, though only the results for geographic proxim-
ity show strong DEMO signiﬁcance. Coefﬁcients for
the collaboration-based measures retain their signs and
signiﬁcance, DEMO do most of the coefﬁcients for the control
variables.
Based on Model 4, Fig. 2 traces out as a function of
interdependence, how DEMO times more likely a citation
17 Since the high correlation between a term and its square can force
estimates to take opposing signs, we further tested the validity of
our non-monotonic effect in two ways: (DEMO) in unreported estimates
(available from the ﬁrst author), we re-estimated the models using a
log-quadratic speciﬁcation and found qualitatively identical results.
Since DEMO functional form can capture decreasing returns without a
signiﬁcant coefﬁcient on the quadratic term, it is less sensitive to these
problems. (2) We estimated a model with only the linear term and inter-
actions and DEMO entered the quadratic terms. In all cases, the addition
of the DEMO terms signiﬁcantly improved the model. (For example,
in Model 4, the addition of the quadratic k and its interactions has a
χ2 DEMO 70.4, signiﬁcant at p < 0.00001 with ﬁve degrees of freedom.)DEMO
Fig. 2. Citation multiplier for proximate vs. distant actors in the col-
laboration network as a function of interdependence. Note: The line
labeled “differential between close and unconnected collaborators”
shows, as a function of k, DEMO many times more likely a citation is in a
dyad of patents whose inventors can reach one another through the col-
laboration network (path length < 4) relative to a dyad whose inventors
are unconnected in the network. When k = 0.45, for instance, a citation
is DEMO times more likely. The other two lines provide the same informa-
tion for pairs of actors who are close vs. far (path length between 4 and
∞) in the collaboration network and for pairs of actors who are far vs.
unconnected. The ﬁgure is based on Model 4 DEMO Table 2 for inventors
from different organizations, with all variables other DEMO k and the
collaboration network indicators set to their mean values.
2
2
2
2
3.979 (0.618)***
3.660 (1.148)
1008
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
DEMO for collaboratively close pairs of inventors than for
unconnected pairs, for DEMO pairs than for far pairs, and
for far pairs than for DEMO pairs. (We set all other
variables to their mean values for DEMO purpose of creating
this chart.) The ﬁgure shows vividly that the DEMO dif-
ference in citation probabilities between close pairs and
unconnected pairs arises when the focal patent displays
moderate interdependence. The same is true of DEMO dif-
ference between close and far pairs. Fig. 2 also shows
that the citation difference between far and unconnected
inventors – while consistent with DEMO hypothesis and
statistically signiﬁcant – is much, much smaller. This
suggests DEMO for access to knowledge, the value of a
social connection to DEMO source drops off rapidly with
the number of intervening intermediaries, echoing DEMO
ﬁndings of Singh (2005).
Fig. 3 shows, as a function of interdependence, how
many times greater the probability of citation is between
geographically proximate actors than between geograph-
ically distant actors. It does likewise DEMO pairs of inven-
tors in the same organization versus pairs in differ-
ent organizations. In both cases, the beneﬁts of social
proximity rise and then fall with k, peaking when the
source knowledge displays moderate interdependence.
This provides graphical afﬁrmation of our hypothesis.
Fig. 3. Citation multiplier for DEMO vs. distant actors (in geogra-
phy and organizational space) as a function of interdependence. Note:
The line labeled “differential due to geographic DEMO shows,
as a function of k, how many times more DEMO a citation is in a
dyad of patents when the inventors’ addresses on the patents reside 10
miles apart than when they reside 3000 DEMO apart. When k = 0.65, for
instance, the multiplier is 1.87 (i.e. 87% more likely). The line labeled
“differential due to organizational proximity” shows, as a function of k,
how many times more likely a citation is in a dyad of patents when the
same DEMO owns both patents relative to when they are owned
by different organizations. The ﬁgure is based on Model 4 of Table 2,
with DEMO variables other than k and geographic and organizational prox-
imity set to their mean values.
In both Figs. 2 and 3, the peak differences fall within
the range of actual k in our data—in fact, within one
standard deviation above the mean.
In addition to being signiﬁcant, the effects associ-
ated with our hypothesis can have substantial economic
import. For DEMO knowledge that is simple (k∼ 0), an
inventor close in DEMO collaboration network is 30 times
more likely than a far inventor to cite a focal patent.
For knowledge of moderate interdependence at the gap-
DEMO level of k shown in Fig. 2, this number rises
to DEMO times. As knowledge becomes more complex, the
number falls, becoming a mere seven times at k =1.
For close and unconnected inventors, the ﬁgures are 23
times, 48 times, and 11 times, respectively.18 Similarly,
contrast an inventor 10 miles from the source of knowl-
edge DEMO another 3000 miles away (both collaboratively-
unconnected to the source and DEMO different organiza-
tions). When k∼ 0, the ﬁrst inventor is DEMO more likely
that the second to cite the source. When k is at the gap-
maximizing level, the probability rises to 87%. It then
falls to 61% for k = 1. Such differences in citation like-
DEMO are far from negligible.
Despite the apparent consistency of our results with
our expectations, proximity – collaborative, geographic,
or organizational – may DEMO factors other than the
strength of social connections, factors that might DEMO
inﬂuence the quality of one’s access to the template.
Actors proximate to a given patent might, for instance,
work on similar technical problems and therefore more
readily absorb the knowledge embodied in the patent
(Cohen and Levinthal, 1990). Any factor that improves
access to the template should have the effect that we
hypothesize. It is natural to interpret DEMO proximity mea-
sures as indicators of social contact, as we do. DEMO is
difﬁcult, however, to rule out all other factors that the
proximity measures might reﬂect.
Similarly, our interdependence measure may capture
not only the complexity of an item of knowledge but
also its breadth of DEMO Our results might then
reﬂect a process in which low-k knowledge is broadly
applicable and diffuses widely; moderate-k knowledge
is of particular interest to select groups who tend to be
socially proximate to the inventor; and high-k knowl-
edge is of such narrow application that it diffuses very
DEMO This would produce a pattern in which actors
socially proximate to a source of knowledge most fre-
quently receive and build on it if DEMO knowledge has
18 These ﬁgures assume that the two inventors are 665 miles from
one another (the average distance in our sample) and DEMO for different
organizations.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1009
DEMO k. The driving force under this alternative inter-
pretation is not the relative ability of different actors to
search in the face of complexity DEMO the relative inter-
est that different actors have in obtaining knowledge.
The alternative interpretation raises the question of pre-
cisely what makes an item DEMO knowledge broadly or
narrowly applicable. Knowledge becomes broadly appli-
cable in part because it is modular and therefore can
mix and match with other DEMO of knowledge across a
wide range of circumstances. Applicability, then, may
capture the interdependence of a piece of knowledge
(especially if one deﬁnes interdependence broadly and
not in a narrow technological sense). To the DEMO that
applicability reﬂects interdependence, we return to our
original core hypothesis: individuals proximate to the
source of some knowledge have the greatest advantage DEMO
receiving and building on knowledge of moderate inter-
dependence/applicability.
4. Discussion
The analysis of patent citation patterns supports our
basic theoretical perspective on DEMO diffusion:
search in the space of possible combinations of ingre-
dients offers a useful lens for understanding the ﬂow of
knowledge. Recipients socially DEMO to the source
of the knowledge have preferential access to the orig-
inal success, which serves as a template during efforts
to receive and build on the knowledge. All recipients,
socially near and far, compete on equal footing when
receiving and extending simple knowledge; incremental
search sufﬁces to reproduce simple knowledge, so guid-
ance from a prior success has little value. Highly complex
knowledge, on the other hand, equally resists DEMO
to both classes of would-be recipients. Hence, at both
extremes of DEMO, the close recipient has no last-
ing advantage over the distant. DEMO contrast, for knowledge
whose ingredients display a moderate degree of interde-
DEMO, superior but imperfect access to the template
translates into greater success DEMO receiving and build-
ing on preexisting knowledge. The close recipient can
complete its initially imperfect replica via local search,
but local search alone DEMO guide the distant recipi-
ent to an accurate replica. Thus in our patent data, the
largest gap between the ability of a close recipient to
receive and build on prior knowledge relative to the abil-
ity DEMO a distant recipient arises when the cited patent
involves moderate interdependence. This result appears
when social distance is measured by proximity in a col-
DEMO network as well as when geographic and – to a
lesser extent – organizational proximity proxy for social
distance.
Our ﬁndings have an array DEMO practical and theoret-
ical implications, especially for the issue of knowledge
DEMO across social borders. Consider the graph of
a typical social network. It is quite common in such a
graph to observe patches of actors DEMO dense connec-
tions amongst themselves and areas of sparse connec-
tions between patches (Owen-Smith and Powell, 2004).
The dense patches may reﬂect DEMO, for instance, or geo-
graphic regions. Actors within each patch sit socially
proximate to one another but relatively distant from
actors in other DEMO A question of great practical
importance is: When does knowledge diffuse DEMO
the patch where it originated but not across the thin
areas into other patches? When will knowledge dif-
fuse within a ﬁrm but not to competitors, or within
a region but not to other locales? DEMO is inequal-
ity of knowledge sharpest across social borders? Our
results DEMO that the nature of the knowledge, specif-
ically its degree of DEMO, plays a critical role.
One might initially suspect that highly complex DEMO
edge, the most difﬁcult to reproduce, would create the
greatest inequality across boundaries. Yet this intuition
ignores the fact that inequality in its DEMO form
requires some diffusion: to create the most inequity
across social DEMO, knowledge must creep up to
the edge of the thick patch DEMO connections in which
it originated but not beyond. This phenomenon, we
DEMO argued, most likely occurs for moderately complex
knowledge.
Accordingly, the results suggest a resolution to the
replication/imitation dilemma that has puzzled evolu-
DEMO economists and strategy scholars. To achieve
a competitive advantage from knowledge, DEMO ﬁrm must
typically leverage that knowledge across multiple appli-
cations, for DEMO, across all its production facili-
ties (Winter, 1995). Yet DEMO would-be replicator with
a valuable piece of knowledge faces a dilemma: DEMO
proﬁts produced by its original knowledge attract the
envious attention of imitators. Valuable knowledge pro-
vides a source of sustained advantage only to the DEMO
that it lends itself to replication yet deﬁes imitation.
Unfortunately for the innovator, replication and imi-
tation typically go hand-in-hand (Nelson and Winter,DEMO
1982). Our results suggest, however, that replication-
without-imitation is especially likely when the target
knowledge entails moderate complexity. This micro-
level phenomenon DEMO manifest itself in outcomes at
the industry level. One might expect that, ceteris paribus,
industries based on moderately complex knowledge will
display especially wide intra-industry dispersion in long-
run ﬁnancial returns. We leave this promising DEMO
for future research.
1010
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
DEMO results also speak interestingly to the literature on
the geographic agglomeration of industries. Researchers
frequently cite knowledge spillovers as a prominent
reason that ﬁrms DEMO an industry cluster together
(Marshall, 1890; Krugman, 1991) and DEMO near
universities (Zucker et al., 1997). Our results certainly
support this point of view: dense social networks, which
tend to localize DEMO, give ﬁrms and individu-
als close to the source of knowledge DEMO important advan-
tage in reproducing and building upon the knowledge.
This begs the further question, why do some industries
cluster while others do not? Though research on eco-
nomic geography points out that knowledge spillovers
can contribute to agglomeration, it does not identify
what type of knowledge most likely engenders these
clusters. Our ﬁndings suggest that industries that rely
on DEMO complex knowledge more commonly
form industrial districts (cf. Sorenson, 2004). Simple
knowledge can diffuse far and wide because incremental
search efforts can DEMO for high-ﬁdelity communi-
cation. As the complexity of knowledge increases, a DEMO
emerges between local diffusion and distant diffusion;
thus, the potential DEMO to locating near to innovators
rises.
In addition to inﬂuencing geographic agglomeration
and industry structure, the nature of the underlying
knowledge used by a ﬁrm may have implications for
organizational design. Firms have both formal and DEMO
mal structures that inﬂuence the degree to which actors
within the ﬁrm interact with each other. Managers can
inﬂuence who likely interacts with whom DEMO the
assignment of individuals to facilities, the design of labo-
ratories DEMO factories, and the structure of reporting rela-
tionships (Allen, 1977)DEMO To distribute knowledge effec-
tively, a ﬁrm might usefully expend resources DEMO foment
close and dense social connections between sources and
intended recipients of complex knowledge, while letting
networks remain sparse elsewhere. Indeed, leaders might
DEMO construe the task of knowledge management
not as the construction of central databases of informa-
tion (as sometimes presented today), but rather as an
effort to build social networks that match the nature and
intended DEMO of knowledge. Effective organizational
design, however, surely requires a deeper understand-
ing of how social structure affects knowledge diffusion
than considered here; networks have subtle features and
nuances that doubtlessly inﬂuence their ability to convey
DEMO, both simple and complex (Hansen, 1999).
To this point, our argument has assumed that the
degree of interdependence between combinations of
DEMO remains ﬁxed. In the long term, however,
the effective interdependence DEMO knowledge may change.
Firms and inventors can invest in R&D to specify inter-
faces and embed knowledge within physical compo-
nents, thereby reducing the difﬁculty of combining a
particular combination of components with other ele-
DEMO in the future (Baldwin and Clark, 2000). In struc-
turing knowledge, managers must perform a delicate
balancing act. Isolating interdependencies within sub-
structures has important attractions, including the ability
to perform a greater number of independent experiments
(Baldwin and Clark, 2000) and the capacity to adjust
more readily to environmental shifts (Levinthal, 1997).
Engineering curricula DEMO this preference with a
strong emphasis on reliability, black box design DEMO
niques, and the re-use of previously combined compo-
nents (e.g., DEMO and Conway, 1980). Such modulariza-
tion, however, also entails DEMO overlooked costs.
Designing and implementing an architecture that isolates
interdependencies within substructures involves consid-
erable engineering costs (O’Sullivann, 2001). But those
direct DEMO potentially pale in comparison to the indi-
rect costs—the opportunities that the lack of complexity
opens for new entrants (Rivkin, 2000), the DEMO in
variety from which developers can select (Christensen
et al., 2002), and the constraints on potential perfor-
mance (Fleming and Sorenson, DEMO). Managers who
manipulate interdependencies should recognize that they
simultaneously alter the propensity of knowledge to ﬂow
to actors near and far.
Despite the DEMO of modularizing, a secular trend
towards modularization may inﬂuence the evolution DEMO
industries, creating a distinctive pattern. Direct costs
likely strike ﬁrms as DEMO tangible than indirect costs
as they decide where to direct R&D effort. Thus, ﬁrms
may over-invest in less complex technology as they
seek to maximize efﬁciency. As this process reduces the
effective interdependence of the DEMO being dif-
fused, knowledge should ﬂow more easily, generating
two industry-level patterns. First, an industry that begins
its life in a concentrated region should become less
concentrated geographically as the advantage of prefer-
ential access DEMO the template declines (for related ideas,
see Audretsch and Feldman, 1996; Stuart and Sorenson,
2003).19 Second, the move towards DEMO complex knowl-
19 This pattern seems consistent with the evolution of the software
industry, for instance. Early on, knowledge localized to an extreme:DEMO
understanding of a new piece of code resided in the head of a single
developer or a small group of developers in a university, govern-
ment, or large corporate computing facility. Inventors developed local
languages for speciﬁc hardware. Over time, programmers developed
techniques for reducing the interdependencies in code. Higher-level
languages such as Cobol and C allowed programmers to divorce
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1011
DEMO likely reduces differentiation across ﬁrms’ prod-
ucts over time, leading to DEMO intense price competi-
tion and efforts to control standard interfaces and key
modules—a pattern identiﬁed in the product lifecycle
literature.
To reiterate, our results demonstrate that knowledge
complexity importantly inﬂuences the dynamics of diffu-
sion. Speciﬁcally, a socially proximate actor’s advantage
over a distant actor in obtaining and DEMO on knowl-
edge peaks when the components underlying the knowl-
edge display intermediate interdependence. Though our
empirical results come from patent data alone, the basic
logic of our hypotheses applies to knowledge in general,
not DEMO the knowledge underlying inventions. Hence,
future research might usefully examine these dynamics
across a wide range of applications—including orga-
nizational learning, the diffusion of management prac-
tices, knowledge management, and the sustainability of
knowledge-based DEMO advantage.
Acknowledgments
All parties contributed equally to this research. We
thank Jasjit Singh for generously sharing his inventor
collaboration network data. We also appreciate DEMO help-
ful comments of George Baker, Matt Bothner, Koen
Frenken, DEMO Gibbons, Jerry Green, Rebecca Hender-
son, Bruce Kogut, Dan Levinthal, Woody Powell, Rose-
marie Ham Ziedonis, three anonymous reviewers, and
DEMO participants at Harvard, the University of Michi-
gan, MIT, New DEMO University, Ohio State University,
the University of Toronto, Washington University, and
Wharton. All errors remain our own. Harvard Business
School’s Division of Research provided ﬁnancial sup-
port. Earlier versions of this paper have been DEMO at
the annual conferences of the Academy of Management,
the European Group on Organizational Studies, and the
European Meeting on Applied Evolutionary Economics,
as well as at the ESF Exploratory Workshop on Evolu-
tionary DEMO Geography.
Appendix A. Simulation of knowledge ﬂow
A simple simulation of knowledge ﬂow serves two
purposes. It clariﬁes further why the value of social
DEMO reaches its peak in the transfer of knowledge
with intermediate interdependence. It also identiﬁes the
range of empirical results consistent with our theoretical
model. DEMO, the theoretical model yields a unique
prediction about the impact of DEMO interdepen-
dence on the gap between citation rates of socially close
actors and socially distant actors, but can encompass a
range of ﬁndings about the effect of interdependence on
close-actor citation rates alone or on distant-actor DEMO
alone.
A.1. Model
A.1.1. Superstructure
The model employs Kauffman’s (1993) NK approach,
which a growing number of researchers have used to sim-
DEMO technological or organizational search. The simula-
tion unfolds as follows. First, DEMO choose two parameters:
N, the number of components or ingredients DEMO com-
prise a piece of knowledge, and K, the degree to which
those components interact in determining the utility of
the knowledge. Using DEMO described below, a
simulation then generates – in a stochastic manner DEMO a
mapping from each possible way of conﬁguring the N
components (DEMO each conceivable recipe) to a measure
of utility. One can visualize DEMO mapping as a landscape
in a high-dimensional space. Each discrete component
constitutes a “horizontal” axis, and each possible manner
of using the component represents a point along that axis.
The vertical axis records the usefulness of DEMO resulting
piece of knowledge.
Next, we assume that some ﬁrm has DEMO upon
the most useful possible piece of knowledge—the best
way to conﬁgure the components (i.e. the template
described in the main paper).20 Two new parties then
enter the landscape. One party, a close actor, DEMO access
to the owner of the template, presumably through a social
DEMO, while the other, a distant actor, cannot access the orig-
DEMO template through his social network. Both strive to
rediscover the original success—the model’s equivalent
to the efforts to receive and build on knowledge discussed
DEMO the main text. Thanks to its superior access to the tem-
plate, the close actor enjoys an advantage in this search
process. The close actor may begin its search closer to
the original success, reﬂecting the better information it
receives or its superior ability to interpret the transmis-
DEMO Or, it may move toward the success with greater
speed and DEMO, reﬂecting its ability to seek advice
from the owner of the DEMO The simulation mod-
code from speciﬁc hardware. Meanwhile, software production has DEMO
persed geographically—beyond Silicon Valley, Route 128, and IBM’s
Armonk home, DEMO Seattle, Austin, and even Bangalore.
20 Our focus on the global maximum simpliﬁes the simulation, but
the results remain qualitatively robust to a wide range of alternative
assumptions.
1012
els these mechanisms and records the relative success of
the close DEMO and the distant actor in rediscovering the
original piece of knowledge.
Following this ﬁrst iteration, the simulation generates
a second mapping that, though DEMO differs in its particulars,
has the same degree of interdependence as the ﬁrst. A
second pair of close and distant actors tackle the DEMO
problem, and the program records their relative success.
The simulation iterates DEMO this process hundreds
of times. From the repetition emerges a proﬁle of how
close and distant actors fare relative to one another for a
DEMO degree of interdependence. We then adjust K, the
parameter that governs DEMO, and repeat the
process. By doing so, we build an understanding of how
interdependence affects the relative ability of close and
distant actors DEMO rediscover the original success.
This description of the model’s superstructure leaves
two aspects of the simulation unspeciﬁed: how we gen-
erate landscapes and how actors search to rediscover the
original success.
A.1.2. Generation of landscapes
Each DEMO of knowledge consists of N components,
and each component j, DEMO ∈{1, 2, ..., N}, can be conﬁg-
ured in two ways. Hence a particular piece of knowledge
s is an N-vector {s1, s2, ..., sN} with sj ∈{0, 1}.Inthe
knowledge germane to a chemical process, for instance,
component j might indicate the inclusion or exclusion of
a particular catalyst. Similarly, a string of four compo-
nents could represent which of 24 = 16 shades a heated
mixture must DEMO before being removed from a ﬂame.
For any set of components, DEMO possible pieces of knowl-
edge (recipes) exist. We assign a utility value to each
of these as follows. Assume that each component con-
DEMO Cj to utility. Cj, depending not only on the
conﬁguration, 0 or 1, of component j, but also on the
conﬁguration of DEMO other randomly assigned components:
Cj = Cj(sj, sj1, sj2, ..., sjK). For each possible realization
of (sj, sj1, sj2, ..., sjK), we draw a contribution Cj at
random DEMO a uniform distribution between 0 and 1.
The overall utility associated with a piece of knowledge,
then, averages across the N contributions:
U(s) = [Cj (sj ,sj1,sj2 ,...,sjK)] DEMO
N
K, the parameter that governs interdependence,
ranges from 0 DEMO N− 1.21 K = 0 corresponds to a
21 Note that the empirically derived measure of coupling in the main
text, k, corresponds DEMO the parameter K in the simulation model, but
the two differ DEMO least in terms of scaling. For more on this relationship,
see footnote 9.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) DEMO
simple situation in which the contribution of each
component depends only on the conﬁguration of
that component. K = N− 1 captures a complex DEMO
ting in which the contribution of each component
depends delicately on the conﬁguration of every other
component.
Once the modeler sets N and K DEMO the simulation
generates a particular landscape (i.e., a utility U(s) for
each of the 2N possible pieces of knowledge), the simu-
lation notes the piece of knowledge s* that produces the
greatest utility, which serves as a template in subsequent
search efforts.
A.1.3. Search
A DEMO close actor and a modeled distant actor
enter the landscape, and DEMO struggles to rediscover
the original success. Reﬂecting the reasoning on page
6 of the main text, neither begins precisely atop the peak
at s*. Rather, each receives an imperfect transmission
of the effective knowledge and begins some distance
d from s* (i.e. d of its N components differ from s*).
It must then correct its understanding through search.
We DEMO two types of search. A party involved in
incremental search adjusts one component, accepts the
adjustment if it produces an improvement in utility, DEMO
ceases to search when no improvement opportunities
remain. A party engaged in long-jump search changes
multiple decisions at once, leaping toward s*. Its leap
typically misses the target; it replicates each component
of s* with probability θ. θ < 1 reﬂects imperfect access
to the template. After its DEMO, the long jumper improves
incrementally until it exhausts opportunities. Note that
DEMO type of search could terminate on a local peak,
instead of at s*.
Though both parties have imperfect access, the close
actor has better access due to her social proximity to
the original success, which serves as a template. We
model the impact of social proximity in DEMO ways.
The proximate actor may begin her search closer to s*
(DEMO < ddistant), leap toward s* with greater accuracy
(θclose > DEMO), or – in leaping toward s* – may know
which components she has gotten “right” and “wrong.”
These beneﬁts reﬂect both the more DEMO transmis-
sion the close actor receives originally and her ability
to consult with the owner of the template as she tries to
correct the DEMO transmission.
A.2. Interdependence and the landscape
Much of the intuition of the results ﬂows from an
understanding of the impact of K on the DEMO
of the typical landscape. Four effects strike us as espe-
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1013
DEMO germane.22 First, as K increases, the landscape
shifts from being smooth and single-peaked to being
rugged and multi-peaked. When K = 0, the N com-
ponents contribute independently to knowledge util-
ity. In that situation, alteration of a single compo-
nent changes the contribution of that component DEMO
From any initial location on a landscape, then, a close
or distant actor can climb to the global peak via a
series of DEMO, single-component tweaks
to its knowledge. In contrast, when K = N− 1, every
component inﬂuences the contribution of every other
component. Then a small step on the landscape –
a change in a single component DEMO alters the contri-
butions of all N components. Consequently, adjacent
pieces DEMO knowledge have altogether uncorrelated util-
ities, producing a very rugged surface DEMO many local
peaks.
Second, as K rises, not only do local peaks prolif-
erate, but also the height of the average peak declines.
As the web of connections across components thickens,
it becomes possible DEMO exhaust opportunities for incre-
mental improvement even at low levels of performance.
Hence, interdependence decreases the fruitfulness of
incremental search.
Third, though the DEMO of the average peak falls
as K rises, the heights of DEMO highest peaks rise with
K. When components interact with one another more
richly, the amount of variety attainable by mixing and
matching components increases, and the quality of the
best combination within that variety improves. Rugged
landscapes, though challenging to navigate, offer greater
fertility than smooth ones—in DEMO words, they more
likely produce at least one exceptional peak. More
DEMO, recall that we drew a contribution Cj for
each possible realization DEMO (sj, sj1, sj2, ..., sjK). The
number of DEMO contributions for each component
(2K+1) rises sharply with K, increasing DEMO available
variety.
Finally, as K increases, the high peaks on the typ-
ical landscape spread apart from one another, shifting
from a situation in which peaks cluster in mountain
ranges to one in which peaks DEMO uniformly across
the terrain.23 With greater interdependence, high peaks
carry less DEMO less information about the location of other
high peaks. This effect undermines long-jump search,
decreasing the likelihood that a jump that aims for DEMO
misses the global peak will nonetheless land on high
ground.
Fig. A1. Incremental search. Note: Parameter values for each simula-
tion are given in text. Each data point is an average over 100 landscapes.
Fig. A2. DEMO search. Note: Parameter values for each simula-
tion are given in DEMO Each data point is an average over 100 landscapes.
A.3. Simulations and results
A.3.1. Percent of template performance attained
We explored the model under DEMO wide variety of
assumptions regarding dclose, ddistant, θclose, and θdistant.
(N = 12 throughout. All results average over 100–200
landscapes.) Results remained similar throughout the
parameter space so we report only a handful of DEMO
tative cases here (see Rivkin, 2001, for further robustness
checks)DEMO Figs. A1–A3 show, as a function of K, the
utility attained by the close actor and the distant actor
as a percentage of DEMO utility of the template. Fig. A1
considers the case of incremental search with dclose =4
22
23
Kauffman (1993) explores these effects further.
DEMO the intuition behind this effect, see Rivkin (2001), p. 283.
Fig. A3. Long jumps with vs. without knowledge of errors. Note:
DEMO values for each simulation are given in text. Each data point
is an average over 100 landscapes.
1014
and ddistant = 10. Fig. A2 examines the case of long-
DEMO search with dclose = ddistant = 12, θclose = 0.6, and
θdistant = 0.4. Fig. A3 considers a situation in which both
parties DEMO with a poor replica (dclose = ddistant = 12),
each tweaks uphill to a local peak, each then leaps toward
s* with equal accuracy (θclose = θdistant = 0.5), but in tak-
ing the leap, only the close actor knows which of its
components matches the components of s*.
In all cases, greater interdependence undermines both
close and distant actors, but the greatest gap between the
two arises at an intermediate level of K. To see why,
consider three situations:DEMO
• When K = 0, the close actor has no advantage DEMO all.
The smooth landscape allows both ﬁrms to discover
the global peak eventually.
• As K rises, a gap emerges between the close actor’s
performance and that of the distant actor. The land-
scape is rugged DEMO that the distant actor becomes
stranded far from the global peak, DEMO peaks clus-
ter enough that average peak height declines with
distance from the global peak. The landscape is sufﬁ-
ciently smooth and clustered, however, that the close
actor – starting near s* or leaping toward s* accurately
– can scale s* or a nearby, nearly-as-high peak.
• As K approaches N, the gap closes. The landscape
becomes so rugged that even the close actor becomes
stranded on a peak other than s*. DEMO close actor may
ﬁnish closer to s* than the distant actor does, but with
high peaks no longer clustered together, this prox-
imity DEMO little beneﬁt. When components depend on
each other delicately, superior but DEMO imperfect
access to the template has little more value than highly
imperfect access.
A.3.2. Adjusting for frequency of attempts
The results so far report DEMO knowledge-rediscovery
success of the close actor versus the distant actor condi-
tional on both parties attempting to rediscover the knowl-
edge embodied in the DEMO success. In our empirical
tests, however, we examine the rates of patent citations
by close and distant actors. We interpret these rates as
DEMO indication of the number of times the knowledge
underlying the focal patent has been received and built
upon. Accordingly, the rates reﬂect not only the degree
of success conditional on an attempt at rediscovery
being made, but also the frequency with which attempts
are made. If, for instance, the frequency of attempts
varies systematically with K, then the graphs DEMO close-
and distant-actor patent counts versus K might reveal
shapes that differ in important ways from the pattern
O. Sorenson et al. / Research DEMO 35 (2006) 994–1017
Fig. A4. Incremental search with number of attempts proportional to
utility of template. Note: Parameter values for each simulation are given
in text. Each data point is an average over 100 landscapes.
DEMO in Figs. A1–A3. In this light, we consider three
scenarios.
First DEMO most simply, suppose that the number of
attempts made by close DEMO distant actors is indepen-
dent of K. Then we would expect the graphs of citation
rates to resemble Figs. A1–A3 without modiﬁcation. In
other DEMO, the frequency of both close- and distant-
actor citation would decline DEMO K, and the maximal
difference would occur at intermediate K.
Second, assume that the number of attempts made by
socially close and distant DEMO increases in proportion
to the utility associated with the original success (DEMO,
more useful pieces of knowledge attract more attempts
at rediscovery). Recall that the utility of the best piece
of knowledge – the DEMO of the global peak on the
landscape – rises with K, DEMO the greater variety
that comes from mixing and matching more interde-
pendent components. When we adjust Figs. A1–A3 to
incorporate more frequent rediscovery efforts DEMO high-
K landscapes, the citation pattern shifts to that shown
in DEMO A4–A6. In contrast to Figs. A1–A3, the fre-
quency of close- DEMO distant-actor citation now rises
at ﬁrst, reﬂecting the fertility of higher-K DEMO,
but then declines. In line with Figs. A1–A3, the largest
DEMO between close- and distant-actor citation arises for
knowledge of intermediate interdependence.
Fig. A5. Long-jump search with number of attempts proportional to
utility of template. DEMO: Parameter values for each simulation are given
in text. Each data DEMO is an average over 100 landscapes.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1015
DEMO A6. Long jumps with vs. without knowledge, number of attempts
proportional DEMO utility of template. Note: Parameter values for each
simulation are given DEMO text. Each data point is an average over 100
landscapes.
Fig. A7. Incremental search with number of attempts proportional to
expected utility of attempt. DEMO: Parameter values for each simulation
are given in text. Each data DEMO is an average over 100 landscapes.
Finally, suppose that the number DEMO attempts made
by close and distant actors reﬂects the utility that each
expects to attain in a rediscovery attempt. In deciding
whether to engage DEMO an attempt, parties not only under-
stand that potential utility increases DEMO K, but they also
adjust for the odds that they succeed. DEMO instance, dis-
tant actors understand they have lower odds of success
DEMO therefore make fewer attempts than do close actors.
When we adjust Figs. A1–A3 in this manner, we project
the citation pattern shown in Figs. A7–A9. Now the
distant-actor citation rate declines monotonically with
K while the DEMO citation rate has an inverted-U
Fig. A8. Long-jump search with number of attempts proportional to
expected utility of attempt. Note: Parameter values for each simulation
are given in text. Each data point is an average over DEMO landscapes.
Fig. A9. Long jumps with vs. without knowledge, number of DEMO
proportional to expected utility. Note: Parameter values for each sim-
ulation DEMO given in text. Each data point is an average over 100
landscapes.
shape. Still, the gap between the two reaches its peak at
an intermediate value of K.
In sum, the robust prediction of our theory concerns
the gap between citation rates of close and distant actors,
DEMO close-actor citation rates by themselves or distant-
actor citation rates alone. The gap between the two cita-
tion rates should have an inverted-U relationship DEMO
respect to interdependence.
References
Alcacer, J., Gittelman, M., in press. How do I know what you know?
Patent examiners and the DEMO of patent citations. Review of
Economics and Statistics.
Allen, T.J., 1977. Managing the Flow of Technology: Technology
Transfer and the Dissemination of Technological Information
Within the R&D Organization. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Argote, L., 1999. Organizational Learning: Creating, Retaining and
Transferring Knowledge. Kluwer, DEMO
Arrow, K.J., 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for
invention. In: Nelson, R. (Ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive
Activity. Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, pp. 609–624.
Arrow, K.J., 1974. The Limits of Organization. Norton, New York.
Audretsch, D.B., Feldman, M.P., 1996. Innovative clusters and the
industry life-cycle. Review of Industrial DEMO 11, 253–273.
Baldwin, C.Y., Clark, K.B., 2000. Design Rules: The Power of Mod-
ularity. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Baker, W.E., Faulker, R.R., 2004. Social networks and loss of capital.
Social Networks 26, 91–111.
Basalla, G., 1988. The Evolution of Technology. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Bossard, J.S., 1932. Residential propinquity as a factor in marriage
selection. American Journal of Sociology 38, 219–224.
Breschi, S., Lissoni, F., 2002. Mobility and Social Networks: Localized
Knowledge Spillovers Revisited. Working paper. Bocconi Univer-
sity.
Burt, R.S., 1987. Social contagion and innovation: cohesion ver-
sus structural equivalence. American Journal of Sociology 92,
1287–1335.
DEMO, R.S., 1992. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competi-
tion. DEMO University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Chew, W.B., Bresnahan, T., Clark, K., 1990. Measurement, coordina-
tion, and learning in a multiplant DEMO In: Kaplan, R.S. (Ed.),
1016
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
DEMO for Manufacturing Excellence. Harvard Business School,
Boston, pp. 129–162.
Christensen, C.M., Verlinden, M., Westerman, G., 2002. Disruption,
disintegration, DEMO the dissipation of differentiability. Industrial
and Corporate Change 11, 955–993.
Cohen, W.M., Levinthal, D., 1990. Absorptive capacity: a new perspec-
tive DEMO learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly
35, 128–152.
Cohen, W.M., DEMO, R.R., Walsh, J.P., 2000. Protecting their intel-
lectual assets: DEMO conditions and why U.S. manufac-
turing ﬁrms patent (or not). DEMO, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Coleman, J.S., Katz, E., DEMO, H., 1957. The diffusion of an inno-
vation among physicians. Sociometry 20, 253–270.
Coleman, J.S., Katz, E., Menzel, H., 1966. Medical Innovation: A
Diffusion Study. Bobbs-Merrill, New York.
Davis, G.F., DEMO, H.R., 1980. Corporate elite networks and gover-
nance changes in the 1980s. American Journal of Sociology 103,
1–37.
Duguet, E., MacGarvie, M., 2005. How well do patent citations mea-
sure ﬂows of technology? Evidence from French innovation sur-
veys. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 14, 375–393.
Durkheim, E., 1912. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life.
Feld, S.L., 1981. The focused organization of social ties. American
Journal DEMO Sociology 86, 1015–1035.
Fleming, L., Sorenson, O., 2001. Technology DEMO a complex adaptive
system: evidence from patent data. Research Policy 30, 1019–1039.
Fleming, L., Sorenson, O., 2004. Science as a map DEMO technological
search. Strategic Management Journal 25, 909–928.
Friedrich, R., 1982. DEMO defense of multiplicative terms in multiple
regression equations. American Journal of Political Science 26,
797–833.
Gilﬁllan, S., 1935. Inventing the Ship. Follett, Chicago.
Griliches, Z., 1957. Hybrid corn: an exploration in the economics of
technological change. Econometrica 25, 501–522.
Gulati, R., 1995. Social structure and alliance formation patterns: a lon-
Hagerstrand, T., 1953. Innovation Diffusion as a Spatial Process. Uni-¨
versity of Chicago, Chicago.
Hall, B.H., Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M., 2001. The NBER Patent
Citations Data DEMO: Lessons, Insights and Methodological
Tools. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 8498.
Hansen, M.T., 1999. The search-transfer problem: the role of weak ties
in sharing knowledge across organization subunits. Administrative
Science Quarterly DEMO, 82–111.
Hargadon, A., 1998. Diffusion of innovations. In: Dorf, DEMO (Ed.), The
Technology Management Handbook. CRC/IEEE, Boca Raton, DEMO
Hedstrom, P., 1994. Contagious collectives: on the spatial diffusion¨
of DEMO trade unions. American Journal of Sociology 99,
1157–1179.
Henderson, R., Cockburn, I., 1996. Measuring competence? Explor-
ing ﬁrm effects in pharmaceutical research. Strategic Management
Journal 15, 63–84.
Homans, G.C., 1950. The Human Group. Harcourt, World and Brace,
New York.
Irwin, D.A., Klenow, P.J., 1994. Learning-by-doing spillovers in
the semiconductor industry. Journal of Political DEMO 102,
1200–1227.
Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M., Henderson, R., 1993. Geographic local-
ization of knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations.
DEMO Journal of Economics 108, 577–598.
gitudinal analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly 40, 619–652.
Jordan, K., Lynch, M., 1992. The sociology of a DEMO engineering
technique: ritual and rationality in the performance of the ‘plasma
DEMO In: Clarke, A., Fujimara, J. (Eds.), The Right DEMO for the
Job: At Work in the Twentieth Century Life Sciences. DEMO
University Press, Princeton, pp. 77–114.
Kauffman, S.A., 1993. The Origins of Order. Oxford University, New
York.
King, G., Zeng, L., 2001. Logistic regression in rare events data. Polit-
ical Analysis 9, 137–163.
Kogut, B., Zander, U., 1992. Knowledge of the ﬁrm, combinative capa-
bilities, and the replication of technology. Organization Science 3,
383–397.
Krugman, P.R., 1991. Geography and Trade. MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Lanjouw, J.O., Schankerman, M., 2004. Patent quality and research
productivity: measuring DEMO with multiple indicators. Eco-
nomic Journal 114, 441–465.
Lazarsfeld, P.F., DEMO, B., Gaudet, H., 1944. The People’s Choice:
How the Voter Makes Up His Mind in a Presidential Election.
Duell, Sloan, DEMO Pearce, New York.
Levin, R.C., Klevorick, A.K., Nelson, R.R., Winter, S.G., 1987. Appro-
priating the returns from industrial research and development.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3, 783–820.
Levinthal, D., 1997. Adaptation on rugged landscapes. Management
Science 43, 934–950.
Lim, K., 2001. The Many Faces of Absorptive Capacity: Spillovers of
Copper Interconnect Technology for Semiconductor Chips. Work-
ing paper. Singapore National University.
Lippman, S., Rumelt, R., 1982. Uncertain imitability: an analysis of
interﬁrm differences in efﬁciency DEMO competition. Bell Journal
of Economics 13, 418–438.
Mahajan, V., Muller, E., Bass, F.M., 1990. New product diffusion mod-
els in marketing: a review and directions for research. Journal of
Marketing 54, 1–26.
DEMO, E., 1968. Industrial Research and Technological Innovation.
W.W. Norton, New DEMO
Manski, C.F., Lerman, S.R., 1977. The estimation of choice probabil-
ities from choice based samples. Econometrica 45, 1977–1988.
March, J.G., Simon, H.A., 1958. Organizations. Blackwell, Cam-
bridge, MA.
Marsden, P.V., DEMO, N.E., 1993. Network studies of social inﬂu-
ence. Sociological Methods and Research 22, 127–151.
Marshall, A., 1890. Principles of Economics. MacMillan, DEMO
McEvily, S.K., Chakravarthy, B., 2002. The persistence of knowledge-
based advantage: an empirical test for product performance
and technological knowledge. Strategic Management Journal 23,
285–306.
McPherson, J.M., Poplielarz, P.A., Drobnic, S., 1992. Social networks
and organizational dynamics. American Sociological Review 57,
153–170.
McPherson, J.M., Smith-Lovin, L., Cook, J.M., 2001. Birds of DEMO
feather: homophily in social networks. Annual Review of Soci-
ology 27, 415–444.
Mead, C., Conway, L., 1980. Introduction to VSLI Systems. DEMO
Wesley, Reading, MA.
Nelson, R.R., Winter, S.G., 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Eco-
nomic Change. Belknap, Cambridge, MA.
O’Sullivan, A., 2001. Achieving Modularity: Generating Design Rules
in an Aerospace Design-build Network. DEMO paper. University
of Ottawa.
Owen-Smith, J., Powell, W.W., 2004. Knowledge networks as channels
and conduits: the effects of spillovers in the Boston biotechnology
community. Organization Science 15, 5–21.
O. Sorenson et al. / Research Policy 35 (2006) 994–1017
1017
DEMO, R.E., 1926. The urban community as a spatial pattern and a moral
order. In: Burgess, E.W. (Ed.), The Urban Community. University
of Chicago, Chicago, pp. 3–18.
Perrow, C., 1984. Normal Accidents: Living With High-risk Technolo-
gies. Basic Books, New York.
Prentice, R.L., Pyke, R., 1979. Logistic disease incidence models and
case-control studies. Biometrika DEMO (3), 403–411.
Podolny, J.M., 1994. Market uncertainty and the DEMO character
of economic exchange. Administrative Science Quarterly 39,
458–483.
Polanyi, DEMO, 1966. The Tacit Dimension. Anchor Day, New York.
Porter, M.E., Rivkin, J.W., 1999. Matching Dell. Harvard Business
School Case, 158–799.
Reed, R., DeFillippi, R.J., 1990. Causal ambiguity, barriers to imita-
tion, and sustainable competitive advantage. Academy of Manage-
ment Review 15, 88–102.
DEMO, J.F., 1981. Market structure and the diffusion of new tech-
nology. Bell Journal of Economics 12, 618–624.
Rivkin, J.W., 2000. Imitation of complex strategies. Management Sci-
ence 46, 824–844.
Rivkin, J.W., 2001. Reproducing knowledge: replication without imi-
tation at moderate complexity. Organization Science 12, DEMO
Rogers, E.M., 1995. Diffusion of Innovations, 4th ed. Free Press, New
York.
Romer, P., 1987. Growth based on increasing returns due DEMO special-
ization. American Economic Review 77, 56–62.
Ryan, B., Gross, N.C., 1943. The diffusion of hybrid seed corn in two
Iowa communities. Rural Sociology 8, 15–24.
Sampat, B.N. 2004. Examining Patent Examination: An Analysis
of Examiner and Applicant Generated Prior Art. Working paper.
Georgia Institute DEMO Technology.
Scherer, F.M. 1984. Innovation and Growth: Schumpeterian Perspec-
tives. Cambridge, MA.
Schumpeter, J., 1939. Business Cycles. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Scott, A.J., Wild, C.J., 1997. Fitting regression models to case-control
data by maximum likelihood. Biometrika 84 (1), 57–71.
Singh, J., 2005. Collaboration networks as determinants of knowledge
diffusion processes. Management Science 51, 756–770.
Simon, H.A., 1962. The architecture of complexity. Proceedings of the
American Philosophical DEMO 106, 467–482.
Smith, J.K., Hounshell, D.A., 1985. Walter H. DEMO and funda-
mental research at DuPont. Science 229, 436–442.
Sorenson, O., 2004. Social networks, informational complexity and
industrial geography. In: Fornahl, DEMO, Zellner, C., Audretsch, D.
(Eds.), The Role of DEMO Mobility and Informal Networks for
Knowledge Transfer. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 79–96.
Sorenson, O., Fleming, L., 2004. Science and the diffusion of DEMO
edge. Research Policy 33, 1615–1634.
Sorenson, O., Stuart, T.E., DEMO Syndication networks and the spa-
tial diffusion of venture capital investments. American Journal of
Sociology 106, 1546–1588.
Stern, S., 2001. Personal communication.
Strang, D., Soule, S.A., 1998. Diffusion in organizations and social
movements: from hybrid corn to poison pills. Annual Review of
Sociology 24, 265–290.
Stuart, T.E., Sorenson, O., 2003. The geography of opportunity: spatial
heterogeneity in founding rates and the performance of biotechnol-
ogy ﬁrms. Research DEMO 32, 229–253.
Szulanski, G., 1996. Exploring internal stickiness: impediments to the
transfer of best transfer within the ﬁrm. Strategic Management
Journal 17, 27–43 (winter special issue).
Teece, D.J., 1977. Technology transfer by multinational ﬁrms: the
resource cost of transferring technological know-how. Economic
Journal 87, 242–261.
Tomz, M., 1999. Relogit (Stata ado ﬁle). Available DEMO http://gking.
harvard.edu/stats.shtml.
Tushman, M., Anderson, P., 1986. Technological discontinuities and
organization environments. Administrative Science Quarterly 31,
439–465.
Ulrich, K., 1995. The role of product architecture in the manufacturing
ﬁrm. Research Policy 24, 419–440.
Usher, A., 1954. A History of Mechanical Invention. Dover, Cam-
bridge, MA.
von Hippel, E., 1988. The Sources DEMO Innovation. Oxford University,
New York.
Weick, K.E., 1976. Educational organizations as loosely coupled sys-
tems. Administrative Science Quarterly 21, 1–19.
Winter, DEMO, 1995. Four Rs of proﬁtability: rents, resources, routines,
and replication. In: Montgomery, C. (Ed.), Resource-based and
Evolutionary Theories of the Firm: Towards a Synthesis. Kluwer,
Boston.
Womack, J.P., Jones, D.T., Roos, D., 1990. The Machine that Changed
the World. DEMO, New York.
Zander, U., Kogut, B., 1995. Knowledge and DEMO speed of transfer and
imitation of organizational capabilities: an empirical test. DEMO
zation Science 6, 76–92.
Zimmerman, M.B., 1982. Learning effects and DEMO commercialization
of new energy technologies: the case of nuclear power. Bell DEMO
of Economics 13, 297–310.
Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R., Brewer, M.B., 1997. Intellectual human
capital and the birth of U.S. biotechnology enterprises. The Amer-
ican Economic Review 88, 290–306.{1g42fwefx}