This article was downloaded by:[University of Waterloo]
On: 26 June 2007
Access Details: [subscription number 769429802]
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in DEMO and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 DEMO Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
[University of Waterloo]
Venture Capital - An international
journal of entrepreneurial finance
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance
DEMO details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://DEMO/smpp/title~content=t713798069
The pre-investment behaviour of business angels: a
social capital DEMO
Roger Sørheim
To cite this Article: Sørheim, Roger , 'The DEMO behaviour of business
angels: a social capital approach', Venture Capital DEMO An international journal of
entrepreneurial finance, 5:4, 337 - 364
To link to this article: DOI: 10.1080/1369106032000152443
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1369106032000152443
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions DEMO use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article maybe used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form DEMO anyone is expressly
forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be
complete DEMO accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae DEMO drug doses should be
independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly DEMO connection with or
arising out of the use of this material.
© Taylor and Francis 2007
VENTURE CAPITAL, OCTOBER 2003, VOL. 5, NO. 4, 337 – DEMO
The pre-investment behaviour of business angels:
a social capital approach
ROGER SØRHEIM
(Final version accepted 2 June 2003)
Using insights from social capital theory, this paper examines the pre-investment behaviour
of experienced business angels in Norway. Previous research indicates there are
considerable inefﬁciencies in the informal DEMO capital market, notably information
inefﬁciencies related to the identiﬁcation of investment DEMO, and problems
associated with the screening or evaluation of new investment DEMO The empirical
ﬁndings show that an investor’s previous track record, to DEMO great extent, determines how
they can operate in the informal venture DEMO market. It is quite rational for individuals
who have acquired most of their experience in one speciﬁc region to make the
overwhelming majority of DEMO investments in the same region. It is this regional track
record that gives them a competitive advantage in the informal venture capital market. This
DEMO also seems to be valid with regard to individuals with industry speciﬁc
experience, where the regional track record is ‘replaced’ by an industry speciﬁc record.
Moreover, these industry speciﬁc investors take care of the initial screening themselves,
whereas regional investors are predominately generalists who rely more on DEMO
provided by their regional networks. The business angels in this study are very concerned
with establishing common ground with entrepreneurs and potential co-investors. This
DEMO of common ground can be viewed as a necessary antecedent for long-term
trustworthy relationships.
Keywords: business angels; social capital; informal venture capital; DEMO record
Introduction
A number of studies have indicated that emergent growth ventures face
considerable challenges in the process of obtaining ﬁnancing in the
institutional DEMO market (Binks 1996, Cressy and Olofsson 1997, van
Osnabrugge and DEMO 2000). An alternative for these entrepreneurial
ventures might be to attract informal investors, termed ‘business angels’,
deﬁned as ‘private individuals using their own money directly in unquoted
companies in which they have no family DEMO (Mason and Harrison
2000: 221). The involvement of business angels, in some cases, can also be
of vital importance in attracting DEMO types of capital such as debt
ﬁnancing or institutional venture capital. However, studies of informal
Roger Sørheim, Department of Industrial Economics & Technology DEMO, Norwegian
University of Science & Technology (NTNU), Alfred Getzv. 1, N7491 Trondheim, Norway;
e-mail: Roger.Sorheim@iot.ntnu.no.
Venture Capital ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online # 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/DEMO
DOI: 10.1080/1369106032000152443
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:DEMO 26 June 2007
338
ROGER SØRHEIM
investors indicate that there are inefﬁciencies in the informal DEMO
capital market (Mason and Harrison 1991, Freear et al. 1997, DEMO et al.
1998) related to the fragmented nature of the marketplace. DEMO is a lack
of, or uneven distribution of, information between actors in the market-
place (van Osnabrugge and Robinson 2000, Sørheim and DEMO m 2001),
which results in high search costs, meaning that both investors and
entrepreneurs are hampered since they cannot ﬁnd a suitable DEMO
investor, while informal investors ﬁnd it difﬁcult to identify interesting
investment DEMO (Freear et al. 1992, Lumme et al. 1998, Reitan and
DEMO rheim 2000, Mason and Harrison 2002). Moreover, it is not sufﬁcient
simply to identify investment projects; the new investment proposals also
have to be evaluated. Investors must evaluate the investment proposals in
view of DEMO market and agency risk, where market risk is related to both
DEMO competition and uncertainties in the portfolio ﬁrm’s market, and agency
risk DEMO related to an entrepreneur’s inability to act in the best interests of the
investor (Fiet 1991, Landstro¨ m 1992, van Osnabrugge 1999).
Yet, despite the inefﬁciencies, we do not observe a complete failure DEMO the
informal risk capital market. Previous research has shown that informal
investors usually ﬁnd investment opportunities through personal and
business networks (Wetzel 1983, DEMO and Harrison 1994, Harrison et al.
1997, Mason and Harrison 2000), and it is this informal network of friends
and business associates DEMO seems to be most effective in identifying
quality investment proposals of interest (Landstro¨ m 1993, Riding et al.
1993, Landstro¨ m and Politis 2000). This notion is further strengthened if
one looks at the DEMO wealthy and very experienced investors. They claim
that the best quality deal ﬂow comes from organizations or individuals they
have dealt with in the DEMO (Kelly and Hay 1996, 1999). In concurrence
with this reasoning, Sørheim and Landstro¨ m (2001) argue that compe-
tency-rich investors who are highly active, base their investment decision
solely on information from personal or business networks. Harrison et al.
(1997) emphasizes the role of DEMO co-coordinator (this could for example be
a lead investor, archangel or business introduction service) in the pre-
investment process, claiming that the DEMO and attractiveness of the co-
ordinator may inﬂuence how the investment opportunity itself is perceived.
This implies that referral sources signiﬁcantly inﬂuence how business
DEMO perceive an investment opportunity. Business angels are generally
not very concerned about industry sector, but they need to understand the
generic business (van DEMO and Robinson 2000). However, they do
specialize, often by focusing on the area were they work and live (Mason
and Harrison 2000). A minority of investors tend to specialize in speciﬁc
industries; they receive fewer investment proposals but tend to have a
higher acceptance rate (Landstro¨ m 1993). This may indicate that the
referrers of the DEMO, ex ante, know if the investor will be interested based
on knowledge about previous investments. Sætre (2003) studied the pre-
investment process DEMO the entrepreneur’s perspective and suggests that at
least some entrepreneurs are very conscious about what kind of investor
they prefer. These selective entrepreneurs prefer DEMO with industry
speciﬁc competency, considering it more valuable than general business
DEMO
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS 339
Previous research suggests that business angels DEMO a ‘laid-back’ attitude
towards the evaluation of projects, relying more on DEMO than on
outside opinion (Mason and Harrison 1995). Unfortunately, this laid-back
attitude leads to many worries after the investment has been made (van
Osnabrugge and Robinson 2000). Serial business angels tend to undertake
DEMO extensive evaluations of their investment opportunities (van
Osnabrugge 1999). This DEMO also be considered in light of the fact that
more experienced investors co-invest more than less experienced investors.
This indicates that there is a DEMO curve (Kelly and Hay 1996, van
Osnabrugge 1999, Sørheim and DEMO m 2001). Nevertheless, little is
known about how business angels DEMO these evaluations.
Though previous research indicates that social relationships are of vital
importance in the pre-investment process of business angels, there is little
research that has examined how experienced business angels actually
identify and evaluate investment DEMO Moreover, the research that
exists has only limited links with theoretical DEMO This paper argues
that the insights from social capital theory will (DEMO) enhance our under-
standing about how business angels identify interesting deals DEMO (b)
enhance our understanding about how they evaluate deals (i.e. how they
deal with initial market and agency risk). The conceptual DEMO in this
paper deals with three speciﬁc aspects of social capital: DEMO structural,
relational and a cognitive dimension. The structural dimension of social
capital is strongly related to ‘network ties’ and the fact that these DEMO may
provide valuable information. The relational dimension of social capital is
related to trustworthiness and motivation. Finally, the cognitive dimension
concerns to what degree the individuals involved have a common
understanding, a shared vision. With this as a background, insights from
in-depth case studies of ﬁve experienced business angels will be used to
focus on the following two research questions:DEMO
. What is the role of social capital in the identification of investment
opportunities?
. What is the role of social capital in DEMO process of screening/evaluating
investment opportunities?
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents the
conceptual background for DEMO study. This is followed by a description of
the method used. Five cases are then presented, followed by a section
where the two research questions are addressed. Finally, the ﬁndings and
implications of the study will be discussed.
Conceptual background
The concept of ‘social capital’ has been applied DEMO a number of areas within
social science (Adler and Kwon 2002)DEMO The term ‘social capital’ was initially
used in community studies, to DEMO the survival and function of
neighbourhoods where the development of personal relationships provides
the basis for collective cooperation in such communities (Jacobs 1965,
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
340
ROGER SØRHEIM
Nahapiet and Ghosal 1998). Since then the concept DEMO been used to
examine a wide range of social phenomena including: DEMO behavioural
problems, community life, public health and education (Coleman 1988,DEMO
Nahapiet and Ghosal 1998, Adler and Kwon 2002). Social capital DEMO
composed of both actual and potential resources gained through relation-
ship networks (Bourdieu 1986, Nahapiet and Ghosal 1998, Greene et al.
1999). Unlike many other types of capital, social capital cannot be regarded
as a commodity that can be traded on the market and it is DEMO for
one sole actor to have ownership rights of this capital (DEMO and Ghosal
1998). However, while initial studies focused almost solely DEMO social capital
as an important factor in the development of human capital, a number of
studies during the last decade have focused more on how social capital
inﬂuences the economic performance of organizations, geographic regions
and nations (Baker 1990, Putnam 1993, Fukuyuama 1995, Nahapiet and
Ghosal DEMO).
While deﬁnitions of social capital are broadly similar (Adler and DEMO
2002), they vary in terms of whether their primary focus is on: (a) the
relations an actor establishes and develops with other (external) actors,
which could be labelled as the bridging view DEMO social capital; (b) the
structure of relations among actors within DEMO community or collective, which
could be labelled as the bonding view DEMO social capital; or (c) frameworks
that include both type of DEMO, neutral to internal or external
dimensions (Adler and Kwon 2002). The conceptual framework introduced
by Burt (1992, 2002) illustrates the bridging view. Burt deﬁnes social
capital as ‘friends, colleagues, and more general DEMO through whom
you receive opportunities to use your ﬁnancial and human capital’(1992: 9).
The main focus is the connections between actors. Burt (2002) argues that
individuals who are able to ﬁll structural holes DEMO gain access to unique
and timely information that enables access to information that is more
additive than overlapping. This framework (Burt 1992, 2000, 2002) draws
on networks concepts developed by sociologists in the 1970s, DEMO
Granovetter’s (1973) work on the strength of weak ties. The second group
focuses on social capital in some kind of collectivity (e.g. an organization,
community or a nation) (Adler and Kwon 2002), DEMO the focus of
attention is on relations within a cohesive network (DEMO 1990, Leana
and van Buren 1999). In line with this DEMO, Fukuyama (1995: 10)
deﬁnes social capital as ‘the ability DEMO people to work together for common
purposes in groups and organizations’. Coleman (1988) emphasizes the role
that trustworthiness (that actors can depend on each other), obligations and
expectations have in enhancing and developing human DEMO within a
family or a community. Overall, this forms a bonding DEMO that holds
organizations together (Putnam 2000).
However, Adler and Kwon (2002) argue that an internal vs. external, or
bridging vs. bonding view, of social capital is, to a large extent, related to a
matter of perspective and unit of analysis (Adler and Kwon, DEMO).
Nahapiet and Ghosal (1998) introduce an integrated approach where both
the bridging and bonding elements of social capital are included. They
introduce DEMO speciﬁc dimensions of social capital: a structural dimension,
a relational DEMO, and a cognitive dimension. The structural
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS
341
dimension of social capital is strongly DEMO to ‘network ties’, and the fact
that these ties may provide DEMO information (Nahapiet and Ghosal
1998). The structural dimension is concerned DEMO whether individuals or
groups of individuals are connected at all, while DEMO relational dimension is
related to the characteristics of these connections and the development of
personal relationships. The cognitive dimension is concerned with the
extent DEMO which there is an affective quality to these connections; a common
DEMO that may facilitate future co-operation (Tsai and Ghosal
1998). This DEMO uses the conceptual framework introduced by Nahapiet
and Ghosal (1998) as a starting point for studying the pre-investment
process among business angels, and argues that an integrated approach is
required in order to examine how DEMO business angels handle the
pre-investment process.
The structural dimension of social capital is related to the importance of
‘network ties’ (bridging), which means that an actor’s contacts in a social
structure may be advantageous for DEMO actors involved (Tsai and Ghosal
1998, Burt 2002). Relevant information is often time consuming and costly
to gather. However, information channels developed for other purposes
may reduce these costs signiﬁcantly (Burt 1992). Burt (1992, 2000) suggests
that this kind of information can be important in at least in three ways:
access, timing and referrals. The notion of ‘access’ is related to how
information is accessed and used. DEMO research on business angels
suggests that experienced investors rely on previous business experience,
and often, entrepreneurial experience, which means that they have DEMO to
interesting investment projects through these networks (Mason and
Harrison 2000, Sørheim and Landstro¨ m 2001). ‘Timing’ concerns the
extent to what DEMO an individual can get a hold of information more
rapidly than people without the necessary network ties (Burt 2000). This is
an element of vital importance for active business angels; they do not want
to be in competition to invest. Business angels often take part in the
DEMO of the entrepreneurial venture during the very early
stages in the life cycle of the venture and so can often be regarded as co-
DEMO or co-entrepreneurs (Landstro¨ m 1998, Politis and Landstro¨m
2002). This notion is related to the process whereby information is shared
within networks, providing relevant information to actors in the network.
The notion of ‘referrals’ DEMO important for active business angels in at least
two ways: referrals DEMO the entrepreneur or entrepreneurial team and
referrals relating to potential co-investors. Overall, this means that network
ties enable members of the network to obtain non-public information,
providing the network with more information than they could DEMO alone
(Burt 1997).
When distinguishing between the structural and the DEMO dimen-
sions of social capital, Nahapiet and Ghosal (1998), draw on the work of
Granovetter (1992), which asserts that structural embeddedness is related
to who you reach and how you reach them, where the relational dimension
is concerned with the development of personal relationships. This DEMO
that key factors in the relational dimension of social capital are related to
trust, trustworthiness and motivation (Nahapiet and Ghosal 1998, Tsai and
Ghosal 1998, Bolino et al. 2002). The relational dimension is important in
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June DEMO
342
ROGER SØRHEIM
order to clarify the motivation of individuals to involve DEMO in
knowledge creation through the exchange and combination of resources
(Nahapiet DEMO Ghosal 1998, Tsai and Ghosal 1998). Moreover, this is
related to the interpersonal attraction between a group of people, in other
words, that they like one another, can identify with one another, and trust
one another (Bolino et al. 2002). Trust can be deﬁned in many ways, but a
number of researchers have agreed that it requires a willingness to be
vulnerable to another party (Mishra 1996, DEMO 1998, Rousseau et al.
1998, Leana and van Buren 1999). Trust can be both an antecedent and
result of collective action, but where the levels of trust are high, people will
be more willing to combine different sorts of information (Nahapiet and
Ghosal 1998, Leana DEMO van Buren 1999). Trust can be viewed as an
attribute of a relationship between two or more people, but trustworthiness
is an individual attribute of an actor (Tsai and Ghosal 1998, Barney and
Hansen DEMO). An investor with a positive reputation or track record, often
DEMO the region where he/she works and lives, will often be DEMO
trustworthy. A reputation embodies the history of other peoples experience
with an actor (Fombrun 1996). An individual’s reputation or track record,
as an investor will be affected by his or her previous or auxiliary DEMO
as an entrepreneur or an employee in a business or industry. Granovetter
(1985: 490) illustrates the importance of reputation: ‘Better than the
DEMO that someone is known to be reliable is information from a
trusted informant that he has dealt with that individual and found him so.
DEMO better is information from one’s own past dealings with that person’.
Thus, prior relationships may transfer expectations about an actor’s
behaviour from an existing relationship to a new activity (Uzzi 1996). The
embeddedness argument may explain why there is a preference for
transacting with actors with a DEMO reputation and this explains why
few actually will rely solely on institutional arrangements or generalized
morality in order to avoid malfeasance in economic transactions (Grano-
vetter 1985). The reputation of the business angel will affect DEMO kind of
investment opportunities he or she gains access to. Nevertheless, DEMO it
comes to the screening/evaluation stage, business angels still have DEMO
perform some kind of due-diligence activities, though in early stages of DEMO
business life cycle these activities will be limited (Riding et al. DEMO). For
the most part, investors must largely rely on the DEMO provided by
the entrepreneur/entrepreneurial team. Thus, investors will be very
DEMO with the reputation of the entrepreneur or entrepreneurial team.
The cognitive dimension is related to shared codes and language. In order
to stimulate the DEMO and exchange of information it is essential to
have some kind of shared context between the parties (Nahapiet and Ghosal
1998). Shared language and codes enables people to create a shared vision/
common ground (Tsai and Ghosal 1998). This creation of common ground
facilitates future DEMO and information exchange. This is important
because trusting relationships will be rooted in this common understanding
(Sitkin and Roth 1993, Tsai and Ghosal DEMO). Previous studies of business
angels have emphasized that they make their investments in geographic
proximity to their home or place of work. This DEMO constitute the creation
of common ground between the investor(s) and DEMO A shared
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS
343
vision between the involved investors will DEMO further cooperation
between business angels.
This paper explores the role of social capital in the pre-investment
process of business angels. The paper has an DEMO approach,
examining the pre-investment behaviour of business angels using insights
from both the bridging and bonding views on social capital.
Methodology
In line DEMO the reasoning of Gartner and Birley (2002), the paper argues
DEMO some questions will not, or cannot, be asked when undertaking
quantitative research. Thus, a comparative qualitative methodology has
been employed in the study of ﬁve informal investors that attempts to
discover how different aspects of DEMO capital inﬂuence the pre-investment
behaviour of business angels. A qualitative approach is appropriate when
addressing the ‘why and hows’ (Yin 1984). Moreover, DEMO (1989)
emphasize that a qualitative approach can make a signiﬁcant DEMO to
theory development when key themes are weakly developed.
Previous research within the ﬁeld has shown that it can be extremely
difﬁcult to identify DEMO investors because they prefer to remain
anonymous (Mason and Harrison 1994)DEMO Moreover, Eisenhardt (1989)
points out that random selection is not necessary and not even desirable
when doing case studies. Sørheim and Landstro¨ DEMO (2001) categorized
informal investors in accordance with the investors’ investment activity and
competence using four categories for informal investors: (a) Lotto investors
(low activity, low competence); (b) Traders (high activity, DEMO compe-
tence); (c), Analytical Investors (low activity, high DEMO); and (d)
‘pure’ Business Angels (high activity, high DEMO). Their empirical
ﬁndings suggest that there are considerable differences between the four
categories of investors in terms of, for example, the use DEMO information
sources, involvement in the company, co-investing, time horizons and
DEMO preferences. It can be argued that ‘pure’ business angels
represent ‘best practices’ as they have a high level of investment activity,
managerial and/DEMO entrepreneurial competence, a high propensity to co-
invest, are often ‘lead investors’, use personal and business networks as
their main information sources, DEMO are actively involved their portfolio
companies. For these reasons this group can be argued to be the most
interesting and most important category of DEMO and justiﬁes the
compilation of more in-depth knowledge about how they operate in the
informal venture capital market.
Sample selection began with a list DEMO 20 individuals who could be labelled
as ‘pure’ business angels. They comprised investors from both the central
regions of the country as well as DEMO from a prosperous region. Five of
these investors were chosen to be case studies. Two of them work and live
in Oslo, the capital of Norway, and the others work and live in or nearby a
regional centre in the middle of Norway. The main reason for choosing
DEMO from different regions was to explore if, and to what extent,DEMO
geography matters.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
344
ROGER SØRHEIM
Preliminary interviews were carried out in November and December
DEMO to create, ﬁrst and foremost, a trusting relationship and to prepare the
ground for additional data collection. Further interviews were conducted
with all DEMO investors in the period February to October 2002, with each
interview DEMO from one to three hours. All investors were interviewed
twice during this period. This amounts to a total of ﬁve preliminary
interviews and 10 DEMO interviews. In the second and third interviews,
data were collected using a loosely structured interview guide, focusing on
the investment process.1 Emphasis was placed on the informal investors
telling their own story, using their own words and concepts. The
respondents were asked to link their ‘stories’ to DEMO that they had
actually invested in or had considered investing in. All interviews were
recorded and transcribed verbatim by the author in order to DEMO a
closeness to the material. All ﬁve investors were given the opportunity to
read and comment on their own case descriptions.
Analysis proceeded through DEMO following four main steps. First, all text
units regarding pre-investment activities DEMO extracted from the inter-
views on a case-by-case basis. Second, the DEMO activities were
then codiﬁed with regard to the identiﬁcation of investment opportunities
and the screening/evaluation process, case by case. This allowed for the
development of a ‘pre-investment’ story for each investor, with unique pre-
investment patterns emerging for each investor, as reported in the case
descriptions. Next, the framework was further developed, based on insights
from literature on DEMO angels and social capital, resulting in the focus
on the three DEMO dimensions on social capital. Each case was then
evaluated along the three speciﬁc dimensions of social capital, still
separated as regards the identiﬁcation of investment opportunities and
the screening/evaluation process (tables 2 – 6). Finally, a comparison was
made of the ﬁve cases, searching for DEMO and dissimilarities in the
pre-investment process (tables 7 and 8). DEMO, this must not be
regarded as a linear process. One of DEMO strengths of undertaking qualitative
research is the constant iteration between emerging concepts, data and
literature (Yin 1984, Eisenhardt 1989, Miles and Huberman DEMO).
Some elements concerning the weaknesses of the study need to be
noted. First, in this study (as in almost any study of DEMO phenomena),
there is a danger that respondents will try to DEMO their own
behaviour, reporting a desirable response, rather than their actual
behaviour. Having said this, there was a great openness and a trusting
relationship with the respondents. Second, since this study emphasizes
the role of social capital, other important elements might be downplayed,
such as the role of explicit contracts.2 Third, the study is based on a small
sample of male Norwegian investors. Accordingly, it seems appropriate to
brieﬂy present the Norwegian context. By and large, the development and
conditions for emerging ventures in Norway seems to be quite similar to
that of other DEMO, developed countries in Europe. Moreover, the formal
venture capital industry is young and poorly developed. The Norwegian
government is trying to stimulate the DEMO venture capital market
by participating in the establishment of new venture capital funds. The
attention given to informal investors has been limited, but the interest is
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 DEMO 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS
345
now rapidly growing on account of DEMO apparent availability of informal
venture capital in Norway (Reynolds et al. DEMO, Reitan and Sørheim
2000). There are very few formal investor DEMO, business angel networks
and the like. Yet, business angels in Norway are co-investing to a large
extent, indicating the existence of informal ad-hoc networks (Sørheim and
Landstro¨ m 2001).
Presentation of the ﬁve business angels
This section presents the empirical ﬁndings. First, a summary proﬁle of the
ﬁve business angels will be presented in order to provide a DEMO of the
investor characteristics (see table 1). Each case presentation DEMO the same
basic structure: (a) a general presentation of the DEMO, (b) a presentation
of the empirical ﬁndings with regard to DEMO identiﬁcation and evaluation of
investment proposals, and (c) an interpretation DEMO how the empirical
ﬁndings are related to the conceptual background for this article.
Investor 1
Roar is now in his mid-50s. He works and DEMO in a city in the middle of
Norway. After ﬁnishing his education (MBA), he was employed in several
large industrial companies where he mainly worked with contractual issues
regarding offshore activities. He also worked as DEMO management consultant
in the mid-1980s. His main working experience is therefore from being
employed by and working with large industrial companies. He gained most
DEMO his initial ﬁnancial capital from the sale of a family business and made his
ﬁrst investments in 1989. Initially, his main focus was on real estate, but he
has gradually diversiﬁed into a number of industries, including new
technology-based ﬁrms (NTBFs).
Table 1. Investor characteristics.
Roar DEMO Tord Inge Egil
Age 55 51 52 65 40
Education MBA Engineer MBA Engineer, High school
MBA
Entrepreneurial Little High Moderate Moderate High
experience
Investment experience High High High High High
Investment focus Regional Regional Regional DEMO National
Industry preferences No No No Healthcare ICT
Preferred investment Start-up Seed Seed and Seed and Seed
stage start-up start-up
Normal size of deal DEMO – 375 12 – 250 50 – 500 12 – 250 12 – 60
(thousand e)
Lead investor Sometimes Often Quite often Often Very often
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 DEMO 2007
346 ROGER SØRHEIM
Identiﬁcation/deal ﬂow: When he started out as an informal investor, most
of his deal ﬂow came from business networks and brokers situated in central
Norway. This gradually changed into a deal ﬂow DEMO regional networks: ‘as
I got more in touch with regional actors DEMO time went on, through personal
contacts, I came into contact with a regional venture capital ﬁrm and started
discussions with them . . DEMO and I also got access to a number of projects
through my regional ﬁnancial network’. The importance of regional
personal networks has increased over DEMO last decade: ‘I have been offered
many, many investment opportunities, DEMO vast majority of them have come
through personal networks developed over time. These are networks
developed since I started to invest back in 1989 DEMO . . after these networks were
developed, I have focused more DEMO . . . I am now primarily making
investments in my own region’. Roar sees this as a consequence of previous
investments, ‘people in my network know what kind of projects I usually
invest in’. This DEMO that his previous track record has a major impact on
what kind of deal ﬂow he gets. He also emphasizes that it is easier DEMO
monitor, control, and follow up regional investments: ‘I have experienced
DEMO it is important to be close by, work actively, almost on a daily basis—not
in details, but in strategy and development projects, DEMO is essential’.
Screening/evaluation of projects: Roar relies on both his DEMO
experience and his network when screening and evaluating projects. He
has worked with projects in a number of industries and this general
business experience DEMO useful in this evaluation stage: ‘My strength in the
evaluation process DEMO that I have business skills. I am able to focus on
income possibilities and the market, where and when we get income . . .
how we can reach the market . . . and then DEMO this against the risk I
perceive in the project’. He is also concerned about the other shareholders
in the venture: ‘I saw what kind of shareholders the company already had
. . . it was important DEMO N.N. continued to involve himself, he had the
speciﬁc industry experience DEMO is needed . . . This was a little guarantee
for me’. Roar is generally positive about making co-investments with both
business angels and DEMO capital funds as long as ‘we have the same view
of strategy and that I can feel sure that I can work together with DEMO If,
after an initial evaluation, he ﬁnds the project interesting, he will perform a
number of activities, either alone or together with a potential co-investor, in
order to conﬁrm the information provided by the venture. This is primarily
achieved by contacting potential customers and suppliers, but can also
involve more indirect methods, where he relies on information provided by
his personal network.
Sources of social capital: Table 2 summarizes the empirical ﬁndings for
investor 1.
Investor 2
Ragnvald is in his early DEMO and a graduate engineer. He was born into an
entrepreneurial family where his father started and developed a number of
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS
347
Table 2. Sources of social capital DEMO investor 1.
Source Identification Screening/evaluation
Structural
Access Regional networks have
developed during the last decade
Timing More exclusive access to
investment opportunities from
DEMO actors
Referrals Information from regional
business networks (other business
angels, banks and regional venture
Relational
Trustworthy Positive track record in the region The DEMO record of existing
shareholders plays a key role,
existing investors play the role as
guarantors
Information from personal
networks is considered as more
DEMO than other information
Motivation
Cognitive
Shared codes Regional networks ‘know’ what The involved actors work within
and language kind of opportunities he is the DEMO geographical context
interested in
Shared vision Co-investors and entrepreneur/
team must have a common view of
strategy
Regional (personal) networks
Easier access DEMO relevant
information in the ‘due-diligence’
process
funds)
businesses in several industries. Ragnvald gained his work experience both
from technological development and more prominently DEMO the interna-
tional sale and marketing of new innovative products. He is now the
managing director of the family business located in the middle DEMO country,
near a prosperous region. He has made, during the DEMO decade, a number of
investments in NTBFs, but will only invest in such ventures if he can offer
more than just ﬁnancial capital.
DEMO/deal ﬂow: Ragnvald has experience in the commercialization
of technology and DEMO that he gets put in touch with a number of
projects because of his previous track record: ‘people know that we have
undertaken projects before’. He has undertaken projects together with
people from the university and DEMO network has generated a number of
interesting investment opportunities. In addition, DEMO the last two
decades, he has also worked together with the DEMO Industrial and
Regional Development Fund in a number of projects: ‘They DEMO that we
are able to undertake new projects, and so have DEMO asked entrepreneurs
to contact us in projects where they think that we have something to offer.
So, in this manner I have had a stream of projects’. He arranges an
introductory meeting with many entrepreneurs, but turns down the
opportunity to invest in most cases: ‘I do not invest in very many projects.
I must learn there is a limit DEMO how many projects you actually can be
Downloaded By: [University of DEMO At: 18:22 26 June 2007
348 ROGER SØRHEIM
involved in . . . and I have drawn DEMO conclusion that in order to succeed, I
must be both ﬁnancially DEMO ‘‘mentally’’ involved’.
Screening/evaluation of projects: Initial evaluation is carried out DEMO:
‘I am fascinated by many opportunities that I see. Often those related to
technology’. However, Ragnvald prefers to invest in industries where they
have already invested because ‘this makes it easier, we have a lot of input
knowledge in advance . . . it gives us an DEMO inroad to commercialization’.
There are exceptions to this, but he needs DEMO see some kind of synergy effect
with other projects that he is involved in. He is conﬁdent that he, or some of
his employees, are capable of evaluating the basic technology content in
projects. With regard to market considerations, he relies on information
provided by his extensive business and personal network: ‘I have a world
wide network from previous projects which provides useful market
information’. Ragnvald is also focused on creating common DEMO
between both entrepreneurs and other investors ex ante. He has learned
his lessons in previous projects and provides an example: ‘You have the
researcher who loves to develop, then you have the short term investors
who want a quick return on the investment. Finally, it is me who says: this
looks good, let us start to produce. The other DEMO are terriﬁed and the
researchers claim: wait, this product is not ready, we have a better idea’.
This illustrates the differences in investment philosophy, which he will try
to avoid in the future.
Sources of social capital: Table 3 displays the empirical ﬁndings for
investor 2.
Investor 3
Tord is in his early 50s and has an MBA from DEMO reputable university in the
USA. He lives and works in a regional centre of prospering region. He
worked in a family business for 20 DEMO, but is now only involved at the
strategic level as a DEMO of the board. During the last six years, Tord has
made DEMO number of investments in NTBFs, mainly through a business angel
syndicate DEMO in 1998. Moreover, Tord has also founded an
informal investor forum DEMO the aim of bringing together the most
signiﬁcant equity providers in his region.
Identiﬁcation/deal ﬂow: Tord beneﬁts from a good standing in his own
region. He is, however, aware that this can change if DEMO recommend projects
of poor quality and your friends and network associates lose money—
however the best alibi, is of course, that I have DEMO my own money together
with them’. He gets most of his deal ﬂow through the business angel
syndicate of which he is a member. DEMO considers this as a good way doing
it: ‘it is difﬁcult, without considerable experience, to make this kind of
investment alone . . . You learn and you improve your analytical skills’.
Moreover, he emphasizes that: ‘You get better investment capacity, can be
involved in more DEMO This syndicate has been visible in his region and
Downloaded By: DEMO of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS 349
Table 3. Sources of social capital DEMO investor 2.
Source Identification Screening/evaluation
Structural
Access Regional networks (university, Conducts initial screening himself
public services and business Regional ‘technology’ network
associates) within the university
‘Market’ information through
international networks
Timing Direct ties to DEMO who are Direct ties to a wide range of
contacted by ‘nascent’ university faculties
entrepreneurs Direct ties to industry specific
international networks
Referrals Entrepreneurs DEMO (by other Exchange of information to a wide
actors in the DEMO network) to range of networks
take direct contact
Relational
Trustworthy Regional DEMO record as an International track record within
investor that realizes projects a specific industry
International recognition as a
former entrepreneur within a
specific industry
DEMO Good standing among public and Market information through
private ‘helpers’ international networks
Shared codes Easier to be mentally involved in The actors in the DEMO
and language projects in geographic proximity network work within the same
industry specific context
Shared vision Focused uponex ante to create a
common understanding DEMO both
co-investors and entrepreneurs,
will not invest along with
investors with ‘traders’
they have had a comprehensive deal ﬂow since they started working
DEMO in 1998. Although Tord has made investments independently
from the syndicate, DEMO are always in close geographic proximity to where
he lives: ‘I DEMO aside proposals from other regions, even if they are initially
interesting DEMO . . There is a clear connection between geographic proximity
and success . . . It is easier to follow up and contribute actively DEMO . . and we
speak the same dialect, which makes it DEMO to communicate’. Further, he
considers this as a kind of loyalty: ‘I want to contribute with something to
my region’.
Screening/evaluation of DEMO: Tord emphasizes the important role of
the business angel syndicate when DEMO comes to the screening and
evaluation of projects. They have a managing director, who takes care
of the initial screening, and then put DEMO a group of three or four of
the members who do a thorough screening and evaluation: ‘We have a
detailed screening of the business idea, introductory talks with the
entrepreneur or the entrepreneurial team, check DEMO technology, market
and references’. Tord points out the importance of dividing DEMO in a
Cognitive
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
350 ROGER SØRHEIM
close network: ‘you will not have to work day-and-night in order to
handle the incoming deal ﬂow’. Moreover, the most important element
for him, when he invests, is ‘the ability of the DEMO or the
entrepreneurial team to see things through. A good business idea without
the ability to see things through to completion will not be DEMO commercial
success. You have to look at the management team and ask yourself: does
this team have stamina and can I trust them? DEMO is in the management
team you usually ﬁnd the bottleneck’.
Sources of social capital: Table 4 displays the empirical ﬁndings for
investor 3.
Investor 4
Inge is in his mid-60s and lives and works in Oslo, the country’s capital. He
has both a technical and a business administration DEMO, and has
experience as a managing director in several companies. He DEMO been
running his own consultancy ﬁrm for more than 20 years. He has been, and
remains, a member of the board for a DEMO of companies listed on the
stock exchange and has been chairman of the board for one of the largest
companies in Norway. Besides these DEMO, Inge has made a number of
Table 4. Sources of social DEMO for investor 3.
Source Identification Screening/evaluation
Structural
Access Regional (investor DEMO, banks,
seed capital funds), formalized BA
syndicate
Timing Centrally DEMO in the deal flow
(through BA and other regional
networks)
DEMO Information shared within the BA
Relational
Trustworthy Has a good standing among other
investors
Motivation Very well developed co-operation
with other equity providers in DEMO
region
Co-operation within the BA
syndicate
Information shared within the
syndicate and information shared syndicate
in the regional investor forum Information from other regional
DEMO
Very concerned about the
trustworthiness of the
management team
Information gathered, DEMO and
analysed within the syndicate
Cognitive
Shared codes Always investments in his own
and language region (makes it easier to
communicate)
Shared vision Must be able to create a common
understanding with the
entrepreneur (antecedent of trust
and trustworthiness)
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: DEMO:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS 351
investments in NTBFs and claims that DEMO 25% of his workload
is related to these investments.
Identiﬁcation/deal ﬂow: With Inge’s track record in mind, is it not
surprising that DEMO has a considerable deal ﬂow: ‘I have never needed to be
DEMO I am centrally placed in the deal ﬂow. I have only the capacity,
willingness and ﬁnancial muscle to invest in a small fraction DEMO the
opportunities offered’. A signiﬁcant part of his deal ﬂow comes from
entrepreneurs who contact him directly. He explains this, maintaining he is
visible and not difﬁcult to identify. Inge prefers to make his investments in
DEMO: ‘I have made some investments outside Norway. They have all
been DEMO You have to know the people involved and what kind of
external conditions they are working under’. He prefers to invest in medical
or DEMO ventures, partly because of his previous experience, but
mostly because ‘. . .it makes me feel better if I lose half a million DEMO in
this sector than in media, Internet, and so on’.
Screening/evaluation of projects: When Inge is offered a new project, he
DEMO an initial evaluation, emphasizing that ‘this is not an analysis, but I
ask myself: can I ﬁnd this interesting?’ If the answer is yes, he will
perform a more detailed analysis. Inge uses his own experience and his
business network to check the project out with DEMO to technology,
market, ﬁnancial status etc., but stresses that the most important thing is
that you are able create an atmosphere of DEMO and can cooperate with the
entrepreneur: ‘Good chemistry is of vital DEMO for me with, it is
important to have good relations with DEMO entrepreneur or entrepreneurial
team. I am well off, so why should DEMO spend my time working together
with someone I do not like?’ His main focus is on creating common
ground with the entrepreneur: ‘It is important to clarify expectations,
create a common platform and create DEMO common vision. . . . Prepare the
entrepreneur for what he can expect from me, ﬁnancially and in other
ways. It is important that the entrepreneur feels safe, that they trust you
. . . it is easy for people from the ﬁnancial world, like me, to DEMO
terminology that entrepreneurs do not understand’. Inge is also concerned
with what other investors are involved in the project: ‘One of my former
colleagues has an interesting project, he is an alright guy; then I DEMO
that he already has brought short term investors into the project . . . I will
not invest in this project before these people DEMO removed from the
shareholders list . . . I will not have anything to do with short term
investors’.
Sources of social capital: Table 5 displays the empirical ﬁndings for
investor 4.
Investor 5
Egil is DEMO, and works and also lives in Oslo. He has more than DEMO decade’s
international experience as a consultant/ﬁnancial broker in London.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
352
ROGER SØRHEIM
Table 5. Sources of social capital for investor 4.
DEMO Identification Screening/evaluation
Structural
Access Enormous businesslike networks National business network (DEMO
developed over the last 30 years the very first initial screening is
Industry specific international carried out by the investor)
network
Timing Centrally DEMO in the deal flow National network provides him
Referrals Visible investor, DEMO with due-diligence information
take direct contact (but the initial screening is DEMO
out by himself)
Relational
Trustworthy Highly profiled investor with a Very concerned about the creation
positive track record on several of trustworthy atmosphere DEMO
arenas the entrepreneur. He must like
the people involved.
Motivation Co-investors must be long term
investors
Clarify expectations ex ante
Cognitive
Shared codes Only DEMO investments, easier
and language to communicate
Prefers to invest within a DEMO
industry
Shared vision Creation of common platform,
common vision is an antecedent of
further cooperation with both co-
investors and entrepreneurs
During this DEMO, he was heavily involved in the start up process of
several DEMO After moving back to Norway, he founded or co-founded
three NTBFs. DEMO means that Egil has relevant experience from all stages
in the life cycle of an entrepreneurial venture. He is well aware of this
himself.
DEMO/deal ﬂow: In the previous ﬁve years, Egil has focused on
investments in the very early stages in the life cycle of NTBFs. DEMO is a
co-entrepreneur and wants to take part in the development of the project
almost from day one: ‘An entrepreneur needs a champion, DEMO
entrepreneur is mistaken if he thinks it is him against the investors. I
will not take part if the parties are not equal’. He DEMO that his main
contribution is his unique experience and network, not DEMO ﬁnancial
capital. Moreover, Egil emphasizes the tremendous importance of being
proactive DEMO having a track record in the process of identifying
interesting investment opportunities: ‘I shoot out arrows all the time . . .
the main thing is to know a lot of people and that these people DEMO you
as a positive person that has a good track record and is capable of seeing
things through’. He is very well aware that DEMO the long run this will
strengthen his position and ‘provides new opportunities to work with
even better people’.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS 353
Screening/evaluation of projects: Egil usually does the initial screening
himself. He is restricted in his investment focus, a conceptual knowledge
of speciﬁc technology areas, and tends to look for concrete ideas that that
match his own visions. Further, Egil makes a point of the fact that he has
no formal education: ‘this is a genuine a chip on my shoulder, I have not
got a piece of paper that actually proves that I know something, . . . but I
have learned a lot within a number of areas DEMO I have had the privilege
to work with smart people’. Egil is able to meet entrepreneurs and carry
on a constructive dialogue, able to speak their language and explain how
their idea can ﬁt his conceptual DEMO Moreover, he emphasizes
the importance of personal chemistry between him or DEMO entrepreneurial
team: ‘Take my last investment as an example, the entrepreneur, a super
person, incredible privilege to work with such a person DEMO . . it took us only
a couple hours to become equal partners’. In order to convince the
entrepreneur, Egil is very conscientious about using other entrepreneurs
as references to conﬁrm his track record. New entrepreneurs DEMO
encouraged to contact other ventures in his portfolio to conﬁrm that Egil
is: (a) a ‘good guy’ to start business with, (b) that he brings competence
with him, and (c) that he DEMO capable of getting further ﬁnance for the
business.
Sources of social capital: Table 6 displays the empirical ﬁndings for
investor 5.
Analysis and interpretations
This section summarizes and analyses the empirical ﬁndings. The two
research questions DEMO be addressed by using the three dimensions of social
capital introduced in section 2.
Addressing research question 1: identiﬁcation/deal ﬂow
The empirical ﬁndings on the role of social capital in the process of
identifying interesting DEMO proposals are summarized in table 7.
These ﬁndings show that all of the investors have extensive social
networks that constantly provide them with new DEMO opportu-
nities. The social network could be other informal investors, but DEMO
important network sources could be, for example, governmental agencies,
VC ﬁrms, universities, etc. The importance of different network sources
varies among DEMO business angels in this study. Ragnvald (investor 2) has
co-operated, DEMO the past two decades, with several research groups at
the university DEMO an investor, but has also hired relevant competence in
order to DEMO his own entrepreneurial ventures. Thus, he has a
reputation as an DEMO who is able to commercialize science-based
ideas. This means that he has access to interesting science-based ideas
already at the embryo stage. Then there DEMO Roar (investor 1) who gets a
majority of his deal ﬂow from regional banks or VC funds. This arises
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
354
ROGER SØRHEIM
Table 6. Sources of social capital for investor 5.
DEMO Identification Screening/evaluation
Structural
Access National industry specific
network
Timing Proactive search through his
network
Referrals Information shared within the
Relational
Trustworthy Has a DEMO record as an individual
who sees things through
national network
Cognitive
Shared codes
and language
Motivation Only interested if he is on an
equal DEMO with the
entrepreneur
A positive track record gives him
the opportunity to work with even
better people
Shared vision Only interested in ideas that
DEMO his conceptual
understanding of the industry
National network (but the very
DEMO initial screening is carried out
by the investor)
Other entrepreneurs share their
views about him as a partner
Personal chemistry with the
entrepreneur DEMO a necessary
antecedent for further co-
operation
Encourage potential partners to
contact his portfolio firms in
order to confirm his track record
Personal chemistry DEMO the
entrepreneur is necessary
antecedent for further co-
operation
from the fact that he has cooperated with these actors in the past and
because DEMO bank or VC fund will not get involved in ventures in the very
early phases of the life cycle. Tord (investor 3) gets DEMO majority of his
deal-ﬂow from other equity providers in his region. This must be viewed
in light of the fact that he was one DEMO the initiators of a formalized
business angel syndicate in his region. Inge and Egil (investors 4 and 5)
get a major proportion of their deal-ﬂow through industry speciﬁc
networks. This again, is related to their prior involvement in these
industries.
All of the investors are co-investing with DEMO informal investors:
investors 1, 2 and 3 in the region DEMO they work and live, and investors 4
and 5 primarily with DEMO within their industry speciﬁc networks.3
These co-investors are people they consider trustworthy based on the fact
that they have dealt with them in the DEMO, thus indicating that
Granovetter’s (1985) embeddedness argument is, to some extent, valid
when examining how business angels identify interesting deals. Further-
more, investors with a track record like that of the investors in this study
will often be visible in the marketplace, which means that entrepreneurs
contact them without prior relationships (directly or via someone in their
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS
355
Table 7. Summary of findings regarding DEMO of investment proposals.
Investor Investor Investor Investor Investor
Sources of social capital 1 2 3 4 5
Structural
Information about investment xa xx
opportunities DEMO through
regional networks
Information about investment xx
opportunities exclusively through
national industry specific networks
Entrepreneurs take direct contact (x) x (x) x DEMO
Relational
Regarded as trustworthy by other (x) x x x x
investors
Has by-and-large a regional track xx x
record
Track record within DEMO (x) x x
industries
Cognitive
Geographic proximity is important x x x
Industry preferences (shared codes (x) x x
and language)
network). However, the average quality of this deal-ﬂow seems to be lower.
Thus, it is the combination of both strong and weak ties that secures an
interesting deal-ﬂow.
Following the reasoning outlined above, it is an intriguing point that
the track record (or reputation) of the DEMO seems to be of vital
importance in several ways. First, the DEMO that they have a long track
record and are experienced investors makes them more visible in the
informal venture capital market, and means that they get investment
proposals directly from entrepreneurs or entrepreneurial teams. Second,
DEMO more importantly, their previous successes leads to an increase in the
DEMO deal-ﬂow and provides them the opportunity to work with even
better projects in the future. This is relevant to potential deals from both
strong DEMO weak network ties. If the track record is related to a speciﬁc
region (or industry), is it quite rational for an informal investor to try and
beneﬁt from this. It is easier to follow up DEMO work within a context
where the investor or group of investors is considered trustworthy. If an
investor’s track record constantly improves, then the quality of the
investment opportunities referred to them will increase. This indicates
that DEMO difﬁcult be an investor in a context where you do not have a track
record. It further suggests that where someone has a track DEMO and
where someone’s personal and business networks lie, strongly affects how,DEMO
and in which contexts, business angels identify interesting investment
opportunities.
However, geography matters. Investors 1, 2 and 3 work and live in or
nearby a regional centre, and they invest solely in opportunities in close
geographic proximity to where they live. The two most prominent reasons
for DEMO narrow geographic focus seem to be: (1) the vast majority DEMO their
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
356
ROGER SØRHEIM
personal and business networks exist in the same region, and (2) it is easier
to follow an investment and to DEMO with people from the region
where the investors work and live. Indeed, investors actually view this
regional knowledge as a competitive advantage. On the other hand, the
other investors who were studied Inge and Egil - work and live in central
parts of the country, yet are not focused upon investing in these.
Nevertheless, they are also concerned about geography, deeming the entire
country as their region. These investors have more nationwide personal and
business networks, but these networks are, to a large DEMO, related to
speciﬁc industries.
Addressing research question 2: screening/evaluation
The empirical ﬁndings with regard to the role of social capital in the
DEMO of screening/evaluating interesting investment proposals are
summarized in table 8. Some of the investors in this study have derived
their experience and the DEMO of their business networks from
speciﬁc industries. These industry speciﬁc investors tend to take care of the
initial evaluation of projects themselves, whereas investors with a more
general business experience rely on information accessed and shared DEMO
regional networks. However, if, after an initial evaluation they decide to go
further with the project, they all perform a more thorough investigation of
the technology, market, management team, ﬁnancial status, intellectual
Table DEMO Summary of findings regarding the screening/evaluation process.
Sources of social capital
Investor Investor Investor Investor Investor
1 2 3 4 5
Structural
Access DEMO and sharing of relevant
information mainly within a
regional network
Access to and sharing of relevant
information within industry networks
Access to and sharing DEMO relevant
information from international
networks
Relational
High importance of initial liking/
perceived trustworthiness of the
entrepreneur
High reliance on information provided
by personal DEMO businesslike networks
(vs. own considerations)
Cognitive
Consider it important to DEMO a common
understanding with entrepreneurs
ex-ante
Consider it important to create a common
understanding with co-investors
ex-ante
x (x) x
(x) x DEMO
(x) (x)
(x) (x) x x x
DEMO x x (x) (x)
xxxxx
xxxx (x)
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS
357
property rights, and so on. An interesting aspect of investors with industry
related networks is that they tend DEMO have access to and share information
with international partners.
The experienced business angels in this study emphasize that they are
investing in the very DEMO stages in the life cycle of entrepreneurial
ventures. Consequently, they must DEMO depend on the
information provided by the entrepreneur or entrepreneurial team, DEMO
are therefore very much concerned with the perceived trustworthiness of
the entrepreneur or entrepreneurial team. Furthermore, this study
indicates that there is a clear link between the relational and cognitive
dimension of social capital in the DEMO/evaluation process. The
investors in this study perceive the creation of some kind of common
platform involving shared goals and values as an antecedent DEMO
developing trustworthy relationships between entrepreneurs and inves-
tors. If this common platform is found to be lacking they reject the
investment opportunity. The cognitive DEMO seems be very
important when it comes to co-investments; the investors DEMO this study
are long-term investors and they will not invest along with short-term
investors. They want to co-invest as long as they and their DEMO
identify themselves with common goals and values. Some of the
investors emphasize the importance of existing investors when they
consider making a new investment. DEMO 1, Roar, illustrates this
when he says that he considers an existing investor as a kind of
guarantor; if he has worked with the investor before and considers him
to be trustworthy, Roar is likely to consider the venture to be
trustworthy as well. Moreover, this may explain why network ties and
previous track records are of vital importance DEMO operating in the
informal venture capital market. The regional investors (or DEMO
speciﬁc investors) have a proﬁle that is well known in a DEMO context.
Entrepreneurs and potential co-investors can ‘check out’ what they can
expect from each other and this makes it easier to create a common
DEMO
Discussion
The analysis has identiﬁed a number of intriguing ﬁndings that need
further discussion. Whereas previous research has suggested that it is
difﬁcult for DEMO investors to identify enough interesting investment
proposals, this study of experienced DEMO angels has revealed a different
picture. The investors studied do not see deal ﬂow a problem; they are
rather more concerned about their limited investment capacity. The reason
for this seems to be rooted in the DEMO that their track records and the
information transferred through regional or industry networks constantly
provides them with interesting investment proposals. Furthermore, this
study indicates that the opportunities identiﬁed through regional or
industry speciﬁc networks are of DEMO quality than the opportunities
offered directly from other sources. Accordingly, the DEMO proposi-
tions are advocated:
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
358 ROGER SØRHEIM
P1a: Experienced business angels identify interesting investment
opportunities mainly through regional or industry speciﬁc networks.
P1b: Investment opportunities identiﬁed via personal or business-
related networks are of a higher quality than opportunities gained
DEMO other sources.
This study also ﬁnds that investors who are oriented towards investment
opportunities in the region where they live and work have general DEMO
experience and track records related to speciﬁc regions. This means that an
orientation towards investments in geographic proximity is related to the
extent to DEMO an investor has a previous track record from a speciﬁc
region. In contrast, investors with more industry speciﬁc experience are
oriented towards investment opportunities within a speciﬁc industry, that
is, within the industry where they DEMO a track record and extensive
network ties. It can be argued that the regionally oriented investors in this
study are generalists in their own DEMO, whereas the industry-oriented
investors are specialists in speciﬁc industries. This indicates DEMO it is
difﬁcult be an investor in a context where you do not have a track record.
Accordingly, the following proposition is advocated:
P2: It is where the investor has a track record that determines how
and in which contexts business angels identify interesting investment
opportunities.
An DEMO ﬁnding is that sector or industry oriented investors do the
initial screening themselves, whereas investors with a more general
investment philosophy rely more on the information from, or the judgment
of, individuals in their regional DEMO This study’s analysis with regard to
the screening and evaluation of projects indicates that experienced business
angels, in general, are quite sophisticated when DEMO comes to the screening and
evaluation of projects, thus supporting previous DEMO that serial
investors undertake a more thorough evaluation of the projects. Based on the
reported ﬁndings in this paper, the following propositions are offered:
P3a: Industry speciﬁc investors take care of the initial screening
themselves to a greater extent than other business angels.
P3b: Experienced business angels undertake a more thorough
screening and evaluation of interesting investment proposals.
Though DEMO activities are considered important, investors are
very aware of the fact DEMO they are investing in the entrepreneur or the
entrepreneurial team when engaging in this kind of early stage investment;
the investors studied also DEMO the perceived trustworthiness of the
entrepreneur. The empirical ﬁndings in this paper indicate an evident link
between the cognitive and relational dimensions of social DEMO A
common platform (common goals and values) is necessary in order to forge
trustworthy relationships with both entrepreneurs and potential co-
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS 359
investors. It is obvious that these DEMO are easier to create if the
investor has a positive track record within the context where he or she
operates. Based on this, the following propositions are proffered:
P4a: The creation of common ground (DEMO and values) is a
necessary antecedent for the development of long-term DEMO
relationships with the entrepreneur or the entrepreneurial team.
P4b: The creation DEMO common ground (goals and values) is a
necessary antecedent for the development of long-term trustworthy
relationships with co-investors or a group of co-investors.
DEMO and implications
This paper has examined the pre-investment behaviour of experienced
business angels using insights from social capital theory. One of the
most intriguing DEMO in this study is that, to a large extent, the
previous track record of business angels determines how they operate in
the informal DEMO capital market. It is quite rational for individuals
whose main experience stems from a speciﬁc region to make the
overwhelming majority of their investments DEMO this region. It is this
regional track record that gives them a competitive advantage in the
informal venture capital market. Moreover, this reasoning seems to be
valid with regard to individuals with industry speciﬁc experience, where
a regional track record is supplanted by an industry speciﬁc record: they
are oriented towards industry rather than geographic proximity. Another
interesting point is DEMO these industry speciﬁc investors take care of the
initial screening themselves to a large extent, whereas regional investors
are generalists who rely on information provided by their regional
networks. The business angels in this study are DEMO much concerned
with creating common ground with entrepreneurs and potential co-
investors.
This paper suggests that insights from social capital theory enhance our
understanding DEMO the pre-investment process of business angels. The
structural dimension plays a key role when accessing and sharing relevant
information within regional or industry networks. DEMO relational
dimension is to large extent related to the perceived trustworthiness of
the investor, for in order to be considered trustworthy the investor must
establish a positive reputation (track record) within an industry or
regional DEMO With regard to the cognitive dimension, this study
suggests that the DEMO of common ground is a necessary antecedent for
developing trustworthy relationships with potential entrepreneurs as well
as potential co-investors. Another important point is that DEMO three
dimensions are interrelated. This means that both the bridging and the
bonding view of social capital must be integrated in order to better
DEMO the pre-investment process among business angels. This
speaks for the type of integrative approach suggested by Nahapiet and
Ghosal (1998).
Downloaded By: DEMO of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
360
ROGER SØRHEIM
Practical implications
A question that needs to be asked DEMO: what about the investors who lack a
track record, but have the will to invest in the informal venture capital
market? Track record is not only correlated to someone’s reputation as an
investor, but could also be related to previous experience as an
entrepreneur or experience from DEMO speciﬁc industry. The implication for
novice investors is that they should try to identify potential co-investors or
groups of investors. The study indicates that DEMO investors may be
willing to include less experienced investors if they share the same goals
and values. The potential investor’s previous track record as DEMO
entrepreneur or employee will also inﬂuence the decision to include less
experienced investors in the experienced business angel’s investment
network.
‘Virgin’ investors could, of course, also use the various forms of
business introduction services, which DEMO be found all over the world.
However, one of the problems DEMO these services is that they are
organized in such a way as to be open to everyone, which means that
you may get ‘B’ proposals and ‘B’ ideas. As a result, these introduction
services are not attractive to experienced angels (Kelly and Hay 1999,
Sørheim and Landstro¨ m 2001). The success of Business Angel Network
(BAN) models, which accept any investor and any entrepreneur, has
been limited (in DEMO of deals funded). However, they have probably
played a signiﬁcant DEMO when it comes to raising awareness about
business angels as an important source of equity. This conﬁrms
Granovetter’s (1985) notion that building institutional DEMO is
not enough.
There has been a recent trend towards the establishment of more
structured angel groups, both regionally as well as with respect to
speciﬁc industries (May 2002). Cerullo and Sommer (2002) report on
experiences from an industry speciﬁc network that focuses on
innovative business DEMO entering a variety of healthcare markets.
This network was founded by three healthcare entrepreneurs and has
45 members, typically cashed out entrepreneurs, with DEMO aim of
helping these ﬁrms ‘out of the garage and into to the market’ (Cerullo
and Sommer 2002). This network, like most DEMO angel groups,
has a paid staff member who takes care of pre-screening the projects,
but involves investors from the network in the DEMO process.
Joining such structured angel groups may be the right solution for
those who need to gain investor experience. However, we have very
little evidence about the success of such groups (or BANs). Time will
show if they are sustainable (Mason and Harrison 2000, May 2002)DEMO A
particular problem in Norway is that such groups barely exist. The
government could potentially support the establishment of this kind of
arena ﬁnancially, but these arenas must be initiated and run by the
business angels DEMO These forums or ‘investor clubs’ should
have some kind of regional or, alternatively, industry/sectoral anchor-
ing. Entrepreneurs will beneﬁt considerably from this, since investor
clubs or syndicates will be more visible in the regions DEMO sectors they
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS
361
operate in. At a minimum, they will be known to the various kinds of
public and private ‘helpers’. DEMO, these structured angel
groups could be linked to various forms of DEMO, science parks,
and so on.
Implications for further research
This DEMO study has provided an enhanced picture of the pre-
investment behaviour of experienced business angels. The study indicates
that insights from social capital theory DEMO to be viable in examining how
business angels operate in the informal venture capital market. Therefore,
future research should continue to examine business DEMO investment
behaviour using insight from social capital theory. Moreover, larger
samples DEMO be used to test concepts from this study, thus, garnering more
reliable results to extend our knowledge about how business identify and
evaluate DEMO opportunities.
This study has adopted a supply side approach. It is therefore
appropriate for other studies investigating how entrepreneurs experience
the pre-investment process to DEMO undertaken, in particular, attempting to
determine to what extent the entrepreneur actually is conscious about, or
capable of, discriminating between potential investors. DEMO study by Sætre
(2003) shows that some entrepreneurs are actually very conscious about
involving investors with relevant background and experience. This is an
DEMO that needs to be further explored. Another issue to be explored entails
to what extent bonding and bridging social capital may inﬂuence the formal
DEMO between investors and entrepreneurs. Finally, there is also a
need for DEMO exploration into the role of bridging and bonding social capital
with regard to the value-added contribution from business angels.
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to DEMO the valuable comments on earlier drafts
of this paper from: Professor DEMO Landstro¨ m, Associate Professor Truls
Erikson and three anonymous reviewers.
Notes
DEMO The ﬁve basic themes in the second interview round were: background/DEMO, pre-investment
activities and post-investment activities. In the third round, the focus was on pre and post-
investment activities. The pre-investment section had introductory DEMO or sub themes
like: how do you identify investment opportunities? Type of network? How do you evaluate
opportunities? Co-investments—why and how? What is decisive for go/no go? Probing and
follow up questions were, of course, also used when needed, suggesting that his kind of
research should be carried out by researchers with considerable experience within this DEMO,
and who throughout, try to be sensitive to the investors’ DEMO stories.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
362
ROGER SØRHEIM
2. For example, Sahlman (1990: 510) who DEMO the role of explicit contracts in early stage
ﬁnance: ‘It would DEMO foolish for the entrepreneur to accept such contract terms if they were not
truly conﬁdent of their own abilities and deeply committed to the DEMO However, this
approach seems to fall short in several ways (Shane and Cable 1999): (1) contracts are offered
rather late in DEMO selection process, other mechanisms must be used in earlier stages; (DEMO)
rigorous explicit contracts are mostly used by venture capital funds; DEMO (3) over optimism
among entrepreneurial ventures will undermine the effectiveness of using explicit contracts.
3. Moreover, the business angels in this study are often ‘lead’ investors, thus it is usually they
who actually bring in other business angels.
References
Adler, P. and Kwon, S., 2002, DEMO for a new concept. Academy of Management Review, 27, 17 –
45.
Baker, W., 1990, Market networks and corporate behavior. American Journal of Sociology, 96, 589 – 625.
Barney, J. and Hansen, DEMO, 1994, Trustworthiness as a source of competitive advantage. Strategic
Management Journal, 15, 175 – 190.
Binks, M., 1996, The relationships between UK banks and their small business customers. In R.
Cressy, B. Gandemo and C. Olofsson (ed.) Financing SMEs – A Comparative Perspective
(Stockholm: Nutek) 113 – 126.
Bolino, M., Turnley, W.H. and Bloodgood, J. 2002, Citizenship behavior and the creation of social
capital. Academy DEMO Management Review, 4, 505 – 522.
Bourdieu, P., 1986, DEMO forms of capital. In J. Richardson (ed.) Handbook of Theory and Research for
the Sociology of Education (New York: Greenwood) 241 – 258.
Burt, R., 1992, Structural holes: The Social Structure of DEMO (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press).
Burt, R., 1997, The contingent of value of social capital. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, DEMO – 365.
Burt, R. 2000, The network entrepreneur. In R. Swedberg (ed.) Entrepreneurship, the Social Science
View (New York: Oxford Management Readers).
Burt, R., 2002, Bridge decay. Social Networks, 24, 333 – 363.
Cerullo, B. and Sommer, B., 2002, Helping DEMO entrepreneurs: a case study of Angel Healthcare
Investors, LLC. Venture Capital, 4, 325 – 330.
Cressy, R. and Olofsson, C., 1996, Financial conditions for SMEs in Sweden. In R. Cressy, B.
Gandemo DEMO C. Olofsson (eds) Financing SMEs – A Comparative Perspective (Stockholm:DEMO
NUTEK).
Coleman, J., 1988, Social capital in the creation DEMO human capital. American Journal of Sociology, 94
(supplement), 95 – 120.
Coleman, J., 1990, Foundations on Social Theory (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Davidsson, P., Lindmark, L. and Olofsson, C., 1994, New ﬁrm formation and regional development in
Sweden. Regional DEMO, 28, 195 – 210.
Eisenhardt, K., 1989, Building theories DEMO case study research. Academy of Management Review, 14,
532 – DEMO
Fiet, J., 1991, Network reliance by venture capital ﬁrms and DEMO angels: An empirical and
theoretical test. In N. Churchill, W. Bygrave, J. Covin, D. Sexton, D. Slevin, K. Vesper and W.
DEMO (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley: Babson College).
Fombrun, C., 1996, Reputation: Realizing Value from the Corporate Image (Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press).
Freear, J., Sohl, J. and Wetzel, W., 1992, The investment attitudes, behavior and characteristics DEMO high
net individuals In N. Churchill, S. Birley, W. Bygrave, DEMO Muzyka, C. Wahlbin and W. Wetzel
(eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship DEMO (Wellesley, Babson College).
Freear, J., Sohl, J. and DEMO, W., 1997, The informal venture capital market: milestones passed and
the road ahead. In D. Sexton and R. Smilor (eds) Entrepreneurship DEMO (Chicago: Upstart) 47 –
69.
Fukuyama, F., 1995, Trust: Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity (London: Hamish Hamilton).
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
PRE-INVESTMENT BEHAVIOUR OF BUSINESS ANGELS
363
Gartner, W. and Birley, S., 2002, Introduction to the special issue on qualitative methods in
entrepreneurship research. Journal of Business Venturing, 17, 387 – 395.
Granovetter, M., DEMO, The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78, DEMO – 1380.
Granovetter, M., 1985, Economic action and social structure: the problem of embeddedness. American
Journal of Sociology, 91, 481 – DEMO
Granovetter, M., 1992, Problems of explanation in economic sociology. In DEMO Nohria and R. Eccles
(eds) Networks and Organizations: Structure, Form and Action (Boston, MA: Harvard Business
School Press).
Greene, DEMO, Brush, C. and Hart, M., 1999, The corporate venture DEMO: a resource-based approach
to role and process. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, spring, 103 – 122.
Harrison, R., Dibben, M. and Mason, C., 1997, The role of trust in the informal investor’s investment
DEMO: an exploratory analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, summer, 63 – DEMO
Huemer, L., 1998, Trust in Business Relation. Economic Logic or DEMO Interaction
Umea˚ ).
Jacobs, J., 1965, The Death and Life of Great American Cities (London: Penguin).
Kelly, P. and Hay, M., 1996, Serial investors and early stage ﬁnance. Entrepreneurial and Small Business
Finance, 5, 159 – 174.
Kelly, P. and Hay, DEMO, 1999, ‘Deal makers’: a reputation that attracts quality. Paper presented DEMO the
Babson College Kaufffman Foundation Entrepreneurship Conference, University of South
Carolina, 12 – 15 May.
m, H., 1992, The relationship between private investors and small ﬁrms: An agency theory
approach. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 4, 199 – 223.
m, H., 1993, Informal risk capital in Sweden and some international comparisons. Journal of
Business Venturing, 8, DEMO – 540.
m, H., 1998, Informal investors as entrepreneurs. Technovation, 18, 321 – 333.
m, H. and Politis, D., 2000, Informal investors as entrepreneurs: the development of an
entrepreneurial career. In P. Reynolds, E. Autio, C. Brush, W. Bygrave, S. Manigart, H.
Sapienza and K. Shaver (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley: DEMO College).
Leana, C. and van Buren, H., 1999, Organizational social capital and employment practices. Academy of
Management Review, 24, 538 DEMO 555.
Lumme, A., Mason, C. and Suomi, M., 1998, Informal Venture Capital: Investors, Investments and
Policy in Finland (Dordrecht: DEMO Academic Publisher).
Mason, C. and Harrison, R., 1991, A strategy for closing the small ﬁrms’ ﬁnance gap. Working Paper
No 3 (Southampton: University of Southampton).
Mason, C. and Harrison, R., DEMO, Informal venture capital in the UK. In A. Hughes and D.J. DEMO
(eds) Finance and the Small Firm (London: Routledge).
Mason, C. and Harrison, R., 1995, Informal venture capital and the DEMO of small and medium-
sized enterprises. Small Enterprise Research – The Journal of SEAANZ, 1/2, 33 – 56.
Mason, C. and Harrison, R., 2000, Informal venture capital and the ﬁnancing of emergent growth
businesses. In D. Sexton and H. Landstro¨ m (eds) Handbook of DEMO (Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers).
Mason, C. and Harrison, R., 2002, Barriers to investment in the informal venture capital sector,.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 14, 271 – 288.
Mason, C. and Rogers, A., 1997, The business angel’s investment decision: an exploratory analysis, In
D. Deakins, P. Jennings and C. Mason (eds) Entrepreneurship in the 1990s (London: Paul
Chapman Publishing) 29 – 46.
May, DEMO, 2002, Structured angel groups in the USA: the Dinner Club DEMO Venture Capital, 4,
337 – 342.
Miles, M. and Huberman, M., 1994, Qualitative Data Analysis: an Expanded Sourcebook (Thousand
Oaks: Sage).
Mishira, A., 1996, Organizational responses to crisis: the centrality of trust. In R. Kramer and T. Tyler
(eds) Trust DEMO Organizations (Thousand Oaks: Sage) 261 – 287.
Nahapiet, J. and Ghosal, S., 1998, Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational advantage.
Academy of Management Review, 23, 242 – 266.
Putnam, R., 1993, The prosperous community: social capital and public life. American Prospect, 13,
35 – 42.
Landstro¨
Landstro¨
Landstro¨
Landstro¨
(Bore` a DEMO
rlag:
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007
364
ROGER SØRHEIM
Putnam, R., 2000, Bowling Alone: the Collapse DEMO Revival of American Community (New York: Simon
and Schuster).
rheim, R., 2000, The informal venture capital market in Norway – investor
characteristics, behaviour and preferences. Venture Capital, 2, 129 – 141.
Reynolds, P.D., Hay, M., Bygrave, W.D., Camp, S.M. and Autio, E., 2000, Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor – 2000 Executive Report, Kauffman DEMO, USA.
Riding, A., Duxbury, L. and Haines, G., 1993, Financing enterprise development: decision-making by
Canadian angels. Working paper (Ottawa: DEMO University).
Roussseau, D., Sitkin, S., Burt, R. and DEMO, C., 1998, Not so different after all: a cross-discipline
view of trust,. Academy of Management Review, 23, 393 – 404.
DEMO, A.S., 2003, Entrepreneurial perspectives on informal venture capital. Venture Capital, 5, 71 – 94.
Sahlman, W., 1990, The structure and DEMO of venture capital organizations. Journal of Financial
Economics, 27, 473 – 521.
Shane S. and Cable, D., 1999, Social relationships and the ﬁnancing of new ventures. Working paper
(Boston: Sloan School of Management)DEMO
Sitkin, S. and Roth, N., 1993, Explaining the limited effectiveness of legalistic ‘remedies’ for trust/
distrust. Organization Science, 4, 367 DEMO 392.
Sørheim, R. and Landstro¨ m, H., 2001, Informal investors – a categorization, with policy implications.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 13, 351 – 370.
Tsai, W. and Ghosal, S., 1998, Social DEMO and value creation: the role of intraﬁrm networks.
Academy of Management DEMO, 41, 464 – 476.
van Osnabrugge, M. and Robinson, M., 1999, Do serial and non-serial investors behave differently? An
empirical and theoretical analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22, 23 – 42.
van DEMO, M. and Robinson, M., 2000, Angel Investing. Matching Start-up Funds with Start-up
Companies (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass).
Wetzel, W., 1983, Angels and informal risk capital. Sloan Management Review, 24, 23 – DEMO
Yin, R., 1984, Case Study Research: Design and Methods (DEMO Hills, CA: Sage).
Reitan, B. and So¨
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 18:22 26 June 2007{1g42fwefx}