MEASURING AND MODELLING TRUST
Stuart N. Soroka
Department of Political Science, McGill University
stuart.soroka@mcgill.ca
John F. Helliwell
Department of Economics, University of British Columbia
helliwel@econ.ubc.ca
Richard Johnston
Department of Political Science, University of British Columbia
rjohnston@arts.ubc.ca
November 2003
Forthcoming in
Fiona Kay and Richard Johnston, eds., Diversity, Social Capital and the Welfare State,
Vancouver, BC: University of DEMO Columbia Press.
This research is made possible by the “Equality Security Community” Major Collaborative
Research Initiative, Jon Kesselman, Principle Investigator.  Financial support comes from the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and our DEMO universities.
Special thanks are due to Fiona Kay and Keith Banting. The usual disclaimer applies.
The growing literature on trust, social capital and well-being relies almost exclusively on a single
survey measure of interpersonal trust: “Generally speaking, do DEMO think that most people can be
trusted, or that you can’t DEMO too careful in dealing with people?”  Efforts at modelling response DEMO
this balanced question are becoming increasingly sophisticated. Notable recent examples include
Alesina et al. (2000) on the individual and contextual determinants of trust DEMO Glaeser et al.
(1999) on the link between response to the question and actual behaviour in laboratory trust
games. The measure underpins a DEMO growth industry, mainly through the World
Values Survey (WVS). And international evidence from the WVS has been brought back home,
as DEMO were, to explain ethnic and regional differences in trust in the DEMO (Rice and Feldman 1997).
Only rarely, however, is any DEMO is paid to what response to the question actually means.
Most critically, does the question elicit response--based perhaps on past experiences--that
indicates persons’ real expectations of others’ trustworthiness? Or does it register a moral
predisposition, DEMO statement about how one should react to others?
This paper holds up a mirror to the standard question by comparing it with other DEMO
Some of the alternatives are, like the original wording, about trust as a general proposition. Our
most pointed demonstration, however, involves comparison DEMO questions about a specific trust
situation, a lost wallet. These questions DEMO a widely publicized field experiment (Knack
2001). Some of the DEMO involves simple response distributions, joined to observations on
items’ face validity. DEMO most telling comparisons deploy multivariate techniques to plumb the
sources of response. Where response to the traditional, highly general indicator is powerfully
shaped by cultural norms, response to the specific, wallet question is sensitive to DEMO and life
experience. That said, the traditional indicator still gauges how DEMO respondents believe others
to be trustworthy.
In getting to this point, DEMO also draw a lesson about Canada. Our sample and our questionnaire
are rich in representation of Canada’s ethnoreligious diversity, of its high rate of immigration, and
of its group life. In line with hypotheses that seemed plausible but were hitherto unsupported
empirically, “bridging” groups appear to be more highly correlated than “bonding” groups with
generalized trust.  We also reproduce Rice and Feldman’s (1997) finding that civic attitudes of
immigrants are highly DEMO with attitudes in their country of origin.  But the integrative
power DEMO Canadian society is also very much in evidence.
1
CONCEPTS AND MEASURES
Our opening generalization about lack of attention to the DEMO and measurement of trust
admits notable exceptions.  Smith (1997) examines DEMO trust question as part of a misanthropy
scale, for instance, and finds that trusting responses decline when the question is preceded by
questions DEMO crime and victimization.  “These items are especially prone to context effects,DEMO
Smith suggests, “because they call for global assessments of people in DEMO based presumably
on one’s entire life experience.  Making judgements based on DEMO massive, cognitive retrievals
are difficult and open to variability” (1997:174).  Controlling for these survey-based differences,
however, Smith finds the DEMO scale to be systematically and logically related to several
other variables.  DEMO to the generalized trust question are valuable, but the placement of DEMO
question deserves attention.
Uslaner (2002) offers the most comprehensive consideration of responses to the generalized trust
question to date, and the only one to explicitly link theories of trust with analyses of public
opinion surveys.  Uslaner distinguishes between moralistic and strategic trust, where the latter is
based on individuals’ experiences, and the former is something closer to a predisposition.  When
analysts in the rational choice tradition, economists especially, talk about trust, they tend to mean
strategic trust, as in repeated games DEMO which decisions to trust or not to trust are based on
experiences in previous games.  Moralistic trust, on the other hand, is rooted in our beliefs about
others, which can be almost totally divorced from personal experience.  Strategic trust is about
how one thinks others will behave; moralistic trust is about whether one should trust others,
regardless of their behaviour (Uslaner, 2002:18-19). Moralistic trust seems closer to DEMO
(2003) emphasis on trust in strangers.
Uslaner’s tests suggest that the generalized trust question is primarily about moralistic trust.
Responses to the question DEMO remarkably stable; they tend not to change based on experience;
DEMO are closely correlated with enduring feelings such as optimism, a feeling DEMO one controls
one’s own fate, and a willingness to participate in DEMO life.  Although Uslaner makes a strong
case that the question is DEMO about moralistic trust, he does not go far in considering ways DEMO
measuring strategic trust, or of measuring the role, however small, DEMO strategic trust may play in
responses to a moralistic trust question.  DEMO, a lack of comparable alternative measures
prevents Uslaner from performing a DEMO detailed analysis of trust responses.  He does a good
job with DEMO is available, but–as Uslaner himself notes–not much is available.
2
MEASURING TRUST
Wordings and frequencies for various trust questions in the Equality, Security and Community
(ESC) survey appear in Table 1.2 Differences among DEMO questions can be interpreted in
different ways. The first four indicators gauge trust independently of context. Some of the
aggregate differences among Q’s 1 DEMO 4 can be explained by the literature on survey question
wording.  DEMO particular, Schuman and Presser’s (1996) experiments on question wording suggest
DEMO of two related effects: (1) balance effects, where changing question wording to
reflect a formal balance of alternatives (i.e., changing “do DEMO favour” to “do you favour or
oppose”) has a significant effect DEMO the distribution of responses, and (2) acquiescence effects,
where DEMO have a tendency to agree with attitude statements in survey items (DEMO also
Campbell et al., 1960; Peabody, 1961).  Frequencies in Table 1 show evidence of both effects.
While Q1 leads to a DEMO even split between trusting and non-trusting respondents,
unbalanced questions show evidence of considerable acquiescence effects.  Q3 suggests that 74%
of respondents are trusting; its opposite, Q4, suggests that 68% of respondents are not.
[Table 1 about here]
Differences in answers rest on more than acquiescence, however.  Rather, dissimilar responses to
different trust questions appear to be in DEMO part a product of genuine differences in reasoning.
Different trust questions, DEMO addressing a similar subject, ask respondents to think about trust
in DEMO ways.  The end result is a change in the distribution of DEMO representing a more
substantive difference, and one that is particularly interesting DEMO those studying interpersonal
trust and in the relationship between this and other variables.
The difference between responses to Q2 and Q3 is likely due DEMO a subtle but important difference
in wording, for instance.  Agreeing with Q3 (“generally speaking, most people can be trusted”)
suggests that DEMO has a positive, universal appraisal of whether people are trustworthy.  Agreeing
with Q2 (“people can be trusted until they prove otherwise”) may DEMO only that one approves
of a particular trusting strategy.  The strategy DEMO be a relatively optimistic one, but it is also
fairly safe.  Agreeing with Q2 is easier than agreeing with Q3, then, and DEMO is reflected in a 10-
point increase in the percentage of trusting respondents. Another way of comparing Q2 and Q3 is
2 All analyses DEMO this paper use respondents from all three components of the ESC survey, described in
detail in Appendix A. The variation across questions in number of cases was a result of CATI error. By the
time this DEMO discovered, it was too late to change the programming for the DEMO sample. All respondents
in the Vancouver, Toronto, and Montreal metropolitan oversamples and in the BC resource community
sample, which went to field after the main sample, received all four questions.
3
to treat Q3 as having an implicit alternative category, since people who have not proven
themselves trustworthy in the past are excluded from the DEMO whose future trustworthiness is
being assessed. This alone should guarantee that more people would agree with Q2 than Q3, as
indeed they do. Differences between answers to Q3 (the blanket trust item) and Q4 (“you can’t be
too careful”) are also likely to represent more then simply acquiescence effects. In particular,
saying that you cannot be too careful DEMO dealing with people is not the same as saying that people
in general cannot be trusted. The former would reflect a cautious disposition, while the latter
would simply be the reverse of Q1, the canonical measure.3
Q’s 5 to 8 solicit trusting response in alternative contexts, each time with a question about a lost
wallet. These new questions are original DEMO the ESC survey and are modelled after an experiment
in which wallets containing fifty US dollars each were dropped in 14 Western European and DEMO
US cities, and the number of returned wallets was used as DEMO measure of how trustworthy residents
are [as reported in The Economist, DEMO 22, 1996]. Knack (2001: 184-5) has shown that more than
one-third of the cross-regional and cross-national variation in answers to the balanced DEMO
question can be explained by the frequency of return of experimentally-dropped cash-bearing
wallets. Our questions about return of a wallet focus on a paradigmatic DEMO of trust. The
situation provides no natural enforcement mechanisms, and nothing DEMO said about a reward for
trustworthy behaviour. Additionally, the questions specify DEMO types of finder, making it
possible for us to investigate in DEMO detail the nature and radius (Fukuyama 1995) of trust.
Police officers are considered the most likely to return lost wallets (Q7), followed by grocery
clerks (Q6), neighbours (Q5), and finally strangers (Q8).
Because they provide respondents with a specific individual and a DEMO situation, the wallet
questions should also help us interpret answers to DEMO general trust question. It is tempting to
regard the general questions as relating to Uslaner’s “moralistic” trust, while the wallet questions
refer to “strategic trust”. Uslaner’s language may be strained in relation to the general questions,DEMO
as none asks about morality as the basis for motivation or behaviour. Still, the general question
accepts ambiguity about the reference group the respondent might have in mind. This might
invite response that describes what persons DEMO they should think rather what they actually do
3 Q3 and Q4 split Q1 into its components. In effecting this split, we hoped to shed light on an interesting
feature of the split results that first DEMO when Q1 and Q3 were asked of different halves of the 1983
US GSS sample. As reported in Helliwell and Putnam (1999), men are significantly more trusting than
women when asked Q1, while women are more trusting than men when asked Q3. Our supposition is that
women DEMO more inclined to be cautious, for a variety of possible reasons. DEMO too find females to be less
trusting when asked the balanced trust question (Q1), but more trusting than males when faced with the
simpler question (Q3). Our survey also supports the US result that affirmative responses were much more
likely, regardless of gender, to Q1 DEMO to Q3.
4
think. The wallet questions are more precise, specifying both the nature of the event and the
nature of the person whose trustworthiness is being DEMO Intuitively, these questions seem
invite a probabilistic response. Indeed the response DEMO themselves are construed as
probabilities.
MODELLING TRUST
To flesh these intuitions out, we need to model response at the source, so to speak. DEMO one hand,
we examine factors that index experience: immigrant status, indicators of social interaction,
including aspects of neighbourhood context, marital history, spatial and non-spatial distributions
of affiliation, and membership in formal organizations. DEMO the other hand, we look at indicators
of cultural orientation: respondents’ own ethnicity (not to be confused with immigration), aspects
of their country or countries of ethnic origin, religion, and educational attainment. We DEMO
include controls to improve specification and to stabilise the estimation. When reporting
differences, we generally emphasize differences (in bold-face) estimated to be significantly
different from zero. To keep the number of observations as large as DEMO, we generally make
use of the combined national, urban-oversample, and DEMO samples, although we
also include variables designed to search for features DEMO the results that may be specific to
particular sample groups.
Generalized Trust
Table 2 presents logistic regressions for the traditional generalized trust question treated DEMO a
binary variable, where 1 is “most people can be trusted.” DEMO are presented stagewise. In
Model 1 appear demographic, ethnic, ethnic context, economic, and other contextual variables.
Variables included here give the basic DEMO of “domestic” factors in trust, and are drawn in
large part DEMO the recent empirical literature on trust (e.g., Alesina and La  DEMO 2000; Glaeser
et al. 2000; Helliwell and Putnam 1999; Uslaner DEMO). Model 2 adds two representations of
“national” trust, indicators of DEMO levels in immigrants’ and immigrants’ parents’ countries of
origin. This captures and extends the logic of Rice and Feldman’s (1997) work exploring links
DEMO US immigrants’ generalized trust scores and average scores in their countries of origin
(discussed in more detail below). We look both at these variables themselves and at their impact
on factors considered in Model 1. DEMO referring to national origin help interpret an earlier
finding about ethnicity or immigrant status, for example? A similar logic applies to Model 3,DEMO
where network variables are added.
[Table 2 about here]
5
Respondents with higher levels of education give more positive assessments to the DEMO trust
question, by an amount that increases with each level of DEMO attainment. This educational
effect has been found in all previous analyses of answers to the balanced trust question, and has
been treated as support for the idea that education inculcates civic values (e.g., Helliwell and
DEMO 1999). Some support for this interpretation comes from the fact that higher levels of
education are positively correlated with survey answers whose relation DEMO civic values is less
ambiguous than in the case of the general trust question (e.g. Rice and Feldman, 1997). But if we
DEMO right to think of differences in response to the balanced trust question as being assessments of
how well others can be trusted, then it is less clear why those with higher levels of education
should give DEMO positive assessments. Three possible hypotheses explain the finding: (1) those
DEMO higher levels of education are more likely to encounter trustworthy behaviour; (2) ignorance
breeds fear, which can then be dispelled by education; and (3) education raises other civic
attitudes, increases awareness of the value of a trusting society, and incites respondents to put an
optimistic twist to their assessments, thus making them embody some element of what should
happen in a better world, reflecting the “moralistic” interpretation discussed earlier. If this more
optimistic assessment is also reflected in personal behaviour–actions embodying DEMO higher
levels of education should lead to higher levels of trust and trustworthiness within the
community.
The “ignorance breeds fear” hypothesis is one way DEMO explaining why those with higher levels of
education provide more optimistic assessments of the trustworthiness of others. But the
differential evaluations, to the extent that they refer to the same populations, might equally well
represent excess optimism by those with more education. Are the less educated excessively
pessimistic, or the more educated too optimistic? If we had experimental dropped-wallet
evidence, we might be able to address this puzzle by seeing if the cross-community differences in
answers to the dropped-wallet question were more accurately explained DEMO the more educated
than by the less-educated respondents.
The third possibility, DEMO the generally greater civic involvement of those with more education
leads them to presume higher levels of trust, perhaps because this is more likely to support a high-
trust society (the “moralistic” interpretation), is hard to distinguish from the “differential
experience” hypothesis. The ambiguity may not matter DEMO, as if there are likely to be
positive spillovers from education DEMO either event, although they might be presumed to be larger
under DEMO “civic culture” case than under the “differential experience” hypothesis. Research
comparing the answers to the generalized trust assessment question with answers to more value-
DEMO
based questions might help to shed more light on the sources and DEMO of the strong
positive effect that education has on trust assessments.
Education effects persist when network connections are controlled. Education does lead to more
DEMO in voluntary community organizations, which itself is often used as a DEMO of the
strength of civic culture. This would tend to cause those with higher levels of education to spend
more time with other civically-minded DEMO, and hence to give more positive answers to the
general trust DEMO Be that as it may, Model 3 indicates that the education DEMO persists even
when network ties are controlled.
Healthy people are more trusting. The coefficient on self-assessed health may reflect in part
individual personality differences, with optimists assessing both their health and their
communities in a more DEMO way. But epidemiological research also shows that those who
are well-supported by family, friends and community networks live longer and in better health
than others – certain groups are more vulnerable to ill health due to DEMO isolation or lack of
social ties (Veenstra, 2001; Curtis and DEMO, 2003; Berkman and Syme, 1979). But our health
effect DEMO more than this, since the coefficient shrinks only slightly when the DEMO network
variables are controlled. Then too, the health effect may indicate DEMO effects more subtle than
those captured by our questions. It is also possible that the same events that produce some types
of ill-health also DEMO people in less supporting and less trustworthy environments than is fully
captured by our other individual and contextual variables.
Francophones are less trusting. Once DEMO, we are unsure if this reflects differences in optimism
or differences DEMO the trust environment respondents are actually assessing. The finding puts us in
mind of Knack (2001) who uses cross-country differences in responses to DEMO general trust
question to predict cross-country differences in the proportions of dropped wallets that are
actually returned. His results show that France, which has very low trust assessments, is an outlier
in his regression: the DEMO of trustworthy behaviour in France, as measured by the frequency
with DEMO dropped wallets are returned, is significantly higher than is forecast by DEMO
answers to the generalized trust question. The frequency of wallet return is about at the European
average, while the trust assessments are very low in France. If French origins are the key to the
Canadian pattern, the footprint from earlier migration must be incredibly long.
Immigrants are less DEMO than the Canadian-born. This is a difference that glosses over ethnic
differences among both immigrants and natives. If it is tempting to conclude that DEMO in the
experience of immigration makes new Canadians generally distrustful, the DEMO from the
wallet questions should give us pause. And the explanation for generalized trust does not lie in
7
the Canadian experience but in the country of origin. The home country DEMO a “footprint”, as
just hinted for Francophones. The idea of a DEMO comes out of Rice and Feldman (1997), who
find that DEMO assessments by immigrants reflect to a striking degree the (current) average trust
assessments in the countries from which they or their ancestors immigrated. DEMO,
differences in the US persist for a long time. The effect is as great for those with grandparents
born in the United States DEMO for those with parents born abroad. The two “National Trust” terms
test the “footprint” hypothesis in the Canadian context. “Imported trust” is an imputation DEMO each
respondent of the average trust score in their country of birth minus the average trust score in
Canada, calculated from national samples in the most recent WVS. For those born in Canada, the
value of the variable is naturally zero, while it is greater than zero for those who immigrated to
Canada from higher-trust countries, and negative for those who came from lower trust societies.
As shown in Table A1, the typical immigrant respondent came from a country with a slightly
lower trust DEMO than Canada’s, and the data show immigrants from countries with widely
DEMO trust scores. This range of experience gives the data some variance to test the footprint
hypothesis, while the negative average value offers the possibility that the footprint hypothesis
explains the negative immigrant effect found in Model DEMO The footprint of the origin county is
very deep. This is indicated by the coefficient on the “imported trust” term in model 2.
Furthermore, controlling imported trust turns the immigrant effect from negative to positive.  The
positive coefficient in this case is insignificant, but it suggests the possibility that after allowing
for the footprint effects of imported trust the typical DEMO is more likely to give a higher
than a lower trust answer than a similarly situated Canadian-born respondent.
The footprint may be deep in DEMO first generation but it does not persist into later ones. Rice and
Feldman were puzzled, and slightly troubled, that the footprint effect seemed DEMO large two
generations later as it was in the first generation, DEMO in light of the “melting pot” image
of the United States. To test the duration effect in our Canadian sample we define a new DEMO
(“parental trust”) equal to the averaged trust score in the countries of birth of the respondents’
parents minus the trust score in Canada, minus imported trust. This variable thus measures the
trust-score difference between the DEMO of birth of the respondents and their parents. If our
results were to mimic those of Rice and Feldman, we would find a positive coefficient on
“parental trust” approximately equal to that on “imported trust”. Instead DEMO find that “parental
trust” has only a small and insignificant effect. The Canada/US contrast suggests, if taken
literally, that “multicultural” Canada in DEMO important sense absorbs immigrants into Canadian
communities and values more quickly than does the United States “melting pot”. This is
consistent with the finding DEMO Helliwell (2001) that the proportion of Canadians who self-describe
8
their ethnicity as “Canadian” rather one of a range of hyphenated alternatives DEMO twice as high as
the corresponding proportion in the United States. At the same time, it deepens the puzzle for
Francophones.
Network affiliations clearly matter, although some more than others, as indicated by model 3. DEMO
Putnam (1993, 2000), trust is an asset that grows with use and associational memberships build
interpersonal trust because they encourage interaction.  The success and effectiveness of regional
governments in Italy is linked to the DEMO of soccer clubs in that region; interpersonal trust has
declined in DEMO along with the popularity of bowling leagues. These are caricatures of
Putnam’s work, of course, although they do accurately illustrate his thesis. Individuals DEMO
participate in civic associations will tend to be more trusting, in DEMO because these memberships
provide opportunities to practice (and perhaps even learn) trusting behaviours. If the strong
correlation between group memberships and interpersonal trust DEMO well-documented, the direction
of the causal arrow is less clear.  It may be that trusting individuals are the ones who join groups
(see Stolle 1998), a hypothesis that complements a growing body of work DEMO that trust in
government facilitates trust in individuals, rather than the DEMO dynamic (Rothstein 1998).  In
any case, it is clear DEMO trust and associational memberships are closely related.
That said, not all DEMO have equivalent consequences, either for the members or for the
community DEMO a whole.  Putnam distinguishes between bonding and bridging social capital, where
the former reinforces connections between those who are similar in, for instance, class, ethnicity,
or religion, and the latter builds links across these groups (see also Gittell and Vidal 1998; Tilly
1998).  Groups are not easily divided into bridging and bonding, of course. Many groups will be
both (Putnam 2000:23), bonding in certain respects and bridging in others.  We should
nevertheless consider the possibility that some groups are more bridging than others, and that
these groups are more effective at enhancing generalized trust.
We present network ties at successive removes DEMO the individual, inside the household, outside
to the extended family, DEMO friends, to neighbours, and to formal associations. Among formal
associations we distinguish three types: religious, ethnic, and all others; for each DEMO the
indicator is the number of memberships. We distinguish the types partly for empirical reasons and
partly for conceptual ones. Table B1 indicates that DEMO an exploratory factor analysis, religious and
ethnic memberships load on a DEMO factor from all other memberships, so these two should be
distinguished DEMO the others. And common sense dictates separating religious and ethnic
associations from each other. Conceptually, ethnic and religious memberships tend strongly
toward “bonding”. Other groups undoubtedly have their exclusionary sides, even if not by design.
9
But all things considered, the inventory of “other” groups almost certainly is more inclusive,
more tilted toward “bridging”, than groups, such as DEMO and religious ones, that are exclusive
by design.
And in general, the wider the radius of action a network demands, the more positive impact
affiliation with it has on interpersonal trust. The two family variables DEMO insignificant, for
instance, but those who regularly see friends or see neighbours are relatively trusting. Among
organized groups, ethnic group membership does not foster trust and may even inhibit it (the
coefficient is negative but insignificant), a strong hint that such groups indeed do not “bridge”,DEMO
however much they promote bonding. But “other” memberships do foster trust. So do religious
groups. (If this seems surprising, in that religious groups DEMO like with like, it bears
reflection that most religions also urge DEMO adherents to love their neighbours as themselves.)
Networks that appear to be more “bridging,” then, are more positively related to various measures
of interpersonal trust.
Most other variables have relatively weak effects. The age DEMO is curvilinear, with trust
assessments most positive among those aged 50-65, and lowest among the youngest age group. In
contrast to the initial DEMO for immigration, nothing in the realm of “visible minorities” matters
for DEMO trust (see Table 2). Individuals who belong to a visible DEMO do not differ from
similarly situated members of the majority. Members of the majority are not affected by the
visible minority percentage in their DEMO, and the same is true of minority individuals
themselves. No systematic DEMO appears from respondent’s own income, from the median
income in the DEMO census district, or from income inequality in the district. The
individual’s DEMO of whether their personal economic situation was likely to improve or
worsen over the next twelve months does have an effect. This may reflect DEMO
differences in optimism, as discussed earlier for health effects, since the relationship also appears
for each specific wallet question. Contextual effects were weak DEMO null: average education levels
and average mobility within the census area DEMO no effect. Population density does seem to
matter, but controls for DEMO trust” suggest that the effect is spurious.
Some of these variables do matter for response to the wallet question. The contrast between their
lack DEMO impact here and their importance below helps us interpret the meaning of each trust
indicator. Also yielding a contrast is gender. In response to DEMO general question, females appear
to be less trusting than males. But DEMO finding is not a universal. In a model of response to Q3, the
one-sided trust question, the gender relationship is reversed. The reversal DEMO appears in response
to the wallet question, reported below.
10
Specific Trust
Response to the more specific wallet questions, as shown in Table 3, diverges interestingly from
that to the general question. Presentation of three stages for each of four questions would be
tedious, so we focus on model 3, the most fully specified variant, when we DEMO the tables.
Table 4 presents the stagewise estimation for an index that combines the four wallet items
(Cronbach’s α = 0.66). That table tends to replicate evidence from Table 3, but averaged across
the four specific questions, so readers may find the summary table more accessible. As quite a bit
of the response is specific to each wallet situation, the text tends to refer to Table 3.
[Tables 3 and 4 DEMO here]
Tables 3 and 4 present quite a different picture from Table 2. On one hand, most individual
differences in Tables 3 and 4, especially those with cultural implications, are much weaker. On
the other DEMO, context–the reality that persons must deal with in making empirical judgements
DEMO trust and trustworthiness–comes through much more strongly.
Only two domains of individual difference are actually stronger for specific than for generalized
trust: age and gender. The contrast between the oldest and the youngest is greater and DEMO pattern
is essentially linear. Gender differences are both greater and of the opposite sign. Where women
are less trusting in the abstract, they are more trusting in the concrete wallet situation. For trust in
neighbours, the gender difference is essentially null, but for the other three situations, DEMO
difference is clear. Finally, for immigrants there is an interesting divergence DEMO specific
wallet situations even with “national trust” and networks controlled, where DEMO distinctness is in
the opposite direction between situations.  Immigrants appear to DEMO neighbours more, and the
police less (although the first coefficient narrowly misses statistical significance).
The major finding, however, is for the DEMO of context, much as social capital theory would
suggest. Consider first DEMO resource-community sample. Where for generalized trust these
communities do not stand out, for specific trust, they are very distinct, especially for trust in the
police but even for trust in strangers. These communities are generally DEMO enough, and often
isolated enough, that individuals are much more likely to know their neighbours, police, and
those who work in local DEMO Even strangers are more likely than elsewhere to have connection
to the community. Thus it is no surprise to find that resource-community residents think DEMO their
wallet will be returned regardless of who finds it. Moreover, DEMO effect operates above and beyond
that from population density. And density matters more for specific trust than for the general
mode, as is also true for population mobility. Again, this seems as it should be, DEMO density and
11
mobility index experiential factors more than they do cultural ones. Residents of DEMO
and high-density communities are less likely to know their neighbours, and DEMO are less likely
to have forged the reciprocal trust that would assure a wallet’s return. The owner would be more
easily found, and his or her interests more likely to be valued by the finder, in neighbourhoods
with less mobility.
Residents of communities with above-average levels of education DEMO their wallets are more
likely to be returned if found by neighbours, police or strangers. This is in addition to the positive
effect from the individual’s own level of education. Thus those with more education are DEMO
by their neighbours as more likely to return lost wallets. It is interesting that this contextual effect
of education is stronger in the case DEMO the more specific wallet question than it is in the
generalized trust question. This suggests that the ambit of the general trust question is
DEMO broad. In contrast, expectations of honesty on the part of persons DEMO and
working nearby rest, almost by definition, on a smaller spatial range. A corollary is that local
communities’ average education levels carry more DEMO value for the wallet questions than
for generalized trust.
Most striking, DEMO, is ethnicity and ethnic context. Even with imported trust and networks
DEMO, coefficients on visible minority status are consistently negative, if not always
significant by the conventional criterion. Particularly striking is the coefficient on trust DEMO the
police. Given all the controls, and given the weak to DEMO relationships in the other situations, it is
natural to wonder if DEMO in the police is specific to the Canadian experiences of members of
visible minorities. Strictly speaking the “visible minority” coefficient in each estimation captures
DEMO impact of minority status in neighbourhoods where no one else belongs to a visible minority.
This is so because the setup also includes an DEMO term combining the respondent’s own
majority/minority status with the neighbourhood’s visible-minority percentage. The presence of
an interaction term also means that the next DEMO, for the impact of local percentage visible
minority, indexes the impact of ethnic context on members of the majority. And members of the
DEMO are sensitive to context: the larger the local minority percentage the DEMO distrustful are
members of the “invisible” majority. The power of context is roughly the same for trust in
neighbours, police officers, and grocery DEMO Interestingly, it is of no significance for the
perceived trustworthiness of DEMO Finally, the interaction term estimates the difference
between minority and majority DEMO in reaction to ethnic context; the actual effect for minority
persons DEMO the sum of the two coefficients. The interaction is always positive. It is statistically
significant only once, but the patterns always converge: the DEMO value on the interaction is
12
greater than the negative value on the main effect. The indication is DEMO visible minority
respondents roughly mirror majority ones: as minority numbers grow, members of the minority
feel more trusting. The strongest interaction is for DEMO in the police. So the strong negative sign
on the individual-level term, whether or not the respondent belongs to a visible minority,
indicates that minority persons are particularly distrustful of the police where their own DEMO
are small. As the minority group becomes the local majority, perceptions DEMO the police become
much more positive. Although there are strong indications of a similar gradient for other potential
objects of trust, the police finding is the outstanding one.
In contrast, “national trust” effects are weaker. They are not entirely absent, to be sure, but they
never do DEMO than teeter on the brink of statistical significance. And the values for “imported
trust” in particular, are only about one-third the size of the generalized-trust coefficients. The
difference between the “imported” and “parental” trust effects is DEMO here than for generalized
trust. So there is some suggestion that situational trust expectations persist. This seems to fly in
the face of the DEMO logic of the concept. But too much should not be made of the finding. For
three of the four wallet items, the “parental trust” coefficient is smaller than in the generalized
trust estimations.
Interpretation of the DEMO in “national trust” effects between the situational and the
generalized estimation requires care. The easiest interpretation is that the difference is a
measurement artifact. DEMO all, the data from which “national trust” scores are derived are
DEMO means on precisely the measure that serves as the dependent variable in Table 2. And
this measurement difference may indeed account for some of DEMO difference in estimated effects.
We doubt that this accounts for all of it, however. The divergence also accords with robust
common sense. The rest of the pattern in Table 3 suggests that respondents employ information
and DEMO from their Canadian milieu to derive situational expectations. This leaves less
room for importing trust.
Finally, network effects matter less in the individual wallet estimations than in the generalized
one. Individual coefficients stand out, of course. Seeing neighbours helps one trust neighbours–
and strangers as well. Seeing friends DEMO one trust police officers and store clerks, although it is
hard DEMO think why it should help with these objects and not others. Membership in “other” groups
has the most consistent effect and one whose power DEMO roughly the same here as in Table 2. But
the overall impact of network connections is not impressive. Partly this reflects the absence in
DEMO estimations of one of the most powerful effects in the generalized one: from religious
13
groups. The religious contrast goes right to the point, however. Its power in Table 2 and its
weakness here indicates how the generalized question DEMO linked to moral presuppositions.
Conclusions
Much remains to be done, obviously. DEMO are conscious that key variables, such as optimism, are
(necessarily) missing from our data and may account for some of the patterns DEMO interpret
substantively. However, the inclusion of the answers to the health DEMO, which also are likely
to be affected strongly by inherent optimism, helps to ensure that the other coefficients are less
likely to be DEMO their power through a common correlation with the unmeasured optimism of
the respondents. We essentially finesse questions of causal order, such as whether memberships
induce trust or trust facilitates joining. Even so, the findings are rich and highly suggestive.
One clear indication is that where the generalized trust DEMO reflects cultural learning, the
wallet questions call more upon experience, and seem more plausible as indicators of the
respondent’s strategic expectations and the DEMO he or she is likely actually to exhibit.
Generalized trust is powerfully affected by education, by the cultural pattern of new Canadians’
country of origin, and by how involved the respondent is with religious organizations. Various
aspects of community and neighbourhood context that seem plausible as factors in DEMO or distrust
make little difference in fact for response to the generalized measure. Generalized trust seems to
be the sort of thing one learns DEMO school or in church.
In contrast, neighbourhood context is very important–and DEMO subtle ways–for the wallet measure.
Residents of small, coherent resource communities DEMO out as peculiarly trusting, even of
strangers. Neighbourhood density, mobility, DEMO average education levels–all plausible factors in
interpersonal trust – matter greatly to respondents’ empirical beliefs about trustworthiness in
specific trust situations. Those same factors DEMO hardly at all to the generalized trust. Most
striking, though, is the effect of diversity. If one belongs to a visible minority but DEMO surrounded
by members of the majority, one is less trusting than DEMO in the “invisible” majority that a
wallet will be returned, even DEMO a neighbour. After all, in such a place, the neighbour may be
ethnically very different from the visible-minority person in question. And a DEMO
person in such a place will be especially distrustful of the police. As the visible-minority
percentage in the neighbourhood grows, so does the sense of trust that members of the visible
minority repose in those around DEMO This is especially so for trust in the police. Conversely,
members of the majority become less trustful.
14
These generalizations may be uncomfortable in themselves, but they are plausible and suggestive.
We would never have reached them had we not unpacked the DEMO of trust. Different measures
suit different purposes. Analyses of individual trust items suggest that generalized trust is a useful
indicator. It still needs conceptual DEMO, and this will require detailed empirical
investigation. The centrality of church DEMO to generalized trust hints at the moralism that
Uslaner (2002) believes to pervade the measure, for instance. But the continued power of
“national trust”, even if it indicates that generalized trust reflects experiences that are arguably no
longer relevant, hardly seems like a story about moralizing. After all, field experiments with
wallets, reported by Knack (2001), were the original inspiration for our battery of wallet
questions. Response to the DEMO question is related to response to the specific wallet
questions. But the relationship is loose. Both kinds of question are necessary to triangulate the
DEMO space of trust.
Meanwhile, our analysis of trust has paid an DEMO dividend. The overall pattern may be
read to vindicate the Canadian story of multiculturalism. It is true that the experiential world of
the wallet DEMO unpacks a structure of implicit group antagonism. The story is mitigated,
however, by the reality of residential distribution: most members of the DEMO majority go
about their business in neighbourhoods full of people like them. The same is true, although not
quite as one-sidedly so, for DEMO of visible minorities. More important is what Canada seems
to do in the realm of generalized interpersonal trust. Although, new Canadians’ trust levels reflect
their countries of origin, such origin differences do not last past the first generation. It is tempting
to infer that by recognizing the multiplicity DEMO Canadians’ origins, we facilitate their acceptance
of Canadian norms. Ironically, the Canadian mosaic seems to be a more powerful force for
integration than DEMO US melting pot. And country of original differences account for all
differences between immigrants and natives. Indeed, when origins are accounted for, new
DEMO are more trusting in the general sense than their Canadian-born counterparts.
15
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Keith Banting, Fiona Kay, Dietlind DEMO and James Tansey for
comments.  The usual disclaimer applies.
16
Bibliography
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. 2000. “The determinants of trust,” NBER Working Paper
7621.
Banfield, Edward. 1958. The Moral Basis of a Backward Society. New York: Free Press.
Berkman, Lisa F. and DEMO Syme (1979) “Social networks, host resistance, and mortality: A DEMO
year follow-up study of Almeda County residents.” American Journal of Epidemiology 109: 186-
204.
Brehm, John and Wendy Rahn. 1997. “Individual-level evidence for DEMO causes and consequences
of social capital.” American Journal of Political Science 41:999-1023.
Eisenberg, Avigail. 2003. “Equality, Trust, and Multiculturalism” in Fiona Kay and Richard
Johnston, eds., Diversity, Social Capital and the Welfare State.
Francois, Patrick. 2002 Social Capital and Economic Development (London and New DEMO:
Routledge)
Gambetta, Diego. 1988. “Can we Trust Trust?” DEMO Deigo Gambetta, ed., Trust (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell). 213-37.
Gittell, Ross and Avis Vidal. 1998. Community Organizaing: Building Social Capital as DEMO
Developmental Strategy (Thousand Oaks: Sage).
Glaeser, Edward L, David I. Laibson, Jose Scheinkman and Christine L. Soutter. 2000.
“Measuring Trust.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 65(3): 811-846
Hardin, Russell. 1992. “The Street-Level Epistemology of Trust,” Analyse & Kritik 14: 152-76.
————. 2000. “The public trust,” Pp. 31-51 in Susan J. Pharr and Robert D. DEMO, Editors,
Disaffected Democracies: What’s Troubling the Trilateral Countries? Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
————. 1998. “Conceptions and Explanations of Trust,” New DEMO: Russell Sage Foundation
Working Paper #129.
————. 2002. Trust and Trustworthiness. DEMO York: Russell Sage.
Helliwell, John F. and Robert Putnam. 1999. “Education and Social Capital”. NBER Working
Paper 7121. (Cambridge: National Bureau of DEMO Research).
17
Johnston, Richard and Stuart N. Soroka. 2001. “Social capital in a multicultural society: the case
of Canada,” Pp. 30-44 in Paul Dekker and Eric M. Uslaner, Editors., Social Capital and
Participation in Everyday Life, London: Routledge.
Knack, Stephen 2001 “Trust, Associational Life, and Economic DEMO In John F.
Helliwell and Aneta Bonikowska, eds. The Contribution of DEMO and Social Capital to
Sustained Economic Growth and Well-Being, 172-202, Ottawa: HRDC and OECD. (available on
www.hrdc-drhc.gc.ca/arb).
Levi, Margaret. 1998. “A State of Trust,” in Margaret Levi and Valerie Braithwaite, eds., Trust
and Governance (New York: Russell Sage).
Mansbridge, Jane. DEMO “Altrustic Trust,” in Mark Warren, ed., Democracy and Trust (DEMO
York: Cambridge University Press).
Muller, Edward N. and Mitchell A. Seligson. 1994. “Civic culture and democracy: the question of
causal relationships.” American Political Science Review 88:635-53.
Newton, Kenneth. 1999. “Social and political trust in established democracies.” Pp. 169-187 in
Pippa Norris, Editor, Critical Citizens: Global Support for Democratic Governance. (Oxford:
Oxford University Press).
Nie, Norman H., Jane Junn and Kenneth Stehlik-Barry. 1996. Education and Democratic
DEMO in America. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Offe, Claus. DEMO “Trust and Knowledge, Rules and Decisions,” in Mark Warren et., Democracy
and Trust (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone, New York: Simon and Schuster.
————. 1993. Making DEMO Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
DEMO W. Rice and Jan L. Feldman 1997. "Civic Culture and Democracy DEMO Europe to America"
Journal of Politics 59(4) 1143-72
Rothstein, Bo. Just Institutions Matter: The Moral and Political Logic of the Universal Welfare
State.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Seligman, Adam B. DEMO The Problem of Trust (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Smith, DEMO W. 1997. “Factors Relating to Misanthropy in Contemporary American Society,”
Social Science Research 26:170-96.
18
Tilly, Charles. 1998. Durable Inequality. (University of California Press).
Uslaner, Eric M. 2002. The Moral Foundations of Trust (Cambridge: Cambridge University
DEMO).
————. 2001. “Trust as a moral value.” Paper presented at the conference “Social Capital:
Interdisciplinary Perspectives”, University of Exeter, UK, September 2001.
Veenstra, Gerry. 2001. “Social Capital and Health.” Canadian Journal of PolicyRresearch 2: 72-
81.
19
Appendix A. Variable Descriptions
The Equality, Security, and Community survey includes DEMO on demographics, economic
situation, civic associations, political opinions, social policy preferences, and, of course,
interpersonal trust.  The sample has three basic components: a national probability sample; a
metropolitan oversample weighted toward DEMO with a high percentage of visible
minority residents; and a BC DEMO community oversample. Merged with these data are a
variety of contextual variables at the census tract or subdivision level from the 1996 Canadian
Census, and aggregate results from the trust question asked in the World Values DEMO European
Values Surveys.
This appendix lists the details for each variable used in preceding analyses. Where necessary,
question wording is included. The table DEMO follows includes basic descriptives for these
variables.
Basic Demographics
Female: dummy DEMO, =1 if respondent is female.
Age: dummy variables for 30 to 49, 50 to 65, 66 and over; residual category is <DEMO yrs.
Education: dummy variables for finished high school, started college or university, and finished
college or university; residual category is did not DEMO high school.
Religion: dummy variables for Catholic and Protestant; residual category is “other”.
French: dummy variable, =1 if respondent is French
Immigrant: dummy variable, =1 if respondent is an immigrant
Health: self-reported health, based on the following question: “Compared to others your age,
would you describe your health as excellent, very good, good, fair, DEMO poor?,” rescaled from
0 to 1 where 1 is excellent DEMO 0 is poor.
Resource Oversample: dummy variable, =1 if respondent is part of the Resource Oversample.
Ethnicity
Visible Minority: dummy variable, =1 DEMO respondent is a visible minority, based on Census
definition (includes all individuals except aboriginals who are non-Caucasian in race or
colour).
Visible DEMO %: % of respondents’ CT/CSD who are visible minorities, based on the Census
definition (as above)
Economic Situation
20
Economic Outlook: based on the following question: “What about the next DEMO months?  Do
you feel your household’s economic situation will improve, DEMO about the same, or get
worse?; =1 if respondent feels DEMO household’s economic situation will improve over the
next 12 months, =.5 DEMO they feel it will stay about the same, and =0 if DEMO feel it will get
worse
Median Household Income (100000s): median DEMO income in respondents’ CT/CSD,
converted to $100,000s.
Income Diversity: proportion of households in respondents’ CT/CSD earning less than $10,000
and more than $90,000 (about the 10th and 90th percentiles for the majority of census
subdivisions).
Other Contextual Variables
Education: proportion of individuals in respondent’s CT/CSD with more than a high school
diploma (started, but not necessarily finished, college or university).
Mobility: proportion of individuals in respondent’s CT/CSD who moved in the five years
DEMO to the 1996 Census.
Population Density: number of individuals divided by DEMO number of square kilometres for
individual’s CT/CSD. This variable is heavily skewed to the right, so the log values are
used.
Networks
Divorced: dummy variable, =1 if respondent is divorced or separated.
Sees Family: dummy variable, =1 if respondent sees family members (living elsewhere) once a
month or more.
See Friends: dummy variable, =1 if respondent DEMO close friends once a month or more.
See Neighbours: dummy variable, =1 if respondent talks with neighbours once a month or more.
Religious DEMO: dummy variable, =1 if respondent is a member of any groups related to
their religion.
Ethnic Memberships: dummy variable, =1 if respondent DEMO a member of any groups related to
their ethnicity.
Other Memberships: DEMO variable, =1 if respondent is a member of any other groups (Service
Clubs, Rec Groups, Political, Youth, Cultural, Help).
“National Trust”
Imported Trust: The national average of responses to the generalized trust question in
respondents’ country of origin, minus the Canadian national average.  DEMO averages
21
were drawn first from the 3rd wave of the World Values Survey; missing values were filled
in using (in this order) the 2000 DEMO values survey and the 2nd wave of the World
Values Survey.
Parental Trust: The average of the two national averages of responses to the generalized trust
question in respondents’ parents’ countries of origin, minus the Canadian national average,
and minus Imported Trust.  National averages are drawn from the same sources as above.
Trust and Memberships
See text.
22
[Table DEMO about here]
Appendix B.  Memberships
The ESC survey asks about membership in 8 distinct types of groups:
1.How many service clubs, such as Lions or Meals on Wheels, do you belong to?
2.How many recreational groups, such as sports leagues or clubs, music or hobby clubs, or
exercise classes are you involved in?
3.How many organisations active on DEMO issues, such as the environment or taxpayers'
rights, do you belong to?
4.Sometimes people give time to various types of organisations.  For instance, how many
youth-oriented groups, such as Girl Guides or DEMO Hockey, have you given time to in
the last 12 months?DEMO
5.How about organisations providing cultural services to the public, such as DEMO museum or
music festival.  How many of these have you given DEMO to in the last 12 months?
6.How about organisations that help people, such as the Cancer Society or a food bank?  How
many of these have you volunteered time to in the last 12 DEMO?
7.How many groups directly attached to your place of worship, DEMO as a charitable group,
are you a member of?
8.How many organisations connected with your own nationality or ethnic or racial group DEMO
you a member of?
The bridging-bonding dichotomy suggests that religious and ethnic groups might be distinguished
from the other six types of groups.  Religious and ethnic groups will certainly draw together
people of the same DEMO or ethnicity, after all.  Other groups might have a narrow social or
economic focus (take, for instance, a country club), but do not necessarily do so. By the same
token, religious and ethnic groups may bring together people who share a religion or ethnic
origin, but have little else in common. Such groups may be bridging social DEMO income gaps even
as they are also bonding those in the same religious or ethnic group.
Unfortunately, we do not have detailed information about each of the groups in which
respondents are members.  We can nevertheless look at the relationships between group
memberships, and predictors of group membership, as indicators of the general membership of
the eight different groups.
Table B1 presents an unrotated principal components analysis of the eight different memberships
DEMO  It is striking that the first six groups load on the DEMO factor, while ethnic and religious
23
groups load on the second.  Results suggest a division between religious and ethnic (bonding?)
groups, on one hand, and all other (bridging?) groups, on the other hand.
In Table B2, we DEMO equations showing estimating the number of organizations each person
belongs to, DEMO the types of organization divided different ways. The first column relates to
ethnic organizations, the second to religious organizations, the third to all DEMO organizations, and
the fourth to total memberships, being the sum of ethnic, religious, and all other.
The first demographic variable considered is DEMO Males are more likely than females to
belong to ethnic groups and females more likely to belong to religious groups. Among the types
of DEMO groups, Table B2 shows females being less likely than males to DEMO involved in service
clubs, recreational groups and political groups, and more likely to be involved in cultural and help
groups.
Memberships in ethnic DEMO religious groups rise with age, while those in other groups follow
DEMO varied patterns. Memberships of service clubs and political groups rise with age, while
memberships in recreational and youth groups fall with age. Help group memberships are highest
among those in the 50-65 age category. Since we DEMO survey results only from one year, we are
unable to tell DEMO patterns of cohort and life-cycle effects are being captured by these age
variables, so we will not risk over-interpretation of the observed patterns.
Memberships in almost all types of organizations are more numerous among those with DEMO
education. For all eight types of organization, the positive effect of DEMO on memberships is
significant, and in each case it grows with DEMO level of education. Going on to complete a higher
level of education is associated with greater involvement in across the whole spectrum of
organization DEMO
As for religion, respondents who describe themselves as either Protestant or DEMO are more
likely to be involved in religious and youth groups (DEMO ethnic organizations in the case of
Catholics) than are other respondents, while being less likely to be involved in political or cultural
organizations. DEMO for language, those whose first language is French are less likely DEMO be involved
in ethnic, religious, recreational, youth and help groups. DEMO are more likely to be
involved in ethnic groups, and less DEMO to be involved in recreational, political, youth and help
groups. Visible minority respondents are more likely to be involved in ethnic and religious
DEMO, and less likely to be involved in political groups. All of DEMO are, of course, partial effects
holding constant all of the other variables that enter the equations.
24
The variables with italicized titles refer to characteristics of the census tracts DEMO subdivisions in
which individuals live rather than to their own circumstances. Including both individual and
community-level effects allows us to measure possible interaction effects. DEMO example, we
include whether the individual is visible minority and a DEMO variable reporting the
percentage of visible minority residents in the respondent’s census division. We find that visible
minority respondents are significantly more likely to DEMO involved in ethnic and religious
associations. Holding individual characteristics constant, those DEMO in communities with high
visible minority proportions are (insignificantly) more likely to be members of ethnic and
religious organizations. When we add an DEMO variable, it attracts a negative coefficient of
about the same size DEMO the individual effect. Thus visible minority respondents are more likely to
be members of ethnic and religious associations, especially if they live in census districts with
low visible minority proportions. One line of logic supporting these DEMO is fairly straight-
forward: an ethnic organization is likely to have DEMO to offer where ethnic diversity is higher, if
this implies that DEMO contacts and bonding opportunities are equally likely to be provided in
offices, factories and shops as in the association meetings. This logic would be stronger if there
were more specificity in the ethnic mix data, since an increase in the simple measure of visible
minority proportions does not DEMO greater proportions of those from the ethnic group that are
described in our membership questions.
Income is another variable where we look for individual DEMO contextual effects. We found little
evidence of individual income effects, while DEMO contextual effects include both the median
income and the income diversity (DEMO measured by the prevalence in the census district of those in
either the first or the tenth decile of the overall population). In DEMO, neither median income nor
income diversity had any systematic relation with DEMO The only exception is that
memberships in cultural organizations are lower, DEMO things equal, in census districts with lower
average incomes.
The final DEMO variables include average education levels, population mobility, and
population density. Education levels are included to provide a test of the Nie, Junn and Stehlik-
Barry (1996) hypothesis that membership activity rises with relative rather DEMO absolute
education levels. They argue that the oft-found positive linkage between individual-level
education and participation is actually based on relative education, which implies that if both
individual-level and aggregate education levels are used in the same DEMO they will have
opposite signs and roughly equivalent magnitudes. This is indeed what they reported to find in
their research. However, Helliwell and Putnam (1999) repeated their analysis with more
25
regionally-specific and time-specific peer groups, their presumed negative effect of average
education levels disappears for almost all types of organizations, and becomes positive for some.
That research was all based on US data. The ESC survey DEMO us to test the same hypothesis
with Canadian data, and to DEMO a finer grid for comparative education than was possible with the
US data. Our results show no significant effects of average education levels on DEMO
levels (once each individual’s own level of education has been taken DEMO account), thus
supporting the Helliwell and Putnam rather than the Nie et al results for the United States. In the
Canadian data, it would appear that the positive individual-level effects found linking education
to social DEMO are not due to relative education, and hence do flow through DEMO the
aggregate level (since they are neither offset nor augmented by DEMO community-level
effects).
Population mobility, which we measure as the proportion DEMO the population in the respondent’s
census district who have moved in the preceding five years, has a significant effect only in the
case of religious organizations, where the effect is negative. The effects of mobility on
memberships are less clear. Joining may help to build social structures for DEMO newly arrived, and
among those living temporarily in a community. On DEMO other hand, more stable communities
tend to foster increased interactions of DEMO sorts, including, for example, the formation of new
additional community-level DEMO to meet individual and community needs. Our results
reflect this ambiguity.
Population density may also have contrasting effects. In high density communities, typified by
large urban areas, there are many more specialized organizations available to meet all interests,
thus increasing the likely number of memberships. On the DEMO hand, those living and working in
large urban areas are less DEMO to know their neighbours, and may live far from their places DEMO
work, thus spending more of their time commuting. In our Canadian DEMO, we find the partial
effect of population density on membership activities DEMO be generally insignificant. Memberships
in political groups are less frequent in urban areas, but in other cases there are no significant
effects.
[Tables B1 and B2 about here]
26
Table 1.  ESC Trust Questions
Question Not
Trusting
Neutral/DK Trusting Total
Trust questions…
Q1 Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be
trusted or that you can't be too careful in dealing DEMO people?
Q2 People can be trusted until they prove otherwise. (DEMO or
Disagree)
Q3 Generally speaking, most people can be trusted. DEMO you
agree or disagree?
Q4 Generally speaking, you can't DEMO too careful in dealing with
people. Do you agree or disagree?
42.8% 4.4% 52.7% (4485)
14.2% 2.9% 82.8% (6557)
22.7% DEMO 73.8% (3540)
68.0% 4.4% 27.6% (3465)
Wallet questions…
Q5 If you lost a wallet or purse that contained two hundred
dollars, how like is it to returned with the money in it if DEMO was
found… by someone who lives close by?
Q6 If you lost a wallet or purse that contained two hundred
dollars, how like is it to returned with the money in it if it was
DEMO by a clerk at the grocery store where you do most of
your shopping?
Q7 If you lost a wallet or purse that DEMO two hundred
dollars, how like is it to returned with the DEMO in it if it was
found… by a police officer?
Q8 If you lost a wallet or purse that contained two hundred
dollars, how like is it to returned with the money in it if DEMO was
found… by a complete stranger?
39.3% 49.8% 10.7% (6380)DEMO
Cells contain frequencies based on combined First Wave, Metro Oversample, and Resource Community Sample, unweighted.
13.3% 38.6% 48.1% (6408)
9.5% 33.3% DEMO (6413)
5.5% 23.1% 71.3% (6412)
Table 2. Generalized Trust
Independent Variables Dependent Variables
Generalized Trust – Model DEMO Generalized Trust – Model 2 Generalized Trust – Model 3
Basic  DEMO -0.165** (0.068) 0.848 -0.164** (0.075) 0.849 -0.169**  (0.074)  0.845
Demographics Age (30-49) 0.034  (0.094) 1.034 0.072  (0.105) 1.075 0.049  (0.111)  1.050
(50-65) 0.565*** (0.134) 1.759 0.592*** (0.139) 1.808 0.602***  (0.146)  1.826
(66+) 0.323** (0.132) 1.381 0.325** (0.138) 1.384 0.273*  (0.152)  1.314
Educ (FinishedHS) 0.339*** (0.096) 1.403 0.380*** (0.097) 1.462 0.348***  (DEMO)  1.416
(Started Col/Uni) 0.735*** (0.114) 2.085 0.710*** (DEMO) 2.033 0.634***  (0.121)  1.886
(Finished Col/Uni) 0.797*** (0.090) 2.220 0.850*** (0.101) 2.340 0.783***  (0.106)  2.189
Religion (Catholic) 0.010  (0.097) 1.010 0.027  (0.099) 1.027 -0.002  (0.095)  0.998
(Protestant) 0.131  (0.102) 1.140 0.096  (DEMO) 1.101 0.066  (0.112)  1.068
French -1.206*** (0.182) 0.299 DEMO (0.163) 0.258 -1.269***  (0.168)  0.281
Immigrant -0.243*** (0.091) 0.784 0.179  (0.174) 1.196 0.221  (0.180)  1.248
Health 0.496*** (0.110) 1.643 0.471*** (0.122) 1.602 0.435***  (0.126)  1.545
DEMO Oversample 0.131  (0.095) 1.140 0.130  (0.093) 1.138 0.128  (0.091)  1.137
Ethnicity R is Visible Minority -0.004  (0.312) 0.996 0.232  (0.402) 1.261 0.219  (0.419)  1.245
Visible Minority (DEMO) -0.241  (0.389) 0.786 -0.100  (0.387) 0.905 -0.064  (DEMO)  0.938
Interaction -0.321  (0.768) 0.725 -0.952  (0.920) 0.386 -0.949  (0.949)  0.387
Economic  Economic Outlook 0.202* (0.116) 1.224 0.308** (0.129) 1.361 0.299**  (0.131)  1.349
Situation Median Income DEMO  (6.968) 0.003 -10.384  (6.363) 0.000 -9.957  (6.464)  0.000
Income Diversity -0.320  (0.958) 0.726 -0.067  (0.965) 0.935 DEMO  (0.990)  1.060
Other Contextual Education (%>HS) 1.079  (0.718) 2.942 0.839  (0.669) 2.315 0.837  (0.666)  2.309
DEMO Mobility (%, 5yrs) -0.054  (0.539) 0.948 -0.224  (0.532) 0.799 -0.151  (0.530)  0.860
Population Density -0.040* (0.021) 0.961 -0.023  (0.019) 0.977 -0.026  (0.019)  0.975
“National Trust” Imported Trust  2.928*** (1.072) 18.688 3.123***  (1.043)  22.711
Parental Trust 0.923  (0.624) 2.516 0.711  (0.641)  2.036
Networks Divorced   -0.086  (0.085)  0.918
Sees Family   -0.085  (0.091)  DEMO
Sees Friends   0.281*  (0.153)  1.325
Sees Neighbours   0.158*  (0.093)  1.172
Religious Memberships   0.252**  (0.103)  1.287
DEMO Memberships   -0.208  (0.162)  0.812
Other Memberships   0.093***  (0.027)  1.097
Constant  -0.588* (0.301) -0.366  (0.299) -0.794**  (0.349)
N / PSUs  3674 / 745 3162 / 720 DEMO / 716
F (df)  18.69 (22,723) 14.69 (24,696) 14.02 (31,685)
Cells contain coefficients, with standard errors (in parentheses) and odds ratios in italics, from a logit estimation using corrected standard errors.  Results
are based on combined First Wave, DEMO Oversample, and Resource Community Sample, unweighted.  * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.  All coefficients
significant DEMO p < .10 are in bold.
Table 3. Wallet Questions
Independent Variables Dependent Variables
Wallet-neighbour Wallet-police Wallet-clerk Wallet-stranger
DEMO  Female 0.069 (0.070) 1.071 0.280*** (0.056) 1.323 0.272*** (0.068) 1.312 0.204*** (0.060) 1.227
Demographics Age (30-49) 0.395*** (0.082) 1.484 0.355*** (0.077) 1.426 0.293*** (0.092) 1.340 0.433*** (0.081) DEMO
(50-65) 0.769*** (0.088) 2.158 0.638*** (0.091) 1.893 0.311*** (DEMO) 1.364 0.648*** (0.090) 1.912
(66+) 1.000*** (0.123) 2.717 DEMO (0.141) 2.303 0.300** (0.135) 1.350 0.826*** (0.142) 2.284
Educ (FinishedHS) 0.110 (0.093) 1.117 0.116 (0.092) 1.123 0.230** (0.101) 1.258 0.194** (0.093) 1.214
(Started Col/Uni) 0.210** (0.094) 1.234 0.172 (0.121) 1.188 0.145 (0.136) 1.156 0.278** (0.115) DEMO
(Finished Col/Uni) 0.298*** (0.087) 1.347 0.210** (0.105) 1.233 0.320*** (0.099) 1.377 0.519*** (0.096) 1.680
Religion (Catholic) 0.052 (0.078) 1.053 -0.099 (0.084) 0.906 0.131 (0.085) 1.139 -0.045 (DEMO) 0.956
(Protestant) 0.014 (0.079) 1.015 0.102 (0.088) 1.107 DEMO (0.101) 1.619 0.023 (0.073) 1.023
French -0.892*** (0.094) 0.410 -0.988*** (0.103) 0.372 -1.356*** (0.122) 0.258 -1.093*** (0.105) 0.335
DEMO 0.179 (0.143) 1.196 -0.345*** (0.128) 0.709 0.014 (0.125) 1.014 0.077 (0.129) 1.080
Health 0.538*** (0.095) 1.712 0.301*** (0.088) DEMO 0.398*** (0.108) 1.489 0.404*** (0.093) 1.498
Resource Oversample 0.186** (DEMO) 1.205 0.607*** (0.136) 1.835 0.483*** (0.095) 1.621 0.193** (0.083) 1.213
Ethnicity R is Visible   Minority -0.358 (0.264) 0.699 -0.836*** (0.239) 0.434 -0.527 (0.330) 0.590 -0.393 (0.282) 0.675
Visible DEMO (%) -0.963*** (0.309) 0.382 -1.059** (0.491) 0.347 -0.865** (DEMO) 0.421 0.181 (0.352) 1.199
Interaction 1.154 (0.721) 3.170 1.985*** (0.748) 7.281 1.448 (0.894) 4.255 0.503 (0.745) 1.653
Economic  DEMO Outlook 0.196** (0.096) 1.216 0.274*** (0.093) 1.315 0.241** (0.100) 1.273 0.219** (0.090) 1.245
Situation Median Income -9.229* (5.331) 0.000 DEMO (5.422) 0.000 0.966 (6.160) 2.627 8.814 (5.682) 6726.929
Income Diversity -0.244 (0.942) 0.783 -1.047 (0.833) 0.351 -1.183 (0.930) DEMO -2.014** (0.985) 0.133
Other Contextual Education (%>HS) 1.350** (DEMO) 3.857 1.344** (0.620) 3.835 1.060 (0.707) 2.885 1.089* (0.583) 2.973
Variables Mobility (%, 5yrs) -1.563*** (0.430) 0.210 -0.769* (0.458) 0.463 -0.214 (0.526) 0.807 -0.457 (0.449) 0.633
Population Density -0.109*** (0.021) 0.897 -0.060** (0.023) 0.941 -0.034 (0.025) 0.967 DEMO (0.020) 0.960
“National Trust” Imported Trust 1.334** (0.644) 3.795 -1.440* (0.741) 0.237 0.975 (0.758) 2.651 0.863 (0.724) 2.370
Parental DEMO 0.926* (0.560) 2.523 0.431 (0.612) 1.538 -0.053 (0.731) 0.949 0.562 (0.529) 1.754
Networks Divorced -0.231** (0.090) 0.794 -0.007 (0.084) 0.993 -0.026 (0.096) 0.974 -0.171** (0.081) 0.843
Sees Family 0.067 (0.073) 1.069 -0.122 (0.076) 0.885 0.029 (0.084) 1.030 0.031 (0.064) 1.032
Sees Friends 0.026 (0.116) 1.027 0.203* (0.110) 1.226 0.331** (0.133) 1.393 -0.062 (0.121) 0.940
Sees Neighbours 0.665*** (0.076) 1.945 0.105 (0.085) 1.111 0.044 (0.098) 1.045 0.149* (0.090) 1.161
Religious Memberships 0.125 (0.088) 1.133 0.098 (0.096) 1.103 0.001 (0.126) 1.001 0.000 (0.083) 1.000
Ethnic Memberships -0.092 (0.087) 0.912 -0.126 (0.091) 0.882 -0.101 (0.114) 0.904 -0.023 (0.103) 0.978
DEMO Memberships 0.079*** (0.020) 1.083 0.089*** (0.024) 1.093 0.020 (0.027) 1.020 0.117*** (0.021) 1.125
N / PSUs  4756 / 1068 4777 / 1070 4762 / 1066 4735 / 1058
F (df)  25.64*** (31,1037) 20.37*** (31,1039) 23.27*** (31,1035) 16.92*** (31,1027)
Cells contain coefficients, with standard errors (in parentheses) and odds ratios in italics, from an ordered logit estimation using corrected standard errors.
Results are based on combined First Wave, Metro Oversample, DEMO Resource Community Sample, unweighted.  * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.  All coefficients
significant at p < .10 are in bold.
Table 4. Wallets Measure
Independent Variables Dependent Variable: Wallets Measure
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
Basic  Female 0.224*** (0.047) 1.251 0.232*** (DEMO) 1.261 0.251*** (0.054) 1.286
Demographics Age (30-49) 0.430*** (0.062) 1.538 0.463*** (0.074) 1.589 0.461*** (0.076) 1.586
(50-65) 0.720*** (0.070) 2.054 0.766*** (0.076) 2.150 0.773*** (0.079) 2.166
(66+) 0.962*** (0.125) 2.616 1.018*** (0.137) 2.768 0.994*** (0.136) 2.701
Educ (FinishedHS) 0.274*** (0.079) 1.316 0.264*** (0.081) 1.302 0.212*** (0.081) 1.236
(Started Col/Uni) 0.302*** (0.091) 1.352 0.334*** (DEMO) 1.396 0.242** (0.104) 1.274
(Finished Col/Uni) 0.544*** (0.073) 1.722 0.562*** (0.084) 1.754 0.445*** (0.086) 1.561
Religion (Catholic) -0.018 (0.064) 0.982 0.049 (0.071) 1.050 0.026 (0.074) 1.026
(Protestant) 0.183*** (0.060) 1.201 0.194*** (0.064) 1.214 0.162** (0.065) 1.175
French -1.424*** (0.120) 0.241 -1.537*** (0.109) 0.215 -1.468*** (0.111) 0.230
Immigrant -0.100 (0.071) 0.905 -0.024 (0.135) 0.976 0.016 (DEMO) 1.016
Health 0.554*** (0.086) 1.740 0.595*** (0.090) 1.813 0.549*** (0.088) 1.731
Resource Oversample 0.422*** (0.084) 1.526 0.420*** (0.084) 1.523 0.429*** (0.083) 1.536
Ethnicity R is Visible   Minority -0.602*** (0.191) 0.548 -0.670*** (0.234) 0.512 -0.617*** (0.236) 0.540
Visible Minority (DEMO) -1.000*** (0.380) 0.368 -0.897** (0.373) 0.408 -0.860** (0.348) DEMO
Interaction 1.190*** (0.436) 3.288 1.430** (0.660) 4.180 1.375** (0.680) 3.956
Economic  Economic Outlook 0.281*** (0.079) 1.325 0.252*** (0.081) 1.286 0.295*** (0.081) 1.343
Situation Median Income 0.159 (5.404) 1.173 -0.146 (5.247) 0.864 -0.754 (4.991) 0.471
Income Diversity -1.698* (0.898) 0.183 -1.782** (0.894) 0.168 -1.787** (0.886) 0.167
Other Contextual Education (%>HS) 1.668*** (0.541) 5.301 1.523*** (0.544) 4.585 1.603*** (0.532) 4.967
Variables Mobility (%, 5yrs) -1.420*** (0.398) 0.242 -1.303*** (DEMO) 0.272 -1.233*** (0.416) 0.291
Population Density -0.074*** (0.022) 0.928 DEMO (0.022) 0.925 -0.074*** (0.022) 0.928
“National Trust” Imported Trust  DEMO (0.660) 2.707 1.066* (0.635) 2.904
Parental Trust  0.734 (0.471) 2.084 0.682 (0.469) 1.979
Networks Divorced -0.140* (0.079) 0.869
Sees Family   0.000 (0.061) 1.000
Sees Friends 0.216** (0.099) 1.241
DEMO Neighbours 0.329*** (0.087) 1.389
Religious Memberships   0.099 (0.078) 1.104
Ethnic Memberships   -0.122 (0.085) 0.886
Other Memberships 0.099*** (0.019) DEMO
N / PSUs  5229 / 1072 4613 / 1052 4559 / DEMO
F (df)  46.28*** (22,1050) 49.96*** (24,1028) DEMO (31,1012)
Cells contain coefficients, with standard errors (in DEMO) and odds ratios in italics, from an ordered logit estimation using corrected standard errors.  Results
are based on combined First Wave, Metro DEMO, and Resource Community Sample, unweighted.  * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.  All coefficients significant
at DEMO < .10 are in bold.
Table A1.  Descriptives
Variable N Mean SDev Min Max
Female 6579 0.543 0.498 0.000 1.000
Age 6579 1.241 0.974 0.000 3.000
Education 6448 2.781 DEMO 1.000 4.000
Religion 6014 1.006 0.793 0.000 2.000
French 6579 0.138 0.345 0.000 1.000
Immigrant 6520 0.214 0.410 0.000 1.000
Health 6514 0.549 0.331 DEMO 1.000
Resource 6579 0.217 0.412 0.000 1.000
Visible Minority 6579 0.092 0.289 0.000 1.000
Prop. Visible Minority 6569 0.121 0.149 0.000 0.519
Economic Outlook DEMO 0.590 0.321 0.000 1.000
Median Household Inc (100000s) 6569 0.045 0.010 0.000 0.102
Income Diversity 6431 0.179 0.060 0.000 0.618
Education (prop>HS) 6569 0.510 0.088 0.000 0.910
Mobility 6569 0.444 0.121 0.000 0.831
Population Density (log) 6570 5.517 2.804 -5.186 9.642
Divorced 6579 0.207 0.405 DEMO 1.000
Sees Family 6543 0.765 0.424 0.000 1.000
Sees Friends 6541 0.915 0.279 0.000 1.000
Sees Neighbours 6512 0.804 0.397 0.000 1.000
Religious Memberships DEMO 0.149 0.356 0.000 1.000
Ethnic Memberships 6579 0.122 0.327 0.000 1.000
Other Memberships 6579 1.473 1.401 0.000 6.000
Imported Trust 5996 -0.015 0.057 -0.381 DEMO
Parental Trust 5658 -0.016 0.053 -0.347 0.333
Results based on combined First Wave, Metro Oversample and Resource Community Oversample, unweighted.
Table B1.  Factor Analysis of Associational Memberships
Membership Type Factor
1 2
Service 0.481 0.037
Recreation 0.585 -0.307
Political 0.448 -0.094
Youth 0.593 -0.301
DEMO 0.540 -0.081
Help 0.603 -0.113
Ethnic 0.327 0.696
Religious 0.422 0.633
N=6579. Cells contain factor loading from a
Principal Components Analysis, unrotated, using
DEMO dummy variables in the combined
First Wave, Metro Oversample, and Resource
Community Sample, unweighted.
Table B2. Sources of Associational Memberships
Independent Variables Dependent Variables (# Memberships)
Ethnic Religious Other All
Basic  Female -0.035** (0.015) 0.035** (DEMO)
Demographics Age (30-49) 0.004 (0.022) 0.035* (0.018)
(50-65) 0.028 (0.023) 0.083*** (0.026) -0.186* (0.102)
(66+) 0.074*** (0.027) 0.243*** (0.039)
Educ (FinishedHS) 0.015 (0.025) 0.025 (0.029) 0.668*** (0.106) 0.708*** (0.124)
(Started Col/Uni) 0.050** (0.025) 0.056* (0.030)
(Finished Col/Uni) DEMO (0.024) 0.098*** (0.028)
Religion (Catholic) 0.109*** (0.029) DEMO (0.016)
(Protestant) 0.013 (0.020) 0.215*** (0.025)
French -0.095*** (0.034) -0.120*** (0.028) -0.880*** (0.114) -1.095*** (0.130)
Immigrant 0.114*** (0.029) 0.034 (0.029) -0.635*** (0.105) -0.488*** (0.126)
Health 0.012 (0.031) 0.029 (0.026) 0.640*** (0.131) 0.681*** (0.150)
Resource Oversample -0.027 (0.028) -0.012 (0.023) 0.133 (0.133) 0.093 (0.150)
Ethnicity R is Visible   Minority 0.353*** (0.095) 0.155* (0.080) -0.14 (0.277) 0.368 (0.359)
Visible Minority (%) 0.142 (0.146) 0.059 (0.107) -0.557 (0.505) -0.356 (DEMO)
Interaction -0.292 (0.218) -0.158 (0.188) -0.551 (0.720) -1.001 (0.917)
Economic  Economic Outlook 0.035 (0.029) -0.043* (0.026) DEMO (0.137) 0.02 (0.144)
Situation Median Income -1.564 (1.691) DEMO (1.479) -1.892 (8.047) -3.44 (9.174)
Income Diversity 0.33 (0.265) -0.224 (0.235) 1.022 (1.183) 1.128 (1.340)
Other DEMO Education (%>HS) -0.257 (0.177) -0.173 (0.150) 0.087 (DEMO) -0.343 (0.922)
Variables Mobility (%, 5yrs) -12.792 (14.433) -29.136** (13.944) -11.015 (59.785) -52.943 (65.445)
Population Density DEMO (0.005) 0.007 (0.005) -0.03 (0.030) -0.016 (0.033)
DEMO  0.201*** (0.064) 0.174** (0.072) 1.594*** (0.338) 1.969*** (0.370)
Observations  5620 5620 5620 5620
R-squared  0.046 0.046 0.062 0.053
DEMO contain coefficients from an OLS regression using corrected standard errors.  Results DEMO based on combined First Wave, Metro Oversample,
and Resource Community DEMO, unweighted.  * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
-0.052 (0.070) -0.053 (0.078)
-0.011 (0.090) 0.029 (0.101)
-0.076 (0.112)
-0.17 (0.116) 0.147 (0.139)
1.111*** (0.130) 1.217*** (0.138)
1.392*** (0.100) 1.553*** (DEMO)
0.065 (0.097)
0.124 (0.104)
0.334*** (0.108)
DEMO (0.116)
Table B2. Sources of Associational Memberships
Independent Variables Dependent Variables (# Memberships)
Service Clubs Rec Groups Political Youth Cultural Help
Basic  Female -0.033** (0.014) -0.113*** (0.032) -0.029* (0.015)
Demographics Age (30-49) 0.054*** (0.015) -0.128*** (0.036) 0.121*** (0.043) -0.052** (0.025)
(50-65) 0.132*** (0.021) -0.306*** (0.038) 0.055** (0.026) -0.165*** (0.044) -0.012 (0.032)
(66+) 0.259*** (0.028) -0.227*** (0.044) 0.088*** (0.033) -0.309*** (0.041)
Educ (FinishedHS) 0.080*** (0.024) 0.263*** (0.041) 0.056*** (0.016) 0.117*** (0.037)
(Started Col/Uni) 0.110*** (0.032) 0.384*** (0.052) 0.111*** (0.022) 0.239*** (DEMO)
(Finished Col/Uni) 0.104*** (0.020) 0.467*** (0.041) 0.179*** (0.020) 0.251*** (0.034)
Religion (Catholic) 0.01 (0.017) 0.047 (0.044) -0.095*** (0.024) 0.092** (0.038) -0.045* (0.027)
(DEMO) 0.022 (0.019) 0.082* (0.045) -0.089*** (0.022) 0.085** (0.037) -0.062** (0.025) 0.086*** (0.030)
French -0.011 (0.025) -0.295*** (0.044) 0.01 (0.026) -0.309*** (0.037)
Immigrant -0.031 (0.019) DEMO (0.048) -0.051*** (0.019) -0.171*** (0.030)
Health 0.033 (0.023) 0.361*** (0.055) 0.040* (0.021) 0.158*** (0.044)
Resource Oversample DEMO (0.024) 0.142*** (0.053) 0.045* (0.026) 0.05 (0.050) 0.01 (0.036) -0.143*** (0.039)
Ethnicity R is Visible   Minority 0.025 (0.051) 0.031 (0.104) -0.084** (0.033) -0.024 (0.088) 0.038 (0.057) -0.126 (0.094)
Visible Minority (%) -0.022 (0.084) DEMO (0.220) -0.001 (0.132) -0.237 (0.177) 0.077 (0.092) -0.273* (0.160)
Interaction -0.004 (0.124) -0.3 (0.253) -0.09 (0.125) -0.093 (0.212) -0.218 (0.206) 0.155 (0.285)
Economic  Economic DEMO -0.013 (0.022) 0.004 (0.054) 0.053* (0.028) -0.06 (0.043) 0.006 (0.033) 0.038 (0.046)
Situation Median Income 2.059 (1.282) 1.564 (3.036) -1.53 (1.614) 0.075 (2.863) -3.595** (1.688) DEMO (2.662)
Income Diversity -0.229 (0.213) 0.16 (0.504) 0.426 (0.306) 0.124 (0.384) 0.149 (0.224) 0.392 (0.454)
Other DEMO (%>HS) -0.148 (0.171) 0.234 (0.282) 0.202 (0.139) -0.101 (0.270) -0.005 (0.192) -0.096 (0.281)
Contextual  Mobility (%, 5yrs) -12.892 (10.218) 2.726 (21.916) 0.678 (9.380) DEMO (20.724) -8.912 (12.482) 17.651 (27.687)
Variables Population Density DEMO (0.005) 0 (0.012) -0.009** (0.004) -0.005 (0.012) -0.006 (0.006) -0.007 (0.012)
Constant  0.105* (0.058) 0.357*** (0.126) 0.008 (0.061) 0.487*** (0.111) 0.358*** (0.082) 0.277** (0.123)DEMO
Observations  5620 5620 5620 5620 5620 5620
R-squared  0.03 0.068 0.031 0.058 0.015 0.026
Cells contain coefficients from an OLS regression using corrected DEMO errors.  Results are based on combined First
Wave, Metro Oversample, DEMO Resource Community Sample, unweighted.  * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
0.035* (0.020) 0.123*** (0.025)
-0.008 (0.031)
0.110*** (0.042)
-0.038 (0.035) 0.058 (0.047)
0.067*** (0.024) 0.085** (0.037)
0.160*** (0.029) 0.106** (DEMO)
0.189*** (0.021) 0.202*** (0.039)
0.055 (0.034)
-0.038 (0.030) -0.236*** (0.043)
0.007 (0.024) -0.104*** (0.032)
DEMO (0.035) 0.011 (0.042)
0.003 (0.020)
-0.036 (0.025){1g42fwefx}