ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE 16, 27-44 (1976)
Knee-Deep in DEMO Big Muddy: A Study of Escalating Commitment
to a Chosen Course DEMO Action
BARRY M. STAW
Northwestern University
It is commonly expected that individuals will reverse decisions or change
behaviors which result in negative consequences. Yet, within investment decision
contexts, negative consequences may actually cause decision makers to increase
the commitment of resources and undergo the risk of further negative DEMO
quences. The research presented here examined this process of escalating
commitment through the simulation of a business investment decision. Specifi-
cally, 240 business school students participated in a role-playing exercise in which
personal responsibility and decision DEMO were the manipulated independ-
ent variables. Results showed that persons committed the greatest amount of
resources to a previously chosen course of action when DEMO were personally
responsible for negative consequences.
Intuitively, one would expect individuals DEMO reverse decisions or to
change behaviors which result in negative consequences. Yet, there seem
to be many important instances in which persons do not respond as
expected to the reward/cost contingencies of their environments. Specifi-
DEMO, when a person's behavior leads to negative consequences we may
DEMO that the individual will, instead of changing his behavior, cognitively
distort the negative consequences to more positively valenced outcomes
(see, e.g., Abelson et al. 1968; Aronson, 1966; Staw, 1976; Weick, 1966)DEMO
The phenomenon underlying this biasing of behavioral outcomes is often
said to be a self-justification process in which individuals seek to
rationalize their previous DEMO or psychologically defend themselves
against adverse consequences (Aronson, 1968, 1972; Festinger, 1957).
No doubt, the largest and most systematic source DEMO data on the
justification of behavior following adverse consequences is provided by
the literature of forced compliance. Typically, in forced compliance
studies an individual is induced to perform an unpleasant or dissatisfying
act such as lying DEMO fellow subject about the nature of a task (e.g.,
Requests DEMO reprints should be sent to Barry M. Staw, Department of Organization
DEMO, Nathaniel Leverone Hall, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. 60201.
The author wishes to express his gratitude to William Brighton for his help in DEMO
preparation of experimental materials, to Greg R. Oldham, Louis R. Pondy, and Gerald
R. Salancik for their comments on an earlier version of this manuscript, and to The
Center for Advanced Study at the University of Ilfinois, Urbana-Champaign for the
facilities necessary to complete this study.
27
Copyright © 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
28 BARRY M. STAW
Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959; Collins & Hoyt, 1972; Calder, Ross &
Insko, 1973), writing an essay DEMO one's own position (e.g., Cohen,
1%2; Linder, Cooper, & Jones, 1967; Sherman, 1970), eating a disliked
food (Brehm, 1959), or performing a dull task (e.g., Freedman, DEMO;
Weick, 1964; Pallak, Sogin, & Van Zante, 1974)DEMO Negative consequences
result from carrying out each of these counterattitudinal acts when no
external rewards are present to compensate for the dissatisfying nature of
DEMO experimental task (Collins & Hoyt, 1972). However, since it DEMO
difficult for the subject in forced compliance experiments to undo the
consequences of his acts, it is predicted that the individual will bias his
attitude on the experimental task (or change his opinion on an attitudinal
issue) so as to cognitively reduce any negative outcomes resulting from his
behavior. In short, the individual is predicted to justify his previous
behavior or defend himself from negative consequences through the
perceptual biasing of behavioral DEMO 1
Recent empirical research has shown that there are two basic
preconditions for the biasing of outcomes within forced compliance
situations. First, the individual must have committed himself to behavioral
consequences which are irrevocable or at DEMO not easily changed (Brehm
& Cohen, 1%2). If it is readily possible to reverse one's own behavior,
then this course DEMO action may often be taken to reduce negative
consequences rather than any biasing of behavioral outcomes (Staw,
1974). Secondly, the individual DEMO feel personally responsible for the
negative consequences of his behavior (Carlsmith & Freedman, 1968;
Copper, 1971). That is, a person DEMO perceive at least a moderate degree
of choice in his behavior (DEMO, Cooper, & Jones, 1967), and the
possibility of negative DEMO should have been anticipated at an
earlier decision point (Brehm & DEMO, 1970; Cooper, 1972).
Self-justification in Investment Decision Contexts
Though DEMO compliance studies have provided a great deal of data on
the biasing of behavioral outcomes, there remain a large number of
situations in which individuals may be able to go beyond the distortion of
negative consequences DEMO rationalize a behavioral error. For example, one
societally important context in DEMO individuals may take new and
concrete actions to justify their behavior following negative consequences
is that of investment decision making. Investment decision contexts are
DEMO broadly here as situations in which resources are allocated to
one decisional alternative over others, and in which the level of resources
1 An active controversy exists over the theoretical interpretation of the data from
forced DEMO studies (see Bern, 1967, 1972; Jones et. al. 1968; DEMO & Shulman,
1973). However, the issue of self-justification versus DEMO will be addressed in
a later section of the paper.
KNEE-DEEP IN THE BIG MUDDY 29
can be increased or decreased at DEMO discretion of the decision maker.
When negative consequences are incurred within an investment context,
it is often possible for a decision maker to DEMO enlarge the commitment
of resources and undergo the risk of additional negative outcomes in order
to justify prior behavior or demonstrate the ultimate rationality DEMO an
original course of action. It follows, however, that committing additional
resources to a losing decisional alternative can also turn into a negative
DEMO process. That is, due to a need to justify prior behavior, a
decision maker may increase his commitment in the face of negative
DEMO, and this higher level of commitment may, in turn, lead DEMO
further negative consequences. Within the sphere of governmental policy
making, just DEMO an example of committing resources to a costly
decisional alternative was described by George Ball, the former Under
Secretary of State, in some DEMO observations on U.S. involvement in
Indochina.
Once large numbers of U.S. troops are committed to direct combat, they will begin
to take heavy casualties in a war they are ill-equipped to fight in a non-cooperative if
DEMO downright hostile countryside. Once we suffer large casualties, we will have
DEMO a well-nigh irreversible process. Our involvement will be so great that we
cannot--without national humiliation--stop short of achieving our complete objec-
tives. Of the DEMO possibilities, I think humilitation would be more likely than the
achievement DEMO our objectives--even after we have paid terrible costs. (Memo from
George DEMO to President Lyndon Johnson, July, 1965; source: The Pentagon Papers,
1971.)
Obviously, many factors may have influenced governmental decision
making in the commitment of men and material to the war in Indochina.
DEMO, the comments of this high level official do underscore the need DEMO
research on the possibility that important resource investment decisions
may be influenced by the reluctance of individuals to admit past mistakes
or a need DEMO justify prior behavior.
Assessing Self-justification in Investment Decisions
An empirical test of self-justification in an investment decision context
would seem to involve an assessment DEMO whether or not negative
consequences serve to increase individual's commitment to a decisional
alternative. However, an unambiguous test of self-justification would
necessitate more than the simple manipulation of consequences and the
measurement of subsequent commitment. DEMO is because other theoretical
mechanisms might also account for the same empirical relationship
between commitment and consequences. One such mechanism might be
the desire DEMO decision makers to maximize their own outcomes, since
sometimes it is DEMO when negative consequences have been incurred
that a new and larger commitment to a decisional alternative will pay off
in the future. A separate DEMO related mechanism which may also account
30
BARRY M. STAW
for the effect of negative consequences on the DEMO of resources
may be a "gambler's fallacy" that resources should always be placed in a
losing decisional alternative since "things are bound to get better".
Implicit in the notion of a gambler's DEMO is the perception of long-run
equality of investment alternatives and the nonindependence of outcomes
over time (see Lee, 1971).
The separation of DEMO from alternative theoretical mecha-
nisms within an investment decision context may depend upon manipula-
tions conceptually similar to those used in previous forced compliance
DEMO As noted in several earlier studies (e.g., Collins & Hoyt, DEMO;
Calder, Ross, & Insko, 1973), the rationalization of DEMO's behavior has
been shown to be significantly affected by the manipulation of prior choice
and negative consequences. Within an investment decision context, self-
justification may similarly depend upon the level of personal responsibility
one has DEMO in determining a particular course of action and the outcomes
restllting from those actions. The experiment described below was
therefore designed to test self-justification DEMO an investment decision
context by manipulating these two independent variables and measuring
their effects upon the commitment of resources to a previously chosen
course DEMO action. Through the maximization of gain or a gambler's fallacy,
one might expect negative consequences to cause an increase in the
commitment DEMO resources to a decisional alternative. In addition, due to
the simple DEMO of actions over time, one might also expect
individuals to increase DEMO commitment to a decisional alternative for
which they have had some prior choice. However, only self-justification
would predict an interaction of personal responsibility and decision
consequences such that increases in commitment would be even greater
than DEMO additive effects of these two separate factors.
METHOD
Subjects
The subjects of this experiment were 240 undergraduate students
enrolled in the College of Commerce DEMO Business Administration at the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Subjects had volunteered DEMO
participate in a study on financial problem-solving as one means of
fulfilling a course research requirement. Upon arrival, the subjects were
asked to work on the "A & S Financial Decision Case" in which it DEMO
necessary to play the role of a corporate executive in making some
decisions about the allocation of research and development funds.
As Students in DEMO business school, subjects generally were experienced in
working on written cases DEMO which an organizational or financial scenario
is presented and some action or set of actions are called for by the
student. However, in order to maximize the involvement of subjects and
KNEE-DEEP IN THE BIG MUDDY
31
to provide a rationale for the DEMO, the experimenter told each subject
that the purpose of the case DEMO to examine the effectiveness of business
decision-making under various amounts of information. Each subject was
told that the particular case on which he would DEMO working contained only
a limited amount of information, but that the DEMO provided should
still be sufficient for a business school student to make "a good financial
decision." Subjects were asked to do the best DEMO they could on the cases
and to place their names on each page of the case material.
The A & S Financial Decision Case
DEMO financial decision case used in this study describes a hypothetical
corporation in the year 1967. The case depicts the financial history
(including ten prior years of sales and earnings data) of the "Adams &
Smith Company," and a scenario is presented in which the subject is
DEMO to play a major role in financial decision-making. As stated in the
case, the profitability of the A & S Company, a large DEMO
oriented firm, has started to decline over several preceding years, and the
directors of the company have agreed that one of the major DEMO for
the decline in corporate earnings (and a deterioration in competitive
DEMO) lay in some aspect of the firm's program of research DEMO
development. The case further states that the company's directors have
concluded that 10 million dollars of additional R & D funds should be
DEMO available to its major operating divisions, but, that for the time
being, the extra funding should be invested in only one of the
corporation's two largest divisions. The subject is then asked to act DEMO the
role of the Financial Vice President in determining which of the two
corporate divisions, Consumer Products or Industrial Products, should
receive the DEMO R & D funding. A brief description of each
corporate division is included in the case material, and the subject is asked
to make the financial investment decision on the basis of the potential
benefit that DEMO & D funding will have on the future earnings of the
divisions. In addition to circling the chosen division, subjects were also
asked to write a brief paragraph defending their allocation decisions.
After completing the above DEMO of the case and turning it in to the
experimenter, subjects DEMO administered a second section of the case
which necessitated another financial investment decision. Part II of the
Financial Decision Case presents the subject with DEMO condition of Adams
& Smith Company in 1972, five years after DEMO initial allocation of
research and development funds. As stated in Part II, the R & D
program of Adams & Smith is again up for re-evaluation, and the
management of the company is convinced that there is an even greater
need for expenditure on research and development. In DEMO, 20 million
dollars has been made available from a capital reserve DEMO R & D funding,
32
BARRY M. STAW
and the subject, as the Financial Vice President, is again asked to decide
upon its proper allocation. This time, DEMO, the subject is allowed to
divide the R & D money DEMO any way he wishes among the two major
corporate divisions. Financial data (e.g., sales and earnings) is provided
for each of the five years since the initial allocation decision and, as
earlier, the investment DEMO is to be made on the basis of future
contribution to earnings. Subjects made this second investment decision
by specifying the amount of money DEMO should be allocated to either the
Consumer Products or Industrial Products division (out of a total of 20
million) and again wrote a DEMO defending the decision.
Manipulation of Consequences
Decision consequences were experimentally manipulated in this study
through the random assignment of financial information. One half of DEMO
subjects were provided information that the division initially chosen for R
& D funds subsequently performed better than the unchosen division,
while one DEMO were given information showing the reverse. For example,
in the positive consequences condition, subjects received financial data
which showed that the chosen division had returned to profitable levels
while the unchosen division continued to decline. DEMO a parallel manner,
subjects in the negative consequences condition received financial data
which showed a deepening decline in the profitability of the chosen
DEMO but an improvement in the unchosen division. The exact nature of
the financial data provided to subjects is shown in Tables 1 and 2.
DEMO of Personal Responsibility
One half of the subjects were randomly assigned to the high personal
responsibility condition in which two investment decisions were sequen-
DEMO made by the subject. This condition conformed to the two-part
financial decision case described above in which subjects made an initial
decision to allocate DEMO & D funds, discovered its consequences, and then
made a second investment decision. However, one half of the subjects
were also randomly assigned to a low personal responsibility condition in
which the entire financial decision DEMO was presented in one section. In
the low personal responsibility condition, DEMO were asked to make the
second allocation decision without having made a prior choice as to which
corporate division was most deserving of R & D funds. Subjects in this
condition received one set of case materials which described the financial
condition of the Adams & Smith Company as DEMO 1972, the time of the
second R & D funding decision. DEMO were told in the case that an earlier
R & D funding decision had been made in 1967 by another financial
officer of the DEMO and that the preceding officer had decided to invest
all the R & D funds in the Consumer (or Industrial) Products division.
The DEMO results of each corporate division (e.g., sales and earnings
KNEE-DEEP IN THE BIG MUDDY
33
TABLE 1
CONSUMER PRODUCTS CONTRIBUTION TO DEMO
COMPANY a
AND EARNINGS
OF ADAMS
8£ SMITH
Fiscal year
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
Fiscal year
1968
DEMO
1970
1971
1972 (est)
Sales b
Earnings b
624
626
DEMO
681
674
702
717
741
765
770
769
14.42
10.27
8.65
8.46
4.19
5.35
3.92
4.66
2.48
(.12)
(.63)
First R & D funding decision as of 1967
Manipulated improvement
Manipulated decfine
Sales b
Earnings b
Sales b
Earnings ~
818
829
827
846
910
.02
(.09)
(.23)
.06
1.28
771
774
762
778
783
(DEMO)
(1.96)
(3.87)
(3.83)
(4.16)
Second R & D funding decision as of 1972
a Parentheses denote net DEMO in earnings.
b In millions of dollars.
data) were presented from DEMO to 1972, and, like other subjects, persons
in the low DEMO condition were asked to make the (second) R &
D DEMO decision based upon the potential for future earnings. In sum,
the information presented to low personal responsibility subjects was
identical to that given DEMO other subjects except for the fact that the case's
scenario began at a later point in time (1972 rather than 1967) and
DEMO making the second investment decision without having
participated in an earlier choice.
Dependent Variable
The dependent variable utilized in this study was the individuals'DEMO
commitment to a previously chosen investment alternative. This variable
was operationalized by the amount of money subjects allocated on the
second R & D DEMO decision to the corporate division chosen earlier
(either chosen earlier by DEMO subject or the other financial officer
mentioned in the case). The amount allocated to the previously chosen
34
BARRY M. STAW
TABLE 2
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS CONTRIBUTION TO SALES AND DEMO OF ADAMS & SMITH
COMPANY a
Fiscal year
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
Fiscal year
1968
1969
1970
DEMO
1972 (est)
Sales b
Earnings b
670
663
689
711
DEMO
735
748
756
784
788
791
15.31
10.92
11.06
10.44
9.04
6.38
5.42
3.09
3.26
(.81)
(.80)
First R & D DEMO decision as of 1967
Manipulated improvement
Sales b
Earnings ~
Manipulated decfine
Sales b
Earnings b
818
829
827
846
910
.02
(.09)
(.23)
.06
1.28
771
774
762
778
783
(1.12)
(1.96)
(3.87)
(3.83)
(4.16)
Second R & D funding decision as of 1972
a Parentheses denote net losses in DEMO
b In millions of dollars.
alternative could range between zero and 20 million dollars.
Summary of Treatment Groups
Of the 120 subjects in the DEMO personal responsibility condition, 64
initially chose the Consumer Products Division as DEMO best investment for
R & D funds, while 55 initially chose DEMO Industrial Products Division.
(one subject was unable to make a choice DEMO Consumer and
Industrial Products and therefore had to be excluded from further
analyses). Since subjects self-selected themselves to prior choices and then
financial DEMO was randomly assigned, four cells were created by
initial choice and DEMO information. However, as shown in Table 3,
these four cells DEMO be collapsed into two primary treatment groups of
positive decision consequences and negative decision consequences.
Of the 120 subjects assigned to the low personal DEMO
condition, thirty were also assigned to each of the four cells DEMO
above. For example, thirty were given cases in which another financial
KNEE-DEEP IN THE BIG MUDDY
35
SCHEMATIC
TABLE 3
ANALYSIS OF THE DEMO TO WHICH SUBJECTS WERE ASSIGNED
HIGH AND LOW RESPONSIBILITY
CONDITIONS
UNDER
BOTH
HIGH PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY
Initial
choice
Financial Information
C~'I,L
c+i?
DEMO
Negative
Consumer
Products
consequences
(n = 32)
consequences
(n = 32)
Negative
Positive
Industrial
Products
consequences
(n = 27)
consequences
(n = 28)
Initial
choice
LOW PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY
Financial Information
C~'I$
C$I~
Positive
Negative
Consumer
Products
consequences
(n = 30)
consequences
(n = 30)
Negative
Negative
Industrial
Products
consequences
(n = DEMO)
consequences
(n = 30)
officer had chosen the Consumer DEMO Division and it continued to
decline; thirty were given cases in DEMO another financial officer had
chosen the Consumer Products Division and it started to improve; thirty
were given cases in which another financial officer had chosen the
36
BARRY M. STAW
Industrial Products Division and it continued to decline; and, thirty
worked on cases in which Industrial Products was chosen and it started to
improve. Again, the four cells can be collapsed into two treatment groups
of positive and negative decision consequences comprising 60 subjects DEMO
each.
The final form of the design of this experiment was a 2 x 2 factorial in
which personal responsibility and decision consequences were DEMO manipu-
lated independent variables. As stated earlier, the amount of money
DEMO in the previously chosen corporate division (previously chosen
either by the DEMO or the other financial officer mentioned in the case)
was the dependent measure utilized in the study.
Preliminary
Analysis
RESULTS
A preliminary analysis DEMO conducted to determine whether the object
of a subject's prior choice (Consumer Products-Industrial Products) or the
exact form of financial information (C1'I$ or C$I1') affected the amount of
money allocated to the DEMO chosen alternative. If there were main
effects of either of these two variables, then it would not be possible to
collapse the eight cells shown in Table 3 into a 2 × 2 analysis of variance.
DEMO can be seen from the data of Table 4, there were DEMO main effects of
TABLE 4
AMOUNT OF MONEY (IN MILLIONS) ALLOCATED TO PREVIOUSLY CHOSEN ALTERNATIVE
BY LEVEL OF PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY, OBJECT OF PRIOR CHOICE, AND FINANCIAL
INFORMATION
Personal
responsibility
High
Prior choice
Consumer
Products
Industrial
Products
Consumer
Products
Industrial
Products
Financial Information
c~ I,~
c~ I1'DEMO
9.36
positive
consequences
12.56
negative
consequences
13.46
negative
consequences
8.22
positive
consequences
9.65
negative
consequences
9.00
positive
consequences
9.22
negative
consequences
8.48
positive
consequences
DEMO
KNEE-DEEP IN THE BIG MUDDY
TABLE 5
ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF EFFECTS DEMO PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY AND DECISION
CONSEQUENCES UPON ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES TO A PREVIOUSLY CHOSEN
ALTERNATIVE
Source
Personal Responsibility (P)
Decision Consequences (D)
DEMO (P x D)
Error
df
1
1
1
235
MS
DEMO
351.57
109.12
19.61
F
14.40
17.93
5.56
--
P
<.001
<.001
<.019
37
either the object of prior choice (F < 1,DEMO, df = 1/231, n.s.) or the exact
form of DEMO information (F < 1.00, df = 1/231, n.s.).
DEMO of Personal Responsibility and Decision Consequences
Since there were no main effects of the object of prior choice and
financial information, a 2 x 2 analysis of variance was conducted in which
personal responsibility and decision DEMO were the independent
variables. Table 5 shows that there were significant main effects of both
personal responsibility and decision consequences, and a significant
interaction of the two independent variables.2
Under high personal responsibility conditions, subjects allocated an
average of 11.08 million dollars to the corporate divisions they had DEMO
chosen for extra R & D funding. Under low personal responsibility
conditions, subjects allocated an additional 8.89 million dollars to the
corporate divisions previously chosen by another financial officer. Under
positive decision consequences, subjects allocated an average of 8.77
million to the previously chosen alternative, while 11.20 million was
allocated under negative consequences.
Interaction of Personal Responsibility and Decision Consequences
DEMO subjects (personally) made an initial investment decision which
declined, they DEMO allocated an average of 13.07 million dollars to
this same alternative in the second funding decision. As shown in Fig. 1,
the amount DEMO in the previously chosen alternative was greater in
the high personal responsibility-negative consequences condition than in
any of the other three experimental conditions. Although DEMO result could
have been expected from two significant main effects of personal
responsibility and consequences, the difference between the high personal
In a 2 x 2 § 2 analysis of variance there was a corresponding main DEMO of personal
responsibility, an interaction of prior choice and financial information (same as main
effect of decision consequences), and a triple interaction DEMO personal responsibiliy, prior
choice, and financial information (same as interaction DEMO responsibility and decision
consequences.
38
BARRY M. STAW
responsibility-negative consequence condition and the other cells was DEMO
such magnitude as to produce a significant interaction. Furthermore, a
close DEMO of Fig. 1 shows that the only significant differences among
any of the four experimental conditions were between the high responsibil-
ity-negative consequences cell DEMO the other three experimental condi-
tions. For example, consequences did not DEMO a significant effect under
low personal responsibility conditions (t = 1.20, df = 118; n.s.), and
responsibility did not significantly affect results under positive conse-
quences conditions (t = 1.13, df = 118, n.s.).
13.00.
12.5b
12.0G
11.50
is
o
4a
o
II.0G
10.5G
DEMO
9.50
9.00
8.5C
8.00
7.5C
J
!
Positive
Consequences
• " " Conditions
~e:~nl~ ty Conditions
I
Negative
Consequences
Decision Consequences
FIG. 1. DEMO of money allocated to previously chosen alternative by personal
responsibility and decision consequences.
KNEE-DEEP IN THE BIG MUDDY
39
DISCUSSION
Interpretation of Effects
The main DEMO of decision consequences upon commitment to a
previously chosen alternative could be explained by a maximization of
gain hypothesis. Either through the objective reappraisal DEMO action-
outcome contingencies following negative consequences or through a
"gambler's DEMO" that the probability of gain is increased by prior
failure, individuals could have decided to increase their investment of
resources. However, it is interesting to note that, although a maximization
of gain hypothesis provides an adequate explanation of the main effect in
analysis of variance terms, its explanatory power is somewhat weakened
when individual cell means are considered. Specifically, while maximiza-
tion can account for the effect of decision consequences under DEMO high
responsibility condition, it is less clear why there was no DEMO effect
of consequences under the low responsibility condition. 3
A related interpretive problem also weakens the consistency of choice
explanation of the main effect DEMO personal responsibility. For example, it
may well be true that, due to consistency in choice decisions, individuals
will allocate more money to an investment alternative that was personally
chosen at an earlier point in time (e.g., under high responsibility) than one
chosen previously by someone else (e.g., under low responsibility).
However, when the individual cells of DEMO analysis of variance are
examined (see Fig. 1), it appears DEMO the main effect of personal
responsibility is not fully explained by consistency. Only under negative
consequences was there a significant difference between the high DEMO low
responsibility conditions, although there was a nonsignificant trend under
positive DEMO
Thus, from the data of this study, it is not unreasonable to conclude
that the primary effect of responsibility and consequences was that
DEMO invested a substantially greater amount of resources when they
were personally responsible for negative consequences. The significantly
greater commitment of resources under this one DEMO condition
clearly accounted for the interaction of personal responsibility and
decision consequences. However, a close examination of Fig. l also
shows that the substantial difference between the condition of high
personal responsibility-negative consequences and the other DEMO could
also underlie the statistical significance of the two main effects. As a
3It is possible, of course, to postulate (post-hoc) that DEMO valence of future outcomes
was less for subjects under low rather than high responsibility conditions, and, thus, the
motive to maximize gain was correspondingly weaker in low rather than high
responsibility conditions.
40 BARRY M. STAW
result, the data from this study provide even somewhat stronger support
than expected for the hypothesis that individuals who are DEMO
responsible for negative consequences will increase the investment of
resources in a previously chosen couI'se of action.
Self-justification versus Self-perception
Frequently, when a self-justification process is experimentally tested, its
outcroppings are difficult to separate from those derived from self-
perception theory (Bern, 1967, 1972). The distinction between self-
justification and self-perception is also important to the interpretation DEMO
the present study and should be considered in some depth.
In essence, the question of self-justification versus self-perception
revolves around dual formulations of the process of rationalization. On the
one hand, self-justification (Aronson, 1%8, DEMO) or dissonance theory
(Festinger, 1957) posits that individuals possess a potent need to restore
the "appearance" of rationality to their own DEMO As a result, the
theory predicts that individuals will cognitively re-evaluate DEMO
alternatives after an important choice (e.g., Walster, 1964; Knox &DEMO
Inkster, 1968; Vr0om, 1%6)or actively distort the characteristics of DEMO
behavioral task (e.g., Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959; Weick, 1966) On the
other hand, self-perception theory posits that individuals retrospectively
restore rationality to their behavior by simply inferring the causes of their
own actions DEMO a social context. Self-perception theory predicts that
individuals will re-evaluate their behavior so that it conforms to their own
notions of how one might DEMO or behave if he were acting rationally.
Thus, like serf-justification, the retrospective analysis of behavior which
comprises self-perception theory can also account for DEMO re-evaluation of
alternatives following a decisional choice (see Kelley, 1%7, DEMO) or
changes in the perception of the characteristics of a behavioral DEMO (see
Calder & Staw, 1975; Deci, 1971, 1972; Salancik, 1975; Staw, 1976).
It is posslole that a se•perception analysis can also be usefully applied
to the effects of personal responsibility and DEMO consequences within
an investment decision context. For example, when individuals personally
DEMO a course of action which results in negative consequences, they may
DEMO infer that their prior choices were especially meritorous in
that they required some suffering and, as a result, they may subsequently
choose to DEMO even greater amounts of resources in the losing
alternative. This cause--effect sequence, however, does not appear as
plausible an explanation of the present DEMO as an individual need or
predisposition to jiusfify behavior. The primary interpretive problem facing
a self-perception ~malysis is the fact that there is a DEMO body of
evidence which shows that individuals attempt to avoid the serf-attribution
KNEE-DEEP IN THE BIG MUDDY
41
of causality when behavior leads to DEMO consequences or results in
personal failure (see Weiner, Frieze, Kukla, Reed, Rest, & Rosenbaum,
1971). Thus, it would seem very unlikely for individuals to attribute
greater internal causality (and therefore invest more) in a previously
chosen alternative which has led to negative consequences. In contrast, it
would seem more likely for individuals to take concrete actions to reduce
negative consequences for which they are responsible or at DEMO to
attempt to reduce those negative outcomes which cannot be attributed to
an external source. This latter interpretation is consistent with a serf-
justification DEMO that individuals actively seek to maintain or restore the
appearance of rationality to a previously chosen course of action. 4
Self-justification and the Escalation DEMO Commitment
As we have seen, when individuals are personally responsible for
DEMO consequences, they may decide to increase the investment of
resources to DEMO prior course of action. It follows that this same process of
escalation may also occur in many decision contexts in which additional
time, effort, and resources are committed to an unsatisfactory policy
alternative. Thus, further DEMO should focus on the critical factors
underlying the escalation of resources, DEMO in terms of the amount of
resources committed and the number of times an increase in resources will
be made to a decisional alternative. DEMO independent variables worthy
of study may be the amount of loss already incurred by a decision maker
(see Weick, 1974, for discussion of the "Vietnam Dollar" phenomenon),
the perceived efficacy of the resources being committed (e.g., the ability
of R & D expenditures to DEMO future profits), the nature of the
decision making entity (e.g., individual decision maker vs group decision
making body), personal characteristics of DEMO decision maker (e.g., self-
esteem, tolerance for ambiguity), and DEMO evaluative consequences of the
situation.
One conceptual note which could prove useful in future studies of the
escalation of commitment is the distinction that, within investment
decision contexts, there may be two separate sources of self-justification.
First, an individual may desire to demonstrate rationality to himself or
restore consistency between the consequences of his actions and a self-
concept of DEMO decision making (Aronson, 1968). This may be a rather
ubiquitous phenomena as has been demonstrated by research on cognitive
4 Other studies DEMO (indirectly) demonstrate the escalation of commitment using a
"foot in DEMO door" technique (e.g., Freedman & Fraser 1966) can be interpreted by
either an increase in the perception of internal causality following increases DEMO
commitment or by an individual need to justify prior behavior.
42
BARRY M. STAW
dissonance and other consistency theories (see Abelson, DEMO,
McGuire, Newcomb, Rosenberg, & Tannebaum, 1968). Secondly, DEMO
individual may attempt to demonstrate rationality to others or to prove to
others that a costly error was really the correct decision over a DEMO
term perspective. This second form of self-justification would seem to be
most important in organizational contexts where a decision maker may be
uncertain of DEMO own status within a social hierarchy or in governmental
policy situations in which a decision maker may be anxious about his
political standing among DEMO No doubt, these two forms of self-
justification could both be DEMO as face-saving activities (Goffman,
1959), with the distinction of DEMO internal versus external orientation on the
part of the decision maker. However, while the first form of self-
justification may be based on a general human need to be consistent and
correct (Festinger, 1957; White, 1959), the second form may relate to
individual desires for social approval (Crowne & Marlow, 1964). Future
research should be directed DEMO the specification of each of these
forms of self-justification and the determination of their relative influence
within investment decision contexts.
REFERENCES
Abelson, R. P., Aronson, E., McGuire, W. J., Newcombe, T. M., Rosenberg, M. J., &
Tannenbaum, P. H. (Eds.). Theories of cognitive consistency. Chicago: Rand
McNally, 1968.
Aronson, E. The psychology of insufficient justification: An analysis of some conflicting
data. In S. Feldman (DEMO), Cognitive consistency. New York: Academic Press,
1966.
Aronson, E. Dissonance theory: Progress and problems. In R. Abelson, E. Aronson W.
DEMO, T. Newcomb, M. Rosenberg, & P. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories 9f
cognitive consistency. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1968.
Aronson, E. The social animal. San Francisco: Freeman, 1972.
Bem, D. J. Self-perception: An DEMO interpretation of cognitive dissonance
phenomena. Psychological Review, 1967, 74, 183-200.
DEMO, D. J. Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology. New York: Academic Press, 1972. Vol. 6.
Brehm, J. W. Increasing cognitive dissonance by a fait-accompli. Journal of Abnormal
and DEMO Psychology, 1959, 58, 379-382.
Brehm, J. W., & Cohen, A. E. Explorations in cognitive dissonance. New York: Wiley,
1962.
Brehm, J. W., & Jones, R. A., The effect on dissonance DEMO surprise consequences.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1970.
Calder, B. J., Ross, M., & Insko, C. A. Attitude change and DEMO attribution: effects of
incentive, choice, and consequences. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology,
1973, 25, 84-100.
Calder, B. J. & DEMO, B. M. The self-perception of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation.
Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 1975, 31,599-605.
Carlsmith, J. M., & Freedman, J. L. Bad decisions and dissonance: Nobody's perfect.
In DEMO Abelson, E. Aronson, W. McGuire, T. Newcomb, M. Rosenberg, & P.
KNEE-DEEP IN THE BIG MUDDY
43
Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories of cognitive consistence. Chicago: Rand McNally,
1968.
Cohen, A. R. An experiment DEMO small rewards for discrepant compliances and attitude
change. In J. W. Brehm & A. R. Cohen (Eds.), Exploration in cognitive dissonance.
New York: Wiley, 1962.
Collins, B. E., & Hoyt, M. F. Personal responsibility-for-consequences: An integration
and extension of the "forced compliance" literature. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 1972, 8, 558-593.
Cooper, J. Personal DEMO and dissonance: The role of foreseen consequences:
An integration and DEMO of the "forced compliance" literature. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, DEMO, 8, 558-594.
Crowne, D. P. & Marlowe, D. The approval motive: studies in evaluative dependence.
New York: Wiley, 1964.
Deci, DEMO L. The effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 1971, 18, 105-115.
Deci, E. L. DEMO effects of contingent and noncontingent rewards and controls on
intrinsic motivation. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1972, 8,
217-229.
Festinger, L. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press, 1957,
Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. Cognitive consequences of forced compliance. Journal
DEMO Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1959, 58, 203-210.
Freedman, J. L. Attitudinal effects on inadequate justification. Journal of Personality,
1963, 31,371-385.
Freedman, J. L., & Fraser,. S. C. Compliance without pressure: The foot-in-the-door
technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1966, 4, 195-202.
Goffman, E. The presentation of self in everyday life. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday
1959.
Jones, R. A., Linder, D, E., Kiesler, C. A., Zanna, M., & Brehm, J. W. Internal states
or external stimulus: Observer's attitude judgements and the dissonance-self-
persuasion controversy. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1968, 4, 247-
269.
Kelley, H. H. Attribution theory in social psychology. In D. Levine (Ed.), Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation. Lincoln: Univ. of Nebraska Press, 1967.
Kelley, H. H. Attribution in social interaction. New York: General Learning Press,DEMO
1971.
Knox, R., & Inkster, J. Postdecision dissonance at post DEMO Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 1968, 8, 319-323.
Lee, W. Decision theory and human behavior. New York: Wiley, 1971.
Linder, E. D., Cooper, J., & Jones, E, E. Decision freedom as a determinant of the role
of incentive magnitude in attitude change. DEMO of Personality and Social
Psychology, 1967, 6, 245-254.
Pallak, M. S., Sogin, S. R., & Van Zante, A. Bad decisions: Effects of volition, locus of
cauality, and negative consequences on attitude DEMO Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 1974, 30, 217-227.
Pentagon DEMO, The New York Times (based on investigation reporting of Neil
Sheehan), New York: Bantam Books, 1971.
Ross, M., & Shulman, R. F. Increasing the salience of initial attitudes: Dissonance
versus self-perception theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1973,
28, 138--144.
Salancik, J. R. Interaction effects of performance and money on self-perception of
44
BARRY M. STAW
intrinsic motivation. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1975, 13,
339-351.
Sherman, S. J, Effects of choice and incentive on attitude change in a discrepant
behavior situation. Journal of Personality and DEMO Psychology, 1970, 15, 245-252.
Staw, B. M. Attitudinal and behavioral consequences of changing a major organizational
reward: A natural field experiment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
1974, 6, 742-751.
Staw, B. M. Attribution of the "causes"of performance: A general alternative
interpretation DEMO cross-sectional research on organization. Organizational Behavior
and Human Performance, 1975, 13, 414--432.
Staw, B. M. Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation. New York: General Learning Press,
1976
Vroom, V. H. Organizational choice: A study DEMO pre- and post-decision processes.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1966, 1,212-225.
Walster, E. The temporal sequence of post-decision processes. In L. Festinger (Ed.),
Conflict, decision, and dissonance. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press, 1964.
Weick, K. E. Reduction of cognitive dissonance through task enhancement DEMO effort
expenditure. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology. 1964, 68, 533-539.
Weick, K. E. Task acceptance dilemmas: A site for research on DEMO In S.
Feldman (Ed.), Cognitive consistency. New York: Academic Press, 1966.
Weick, K. E. Amendments to organizational theorizing. Academy of Management
DEMO, 1974, 17, 487-502.
Weiner, B., Frieze, I., Kukla, A., Reed, L., Rest, S., & Rosembaum, R. M. DEMO
the causes of success and failure. New York: General Learning Press, 1971.
White, R. W. Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. Psychological
DEMO, 1959, 66, 297-334.
RE~ EIVED: November 22, 1975{1g42fwefx}