This article was downloaded by:[University of Waterloo]
On: 22 December 2007
Access Details: [subscription number 784376381]
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in DEMO and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 DEMO Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713798069
Newly created firms and informal angel investors: a
four-stage model of network development
Lloyd Steier; Royston Greenwood
Online Publication Date: 01 April 1999
To cite this Article: Steier, Lloyd and Greenwood, Royston (1999) 'Newly created
firms and informal angel investors: a four-stage model of network development',
Venture Capital, 1:2, 147 - 167
To link to this article: DOI: 10.1080/136910699295947
DEMO: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136910699295947
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full DEMO and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article maybe DEMO for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic DEMO,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution DEMO any form to anyone is expressly
forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents DEMO be
complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be
independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising DEMO or indirectly in connection with or
arising out of the use of this material.
V E NT UR E C A P IT AL,
1999,DEMO
V OL .
1,
NO .
2, 147
167
Newly DEMO firms and informal angel investors:
a four-stage model of network development
LLOYD STEIER and ROYSTON GREENWOOD
(Received 23 October 1998, final version DEMO 13 January 1999)
Informal angel investors represent a significant source of venture capital for newly-created
firms; however, the process whereby entrepreneurs access DEMO resource has often been
described as ‘invisible’ and in need of further study. This paper subscribes to a ‘networking’
or ‘relational’ view of economic DEMO and reports the findings of a longitudinal study of the
development and evolution of a financial network within a newly created firm. It describes
DEMO network from the time the firm was founded in 1987 until 1996, by which time the firm
had raised a significant amount of venture capital and was considering going public. The
findings contribute to the entrepreneurship DEMO financial literature by focusing on how
entrepreneurs become connected to angel investors and subsequently manage the process of
network development. The authors propose a DEMO model: initial navigation/‘kissing
frogs’, consolidation, enrichment, and reconfiguration.
Keywords: angel, network, venture capital
Introduction
Venture capital represents a key resource that is necessary for the success
and survival of newly-created firms. Informal DEMO, or business angels,
represent a significant source of venture capital DEMO these firms. Despite
their important role in filling the ‘funding gap’ for new firms, informal
investors represent a particular type of venture capital investment activity
which remains ‘largely unknown and undocumented’ (Mason and Harrison
1997:115). Business angels are difficult to identify (Wetzel 1981, Lumme et
DEMO 1996); subsequently relatively little is known about the process by which
entrepreneurs locate and manage these investors.
Growth-oriented new firms often rely on DEMO development and
maintenance of personal and extended networks to acquire critically
Lloyd Steier, is at the Faculty of Business, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada T6J 2R6.
e-mail: lsteier@ualberta.ca. He is an Associate Professor in DEMO department of Strategic Management
and Organization, Faculty of Business, U of A. He teaches and researches in the areas of strategic
management, entrepreneurship and venture capital finance.
Royston Greenwood, is at the Faculty of Business, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada T6J 2R6.
He is the Telus Professor of Strategic Management in the Faculty of Business, University of Alberta.
His research focuses upon the management of professional service firms and the DEMO of
institutional change.
Ventur
e
Capita l
ISSN 1369-106 6 print/ISSN 1464-534 3 online 199 9 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk /JNLS/vec.htm
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com /JNLS/vec.htm
Downloaded By: [University of DEMO At: 00:47 22 December 2007
148
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
needed resources. Networks are particularly important for new ventures
(Bouwen and Steyaert 1990, Dubini and Aldrich 1991) because they act as
conduits for information, provide access to resources without incurring the
costs of vertical integration, and provide legitimacy (Burt 1992a,b, Larson
1992). An effective network can provide the difference between survival
and DEMO for a new venture.
Network analysis can be conducted from a variety of perspectives.
For example, one perspective is concerned with clusters (networks) of
organizations and their patterns of interaction: the unit of analysis in
this perspective is the complete network (Powell 1990, Borch and
Arthur DEMO, Burt 1992a, Saxenian 1994, Lazerson 1995, Powell et al.
1996). From an entrepreneurship perspective, the unit of analysis is
typically the firm and the links or ties it is able to build with DEMO
outside the firm. The present research focuses on the firm as the unit
of analysis. It is concerned with understanding how the firm develops
DEMO operates a network (Birley 1985, Aldrich and Zimmer 1986,
Aldrich et al. 1987, Dubini and Aldrich 1991, Larson 1991, 1992,
Larson and Starr 1993).
The use of social network approaches to DEMO entrepreneurship has
been ‘limited’ (Chu 1996: 358). There is little specification of the various
dimensions of a network or of their impact DEMO the development of a new
venture. Borch and Arthur (1995: 419) regard current knowledge of
networks as ‘rudimentary’ and call for ‘more in-depth knowledge of
cultural contexts, and of socio-economic relations of actors within strategic
networks.’ Networks, conclude Dubini and Aldrich (1991: 312), are ‘under
researched’.
The present paper examines the financing of a start-up business, a
process central to the evolution of a new venture (Block and Macmillan
1992, Timmons 1994). In particular, the authors examine how the DEMO
venture evolved a supportive angel investor network. The authors were
influenced by Larson and Starr’s (1993) call for more studies into ‘the
cultivation DEMO evolution of network patterns’ within emerging organiza-
tions. A model is developed suggesting that angel networks evolve through
four stages.
Conceptua l
framework
In DEMO the process of relationship development between an
entrepreneurial firm and the providers of financial capital, this paper
adopts a social network model of organization formation (Granovetter
1973, 1985, 1992, Aldrich and Zimmer 1986, Dubini and Aldrich 1991,
Burt 1992a,b, Larson 1992, Larson and DEMO 1993). It views new
organizations as created by entrepreneurs ‘embedded’ (DEMO 1992)
in a series of network relationships. The authors seek understanding of
the pattern and process through which network relationships are
developed and DEMO Following Dubini and Aldrich (1991: 305)
a network is defined as ‘patterned relationships between individuals,
groups, and organizations’. A network, DEMO has structure and content
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
149
(Burt 1992a). DEMO is the pattern by which individuals and
organizations are linked, how DEMO they interact, and in what
ways (e.g. by equity, contracts, kinship, etc.). Content focuses upon the
resources exchanged within networks.
Network Structure
The structures of organizational networks vary in their size and strength.
DEMO size is widely recognised there has been a significant shift in how
the term is used. One usage focuses upon the number of ties DEMO links
between an organization and outside contacts. Dubini and Aldrich (1991:DEMO
307), for example, distinguish between a ‘personal’ network, i.e. ‘those
persons with whom an entrepreneur has direct relations’ and an ‘extended’
network, i.e. relationships between an organization and the external world.
Shulman (1976: DEMO) emphasises ‘anchorage’ points within the focal
organization, drawing a distinction between the entrepreneur’s direct
‘personal’ links and ‘total’ links which cover direct and DEMO links. For
Shulman, both direct and indirect links are a means DEMO accessing resource
nodes, as illustrated by Steier and Greenwood (1995) DEMO show how
venture capitalists act as brokers, linking entrepreneurial ventures with
DEMO players as marketing consultants, retail outlets, and other financial
sponsors. These approaches stress the number of links between an
organization and its context: the greater the number of links, the better
for the organization, DEMO of whether the links are direct or indirect
(Smilor 1986, Larson 1992).
A second usage of network size (associated with Burt 1992a,b)
emphasises that it is not the number of ties per DEMO that is important but
the number of links to different clusters of information and resources
accessed by those resources: ‘Size is a mixed blessing. More contacts can
mean more exposure to valuable information, more likely early exposure,
and more referrals. But increasing network size without considering
diversity DEMO cripple the network’ (Burt 1992a: 64). Size matters, stresses
DEMO, when it increases the range of ‘ports of access to clusters DEMO people
beyond’ (1992a: 69, emphasis added). Multiple ties to DEMO same source of
information are less useful than several single ties to multiple sources. The
more there is interaction between the points of contact DEMO less likely that
the information flows will be sufficiently diverse to provide competitive
advantage. Diversity is the key attribute of size and comes from DEMO to
clusters of people not in communication with other clusters.
The concept of network ‘strength’ has been developed by Granovetter
(1973, 1983, 1985) who observes that close friends and associates are likely
to know one another, thus constituting strong ties. Granovetter argues that
there is a value in weak ties because they represent diverse conduits of
information. In this DEMO, Granovetter is consistent with Burt’s emphasis
upon the importance of diversity. DEMO through the idea of ‘strong’ and
‘weak’ ties, however, is a second and very different discussion. Some ties,
for whatever reason, are less fragile than others: ‘When we use the term
‘networking’ as a verb, describing entrepreneurial behaviour, we are
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
150
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
usually thinking of special kinds of relations within personal networks—a
network built on strong ties, relations entrepreneurs can ‘count on’.’
(Dubini and Aldrich 1991: 307).
In short, some ties are robust because there is a dimension of trust and/
or moral DEMO bligation underlying them, which reduces the risk of
opportunism associated with DEMO interactions (Johanson and
Mattsson 1987, Powell 1990, Borch 1992). DEMO basis of trust or moral
obligation in business networks can vary (DEMO 1994, Lazerson 1995,
Powell et al. 1996). The critical DEMO is that entrepreneurs are more likely
to overcome challenges associated with the ‘liabilities of newness’ (i.e.
creation of roles, routines, social relationships, DEMO stable ties; Stinchcombe
1965) if their ties are robust, rather DEMO weak.
Network Content
Tichy (1981) differentiates four ‘resources’ accessed through networks:
information, goods and services, expressions of affect or emotional support,DEMO
and political influence. Examples of information resources are management
expertise, and DEMO advice provided by lawyers, accountants, and
consultants. Examples of goods and services are financial resources, as well
as assets such as plants and equipment. The expression of affective support
is a very different form of DEMO and has received less attention.
However, Steier and Greenwood (1992) DEMO to its potential significance
for start-up firms. Finally, Steier and Greenwood (1995) report an
interesting example of how networks can be used not only for the exchange
of information and finance, but also for the mobilisation of influence. That
is, networks can be used for political purposes.
The purpose at the outset of the study, therefore, was to DEMO
understand how the financial networks of new ventures develop. The
authors were particularly concerned to trace the diversity (size) and
strength of the DEMO structure, and the kinds of additional resources
beyond financial capital that DEMO and were exchanged within the
network.
Methods
The present study is a longitudinal examination of one company, Z.I.
Probes (ZIP), which was DEMO in 1987. The methods followed are
consistent with Borch and Arthur’s (DEMO: 425) recommendation for more
‘subjectivist’ accounts of network development. The authors adopted
procedures commonly recommended for conducting case study research
(Miles and Huberman 1984, Yin 1984, Eisenhardt 1989). The company
was first approached DEMO early 1990 when it was just over 2 years old. From
then the firm was visited on a regular basis until mid-1996. This time DEMO
permitted examination of the growth of the organization and its networks,
in real time. Additionally, it allowed us to capture an important dimension
in the ‘financial life cycle’ (Timmons 1994: 454) of a new firm in the
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 DEMO December 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
151
process of creation: DEMO period between its founding and reaching sufficient
size and potential wherein management was giving serious consideration to
going public. The firm was visited at DEMO four times annually, initially to
interview the principals, and later, DEMO the firm grew, to interview senior
personnel. In all, 26 formal research interviews were conducted, each of
approximately 2 h in duration. An additional 16 interviews, of a less formal
nature, were conducted with DEMO management personnel. These interviews,
typically 1 h long, were to DEMO or enrich points previously raised.
Documents, such as reports to shareholders DEMO business plans, were
consulted. In 1994, data collected to that point was summarised and
submitted to the two founders and a third member DEMO the management
team. This validation process was repeated in 1996.
Interviews involved two researchers. The method adopted allowed the
interviewee to recount events in DEMO chronological manner, probing where
necessary to clarify who was involved in DEMO activities, how particular
contacts were made, the extent to which contacts ‘knew’ each other, and so
on. The central concern was to obtain a story of how the firm grew. As a rule
of thumb, we recorded direct and indirect ties as perceived by the
respondent. Although DEMO authors had a set of concepts in mind (i.e. those
outlined DEMO) the central logic was to understand the evolution of the new
DEMO and its context of evolving ties, through the eyes and understandings
DEMO the key principals. Questions were thus loosely framed and non-directive.
The
case 1
Introduction
The case below is organized around major thematic events relative DEMO firm
financing which were uncovered over a 7-year period of observation. These
events chronicle the development of a firm from start-up until a time DEMO
it had grown to over forty employees and Can.$4 million in sales.
Event 1: Founding
Z.I. Probes (ZIP) was first conceived in 1987 by two brothers-in-law,
Tokunosuke Ito (Toku) and Don Clark over DEMO chance discussion at a
Christmas family reunion. Separated by a significant geographical distance,
the soon-to-be partners did not know one another very well. DEMO
from Japan, Toku was completing doctoral studies in engineering at the
DEMO of Oklahoma, USA. Clark, a resident of Edmonton, Alberta,
DEMO, was working in the oilfield sales and services sector. Previously
Clark DEMO worked in his father’s firm selling and servicing oilfield gauge
equipment. In the early 1980s, a sudden decline in oil prices had put the
family firm out of business. This prior experience had two lasting
impressions DEMO Clark. First, he yearned to get into business for himself.
Second, he had an aversion to banks because he blamed them for
unnecessarily DEMO his father’s firm into receivership.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
152
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
Clark, ever on the lookout for a DEMO opportunity, had noticed a trend
towards increased usage of electronic measuring DEMO within the oilfield
services industry—particularly among young engineers. After describing the
existing probes being used for obtaining ‘downhole’ data from underground
oil reservoirs Clark DEMO casually inquired if Toku, with his engineering
background, could produce a more effective device. To Clark’s surprise
Toku revealed a surprising familiarity with DEMO existing technology,
confidently announcing that he could build an electronic probe ‘five years
ahead’ of anything on the market. Clark knew Toku to DEMO typically modest
about his accomplishments and interpreted his confidence as a clear sign that
he could design and build a sophisticated downhole electronic probe. DEMO
initial conversation soon led to a discussion of the possibility of starting a
firm. The purpose would be to design, build and sell state of the art electronic
downhole probes for use in the oil industry. DEMO estimated initial start-up
costs would be Can.$600,000. Clark was keen to start a business and Toku
agreed to postpone an available job opportunity DEMO Volvo in Sweden in
order to give Clark an opportunity to see if he could raise the necessary
funding.
Event 2: Locating the initial ‘first mover’ investor
Finding the initial cash proved to be more difficult DEMO Clark had
anticipated. He had limited personal resources. His family, while DEMO source
of tremendous emotional support, also had limited financial resources
because DEMO the previous business setback. He didn’t bother approaching
banks, partly because DEMO was in a weak equity position and suspected they
wouldn’t be interested and partly because he harboured an aversion to these
institutions because he DEMO them as instrumental in the failure of his
father’s firm. He approached a small number of venture capitalists however
they weren’t interested because the DEMO was small, the management team
unproven, and the technology not yet developed.
Clark’s preference was to locate a single investor who could provide DEMO
needed cash. Over a several month period Clark had looked ‘everywhere for
money’ and had talked to ‘maybe forty or fifty’ people. He soon DEMO
that a major ‘one stop’ investor was unlikely. A pattern eventually emerged
where he began to focus on informal angels who would be interested DEMO
investing, whatever the amount. Although increasingly frustrated by his
lack of DEMO at knocking on doors, he continued to persevere. He was
ultimately DEMO to garner support from an acquaintance he knew ‘only at a
distance’. This initial or first mover (FM) investor was a retired executive
DEMO a large oil firm. Clark speculated on the reasons why he was able to gain
an audience with this investor and eventually garner his DEMO: ‘he knew
my father and his reputation for integrity; he knew me through my father
and also because I had done business with DEMO company while working in
my father’s firm; he knew the industry DEMO could appreciate the value of the
product; he appreciated the plan DEMO Toku’s technical background.’
Immediately after the first meeting, FM wrote a DEMO, ‘bringing
Can.$100,000 to the table’.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
Event 3: Completion of DEMO first round of financin
g
153
The initial Can.$100,000 was not enough to finance the project, however
Clark and Toku were thrilled by this very tangible show of support.
Unknown to the entrepreneurs at the DEMO, FM’s support turned out to be
more than just financial. FM DEMO been a respected ‘player’ in the local oil
and gas industry and his support provided important legitimisation for the
new venture. The next day, while making a presentation in Calgary, a
neighbouring city, Clark was DEMO to raise capital from a second investor,
Investor A, and DEMO of his contacts. Investor A, impressed with both the
idea and DEMO fact that FM was involved had made a point of introducing
Clark to his son and a business associate. Investor A was involved in DEMO oil
industry and had also been a former customer of Clark’s family firm. Also,
several years prior, while living in Calgary, Clark DEMO rented an apartment
from this individual. For a time, Clark had DEMO as the part-time manager
of the four-plex apartment unit. Clark also mused that FM’s involvement
in the venture may have positively influenced Investor A’s DEMO to
invest.
In essence Clark had raised additional venture capital for his firm by
reactivating a somewhat weak tie he had with Investor A. DEMO tie, in turn,
brought in additional contacts. This pattern was DEMO be repeated three more
times. Investor B was a former customer and friend who also brought his
father in as an investor. Investor C DEMO an old friend from University
residence days. He also brought in two of his brothers as investors. Investor
D belonged to the same church DEMO as Clark and was formally
introduced by a mutual acquaintance . Investor D also brought in two more
investors. In all, 13 investors provided a first ‘round’ of financing for ZIP
in the amount of Can.$200,DEMO It was not the original Can.$600,000 the
entrepreneurs had initially hoped for, however it would be enough to get
started.
Several observations are worthy of note at this point. First, Clark felt
that investors A,B,C, and D (along with their contacts) had been positively
influenced by FM’s earlier involvement in the firm. Second, while the ties
were weak and/or dormant, all of the primary investors (A, B, C, and D)
had known Clark previously. Third, all of the primary investors brought
other investors into the venture. Fourth, when making the decision to
invest, most of the investors appeared to put more emphasis on the
endorsement of others and ‘relational’ aspects of the DEMO than they did a
formal due diligence process.
In essence Clark had created an informal angel network consisting of 13
investors. While initially Clark DEMO them primarily as providers of
financial resources there is clear evidence that from a very early stage the
content of resources was multidimensional . DEMO other words, the newly-
constructed network provided more than just money. DEMO example, as
already noted FM was an important source of legitimacy DEMO other
investors. FM’s involvement in the venture also becam e useful when
establishing relationships with customers and local suppliers. FM soon
took a personal DEMO in the firm and often visited the office on a weekly
basis, providing valuable encouragement, advice and support. Clark found
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
154
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
him particularly helpful at reviewing contracts and other business
documents. Investors A and B were also active promoters of ZIP’s DEMO
with the oil industry. Investor C, formally a close friend of DEMO,
provided strong emotional support (eventually Investor C’s brother—an
original investor DEMO the firm—becam e ZIP’s VP of Finance). Investor D, an
DEMO businessperson who often invested in start-ups, became an
ongoing source of DEMO business and legal advice.
Event 4: A second cash injection
A DEMO shareholder’s meeting was held in 1988. The firm was on schedule
and had clearly demonstrated an ability to parsimoniously manage its
existing cash. Everyone DEMO, however, that an additional cash
injection would be necessary. The first round of financing had been in the
form of shareholder loans. The DEMO lawyer suggested that these loans
be converted to equity. Investor A strongly supported this conversion and
further suggested that each investor be able to DEMO their initial equity at
the original shareholder price. All 13 of the original founding investors took
advantage of these terms, providing ZIP with an additional Can.$200,000.
Event 5: A third cash injection from original shareholders and a
new ‘cluster’ of investors
In 1989 ZIP ran into serious DEMO flow problems. They were primarily
caused by two related factors. First, DEMO serious underestimation of the time
required to convert a laboratory prototype to a ‘field ready’ model. Second,
ongoing problems with a Silicon Valley DEMO supplier of the sensors used
in the electronic probe. The supplier had originally supplied faulty sensors,
causing unnecessar y delays in building and DEMO the probe. Even after
ZIP had identified the problem, the supplier DEMO not take much interest in
servicing the relatively small account.
ZIP was able to raise a further Can.$200,000 from two sources: original
shareholders and a new cluster of investors. The manager (Investor E) of
DEMO research park where the firm leased office space, significantly impressed
with DEMO firm’s prospects, represented a sixth cluster of investors. He was
also DEMO in bringing two other investors to the venture (Investors
E1 and DEMO).
Event 6: New sources of financia
l resources
As the DEMO continued to grow it became apparent that it had an ongoing
need for cash. In order to fuel this need Clark continued to approach DEMO
variety of individuals and agencies. Once again, he approached formal
venture DEMO however they remained uninterested in the relatively
small venture. According to Clark, ‘It was really nothing but a big hassle.
The venture capitalists were major disappointments.’
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 DEMO 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
155
By late 1989 the firm had reached a sufficient size and potential to
attract the interest DEMO support of a variety of government agencies. In
1989 ZIP secured a Can.500,000 interest-free loan from Western
Economic Diversification (WED). In 1989, 1990 and 1991, an Industrial
Research Assistance Program (IRAP) provided DEMO to hire university
summer students. In 1993, largely based on its DEMO record of
collaboration with summer students, the firm was able to DEMO a
Can.$100,000 grant to subsidise the hiring of four new full-time
employees. Similarly, in 1994 the firm received another Can.$178,000
grant from IRAP. In addition to cash, the IRAP affiliation brought
many useful technological contacts to the firm. The IRAP hiring activity
also spawned a series DEMO long-lasting relationships with the local
university, particularly with students. Clark was DEMO to muse that:
‘When we are hiring, we find students DEMO be the best sources of
information. They know more about one another than their professors
know about them. We simply ask them: ‘Who are the best people in the
engineering faculty?’ Then we get them DEMO help us with recruiting. As
long as we hire new people at least every two years we have pretty good
information about who is DEMO and who isn’t.’
Event 7: A new partner with connections in DEMO Middle East
In 1992 the firm had achieved a million dollars in sales and was finally
breaking even. The firm’s ‘angel’ investor network was DEMO in size and
located within a single geographic region. This made it relatively easy to
manage. However competitive pressures in the oil industry, combined with
a downturn in the Alberta oilpatch, prompted Clark and Toku to look
abroad for further opportunities.
An opportunity presented itself when an engineer DEMO for a major
Canadian firm was transferred to Yemen in the Middle East. Having used
ZIP’s probe in Canada and being impressed with its DEMO, he was
instrumental in establishing a lucrative rental agreement for the DEMO
Encouraged by this success, and recognising the huge business potential in
DEMO Middle East, the firm set out to do more business. A DEMO was hired
who eventually put the firm in contact with a potential investor/partner
who was located in the United Arab Emirates. Eventually ZIP DEMO into
an international joint venture agreement (IJV) with this Middle East
partner (MEP). ZIP was to provide probes and technical support. MEP
was to provide valuable industry and government marketing contacts in the
Middle DEMO MEP was also to provide a much-needed US$500,000 in
order to design and build new probes. MEP was to be ZIP’s exclusive agent
DEMO the Middle East and was given marketing rights for all of the Middle
East, India and Pakistan.
The joint venture appeared to be plagued with problems from the start.
MEP only delivered US$375,000 of the DEMO upon US$500,000. More
importantly MEP failed to deliver many of the promised Middle East
contacts. Even though ZIP had set up an office DEMO the Middle East, by 1994
matters had deteriorated to point where DEMO attempted to terminate the
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
156
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
joint venture. MEP and ZIP subsequently became embroiled in a lengthy
international arbitration hearing. Eventually (1998) the arbitrator found DEMO
favour of ZIP. However, the hearings had been a substantial drain DEMO ZIP’s
time and finances and the firm was not optimistic about collecting the
damages awarded.
From the perspective of network development, ZIP had extended its
network to include a somewhat fragile tie. An indirect referral, no previous
ties, geographical distance, cultural differences and the inability of the
DEMO to strengthen the relationship, all contributed to the failure of the
DEMO
Event 8: Back to original investors
ZIP continued to grow, despite ongoing problems in the Middle East,.
This growth required cash beyond DEMO could be generated from
sales. While there was a market for more probes, ZIP didn’t have
enough money to build them. Clark described their predicament thus:
‘We didn’t want to go into debt, we didn’t want to borrow money, we
didn’t want to sell shares.’ ZIP needed to find a new way to raise
cash. Their corporate manager, Bob, developed a joint venture
proposal to raise Can.$200,000 from existing investors whereby they
could finance the building of 110 new gauges. ZIP would DEMO 25%
interest per annum and technically the investors would own the gauges
until ZIP paid back all of the principal and interest. At that DEMO
ZIP ownership of the gauges would revert to ZIP. To management’s
amazement (and delight) within 2 weeks, the firm raised almost twice
as much money as they had requested and they found themselves in
the DEMO situation of returning money to investors because it wasn’t
needed.
ZIP did similar shareholder loans in 1994 (for Can.$164,000) and
1995 (for Can.$146,000) at substantially reduced rates of interest. Later,
when contrasting the failure of the Middle East relationship with the
successes the firm DEMO experienced in raising money from its original
shareholders, Clark recognised the DEMO of the first venture: ‘We did it
not even knowing that DEMO our own backyard the shareholders were there
for us with loans. We didn’t have to do it!’ This realization was a critical
juncture for DEMO firm. A financing strategy had emerged (Mintzberg and
Waters 1982, 1985), somewhat serendipitously, which proved to be
compatible with the firm’s ongoing financing needs. On the basis of past
performance and the trust established DEMO previous dealings, the firm was
able to approach existing shareholders. These DEMO, and contacts
that they voluntarily nominated, provided the bulk of the firm’s ongoing
need for cash through a combination of debt and equity DEMO
There were two additional positive features of this approach to
financing. First, calls for cash were fulfilled in a relatively short period
of time (as opposed to dealing with formal venture capitalists or lending
agencies). Second, the firm was only required to relinquish equity on an
‘as needed’ basis.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 DEMO 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
Event 9: Enacting and DEMO
g the angel network
157
By 1996 the firm was generating Can.$4 million in sales. However,
continued expansion along with the introduction of DEMO new products (a
‘shut-in’ tool and a satellite Surface Data Transmission DEMO [SDS])
required another cash injection. The firm anticipated that an additional
Can.$1.5 million would be needed. A new share offering of 250,000 DEMO
at Can.$6 per share was made to existing shareholders and other ‘qualified’
investors. While existing shareholders produced a large number of shares,
they DEMO introduced a number of new investors to ZIP. Clark described the
dynamics of this fund raising effort: ‘We have a whole new cast of
characters coming in. They’re starting to spin-off new contacts. Some of
our DEMO investors brought in some and they brought in more. It’s like
they know two people who know two people and so on.’ Clark was
DEMO pleased that the firm’s latest financing initiative had enabled
them to make another level of contact with business people: ‘It just seems
to happen over time! You’ve got this little network and all of a sudden DEMO
get this little plug in there and, Boom! You’ve got this DEMO new network.’
At this point in the firm’s development, people within DEMO firm, along
with existing investors, were accessing other potential investors. In-
vestors, H, I, and J represent these new investors, whose DEMO to
the firm—at least initially—was primarily financial. More significantly,
the demonstrated capability of ZIP persuaded existing investors to
approach their key contacts. Thus, Investor FM introduced ZIP to
Investor G, whom Clark had known ‘for years, but only at a distance’.
Clark was fully aware of the legitimisation offered by Investor G: ‘You
know, just the presence of DEMO name is user friendly.’ Contact with
investor F was made in a similar fashion, i.e. through FM. Clark had
been initially introduced to Investor F by Investor FM who had known
Investor F for years. Interestingly, Investor FM had been involved with
ZIP since 1987 but only in DEMO, when the firm’s track record and size
were substantial, was Investor FM prepared to make representations on
behalf of ZIP.
Event 10: The process of enriching the network continues
As had been the process in DEMO past, many investors continued to bring
much more to the network DEMO financial resources. For example, Investor
G, was a former VP of Mobil Oil who had considerable experience in the oil
industry and was DEMO valuable source of strategic advice. Furthermore, the
same investor was prepared DEMO arrange for the necessary resources (money,
contacts, and advice) DEMO the firm decide on an aggressive international
expansion or opt for a public offering on one of the New York exchanges.
Investor F, prominent in the local business community, was also prepared
to champion the firm. He brought additional investors, his son, his brother,
and his DEMO (F1 , F2 , F3 ) who were also prominent in DEMO business
community. Clark summarised this investor’s attitude: ‘We’re here to help
DEMO We just want you to succeed. Heh! I’ve got a Harvard MBA guy here
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 DEMO 2007
158
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
and you can use him or his network . . . You know they (the investors) just
open the DEMO to all sorts of people’.
Event 11: Maintenanc
e and management DEMO the growing web
By 1996 ZIP’s network of angel investors had grown significantly. While
the large size of this network enabled the firm to DEMO a wide variety of
resources, its management became a much more DEMO and demanding
task. Furthermore, the multidimensional nature of the relationships added
DEMO the complexity. Significantly, the distribution of importance of the
‘players’ within DEMO network had also shifted. Some of the newer investors
brought much more money and business expertise to the table than had
many of the DEMO investors. Some of the larger investors even
complained that ZIP had ‘too many’ shareholders. Up to this point, Clark
had successfully managed the financial network by dealing one-on-one, and
in a non-formal manner, with each DEMO The clusters were directly
connected to Clark: he was the hub DEMO a series of relationships. By 1996,
some of the new links were recognized as particularly critical to the firm’s
expansion. (Chu 1996). Sometimes, these critical links were indirect ties,
presenting a complicated problem of how to strengthen those critical links
and avoid dependenc y upon DEMO intermediate investors. Maintaining
existing networks while at the same time soliciting new member s
appropriate for the ’s stage of development presented a complex
DEMO to the firm.
ZIP attempted to address the challenge of managing the expanding and
increasingly complex network in a number of ways. First, the firm
implemented more formal procedures and formulas. For example,
communication had DEMO much more formalised with greater reliance
on mechanisms such as newsletters, DEMO reports, annual reports, and
shareholder meetings. Second, responsibility for managing DEMO of the
relationships previously maintained by Clark became delegated to others in
the firm such as the Vice-President of Finance or the Corporate Manager.
DEMO, by late 1996 one of management’s stated goals was to: ‘Improve
communication to shareholders through a professional corporate structure
and procedures’. Third, in some cases the level of personal communication
with existing contacts was reduced. DEMO of these relationships became
implicitly ‘culled’ or ‘jettisoned’ from involvement in the firm’s ongoing
operations.
firm
Discussion
ZIP’s network development was hardly a planned DEMO On the contrary,
the process of evolution often seemed messy and accidental. During the
research process we found it difficult to anticipate how DEMO network might
evolve. Late in the project, however, as we analysed how the network had
changed over the research period, the outline of a four-stage model became
apparent. Each stage represents an attempt by the DEMO venture to handle a
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
159
critical management challenge. As the challenge of one stage is resolved, a
new challenge arises. Figure 1 provides a graphic representation and
description of this model.
Figure
1.
DEMO
angel
investors:
a
four-stage
model
of
network
development
.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
160
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
Stage 1: Initial navigation/ ‘kissing frogs’
The managerial challenge confronting the entrepreneur at the outset of
new venture creation DEMO simple, yet demanding: locate the sources of
needed resources. Finding these resources requires the entrepreneur to
erect a network. The authors liken this DEMO to ‘kissing frogs’ as the
entrepreneu r tries to make sense of the array of potential contacts in his/
her personal and business DEMO As the fable goes, a lot of ‘frogs’ have
to be DEMO before the proverbial ‘prince’ is found. Hypothetically, for
example, Clark and Toku were set within a wide universe of funding
possibilities: banks, DEMO capitalists, friends, family and past work
associates. The first task of the entrepreneur is to make contact with a
sufficient number of these DEMO ports of access. In the case of ZIP,
family members, DEMO used as a source of capital in new venture
start-ups, were DEMO a viable source of funding because of an earlier
business failure. Clark’s father, however, was an important source of
affective support and a DEMO to other contacts. Clark’s aversion to
banks also made it reasonable that he approach existing personal and
business contacts, some of whom were already in the oil and gas
industry. Doing so, however, meant that DEMO skeletal network as it
developed was somewhat larger, and thus more DEMO to manage, than
would have been the case had Clark obtained DEMO or family financing.
In effect, Clark constructed his skeletal network from DEMO
established ties in earlier, sometimes dormant networks. This task
involved reconfiguring DEMO links into a new network centred upon
ZIP.
The new network was initially concerned exclusively with the flow
and exchange of financial resources and DEMO stakes. That is, in
seeking funding, Clark was building ties for which the content of
exchange was a formal transaction of money for DEMO future
financial gain. These ties had previously been relatively weak, because
DEMO had little reason to interact with them prior to their involvement
as investors.
Clark’s network initially consisted of five ports of access: investors
FM, and A – D inclusive, were not in contact with one DEMO, either
socially or as business partners, and each brought indirect investors to
ZIP. In one sense the major clusters were not related. However DEMO
reputation crossed from one cluster to another, making it easier for
DEMO to gain further investment. It may be that in developing a
network the entrepreneur has a greater chance of success where
approaches are made DEMO discrete clusters or ‘communities’ (Hannan
and Freeman 1989) of contacts who, although not in formal or social
contact, nevertheless have knowledge of DEMO other. Obtaining the
support of one can ‘legitimate’ the entrepreneur’s actions and ease the
challenge of building support. Organizations within a field may not
DEMO directly with each other, but are aware of the status and
DEMO of actors within the field such that an entrepreneu r
obtains legitimacy from one cluster because its relationship with
another.
of
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
Stage 2: Consolidation
161
DEMO managerial challenge of the second stage is to mobilize needed
resources. The entrepreneur strengthens ties in order to facilitate the
creation of a financial DEMO Clark did indeed seek to strengthen his
initial contacts, both by DEMO the frequency of contacts with the
founding investors, and by being DEMO with them about his difficulties and
aspirations.
As the ZIP network developed, Clark was aided by its relatively small
size. Clark also made choices, spending more time with the five direct ties,
and especially FM, who was the significant lead investor. After all, it had
been DEMO reputation that legitimated the venture to the other investors.
These investors, DEMO, would not blindly follow FM as the firm
developed. Nevertheless, FM’s support was particularly critical and Clark
spent more time strengthening his relationship DEMO FM than with any
other investor. In the first 2 years, DEMO and FM were in contact ‘once or
twice a month’ and, DEMO, almost weekly. Contact was easily managed
because FM was retired. The DEMO investors were also in contact with
Clark but much less frequently. That is, by interacting with FM and the
four other lead investors, DEMO was able to satisfactorily consolidate
relationships with the five discrete clusters in the network.
Stage 3: Enrichment
The managerial challenge in stage 3 is to optimise use of the resources
within the network. The point is DEMO the aggregated value of a network is
enhanced by an ability to access and draw upon the full potential of each
cluster. An important DEMO of an entrepreneur’s network is that the
different clusters are reservoirs of potential support. These reservoirs vary,
depending upon the experience and capabilities DEMO the contacts. ZIP was
fortunate in that its founding network included highly experienced actors
from the oil and gas industry. The success of ZIP DEMO overcoming the
liabilities that afflict new firms may partly be explained by its ability to tap
into the richness of the resources contained in DEMO clusters.
What the authors observe in the ZIP case was the ability of the new
venture to broaden a network constructed to access financial DEMO, in
order to access other resources from the same ties. As DEMO entrepreneu r
‘thickens’ the relationships with key ports of access, the DEMO
become more complex and multidimensional. Exchanges between the
parties are no longer restricted to the initial and intended resource. In the
case of ZIP, Clark began to receive from Investor FM resources that went
beyond just DEMO support. FM’s initial participation was a powerful
political endorsement that influenced others to lend their support.
However later, as ZIP developed, Clark received DEMO advice on
production and marketing options.
More significantly, Investor FM, because of his long experience in
management, provided useful affective support. The entrepreneuria l
venture may be a lonely endeavour, with the need for reassurance and
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December DEMO
162
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
comfort from an experienced and respected source. One entrepreneu r
described this process using the analogy of the mother with DEMO new baby. To
the young mother, there can be many confusions DEMO alarms in the baby’s
first few months: significant others such as DEMO, because of their
experiences, have a better sense of perspective and provide an important
stabilising and reassuring role. The ritual of the ‘baby DEMO the
mother-to-be is showered with gifts is a further example of the multi-
dimensionality of resources and relationships. While the gifts are very
tangible DEMO (similar to finance) other equally important resources,
such as emotional support, advice and information, are provided—as well
as conduits to resources DEMO may be needed in the future. Venture
capitalists, private investors, even professional advisors (lawyers, accoun-
tants) can provide the same role for the rookie entrepreneur (Chu 1996).
For Clark, Investor FM especially DEMO this role.
During stage 3, in other words, the process begun in stage 2 of turning
weak into strong ties is accentuated through DEMO broadening of the transactional
content. In other words, members of the DEMO, who were approached as
providers of a specific resource (finance) DEMO provide other resources such
as advice, critical information, emotional support, DEMO, and new
contacts. The reciprocal sense of trust and commitment evolved DEMO stage 2
enables the relationships to become (in stage 3) multidimensional and thus
more significant for survival. Multidimensionality, once achieved, then acts
DEMO reconstitute the robustness of the relationship.
It is important to note the roles of geographical proximity and a
common set of values in enabling DEMO to move through the first three stages
of the process. ZIP’s problematical expansion overseas illustrates how a
new venture can suffer if the network DEMO in Stage 1. Thus it was
noticed in the case of Middle East Partner [MEP] that it was difficult for
Clark to consolidate the DEMO ties. Clark had been introduced to MEP very
indirectly i.e. via an oil industry contact who located a broker who located
MEP. The weakness DEMO the tie was an impediment to doing due diligence
on the contact, which resulted in adverse consequences .
The authors would suggest that the development of contacts in new
social arenas (e.g. overseas) makes it DEMO to strengthen weak ties. In
one sense, Clark had an efficient DEMO to MEP, in that MEP was the sole
connection to Middle DEMO markets. At the same time, Clark was dependent
upon MEP to DEMO within the intricacies of those markets. Clark would
have been well advised to develop other links in the Middle East in order to
make DEMO less dependent on MEP. The link with MEP remained weak,
partly because geographical distance made interaction difficult, and partly
because of an absence of any binding ties between Clark and MEP, other
than business interests. Clark, in fact, was seriously concerned about the
different ethical requirements DEMO operating in the Middle East.
Stage 4: Reconfiguration
Subsequent financing is DEMO to initial financing. First, the entrepre-
neur has a wider selection DEMO potential funding partners because legitimacy
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
163
has been secured—there is available evidence of tangible success. For ZIP,
initial market success opened DEMO to formal venture capitalists, granting
agencies, and additional angel investors. More significantly, market success
introduced ZIP to MEP. The key point is that subsequent financing is
characterised by access to a greater array of potential DEMO, which results
in the managerial challenge characteristic of stage 4: to manage the larger
size and complexity of the network, and, at DEMO same time, to develop new
links consistent with the evolving strategic DEMO This may involve
handling the altered importance of certain links (especially DEMO emerging
importance of certain indirect links). The formalization stage involves the
implementation of more formal control and information systems to address
the challenge DEMO managing and organizing the growing network.
In the case of ZIP a discernible pattern emerged for handling the ‘who’
and ‘how’ questions of the DEMO ongoing finance needs. Noticeably, the
pattern was established in the firm’s DEMO financing. Money was raised by
approaching established contacts with an offer of additional shares or
shareholder loans. These existing shareholders occasionally brought in new
DEMO Funding was thus characterized by replicating strategies that had
been successfully used in the past. This replication of the funding formula
may partly reflect DEMO it is easier to utilise existing
sources than it is to find new ones—but it is also the outcome of imprinting
and habit (Kimberly 1987). Whatever the reason, one consequence of using
the same contacts was that the network remained more manageable, in
terms of its size, than if completely new sources of financing had been
sought. Nevertheless, DEMO growing size of the network could not be handled
through personal contact with each tie. Greater formalisation was required.
The established network, although more formalised, is not static.
Existing exchange relationships are revisited, often becoming DEMO and/
or assuming a multidimensional orientation. The existing circle of
relationships is further expanded, usually through referrals from existing
networks and planned or chance encounters. This process repeats itself in a
‘spiral’ fashion. As a DEMO, the entrepreneur is presented with a
further challenge of managing the DEMO tension’ between enrich-
ment and expansion. As the entrepreneur develops new links it becomes
more difficult to personally manage or enrich existing links. It DEMO
becomes important to identify the links of lesser significance and to manage
them more efficiently. Within ZIP three distinct routines emerged for
handling these DEMO: First, communication becam e less frequent
and more formal. For example, standardized written documentation and
forms were developed. Communication was increasingly conducted
through routine channels , such as newsletters, quarterly reports, annual
reports, and shareholder meetings. The establishment of these commu-
nication channels supplemented, and in some cases displaced, personal
contact as a means of conveying information about the firm. Second,
responsibility for communication became delegated to others in DEMO firm
(e.g. the corporate manager or the Vice-President, Finance). Third, some
relationships were ‘culled’ (Larson and Starr 1993) from the network.
Some contacts, initially of significance, often become less critical as the
DEMO grows and their contribution, in terms of accessing required resources,
DEMO By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
164
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
diminishes or becomes redundan t to the needs of the maturing firm. At the
same time, new contacts provide a wider array of new resources and need to
be nurtured and enriched DEMO the benefit of the firm. Identifying important
links, developing stronger ties, and enriching the transactional content of
the new relationships, become important activities for the entrepreneur.
The entrepreneur must balance the demands for developing or DEMO
new links with the obligation to maintain existing relationships.
In some cases the entrepreneur finds it efficient to ‘cull’ contacts that
provide equivalent (or redundant) resources. However, we would suggest,
that redundanc y may, at times, outweigh the associated costs of
inefficiency. The trade-offs between redundancy and efficiency must be
carefully balanced . Experience with complex technological systems
(Perrow 1984) illustrates that, sometimes, it is prudent for a system to
have redundancy built into its most critical components. Or, as is the case
with small aircraft design, even though one engine might be capabl e of
doing the job indefinitely, there are occasions when it is reassuring to have a
second engine. In other words, when relationships provide critical links to
resources necessary for the survival of the firm DEMO may be advantages in
redundancy, however inefficient. When key actors are DEMO to critical
resources, unanticipated events such as accidents, transfers, or DEMO
ships gone sour, can remove access to critical resources in an DEMO
Gateopeners may suddenly become gatekeepers.
In the case of ZIP and its Middle East initiative, the company took a
‘significant risk’ on a single somewhat nebulous relationship. In hindsight,
the firm may have been better DEMO to have stayed with more reliable,
known contacts for raising money. The firm may also have been better
advised to refrain from exclusivity DEMO to spread risk through multiple
relationships. Thus, when resources permit, it might be advantageous for
entrepreneurs to seek out actors who provide equivalent DEMO resources. In
other words, efficient networks may be necessary in the DEMO stages of new
firm formation, but, they may provide somewhat fragile links to key
resources and thus contribute to the liabilities of newness.
DEMO
In summary, the experience of ZIP suggests that the creation of DEMO
informal angel investor network passes through four stages, each
characterised by DEMO separate managerial challenge and having particular
defining features. In Stage 1, DEMO Navigation/ ‘Kissing Frogs’, the
entrepreneu r is faced with the challenge of locating the sources of needed
financial resources and attempts to build DEMO network from a potential
‘universe’ of contacts. In addition to developing new contacts, this process
involves approaching previously established ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ ties, DEMO
reactivating ‘dormant’ relationships. In Stage 2, Consolidation, the
entrepreneu r faces the challenge of mobilizing needed resources. A network
is created by strengthening DEMO relationships that facilitate strategic
intent. In Stage 3, Enrichment, the entrepreneu r faces the challenge of
optimizing resources available within the network. The DEMO
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
165
content of the relationship becomes multi-dimensional as the entrepreneu r
access more than just financial resources DEMO some of the ties i.e. advice,
critical information, emotional support, legitimacy, and new contacts. In
Stage 4, Reconfiguration , the entrepreneur DEMO faced with the challenge of
managing a larger, more complex network DEMO at the same time
establishing new ties that will enable the firm to grow further. Defining
features of this stage include continued growth of DEMO network; others
within the firm assume responsibility for managing some of DEMO relation-
ships; communication becomes more formalized, relationship patterns
become reconfigured and some contacts are ‘culled’ from the network.
Conclusion
Given the important role DEMO angel investors in the financing of new
ventures, understanding the process DEMO which angel networks are
developed and managed remains a significant but imperfectly understood
aspect of the entrepreneurial process. In this paper a four-stage model DEMO
angel network development has been proposed. The model addresses how
entrepreneurs secure critical financial resources and suggests that the stages
of network evolution are DEMO by different managerial challenges
and actions. Further research is required to further validate, and refine, the
model developed here.
In the present study DEMO investors’ decisions to invest were influenced
by factors beyond those typically associated with formal ‘due diligence’
models and venture capitalists’ investment decisions. The study DEMO
the importance of previously established ties in influencing angel investors’
decisions to invest. It particularly emphasized the value of ‘weak’ or
‘dormant’ ties. It DEMO established that the transactional content of the
relationship often becomes ‘enriched’ over time, reinforcing the observa-
tion that angel investors contribute more than just financial resources to the
new venture. Finally, it suggests that, as DEMO investor networks grow and
become more complex, specific attention has to DEMO devoted to managing
them effectively. The relationship between entrepreneurs and informal
angel investors clearly has an important social dimension that also merits
further study.
DEMO
1.
A fuller version of the case is available from the first author.
References
Aldrich, H. and Zimmer, C., 1986 Entrepreneurship through social networks. In D. L. Sexton and R.
W. Smilo r (eds.) DEMO Art and Science of Entrepreneurship (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger) 2–23.
Aldrich, H., Rosen, B. and Woodward, W., 1987, The impact DEMO social networks on business foundings
and profit. In N. Churchill, J. DEMO, O.J. Krasner, and K. Vesper (eds.) Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research (Wellesley, MA: Babson College) 154–168.
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
166
L LOYD
S TE I ER
AND
ROY ST O N
DEMO E NW OO D
Birley, S., 1985, The role of DEMO in the entrepreneurial process. Journal of Business Venturing, 1,
107–117.
DEMO, Z. and MacMillan, I.C., 1992, Milestones for successful venture planning. In W. A. Sahlman,
and H.H. Stevenson (eds.) The entrepreneurial DEMO (Boston: Harvard Business School).
Borch, O. J., 1992, DEMO firms and the governance of environmental change. Scandinavian Journal of
Management 8, 321–334.
Borch, O. J. and Arthur, M. B., 1995, Strategic networks among small firms: implications for strategy
research methodology. Journal of Management Studies, 32, 419–441.
Bouwen, R. and Steyaert, C., 1990, DEMO organizational texture in young entrepreneurial firms.
Journal of Management Studies, 27, 637–649.
Burt, R. S., 1992a, The social structure of competition. In N. Nohria and R. G. Eccles (eds.) Networks
and Organizations: Structure, Form, and Action. (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press)
57–91.
Burt, R. S., 1992b, (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Chu, P., 1996, Social network models of overseas Chinese entrepreneurship: DEMO experience of Hong
Kong and Canada. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences. 13, 358–365.
Dubini, P. and Aldrich, H., 1991 Personal and extended DEMO are central to the entrepreneurial
process. Journal of Business Venturing, 6, 305–313.
Eisenhardt, K., 1989, Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review, 14,
532–550.
Granovetter, M. S., 1973, DEMO strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78, 1360–1380.
Granovetter, M. S., 1983, The strength of weak ties revisited. In R. Collins (ed.) Sociological Theory
(San Francisco: Jossey Bass).
Granovetter, M. S., 1985 Economic action and social structure: the problem of DEMO
American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481–510.
Granovetter, M. S., 1992 Problems of explanation in economic sociology. In N. Nitin and R. Eccles
(eds.) Networks and Organizations: Structure, Form, and Action. (Boston: DEMO Business
School Press). 25–56.
Hannan, M. T. and Freeman, J., 1989, Organizational Ecology (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press).
Johanson, J. and Mattson, L.G., 1987, Interorganizational relations in industrial systems: a network
approach compared with a transaction-cost approach. International Studies of Management DEMO
Organization 17, 34–48.
Kimberly, J., 1987, The study of organization: toward a biographical perspective. In Handbook of
Organizational Behavior (Englewood Cliffs, CA: Prentice Hall).
Larson, A., 1991, Partner networks: leveraging external ties to improve entrepreneurial performance.
Journal of Business Venturing, 6, DEMO
Larson, A., 1992, Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: a study of the governance of exchange
relationships. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 76–104.
DEMO, A. and Starr, J. A., 1993, A network model of organization formation. Entrepreneurship, Theory
and Practice, 17, 5–15.
Lazerson, M., 1995, A new phoenix? Modern putting-out in the Modena knitwear industry.
DEMO Science Quarterly, 40, 34–59.
Lumme, A., Mason, C. and DEMO, M., 1996, The returns form informal venture capital investments:
DEMO exploratory study. Entreprenuerial and Small Business Finance, 5, 139–158.
Mason, DEMO and Harrison, R.T., 1997, Business angel networks and the development DEMO the informal
venture capital market in the UK: is there still DEMO role for the public sector? Small Business
Economics, 9, 11–123.
DEMO, M. B., and Huberman, M. A., 1984, Qualitative Data DEMO (Beverly Hills CA: Sage).
Mintzberg, H. and Waters, J. A., 1982, Tracking strategy in an entrepreneurial firm. Academy of
Management DEMO, 25, 465–499.
Mintzberg, H. and Waters, J. A., 1985, Of strategies, deliberate and emergent. Strategic Management
Journal, 6, 257–272.
Perrow, C., 1984, Normal Accidents (New York: Basic Books).
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007
A F OUR -S TAG E MOD E L OF
N ET DEMO ORK
DE V EL OP M ENT
167
Powell, W. W., 1990, Neither market nor hierarchy: network forms of organization. In B. DEMO Staw and
L.L. Cummings (eds.) Research in Organizational Behavior, 12, (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press).
295–336.
Powell, W. W., Koput, K.W. and Smith-Doerr, L., 1996, Interorganizational collaboration and the
locus DEMO innovation: networks of learning in biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41,
116–145.
Saxenian, A., 1994, Regional Advantage (Cambridge, MA: Harvard DEMO Press).
Schwartzman, H. B., 1993, Ethnography in Organizations (Newbury Park, CA: Sage).
Shulman, N., 1976, Network analysis: DEMO new addition to an old bag of tricks. Acta Sociological, 19, 307–
323.
Smilor, R.W., 1986, Building indigenous companies: the technology DEMO approach. In R. D.
Hisrich (ed.) Entrepreneurship, Intrapreneurship and Venture DEMO (Lexington, MA: D.C.
Heath).
Steier, L. and Greenwood R., 1992, Priming the pump: promoting the small business sector in Alberta.
Paper prepared for the National Entrepreneurship Development Institute. June, Montreal,
Quebec.
Steier, L. and Greenwood R., 1995, Venture capitalist relationships in the deal structuring and post-
investment stages of new firm creation. Journal of DEMO Studies, 32, 337–357.
Stinchcombe, A. L., 1965, Organizations and DEMO structure. In J. G. March (ed.) Handbook of
Organizations (Chicago: Rand-McNally). 153–193.
Tichy, N. M., 1981, Networks in organizations. In P. C. Nystrom and William H. Starbuck (eds.)
Handbook of Organizational Design, vol. 2 (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Timmons, J. DEMO, 1994, New Venture Creation, 4th edn (Boston, MA: Irwin).
Wetzel, W.E., 1981, Informal risk capital in New England. In K.H. Vesper (Ed.) Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research (Babson Park, MA: Babson College) 217–245.
Yin, R., 1984, Case study research: Design and methods (Beverly Hills , CA: Sage).
Downloaded By: [University of Waterloo] At: 00:47 22 December 2007{1g42fwefx}