A Paradigm of Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial Management
1IIiiiiil
..1IiiiII@
Howard H. Stevenson; DEMO Carlos Jarillo
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 11, Special Issue: Corporate DEMO
(Summer, 1990), pp. 17-27.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28199022%2911%3C17%3AAPOEEM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
Strategic Management Journal is currently published by John Wiley & DEMO
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that DEMO you
have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire DEMO of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and
you may DEMO content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
DEMO contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor .org/journals/jwiley.html.
Each DEMO of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or
printed page of such transmission.
DEMO is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to creating and preserving a digital archive of
scholarly journals. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org/
Sat May 13 09:06:54 2006
Strategic Management Journal, Vol.
A PARADIGM OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
ENTREPRENEURIAL MANAGEMENT
HOWARD H. STEVENSON
Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
J. CARLOS JARILLO
IMD, Lausanne, Switzerland
11, 17-27 (1990)
Corporate entrepreneurship seems DEMO many entrepreneurship scholars a contradiction in
terms. This paper represents an attempt to bridge that gap. This is done by, first, reviewing
the DEMO on entrepreneurship, trying to summarize it in a few major themes. DEMO, a
view of entrepreneurship is proposed that facilitates the application of DEMO previous findings
to the field of corporate entrepreneurship. Finally, a series DEMO propositions are developed,
as instances of the kind of research that can be pursued by following the proposed approach.
Corporate entrepreneurship is a DEMO that has
acquired more and more importance in the last
few years. Serious, scholarly work has appeared
on the subject (see, for instance, Burgelman,
1983a,b, 1984a,b, Nielsen, Peters and Hisrich,DEMO
1985; MacMillan, Block and Subba Narasimha,
1986; Hisrich and DEMO, 1986; MacMillan and
Day, 1987; for some recent examples). General-
interest books have also made an impact (Brandt,
1986; DEMO, 1986; Kanter, 1983, 1989), and
some of them have even reached best-seller lists
(Pinchot, 1985). The very existence of DEMO issue
of the Strategic Management Journal testifies to
the credibility gained by the concept among
experts in business management.
Yet, when reading much of the literature on
entrepreneurship as such, to which corporate
entrepreneurship should be somewhat related
(perhaps as is a species to its genus), one finds
an implicit definition of entrepreneurship as
something which is radically different DEMO
corporate management. Indeed, some writers
find it to be the opposite DEMO corporate management
(Vesper, 1985). Thus, the very concept of
DEMO entrepreneurship sounds to many
entrepreneurship scholars as something of an
oxymoron.
What is, then, behind that surge of the corporate
014.1--2095/90/050017-11 DEMO
© 1990 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
entrepreneurship construct? There is no doubt
that, of late, entrepreneurship in general has
gained DEMO status as a legitimate scholarly research
subject, enjoying in addition much DEMO interest
(Vesper, 1988). This is evidenced by the appear-
ance of new academic journals, such as the
Journal of Business Venturing; DEMO the fact that
mainstream journals carry more and more articles
on related issues (Churchill and Lewis, 1985);
and by the growth of interest in non-academic
publications, which has been even faster (see
McClung, J. J. and J. A. Constantin, 'Nonaca-
demic literature on entrepreneurship: An evalu-
ation', in Kent et al., 1982). As of today, there
is practically no business school without at least
one course on entrepreneurship (Porter and
McKibben, 1988).
The main traits generally DEMO to be
associated with entrepreneurship, such as growth
(Drucker, 1985), innovation (Backman, 1983),
and flexibility (Birch, 1987), DEMO, were
deemed to be also desirable traits for large
corporations, by theorists and practitioners alike.
Thus the field of corporate entrepreneurship was
born. DEMO is a need, however, to establish
clear links between the fields of entrepreneurship
and corporate management, if the large body of
research in the former is to benefit the latter.
18 H. H. Stevenson and J. C. Jarilla
Establishing such a link DEMO especially important
because,' as pointed out above, many entrepre-
neurship DEMO would consider entrepreneurship
as just what is outside of mainstream corporate
management.
This paper attempts to establish this linkage.
It .reviews much of the DEMO on entrepre-
neurship and groups these previous studies into a
few underlying themes which have relevance to
corporate entrepreneurship. It then re-examines
definitions of DEMO and advances its
own definition of entrepreneurship that facilitates
the connection of the previous research findings
to the broader field of corporate management.
From DEMO connection, propositions for research
and implications for the teaching and practice DEMO
corporate entrepreneurship are developed.
THREE MAIN STREAMS OF RESEARCH
The plethora of studies on entrepreneurship can
be divided in three main categories: what happens
when entrepreneurs act: why they act; and how
they act. In DEMO first, the researcher is concerned
with the results of the actions DEMO the entrepreneur,
not the entrepreneur or even his or her actions
per se. It is generally the point of view taken by
economists, such as Schumpeter, Kirzner, or
Casson. The second current may be DEMO the
'psychological/sociological approach' , founded by
McClelland (1961) and Collins and Moore (1964),
in the early 1960s. Their work DEMO a useful
emphasis on the entrepreneur as an individual,
and on the idea that individual human beings-
with their background, environment, goals,DEMO
values, and motivations-are the real objects of
analysis. The causes of DEMO entrepreneurial
action constitute the primary interest of the
researcher. Both the individual entrepreneur and
the environment as it relates to the motives of
individual DEMO behavior are con-
sidered. It is the why of the entrepreneur's
actions that becomes the center of attention.
Finally, how entrepreneurs act can become the
center of attention. In this case, researchers
analyze the characteristics of entrepreneurial
management, how entrepreneurs are able to
achieve their aims, DEMO of the personal
reasons to pursue those aims and oblivious to
the environmental inducements and effects of
such actions.
Considering what happens when entrepreneurs
DEMO: Studying the results of entrepreneurship
The area of literature concerned with DEMO question
of what happens when entrepreneurs act is
dominanted by economists. What matters here is
the net effect upon the general economic system
of DEMO actions of the entrepreneur, and the role
he or she plays DEMO the development of the market
system. The earliest interest in entrepreneurship
was expressed by Richard Cantillon, who focused
upon the economic role of the entrepreneur,
rather than the individual who performs such a
role. Cantillon, who coined the word 'entrepre-
neur,' said that entrepreneurship entails bearing
the risk of buying at certain prices and selling at
uncertain prices. DEMO Baptiste Say broadened
the definition to include the concept of bringing
together the factors of production. Thus the
entrepreneur is the protagonist of economic
DEMO in general.
Schumpeter takes a more specific view. He
considers entrepreneurship the process by which
the economy as a whole goes forward. It is
DEMO which disrupts the market equilibrium,
or 'circular flow.' Its essence is 'innovation.' He
writes that 'the carrying out of new combinations
we call "enterprise"; the individuals whose
function is to carry them out we call "entrepre-
neurs" (1934: 74). He thus DEMO different
roles:
We call entrepreneurs not only those 'indepen-
dent' businessmen in an exchange economy who
are usually so designated, but all who actually
fufil the function by which we define the concept,
DEMO if they are, as is becoming the rule,
"dependent" DEMO of a company, like
managers, members of boards of directors, DEMO
so forth, or even if their actual power to perform
the DEMO function has any other
foundations, such as the control of a DEMO
of shares. As it is the carrying out of new
combinations that constitutes the entrepreneur,
it is not necessary that he should be DEMO
connected with an individual firm; many 'finan-
ciers,' 'promoters,' and so forth are not, and
still they may be entrepreneurs DEMO our sense. On
the other hand, our concept is narrower than
DEMO traditional one in that it does not include
all heads of firms or managers of industrialists
who merely may operate an established business,
DEMO only those who actually perform that function
(p. 74).
A few pages earlier he had spelled in detail what
he understood DEMO 'new combinations':
(1) The introduction of a new good-that is one
with which consumers are not yet familiar-or
of a new DEMO of a good. (2) The introduction
of a new method of production, that is one not
yet tested by experience in the branch of
manufacture concerned, which need by no means
be founded upon a discovery scientifically new,
and can also exist in a new way DEMO handling a
commodity commercially. (3) The opening of a
new market, that is a market into which the
particular branch of manufacture of the country
in question has not previously entered, whether
or not this market has existed before. (4) The
conquest of a new source DEMO supply of raw
materials or half-manufactured goods, again
irrespective of whether DEMO source already exists
or whether it has first to be created. (DEMO) The
carrying out of the new organization of any
industry, like the creation of a monopoly position
(for example, through trustification) or the
breaking up of a monopoly position (p. 66).
After Schumpeter's work, most economists
(and many non-economists as well) have accepted
his identification of entrepreneurship with inno-
vation. This represents a change from DEMO previous
tradition, where the term 'entrepreneur' meant
basically 'businessman,' as we saw. (See Kilby,
1971, for a summary of DEMO term 'entrepreneur'
in classical economics.)
Some economists interpret the DEMO of
entrepreneurship in a different way: instead of
disrupting the market DEMO, thus advancing
the economy to qualitatively higher levels, the
entrepreneur works towards the accomplishment
in real life of the (theoretical) equilibrium
(Kirzner, 1979). The first tradition, represented
by Cole (1968) at DEMO Harvard Research Center
in Entrepreneurial History, has stressed the
aspect of DEMO in the entrepreneurial
function (see Scherer, 1984, significantly titled
Innovation DEMO Growth, Schumpeterian
Perspectives). The second, represented by
Kirzner, has DEMO the informational aspects
of the entrepreneurial function; his argument is
that DEMO entrepreneur has a superior knowledge
of market imperfections, that he uses DEMO his
advantage. Leibenstein (1968), also based at
Harvard, takes this approach, beyond merely
allocative efficiency. He makes the entrepreneur's
basic function the destruction of pockets of
inefficiency in the system.
A Paradigm of DEMO
For the most part, microeconomics has
neglected the study of the DEMO func-
tion, simply by assuming that markets would
eventually reach equilibrium. DEMO industrial
organization, the area of microeconomics that is
arguably closest to DEMO management practice
(Porter, 1981), maintains an emphasis on supra-
firm variables by concentrating on the assumption
that the structure of a given DEMO drives the
conduct of the firms in it. Nevertheless, the
importance DEMO the 'entrepreneurial function' to
the actual development of the economy of a
given country, following more or less Schumpeter-
ian lines, has DEMO studied extensively, starting
with Hirschman: 'development depends not so
much DEMO finding optimal combinations for given
resources and factors of production as on calling
forth and enlisting for development purposes
resources and abilities that are DEMO, scattered
or badly utilized' (1958: 5) These points of DEMO
open the way for an empirical study of the effects
of entrepreneurship in the real economy. Birch
(1979, 1987) has analyzed carefully the impact
of entrepreneurial activity in the overall economy
through the actual creation DEMO jobs.
Thus the study of the effects of entrepreneurship
has the following characteristics: (1) It abstracts
from the individual entrepreneur and his or her
actions to focus on the process by which those
actions affect DEMO economic environment. (2) It
recognizes the entrepreneurial function as respon-
sible for economic improvement in our society,
due to its 'innovations,' thus providing a theoreti-
cal base for the 'advocacy studies' we DEMO discuss
below. (3) It creates a basis for the distinction
between the roles of 'investor,' the 'manager,'
and the 'DEMO' Under this third torch of
analysis, entrepreneurship would then go well
beyond the mere creation of small businesses
(Scherer and Ravenscraft, 1984), thus paving the
way for the legitimation of the concept of
corporate entrepreneurship.
Considering why entrepreneurs act: Studying the
causes of entrepreneurship
It is not surprising that entrepreneurs themselves
have been subjects of interest. If entrepreneurship
DEMO at the root of economic improvement, the
implication that 'we need more of it' is not
difficult to draw. Researchers must, therefore,DEMO
understand those who provide it. This is consistent
19
20 H. H. Stevenson and J. C. Jarilla
with a cultural emphasis DEMO the individual
actor ('.the cult of the individual'). It DEMO fits
with a need to understand why some depart from
the norms of average behavior: the dramatic
accomplishments of some entrepreneurs easily
leads to the thinking that the individuals behind
them must somehow be different and DEMO
of particular interest..
One level of inquiry into the 'causes' of
observed entrepreneurial behavior conceptualizes
entrepreneurship as 'a psychological characteristic
of individuals, DEMO can be described in terms
such as creativity, daring, aggressiveness, DEMO the
like' (Wilken, 1979: 58). It was probably started
by The Enterprising Man, by Collins and Moore
(1964), who DEMO at the core of entrepreneurship
the 'desire for independence,' and DEMO identified
as the causal variable certain Oedipal conflicts
and neuroses of the entrepreneur. This early
work has had much following, particularly among
social scientists with a background in psychology.
Brockhaus studied the locus of control belief DEMO
entrepreneurs (1975), and their risk-tendency
(1980). Marcin and Cockrum (1984), study
psychological characteristics of entrepreneurs
across different countries. Hochner and Ganrose
(1985) analyze the characteristics of entrepre-
neurs, compared to their non-entrepreneurial
fellow co-workers; and a similar psychological
study is performed on female entrepreneurs
by Rowen and Hisrich (1986). Cooper and
Dunkelberg (1986) compare the path to entre-
preneurship (inheritance, purchase, start-up) with
DEMO attitudes characteristic of a large
sample of entrepreneurs. The popular press
has also written extensively about the 'special
psychological characteristics of the entrepreneur,'DEMO
generally understood as someone who starts-
somewhat successfully-his or her own business.
An interesting twist is the study of the
relationship between personal characteristics DEMO
entrepreneurs and the companies they set up.
Smith and Miner (1983) analyzed the adequacy
of different 'types' of entrepreneurs along the
different DEMO in the development of a firm,
while Webster (1977) and Gartner (1985) focus
on the kinds of firms set up by DEMO kinds
of entrepreneurs.
A second level of inquiry conceptualizes
entrepreneurship 'as DEMO socal role ... that may be
enacted by individuals in different social positions'
(Wilken, 1979: 58). It was pioneered by McClel-
land's best-selling The Achieving Society (1961).
The essence of this approach is that entrepreneur-
ial behavior is dependent upon personal motiv-
ations DEMO in turn are dependent on environ-
mental characteristics. McClelland started from
a psycho-sociological point of view, asking why
some societies, at some points DEMO time, had
exhibited high economic and social growth.
He attributed that DEMO to the 'need for
achievement (n-achievement)' present in the
psychological make up of large parts of the
population in those societies. This DEMO of view
has been very fruitful in that it has brought all
the theoretical resources of sociology to bear on
the field of entrepreneurship. DEMO results have been
well-detailed accounts of how the environment
affects practice of entrepreneurship (see, for
instance, Greenfield, Stricken and Aubey, 1979;
Delacroix and Carrol, 1983; Pennings, 1982a,b).
The practical consequences for public policy are
obvious, so much of the research undertaken
with this 'environment as motivator' approach
has clear political overtones. In fact, much of
what is being published right now falls into this
advocacy DEMO (see, for instance, Backman,
1983 and Kent, 1984).
Many criticisms have been levelled at these
attempts to understand the why DEMO entrepre-
neurship. First, it can be pointed out that it is
DEMO difficult to link particular psychological
or sociological traits causally to patterns of
complex behavior, such as entrepreneurship
(Cooper, Dunkelberg, and Woo, 1988). Indeed,
the literature suggests that no causal link can be
DEMO between any of the above-mentioned
variables and entrepreneurship. At most, one
DEMO speak of correlates or antecedents of
particular kinds of entrepreneurial behavior.
An added problem with this approach is that
its constant focus on the DEMO entrepreneur
has led, in many cases, to the identification of
entrepreneurship with small business manage-
ment (Carland et al., 1984) and to the failure to
differentiate clearly between the individuals and
organizations. These two DEMO of view seriously
impair the ability to transfer whatever knowledge
is gained in entrepreneurship research to broader
fields of management, such as corporate entre-
preneurship.
On the other hand, the contributions of this
'entrepreneurship from DEMO causes' approach are
extremely important, and cannot be forgotten in
A Paradigm of Entrepreneurship
21
any serious attempt at understanding corporate
entrepreneurship. DEMO approach has reminded
us of the following facts: (1) It DEMO individuals who
carry out entrepreneurial activities, no matter
how they are DEMO (2) Their characteristics
(personality, background, skills, etc.) matter.
(3) Environmental variables are also relevant,
not only in that they open up opportunities to
exploit market Inefficiencies, as in the 'econo-
DEMO' approach,' but also in the sense that
different environments are DEMO or less conducive
to entrepreneurship, and can be more favorable
to DEMO new venture's success. So, apart from the
possible social benefits DEMO might have obtained
from some of the advocacy approach, emphasis
on DEMO individual focuses the study of entrepre-
neurship on its protagonist-the invidivual entre-
preneur, who was somewhat 'lost' in the previous
economic analysis.
Considering how entrepreneurs act: Studying
entrepreneurial management
The two streams of research discussed above,
which have been characterized as 'entrepre-
neurship from its effects' and 'entrepreneurship
from. its causes,' deals with the 'what' DEMO the
'why' of entrepreneurship. It is now left to study
the 'how'. Entrepreneurship can be considered
from a. practical point of view-what do entre-
preneurs do, or, normatively, 'how to succeed at
DEMO an entrepreneur.' It is, in fact, what is
between the 'causes' and the 'results': the
'managerial behavior' of the DEMO Table
1 represents the three major categories entrepre-
neurial studies can be fitted into.
Table 1.
Line of inquiry Causes Behavior
Main question Why DEMO
Basic discipline Psychology, sociology Management
Contributions Importance of individual
Environmental variables DEMO
relevant
Contributions of disciplines to entrepreneurship
There is a vast popular literature along these
'how-to' lines, from functional studies on aspects
of interest to small businesses, to work on start-
ups, venture capital, etc.; as well as many
practical, functional studies on how to set DEMO and
run a few businesses successfully (see, for
instance, Silver, 1983). There is also now emerg-
ing academic work focused on DEMO how
entrepreneurs act. The study of strategy formation
in entrepreneurial firms is now a legitimate area
of inquiry (Mintzberg and McHugh, ~985).
DEMO important areas of research in this domain
are studies concerned with the different life cycles
through which new ventures pass and the
problems entrepreneurs DEMO as their companies
mature (Gray and Ariss, 1985; Quinn and
DEMO, 1983); and studies that try to find
predictors of success DEMO new ventures. This latter
group attempts to identify predictors generally
by relating such success (or lack thereof) to
either the entrepreneurs' background, DEMO chosen
strategy, environmental considerations, or some
mixture of these (Dollinger, 1984; Miller, 1983;
Cooper and Bruno, 1975). Timmons and Bygrave
(1986), Roure and Maidique (1986), and MacMil-
lan, Zemann and Subba Narasimha (1987) have
all sought predictors of success DEMO new ventures
funded with venture capital. They have found
that there are indeed variables other than just
the personalities of the.individuals involved, such
as the existence and nature of management
teams, which affect the likelihood of a positive
outcome.
It can be argued that this research on 'how' is
the most appropriate for a business school, since
it focuses DEMO understanding (and, it is hoped,
Effects
What
Economics
Entrepreneurship is the
function by which growth
is achieved (thus not only
the act of starting new
businesses)
Distinction between
entrepreneur and manager
22 H. H. Stevenson and J. C. Jarilla
improving) actual managerial practice. An exam-
ple may Help clarify this. The success in business
of DEMO overseas Chinese has been well documented
(see Limlingan, 1986, for DEMO up-to-date analysis),
together with that of other ethnic minority groups
(Sowell, 1983). This can be analyzed from the
point of view of the 'why,' and resultingly we
find answers such as the traditional closeness of
the Chinese family or the need for achievement
of DEMO barely tolerated minority. But also the 'how'
can be studied; then a network of both strong
and weak relationships is found (Larson, 1988).
That network enables the participants in it
to work with much lower transactions costs
(Williamson, 1975), thus becoming much more
DEMO than larger, more formal competitors
(Jarillo, 1988). The first DEMO of analysis provides
little guidance for a would-be entrepreneur. The
second gives a clue as to how a start-up
company can structure itself in DEMO to be more
competitive. As will be seen later, this stream DEMO
research promises the most relevance for the
field of corporate entrepreneurship.
DEFINING ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN A
USEFUL WAY
The extent to which the above studies DEMO be
taken to relate to corporate managment depends
on one critical question, one which we have thus
far avoided throughout the literature review:
what is an entrepreneur? Does anybody who
starts a business qualify as an entrepreneur? Or
is an entrepreneur necessarily an innovator,
whether in a large or a small firm? If we take
the first approach-that is, if we assume that
only those who start a business qualify-then
Ray Kroc of McDonald's or Thomas Watson of
IBM would not DEMO as entrepreneurs, although
they have been producers of all the 'good things'
that entrepreneurs are supposed to do, such as
job and wealth creation through the introduction
of new products and services. At the DEMO time,
only a few of those researchers interested
in entrepreneurial studies would consider the
opening of a typical 'mom and pop' store DEMO
entrepreneurial act worthy of study. The work
of Reynolds, Van de DEMO, Vesper, Cooper,
among others, has provided insights into the
DEMO process; however, they have not always
focused on the difference between high-potential
ventures and others.
This dilemma is reflected throughout the
literature. Some DEMO researchers think that
the present explosion in interest should not be
diverted to anything other than new venture
creation (Vesper, 1985). Others DEMO entrepre-
neurship as something that is indistinguishable
from innovation and as something that should
not be circumscribed to new ventures. It is seen
by DEMO as the key to economic growth and
productivity, and to the DEMO of knowledge
(Baumol, 1986). This view of entrepreneurship
would then also encompass the struggle of large
firms to remain competitive (Kanter, DEMO). The
divergence in points of view is so great that it
has been said that even a 'unifying theme' is
lacking (Kirzner, 1973: 281). Casson has pointed
out that the task of DEMO the literature on
entrepreneurship 'is rendered still more difficult
by the DEMO that in most academic studies of
entrepreneurs the word "entrepreneur" does not
appear in the title, whilst most of the literature
with "DEMO" in the title is either nonaca-
demic or is not about DEMO at all' (1982:
xiii).
Those attempts to pigeon-hole entrepre-
neurship do not contribute very much to our
understanding, for each of the aspects described
above focuses upon one important factor of
entrepreneurship. Generally DEMO, it does
not appear useful, in managerial terms, to delimit
DEMO by definining some economic
functions as 'entrepreneurial' and others as non-
entrepreneurial. Nor does it appear particularly
helpful to base the decision of DEMO an entrepre-
neur is upon studies of personality or character.
The first exercise appears to be rather more
semantic than practical. The second appears DEMO
be equally fruitless, for individuals in our society
may attempt entrepreneurship DEMO often succeed
even if they do not fit the standards of academic
judges as to their entrepreneurial personality or
sociological background. In sum, neither function
nor character provide a useful basis for under-
standing entrepreneurship in DEMO terms.
Defining entrepreneurship is, nevertheless, an
important question, albeit semantic, because a
definition too narrow may render much useful
research inapplicable to DEMO areas, such as
corporate entrepreneurship. On the other hand,
too DEMO a definition may make entrepreneurship
equivalent to good management, thus effectively
dissolving it as a specialized field of study.
The following view of entrepreneurship is then
proposed to -help DEMO advantage of previous
research on entrepreneurship for the strengthen-
ing of the corporate entrepreneurship field:
entrepreneurship is a process by which
individuals-either on DEMO own or inside
organizations-pursue opportunities without
regard to the resources they currently control
(Stevenson, Roberts, and Grousbeck, 1989).
'Opportunity' is DEMO here as a 'future situation
which is deemed desirable and feasible.' Thus
opportunity is a relativistic concept; opportunities
vary among individuals and for individuals over
time, because individuals have different desires
and they perceive themselves with different
capabilities. Desires vary with current position
and future expectations. Capabilities DEMO depend-
ing upon innate skills, training, and the competi-
tive environment. Perceptions of both desires
and capabilities are only loosely connected
to reality. DEMO, in any case, the essence of
entrepreneurship is the willingness to pursue
opportunity, regardless of the resources under
control. It is typical of the entrepreneur 'to find
a way.' Those ways are arrayed on DEMO spectrum
from the behavior of a pure promotor to those
of stodgy trustees (Stevenson and Gumpert,
1985).
This purely behavioral, situational DEMO
fits well with the common experience that the
level of 'entrepreneurship,' however defined,
often varies across the life of an individual, DEMO
even across the different activities of an individual
in a given moment. This approach overcomes
the dilemma posed by the question of whether
or DEMO entrepreneurs are to be found only in
start-up companies; we assume DEMO we are
seeing the entrepreneurial phenomenon whenever
opportunity which requires resources beyond
those controlled is being pursued. The final
advantage of this point of DEMO is that it
concentrates on practice, thus leading us to study
DEMO then teach basic entrepreneurial skills. We
understand these skills not as traits of character
(hardly transmittable in a class room), but
as knowledge that results from training and
experience that has been accumulated over the
DEMO and that will assist in problem-solving
(Simon, 1984). Thus, DEMO concentrating on entre-
preneurial behavior-by trying to understand the
A Paradigm of Entrepreneurship
'entrepreneurial process'-we may be able to
make use of findings of previous research, while
gaining insights on a crucial issue: how DEMO foster
entrepreneurship, by learning the nature of the
entrepreneurial process.
This DEMO also allows us to deal with both
individual and organizational entrepreneurship,
thus providing the necessary link between many
of the findings mentioned in DEMO literature review
(need for innovation; influence of personal
characteristics and motivation upon the outcome
of entrepreneurial ventures; objective (although
contingent) predictors of success, etc.) and the
field of corporate entrepreneurship.
In the remainder DEMO this paper, specific
propositions, relevant to corporate entrepre-
neurship research, DEMO and teaching, are
derived from this view of entrepreneurship,
following DEMO ideas found in Stevenson and
Jarillo (1986).
TOW ARDS THE DEMO
ORGANIZATION
Our definition of entrepreneurship can easily be
applied to a corporation, and this application
can be summarized in six logical propositions
concerning corporate entrepreneurship. Thus the
field of corporate entrepreneurship would not
limit itself to DEMO study of internal venturing,
but also to the ability of corporations to act
entrepreneurially. The first proposition is purely
definitional. Together with proposition DEMO, they
set the stage for the rest, more testable and
research oriented:
Proposition 1: An entrepreneurial organi-
zation is that which pursues opportunity, regard-
less of resources currently controlled.
As has been argued in the previous review of
the literature, it is important to distinguish
between individuals and organizations. At least
in the case of entrepreneurial behavior, this
cannot be avoided by equating an organization's
direction to the wishes DEMO its top managers: an
opportunity is, by definition, something beyond
DEMO current activities of the firm, and it is very
hard for DEMO managers to 'force' that pursuit
through the normal managerial mechanisms of
23
24 H. H. Stevenson and J. C. Jarilla
planning and control: it has to come from below.
Therefore:
Proposition 2: The level of entrepreneurship
within the firm (i.e. the pursuit of opportunities)
is critically dependent on the attitude of
individuals within the firm, below the ranks of
top managment.
The crux of corporate entrepreneurship is,
then, that opportunity for the firm has to be
pursued by individuals within it, who may have
perceptions of personal opportunity more or less
at variance DEMO opportunity for the firm. In
addition, an opportunity can hardly be DEMO,
of course, if it has not been spotted. But spotting
DEMO is certainly a function of the
individual's abilities: his/her DEMO knowledge'
of the market, the technologies involved, custo-
mer's needs, etc. As a consequence, the kind of
jobs and positions DEMO firm designs, the effort it
puts into developing generalists, able to make
the necessary mental connections to detect the
opportunity, should have a measurable impact.
Thus:
Proposition 3: The entrepreneurial behavior
exhibited by a firm will be positively correlated
with its efforts to put individuals in DEMO position
to detect opportunities; to train them to be able
to DEMO so and to reward them for doing so.
But, as we DEMO learned from the studies of
the 'causes' of entrepreneurship, the DEMO's
motivations are decisive to the emergence of
entrepreneurial behavior. By definition, nobody
will pursue an opportunity if he/she does not
want to, and we have seen argued that the very
exceptional nature of pursuing opportunities
without adequate resources makes it very difficult
for top management to 'force' that pursuit
through the typical managerial mechanisms by
prespecifying task goals.
There is a large body of literature on moti-
vation, not only in the field of entrepreneurship
(the 'why" question) but also DEMO organization
theory and psychology. It is not redundant to
remark how important motivation is for the
emergence of entrepreneurial behavior within the
corporation. In DEMO cases the individuals who
must exhibit that behavior if the firm is to succeed
have already satisifed most of their basic needs,
since DEMO are on a company's payroll. Thus the
positive inducements necessary to break the status
quo may have to be stronger (Baker, 1986)DEMO
Indeed, several of the studies mentioned above
on the background of DEMO entrepreneurs
point out that many of them come from relatively
dispossessed families.
But that extra inducement is hard to develop
within an organization. For DEMO reason it may
be more efficient to lessen the impact of deterrents
to entrepreneurial behavior, particularly that of
fear of the consequences of failure to the career
of the corporate entrepreneur. Given that the
would-be entrepreneurs DEMO an acceptable
status within the firm, the treatment of failure
would DEMO to be a critical component of the
necessary motivation to pursue opportunity.
Thus:
Proposition 4: Firms which make a conscious
effort to lessen negative consequences of failure
when opportunity is pursued will exhibit a
higher DEMO of entrepreneurial behavior.
The third element in the pursuit of opportunity,
after its detection and the willingness to pursue
it, is the belief that it can, at least with some
likelihood, be successfully exploited. DEMO:
Proposition 5: Not only the success rate, but
the very amount of entrepreneurial behavior
will be a function of the employees' (DEMO)
ability to exploit opportunities.
How is that ability increased? The DEMO of
the 'how-to' stream of research in entrepre-
neurship offer insights. These include the impor-
tance of investing the venture with enough
managerial DEMO technical ability from the begin-
ning, found in the studies for DEMO capital-
funded start-ups success. Widespread research
suggests that different stages in the life of a
venture may require different managers. The
importance of teams DEMO successful entrepreneur-
ships also follows.
Directly deriving from the above definition of
entrepreneurship, a specific skill would appear
to be particularly important: that DEMO making use
of resources that are outside the entrepreneur's
control (DEMO, 1983; Jarillo, 1989), since.
entrepreneurial behavior implies pursuing oppor-
DEMO regardless of the resources under control.
A Paradigm of Entrepreneurship
25
The vast amount of literature on networks DEMO
be applied here, from studies that show the
usefulness of a DEMO network in order to sustain
the new venture (Birley, 1986), to those that
analyze how an efficient network can be sustained
over DEMO long-term (Jarillo and Ricart, 1987;
Birley, 1989; Lawrence, DEMO). This literature
now can be seen as relevant to corporate
entrepreneurship, for the ability to obtain access
to resources widely scattered throughout the
. organization, with no need to set up a previous,
rigorous appropriations procedure, greatly
facilitates the pursuit of opportunities. Thus:
Proposition 6: Organizations which facilitate
the emergence of informal internal and external
networks, DEMO allow the gradual allocation and
sharing of resources, will exhibit a DEMO degree
of entrepreneurial behavior.
CONCLUSIONS
This paper shows how a particular conception
of entrepreneurship, based on the notion of
opportunity, may help link DEMO vast and varied
research on that topic with the emerging field of
corporate entrepreneurship. The proposed view
understands corporate entrepreneurship as some-
thing wider DEMO just 'corporate venturing,' or
setting-up intra-firm 'venture capital' processes.
DEMO behavior would be, following the
economists' tradition started by Schumpeter, DEMO
quest for growth through innovation, be this
technological or purely mangerial. DEMO pursuing
opportunity, whether through specific company
structures of not, constitutes the core of entre-
preneurship, both individuals and corporate.
More research is needed, at all levels, on
how that process develops, and on successfully
exploiting opportunity. Certainly, the three
aspects discussed above-namely detection of
the opportunity, willingness to pursue it, and
confidence and the possibilities of succeeding-
DEMO key components in the process. Much
research, from many different fields, can shed
light on those issues, but there are still plenty of
unanswered questions.
The implications for teaching are quite clear:
entrepreneurship is DEMO than just starting up
new businesses. It is a process for which some
skills are highly relevant. Many of those skills
are teachable. In DEMO, the implications for
teaching may well go beyond the field of
DEMO, for entrepreneurial manage-
ment may be seen as a 'mode of management'
different from traditional management, with
different requirements of control and rewards
systems, for instance.
Practitioners of corporate entrepreneurship
would be well advised, following the proposed
approach, to address all three key parameters of
DEMO behavior. Without an environ-
ment that fosters the detection of opportunities,
no entrepreneurship will emerge. Equally, the
motivation to pursue opportunity, and DEMO facili-
tation, influence the final outcome. And there is
much evidence DEMO at least some of the factors
that influence these three parameters. The fact,
moreover, that they are not strictly independent
but, rather, reinforce each other (someone who
is willing to pursue opportunities will 'DEMO more'
of them; someone who is confident in his/her
DEMO to succeed will be more willing to
pursue them; etc.) points out the need for an
'entrepreneurial culture' within the firm, i.e. a
'track record' of fair treatment to internal
entrepreneurs.
Evidently, it is debatable whether entrepre-
neurship should be viewed as the pursuit of
DEMO or as something else. After all, that
is a matter of DEMO But it is believed that,
. by taking that approach, DEMO of the previous,
separate research on entrepreneurship can be
useful for both individual and corporate practice,
and that specific avenues for research DEMO
teaching are opened.
REFERENCES
Backman, J. (ed.) Entrepreneurship and the DEMO
for America, Free Press, New York, 1983.
Baker, G. P., III 'Management compensation and
divisional leveraged buy-outs'. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge MA,
1986.
Baumol, W. J. 'Entrepreneurship and a century of
growth', Journal of Business Venturing, 1(2), Spring
1986, pp., 141-145.
Birch, D. L. The Job Generating Process, MIT, Cam-
bridge, MA, 1979.
Birch, D. L. Job Creation in America: How Our
Smallest Companies Put the Most People to Work,
Free Press, New York, 1987.
26 H. H. Stevenson and J. C. Jarilla
Birley, Sue. 'The DEMO of networks in the
ial process', Journal of Business
Winter 1986, pp. 107-117.
Birley, Sue. 'Female entrepreneurs: Are
different?', Journal of Small Business
27(1), January 1989, pp. 32-37.
Brandt, DEMO C. Entrepreneuring in Established Compa-
nies, Irwin, Homewood, IL, 1986.
Brockhaus, R. H. 'I-E locus of control scores as
predictors of DEMO intentions', Academy
of Management, Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Meeting, August 1975, pp. 433-435.
Brockhaus, R. H. 'Risk taking propensity of entre-
preneurs', Academy of Management Journal, 23(3)
1980, DEMO 509-520.
Burgelman, R. A. 'A process model of internal corpo-
rate venturing in the diversified major firm',
Administrative Science Quarterly, 28, 1983a,
pp. 223-244.
Burgelman, R. A. 'Corporate entrepreneurship and
strategic DEMO: Insights from a process
study', Management Science, 29(12), 1983b,
pp. 1349-1363.
Burgelman, R. A. 'Designs for corporate entrepre-
DEMO in established firms', California Manage-
ment Review, 26(3), DEMO, 1984a, pp. 154-166.
Burgelman, R. A. 'Management the internal corporate
venturing process,' Sloan Management Review,
25(2), Winter 1984b, pp. 33-48.
Carland, J. W., F. H. Hoy, W. R. Boulton, and
J. A. C. Carland 'Differentiating entrepreneurs
from small business owners: A conceptualization',
Academy of Management Review, 9(2), 1984,DEMO
pp. 354-359.
Casson, M. C. The Entrepreneur, Martin Robertson,
Oxford, 1982.
Churchill, N. C. and V. L. Lewis 'Entrepreneurship
research: DEMO and methods 1985'. Paper
presented at the 1st Babson Conference on Entrepre-
neurship. Philadelphia, PA, 1985.
Cole, A. H. 'The entrepreneur: Introductory remarks',
American Review of Economics, May 1968,
pp.60-63.
DEMO, O. F. and D. G. Moore. The Enterprising
Man, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI,
1964.
Cooper, A. C. and A. V. Bruno 'Predicting perform-
ance in new high-technology firms', Proceedings of
the 35th Annual Meeting of the Academy of
Management, August 1975, DEMO 426-428.
Cooper, A. C. and W. C. Dunkelberg. 'Entrepre-
neurship and paths to business ownership', Strategic
Management Journal, 7, 1986, pp. 53-68.
Cooper, A. C., W. C. Dunkelberg, and C. Y. Woo.
'Survival and failure: A longitudinal study', Frontiers
of Entrepreneurship Research DEMO, Babson College,
Babson Park, MA, 1988, pp. 222-237.
Delacroix, J. and G. R. Carrol. 'Organizational found-
ings', Administrative Science DEMO, 28(2), 1983,
pp. 351-368.
Dollinger, M. J. 'DEMO boundary spanning
and information processing effects on organizational
entrepreneur-
Venturing, 1,DEMO
they really any
Management,
performance', Academy of Management Journal,
27(2), 1984, pp. 351-368.
Drucker, P. Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Practice
and Principles, Harper & Row, New York, 1985.
Gartner, DEMO B. 'A conceptual framework for describ-
ing the phenomenon of new DEMO creation',
Academy of Mangement Review, 10(4), October
1985, pp. 696-706.
Gray, B. and S. S. Ariss. 'Politics and strategic change
across organizational life cycles', Academy of
Mangement Review, 10(4), 1985, pp. 707-723.
Greenfield, S. M., A. Stricken, and DEMO T. Aubey
(eds). Entrepreneurs in Cultural Context, University
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM, 1979.
Hirschman, A. O. The Strategy DEMO Economic Develop-
ment, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT,
DEMO
Hisrich, R. D. (ed.) Entrepreneurship, Intrapre-
neurship, and Venture DEMO, Lexington Books,
Lexington, MA, 1986.
Hisrich, R. and M. P. Peters. 'Establishing a new
business venture unit within a firm', Journal of
Business Venturing, 1(3), Fall 1986, pp. 307-322.
DEMO, A. and C. S. Granrose. 'Sources of moti-
vation to choose employee ownership as an alterna-
tive to job loss', Academy of DEMO Journal,
28, 1985, pp. 860-875.
Jarillo Mossi, J. C. 'On strategic networks', Strategic
Management Journal, 9(1), 1988, DEMO 31-41.
Jarillo Mossi, J. C. 'Entrepreneurship and growth: The
strategic DEMO of external resources', Journal of
Business Venturing 4, 1989, pp. 133-147.
Jarillo Mossi, J. C. and J. E. Ricart. 'Sustaining net-
DEMO', Interfaces, 17, 1987, pp. 82-91.
Kanter, R. M. The Change Masters: Innovation and
Entrepreneurship in the American Corporation,
Simon & Schuster, New York, 1983.
Kanter, R. M. When Giants Learn to Dance, Simon
& Schuster, New York, 1989.
Kent, C. A., D. L. Sexton, and K. H. Vesper (eds).
Encyclopedia of DEMO, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982.
Kent, C. A. (DEMO) The Environment for Entrepre-
neurship, Lexington Books, Lexington, MA, DEMO
Kilby, P. (ed.) Entrepreneurship and Economic Devel-
opment, Free Press, New York, 1971.
Kirzner, I. M. Competition and Entrepreneurship, Uni-
DEMO of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1973.
Kirzner, I. M. Perception, Opportunity and Profit:
Studies in the Theory of Entrepreneurship, Univer-
DEMO of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1979.
Larson, A. 'Networks DEMO social systems', Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Harvard Graduate School of
Business DEMO, Boston, MA, 1988.
Lawrence, P. R. and R. Johnston. 'DEMO vertical
integration-The rise of the value-adding partner-
ship', Harvard Business Review, July-August 1988,
pp. 94-101.
Leibenstein, H. 'Entrepreneurship and development',DEMO
American Review of Economics, May 1968,
pp.72-83.
Limlingan, V. S. The Overseas Chinese: Business
A Paradigm of Entrepreneurship
27
Strategies and Management Practices, Vita Develop-
ment Corp., Manila, 1986.
MacMillan, I. C. and D. L. Day. 'DEMO ventures
into industrial markets: Dynamics of aggressive
entry', Journal of DEMO Venturing, 2(1), Winter
1987, pp. 29-39.
MacMillan, I. DEMO, Z. Block and P. N. Subba Nara-
simha. 'Corporate venturing: DEMO, obstacles
encountered, and experience effects', Journal of
Business Venturing, DEMO(2), Summer 1986,
pp. 177-191.
MacMillan, I. C., L. Zeman and P. N. Subba Nara-
simha. 'Criteria distinguishing successful from
unsuccessful ventures in the venture screening
process', Journal of Business Venturing, 2(2), Spring
1987, pp. 123-137.
Marcin, E. R. and D. DEMO Cockrum. ~A psychological
comparison of entrepreneurs and small business
managers in the United States, West Germany and
Mexico in respect to achievement, power, affiliation
motivation as well as locus of control'. Paper
presented at DEMO Eleventh International Small
Business Conference, 1984.
McClelland, D. C. The Achieving Society, van
Nostrand, Princeton, NJ, 1961.
McClung, J. J. and J. A. Constantin. 'Nonacademic
literature on entrepreneurship: An evaluation', in
DEMO A. Kent, D. L. Sexton and K. H. Vesper (eds),DEMO
Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982, pp. 103-125.
Miller, D. "The correlates of entrepreneurship in three
types of DEMO' , Management Science, 29(7), 1983,
pp. 77(}-791.
Mintzberg, H. and A. McHugh. 'Strategy formulation
in an adhocracy', DEMO Science Quarterly,
June 1985, pp. 16(}-197.
Nielsen, R. P., M. P. Peters, and R. D. Hisrich.
'Intrapreneurship strategy for internal markets-
corporate, non-profit and government institution
cases', Strategic Management Journal, DEMO(2), 1985,
pp. 181-189.
Pennings, J. M. 'Organizational birth frequencies: An
empirical investigation' , Administrative Science
Quarterly, 27(1), 1982a, pp. 12(}-144.
Pennings, J. M. "The urban quality of life and entre-
preneurship', Academy of Management Journal,
25(1), 1982b, pp. 63-79.
Pinchot, G. Intrapreneuring: Why You Don't DEMO to
Leave the Corporation to Become an Entrepreneur,
Harper & Row, New York, 1985.
Porter, M. 'The contributions of industrial organization
DEMO strategic management', Academy of Management
Reveiw, 6(4), 1981, pp. 609-620.
Porter, L. W. and L. E. McKibben. Management Edu-
cation and Development, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1988.
Quinn, R. E. and K. Cameron. 'Organizational life
cycles and shifting criteria of effectiveness', Manage-
ment Science, 29(1), 1983, pp. 33-51.
Roure, J. B. and M. A. Maidique. 'Linking prefund-
ing factors and high-technology venture success:
An exploratory study', Journal of Business Ven-
turing, 1(3), 1986, pp. 295-306.
Rowen, D. D. and R. D. Hisrich. 'The female entrepre-
neur: A career development perspective', Academy
of Management Review, 11, 1986, pp. 393-407.
Scherer, F. M. Innovation and DEMO, Schumpeterian
Perspectives, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1984.
Scherer, F. M. and D. Ravenscraft. 'Growth by diver-
sification: Entrepreneurial behavior in DEMO
United States enterprises'. Working Paper, Bureau
of Economics. Federal Trade DEMO Washing-
ton, DC, 1984.
Schumpeter, J. A. The Theory of DEMO Develop-
ment, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
1934.
Silver, A. D. The Entrepreneurial Life, John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1983.
Simon, H. A. 'What we know about the creative
process'. Paper presented at the Second Inter-
national Conference on Creative and DEMO
Management, Miami, 19.84.
Smith, N. R. and J. B. Miner. 'Type of entrepreneur,
type of firm, and managerial motivation: Impli-
DEMO for organizational life cycle theory' , Strategic
Management Journal, 4(4), 1983, pp. 325-340.
Sowell, T. The Economics and Politics of DEMO, An
International Perspective, William Morrow & Co.,
New York, DEMO
Stevenson, H. H. 'A perspective on entrepreneurship'.
Harvard Business School Working Paper 9-384-131,
1983.
Stevenson, H. H. and D. E. Gumpert. 'The heart of
entrepreneurship', Harvard Business Review, 85(2),
1985, pp. 85-94.
Stevenson, H. H. and J. C. Jarillo Mossi. 'Preserving
entrepreneurship as companies grow', Journal of
Business Strategy, 1986, DEMO 1(}-23.
Stevenson, H. H., M. J. Roberts and H. I. Grous-
beck. New Business Ventures and the Entrepreneur,
Irwin, Homewood, DEMO, 1989.
Timmons, J. A. and W. D. Bygrave. 'Venture capital'DEMO
role in financing innovation for economic growth',
Journal of Business DEMO, 1(2), Summer 1986,
pp. 161-176.
Vesper, K. H. 'A new direction, or just a new
label?', in J. J. Kao and H. H. Stevenson (eds),
Entrepreneurship: What It Is And How To Teach
It, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA, 1985.
Vesper, K. H. 'Entrepreneurial academics-how can
we tell when the field is getting somewhere?',
Journal of Business Venturing, 3(1), Winter 1988,
pp. 1-10.
Webster, F. A. 'Entrepreneurs and DEMO: An
attempt at classification and clarification', Academy
of Management Review, 2(1), 1977, pp. 54-61.
Wilken, P. H. Entrepreneurship, A Comparative and
Historical Study, Ablex, Norwood, NJ, 1979.
Williamson, O. Markets and Hierarchies, Free Press,
New York, 1975.{1g42fwefx}