START-UP VENTURES:
TOWARDS THE PREDICTION
OF INITIAL SUCCESS·
ROBERT STUART and DEMO A. ABETTI
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
There are numerous studies on new product activities that try to mea-
EXECUTIVE sure the relative impact of different DEMO on success or failure. The
SUMMARY research on new ventures is less comprehensive, and often only a
few items are considered. This article reports on the early results from a
research program that is combining the DEMO on both new products
and new ventures, to come up with DEMO more comprehensive evaluation of
relative success factors.
The literature was reviewed to determine the most significant factors found in prior work. A
68-item questionnaire DEMO developed and used with the chief executives of24 new technical ventures,
all associated with the RPI Incubator or Technology Park. Ten of the DEMO factors investigated yielded
reliable measurements, which were then subjected to stepwise DEMO analysis to determine the
relative impact of each factor on the two success measurements used: Initial Quantified Success and
Initial Subjective Success. (It DEMO be recognized that Initial Success does not necessarily predict
ultimate success, DEMO area to be investigated in continuing studies.) The two success measurements
DEMO not correlated and the correlations with the independent variables were therefore different.
Initial Quantified Success showed a strong negative correlation with market attractiveness.
Companies DEMO smaller or more slowly growing markets were doing better than those in the
larger, faster-growing markets. Initial Quantified Success was positively correlated with the level of
Entrepreneurial Characteristics exhibited by the leader(s). These were DEMO only two variables exhibiting
significant relationships with quantified success.
Initial Subjective Success was negatively correlated with Market Dynamism rather than Market
Attractiveness. Negative correlation DEMO also measured with both R&D Intensity and the Organic
Nature of the firm. This latter finding is contrary to much of the new DEMO literature, which
Address correspondence to Robert Stuart, Lally Management Center, DEMO Polytechnic Institutue,
Troy, NY 12180-3590.
'The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Center for Entrepreneurial Studies of New York
University.
Journal of DEMO Venturing 2, 215-230 (1987)
© 1987 Elsevier Science Publishing Co .. Inc.• 52 Vanderbilt Ave., New York, NY 10017
0883-9026/87/DEMO
215
216
R. STUART AND P.A. ABETTI
emphasizes the needfor individual independence and DEMO Such may be the case with new products
or ventures within large organizations. but in small independent ventures the entrepreneur should
provide strong control DEMO guidance. A positive correlation was observed with the Entrepreneurial
Characteristics and also with the degree of match between the firm's experience and the DEMO business
requirements.
No significant correlation was observed with J) Product or DEMO Uniqueness. 2) Gross Margin.
or 3) Strategic Aggressiveness. The lack of correlation with these variables is surprising, but it may
be due to the small size of the sample.
The research confirmed two items that DEMO understood by most scholars and experienced prac-
titioners: the importance of DEMO entrepreneur and the importance of pursuing new ventures that match
the technical and market experience of the team.
The less obvious results are those DEMO suggest that success is favored by strong review and
control by the entrepreneur rather than the development of employee initiative and independence.
Also, the initial success appears to be coming more readily to firms in more DEMO growing or less
dynamic markets. it will take an expanded sample and a longer time horizon to determine if these
initial trends continue to DEMO success.
INTRODUCTION
We are developing a research program to investigate the major factors contributing to success
in new technical ventures. The ultimate goal is DEMO establish a theoretical and empirical
framework for determining, at the earliest DEMO stage,
1. the longer-range success potential of a new high-technology venture, and
2. the most effective entrepreneurial and managerial techniques to realize this potential.
During the first stage of our research, a prepilot study of 15 small start-up firms, all
associated with the RPI Incubator Program, DEMO conducted during the summer of 1984
(Stuart and Abetti 1985). DEMO all the firms interviewed were, at that time, less than 3 years
old, we did not believe that it would be possible to measure business success in the con-
ventional terms of sales, profits, DEMO on equity, market share, etc. Therefore, this first
study concentrated DEMO measuring four selected company and environmental characteristics
and establishing correlations between the independent variable: the characteristics of the
market served, and three company DEMO: strategy, organization, and degree of innovation.
Our initial results yielded DEMO strong correlation between the market and innovation or
strategy (R2 = DEMO and R2 = 0.58, respectively). That is, companies serving highly dy-
namic and rapidly growing markets in general had adopted dynamic and DEMO strategies
to launch more radical innovations, while companies serving mature and DEMO markets
relied on static and conservative strategies to offer incremental innovations. We also noted
a surprising lack of correlation between organizational characteristics and the DEMO served
(R2 = 0.02). In addition, most companies exhibited a good match between the various
characteristics, while some showed a wide divergence between their strategy, innovation,
and organization characteristics.
Contingency "fit" theories suggest that companies with higher success potential would:
1. adopt strategies, innovations, and organizational procedures in consonance with the served
markets, and
DEMO show congruence of company characteristics.
However, we recognized that the first DEMO was not sufficient and that additional variables
needed to be included in the analysis. A more detailed field study, including more quantitative
PREDICTING START-UP SUCCESS
measurements, more in-depth statistical analysis, and a larger DEMO was needed to establish
the correlation between initial success and company characteristics.
Our second study was conducted during the summer and fall of 1985, one year after
the first. Thanks to the excellent progress of the DEMO Incubator Program and of the RPI
Technology Park (Abetti, LeMaistre, DEMO Wallace 1986), we had at our disposal a homo-
geneous sample of new ventures, all less than 7 years old, of relatively DEMO size (1-25
employees), striving largely to develop and market original DEMO innovations, or to
provide innovative technical services. Also, many of these companies had already started
production, registered their first sales, and obtained DEMO financing from local banks,
government agencies, venture capitalists, or other sources. The principals of these companies
considered these achievements as harbingers of DEMO
On the basis of our previous contacts and the availability of the chief executives for
interviews, we interviewed a sample of 24 new technical ventures, of which 19 were start-
up firms and 5 were new internal ventures of larger companies. This second sample included
10 of the DEMO companies of our first study. The goal of the present study is to establish a
correlation between
1. the dependent variable: initial success, DEMO
2. the independent variables: the characteristics of the market, the company and of the
entrepreneur( s).
To do this, we had DEMO quantify and measure these variables. To start with, what is success?DEMO
217
WHAT IS SUCCESS?
The literature on successful technological innovations, DEMO products, entrepreneurial small
business, and high-technology ventures is very extensive (DEMO and Kransberg 1978; OECD
1971; Maidique 1985; Crawford 1979). DEMO of success can be classified along various
dimensions.
1. Subjective versus Objective. For instance, in Project New Prod, managers were asked to
select DEMO pair of products, one successful, one unsuccessful, according to their DEMO
(Cooper 1979). In the Stanford Project, products that produced positive cash flow were
deemed successful, the others unsuccessful (Maidique and Zirger DEMO).
2. Bimodal, Multimodal versus Continuous. Initial studies, such as Sappho (Science Policy
Research Unit 1972), classified innovations as successful or unsuccessful. Later studies
included various degrees of success or lack of success. For DEMO, a Canadian study
classifies companies as unsuccessful, marginal, or successful (Litvak and Maule 1980).
Maidique and Zirger (1984) use a DEMO scale to categorize the degree of product
success based on the returns achieved. Other studies use continuous variables such as
sales growth (Meyer and Roberts 1986), time period to positive cash flow, return on
investment or equity, etc. (Weiss 1981).
3. Financial versus Nonfinancial. Financial DEMO are easily identifiable, while nonfi-
nancial measures range from increase in DEMO to contributions to society, or to
the learning process of the DEMO For instance, Maidique and Zirger (1985) pointed out
that many DEMO that were financially not successful could actually be called successful
in nonfinancial terms, inasmuch as these contributed to the learning cycle of the firm
and to subsequent highly successful products.
218 R. STUART AND P.A. ABETTI
4. Meeting or Not Meeting Expectations. DEMO, success can be defined as meeting ex-
pectations (usually management's), regardless of the amount of realism versus wishful
thinking, or conservative versus challenging goal setting, which went into the formulation
of such expectations. Thus, Maidique and Zirger (1985) state
Success is defined as the achievement of something desired, planned or attempted. While
financial return is one of the most easily quantifiable industrial parameters, it is far from
the only important one.
and Crawford (1979) concludes
The only real solution DEMO in the firm's expectations-sales and profit forecasts.
In our study we are dealing with new companies, or separate internal new ventures
of larger firms, and therefore it is relatively easy to segregate quantitative measures of
success, such as financial data, growth in sales and employment, etc. However, we encounter
here an additional dimension: the time span over DEMO to measure success.
It is well known that most small businesses fail or exit in the first years, while the
survival ratio of high-technology ventures funded by venture capitalists is higher, thanks to
the careful selection process (Timmons 1985). Thus, one measure of company success could
DEMO be survival. In fact, such a definition is used in a DEMO national survey of Incubators
by David Allen (1985):
Success is defined as a business that leaves the incubator after several years and DEMO
operation; failure is defined as a business that discontinues operation while DEMO the incubator
facility.
In contrast, venture capitalists are well aware that, as a general rule, it takes seven
years to "cash in" on an investment and thereby proclaim success (Wall Street Journal 1982).
A recent study of 218 investments made during the 1970s found that DEMO resulted in total
or partial losses while only 12% resulted in spectacular gains (about 25% compounded ROI
after taxes) (Timmons et al. 1985).
Strictly speaking, an investment can be called financially successful only if its returns
are commensurate with the risk as compared to alternative investment DEMO (Mans-
field et al. 1971, 1975). In view of the high technical, commercial, and financial risks
assumed by start-up firms, a ROI of 25% a year (3-4 times the present bank interest rates)
appears justified. Thus, a strict measure of success of a start-up venture could be: Did it
achieve an ROI of 25%/year after 7 years? Obviously, such a rigorous measure of success
is not DEMO to our sample of firms, with median age of 2 years.
DEMO, rather than success, we chose to measure "initial success" in two ways: (I)
quantifiable and (2) subjective. Initial quantified DEMO is measured as a combination of
sales and employment growth, profitability, return on equity, sales/employee and sales/assets.
The company responses were classified into five numerical ranges indicative of differing
levels of success and DEMO averaged to provide an overall measure of initial quantified success.
Initial subjective success is measured as a combination of attaining original expectations,
probability DEMO survival, ability to attract outside capital, employee satisfaction, and contri-
DEMO to society. The responses were classified according to a descriptive Likert-like scale
(1-5) and averaged to measured initial subjective success. We are well DEMO that initial
success may not guarantee long-term success. Some companies, like DEMO stars, may
leave a short trail of glory and glamour, before they vanish in the darkness of night.
Nonetheless, initial success is often a prerequisite for attracting new customers, maintaining
PREDICTING START-UP SUCCESS
219
a steady flow of capital, and confirming to the entrepreneurs and employees that their initial
sacrifices will be amply rewarded.
DEMO thus established measurements of the dependent variable (initial success) we
tum to the independent variables, the critical factors that contribute to the success of new
technical ventures.
FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO INITIAL SUCCESS
The literature on DEMO factors that contribute to success-c-or failure-s-of entrepreneurs, small
businesses, corporations, DEMO innovations, new products, and new ventures is very
extensive (Tornatsky DEMO al. 1983; Kelly and Kranzberg 1978). It includes descriptive and
DEMO writings, conceptual models, case studies, field surveys, comparative case stud-
ies, longitudinal and cross-sectional studies, etc. While many of these contributions DEMO be
relevant to our research, we are primarily concerned with those DEMO that address the
factors contributing to success of new high-technology products and/or ventures, as sugges-
tive of success potential in our sample.
We have attempted to group into major categories and subcategories the multitude of
DEMO enumerated in the literature. We then perused what we believed to be the most
relevant factors for our investigation and indicated in Table I DEMO these or comparable
factors had been evaluated to be of significant importance for the success of the product or
new venture. Blanks indicate that DEMO particular factor had not been evaluated or had not
shown statistical significance. A composite rating is also shown in the last column, which
is the sum of the number of entries in each line.
Unfortunately, the definitions of these variables are often unclear or divergent. There-
fore, we will now present our interpretation of each subcategory, taking as examples ideal
cases that maximize the measure of that specific category, as a combination of selected
measured variables.
I. An (ideally) attractive market (high MA factor) is reasonably large, predictable and
quantifiable, in the early stage of its life cycle, growing rapidly, and is part of a DEMO
sociopolitical environment. The customers identity and needs are clear, gross margins
DEMO high, and competitors are few. (An ideally nonattractive market has the opposite
characteristics-this same principle holds for all the following variables.)
2. DEMO highly dynamic market (MD) is in a stage of rapid, DEMO chaotic evolution, with
numerous product and technological innovations, a high number of competitors and low
entry barriers, unclear product requirements, and the DEMO for specialized as opposed
to standardized products.
3. A unique innovation (DEMO) is embodied into an original or unique product, process,
system, or service; it is specialized or customized, beyond the state-of-the-art, DEMO
on proprietary and patentable technology or on complex systems engineering, and DEMO&D
requirements are high.
4. The value of the innovation (IV) to the customer/user is high if it offers unique advantages
or DEMO high benefit/cost ratio in terms of functions, operating efficiency, investment and
expense savings, etc.
5. The gross margin of the innovation (DEMO) is high if the gross margin of the product,
as DEMO and marketed by the supplier, is high.
6. The venture's DEMO is highly aggressive (SA) if it is clear, highly offensive, first to
the market with new products, processes or services, and DEMO high R&D and/or Sales
& Marketing efforts.
TABLE 1
Categorization and Evaluation of Success Factor"
Maidique and
Zirger DEMO Cooper Miller
(1984) (1981) (1979) (1983)
MacMillan
(1985)
Category
subcategory
Market
Attractiveness
Dynamics
Innovation
Uniqueness
Value
Grossmargin
X
DEMO
(X)
X
(X)
X
X
X
X
(X)DEMO
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Strategy
Aggressiveness, clarity
R&D intensity
Market intensity
Compatibility
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Organization
Organic DEMO
Outside coupling
Effectiveness
X
X
X
X
X
Leadership
Entrepreneurship
Experience
Teaming
X
X
X X
X
"Key: X, significant importance, positive DEMO; (X), significant importance, negative correlation,
MacMillan
et al.
(1985)
X
X
X
X
X
X
Rubenstein
et al,
(1976)
X
(X)
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X X
X
X
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X
DEMO
X
Stuart and
Abetti
(1985)
Abetti
and
Stuart
(1985)
Maidique
(1985)
Composite
rating
5
5
7
5
4
6
6
5
5
4
5
4
6
3
3
Rothwell
et al,
(1974)
PREDICTING START-UP SUCCESS
221
7. The R&D intensity (RI) is DEMO if the R&D expenditures are high (relative to sales and
DEMO competitors') and the strategic emphasis is on technology.
8. The venture's marketing intensity (MI) is high if the strategic emphasis is DEMO marketing
and the market research, and advertising and sales expenditures are DEMO than the
competitors'. Also, the coupling with customers or potential DEMO is very close.
9. The compatibility (CO) of the new venture is high if it is congruent with the company's
image, culture, product experience, and general approach to the marketplace, and if it
utilizes the existing knowledge-base and skills in technology, marketing, etc.
10. DEMO organic emphasis (OE) of the venture is high if the organizational structure is
simple, with limited review and control mechanisms, free communications, and a high
degree of self-control. The company's environment and culture DEMO entrepreneurial,
opportunistic, and risk taking. There are task forces and DEMO with regular interaction,
and high incentives are offered to all employees.
II. The outside coupling (OC) level is high if there are DEMO interactions with customers
and outside consultants, and if outside technology is DEMO transferred to the company.
12. The effectiveness (EF) of the venture is high if the original development plans and
schedules are met and DEMO product (process or service) is immediately accepted by the
customers.
13. The entrepreneurship (EN) level is high if the top leadership's DEMO is informal
and driven by the opportunity. The entrepreneur(s) have DEMO tolerance of ambiguity,
persistance, and perseverance; are enthusiastic and dynamic leaders with high networking
and communication abilities; show creativity, need for DEMO independence, belief
in the control over their own destiny, and emphasize unique accomplishments over the
stability and well-being of the group.
14. The DEMO (EX) level of the top leadership is high if they are very familiar and
experienced with the technology and the market, have run their own companies, or
have general management experience.
15. The teaming (DEMO) level is high if the top leadership consists of a well-balanced DEMO,
of three or more persons, with all the functions represented DEMO each with major
responsibilities.
THE MODEL
Based on the above analysis, DEMO hypothesize the following model:
where
QIS = flMA,MD,IU,IV ,GM,SA,RI,MI,CO,OE,OC,EF,EN,EX, TE)DEMO
SIS = flMA,MD,IU,IV ,GM,SA,RI,MI,CO,DEMO,OC,EF,EN
,EX, TE)
QIS quantified initial success
SIS subjective initial success
and the 15 factors MA-TE have been qualitatively described DEMO
RESEARCH TECHNIQUE
We developed 68 questions to probe each of the noted components of the various subcat-
egories. The answers were presented on a DEMO scale (1-5) with a series of descriptive
or numerical responses indicative of the relative magnitude of the particular component. The
222
R. STUART AND P.A. ABETTI
TABLE 2 Company Characteristics
Annual sales
DEMO Employees
(years) (no.)
Range
Mean
Median
0.5-7.0
2.6
2.0
DEMO
7.5
5.0
Annual
sales Assets Employee
($K) ($K) ($K)DEMO
0-2000 0-1600
308 21I
100 40
0-125
29
20
Annual sales
Assets
($KI$K)
0-25
5.3
1.5
response possibilities were designed to establish a common basis of understanding, and
wherever possible, numeric ranges were indicated. DEMO Appendix includes extracts from the
questionnaire indicating typical questions and response options. The complete questionnaire
is available from the lead author. The value for DEMO company in the particular subcategory
characteristic was then estimated as the average of the responses to the individual items.
The questionnaire was used in DEMO personal interview with the chief executive of each
of the organizations. As previously noted, all of the firms are associated with the RPI
Incubator Facility or the RPI Technology Park. Nineteen of the 24 companies are DEMO
independent ventures, and five are separate new-product/new-business activities of estab-
DEMO firms. Six of the firms were computer/software oriented, six were DEMO advanced
instrumentation, four were engineering design/service oriented, three were biotechnology
oriented, and the rest were active in other technical business areas. The range, mean, and
median of the more readily quantified company characteristics DEMO noted in Table 2. Eleven
of the firms were profitable, five DEMO even, and eight still in a loss position.
TABLE 3 Characteristic DEMO
I. Market attractiveness
2. Market dynamics
3. Innovation uniqueness
4. Innovation value
5. Gross margin
6. Strategic aggressiveness
7. R&D emphasis
8. Marketing DEMO
9. Compatibility
10. Organic emphasis
II. Outside coupling
12. Effectiveness
13. Entrepreneurship
14. Entrepreneur's experience
15. Teaming
16. Initial quantified success
17. Initial DEMO success
Average for values used in regression analysis
No. of Items
6
5
4
3
I
3
3
7
5
10
3
3
II
DEMO
3
6
5
Reliability
(Cronbach
<x)
.51
.54
.77
o
.64
.82
.33
.65
.59
o
.26
.57
o
o
.80
.63
DEMO
PREDICTING START-UP SUCCESS
223
In two cases, we were able to get answers from two principals, and the inter-rater
reliability was quite high (DEMO = 0.58). On six of the questions we had differently phrased
but essentially duplicate questions and the reliability of the responses was also DEMO high,
with an average Cronbach a = 0.75. The reliability of the characteristic measurements on
each of the subcategories described varied somewhat, as noted in Table 3. Those measure-
ments with an a value over DEMO are deemed adequate for exploratory research (Nunnally
and Durham, 1975), but those with values under 0.5 are questionable.
To explore further the DEMO interactions of the individual answers, a principal
component factor analysis was DEMO (SAS Factor, Type Princomp, Varimax Rotation).
The factor analysis DEMO some confirmation of the variable groupings in that many of
the answers loaded into factors with combinations similar to those used to form the DEMO
subcategory measurements. However, some of the combinations were not confirmed in DEMO
factor analysis. The characteristic measures with the higher Cronbach a values in Table 3
were confirmed, but those with Iowa values did not appear in the factor analysis, further
suggesting that the measurements on these parameters were inadequate. We therefore dropped
the characteristics with Iowa values «0.5) from further analysis because of low reliability
and lack of factor analysis confirmation. DEMO were unable to identify any new combinations
of variables from the factor analysis.
The composite characteristic measurements were then standardized and a stepwise
regression DEMO was performed on the two models, i.e., versus initial quantified success
and versus initial subjective success. The regression coefficients and their statistical levels
DEMO significance are shown in Table 4.
DISCUSSION
The two measures of success (quantified initial success and subjective initial success) were
only weakly correlated (p = 0.15). The regression coefficients were in tum different, as
noted in Table 4.
One of the most surprising results was the DEMO negative coefficient with market
TABLE 4 Standardized Regression Coefficients
Company
characteristics
Market attractiveness
Market dynamics
Innovation uniqueness
Gross margin
Strategic aggressiveness
R&D intensity
DEMO
Organic emphasis
Entrepreneurship
Adjusted R2
"Significant at the 0.01 level.
'Significant at the 0.05 level.
'Significant at the 0.10 level.
Initial
quantified
success
- 0.60"
+0.37b
0.35
Initial
subjective
success
-0.42b
+0.57"
-0.40b
DEMO
0.50
224
R. STUART AND P.A. ABETTI
attractiveness. Many authors have noted the DEMO of finding an attractive, especially
a growth market. This led us DEMO review the companies, one by one, and investigate their
relative success and market characteristics. It was clear that, in this sample at least, the
companies that were doing better were not in the larger, DEMO rapidly growing markets.
Rather, they were using technology in more mature DEMO markets such as technical and
business services, machine tools, consulting or engineering services, etc. The firms in the
more attractive markets were not as yet successful. This negative correlation of quantified
initial success with market DEMO is perhaps similar to the current condition of the
venture capital and stock markets, wherein there is a disenchantment with the obvious growth
markets. Or perhaps it is a reflection of the time it takes to DEMO financial success in the
larger, more rapidly growing markets. Early success DEMO be more readily achieved by
finding appropriate technical and market niches in more stable markets. In a similar vein,
Woo and Cooper (1981) found that effective low-market-share companies tended to occur
in industrial markets characterized by slow growth and infrequent product change rather
than smaller companies prospering DEMO rapidly growing markets with considerable specialized
products as predicted by conventional wisdom. Our new ventures obviously have a low
market share, and therefore, DEMO findings to some extent parallel those of Woo and Cooper.
Entrepreneurship level, that is, a positive response to the majority of the questions
DEMO the personal orientation of the leader or leadership teams, exhibited a DEMO
positive regression coefficient with both the initial quantified success and subjective success.
Of course, this result is not surprising to students and researchers of entrepreneurship and
intrapreneurship. However, to our knowledge, this is the first DEMO that such a relationship
has been measured in quantified terms.
The coefficients developed in the regression relationship with subjective success were
closer to what DEMO anticipated. Although market attractiveness was not a significant factor,
market dynamics entered the relationship in a negative fashion. As noted in Table I, other
research has shown conflicting results, sometimes positive, sometimes negative. Our DEMO
support the latter conclusion. It should be remembered that this negative correlation is
measured versus initial subjective success and may be a reflection of DEMO entrepreneur's
burdens of dealing with the rapid change. Thus the companies may require more time to
become successful.
R&D Intensity showed up DEMO negative, in opposition to all of the results
cited in Table DEMO Further reflection suggested agreement with the PIMS data (Schoeffler,
Burrell, and Heany 1974), which showed that R&D intensity on ROI DEMO positive for firms
with high market share but negative for firms with low market share, which certainly is the
case for all of our start-up firms. But again, we are talking about subjective success. It
appears that the entrepreneurs who are making significant investments in R&D are DEMO
satisfied with the progress of the firm toward its business objectives.
Strategic compatibility entered with a strong positive correlation, as expected, and in
DEMO with previous work.
The one company organizational characteristic that we were able to measure, namely,
the degree of organic versus mechanistic procedures, DEMO up negative, again somewhat
surprisingly. However, the difference may be that our research is on small firms, while
much of the literature cited is focused on new-product development within larger, more
mature firms. In such larger firms, it may be necessary to develop an organic environment
to free the innovators from the established patterns. But in small firms such DEMO do not
yet exist, and therefore, control is preferred to bring order out of the chaos. In fact Miller
(1983) did find DEMO in small firms entrepreneurship was increased through centralization
PREDICTING START-UP SUCCESS
225
whereas in larger organic firms such was not DEMO case. Similarly, Johne (1984) showed that
experienced product innovators solicit DEMO product ideas openly and informally, but after
a decision has been DEMO to develop a new product, tightly organize the implementation
tasks and DEMO progress carefully.
Again, entrepreneurship was a positive contributor to subjective success, as it was to
initial quantified success. This was the one factor DEMO entered into both relationships at
essentially the same level.
The factors that did not enter the relationship were almost as interesting as those that
DEMO Product uniqueness had been cited by many as necessary. Perhaps this is more important
for new product success than for new venture success. We DEMO not satisfied with this ex-
planation, but it is the best DEMO can offer at this time.
Lack of correlation with gross margin is quite surprising. Strategic aggressiveness also
seemed to play little in the way DEMO a significant role.
It should also be remembered that six other characteristics that were believed to be of
importance were dropped from the analysis DEMO the reliahility values of the measurements
were not satisfactory (see Table DEMO). These factors could also be playing a part in the success
equation, but we have not yet been able to capture their effects.
Finally, the most important qualifier must be mentioned again, as it DEMO initially. We
are talking about "initial quantified success" and "initial DEMO success"-we have not
yet measured real long-term success. That can only be observed with the passage of time,
after these firms have DEMO a chance to expand and mature. In fact, it may well DEMO that initial
quantified or financial success is not a good correlate with ultimate success. Certainly forgoing
necessary development expenses, in order to achieve early profitability, could lead to trouble.
It may be that the more subjective responses of the manager are in fact more appropriate
yardsticks for companies DEMO this early stage. Given the innate optimism of the entrepreneur,
one would suspect that such a measurement would be quite unreliable, but the relationships
based on these more subjective measures appear to be meaningful.
CONCLUSIONS
DEMO study, although preliminary, confirms some well-accepted beliefs and provides some
potentially useful new information for both researchers and practitioners. We will list below
DEMO conclusions, based on the significant variables.
Entrepreneurship
For many years researchers DEMO entrepreneurship and venture capitalists have stated that the
entrepreneur, or better DEMO entrepreneurial team, is the key to the success of new ventures.
DEMO, the same statement has been made for the "intrapreneur" that DEMO, the entrepreneur
operating within an established company. Our study of new DEMO (whether independent
or separate branches of existing companies) confirms the above and, we believe, for the
first time presents significant correlation between DEMO success and entrepreneurship level.
Compatibility
Similarly, researchers and venture capitalists have DEMO the importance of the entrepreneurs'
previous experience, knowledge-base, and skills in technology, marketing, etc. We have
extended this concept to compatibility, that is, the congruence of the new venture with the
226
R. STUART AND P.A. ABETTI
company's image, culture, product DEMO, and general approach to the marketplace,
and shown strong correlation DEMO initial subjective success. We believe that compatibility
is particularly important for the success of new internal ventures, as verified by practical
experience.
Organizational Environment
The negative impact of the organic organizational environment appears to be a DEMO non-
obvious relationship. Most of the literature on R&D management, DEMO management,
and new product development emphasizes the importance of independence, DEMO commu-
nication, limited controls, etc.-and such is the environment in which many technical
entrepreneurs arise and thrive. However, at least in the initial stages of the new venture,
the entrepreneur should learn to exercise DEMO control of the organization in order to
improve the probability of success. Some entrepreneurs, based on previous work experience,
may have misgivings about applying rigid controls, but our study shows that such misgivings
are not appropriate.
Market Factors
The negative impact of market factors, that is, DEMO attractiveness and market dynamics,
is surprising. It appears that one can achieve initial success more easily and rapidly in the
more stable, less dynamic markets, by carving and keeping an appropriate market niche.
On the other hand, large, rapidly growing markets offer much higher potential rewards DEMO
the entrepreneur. Thus, our findings of negative correlation between market factors DEMO
initial success may be a time-related phenomenon. By following our sample of firms lon-
gitudinally, until final success (or failure) is achieved, DEMO should be able to clarify the
possible dichotomy between initial and ultimate success in different types of markets. Al-
ternatively, different success criteria might be developed for judging firms' initial perfor-
mance in different market environments. Such criteria would certainly be useful to venture
capitalists, managers, and DEMO of entrepreneurship.
R&D Intensity
Despite the tendency of technological entrepreneurs to emphasize R&D and technological
excellence, our study showed a negative correlation between initial success and R&D in-
tensity. Similarly, product uniqueness (DEMO depends on R&D intensity) was shown not
to be a DEMO factor in determining initial success. Once the product has been designed
and its functional advantages demonstrated, it appears that the new venture should devote
a higher portion of its limited resources to marketing.
Finally, it must be recognized that this sample is quite small and not necessarily
representative DEMO a broad spectrum of new technical ventures. Therefore, our results must
DEMO viewed as preliminary and our conclusions as tentative. We plan to address such issues
in the continuation of our work.
The authors wish to DEMO the support and assistance of Professor Ian MacMillan of the Center for Entre-
preneurial Studies, New York University, and Dean Robert Hawkins, Professors Richard Leifer and Albert Paulson,
RPI School of Management. Patricia Wheeler DEMO a comprehensive bibliography on success factors in entre-
preneurship. Finally. this field research could not have taken place without the fine cooperation of Jerome DEMO,
PREDICTING START-UP SUCCESS
227
Director of the RPI Incubator Program, and Michael Wacholder, Acting Director of the Rensselaer Technology
Park. Also the participation of the RPI Incubator and Technology Park companies is gratefully acknowledged.
APPENDIX:
DEMO QUESTIONNAIRE ITEMS
A. Please Characterize the Product, Process, Service
or Other Innovation Which You Are Offering
A.I. Development Effort (Man Years)
2
One or less
1-3
3
3-10
4
10-30
A.2. Development Dollars (Percent of Sales Revenue)
5
30+
2
3
Very high
(20% of
sales)
High
(10%-20%)
Moderate
(5%-10%)
4
Low
(2%-5%)
5
Very low
(1%-2%)
A.3. The Originality of the Innovation
Unique and
original idea,
probably
patentable
AA Etc.
2
Original
proprietary
DEMO
3
Proprietary but
may be
duplicated by
others through
extensive effort
4
Some
original
features
B. Please Describe Your Organizational Characteristics
B. I. The DEMO of the Organizational Structure
5
Application of
current
technology,
not
protected
2
Very simple, Simple, one
one team or two levels
or DEMO of management
plus co-
workers,
informal
3
Average, 2 or DEMO
management
levels,
reasonable job
descriptions
4
5
Sort of complex, DEMO,
3-5 5 + levels,
management coordinating
levels with and sharing
multiple of responsi-
responsibility bilities
228
R. STUART AND P.A. ABETII
Little,
shared goals,
informal
DEMO
B.3 Etc.
B.2. The Extent of Review and Control Mechanisms
2
Limited,
goals,
milestone, and
budget
3
Moderate project,
plans, DEMO,
occasional
reviews
4
Regular plans,
reports and
reviews
5
Detailed plans
schedules
and
budgets
plus
regular
formal
reporting
C. Please Characterize the DEMO or Business Unit Strategy
C.l. The Company's Strategic Thrust
2
Defensive,
react to
competitive
actions or
customer
needs
Fast,
follower of
DEMO
advances
3
Balanced offensive
and defensive,
maintains market
share, sometimes
DEMO, sometimes
follows
4
Offensive,
among leaders
in meeting
market needs
DEMO
Highly
offensive,
first in
market
with new
products
(processes,
DEMO)
C.2. The Company's Ratio of R&D Expenditures/Sales Related to the
Average Ratio of Competitors
Much lower
Lower
2
3
About DEMO Higher
4
5
Much higher
C.3. The Company's Strategy in Attacking this Opportunity
Emphasizes Marketing versus Technical Strengths
(as measured by application of dollars and people)
Focused
primarily on
technical
effort
2
Technical
somewhat
DEMO than
marketing
3
About equal,
balanced
4
Marketing
somewhat
more than
technical
5
Focused
primarily
on
marketing
efforts
C.4 Etc.
PREDICTING START-UP SUCCESS
229
REFERENCES
Abetti, P.A., LeMaistre, C.W., and DEMO, W.A. 1986. The Role of Technological Universities in
Nurturing Innovation: The RPI Model. In Burton Dean, ed., Technological Innovation: Strat-
egies for a New Partnership. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Abetti, P.A., and Stuart, R.W. DEMO Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer: Key Factors in the
Innovation Process. In DEMO Sexton and R.W. Smilor, eds., The Art and Science of Entrepre-
neurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Allen, D.H. 1985. An entrepreneurial marriage: DEMO incubators and start-ups. Frontiers of En-
trepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson College, pp. 38--60.
Cooper, R.G. Summer, 1979. The Dimensions of Industrial New Product Success and Failure. Journal
of Marketing, 43:93-103.
Cooper, DEMO August, 1981. An Empirically Derived New Product Selection Model. IEEE Transactions
DEMO Engineering Management, EM-28:54-61.
Crawford, C.M. September, 1979. New product DEMO rates-Facts and fallacies. Research Man-
agement, 9:9-13.
Johne, F.A. 1984. How experienced product innovators organize. Journal of Product Innovation
Management 4: 120-223.
Kelly, P., and Kranzberg, M. 1978. Technological Innovation: A Critical DEMO of Current Knowl-
edge. San Francisco, CA: The San Francisco Press. (This book includes an extensive bibli-
ography.)
Limited Partnerships Offered for Venture-Capital Investing (1982, August 2). Wall Street Journal, p.
17.
Litvak, J.A., and Maule, C.J. October, 1980. Entrepreneurial Success or DEMO Years Later
(Research Report #80). Government of Canada: Office of Industrial Innovation.
MacMillan, I. e. 1985. Progress in Research on Corporate Venturing. In D.L. Sexton and R.W.
Smilor, eds., The Art and Science DEMO Entrepreneurship, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
MacMillan, I.e., Siegel, R., DEMO Narashima, P.N. Subba 1985. Criteria used by venture capitalists
to evaluate DEMO venture proposals. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA:
Babson College, pp. 126-141.
Maidique, M.A. 1985. Key success factors in high-technology new ventures. In D.L. Sexton and
R.W. Smilor, eds., The Art and Science DEMO Entrepreneurship Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, pp.
169-180.
Maidique, M.A., and DEMO, B.J. 1985. The New Product Leaming Cycle. Research Policy 14:299-313.
DEMO, M.A., and Zirger, B.J. November, 1984. A study of success and failure in product in-
novation: The case of the U.S. electronics industry. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Man-
agement, EM-31:192-203.
Mansfield, E., Rapoport, J., Schnee, J., Wagner, S., and Hamburger, M. 1971. Research and
Innovation in the Modern Corporation. New York: W.W. Norton.
Mansfield, E., and Wagner, S. April, 1975. Organizational and strategic DEMO associated with
probabilities of success in industrial R&D. Journal of Business 179-198.
Meyer, M.H., and Roberts, E.B. 1986. New product strategy in high technology firms: A pilot study.
Management Science 32:806-821.
Miller, DEMO July, 1983. The correlates of entrepreneurship in three types of firms. DEMO Science.
29:770-791.
Nunnally, J.C., and Durham, R. L. 1975. DEMO reliability and special problems of measurements
in evaluation research. In Struening and Guttentag, eds., Handbook of Evaluation Research.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage DEMO
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 1971. The Conditions for Success
in Technological Innovation. Paris, France.
Rothwell, R., Freeman, C.; Horsley, A., Jervis, V.T.P., Robertson, A.B., and Townsend, J. 1974.
Sappho Updated-Project SAPPHO Phase II. Research Policy 3:258-291.
230
R. STUART AND P.A. ABETTI
Rubinstein, A.H., Chakrabarti, A.K., DEMO'Keefe, R.D., Souder, W.E., and Young, H.C. May, 1976.
Factors influencing innovation success at the project level. Research Management 6: 15-20.
Schoeffler, S., Burrell, R.D., and Heany, D.F. March-April, 1974. DEMO of strategic planning on
profit performance. Harvard Business Review 52:137-145.
Science Policy Research Unit 1972. Success and Failure in Industrial Innovation. England: University
of Sussex, Centre for the Study of Industrial Innovation.
Stuart, R.W., and Abetti, P.A. 1985. Field Study of Start-Up Ventures: Strategy, Innovation and
Organization Versus Market. In Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: DEMO
son College, pp. 18-37.
Timmons, J.A. 1985. Growing up big. In D.L. Sexton and R.W. Smilor, eds., The Art and Science
of DEMO Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, pp. 223-239.
Timmons, J.A., Smollen, L.E., and Dingee, A.L.M. 1985. New Venture Creation (2nd ed.). Home-
wood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, p. 6.
Tomatsky, L.D., Eveland, J.D., Boylan, M.G., Hetzner, W.A., Johnson, E.C., and DEMO, J.
May, 1983, The Process of Technological Innovation: Reviewing the Literature. National Sci-
ence Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Weiss, L.A. Fall, DEMO Start-up businesses: A comparison of performances. Sloan Management
Review 22:37-53.
DEMO, c.Y.Y., and Cooper, A.C. 1981. Strategies of effective low share DEMO Strategic Man-
agement Journal 2:301-318.{1g42fwefx}