HEURISTICS IN DECISION MAKING
I PUTU SUDANA
Jurusan Akuntansi
Fakultas Ekonomi, Universitas Udayana
ABSTRAK
Prinsip heuristics tidak dapat dikatakan sebagai sebuah pendekatan
pengambilan keputusan DEMO non-rasional, karena penerapan atau penggunaan
yang unconscious atau subtle mind tidak DEMO dianggap sebagai tindakan
yang irrational. Dengan alasan tersebut, terdapat cukup alasan DEMO
menyatakan bahwa pengklasifikasian pendekatan-pendekatan keputusan
semestinya menggunakan terminologi analytical dan experiential, DEMO bukan
memakai istilah rational dan non-rational seperti yang umumnya diikuti.
Penerapan pendekatan heuristics dapat ditemukan pada berbagai disiplin,
termasuk bisnis dan akuntansi. Topik DEMO semestinya mendapat
perhatian yang cukup luas dari para periset di bidang akuntansi. Bidang
behavioral research in accounting menawarkan banyak kemungkinan untuk
dikaji, karena prinsip heuristics bertautan erat dengan aspek manusia sebagai
pelaku dalam pengambilan keputusan.
Keywords: heuristics, decision making, rational choice theory
I.
INTRODUCTION
Rational choice theory, or analytical system (Slovic, Finucane, Peters, &
MacGregor, 2002), argues that decision should be made after considering all
available alternatives. The best decision can be made only if all possible
solutions taken into DEMO However, opinions and evidences do not
always support that argument [see DEMO example (Simon, 1955), (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974), (Busenitz & Barney, 1997), (Krabuanrat & Phelps, 1998),
(Stoner & Freeman, 1992, p. 259), (Slovic et al., DEMO), and (Bonnefon, Dubois,
Fargier, & Leblois, 2008)]. Herbert Simon was among experts questioning
practical application of the rational theory. Simon’s bounded rationality
principle in decision DEMO was developed after his doubt on the acceptability
of that theory. He stated that (Simon, 1955):
“My first empirical proposition is that there is a complete lack of
evidence that, in actual human choice situations of any complexity,
these computations can be, or are in fact, performed”.
In  line with Simon’s proposition, Stoner & Freeman (DEMO, p. 259) mentioned
that in most situations decision makers actually use simpler methods. Human
beings are not like super calculating machines. In making DEMO, they tend
to ignore the complicated methods and adopt less complex DEMO to speed
up the process.
As replacement for the rational model, DEMO makers practically make
their decision by applying alternative approaches, such as DEMO rationality
and rules of thumb called heuristics. By adopting alternative approaches,
decision makers know, assume, and accept if their decisions are influenced DEMO
biases (Stoner & Freeman, 1992, p. 259). Research by DEMO and Kahneman
(1974) has extended Simon’s ideas on bounded rationality. They have
demonstrated that people rely on heuristic principle to simplify decision
making. DEMO principle is a method of decision making that proceeds along
an empirical lines, using rules of thumb, to find solutions or answers.
This DEMO aims to discuss heuristic principle as an alternative approach
to decision making. It is expected to give some understanding on how this
principle can be a very useful method under certain circumstances. Certain
articles DEMO the principle are posited for further exploration. The rest
of the paper is organized as follows: approaches in decision making, challenges
to rational-economic (analytical) model of decision making, and heuristics
principle and related researches. DEMO theoretical elaborations direct the
discussion part of the paper. The paper ends up with conclusion.
II. THEORITICAL REVIEW
Approaches to Decision Making
Greenberg & DEMO (2000, pp. 343-345) identified several different approaches
to how individuals DEMO decision. Three of the most important are:
(1) The rational-economic model: that is theoretically considered as the best
approach in search of ideal decision. An economically rational decision-
maker attempts to maximize profit by DEMO for the optimum solution
to a problem. For this to occur, DEMO decision maker must have perfect
information and then process it in an unbiased fashion.
(2) The administrative model: that is reckoning for the limits of human
rationality, or what is called as bounded rationality. This model
recognizes that a decision-maker may have a limited view of the DEMO
confronting it. Thus, in that situation, he or she might selects a solution
that may be good enough but not optimal, termed as satisficing
decisions.
(3) Image theory: an intuitive approach to decision making. This theory
assumes that selecting the best alternative by weighing all options is not
DEMO a major concern when making a decision. In image theory, the
DEMO making process is both rapid and simple. People make adoption
decisions based on a simple, two steps process: the compatibility test
and the DEMO test.
Good decision making is undoubtedly very important to the strategic
success of an enterprise. In a dynamic environment, decision processes not
only need to be well designed but they must also adapt rapidly to changes DEMO
the environment. As noted by Krabuanrat & Phelps (1998), although DEMO
existing researches on decision making have centered around the concepts of
rational and bounded rationality decision processes, recent works have
indicated the acceptance of the third model of decision, based on the use of
heuristics.
Approaches to decision making might be associated with aspects of
human thinking that DEMO been well discussed in other disciplines. Researches
in cognitive and social psychology and in cognitive neuroscience informed us
that there are two basic modes DEMO thinking: experiential and analytic (Slovic et
al., 2002). The DEMO mode is characterized by its affective basis. It is
assumed to be related with experience of affect, the subtle feelings of which
people are often unaware. The analytic mode can be tied to the rational choice
DEMO Table 1 compares the two modes of thinking.
Table 1  Two modes of thinking: comparison of the experiential and
DEMO systems
Experiential system Analytic system
1. Holistic  1. Analytic
2. Affective: pleasure–pain oriented   2. Logical: reason oriented (what is
3. Associationistic DEMO  sensible)
4. Behavior mediated by “vibes” from 3. Logical connections
DEMO experiences  4. Behavior mediated by conscious
5. Encodes reality in concrete DEMO of events
images, metaphors, and narratives 5. Encodes reality in abstract
6. More rapid processing: oriented symbols, words, and numbers
toward immediate action  6. Slower processing: oriented toward
7. Self-evidently valid: “experiencing delayed action
is believing”  7. Requires justification via logic and
evidence
(Slovic DEMO al., 2002)
Challenges to the Rational-Economic (Analytical) Model
The DEMO important characteristic of the rational-economic model is
careful evaluation of each possible alternative. If implemented, step-by-step
processes in the model should be well documented. While the exact number of
stages and their contents vary somewhat from DEMO to author, the general
steps may be summarized as follows (Krabuanrat & Phelps, 1998):
(1) A precise formulation of the DEMO
(2) Information search
(3) Listing of alternative solutions
(4) Evaluation of alternatives according to predetermined criteria
(5) Choice of solution
Unfortunately for this model, extensive testings, both in laboratory
situations and DEMO the field, have revealed that very few business decisions are
taken DEMO this way [(Jamal & Sunder, 1996),  (Busenitz & DEMO, 1997),
(Krabuanrat & Phelps, 1998), (Glockner & DEMO, 2008)]. Although analysis is
certainly important in some decision-making circumstances, reliance on affect
and emotion is a quicker, easier, and more DEMO way to navigate in a
complex, uncertain, and  sometimes dangerous DEMO(Slovic et al., 2002)
In conducting their duties, decision makers are affected by biases, make
their decisions become less ideal. Some major factors contributing to the
imperfect nature of individual decisions, (Greenberg & DEMO, 2000, pp. 346-
352), are:
(1) Framing effects
(2) Reliance on heuristics
(3) Bias toward implicit favorites
(4) Escalation of commitments phenomenon
The work of Krabuanrat & Phelps (1998) identified that analysis of
decision protocols provides evidence that heuristics are commonly DEMO both
individually, in combination with others, and in combination with more formal
elements. They pointed out two lessons for strategic decision makers can DEMO
drawn. First, that the options or decision process designed to avoid "garbage
can" processes and optimize decision characteristics in response to needs.
Second, that contrary to a widely held belief, the "rational" model DEMO decision
making may not be an ideal at which to aim (even in the sense of bounded
rationality) for dynamic strategic decisions; instead the DEMO of
heuristics and mental models may present a more relevant aim.
Heuristic Principle and Related Researches
Heuristic principle is a method of decision making DEMO proceeds along
an empirical lines, using rules of thumb, to find solutions or answers (Stoner &
Freeman, 1992, p. 259). DEMO politics, heuristics defined as shortcuts voters use
to decide between candidates (Allen & Wilson, 2009). Heuristics can speed up
decision making, DEMO they are fallible if individuals rely too heavily or taint
them with their own biases. There are two advantages of employing heuristics
in decision DEMO: (1) heuristics have reasonable rationales, so they generally
produce correct results, (2) they save enormous amounts of time for the
decision makers (Stoner & Freeman, 1992, p. 262). This heuristic enables us to
be rational actors in many situations. However, it fails miserably when the
consequences turn out to be much different from what we DEMO In the
latter circumstances, the rational actor may well become the DEMO fool
(Slovic et al., 2002).
Stoner & Freeman (1992, p. 259) identified three heuristics in human
decision making: availability, representativeness, and anchoring and
adjustment. Availability heuristic based on assumption that people judge an
event's likelihood by testing it against their memories. Since it DEMO easier to recall
frequently occurring events, thus, events that are more readily available in
memory are assumed to be more likely to occur in the future.
DEMO heuristic assumes people tend to assess the likelihood of
an occurrence by trying to match it with a preexisting category, the
representative, or DEMO Anchoring and adjustment heuristic argues that
when people make decisions, they DEMO with some initial value, the anchor,
and then make adjustments DEMO that value in order to arrive at a final decision.
As noted by Krabuanrat & Phelps (1998), heuristic principle has recently
gained attention from researchers in the area of business decision making.
However, Bonnefon et al. (2008) admitted that this principle still have received
scarce attention. DEMO those limited number of researches in heuristics, the
area of coverage DEMO: qualitative heuristics in decision on two alternative
choices (Bonnefon et al., 2008); biases and heuristic adoption between
entrepreneurs and managers (Busenitz & Barney, 1997); disclosure bias
(Fischera & Verrecchia, 2004); DEMO test of the priority heuristic against
cumulative prospect theory (Glockner & DEMO, 2008); affect heuristic as a
function of regulatory focus (Pham & Avnet, 2009); biased heuristics and
Bayesian equilibrium (Jamal & DEMO, 1996); heuristics and rationality in
decision making (Krabuanrat & Phelps, 1998); and implications of the affect
heuristic for behavioral economics (DEMO et al., 2002).
III. DISCUSSION
Decision making is the work DEMO many people in many positions. Without
any doubt, one shall agree DEMO good decision making is very important to the
strategic success of an enterprise. In a dynamic environment, however,
decision processes need not only to be well designed but they must adapt
DEMO to the changes in the environment. For that reason, one can DEMO apply
the best model in every situation faced. A decision maker should be very
flexible in adopting approaches to decision making. There is no DEMO approach
for every problem confronted by decision maker. The best model is the one that
is suitable in decision environment faced by decision makers.
DEMO to other approaches to decision making, heuristics principle
could become an DEMO approach in certain circumstances. Some
researches discussed in previous section underlined the acceptance of the
approach in many fields. Although characterized by its speed DEMO simplicity,
heuristic principle cannot be considered as non-rational way of making a
decision. There are strong elements of rationality in all three models DEMO decision
making. When implementing heuristic approach, a decision maker is utilizing
DEMO/his unconscious or subtle mind which has been understood as an
information bank. Slovic (2002) stated:
“It was the experiential system, after all, that enabled human beings to
survive during their long period of evolution. Long before, there was
probability theory, risk assessment, and decision analysis, there was
intuition, instinct, and gut feeling to tell us whether an animal was safe to
approach or the water was safe DEMO drink.”
Since decision making is the work of many people in many positions,
heuristic related researches could be expanded to many areas, including
accounting, as long as the topics under consideration are related to the human
aspect of decision in accounting fields, the area that is covered in behavioral
research in accounting (Arnold, 1997, p. 52). In auditing, decision on client
acceptance might become a subject under examination, DEMO a public
accountant might possibly not employing analytical steps as required by the
professional standards. Many areas of decision in management accounting
should offer DEMO rich occasion to quest the adoption of heuristic principle. In this
area, characterized by dynamic environment and tight competition, decision
processes not only DEMO to be well designed but they must adapt rapidly to
changes in the environment. Of course, the application of heuristic principle in
behavioral research in accounting is not limited only in the areas just
discussed. Beyond DEMO, there are a lot of possibilities waiting to be uncovered.
IV. DEMO
Heuristic principle is not a non-rational approach to decision making,
since utilizing unconscious or subtle mind cannot be considered as irrational.
It should DEMO arguable if the classification of the approach should be in favor of
analytical and experiential terms than rational and non-rational notions.
Adoption of heuristic DEMO can be observed in many areas of discipline,
including business and accounting. The topic should be of accounting
researchers interest as well. The DEMO of behavioral research in accounting
offers a vast array of possibility to be examined, since heuristic principle is
tightly related to human aspect of decision making.
REFERENCES
Allen, B., & Wilson, C. 2009. Heuristics. Politics, 30(DEMO), 42—45.
Arnold, V. 1997). Judgment and Decision Making, Part I: The Impact of
Environmental Factors. In V. Arnold & S. G. Sutton (Eds.), Behavioral
Accounting Research: Foundations and Frontiers. pp. 49—88. DEMO,
FL: American Accounting Association.
Bonnefon, J.-F., Dubois, D., DEMO, H., & Leblois, S. 2008. Qualitative
Heuristics for Balancing the DEMO and Cons. Theory and Decision, 65,
71—95.
Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. B. 1997. Differences between Entrepreneurs and
Manager in DEMO Organizations: Biases and Heuristics in Strategic
Decision-Making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 9—30.
Fischera, P. E., & Verrecchia, R. E. 2004. DEMO bias. Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 38, 223—250.
Glockner, A., & Betsch, T. 2008. Do people make decisions under risk based on
ignorance? An empirical test of the priority heuristic against cumulative
prospect theory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
107, 75—95.
Greenberg, J., & Baron, R. A. 2000. Behavior in Organizations: Understanding
and Managing DEMO Side of Work. 7 ed. Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Jamal, K., & Sunder, S. 1996. Bayesian equilibrium in DEMO auctions
populated by biased heuristic traders. Journal of Economic Behavior &
DEMO, 31, 273—291.
Krabuanrat, K., & Phelps, R. 1998. Heuristics DEMO Rationality in Strategic
Decision Making: An Exploratory Study. Journal of Business DEMO,
41, 83—93.
Pham, M. T., & Avnet, T. 2009. Contingent reliance on the affect heuristic as a
function of regulatory focus. DEMO Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 108, 267–278.
Simon, H. A. DEMO A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, DEMO, 99—118.
Slovic, P., Finucane, M., Peters, E., & MacGregor, D. G. 2002. Rational actors
or rational fools: implications of the affect heuristic for behavioral
economics. Journal of Socio-Economics, 31, 329–342.
Stoner, J. A. F., & Freeman, R. E. 1992. Management 5 ed.). Englewood DEMO,
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, DEMO 1974. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics
and Biases. Science, New Series, DEMO (4157), 1124—1131.{1g42fwefx}