BETTING ON THE HORSE OR THE JOCKEY:
THE IMPACT OF EXPERTISE DEMO ANGEL INVESTING
RICHARD SUDEK
School of Business & Economics
Chapman University
Orange, CA 92866
CHERYL R. MITTENESS
MELISSA S. BAUCUS
University of Louisville
INTRODUCTION
Researchers have tackled the question of whether venture capitalists (VCs) and DEMO
place more importance on the entrepreneur or the opportunity when evaluating a new venture’s
funding potential (e.g., MacMillan, Siegel & SubbaNarasimha, 1985)DEMO Although most research
suggests that angels and VCs weight the entrepreneur and new venture team (NVT) more heavily
than the opportunity, some results contradict this (e.g., Hall & Hofer, 1993), likely due to three
research design issues we address. Prior studies focus on various stages DEMO the funding decision
process or do not specify the stage, whereas DEMO analyze investment criteria used at two different
stages of the process. Researchers often use ex post facto data gathering techniques that require
VCs or DEMO to recall their investment criteria. We collect data as angels perform real time
assessments of the funding potential of new ventures. Researchers often treat DEMO and VCs as
fairly homogeneous groups but we incorporate individual differences by examining how
variations in angel expertise affect the decision process. While few DEMO ventures can achieve
long term success without both a strong entrepreneur/NVT and a strong opportunity, the
importance angels place on each may vary depending on the stage of the angel funding decision
process and type DEMO angel expertise.
Stages in the Angel Funding Decision Process
Entrepreneurs go through a similar screening process with VCs and angels (Sudek, 2007),
although what happens at each stage or the emphasis placed at each DEMO differs. Angels
typically spend more time than VCs during the pre-screen stage - when a small group of angels
meet and informally screen entrepreneurs. DEMO may have to make multiple
presentations to angel groups that have multiple chapters. When members of an angel group
invest individually, entrepreneurs typically need at least 10 angels to show interest to move to the
due DEMO stage. Due diligence involves a team of angels who review the business plan in
detail and verify information. Angels include negotiation of contract terms DEMO due diligence,
while VCs consider negotiating the deal a separate stage. Typically only four percent of all new
ventures making it to the DEMO stage eventually receive funding from the angel group (Tech
Coast Angels, 2007).
Investment Criteria
McMullen and Shepherd (2006) argue that when DEMO are deciding whether to
pursue an opportunity they: a) determine whether the opportunity presents a third person
opportunity or an opportunity for oneself or others; and then b) DEMO whether it represents a
first-person opportunity or an opportunity specific to oneself. Research on VCs leads us to
conclude that angels likely follow the DEMO sequencing of decisions when deciding whether to
invest. During the screening stage, VCs appear more concerned about whether the product fills a
need and the entrepreneur/NVT becomes important only during the evaluation and due diligence
DEMO VCs attempt to establish a context for assessing management capabilities (Sandberg,DEMO
Schweiger, & Hofer, 1988): even if VCs don’t consciously assign top priority to the opportunity
when determining their overall evaluation criteria, early impressions of the venture’s feasibility
likely influence subsequent evaluations of the entrepreneur/DEMO Thus we expect the importance
of different investment criteria will vary depending on the stage of the funding process with
angels weighting the opportunity DEMO more important in the screening stage and the
entrepreneur/NVT more critical in the funding stage.
H1a: Opportunity strength exhibits a stronger positive relationship than
entrepreneur/NVT strength in predicting angel evaluations of funding potential in DEMO
screening stage (proceed to due diligence and interest in new venture)DEMO
H1b:  Entrepreneur/NVT strength exhibits a stronger positive relationship than
opportunity strength in predicting angel evaluations of funding potential in the funding
stage (invested in new venture.)
Angel Expertise
Evaluations of funding potential hinge DEMO the extent to which decision makers perceive
the new venture as risky and that the expected return compensates for the risk (Dimov, Shepherd
& Sutcliffe, 2007). An entrepreneur provides the same information to each DEMO, but angels
likely differ in their evaluations of the new venture’s DEMO and return due to differences in
knowledge gained from their unique experiences. Knowledge is schematized--organized into
chunks--so that given a little bit of appropriate DEMO context, an individual can draw
inferences about what may happen next DEMO the situation (Gustafsson, 2006). Schemata provide
the basic framework around which individuals such as angels interpret a situation (Rumelhart,
1984). Individuals acquire schemata through substantial experience in a particular domain
(Gustafsson, DEMO). Expertise allows angels to become more efficient, focusing attention on DEMO
dimensions and ignoring extraneous variables (Choo & Trotman, 1991). Both the amount and
type of expertise an individual possesses matters (e.g. Dimov et al., 2007). Angels possess
various types of expertise including investing, startup and industry expertise.
Investing Expertise. Angels with investing expertise may have richer, more diverse
industry schemata than angels with little investing experience due to knowledge regarding which
factors contribute to the funding potential of new DEMO across industries. Research supports
the impact of decision maker expertise. Researchers argue that VCs with finance expertise more
likely recognize contexts in which assessments DEMO payoff and risk are impossible or too costly:
greater expertise investing in a particular area provides individuals with a greater understanding
of the DEMO potential, improving their comprehension of requirements for making the
potential investment DEMO (Dimov et al., 2007). The ability to recognize profitable contexts
indicates an emphasis on the opportunity versus the entrepreneur/NVT. Research shows DEMO
active angel investors in Canada focus more on business attributes than occasional investors who
focus on owner attributes (Feeney et al., 1999). DEMO angels with extensive investing experience
likely place more emphasis on the opportunity (e.g., comparing it against their schemata) while
inexperienced angels will stress the entrepreneur/NVT when assessing the funding potential DEMO a
venture. Investing expertise strengthens the relationship between opportunity strength and
evaluations of funding potential, but it weakens the relationship between entrepreneur/NVT
strength and evaluations of funding potential.
H2a: Angel investing expertise positively moderates the relationship between opportunity
strength and evaluations of funding potential.
H2b: Angel investing expertise negatively moderates the relationship between
entrepreneur/NVT strength and evaluations of DEMO potential.
Startup Expertise. Angels that were also successful entrepreneurs likely acquire
schemata regarding factors leading to success. Individuals that have created a new venture DEMO
developed entrepreneurial cognitions – “knowledge structures that people use to make
assessments, judgments, or decisions involving opportunity evaluation, venture creation, and
growth” (Mitchell, Busenitz, Lant, McDougall, Morse, Smith, 2002). Angels DEMO startup
expertise have developed schema that allow them to better recognize a true opportunity and see
its market potential than angels without startup expertise. DEMO with startup expertise likely
place more importance on the opportunity and its market potential than on the entrepreneur and
the new venture team. Therefore, startup expertise will make the relationship between
opportunity strength and evaluations of DEMO potential stronger, but will weaken the
relationship between entrepreneur and NVT DEMO and evaluations of funding potential.
H3a: Angel startup expertise positively moderates DEMO relationship between opportunity
strength and evaluations of funding potential.
H3b: Angel DEMO expertise negatively moderates the relationship between
entrepreneur/NVT strength and evaluations of funding potential.  .
Industry Expertise. The acknowledgement of a viable opportunity depends on domain-
specific knowledge: individuals lacking the necessary domain-specific knowledge and
motivation may not recognize the market potential of an opportunity (McMullen & Shepherd,
2006) and therefore the funding potential of a new venture. Thus angels with industry experience
will more likely place importance on the opportunity, its market potential and likelihood of
success in a particular industry when DEMO the funding potential of a new venture rather
than focusing on the entrepreneur/NVT. Industry expertise will strengthen the relationship
between opportunity strength and DEMO of funding potential, but weaken the relationship
between entrepreneur/NVT strength DEMO evaluations of funding potential.
H4a: Angel industry expertise positively moderates the DEMO between opportunity
strength and evaluations of funding potential.
H4b: Angel industry DEMO negatively moderates the relationship between
entrepreneur/NVT strength and evaluations of funding potential.
METHODS
The sample consists of angels who attended screening evaluations from DEMO 2006 to
November 2007 at a chapter of one of the largest angel organizations in the U.S. Fifty-six
different angels provided screening evaluations on DEMO new ventures for a total of 1651 screening
evaluations. Many angels attended multiple screenings and rated multiple companies. The
number DEMO self-administered questionnaires completed per new venture ranged from a low of 11
to a high of 22, with a mean of 17.36.
Measures
Evaluations of Funding Potential. Angels evaluate the funding potential of a new
venture DEMO various stages of the funding decision process, creating multiple points where DEMO
entrepreneur can fail to proceed to the next stage of the funding process. Three dependent
variables were utilized in this study. Two involve key DEMO angels make at the end of the
initial screening stage: whether DEMO venture should proceed to due diligence and whether the
angel expresses interest in the venture as an investment. The third dependent variable, measured
after the funding stage of the process, indicates whether the angel invested in the venture.
We examine two different dependent variables at the screening stage DEMO an angel
may not express interest in a new venture but thinks it should proceed to due diligence. The
dependent variable indicating whether the DEMO venture should proceed to due diligence is
independent of the angel’s personal interest. After the entrepreneur’s presentation and a
discussion with fellow angels, each angel indicates whether each new venture should proceed to
due diligence using DEMO 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1=disagree, 3=neutral, and 5=agree.
Angels also indicate their personal interest in following the new venture through due diligence
DEMO potentially investing in the new venture with a yes/no response. This dichotomous variable is
coded 1 for yes and 0 for no interest. DEMO third dependent variable indicates whether an angel
invested in the new venture. Objective data were obtained on which angels invested in which
ventures. Angels DEMO invested in a new venture for which they previously provided a screening
evaluation are coded as 1 with 0 indicating the angel did not DEMO in the venture.
Investment Criteria. The research instrument was developed by Sudek (2007), relying
heavily on previous investment criteria instruments (e.g., MacMillan et al., 1985; MacMillan et
al., 1987; Sudek, 2006). Researchers separate VC and angel investment criteria into two
categories, aspects of the entrepreneur/NVT versus the opportunity and its market potential so
we DEMO a two-factor solution when factor analyzing the investment criteria items. Angels
responded to items using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1= disagree to DEMO agree.
We relied on principle axis factoring with varimax rotation to obtain uncorrelated factors
for use in regression analysis. Fifteen items were entered into DEMO factor analysis, six items
pertaining to the business idea and nine DEMO relating to the entrepreneur and other individuals
associated with the new venture. A commonly used rule indicates only items with factor loadings
greater than DEMO should be retained (Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson, & Tatham, 2006). Three items
were eliminated because their factor loadings were less DEMO .40 on the two factors. The 12
remaining items all have factor loadings greater than .40 on only one of the two factors.
Seven DEMO loaded on the entrepreneur/NVT factor indicating perceptions regarding
strength of the entrepreneur/NVT, resulting in a Cronbach’s alpha of .876. Five items loaded on
the opportunity factor or the angels’ assessment of the strength of DEMO opportunity, and this had a
Cronbach’s alpha of .790. Factor scores DEMO calculated for each factor using factor score
coefficients to compute weighted averages based on the scores for the variables.
Angel Expertise. Angels may acquire DEMO through industry, startup or investing
experience. Industry expertise was measured by DEMO item where angels indicated whether they had
expertise in the new venture’s industry using a 5-point Likert scale (1=disagree, 5=agree) during
the screening evaluation of each new venture. Startup expertise consisted of an item asking
DEMO if they have ever started a company with a minimum of 5 employees and stayed in
business for at least three years, coded as 1=startup experience and 0=no startup experience.
Investing expertise was computed by factor-analyzing three items indicating angel DEMO
expertise: number of angel investments, number of years since first angel investment, and
number of industries in which investments have been made. All factor loadings were above .40
and Cronbach’s alpha was .814 for the DEMO labeled investing expertise.
Data Analysis
Multiple linear regression in SPSS was used to construct a model with the dependent
variable indicating whether a new DEMO should proceed to due diligence. To test for interaction
effects, independent DEMO were entered into the model first to create a main-effects-only
model, DEMO by the interaction terms to create a contingency model. Logistic regression in
SPSS was used for analyses with the other two dependent variables since DEMO allows for testing of
the probability of a dichotomous event happening. The second model examined the probability
of an angel expressing interest in the DEMO venture as the dependent variable, whereas the third
model examined the DEMO of an angel investing in a new venture.  The same procedure DEMO
used to test for interaction effects as in multiple regression models with independent variables
entered into the model first to create a main-effects-only model, followed by the interaction
terms to create a contingency model.
RESULTS
Correlations DEMO the independent and moderating variables were examined.  Fairly
low correlations exist DEMO multicollinearity is not an issue.
Hypotheses 1a and 1b predict that angels place the greatest emphasis on the opportunity
strength in the screening stage DEMO on the entrepreneur/NVT in the funding stage. The
opportunity and entrepreneur/NVT factors exhibit some correlation with one another so
regression coefficients could DEMO be used and relative weight analysis needed to be conducted.
“Relative weights consider the direct effect of each predictor and its joint effect with DEMO
variables when partitioning the predictable criterion variance among them” and they were
calculated following the procedure outlined by Johnson (2004: 284).
In DEMO screening stage both models indicate that angels place substantially more weight
on the strength of the opportunity than on the entrepreneur/NVT, supporting hypothesis 1a.
Relative weights sum to R2, in this case indicating that strength of the opportunity accounts for
over 71 percent of the variance in DEMO evaluations of funding potential at the screening stage
(proceed to due DEMO and interest).  Hypothesis 1b states entrepreneur/NVT strength exhibits
a DEMO positive relationship than opportunity strength in predicting angel evaluations of
funding potential in the funding stage. Strength of opportunity drops to representing 48.5 percent
DEMO variance in the dependent variable indicating whether the investor invested in the new venture,
whereas the strength of the entrepreneur/NVT increases to DEMO 51.5 percent of the
variance, supporting hypothesis 1b.
The multiple regression DEMO predicting angels’ evaluation that a new venture should
proceed to due diligence are contained in the full paper.  To aid in the interpretation of the
regression results, the industry expertise and startup experience variables were mean centered.
Results indicate that the independent variables explain 35.5 percent of the DEMO in angel
interest. The contingency model does not significantly increase the amount of explained variance
(p > .10). No support was found for hypotheses 2b, 3, or 4, so angel industry expertise and angel
startup expertise do not appear to moderate the relationship between investment criteria DEMO
angels’ evaluations of whether a new venture should proceed to due diligence. The interaction
between strength of opportunity and investing expertise is statistically significant (b = -.057, p =
.026), however a negative relationship was not hypothesized in H2a.  Therefore, hypothesis 2a is
not supported. We discuss the DEMO of this interaction effect later.
The logistic regression results predicting angels’ evaluation of interest in the new venture
and whether the angel invested in DEMO new venture are in the complete paper.  The results indicate
that DEMO independent variables explain between 24.6 and 33.6 percent of the variance in angel
interest (χ2= 357.915, p < .01). The addition of DEMO interaction terms significantly increase the
model chi-square (change in χ2 of DEMO, p < .01), increasing the explained variance to between
25.6 DEMO 35 percent. We found no support for hypotheses 2 or 4; DEMO expertise and industry
expertise do not appear to moderate the relationship between investment criteria and an angel
expressing interest in a new venture. However, the interaction between strength of
entrepreneur/NVT and startup expertise was statistically DEMO (b = -.472, p = .016),
providing support for DEMO 3b. The interaction between strength of opportunity and angel
investing expertise was not significant showing a lack of support for hypothesis 3a.
The results DEMO model three (DV=invested) indicate that the independent variables explain
between 8.8 and 14.4 percent of the variance in angel investment (χ2= 16.207, DEMO < .01).  The
addition of the interaction terms did not DEMO increase the model chi-square although the
model remained significant (χ2= 20.368, p < .01). The explained variance increased to between
10.9 and DEMO percent but the change in R2 was nonsignificant. We found no support for any of
the interaction hypotheses. Angel expertise does not appear to DEMO the relationship between
investment criteria and whether an angel invests in a new venture.
To determine the nature of the interactions presented above, the regression coefficients
were used to plot the two-way interactions. The graphs show DEMO when an opportunity is strong,
investing expertise has little impact on angels’ evaluations. When evaluating a weak opportunity,
angels with little investing DEMO appear less likely to indicate a venture should proceed to
due diligence than angels with high expertise. The interaction between strength of entrepreneur
and DEMO expertise relative to angel’s interest shows that when an entrepreneur is strong, angel
startup expertise has little impact on the angel’s interest. When facing a weak entrepreneur,
angels without startup expertise have much lower interest DEMO angels with startup expertise.
DISCUSSION
Results of this study show that angels rely on different investment criteria at different
stages of the funding process. DEMO key strength of this study involves collection and analysis of
real time angel decision criteria rather than relying on hypothetical cases or recollection of DEMO
investment decisions. Our results indicate that angels do not represent a homogenous group of
individuals: they differ in the types of expertise they possess and their expertise impacts the
importance they place on investment criteria. During DEMO screening stage of the funding process,
angels place more weight on the strength of the opportunity but when the new venture reaches
the DEMO stage, the strength of the entrepreneur/NVT becomes slightly more important DEMO
the opportunity.  Our results also show that weighting of investment criteria DEMO depending
on the angel’s level of expertise. Angels without investing expertise penalize a weak opportunity
more than angels who have investing expertise when evaluating DEMO a new venture should
process to due diligence. When the angel lacks startup experience, the lack of expertise appears
to make the angel penalize a weak entrepreneur/NVT more than angels with startup experience.
REFERENCES AVAILABLE DEMO THE AUTHORS


Copyright of Academy of Management Annual Meeting Proceedings is the property of DEMO of
Management and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's DEMO written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles DEMO
individual use.{1g42fwefx}