ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN DECISION PROCESSES
Vol. 65, No. 3, March, pp. 252 – 267 (1996)
ARTICLE NO. 0026
Decision Making and the Search for Fundamental Psychological
Regularities: What Can Be Learned from a Process Perspective?
OLA SVENSON
Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
This article starts with a description of decision re-
search in DEMO past as a development towards an under-
standing of decision making as a process in which a
decision maker’s decision rules and problem represen-
DEMO interact in the creation of a ﬁnal choice. The
Differentiation and Consolidation Theory (Svenson,
1992) is presented brieﬂy to provide a framework DEMO
a discussion of process studies and regularities in hu-
man decision processes. Subsequently, recent ﬁndings
about pre- and postdecision processes are presented
followed by some methodological considerations for
future decision research. For example, it is argued that
within subjects designs should be used whenever pos-
sible and that DEMO differences concerning
importance of attributes must be accommodated be-
fore aggregating group data. The paper ends with a
section presenting a number of suggestions DEMO areas
and problems deserving more attention and research
efforts in the future. q 1996 Academic Press, Inc.
INTRODUCTION
Decision making is often a kind of conﬂict resolution
in which contradictory goals have to be negotiated and
DEMO This conﬂict resolution is highly dependent
on problem, context and individual DEMO which ob-
scure and make it hard to ﬁnd generic regularities in
human decision processes. In spite of this, the present
paper offers a contribution with the purpose of dis-
cussing how regularities in human decision DEMO can
be found through empirical research. To meet this pur-
pose a generic framework for human decision pro-
cesses, the Differentiation and Consolidation Theory,
This study was supported by a grant from the Swedish Council
DEMO Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences and the Swedish
Work Environment Fund. The author thanks Anders Biel, Anne Ed-
land, Joke Harte, Baruch Fischhoff, Gideon Keren, John W. Payne,
and Paul Slovic DEMO valuable comments and discussions relating to
the issues covered in the present study. Address correspondence and
reprint requests to: Ola Svenson, Risk Analysis DEMO Decision Re-
search Unit, Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, S-
DEMO 91, Stockholm, Sweden.
is presented. Next, this framework is used DEMO integrat-
ing a set of results from a wide range of decision re-
search approaches. Based on this framework and ear-
lier research a DEMO is offered about some re-
search areas and problems which should be explored
in order to uncover new regularities in human decision
making.
Decision DEMO can be studied in structural and
process approaches. In its pure form a structural re-
search approach relates choices and ratings to input
variables (e.g., the maximum amount that can be
gained, the variability across DEMO in gains and/
or probabilities). Psychological intervening variables
are derived from psychological theory and behavioral
patterns in decision tasks. However, no attempts are
made in structural approaches to assess the psychologi-
cal process at DEMO stages from problem presenta-
tion to ﬁnal decision.
In process approaches the researcher follows and
draws conclusions about the psychological process from
problem presentation DEMO decision through collecting
process tracing measures, such as, information search
and think aloud protocols. Hypotheses and theories
based on process approach data can DEMO be tested in
new process or structural studies.
It is possible to distinguish four different stages in
the development of decision making research during
DEMO last 40 years. In his seminal paper on decision mak-
ing, DEMO Edwards (1954) said virtually nothing about
the psychological processes leading to a decision. Deci-
sions were primarily modeled as if they followed a DEMO
jective expected utility rule and as if they followed basic
assumptions of decision theory such as transitivity and
consistency. This ﬁrst stage in the DEMO of human
decision making research represents a purely struc-
tural approach to decision research.
The second stage of this evolution was already going
on DEMO followed very quickly when demonstrations of
behavior inconsistent with the postulates and predic-
tions of the theory started to appear (e.g., Papandreou,
DEMO; May, 1954; Coombs, 1958). However, still the
mediating DEMO leading to a decision that was con-
0749-5978/96 $18.00
Copyright q 1996 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
252
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISION MAKING AND PROCESS PERSPECTIVE
253
sistent or not consistent with the DEMO were largely the representation of the decision alternatives in the
ignored. For a long time the second stage perspective decision space. He proposed that DEMO actively con-
dominated decision research and a massive research struct a possible solution to a decision problem through
literature now tells us the limits DEMO the subjective ex- changing the perspective which in turn changes the
pected utility model in describing and predicting hu- values or projections on the DEMO attributes.
man decision making (Slovic, Fischhoff & Lichtenstein, This theme DEMO followed up a decade later by research-
1977; Einhorn & Hogarth, 1981). In fact, most of con- ers both in the structural approach as editing (Kahne-
temporary research still uses the utility model elabo- man & Tversky, 1979), and in the process approach as
rated in different ways as a theoretical and empirical a continuous inﬂuence of DEMO rules on changes of
research reference (cf., Yates, 1990; Payne, Bettman & the representation system to meet rule requirements
Johnson, 1992; Dawes, 1996). (Svenson, 1979).
Quite soon, however, one could ﬁnd researchers who Payne (1982) called the process of adapting DEMO
acted as precursors to later developments and who saw rules to the structure of a problem contingent decision
the human decision maker as an DEMO processor behavior and Montgomery (1983) selected the rule of
with limited capabilities which, in turn, could explain dominance to be the guiding DEMO for the changes
the deviations from theoretical expectations (e.g., of the representation system. Beach (1990) has pre-
Miller, 1956; Simon, 1955). These researchers argued sented his important process theory called Image The-
DEMO these limitations were essential in describing and ory of decision making and recently, Payne, Bettman
predicting human decisions. This can be seen as DEMO and Johnson (1993) have further developed the process
third stage in the evolution of decision research. One perspective on decision making.
of the DEMO of the human decision maker is the THE SEARCH FOR REGULARITIES
restricted number of entities that can be handled by
working memory at one DEMO in time. This necessi- One of the major goals in psychological science is to
tates sequential processing in more complex decisions ﬁnd regularities (or invariants, cf. Simon, 1990). Even
and encouraged process-tracing studies of DEMO though preferences have been found so variable, both
making. structural and DEMO approaches have revealed many
It took a long time before process tracing studies regularities or lawful relations in the past. Allais’
gained any general DEMO and process-tracing (1953) paradox, framing effects (Tversky & Kahneman,
studies were hard to publish in regular journals which 1981) and the fact that preference judgments and
was reﬂected in Svenson’s (1979) coverage DEMO the ex- choices do not correspond (cf. Slovic, 1975; Slovic, Grif-
isting literature up to the late 1970s. Payne (1976) who DEMO & Tversky, 1990) all refer to regularities found in
worked in Simon’s department has been one of the most structural approaches. Process approaches DEMO de-
prominent US process oriented decision researchers tected regularities like, for DEMO, the use of different
through the years. In Europe, Svenson (DEMO, 1974, types of decision rules in succession (noncompensatory
1979), DEMO (Montgomery & Svenson, 1983) in the ﬁrst part of a DEMO followed by compensatory
and van Raaij (1977), among others, performed early processing, e.g., Svenson, 1979; Ford, Schmitt, Schecht-
process DEMO decision making studies. man, Hults & Doherty, 1989) and the DEMO of the
In essence, this third stage explored the decision information DEMO pattern to the attribute 1 alterna-
making process and found evidence for a sequence of
other rules different from the subjective expected util-
ity DEMO For example, it was recognized that often
alternatives were eliminated by DEMO some cut off cri-
terion on one or several attributes and that compensa-
tory rules were used more towards the end of the pro-
DEMO The representations of the decision alternatives
were always assumed to be stable within uncertainty
limits in this stage. A similar development occurred
within structural DEMO (cf., Tversky, 1972).
The fourth stage also included assumptions DEMO
changes of representation to solve decision conﬂicts,
which was not completely new in the decision research
literature. Shepard (1964) suggested that the DEMO
of a decision problem can be related to a change of
tive representation (Payne, 1976). In the present paper
it is contended DEMO a process perspective on human
decision making is essential in the exploration of regu-
larities of human decision making. The methods used
in this DEMO may be derived both from structural
and process approaches as long as the underlying the-
ory models decision making as a psychological process.
In DEMO present context, Svenson’s (1992) Differentiation
and Consolidation Theory of human DEMO making
will be used as a framework in the search for regulari-
ties in human decision making.
A PROCESS APPROACH TO PRE- AND
POSTDECISION DEMO
Most process studies of decision making focus on pre-
decision information gathering and processing pat-
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
254
OLA SVENSON
terns. However, Svenson (1992) has advocated that de- Schneider, 1977; Svenson, 1990, 1992). Such decisions
cision research DEMO also cover postdecision processes are also called recognition-primed decisions by Klein
as an important phase for understanding human deci- (1989) and can be DEMO as an exemplar model in
sion making. Earlier work by Festinger (DEMO) had ad- decision making (Estes, 1994). When such decisions DEMO
dressed this issue but without using a decision theoreti- made no direct reference is needed to attractiveness.
cal representation system and primarily focusing on DEMO is simply known from earlier experience (including
the postdecision stage. Janis DEMO Mann (1977) were attractiveness evaluations) what decision should be
interested DEMO pre- and postdecision processes, but again made in a particular situation. DEMO illustrate, as a habit
without deﬁning neither elaborated decision rules nor DEMO may buy milk in a green container of a certain
a decision theoretic representation system. Frey (1981, design. But you do not think DEMO the quality of that
1986) has studied postdecision information selection milk DEMO time you make your choice in your local
from a social psychological standpoint. In the present store. Instead you use the perceptual cues of DEMO milk
paper both pre- and postdecision processes will be container without any reference to your milk prefer-
treated as important components in human decision DEMO at the moment of choice. Smith (1992) provides
making. an excellent exposition of exemplar based models in
social psychology which can be applied DEMO this kind of
Introduction postdecision decision making.
Differentiation and Consolidation theory, DEMO con- Decisions made with reference to one or a few attri-
stitutes the theoretical framework for the present butes favoring the chosen candidate belong DEMO level 2
work, deviates from classical decision theoretic formu- decisions. Such DEMO problems do not involve any
lations in different ways (Svenson, 1992). To exemplify, conﬂicts between attributes and the solution is quite
the goal of a decision process is not just to fulﬁll one obvious. DEMO considerations and referrals to
or several decision rules but to create an alternative habits belong to this category if attractiveness plays a
that is DEMO superior in comparison to its compet- role in those decisions. Recently, DEMO and Ho-
itor(s) through restructuring and application of one or DEMO (1993) studied postdecision justiﬁcations and
several decision rules. The structuring principles are found many instances of metarules in their verbal pro-
not derived DEMO one rule only (e.g., SEU or dominance) tocols. Such metarules DEMO immediately tell a decision
but from a number of different rules contingent on the maker what to do. Svenson and Fischhoff (1985) also
DEMO and the person in that situation. This process treated metastrategies and lower level repeated deci-
is named differentiation. The corresponding postdeci- sions making from DEMO perspectives. Quick emo-
sion process in support of the chosen alternative is tional reactions (Fiske & Pavelchak, 1986) of which the
called consolidation. The general framework provided decision maker is aware also belong to this DEMO The
by the Differentiation and Consolidation (Diff Con) difference between repeated and unique decisions has
Theory approach to decision making is able to DEMO been elaborated by Lopes and Casey (1994), Keren and
modate DEMO existing decision models as sub- Wagenaar (1987) and Keren (1991)DEMO
processes or special cases (cf. Svenson, 1992) and will Usually, when we think of decision making as a pro-
therefore be used DEMO an organizing principle in the pres- cess this refers to choices between alternatives with
ent study. Note that most contemporary structural or goal conﬂicts. DEMO attributes favor one alternative
static decision theories do not at all consider degree of and other attributes another alternative. Such deci-
differentiation or what DEMO be called preference sions are grouped in the level 3 category. Most of the
strength as pointed out by Busemeyer and Townsend existing decision DEMO literature treats problems at
(1993) in their presentation of Decision Field Theory. this level.
With both representation and rules depending on con- In DEMO decision making, the search and creation
text and amenable to ﬂexible DEMO to reach a deci- of decision alternatives play a signiﬁcant or should play
sion, process approaches can help us understand why a signiﬁcant role. However, almost no decision research
preferences are often so variable and hard to predict. has treated this problem (cf., Fischhoff, 1996). In level
Levels of Decision Making 4 decisions the set of decision alternatives DEMO not ﬁxed
nor is the set of attributes (on which the DEMO are
Differentiation and Consolidation Theory distin- ordered) used to characterize them. DEMO solving
guishes four different types of decision problems elic- therefore constitutes an important subprocess in deci-
iting different psychological processes. The ﬁrst level of DEMO making at this level. Keeney (1992) contrasts level
decision processes includes the many quick and largely 3 and level 4 decisions and calls DEMO former ‘‘alterna-
automatic and unconscious decisions (Shiffrin & tive-focused thinking’’ and DEMO latter ‘‘value-focused
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISION MAKING AND PROCESS PERSPECTIVE
255
thinking’’ in decision making (cf., DEMO, Rai- tion also requires energetic effort which leads to a
singhani & Thoret, 1976). readiness to learn from decisions and routinize them
DEMO is important to point out that decision makers of- to a successively larger extent if they are repeated (cf.,
ten use processes at different levels in the same deci- Lopes, 1981). The contrast and accentuation effects (cf.,
sion process. Lower level processes are also nested Kreuger & Rothbart, 1990) illustrate how differentia-
within higher level decision DEMO as subprocesses tion of alternatives can be used in category learning
of the latter. which, in turn, can be related to decision processes.
DEMO mentioned above, most contemporary decision re- Following a decision several threats DEMO the choice
search has been focused on level 3 decision problems appear (loosing the good aspects of the nonchosen alter-
(some of which DEMO be seen as level 2 problems) (Ein- native, stuck with DEMO poor aspects of the chosen alter-
horn & Hogarth, 1981; Abelson & Levi, 1985; Payne native, unpredicted events, new perspectives on DEMO de-
et al. 1992; Yates, 1990; Kleindorfer, Kunreuther & cision in retrospect, etc.) which have to be handled.
Schoemaker, 1993; DEMO, 1992). Comparatively less Diff Con theory assumes that one way DEMO handling this
attention has been given to level 1 and level 4 decision postdecision regret (e.g., Loomes & Sugden, 1982) or
problems (but see e.g., Klein, 1989; Keller & Ho, 1988). DEMO (Festinger, 1964) is to continue differentiat-
ing the chosen alternative DEMO the decision in what is
In principle, the Differentiation and Consolidation DEMO
ory framework includes all levels of decision making now called consolidation.
both in their own right and as components in higher
level processes. However, the focus here will be on level Representation of Decision Alternatives
3 DEMO as the prototype decision problem.
In common with most other decision models Diff Con
THE DIFFERENTIATION AND CONSOLIDATION theory uses an alternative 1 attribute DEMO
THEORY FRAMEWORK
The purpose of a decision process is to select one of
two or more decision alternatives. Differentiation and
Consolidation Theory emphasizes that DEMO is achieved
in a differentiation process which over time separates
the alternatives until one alternative reaches a degree
Thus, a decision problem presents a set of alternatives,
where an alternative, e.g., a home, is represented by
aspects, e, (e.g., 150 m2,) on attributes (e.g., size). The
physical size (of 150 m2) is the foundation for a per-
ceived size, C Å fC (e), DEMO in turn is linked to an
attractiveness scale of size. To illustrate, a 150 m2 big
home may be (visually) perceived as smaller than an-
of differentiation from the others which is sufﬁcient for other DEMO of the same size. The attribute of perceived
a decision. The differentiation variable is a hypotheti- size of homes is related to a corresponding DEMO
cal construct which is related to attractiveness mea- tiveness attribute of size through a Å fa (C). In this
sures and decision rule support (Svenson, 1992). Diff case, this may imply increased attractiveness up to a
Con theory assumes that sufﬁcient differentiation pro- certain point (e.g., when it is very hard to clean all that
tects the decision maker from external (e.g., poor out- area) after which attractiveness may decrease. Thus,
come) and internal (e.g., change of own values) threats attractiveness may either increase monotonically or it
to the preference of the chosen alternative. Note that may increase on a perceived attribute DEMO to a certain
the goal in Diff Con theory is to achieve differentiation point after which attractiveness decreases (Svenson,
in a balanced way in which pros and cons together 1979). The attributes reﬂect fulﬁllment DEMO the set of
contribute to a sufﬁcient degree of differentiation. This goals elicited in a situation (cf., Keeney, 1992). The
differs from, for example, Dominance theory (Mont- importance of an attribute reﬂects its potential relative
gomery, 1983) in which rules are used to eliminate DEMO contributions to fulﬁllment of the goals of the decision
ﬂict and deviations from the principles of dominance maker. It is not necessary for Diff DEMO theory to postu-
which is just one of several rules of Diff Con theory. late the above representation but it is practical to use DEMO
Note, that early contributions such as Wald (1950) as- well-known DEMO of representing decision alternatives.
sumed that decisions were made following sufﬁcient A fundamental characteristic of attractiveness repre-
separation of an alternative as a result DEMO processing sentations, is their variability. Thus, there is no true
of the available (objective) information. point estimate of the attractiveness of an DEMO which
Diff Con theory assumes that a minimization of effort can be assumed strictly invariant over time. There is
principle is at work (e.g., Beach & Mitchell, 1978; always a variation of attractiveness caused by, for ex-
Payne, et al., 1993). It is assumed that retrospectively ample, the stream of environmental inputs and the de-
questioning a chosen alternative or changing it gener- cision maker’s own inner processes including DEMO
ally requires energetic effort which a decision maker goal mappings. A decision maker’s uncertainty about
wants to minimize. However, predecision differentia- how to represent his own values and goals in a decision
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:DEMO:05 obha AP: OBHDP
256
OLA SVENSON
problem has been elaborated by Fischhoff, Slovic & nents, and the decision problem itself. The active cre-
Lichtenstein (1980) and Fischhoff (1991). Some of this ation and restructuring of alternatives, DEMO and
uncertainty lies in the fact that people do not know editing processes are all performed in accordance with
what they will like in DEMO future (cf. Kahneman & Snell, the goals elicited and applied to the decision problem.
1992). Different ways of framing the same decision DEMO goals include apparent aspects of the decision situ-
problem can elicit different perspectives. A decision ation but also intentions and goals at higher levels DEMO
maker vacilating between different perspectives can well, such as schemas about DEMO to behave, the goal of
elicit different goals and introduce quite DEMO vari- minimization of energetic effort and what to strive for
ability in attractiveness (cf., Shepard, 1964; Tversky & in life. The result DEMO the editing process in turn may
Kahneman, 1981; Montgomery, 1994)DEMO Perceived un- affect the relative importance of different goals at lower
certainty about facts or the outcome of a decision also levels active in DEMO continued decision process.
contributes to and affects the uncertainty of the attrac-
tiveness of decision alternatives. Selection of a Reference and/or a Preliminary DEMO
Alternative
A reference decision alternative can be selected in a
level 1 quick process involving a classiﬁcation without
any evaluative component at the time. DEMO alternative
may serve in determining aspiration levels (Dembo,
1931) or as an anchor in other respects. It may also be
derived in DEMO elaborate and deliberate processes. A
selection of a preliminary (cf., Montgomery, 1983;
Beach, 1990) alternative can also involve a quick holis-
tic association.
The preliminary choice in unknown and more com-
plex situations DEMO or is contingent on the identiﬁ-
cation of the set of decision alternatives. Sometimes,
the number of alternatives seems to be reduced ﬁrst
DEMO application of a noncompensatory rule like the
conjunctive rule (cf., Svenson, 1979). The preliminary
choice candidate is selected from this set (DEMO, ‘‘consider-
ation set’’ in marketing research) and is later tested in
the differentiation process. Recent contributions (e.g.,
Levin & Jasper, 1993) suggest that the attribute(s)
used in the earlier elimination stages DEMO also be just
as important later in the differentiation process. Mont-
gomery (1994) emphasizes that a preliminary or ﬁnally
chosen decision alternative is DEMO from a generally
positive ‘‘inside’’ perspective as contracted with the
‘‘outside’’ perspective of the nonchosen alternatives.
Note again, that in applied settings there may often
be just one alternative that is considered and the deci-
sion DEMO concerns a choice between the status quo
alternative and one other alternative (cf., Samuelson &
Zeckhauser 1988, Kahneman, Knetsch & Thaler, DEMO;
Svenson, 1990; Schweitzer, 1994).
tives may concern selection DEMO several given ones Differentiation Leading to a Decision
as in most laboratory studies. In many real life situa-
tions decision problems evolve at the DEMO with The differentiation of the preliminary chosen alter-
one decision alternative at a time that has to be ac- native from its competitor(s) may be successful or it
cepted or rejected (cf., Fischhoff, 1996) or when a situa- may fail. However, according to the theory DEMO probabil-
tion requires the creation of new alternatives. ity of an alternative being chosen is rather higher than
The goals elicited by the decision DEMO for a decision lower if it is ﬁrst selected as the preliminary choice.
depends on the decision maker, situational compo- This is implied by the fact that differentiation attempts
Identif ying Decision Alternatives, Goal Elicitation
and Editing
When a decision problem appears this is followed
by identiﬁcation of DEMO alternatives, elicitation of
goals from the decision maker and editing of DEMO infor-
mation follows. When a decision maker starts analyz-
ing a decision problem this process is assumed to be
governed by markers telling the DEMO maker where
to start. Markers can be perceptual or cognitive and
relate to the goal structure and the representation of
the decision problem. To DEMO, the nomination of
one attribute as most important can be governed DEMO
some marker so that the aspects on that attribute are
compared ﬁrst. A marker can be, for example, the label
of an attribute (e.g., costs) or the aspects on an attri-
bute (e.g., DEMO very high or low value). It is assumed that
markers are very important and may explain im-
portant parts of otherwise not understood DEMO
Svenson (1983, 1985) found that, in ratings of total risk
as a function of varying risk levels over a year, the
longest exposure time with a constant risk served as a
marker and the DEMO started with the risk level dur-
ing that period of time. Otherwise the length of the
longest period was totally neglected in forming the DEMO
judgment also reﬂected in a series of regression analy-
ses. Editing is also initiated by markers and essential
to reduce the demand of energetic DEMO It is a
crucial activity in a decision process which will be elab-
orated below (cf., Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Abel-
son & Levi, 1985; Ranyard, 1989; Tversky & Kahne-
man, 1992; Coupey, 1994). Identiﬁcation of alterna-
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISION MAKING AND PROCESS PERSPECTIVE
257
to support the ﬁrst preliminary choice DEMO a biased way ternative. The size of the difference between the alter-
favoring that candidate. Empirical evidence for this can natives is of no DEMO for the choice according to
be found in studies by, for DEMO, Shaﬁr and Tversky these theories. Note that this contrasts with Diff DEMO
(Shaﬁr & Tversky, 1992; Shaﬁr, 1993) in which more DEMO which requires that a sufﬁciently superior alter-
and neutral information increases differentiation. If native is chosen. Thus, an additional decision rule may
the preliminary alternative cannot be sufﬁciently dif- give a degree of support adding to DEMO total level of
ferentiated it will be replaced by another candidate differentiation. Instead of predicting processes only
which then becomes the next focus of DEMO differentia- striving for elimination or denial of conﬂicts in a deci-
tion process. sion situation Diff Con theory assumes that a balanced
There are DEMO kinds of differentiation processes in view with pro and cons in the choice can also lead to
Diff Con theory, holistic, process and DEMO differ- greater postdecision resilience. In addition, it is as-
entiation. Svenson (1992) presents a full account of dif- sumed that less important attributes can be used to
ferentiation processes and therefore the presentation emphasize a DEMO with pros and cons (even through
here will be kept short. DEMO change against the chosen alternative which is bal-
anced out on other attributes). A decision consolidated
Holistic Differentiation in this way could be DEMO resilient in the postdecision
Holistic differentiation is quick and may be experi- implementation stage than a decision in which the
enced by the decision DEMO as something like a clas- counterfactuals are denied or deemphasized.
siﬁcation process (not readily available for conscious
control or awareness) of the preferred DEMO Structural Differentiation
The process may be both totally separated from any Structural differentiation refers to changes in psy-
attractiveness or goal considerations at the DEMO chological representations of the decision alternatives.
(level 1 decisions such as, many habits) or affective All such changes are made in relation to one or several
or emotional factors can have been elicitated instan- decision DEMO This depends on the fact that the elicited
taneously as in some level 2 decisions (cf., Zajonc, goal structure mapped onto a particular decision prob-
1980). Holistic differentiation often leads to a degree lem DEMO implemented in the selection of one alternative
of differentiation which is sufﬁcient for a ﬁnal choice. through the application of one or several decision DEMO
However, it may also be part of more complex differ- To DEMO, let one of the decision rules, activated in
entiation processes (DEMO, in selecting a preliminary a decision problem, be a lexicographic type rule in
alternative). which the size of the difference on the DEMO important
Process Differentiation attribute favoring the preliminary choice matters most.
Then, DEMO differentiation should focus on the
Process differentiation includes the use of one or most important attribute making that difference sufﬁ-
more decision rules (e.g., the conjunctive rule, the addi- ciently large if it is not DEMO large enough. This can
tive difference rule, cf., Svenson, 1979, 1992; Beach, be done through upgrading the chosen alternative on
1990) the elicitations of which depend on both the indi- that attribute or DEMO the nonchosen or both.
vidual, the context and the structure of DEMO decision Changes on other attributes, if any, are irrelevant in
problem. The frequently reported initial use of the con- this example. If another DEMO rule is also salient
junctive rule in the screening of the alternatives to other types of goals for the restructuring process are
reduce the DEMO of options belongs to this category also selected (e.g., sufﬁcient advantage on two or three
of differentiation. Changing the criterion limits on dif- DEMO important attributes for a weighed attractiveness
ferent attributes, in rules using DEMO criteria, is an- difference rule).
other and related kind of DEMO differentiation. To Structural differentiation processes are of different
exemplify, a conjunctive DEMO can be applied with suc- kinds depending on which parts of the structure is the
cessively stricter criteria of rejection in the early stages DEMO Different kinds of processes are assumed to take
of a decision process to reduce the set of possible alter- place concurrently and contingent on DEMO other and
natives. can be divided into the following categories (cf., Sven-
In later stages of the differentiation process, the pre- son, DEMO).
liminary choice can be tested against other alternatives
in different decision rules. Note that in decision re- Attractiveness restructuring concerns the attrac-
search, most decision rules are typically formulated so tiveness of aspects and is DEMO by decision rules
that they predict a choice of one alternative if the rule setting the goals for the process. The restructuring is
identiﬁes DEMO alternative as superior than another al- made possible through uncertainty of attractiveness
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
258
OLA SVENSON
representations, uncertainty in goal elicitation and the depreciate positive aspects of the chosen alternative
relative importance of different goals. These uncertain- DEMO the decision process to anticipate postdecision
ties can be kept fuzzy by the decision maker and used regret (and perhaps end up with a pleasant post-
in negotiating the structure with himself before the decision surprise)DEMO In such cases predecision differenti-
decision and thereafter. ation may seem relatively weaker (but still sufﬁcient)
and postdecision consolidation may seem relatively
stronger.
The same kinds of differentiation processes (holistic,
process and structural) DEMO presented in the predecision
phase can be used in the postdecision consolidation
phase also. However, some decision rules such as the
conjunctive rule may be less frequent after the decision
than before because of its predecision DEMO charac-
ter. Note that it is also possible to split the postdecision
phase into (1) postchoice, (2) implementation and (3)
DEMO stages. This separates processes after the
decision before implementation and the implementa-
tion stage before the outcome. Lewin, Dembo, Fes-
tinger, and Sears (1944) suggested two different phases
(1) goal setting which corresponds DEMO decision, and (2)
goal striving which corresponds to the implementation
phase (cf., also Gollwitzer, Heckhausen & Steller,
1990). In the present context, however, we do not follow
up these distinctions DEMO than discussions of the
effects of outcome on postdecision consolidation.
Attractiveness restructuring is likely to depend on
the pattern of aspects in a decision DEMO If, for
example, the preliminary chosen alternative is initially
far better on the most important attribute there is less
of a need to DEMO on that attribute than if it
is just barely superior. If the second most important
attribute also supports the chosen alternative then
there is DEMO of a need to consolidate than if it conﬂicts
with the chosen option. If the attractiveness difference
is sufﬁcient on the most important attribute DEMO is
room for attention to and consolidation of the second
Postdecision Consolidation most important attribute. Some studies (cf., Svenson et
Postdecision consolidation is DEMO in processes al. 1994) have indicated that aspects on less important
DEMO to those in the predecision phase. Following a attributes may be changed so that they contradict the
decision the decision maker has now lost DEMO opportu- chosen alternative. This may be the result of consolida-
nity of choice, the unique good aspects of the rejected tion towards a typical ‘‘gestalt’’ for the chosen alterna-
alternative(s) are gone and he or she is stuck with the tive involving both supporting and contradicting as-
DEMO aspects of the chosen alternative. This can create pects which are all changed to retain some kind of com-
postdecision dissonance (cf., Festinger, 1964) or regret pensatory pattern and an overall support for the chosen
(Loomes & Sugden, 1982) which has to be managed alternative.
psychologically and or in the implementation phase. Postdecision processes have been studied within DEMO
In response to these challenging threats predecision cognitive dissonance approach with over-all judgments
differentiation can be continued in what is now called of decision DEMO or information search tracing
postdecision consolidation. In some cases, in particular (cf., Brehm, 1956, Festinger, 1957, Festinger, 1964;
when DEMO have been quick and perhaps imma- Greenwald, 1980; Frey, 1986)DEMO Recently, Zakay and
ture, postdecision consolidation supporting the decision Tsal (DEMO) studied postdecision conﬁdence and struc-
may be a late substitute for DEMO processes (cf., tured possible sources affecting degree of (overall) con-
Svenson, 1992). In other cases, the decision maker may ﬁdence DEMO a decision. Joseph, Larrick, Steele,
Attribute importance restructuring refers to changes
in the importance of an attribute across alternatives.
For example, differentiation according to a weighed ad-
ditive difference rule can be performed through DEMO
ing the relative importance among the attributes so
that attributes favoring the hypothetical choice attain
more importance (weight).
Facts restructuring refers to changes in the perceived
reality to support the hypothetical alternative to a
greater DEMO A decision maker citing facts which are
biased towards supporting the hypothetical choice re-
ﬂects facts restructuring as well as memory retrievals
of earlier DEMO statements as more supportive than
they were before the decision or judgment (cf., hind-
sight effects, Fischhoff, 1975). Facts restructuring par-
DEMO attractiveness restructuring and the two are
sometimes substitutable.
Problem restructuring implies using available facts
and/or searching for new facts for an alternative way
DEMO representing the decision problem. This may involve
new attributes, for example, supporting a preliminary
choice and/or the creation of new alternatives. Problem
DEMO includes level 4 decision processes in
which new alternatives can also be created and old ones
thoroughly modiﬁed. This kind of restructuring may
give DEMO support to a preliminary choice alternative
but it may also erase it completely from the set of possi-
ble alternatives.
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:DEMO:05 obha AP: OBHDP
and Nisbett (1992) have combined decision theory with can be found DEMO different paradigms and in applica-
dissonance theory. The present author has used Differ-
entiation and Consolidation theory to study postdeci-
sion processes. The attribute DEMO aspects representation
of alternatives in this theory and the measurements
of attractiveness on each attribute have improved the
experimental and statistical power of the DEMO
work of detecting postdecision effects compared to the
earlier studies. To exemplify, postdecision consolida-
tion may not be detectable through wholistic ratings
of complete alternatives, but revealed as a pattern in
which, for example, only the most important attributes
are used for consolidation (cf., Svenson & DEMO,
1992).
WHAT HAS BEEN LEARNED FROM RECENT DIFF
CON RELATED DECISION RESEARCH?
Studies performed during the past few years within
the DEMO Con framework have focused on post-decision
consolidation processes. Some of the main results indi-
cate (1) that post-decision structural consolidation oc-
curs regularly (Svenson & Benthorn, 1992; Benthorn,
1994; Benson & Svenson, DEMO; Svenson, Ortega Rayo,
Sandberg, Svahlin, & Andersen, 1994; Svenson &
Malmsten, 1991), (2) that aspects on the DEMO and/or
second most important attributes are predominantly
used in postdecision consolidation, (3) that subjects
differ in degree of importance ascribed to different at-
tributes and that this difference matters in the data
analyses (Benthorn, 1994), (4) that uninteresting and
noninvolving decision problems may not lead to post-
259
tions of different methods.
SOME METHODOLOGICAL AND DESIGN
DEMO IN DECISION RESEARCH
Theories and methods are intimately intertwined in
science and it is interesting to follow the interplay be-
tween the two in DEMO research. For example,
broadly speaking, theories in which a decision DEMO mod-
eled as taking place at a given moment in time are
coupled with structural approaches and methods in de-
cision research. All input DEMO that are varied are
related to variations in the output decisions or judg-
ments. Thus, there is less focus on the information
search, DEMO and processing stages which interest
researchers using process tracing methods. As men-
tioned before, process approaches use other kinds of
data, process data, and model decision making as tak-
ing place over time with the DEMO, selection and pro-
cessing of information as the most interesting aspects
DEMO decision making. Relatively little effort is used to
predict decisions from decision problem parameters in
process approaches. Preferably, structural and process
approaches should converge in the future. The follow-
ing presentations of methodological issues are offered
DEMO arguments in a discussion of advantages and disad-
vantages of different research methods and designs to
promote the goal of a convergence of the DEMO main re-
search approaches used in contemporary decision re-
search.
decision consolidation while interesting and more in- On Cognitive Modeling in Process Approaches
volving DEMO can (Benthorn, 1994; Svenson et al.,
1994), (5) that an increase in consolidation does not Decision rules and structuring assume fundamental
necessarily result from a need of justiﬁcation (Svenson cognitive processes for their execution and this opens
et al., 1994), (6) that aspect attractiveness restructur- up the question of which fundamental cognitive pro-
ing DEMO much stronger than attribute importance re- cesses execute the restructuring and the processing of
structuring (Malmsten, 1996), (7) that decision out- DEMO according to the rules. This problem has
come feedback speeded up postdecision consolidation interested Payne et al., (1993) for a long time in repeti-
processes (Svenson & Malmsten, 1996) (8) that time tive decision tasks. Recently, Harte, Westenberg &
pressure seems to be detrimental to and weakening Someren (1994) reviewed 23 think aloud studies of
DEMO and/or immediate consolidation (Ben- judgment and decision making and found DEMO only 4
son, 1993). of them presented their results in DEMO process
Other studies in other contexts have illustrated pre- models. Another exception to this trend is Oswald
decision differentiation in terms of early rejection DEMO Huber (1989) who has also made theoretical contribu-
several and selection of one preliminary choice alter- tions introducing cognitive processes into decision the-
DEMO and the successive differentiation in terms of ory. It seems clear that decision research would have
value statements of that alternative (or the rejection to use cognitive modeling to generate hypotheses and
of it and differentiation DEMO another alternative) (e.g., to interpret results in order to arrive DEMO a psychological
Kleinmuntz, 1963; Svenson, 1974, 1979; Montgom- theory DEMO decision making. Differentiation and Consoli-
ery & Svenson, 1989; Bettman, DEMO & Payne, dation theory may provide a ﬁrst step towards the DEMO
1991). These and other studies are important because velopment of a more detailed psychological model at
it is of great value that regularities DEMO decision making least for unique and less frequently repeated decisions.
DECISION MAKING AND PROCESS PERSPECTIVE
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
260
OLA SVENSON
Only adequate modelling can assist us in revealing ex- DEMO points in time. This makes it possible to se-
isting regularities in human decision making. cure data with a precision corresponding to the one
DEMO in structural approaches. Based on changes in
On Process Tracing Methods measures of structures, decision processes may also be
inferred. Effects like differentiation, DEMO and consoli-
A number of different methods have been used in dation can be followed in reasonable detail in this way.
research on human DEMO processes. Eye movement To illustrate, Svenson and Benthorn (1992) used DEMO
recordings were used early to study the information sion alternatives described through marks on hori-
input sequence (e.g., Russo & Rosen, 1975). Informa- zontal lines representing attributes (from very poor to
tion about eye movements can secure information very good). More concretely, subjects who made a choice
about what decision rules could not have been used between DEMO stereoplayers were informed about how
and provide some (nonconclusive) evidence about what poor or good each player was on the attributes of price,DEMO
decision rules could really have been used (cf., Svenson, design, sound quality and overall (electronic and me-
1979). The information board paradigm in which sub- chanical) quality. Each subject made only one decision
jects successively uncover the information they need in the experiment and was DEMO to reproduce the deci-
may be a more efﬁcient way of gathering information sion alternatives on (the now empty) attribute scales
than the DEMO movement recordings. (However, the new at different times after the decision. In this way it was
lightweight cameras and high resolution techniques possible DEMO follow the process of consolidation following
have improved the latter technology considerably.) In- a decision.
formation board techniques (Jacoby, Chestnut, Weigl & DEMO important ﬁnding was that analyses based on
Fischer, 1976; Van Raaij, 1977) have become very popu- the attribute labels (price, design, etc.) did not reveal
lar in process studies of decision making. The most any regularities. This was due to the fact that subjects
advanced DEMO well thought through technique of this did not agree about how important the attributes were
type is the computerized mouse lab method developed when DEMO made their decisions. However, sorting the
and used by Johnson, Payne, Bettman and their col- data according to degree of importance (ratings DEMO attri-
league (e.g., Johnson, Payne, Schkade & Bettman, bute DEMO were also collected from each subject)
1991; Payne et al., 1993). Although, the different infor- and averaging across subjects revealed regularities in
mation board processing techniques have improved postdecision consolidation processes as mentioned DEMO
much over the years they still lack some of the precision lier. Thus, in retrospect subjects ‘‘improved’’ their cho-
in, for example, disentangling different decision rules, sen alternative through devaluating the nonchosen al-
that well designed structural approach studies have. ternative on the two most important attributes. DEMO
Note, however that the approach chosen by Payne and represents attractiveness DEMO and it was re-
his associates is quite well developed and, DEMO a package, ﬂected in quantitative measures one week after the
provides DEMO powerful tool for analyses of repeated deci- decision.
sions. In conclusion, DEMO detailed measures of a deci-
The think aloud technique provides the decision re- sion process can be regarded as an important comple-
searcher with DEMO tape recording or a written verbal pro- ment to other process tracing techniques in forming a
tocol (Clarkson, 1962; Bettman, 1969; Newell & Simon, bridge between the process and structural approaches.
1972; Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Svenson, 1979, 1989;
Ericsson & Simon, DEMO; Ford et al., 1986; Harte et al., On Between and Within Subjects Designs
1994; Someren, Barnard & Sandberg, 1994). One might
expect that such protocols would contain also more One lesson learned DEMO the postdecision research
strategic and planning type information. Unfortu- which we have carried out is that just aggregating over
nately, in reality, the DEMO generates almost exclu- attributes across individuals makes it hard or impossi-
sively piece by piece information input and evaluations ble to ﬁnd some psychological DEMO This is so
of the input. In most cases even simple decision rules although the psychological process may be regular
have to be inferred DEMO the protocols just as in the across subjects. For example, the DEMO in which the
information board experiments. However, in conjunc- aspects are DEMO may be regular across individuals
tion the two methods may contribute more information and depend on each individual decision maker’s judg-
than each in DEMO (Westenberg & Koele, 1994) ment of attribute importance. One such DEMO is
providing a possibility of ﬁnding regularities in human to search aspects across all alternatives on one attri-
decision making. bute at a time, selecting attributes according to attri-
Using the Diff Con framework the structural DEMO bute importance with the most important attribute
sentation of a decision problem can be measured at searched ﬁrst. If the order of processing affects DEMO ﬁnal
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISION MAKING AND PROCESS PERSPECTIVE
261
result (which is quite likely) DEMO true regularities can decision which if repeated in the long run would yield
only be found when all subjects agree on the evaluative the DEMO gain. For many years, Lopes (1981, 1994)
representation of DEMO decision problem. If the importance has stressed the difference of decision making in the
of attributes is taken into consideration regularities short and long DEMO Vlek (1973) noticed the difference
can be found even across different decision problems between unique and repeated decisions, recently also
(e.g., Svenson & Benthorn, 1992; Svenson et al., 1994). treated by Keren (1991) and Keren and Wagenaar
Note that seemingly straightforward decision problems (1987). Diff Con theory predominantly treats unique or
may be interpreted DEMO different ways not only in terms difﬁcult decisions and simply refers repeated decisions
of degree of importance of attributes but also concern- to level DEMO and 2 types of decisions. In fact, to the present
ing DEMO polarity good and bad (Benthorn, 1994) and author’s knowledge almost DEMO studies of how decision
ideal preference points (cf., Coombs, 1975)DEMO maker learn to routinize repeated decisions exist. Even
Th e a bove illu st ra tes h ow differ en t choices ca n DEMO e- in the cue probability learning paradigm, which does
su lt DEMO om t h e sa m e r egu la r decision pr ocess. Cor r e- not normally use attractiveness attributes but facts DEMO
spon dingly, t he sa me ch oice ca n a DEMO r esult from dif- tributes (cues), most of the interest DEMO to have been
fer en t decision pr ocesses wh ich fu r t h er st r esses t h e devoted to DEMO levels of judgment behavior.
usefulness of pr ocess a pproaches or str uctu ra l a p- Therefore, studies of how people learn to make deci-
pr oa ch es wit h t h e pu DEMO pose of in vest iga t in g pr ocess sions seems to be a promising ﬁeld of research. Also,
ch ar acterist DEMO the unlearning of suboptimal but routinized decisions
In conclusion, future research DEMO attempt to seems to be a very relevant research area with a poten-
avoid confounding interindividual differences in goal tial for very interesting results. DEMO, the use of
elicitation and goal mapping with decision making pro- DEMO choices of gambles or lotteries is not a safe
cesses as performed by single individuals and attempt way of generating interesting results. This paradigm
DEMO use within subjects designs whenever feasible. Oth- is too simple if the goal is to ﬁnd generic regularities
erwise we run the risk of DEMO understanding processes of human decision making. Recently, Kunreuther and
about decision DEMO in which everybody agrees Hogarth wrote ‘‘Will the study of choice ﬁnally show
about values and the mapping of values (and of getting that the standard laboratory gamble was an oversim-
confused when there is a DEMO of goal representa- pliﬁcation of individual decision making in much the
tions). This will be elucidated further in the section same way that DEMO syllables proved inadequate
below about decision makers’ goals. As elaborated by for studying memory? The arguments presented in this
Keren and Lewis (1993) it is not always possible or paper suggest that this is the DEMO (Kunreuther &
practical to use within subjects designs. Such designs Hogarth, 1993 pp. 33 – 34). Fischhoff (1996) further
can create unwanted and unrecognized interactions elaborates and deepens the critizism of traditional deci-
DEMO the process under study and other factors not de- sion experiments as guides for our understanding of
liberately included in the design. To exemplify, Sven- human decision making outside the laboratory.
son and Edland (1987) DEMO the effects of time pres-
sure on decision making using both a between and a THEMES FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
within subjects design. In this DEMO the within design
was associated with carry over learning effects which One of the aims of the present paper was to present
were stronger DEMO the effect of manipulating the dead- a discussion of possible future research themes and
line for a judgment. In process studies of decision mak- DEMO of decision research. The remainder of
ing within subjects designs seem indispensable when- this contribution contains discussions about (1) goals
ever they are DEMO In tests of predictions from struc- elicited in a decision task, (2) preliminary choices in a
tural models of aggregated data, within DEMO decision process, (3) relations between pre- and postde-
designs may DEMO always be so necessary. However, even cision processes, (4) decision process moderating fac-
here great caution must be paid to individual differ- DEMO and (5) the relation between decision making re-
ences when group data are aggregated. search and social psychology.
On Unique and Repeated Decisions
DEMO Subjects’ Goals in Decision Tasks
Every decision researcher knows that for decades Process tracing methods do not in themselves auto-
gambles or lotteries have DEMO used to elicit human matically provide information about a decision maker’s
decision behavior which could be interpreted in relation goals and values. Yet, goals and values elicited in a
to normative theory. Rational behavior in such DEMO situa- given person in a particular situation govern most of
tion was usually assumed to correspond to a single the decision process (cf., DEMO & Zajonc, 1985 who
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha DEMO: OBHDP
262
OLA SVENSON
criticized the lack of context and goal analysis in DEMO vidual decision making. In fact, such results reﬂect in-
man judgment DEMO). First, the relative priorities terindividual differences. It may be added DEMO the deci-
given to different goals on a meta level have to emerge. sion situation and context also induces goals originat-
That is, how to prioritize goals including goals such as ing from, for example, DEMO experimenter and the
the basic needs of food and water, social DEMO but also instruction in an experiment. Tetlock (1991) elaborates
other needs, such as needs of effort minimization, con- this theme along the DEMO of accountability.
trollability and justiﬁability. The latter type of goals Decision making is not just fullﬁlling goals. It also
may be further exempliﬁed by DEMO trade-off between involves considerations of implementation. Therefore,
accuracy or correctness of a decision and the speed of restrictions as to which alternatives can DEMO realistically
the decision process. Lopes (1987) and Jungermann implemented have also to be included in a theory of
(1983) have contributed to DEMO discussion about goals decision making (e.g., Lewin, et al., 1944; Wright &
in decision making. Barbour, 1977). From a normative view, alternatives
Second, mapping of the elicited goals on the aspects DEMO could not be realized should not affect goal elicita-
and attributes has to be performed in order to make it tion and mapping on DEMO remaining alternatives. How-
possible to reach a decision. It may well be that the ever, taking human characteristics, (such as those re-
same decision process is used in formally identical ﬂected in violations of the DEMO thing principle), into
problems which lead to different decisions reﬂecting account there seems to be good reasons to believe that
the results of DEMO goal elicitations. To exemplify, restrictions affect goal elicitation and mapping for DEMO
Maule (1989) found that the positive framing of Asian remaining alternatives. This problem may open up for
disease type problems (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981) an interesting ﬁeld of research.
elicited signiﬁcantly more statements about DEMO
lives than the negative framing which in turn gener- On Preliminary Choices in Decision Processes
ated almost exactly the same number of statements There DEMO empirical evidence indicating that a prelimi-
about loosing lives. This may reﬂect different goals but nary choice is often made early or relatively early DEMO a
the same underlying process to reach a decision (not decision DEMO Furthermore, this choice seems to
investigated by Maule) when handling the information have a more than random chance of becoming the ﬁnal
to DEMO the different goals induced by the different choice (e.g., Montgomery & Svenson, 1983; Tyszka &
framings. Wielochowski, 1991). The selection DEMO a preliminary al-
Thus, preferably, goals and values elicited by a deci- ternative is cognitively efﬁcient because it tends to de-
sion problem DEMO also be measured independently crease the number of comparisons of aspects among
to provide additional information which can prove to alternatives which decreases the DEMO on working mem-
be crucial in interpreting the data in studies of decision ory. Thus, a very important research area concerns the
making. If this information could be partialed out we rejection or successful differentiation of DEMO preliminary
would know more about decisions, biases and psycho- choice from DEMO competitors. Note that the preceding
logical processes. To illustrate, one subject DEMO want to presentation was very much concentrated on the ﬁnally
minimize possible loss outcome and another maximize chosen alternative and provided little detail about DEMO
possible gain in the same situation. Having indepen- selection or rejection of a preliminary chosen alterna-
dent information about different subjects’ goals in dif- DEMO
ferent conditions could reveal identical psychological Examples of interesting questions are: DEMO which ways
processes that are used with the purpose of reaching can the preliminary choice alternative be selected?
different goals (minimize possible loss versus maximize What are the crucial aspects (markers) triggering a
possible DEMO respectively). Not taking such informa- particular preliminary choice? Given that DEMO prelimi-
tion into account would, at best, lead to post hoc group- nary choice is favored in the differentiation process,
ing on DEMO dependent variable. That is, analyses of indi- what processes typically lead DEMO a rejection? What are
vidual subjects to infer which goal could DEMO each the most important aspects triggering the rejection of
subject’s behavior may enable the classiﬁcation of sub- a preliminary choice?
jects in different DEMO Subsequently, data from these The above indicates that studies of rejection DEMO
groups would be treated independently. Lastly, possi- cesses of preliminary choices DEMO also teach us an im-
ble generalizations could be made across groups. How- portant lesson about human decision processes in addi-
ever, in contemporary research, group data often seem tion to studies of the differentiation of the ﬁnally cho-
to be analysed so that they lead to interpretations DEMO sen alternative. Beach (1990) has paid special attention
which different goals seem to have been given different to the screening phase eliminating alternatives (the
relative weights wrongly generalized to describe indi- compatibility test) which do not deserve consideration
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISION MAKING AND PROCESS PERSPECTIVE 263
in the second stage in which DEMO remaining alternatives (e.g., between information search and information inte-
are evaluated (the proﬁtability test). Decisions between gration) and the conﬂict between DEMO and quality, all
the status quo and one other alternative have DEMO of which are interesting for further investigation (cf.
interest from a DEMO of researchers (e.g., Sam- Payne et al., 1993; Svenson & Maule, 1993). In terms
uelson & Zeckhauser, 1988; Ritov & Baron, 1992; of differentiation, time pressure would allow less differ-
Baron & Ritov, 1994). If Fischhoff (1996) and Karlsson entiation and may lead to a greater need for postdeci-
(1987) are correct DEMO pointing out that many, if not sion consolidation if the predecision DEMO was
most, real-life important decisions concern the accep- insufﬁcient.
tance or DEMO of one decision alternative only, then The effects of stress, other than time stress on deci-
there is also a basic applied interest DEMO ﬁnding out more sion making, is another ﬁeld of great potential DEMO
about acceptance and rejection of single decision alter- in the future as well as the effects of, for example,
natives. sleepiness on decision making. The degree to which a
decision maker is involved in and DEMO by a decision
Relations between Pre- and Postdecision Processes problem, also DEMO the processing of information. For
Adopting a Diff Con perspective it becomes interest- example, it is possible to predict that there will be a
ing to relate pre- and postdecision processes to each greater potential for DEMO consolidation if the
other. Following up this vein, the following research DEMO maker is more involved. The effect of involve-
problems may arise. How is the degree of postdecision ment has been pointed out by several DEMO (e.g.,
consolidation related to prior differentiation? What de- Festinger, DEMO). In order to control for levels of process
cision rules tend to lead to greater postdecision consoli- moderating factors and different goals of DEMO mak-
dation? Do different decision makers use different ers it would DEMO helpful to develop some measures which
‘‘styles’’ of differentiation and consolidation across do- could be applied when performing experiments on hu-
mains? What are the effects of repeated decisions and man decision making. To exemplify, Zaichkowsky,
varying outcomes on predecision differentiation? In (1985) has developed a questionnaire for involvement
contrast to most decision research the Diff Con para- DEMO consumer decisions and Edland (1994) devised a
digm does not routinely use repeated decisions. Due to short form for measuring the effects of DEMO pressure
the processes investigated, only one decision has been independently of DEMO subjects’ behavior in a decision
made by each subject in most of the studies. Speculat- task. Although, the construct of involvement and other
ing about the effects of differentiation and consolida- process moderating factors are unclear DEMO fuzzy it
tion on the readiness to learn, postdecision consolida- seems DEMO important to consider and reﬁne them in
tion would be detrimental to a learning process since future decision making research.
in some sense it DEMO distort feedback (Bjo¨ rkman 1993).
Predecision differentiation can also contribute DEMO con- Decision Research and Social Psychology
trast emphasizing the more important attributes which In the classical dissonance postdecision studies (Fes-
may facilitate learning. Because Diff Con theory as- tinger, 1964), alternatives were given overall evalua-
sumes that level 3 and 4 decisions are also made in tions. DEMO approach is insensitive to changes of within
order to prepare for future decisions on lower levels it alternative attractiveness proﬁles. If changes go in DEMO
would be interesting to consider also sequential deci- ferent directions for different attributes there is, of
sions (e.g., Hirtle & Ga¨ rling, DEMO; Ga¨ rling, 1994; course, a smaller chance of detecting signiﬁcant overall
Huber, 1994; Lopes & Casey, 1994) and the learning DEMO Through applying a decision theoretic ap-
processes treated earlier which are normally ignored
in decision making experiments. proach with an alternativeit is possible to DEMO up patterns such as signiﬁcant1 attributes representation
Decision Process Moderating Factors changes on one or a few signiﬁcant attributes only (e.g.,
Svenson & Benthorn, 1992; Frey, 1986).
Process moderating factors are factors that affect the From a theoretical as well as from an applied per-
DEMO resources mobilized, the goal structure, rules spective, there have been DEMO developments and
applied etc. They include stress, time pressure, involve- sometimes strong links between social psychology and
ment in task, mood and other conditions which affect decision research (e.g., Lewin et al., 1994; DEMO
the decision maker. To exemplify, time pressure has 1964; Janis & Mann, 1977 and Frey 1986). Attitude
been shown to affect decision making and judgment in researchers such as Fischbein and Ajzen, (1975) have
different systematic ways (Payne et al., 1993; Sven- used concepts close to decision theory. In some sense
son & Maule, 1993). Time pressure can activate goal the postdecision phase of Diff Con theory DEMO a
conﬂicts such as those concerning resource allocation social psychology tradition. Some regularities in the
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
264
OLA SVENSON
post-decision consolidation phase may be seen as just
another DEMO of a self-serving bias (cf. Larrick,
1993) belonging to the same family of phenomena as
dissonance reduction and attribution theory. Predeci-
sion DEMO is more difﬁcult to relate to social
psychology (but see Josephs DEMO al.). However, if at-
tempts are made to link decision DEMO processes to
social psychology this could lead to greater understand-
ing of, for example, attitude – behavior discrepancies
and the role of habits DEMO decision making. Thus, further
work beyond what is actually going on DEMO social
psychology and decision research both theoretically
and empirically seems to be a promising activity in a
search for regularities in decision making.
CONCLUDING DEMO
To a large extent decision making is the art of conﬂict
resolution. That is, conﬂicts between inner goals, be-
tween own and others’ DEMO, conﬂicts concerning how
to evaluate alternatives in relation to competing goals
DEMO so on. Four decades of research has complicated,
widened and deepened our knowledge about the deci-
sion processes operative in solving these conﬂicts.
DEMO from a predominantly structural research
paradigm, decision research now also encompasses DEMO
process perspective which allows both pre- and postde-
cision processes to appear on the agenda. The Differen-
tiation and Consolidation theory approach attempts to
DEMO a framework that is wide enough to accommo-
date much of contemporary research and yet puts some
structure on a ﬁeld that tends to DEMO most avail-
able developments of classical Expected Utility theory
in one way or the other. Furthermore, Diff Con theory
has a potential for linking the ‘‘planning for the future’’
aspects of decision making with postdecision phases
DEMO the constructed reality which feeds back to
the decision maker and affects her or his future deci-
sions. Hopefully, perspectives such as the Diff Con the-
ory approach will contribute in a process to unify a DEMO
which threatens to become too disparate for effective
converging research. This unifying role was played by
expected utility models for a long time, but it seems as
if those models now have to be substituted by DEMO
tive frameworks.
REFERENCES
Abelson, R. P., & Levi, A. (1985). Decision making and decision the-
ory. In G. Lindzey & E. DEMO (Eds.) Handbook of social psychol-
ogy (3rd ed, pp. 231 – 309). New York: Random House.
Allais, M. (1953). Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant
le risque: Critique de postulats et axiomes de l’ecole americaine.
Econometrica, 21, 503 – 546.
Baron, J., & Ritov, I. (1994). Reference points and omission bias.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 59, 475 –
498.
Beach, L. R. (1990). Image theory: Decision making in personal and
organizational DEMO Chichester: Wiley.
Beach, L. R., & Mitchell, T. R. (DEMO). A contingency model for the
selection of decision strategies. Academy of Management Review,
3, 439 – 449.
Benson, L., III. (DEMO). Studies in human decision making: On the
effects of experimental DEMO, framing and time constraints.
Unpublished doctorial dissertation, Lund University, Lund, Swe-
den.
Benson, L., III, & Svenson, O. (1992). Post-decision consolidation
following the debrieﬁng of subjects about experimental manipula-
tions affecting DEMO prior decisions. Lund University, Psychologi-
cal Research Bulletin, 32, No. DEMO
Benthorn, L. (1994). On post-decision processes. Unpublished psy-
chology doctoral dissertation, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Bettman, J. R. (1969). Information processing models of consumer
behavior (Research Paper No. 23). Los Angeles: University of Cali-
fornia Graduate School of Business Administration.
Bettman, DEMO R., Johnson, E. J., & Payne, J. W. (1991)DEMO Consumer
decision making. In T. S. Robertson and H. H. Kassarjan (DEMO)
Handbook of consumer behavior. Englewood Cliffs. NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Bjo¨rkman, M. (1993). Personal communication.
Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision change in the desirability of choice
alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and Social DEMO, 52, 384 –
389.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, DEMO T. (1993). Decision ﬁeld theory: A
dynamic-cognitive approach to decision making in uncertain envi-
ronment. Psychological Review, 100, 432 – 459.
DEMO, G. (1962). Portfolio selection —A simulation of trust invest-
ment. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall.
Coombs, C. H. (1958). On the use of inconsistency of preferences in
psychological measurement, Journal of Experimental Psychology,
55, 1–7.
Coombs, C. H. (1975). Portfolio theory and the measurement of risk.
In M. F. Kaplan & S. Schwartz (Eds.) Human judgment and deci-
sion processes (pp. 63 – 85) New York: Academic Press.
Coupey, E. (1994). Restructuring: Constructive DEMO of infor-
mation displays in consumer choice. Journal of Consumer Re-
search, 21, 83 – 99.
Curley, S. P., Yates, J. F., & Abrams, R. A. (1986). Psychological
sources of ambiguity avoidance. Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes, 38, 230 – 256.
DEMO, R. M. (1996). Behavioral decision making, judgment, and
inference. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, and G. Lindzey (Eds.) The DEMO
book of social psychology. Boston, MA: McGraw Hill, in prepara-
DEMO
Dembo, T. (1931). Der¨ Arger als dynamisches Problem. Psycholo-
gische Forschung, 15, 1 – 144.
Edland, A. (1994). Time DEMO and the application of decision
rules: Choices and judgments of multiattribute DEMO Scan-
dinavian Journal of Psychology, 35, 281 – 291.
Edwards, DEMO (1954). The theory of decision making. Psychological
Bulletin, 41, DEMO – 417.
Einhorn, H., & Hogarth, R. (1981). Behavioral decision theory: Pro-
cesses of judgment and choice. Annual Review of Psychology, 32,
53 – 88.
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISION MAKING AND PROCESS PERSPECTIVE
265
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984). Protocol analysis: Verbal
reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Estes, W. K. (1994). Classiﬁcation and cognition. New York: Oxford
Univ. Press.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford Univ. Press.
Festinger, L. (1964). Conﬂicts, decision and dissonance. Stanford,
CA: Stanford Univ. DEMO
Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight is not equal to foresight: DEMO effect
of outcome knowledge on judgment under uncertainty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 1,
288 – 299.
Fischhoff, B. (1991). Value elicitation: Is there anything in there?
American DEMO, 46, 835 – 847.
Fischhoff, B. (1996). The real world: What good is it? Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, in press.
Fischhoff, B., Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (DEMO). Knowing what
you want: Measuring labile values. In T. Wallsten (Eds.) Cognitive
Processes in Choice and Decision Behavior (pp. 64 – DEMO) Hillsdale
NJ: Erlbaum.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention and behav-
ior: An introduction to theory and research. Reading MA: Addison –
Wesley.
Fiske, S. T., & Pavelchak, M. A. (1986). Category-based versus piece-
meal-bases affective responses: Developments in schema-triggered
affect. In R. M. Sorrentino & E. T. Higgins (Eds.) The handbook
of motivation and cognition: Foundation of social behavior. (pp.
167 – 203) New York: Guilford.
Ford, J. K., DEMO, N., Schechtman, S. L., Hults, B. M., & Doherty,
M. L. (1986). Process tracing methods: Contribution, problems and
neglected research questions. Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes, 43, DEMO – 117.
Frey, D. (1981). Postdecisional preference for decision-relevant infor-
mation as a function of its source and the degree of familiarity
DEMO its information. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
17, 51 – DEMO
Frey, D. (1986). Recent research on selective exposure to information.
Advances in experimental social psychology, 19, 41 – 80.
Ga¨ rling, T. (1994). Processing of time constraints on sequence deci-
sions in a planning task. European Journal of Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 6, 417 DEMO
Gollwitzer, P. M., Heckhauser, H., & Steller, B. (1990). Deliberative
and implementation mindsets: Cognitive turning toward congrous
thoughts and information. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 59, 1119 – 1127.
DEMO, A. G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revi-
DEMO of personal history. American Psychologist, 35, 603 – 618.
Harte, DEMO M., Westenberg, R. M., & van Someren, M. (1994)DEMO Process
models in decision making. Acta Psychologica, 87, 95 – 120.
Hirtle, S. C., & Ga¨ rling, T. (1992). Heuristic DEMO for sequential Kunreuther, H., & Hogarth, R. (1993). Decision making under igno-
spatial decisions. Geoforum, 23, 227 – 238. rance: Arguing with yourself. University of Chicago, Graduate
Huber, O. (1989). Information processing operators in decision mak- School of Business Center for Decision DEMO Report, August
ing. In H. Montgomery & O. Svenson (Eds.) DEMO and structure 1993.
in human decision making Chichester: Wiley. Larrick, R. P. (1993). Motivational factors in decision theories: The
Huber, O. (1994). Decision behavior in a multistage investment task. role of self-protection. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 440 – 450.
Acta Psychologica, 85, 139 DEMO 154. Lewin, K., Dembo, T., Festinger, L. A., & Sears, P. S. (1944). Level
Jacoby, J., Chestnut, R. W., Weigl, R. C., & Fischer, W. (1976). Pre- of aspiration. In J. McV. Hunt (Ed.) Personality and the behavior
DEMO information acquisition: description of a process method- disorders (Vol. 1 pp. 333 – 378) New York: Ronald.
ology, research paradigm and a pilot investigation. In B. B. Ander- Levin, I. P., & Jasper, J. P. (1993). Identifying compensatory and
son (Ed.) Advances in consumer research. (Vol. 3, pp. 321 – 327).
Chicago: IU: Assoc. for Consumer Research.
Janis, I. L., & Mann, L. (1977). Decision making: A psychological
analysis of conﬂict choice and commitment. New York: The Free
Press.
Johnson, E. J., Payne, J. DEMO, & Bettman, J. R. (1993). Adapting to
time constraints. DEMO O. Svenson & A. J . Maule (Eds.) Time pressure
and stress in human judgment and decision making. New York:
Plenum.
Josephs, R. A., Larrick, R. F., Steele, C. M., & Nisbett, R. E. (1992).
Protecting the self from negative consequences of DEMO decisions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 26 – 37.
Jungermann, H. (1983). The two camps of rationality. In R. DEMO Schols
(Ed.) Decision making under uncertainty. Amsterdam: North Hol-
land.
DEMO, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1990). Experimental
tests of the endowment effect and the Coase theorem. Journal DEMO
Political Economy, 98, 1325 – 1348.
Kahneman, D., & Snell, J. (1992). Predicting a changing taste: Do
people know what they will like? Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 5, 187 – 200.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: an analysis
of decisions under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263 – 291.
DEMO, G. (1987). A phenomenological psychological method: Theo-
retical foundation DEMO empirical application in the ﬁeld of decision
making and choice. Stockholm: DEMO
Keeney, R. L. (1992). Value-focused thinking: A path to DEMO deci-
sion making London: Harvard Univ. Press.
Keller, L. R., & Ho, J. L. (1988). Decision problem structuring: Gener-
ating DEMO IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernet-
ics, 18, 715 DEMO 728.
Keren, G. (1991). Additional tests of utility theory under unique and
repeated conditions. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 4,
297 – 304.
Keren, G., & Lewis, C. (1993). Data DEMO in the behavioral sci-
ences: Methodological issues. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
DEMO, G., & Wagenaar, W. A. (1987). Violation of utility theory in
unique and repeated gambles. Journal of Experimental Psychology
HPP: Learning Memory and Cognition, 13, 387 – 391.
Klein, G. A. (DEMO). Recognition —primed decisions. In W. B. Rouse
(Ed.) Advances in man –machine system research (Vol. 5, pp. 47 –
92) Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Kleinmuntz, B. (1963). Proﬁle analysis revisited: A heuristic ap-
proach. Journal of Counselling Psychology, 70, 315 – DEMO
Kleindorfer, P. R., Kunreuther, H. C., & Schoemaker, P. DEMO H. (1993).
Decision sciences: An integrative perspective, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press.
Krueger, J., & Rothbart, M. (1990). DEMO and accentuation effects
in category learning. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
59, 651 – 663.
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
266 OLA SVENSON
non compensatory processes in phased decision making. Presented Advances DEMO Consumer Research, (pp. 176 – 184). Chicago: Assoc.
at DEMO of the Judgment and Decision Making Society, Novem- for Consumer Research.
DEMO 1993, Washington DC. Ranyard, R. (1989). Structuring and evaluating DEMO monetary
Loomes, G., & Sugden, R. (1982). Regret theory: An alternative the- risks. In H. Montgomery & O. Svenson (Eds.) Process and structure
ory of rational choice under uncertainty. The Economic Journal, in human decision making. Chichester: Wiley.
92, 805 – 824. Ritov, I., & Baron, J. (1992). Status quo and omission biases. Journal
Lopes, L. (1981) Decision making in the short run. Journal of Experi- of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 49 – 61.
mental DEMO HPP: 377 – 385. Russo, J. E., & Rosen, L. D. (1975). An eye ﬁxation analysis of multi-
Lopes, L. DEMO (1987). Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. attribute choice. Memory and Cognition, 3, 267 – 276.
Advances in Experimental DEMO Psychology, 20, 255 – 295. Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, DEMO (1988). Status quo bias in decision
Lopes, L. L., & Casey, J. T. (1994). Tactical and strategic respon- making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1, 7 – 59.
siveness in a DEMO risk-taking game. Acta Psychologica, 85, Schweitzer, M. (1994). Distentangling status quo and omission ef-
39 – 60. fects: An experimental analysis. Organizational Behavior and Hu-
Malmsten, N. (1996). Studies of postdecision DEMO Unpublished man Decision Processes, 58, 457 – 476.
doctoral dissertation. Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. Shaﬁr, E. (1993). Choosing versus rejecting: Why some options are
Marcus, Z., & Zajonc, R. B. (DEMO). The cognitive perspective in social both better and worse than others. Memory & Cognition, 21, 546 –
psychology. In G. Lindzey & DEMO Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of Social 556.
Psychology. (Vol. 2). New York: Random House. Shaﬁr, E., & Tversky, A. (1992). Thinking through uncertainty: Non-
Maule, A. J. (1989). Positive and negative decision frames: A verbal consequential reasoning and choice. Cognitive Psychology, 24,
protocol analysis of the Asian disease problem of Tversky and Kah- 449 – 474.
neman. In Montgomery, H. & Svenson, O. (Eds.), Process and Shepard, R. N. (1964). On subjectively DEMO selection among
structure in human decision making. New York: Wiley. multiattribute DEMO In M. W. Shelly II & G. L. Bryan
May, K. DEMO (1954). Intransitivity, utility and the aggregation of pref- (Eds.), Human judgments and optimality. (pp. 257 – 281). New
erence DEMO Econometrica, 22, 1 – 13. York: Wiley.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven plus or minus two: Shifﬁn, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and automatic
Some limits of our capacity for the processing of information. Psy- human information DEMO: II Perceptual Learning, automatic
chological Review, 63, 81 – 97. attending, and a general theory. Psychological Review, 84, 127 –
Mintzberg, H., Raisinghani, D. & Thoret, A. (1976). The structure of 190.
unstructured decisions. Administrative Science Quarterly, 21, Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly
246 – 275. Journal of Economics, 69, 99 – 118.
Montgomery, H. (1983)DEMO Decision rules and the search for a domi- Simon, H. A. (1990). Invariants of human behavior. Annual Review
nance structure: Towards a process model of decision making. In of Psychology, 41, 1 – DEMO
P. C. Humphreys, O. Svenson, & A. Vasi (Eds.) Analyzing and Slovic, P. (1975). Choice between equally valued alternatives. Jour-
DEMO decision processes (pp. 343 – 369) Amsterdam: North-Hol- nal of DEMO Psychology: Human Perception and Perfor-
land. mance, 1, 280 – DEMO
Montgomery, H. (1994). Towards a perspective theory of decision Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., & Lichtenstein, S. (1977). Behavioral DEMO
making and judgment. Acta Psychologica, 87, 155 – 178. sion theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 28, 1 – 39.
Montgomery, H., & Svenson, O. (1989). A think aloud study of domi- Slovic, P., Grifﬁn, D., & Tversky, A. (1990). Compatibility DEMO in
nance structuring in decision processes. In H. Montgomery & O. judgments and choice. In R. M. Hogarth (Ed.) Insight in decision
Svenson (Eds.) Process and structure in human decision making. making: A tribute DEMO Hillel J. Einhorn. Chicago: Chicago Univ.
Chichester: Wiley. Press.
Newell, DEMO, & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. En- DEMO, E. R. (1992). The role of exemplars in social judgment. In
gleword Clifts, NJ: Prentice Hall. L. L. Martin & A. DEMO (Eds.) The construction of social judgment.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
know: Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review, Someren, M., van, Barnard, Y., & Sandberg, J. (1994). The think
84, 231 – 259. aloud method. London: Academic Press.
DEMO, A. G. (1953). An experimental test of an axiom in the Svenson, O. (1973). Analysis of strategies in subjective probability
DEMO of choice. Econometrica, 21, 477. inferences as evidenced in continous verbal reports and numerical
Payne, J. W. (1976). Task comlexity and DEMO processing in responses (No. 396). Reports from the Psychological Laboratories,DEMO
decision making: An information search and protocol analysis. Or- University of DEMO
ganization Behavior and Human Performance, 16, 366 – 387. Svenson, DEMO (1974). A note on think aloud protocols obtained during
Payne, J. W. (1982). Contingent decision behavior. Psychological Bul- the choice of a home (No. 421). Reports from the Psychological
letin, 92, 382 – 402. Laboratories, University of Stockholm.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1992). Behavioral Svenson, O. (1979). Process descriptions of decision making. Organi-
decision research: DEMO constructive processing perspective. Annual zational Behavior and Human Performance, 23, 86 – 112.
Review of Psychology, 43, 87 – 131. Svenson, O. (1983). Cognitive processes in judging cumulative risk
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The DEMO over different periods of time. Organizational Behavior and Hu-
decision maker. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. man Performance, 33, 22 – 41.
van Raaij, W. F. (1977). Consumer information processing for differ- Svenson, O. (1985). Cognitive strategies in a complex judgment task:
ent information structures and formats. In W. D. Perrault (Ed.) Analysis of concurrent DEMO reports and judgments of cumulated
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP
risk over different exposure times. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 36, 1 – 15.
Svenson, O. (1989). Eliciting and analysing verbal protocols in pro-
cess studies of judgment and decision making. In H. DEMO &
O. Svenson (Eds.) Process and structure in human decision DEMO
London: Wiley. Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psy-
Svenson, O. (1990). Some propositions for DEMO classiﬁcation of deci-
sion situations. In K. Borcherding, O. I. Larichev, & D. M. Messich
(Eds.) Contemporary issues in decision making. Amsterdam: Else-
vier. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory:
Svenson, O. (1992). Differentiation and Consolidation Theory DEMO hu-
man decision making: A frame of reference for the study DEMO pre-
and post-decision processes. Acta Psychologica, 80, 143 – 168.
Svenson, O. & Benthorn, L. (1992). Consolidation processes in deci-
sion making: Post-decision changes in attractiveness of alterna-
tives. Journal of Economic Psychology, 13, 1 – 13.
Svenson, O. & Edland, A. (1987). Change of preferences under time
pressure: Choices and judgments. Scandinavian Journal of Psy-
chology, 28, 322 – 330.
Svenson, O. & Fischhoff, B. (1985). Levels of environmental deci-
sions: A case study of radiation in Swedish homes. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 5, 55 DEMO 67.
Svenson, O. & Malmsten, N. (1996). Post-decision consolidation DEMO
time as a function of gain or loss of an alternative. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, in press.
Svenson, O. & Maule, A. J. (1993). (Eds.) Time pressure and stress
in human judgment and decision making. New York: Plenum.
Svenson, O. & Montgomery, H. (DEMO). A frame of reference for the
study of decision processes (DEMO 409). Reports from the Psychologi-
cal laboratories, University of Stockholm.
DEMO, O., Ortega Rayo, A., Sandberg, A., Svahlin, I. & Andersen,
(1994). Post-decision consolidation as a function of the DEMO
267
to the decision maker and of the decision problem. Acta Psycholo-
gica, 87, 181 – 197.
Tetlock, P. E. (1991). DEMO alternative metaphor in the study of judg-
ment and choice: People DEMO politicians. Journal of Theory and Psy-
chology, 1, 451 – 475.
chological Review, 79, 281 – 299.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, DEMO (1981). The framing of decisions and
the psychology of choice. DEMO, 211, 453 – 458.
Cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 5, 297 – 323.
Tyszka, T. & Wielochowski, DEMO (1991). Must boxing verdicts be bi-
ased? Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 4, 283 – 295.
Vlek, C. (1973). DEMO studies in probability and decision
making. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Leiden University, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
Wald, A. (1950). Sequential analysis. New York: Wiley.
Westenberg, M. R. M. & Koele, P. (1994). DEMO evaluation
processes: Methodological and conceptual issues. Acta Psycholo-
gica, 87, DEMO – 84.
Wright, P., & Barbour, F. (1977). Phased decision strategies: Sequels
to an initial screening. TIMS Studies in Management Sciences, 6,
91 – 109.
Yates, F. (1990). Judgment and decision making. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Zaichkowsky, J. L. (1985). Measuring the involvement construct.
Journal of Consumer Research, 12, DEMO – 352.
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: DEMO need no infer-
ences. American Psychologist, 35, 151 – 175.
Zakay, D. & Tsal, Y. (1993). The impact of using forced decision
making strategies on post-decision conﬁdence. Journal of Behav-
ioral Decision Making, 6, 53 – 68.
Received October 4, 1995
DECISION MAKING AND DEMO PERSPECTIVE
/ a701$$2592 04-03-96 16:04:05 obha AP: OBHDP{1g42fwefx}