ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE 23, 86-112 (1979)
Process Descriptions DEMO Decision Making
OLA SVENSON
University of Stockholm
This paper introduces a representation system for the description of decision
alternatives and decision rules. Examples of DEMO decision rules, classified
according to their metric requirements (i.e., metric DEMO, commensurability
across dimensions, and lexicographic ordering) in the system, are given. A
brief introduction to process tracing techniques is followed by a DEMO of
results reported in process tracing studies of decision making. The review
shows that most decision problems are solved without a complete search of
DEMO, which shows that many of the algebraic models of decision mak-
DEMO are inadequate. When the number of aspects of a decision situation is
constant, an increase in the number of alternatives (and a corresponding DEMO
crease in the number of dimensions) leads to a greater number DEMO investigated
aspects. Verbal protocols showed that decision rules belonging to the different
groups were used by decision makers when making a choice. It was DEMO
that process tracing data can be fruitfully used in studies of decision making
but that such data do not release the researcher from the DEMO of construct-
ing theories or models in relation to which the data must then be analyzed.
It is gradually becoming clear that human decision DEMO cannot be
understood simply by studying final decisions. The perceptual, emotional,DEMO
and cognitive process which ultimately lead to the choice of a decision
alternative must also be studied if we want to gain an adequate DEMO
standing of human decision making. Therefore, this paper will focus on
DEMO dynamic process in which a decision maker seeks and evaluates in-
formation sequentially. Unfortunately, there are still very few studies
which have been focused on the decision process as such and where
process tracing techniques have DEMO used (cf. Slovic, Fischhoff, &
Lichtenstein, 1977). The DEMO basis for process tracing studies is
still evolving, and the research DEMO so far been mainly devoted to a de-
scriptive approach to decision making processes. The need for theory in
the field is great. Lacking DEMO theory, the present paper starts by intro-
ducing a representation system DEMO describing decision alternatives and
decision rules. After this follow examples of decision rules which are
possible candidates for use in decision processes. The rules DEMO classified
in different groups, depending on which requirements they place on DEMO
The author wishes to thank Harmes Eisler, Sarah Knox, Sarah Lichtenstein, Henry
Montgomery, John Payne, Gordon Pitz, Edward Russo, and Lennart SjOberg for valuable
comments on earlier drafts of the manuscript. The work DEMO supported by a grant from The
Swedish Council for Social Science Research. Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr.
Ola Svenson, Psychological Laboratories, University of Stockholm, S-113 85, Stockholm,
Sweden.
86
0030-5073/79/010086-27502.00/0
Copyright © 1979 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS
OF DECISIONS
87
cognitive representation of choice alternatives and on DEMO process-
ing. After the presentation of this framework, methods for studying DEMO
sion processes are discussed. Results typically found in process tracing
studies are then presented. Finally, the paper ends with a discussion of
some of the issues related to studies of decision processes.
REPRESENTATION OF DECISION ALTERNATIVES
DEMO the following, we assume that a decision maker's subjective rep-
DEMO of the choice alternatives may be described by reference to a
number of dimensions or attributes. More specifically, it is assumed that
each possible outcome of a decision may be characterized by a set of
aspects. DEMO aspects correspond to values on a set of dimensions or
attributes. The subjective representation system corresponds to an objec-
tive description of the decision DEMO not treated here. An aspect
stands for a subjective entity located on an attribute, e.g., the subjective
experience of the price or size DEMO an apartment, the color of a car, the
probability of winning on a lottery ticket, or the probability of dying in an
accident. However, when choices are made between decision alterna-
tives, the subjective DEMO (of, e.g., size or color) is not interest-
ing per se. Rather, what determines the choice is the degree of attractive-
ness associated with each aspect characterizing the alternatives. There-
fore, it is assumed that each aspect may be mapped on a scale of attrac-
tiveness. DEMO is one and only one scale of attractiveness associated with
an attribute. From now on the aspects will be denoted only by numbers on
DEMO scales of attractiveness of the attributes. For example, an apartment
will DEMO represented neither by its objective size nor by its subjective size,
but by a number denoting its degree of attractiveness on the attribute DEMO
size. In the same way the apartment will also be characterized by attrac-
tiveness values on other attributes, such as rent and surroundings. Thus,
an aspect mentioned in the following always refers to the attractiveness DEMO
the aspect.
In the simplest case, only rank order relations are DEMO among the
aspects of different alternatives on an attribute. For instance, DEMO you want
to buy the cheapest rain coat you can get in a foreign city (assuming it is
raining and that you have an excellent one at home), a rank order rep-
resentation of the DEMO' different degrees of attractiveness on the
attribute of price will suffice. DEMO general, the metric level of representation
of the aspects on an DEMO may range from ordinal to interval to ratio
scale level.
The representation of the attractiveness of the aspects may or may
not imply commensurability DEMO attributes. Take the example of a man
choosing an apartment. If he thinks that the values of an aspect on the
attribute of noise DEMO, in one way or another, be combined with an
88
OLA SVENSON
attractiveness value on the size attribute, then the representation is com-
mensurate across attributes. If he does not think he can DEMO the
aspects of noise and size, then the representation will not DEMO commensu-
rate between these attributes when he makes a decision.
The following is an explanation of the notation to be used. A decision
alternative DEMO is characterized by a set of aspects (ail, ai2 ..... a~,), where
the first subscript indicates alternative; the second subscript, attribute;
and n, the total number of attributes. Note that the symbol aiR, k = 1, n,
denotes the degree of attractiveness DEMO aspect k and no other subjective
entity. An alternative refers to a possible outcome of a decision. Thus,
certain and uncertain outcomes will DEMO be differentiated in this paper.
Information about the likelihood of an outcome is regarded as an aspect
on the attribute of belief or subjective DEMO (cf. Wendt, 1975).
In most experiments, where process descriptions DEMO decision making
have been collected, the choice alternatives were characterized by DEMO
bers or other information on a set of variables or attributes (DEMO, Payne,
1976; Payne & Braunstein, Note 7). Thus, most investigations have as-
sumed a priori that the decision alternatives were DEMO in a mul-
tidimensional subjective space. Svenson (Note 10) attempted to construct
a representation system from think aloud protocols collected for choices
among DEMO number of homes. The analysis showed that the alternatives
could easily be described in a multiattribute representation system. How-
ever, the definitions of the attributes varied slightly over subjects and
became more specific and detailed towards DEMO end of a decision process,
indicating that new attributes tended to emerge in the course of the pro-
cess.
In summary, the representation of decision alternatives used in this
paper assumes that a set of DEMO on different attributes can map the
decision maker's perceived pattern of attractiveness of the decision alter-
natives. However, note that nothing is assumed about either the metric
level of the numbers corresponding to the aspects DEMO the degree of com-
mensurability across attributes. These characteristics of the representa-
tion are left free for the decision maker to define and for DEMO psychologist
to explore.
DECISION RULES
In order to find the best alternative a decision maker may apply one or
more decision rules on the DEMO of choice alternatives. In the following, a
sample of such decision DEMO will be listed. The rules will be classified
according to their requirements on the metric level of aspect attractive-
ness, lexicographic order of attributes, and commensurability across at-
tributes (cf. Montgomery & Svenson, 1976).
During a decision process the representation system and the sequence
89
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS OF DECISIONS
of rules applied may be continuously influencing DEMO other. For instance,
it may be assumed that a decision maker may change the degree of com-
plexity of the representation system to DEMO the requirements of a deci-
sion rule he wants to apply. Correspondingly, the choice of a decision
rule or sequence of rules may be a function of the representation of the
decision problem, because some of the simpler rules are only applicable in a
limited number of cases. DEMO instance, the rule of dominance, which states
that the chosen alternative should be better than the other alternatives on at
least one attribute DEMO better or equal on all others, works only in a limited
DEMO of decision situations. If the representation of the situation makes it
impossible to use the rule of dominance, then another decision rule must be
applied to find the best alternative. Thus, the representation system and the
sampling of decision rules may affect each other in the process of DEMO a
decision.
The rules presented below will most often be described with reference
to a decision between two alternatives, but the generalization to more
alternatives is straightforward. Research demonstrating the use of each of
these rules DEMO decision makers will not be cited here, but empirical exam-
ples DEMO be given later in the paper.
Ordinal Attractiveness and No Commensurability (DEMO I)
The dominance rule states that alternative A, should be DEMO over A2
if A1 is better thanA2 on at least one attribute and not worse thanA2 on all
other attributes (cf. Lee, 1971)DEMO
The conjunctive decision rule requires the decision maker to specify a
set of criterion values on the attributes which a chosen alternative must be
DEMO to or exceed. If an alternative does not meet the criterion (DEMO on just
one attribute, the alternative is dropped from the list DEMO remaining possible
alternatives. This elimination of the alternatives proceeds, if possible,DEMO
until only one alternative remains. This rule can be derived from the
satisficing principle (Simon, 1955) and has been regarded as especially
valuable in ill-defined decision making situations (cf. Kozielecki, 1971).
The disjunctive DEMO rule is the mirror image of the conjunctive rule,
and it also requires a set of criterion values on the attributes. A chosen
DEMO must have at least one aspect greater than the corresponding
criterion (DEMO, and all the aspects of the other alternatives should fall below
DEMO be equal to the criterion values.
The conjunctive and disjunctive rules have been presented and
axiomatized by Coombs and Kao (Note 3), Coombs (1964), and Dawes
(1964a, Note 4).
The above rules do not always lead to a decision. Consider, for exam-
ple, DEMO (5, 5, 10) andA~ (10, 5, 5), DEMO the values in parentheses repre-
sent attractiveness on three attributes. Obviously, DEMO dominance rule
90
OLA SVENSON
does not work here, because each alternative is better than the other on
one attribute. If the criteria are all equal DEMO or smaller than 5, no alterna-
tive can be eliminated according DEMO the conjunctive rule. For the disjunc-
tive rule, if the criteria DEMO all equal to or greater than 10, this rule also
fails.
DEMO Attractiveness, Lexicographic Order, and No
Commensurability (Type II)
When DEMO attributes are rank ordered in importance they are said to be
in lexicographic order. The following rules utilize such an order in arriving
at DEMO decision.
The lexicographic decision rule prescribes a choice of the alternative
which is most attractive on the most important attribute, fftwo aspects on
this attribute are equally attractive the decision will be based on the most
DEMO aspect on the attribute next in order of importance, etc.
Fishburn (1974) has worked on the axiomatization of this rule.
The elimination by aspects rule may be interpreted as a combination of
the lexicographic rule DEMO the conjunctive rule. First, the most important
attribute is investigated, and all alternatives that do not exceed the con-
junctive criterion on this DEMO are eliminated. This procedure is then
repeated with new attributes successively lower in the lexicographic or-
der. Tversky (1972) introduced this decision rule DEMO presented empirical
evidence supporting it.
Ordinal Attractiveness Differences, Lexicographic Order, and No
Commensurability (Type III)
The minimum difference lexicographic rule works like the lexicographic
rule, with the additional assumption that for each attribute there is a
minimum difference N. Thus, only differences greater than At between
the attractiveness values of two alternatives may determine a decision. If
the DEMO on the most important attribute is less than 2~, then the
DEMO next in the lexicographic order will be considered. As an exam-
ple of a choice made according to the minimum difference lexicographic
rule, let ~. = 2.5 for all i's and let the choice alternatives DEMO A1 (5, 5, 10)
andA3 (5, 7, 6). If the attributes are given in the lexicographic order, there
is no difference on the first attribute (5-5), and there is too small an
absolute difference on the second attribute (5-7), but on the last attribute
the difference (10-6) is large enough for a DEMO of A1. The lexicographic
semiorder rule (Tversky, 1969) is a DEMO case of this decision rule where
A i is defined only for the most important attribute. For all other attributes
it equals zero.
Situations DEMO information about the attribute is missing as a result of
imperfect discrimination or of unreliability of available information may
encourage the use of rules DEMO on minimum differences on the
attribute.
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS
OF DECISIONS
91
Ordinal Attractiveness and Commensurability (Type IV)
In addition to ordinal attractiveness, the following rules also require
attractiveness values which are comparable (commensurate) across differ-
ent attributes. Such rules are DEMO called compensatory.
The maximizing number of attributes with greater attractiveness rule
prescribes a choice of the alternative with the greater number of favorable
attributes. DEMO specifically, the rule requires that for each attribute the
aspect of DEMO decision alternative must be classified as better, equal, or
worse than the attractiveness of the other alternative on that attribute.
That alternative will DEMO chosen which has the greater number of favorable
classifications. Thus, the DEMO does not lead to a decision between two
alternatives when the numbers of positive classifications for both alterna-
tives are equal. Although this rule DEMO not require commensurability when
deciding which alternative is best on each attribute, it implies commen-
surability in the final stage when the number of positive classifications are
compared.
The elimination by least attractive aspect rule means DEMO the decision
maker eliminates the alternative which has the overall worst aspect.
The choice by most attractive aspect rule simply says that the decision
DEMO should choose that alternative which has the overall most attractive
aspect.
Ordinal Attractiveness Differences and Commensurability (Type V)
The choice by greatest attractiveness difference rule implies that the
decision maker first looks for the attribute DEMO the greatest attractiveness
difference. After this he chooses the alternative which is more attractive
on this attribute, irrespective of the other attributes. This rule may be
seen as an analog to the minimax regret principle in DEMO theory.
Interval Attractiveness (Utility) and Commensurability (Type VI)
At DEMO higher level of representation, type VI, the concept of attractive-
ness is replaced by the term utility. Most of the research in the DEMO
making area relies on this rather sophisticated and cognitively demanding
way of representing the decision alternatives. Only two examples will be
given, rather than a review of all the algebraic decision rules which may
be listed DEMO this group. The most thorough presentation of algebraic mod-
els of this type for information integration have been given by Anderson
(1974a, 1974b)DEMO Techniques for weighted multiattribute utility assessments
have been presented by, e.g., von Winterfeldt and Fischer (1975). Re-
cently, Shanteau (1977) DEMO a review of algebraic models of risky
decision making.
The addition of utilities rule states that a decision is based on a
summation of DEMO utilities for each alternative. The alternative with the
greater sum of utility will then be chosen.
The addition of utility differences rule states that DEMO decision is based on
92
OLA SVENSON
differences between the utilities of different alternatives on the DEMO at-
tribute. However, the differences (aik - a2k) between alternatives DEMO i and
A2 on attribute k do not contribute linearly to the overall evaluation.
Instead, they enter as arguments in a function which determines the con-
tribution of each utility difference to the overall evaluation process. DEMO
rule was proposed by Tversky (1969), who found subjects using DEMO for
making decisions. Later, Montgomery (1977) replicated this finding. The
DEMO of utilities rule is algebraically a special case of this rule.
Ratio Attractiveness and Commensurability (Type VII)
The subjective expected utility model implies that the utility of each
aspect should be weighted by the subjective DEMO of its occurrence
when summing the utilities for an alternative. The alternative with the
greater total expected utility will then be chosen as in DEMO preceding rule.
Earlier, the attribute of subjective probability or belief was DEMO given any
special numerical status, but the present rule requires a DEMO representa-
tion of at least this attribute.
Decision Rules and Heuristics
Montgomery and Svenson (1976) suggested principles which may guide
the choice of DEMO decision rule or rules for a given decision problem. How-
ever, DEMO presentation and discussion of these principles will follow later.
In addition to Montgomery and Svenson, other authors have recently
given more or less comprehensive presentations of decision rules or mod-
els for decision making (e.g., DEMO & Jones, 1972; Wright, 1975; van
Raaij, 1976; Libby & Fishburn, 1977; Beach & Mitchell, Note 1). As
mentioned earlier, decision rules of types I-III are often called noncom-
pensatory, DEMO rules of types IV-VII compensatory (e.g., Einhorn,
1970).
When a decision maker is faced with complex multiattribute alterna-
tives in a DEMO or important situation, the more complex of the above
decision rules DEMO be particularly relevant. However, if similar decision
problems have often been DEMO earlier it is possible that a decision maker
has developed simplifying strategies or heuristics to help him arrive at a
decision more easily (cf. Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). A subject who
starts to apply rules of a less complex type after making a number of
successively more DEMO decisions illustrates the introduction of a
heuristic strategy which may or may not involve the use of some of the
above decision rules. Still, the decision maker may return to a more
detailed and complete decision DEMO procedure if he encounters a deci-
sion which is very important to him.
Thus, simplifying strategies may be developed from the decision
maker's own experience with similar decision problems. Heuristic deci-
sion rules may also DEMO derived from other people's experience. Examples
of heuristics of the latter category are (a) a decision rule saying that one
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS
OF DECISIONS
93
should follow the decision of an expert, and (b) the simplifying strategy of
deciding according to cultural or DEMO tradition. Sometimes when
heuristics are applicable a decision problem may be more fruitfully
viewed as a problem of categorization (cf. Hogarth, 1974). DEMO is, the deci-
sion problem is solved on the basis of DEMO similarity to one of a number of
classes of decision situations, DEMO which each class has its own standard
solution.
Toda (1976) has pointed out that many parts of the decision process
become automatic heuristics, implying that many potential choices be-
come impossible. In addition, heuristics which were once conscious may
become unconscious. This can be disadvantageous, because heuristics
which were once good may lose their relevance or even become detrimen-
DEMO in a rapidly changing world.
Studies of rather slow decision processes, DEMO are repeated so many
times that the decison maker starts using simplifying strategies, may pro-
vide much information about the role of heuristics in decision making.
Russo and Dosher (Note 9) asked subjects to make DEMO great number of
repeated choices between two multiattribute alternatives. Two types of
heuristics appeared in this situation. One of these, the "majority of DEMO
firming dimensions," corresponded exactly to the type IV rule of choos-
ing that alternative which maximizes the number of aspects with the great-
DEMO attractiveness over the attributes. The other heuristic, "dimensional
reduction," implied the elimination of one attribute when making the
decision. In general the DEMO with the smaller difference between the
aspects of the alternatives was ignored.
It would be interesting to know if some people prefer one set DEMO decision
rules and other people another set of decision rules for making a decision.
Some authors have successfully relied on such interindividual differ-
ences DEMO choices of decision rules in their experiments (e.g., Tversky,
1969; Montgomery, 1977). Others have grouped their subjects in different
groups DEMO to their information processing patterns (e.g., Bettman
& Jacoby, 1976; Payne & Braunstein, Note 7). Although the results seem
to indicate the existence of individual search patterns in some of the
decision situations DEMO, little is known about the consistency of
rules across situations. However DEMO the idea, it is much
too early to allege the existence DEMO individual decision habits at present.
Still, in the future the exploration DEMO individual decision strategies may
well be of common interest for clinical psychologists and psychologists
interested in personality and decision processes.
TECHNIQUES FOR STUDYING DECISION DEMO AS A PROCESS
There are two main approaches to studying the cognitive processes
leading up to a decision. One is to perform what may DEMO called a structural
analysis of the final judgments or decisions. Such an analysis typically
94
OLA SVENSON
focuses on the end result of a decision process DEMO tries to relate the final
decision to parameters characterizing the decision problem. By active
manipulation of these parameters mathematical or statistical models are
used DEMO draw inferences about the decision process.
The other approach to studying decision processes employs process
tracing techniques. Here, the fundamental belief is that cognitive process-
es should be studied by collecting data during the decision process DEMO
often as possible. Data typically analyzed in this tradition are records of
eye movements and think-aloud protocols. The results of such an analysis
can, e.g., be described in a flow diagram or simulated on a computer.
Even though the former of these two approaches has been almost ex-
DEMO used in the past, I believe that the latter is much DEMO at the
present stage of our knowledge about individual decision making. There-
fore the remainder of the paper will be almost exclusively devoted to
DEMO tracing studies of decision making. However, first some addi-
tional comments DEMO structural analysis of final decisions will be given for
the sake of completeness.
Structural Analyses
of Final Judgments
Algebraic models typically provide good descriptions DEMO the relations
between cues and responses in decision making experiments (cf. DEMO et
al., 1977). This holds true for models within the DEMO of Anderson's
(1974a, 1974b) "information integration theory" and DEMO within Ham-
mond's "social judgment theory" (cf. Hammond, Stewart, Brehmer, &
Steinman, 1975). However, in the case of another algebraic model, the
SEU model, there have been small but DEMO misfits between model
and data for a long time, and a DEMO of recent, rigorous tests of the
model have shown that it DEMO at most to be able to provide only a global
fit to choice data (cf. Slovic et al., 1977). Independently of the DEMO of fit
between algebraic models and data, these models only provide DEMO
descriptions, as they do not map the details of the successive DEMO in the
decision process. However, the development of algebraic models may DEMO
seen as a first step toward understanding cognitive processes and they
may again be needed when process tracing studies have generated a new
generation DEMO research problems.
In addition to analyses of final judgments or decisions the use of the
latency for producing the response may be analyzed as DEMO dependent vari-
able. Reaction time has been systematically used in perceptual experi-
ments (cf. Neisser, 1967), and latencies became common in cognitive
DEMO during the late 1960s. Sternberg (1969) presented the basic
philosophy and assumptions for stagewise analyses of cognitive processes
using latencies (cf. also Taylor, 1976).
At its simplest, a cognitive process may consist of DEMO series of indepen-
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS
OF DECISIONS
95
dent subprocesses, each requiring a constant processing time. By chang-
ing characteristics of the problems to be solved it DEMO possible to arrive at a
process description of the sequence of cognitive subprocesses which
leads to the solution by observing the total reaction time. DEMO the
analysis gains its power from repeated decisions this method may be
applied most fruitfully in quick, consistent decision processes. Decision
making may then be described as a process where successive applications
of decision rules constitute DEMO cognitive subprocesses.
Decision time, when recorded in experiments on decision making, has
often been regarded as a function of some global characteristic of DEMO
situation such as "difficulty" (Pollay, 1970; Hogarth, 1975) DEMO has been
used as a complement to other types of information about the decision
process such as information search patterns (e.g., Payne & DEMO,
Note 7; Bettman & Kakkar, 1977). If time measures are taken at different
stages during a decision process, and not after its completion only, such
methods of collecting latencies may be seen as belonging to the process
tracing techniques. However, to the best of my knowledge no such ex-
periments have yet been performed to study decision DEMO processes.
Process Tracing Techniques
Two process tracing measures will be discussed briefly here, viz., in-
formation search measures and verbal protocols. However, this section
will not contain any detailed presentations of different process tracing
techniques, as this has been done in a recent paper which is focused DEMO
applications of process tracing techniques in studies of decision making
(Payne, Braunstein, & Carroll, Note 8).
Information Search Patterns
The order DEMO which a decision maker seeks and evaluates the information
of a decision problem is related to the cognitive process leading to the
final decision. DEMO are several ways of tracing information search pat-
terns. Eye movement recordings and records of the information explicitly
demanded by a decision maker are DEMO main types. Eye movement record-
ings can be made accurately if the number of pieces of information (alter-
natives × attributes) is low. DEMO, Just and Carpenter (1976) dis-
cussed eye fixations and cognitive DEMO in a comprehensive article. If
the number of aspects is large the recordings from eye movement cameras
become too imprecise. In that case it DEMO better to let the decision maker
ask for the information he finds necessary for a choice. Examples of
analyses of information search patterns have DEMO given by Payne et al.
(Note 8), Russo and Rosen (1975), who analyzed eye fixations in multial-
ternative choices, and Payne (1976), who used records of explicit informa-
tion search to study choices among apartments. More specifically, Payne
used an information board with a number of cards arranged in an alterna-
96
OLA SVENSON
tive × attribute matrix for presenting the decision alternatives. DEMO order to
get information about the alternatives the decision maker had to take a
card, turn it over, and read its information. This DEMO arrangement made
it easy to register the information search pattern.
There are some important assumptions on which analyses of informa-
tion search patterns rest. DEMO the subject looks at an aspect, this informa-
tion is assumed DEMO be processed at a cognitive level also. In addition, a
decision DEMO's attention to a certain aspect is seen as reflecting the
search for a piece of information which is necessary for a decision
according DEMO a predetermined rule or strategy. Furthermore, a longer
period of attention DEMO an aspect is assumed to be paralleled by a more
complex cognitive process than is a shorter fixation.
Verbal Reports
The idea of using DEMO protocols is an old one. Verbal protocols were
used at the beginning of this century when subjects were asked to intro-
spect. Later, Duncker (1945) used verbal protocols to study problem solv-
ing. Clarkson (1962) used them in a study of portfolio selection in trust
investment, DEMO Groot (1946, 1965) for studies in the thinking of chess
DEMO, and Bettman (Note 2) in an investigation of consumer choice
DEMO Ericsson (Note 5) presented different types of verbal protocols in
an extensive study of thought processes during problem solving. How-
ever, the Anglo-American behavioristic tradition did not encourage the
use of verbal protocols, and the method was for many years confined
mainly to the pyschological tradition of DEMO Europe. However,
with the birth of the computer new ways for thinking about and processing
complex data emerged, making it possible to couple verbal protocols with
computer programs. The pioneers in this tradition were Newell DEMO Simon
(1972).
Verbal protocols may be retrospective or simultaneous in DEMO to the
cognitive process they cover. Retrospective verbal reports are given after
the solution of a problem or the choice in a decision task; they are an
interpretation of the subjects' thought processes during the problem solv-
ing or decision process. Another way of collecting verbal protocol data DEMO
to ask the subject in an experiment to think aloud. More specifically, the
subject is instructed to say aloud any thought that occurs during the solu-
tion of the experimental task. Typically, simultaneous verbal protocols or
think-aloud data are collected when the solution of each decision or
choice DEMO requires a long period of time. This makes it possible for
the subject to talk in parallel with the decision making process.
Russo and DEMO (1975) introduced the technique of prompted verbal
protocols. A prompted protocol is a retrospective protocol that is promp-
ted by the subject's DEMO of eye fixations. That is, he is asked to
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS OF DECISIONS
97
report about his thoughts during the choice DEMO he has just completed
with the aid of a replay of his eye fixation sequence. The eye fixations are
superimposed on the original display DEMO decision alternatives, and the
speed of this replay is controlled by DEMO subject.
Retrospective verbal reports may at best be regarded as unobtrusive
measures. However, simultaneous verbal reports are not unobtrusive, as
the production of DEMO speech requires mental effort which may
affect a decision making or problem solving process.
Payne and Braunstein (Note 7) pointed out that one DEMO the differences
between modern uses of think-aloud data and the way think-aloud data
were used in introspection is the transfer of theorizing from the DEMO to
the experimenter. In classical introspection the subject was often well
trained and had good theoretical knowledge of the psychological phenome-
non under study. DEMO contrast, modern use of verbal protocols involves
naive subjects and encourages DEMO thoughts with no demand that
they should fit into a consistent or complete frame of reference or model.
The effort to fit data to DEMO model or a theory is the responsibility of the
investigator and not of the subjects. Today's emphasis on spontaneous
simultaneous verbal reports makes DEMO interpretation of data more public
and guarantees more objectivity than would be possible if the subject were
to give interpretations.
Recently, Nisbett and Wilson (1977) published an important paper on
verbal reports of mental processes. DEMO authors reviewed a great number
of investigations, the majority of which DEMO dissonance and attribution
studies. But a number of the studies also belonged to other areas, such as
perception and problem solving. The conclusion drawn from this review
about the value of verbal reports as indicators of DEMO processes is
quite pessimistic. By reviewing investigations which used mostly retro-
spective verbal reports, Nisbett and Wilson showed that many cognitive
processes are unconscious and not directly retrievable from memory, but
that their existence may be derived from knowledge about other types of
responses and about stimuli in DEMO experimental situation. Nisbett and
Wilson concluded that "though people may not DEMO able to observe di-
rectly their cognitive processes, they will sometimes DEMO able to report
accurately about them.., when influential stimuli are salient DEMO plausi-
ble causes of the responses they produce" (p. 231). It seems as if Nisbett
and Wilson believe that the major and DEMO part of the set of existing
cognitive processes can only be inferred from structural analyses and that
they are impossible to elucidate through analyses DEMO verbal protocols.
This belief is not shared by the present author. Of course, as Nisbett and
Wilson have illustrated, it is important to DEMO extremely careful when
analyzing verbal protocols. Special care must be taken when interpreting
retrospective verbal protocols, because they allow enough time and the
98
OLA SVENSON
overview of a complete process necessary for a subject DEMO apply his own
psychological theory of what is going on. For instance, in the experiment
reported by Svenson (Note 10) it was found that the final justification of a
choice often gave rather misleading and DEMO information about the
preceding decision process.
All interpretations of think-aloud protocols rest on the assumption that
the decision maker gives a correct description of DEMO least some parts of his
train of thought during the decision process. It is important to note that,
just like any other dependent DEMO, a verbal protocol cannot be coded
without a model or a DEMO for the decision process. The model and the
data upon which it rests may also be tested by collecting other types of
empirical data, such as latencies or final judgments. The reliabifity of the
coding of DEMO protocols has not, as a rule, been reported in the litera-
ture, but it can be easily determined by having different persons code the
same protocol. Svenson (Note 10) and Thorngate and Maki (Note 11)
reported very high interjudge agreement for trained coders using this
DEMO
When two subjects make a joint decision the discussion between them
constitutes a natural verbal protocol, which may be tape recorded and
used for inferences about decision rules and information processing (cf.
Payne, Note 6) in much the same way as think-aloud protocols.
PROCESS TRACING STUDIES
The DEMO of a process tracing study is to reveal a train of thought, called
a cognitive process, leading to a final decision or solution. DEMO mapping
this process it is necessary to know what content or information is pro-
cessed and how it is processed. One way of proceeding DEMO to start mapping
the decision maker's objective pattern of information input and then draw
inferences about what parts of the objective information are DEMO
subjectively. The sequence in which the information is searched may also be
used for inferences about how decision rules or strategies could have been
DEMO in arriving at a choice. Unfortunately, many of these patterns can DEMO
predicted from several rules. In addition, inferences from search patterns
to DEMO are sometimes based on the rather unrealistic assumption that a
decision maker uses one and only one rule all the way through a decision
DEMO Montgomery and Svenson (1976) suggested that, on the contrary,
DEMO decision rules may be applied in succession in the same choice
situation. However, a particular information search pattern may indicate
that some complex rules have not been applied in a decision process. For
instance, incomplete information search eliminates rules of types IV-VII,
and a random walk through DEMO aspects eliminates the lexicographic type II
rule.
In the following, the DEMO "information search patterns" refers only
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS
OF DECISIONS
99
to the order in which a decision DEMO searches the aspects and to which
aspects he investigates in a choice situation. Thus, the interesting ques-
tion of what subjective values or attractiveness these aspects represent
will be postponed until a later section.
Intraalternative and DEMO Information Search
The most common way of categorizing an information search pattern is
to investigate whether it focuses on alternatives or on attributes.
If DEMO decision maker uses alternatives as reference points for the
search, he DEMO investigate all the attributes for one alternative before
going to the next alternative; this is an instance of intraalternative search.
In contrast, a DEMO maker who anchors his information search on
attributes investigates the aspects of one attribute for all the alternatives
before going to the next attribute; this is an example of intraattribute
search.
The above examples assume it DEMO possible to find information for all
alternatives on all attributes. In addition, the search protocols are com-
plete in that all aspects are investigated before a decision is made. In
principle, any decision rule may be applied when the information search is
complete, but the more complex rules (types IV-VII) may be associated
more strongly with complete information search DEMO In many cases
the choice alternatives cannot be characterized on a common set of attri-
butes. In this case a complete search is impossible, and only rules of type
I and the rule of addition of DEMO can produce subjectively satisfactory
decisions based on the available information. Slovic and MacPhillamy
(1974) showed that when information was not given about all DEMO
attributes for all alternatives, subjects emphasized aspects on the common
attribute DEMO a judgment task. It would be most interesting to investigate
further the effects of deliberately limiting the information in a decision task
in this DEMO To illustrate, when one subject could not find the information for
DEMO she searched (Svenson, Note 10), she started inferential reasoning
with herself to derive a reasonable value on the missing attribute.
Information search DEMO seldom exhibit simple, striking intraalter-
native or intraattribute patterns, whether they be based on eye fixations,
explicit information requests, or think-aloud protocols. Therefore, the
protocols are often analyzed in shorter segments, with a DEMO of
information search defined by two (e.g., Payne, 1976), DEMO, or four
consecutive aspects (e.g., Russo & Rosen, 1976). An instance of intraal-
ternative search is then a sequence where one DEMO more consecutive as-
pects characterize the same alternative. Correspondingly, an intraattri-
DEMO search denotes a sequence in which the aspects on one attribute are
searched in succession. The overall proportions of the different types of
search DEMO may then be used to characterize a protocol.
100
OLA SVENSON
Russo and Dosher (Note 9) used retrospective verbal DEMO for val-
idating interpretations based only on eye fixation patterns. The interpreta-
tions involved cases when three or more subsequent fixations were clas-
sifted DEMO reflecting an intraattribute or an intraalternative processing. The
proportion of the interpretations, which were confirmed by the subjects in
the prompted verbal protocols, DEMO about 0.87 for intraattribute process-
ing and about 0.78 for intraalternative processing.
Bettman and Jacoby (1976) have argued against the simple split in DEMO
traalternative and intraattribute search. They found many subjects whose
information search strategies they called "choice by feedback process-
ing." These search patterns were DEMO by alternating short
sequences of intraalternative and intraattribute search.
A decision maker's failure to search all available information is an
indication of the DEMO of the simpler rules of types I-III (except for the
dominance DEMO, which requires complete information). The more com-
plex rules with DEMO or interval attractiveness and commensurability can-
not be used to explain the incomplete search patterns which are so com-
mon (cf. Kleinmuntz, 1963; Svenson, Note 10; Payne, 1976). However,
this does not imply that more complex rules may not be applied in sub-
processes DEMO within a longer decision making process.
Information Search as a Function of Number of Alternatives
and Attributes
Process tracing studies have been applied almost DEMO to deci-
sion problems in which the information about each alternative has been
characterized by the same set of attributes. Thus, the total number of
aspects in a decision problem has been m (number of alternatives) × n
(number of attributes).
The proportion of aspects searched DEMO a decision process may be as-
sumed to decrease as the number (m × n) increases. Empirical evidence
for this assumption is given DEMO Fig. 1, which shows the percentage of
available information searched as DEMO function of number of alternatives and
attributes. The data were taken from recent investigations by Payne
(1976), Payne and Braunstein (Note 7), van Raaij (1976), and Thorngate
and Maki (Note 11) DEMO a variety of decision tasks. The points in the figure
are based on different numbers of subjects and different decision tasks,
and therefore DEMO much generalizing should be avoided. However, the
decreasing trend of the DEMO of aspects searched with increasing
number of alternatives and attributes is clear. Furthermore, data seem to
indicate that increasing the number of attributes has a greater effect on the
proportion of information searched than an increase DEMO the number of
alternatives. More specifically, given a constant number of DEMO (mx
n), an increase in the number of alternatives m (and a corresponding
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS OF DECISIONS
t-'
u
L.
tO
¢b
(n
i/i
tO
Iz
=_
0-
100
80
60
/40
20
Oo
0
4
A
attributes
12
~A
tfri~
~ ~Sattribute~ 0
\
AO
(D)
I
2
I
/,
I
6
I
8
|l
0
DEMO
12
-o
Number
of alternatives
.,C
100
a
B
1/,DEMO
to
N
80
60
ternatives
~~ives
to
i-
~
®
ft.
40
20
8
alternatives
0
0
f
2
=
4
I
6
1
DEMO
I
10
li2
14
Number
of attributes
FIG. 1. Percentage of information searched in choices made among multiattribute choice
alternatives. Data from Payne (1976), Payne and Braunstein (Note 7). van Raaij (1976), DEMO
Thorngate and Maki (Note 11). The point in parentheses in DEMO A was disregarded when
fitting the curves by eye.
decrease in the number of attributes n) generally leads to a higher utiliza-
tion of the information provided.
The proportions of intraalternative and intraattribute transitions could
also DEMO plotted in the same way as the percentage of the aspects searched
was plotted in Fig. 1. Payne (1976) suggested an index which DEMO the
extent to which a search pattern contains intraalternative and intraattri-
bute transitions. If an aspect is on the same alternative as the im-
DEMO preceding one, there occurs an intraalternative transition. If an
aspect belongs DEMO the same attribute as the preceding one, this is an
instance DEMO an intraattribute transition. Let the total number of intraalter-
native transitions be N(alt) and the number of intraatribute transitions be
N(attr). Payne's index is then the ratio [N(alt) - N(attr)]/[N(alt) +
101
102
OLA SVENSON
N(attr)]. This index is equal to 1.00 DEMO N(attr) - 0, and equals -1.00 if
N(attr) DEMO 0. If there are equal numbers of both types of transitions the
index equals 0.0. Note that this index is independent of the number DEMO
transitions occurring with a change of both alternative and attribute. I
have applied this index to data presented by Payne (1976, exp. 1), Payne
and Braunstein (Note 7), van Raaij (1976, exp. DEMO), and Thorngate and Maki
(Note 11). Recently Bettman and DEMO (1976) suggested a correction of
this index which has not been applied here.
The data in the Thorngate and Maki study were collected DEMO 90
subjects in voting decisions involving political candidates. The set of can-
didates consisted of 2, 4, or 8 persons characterized by their DEMO in 2,
4, or 8 political issues. Each choice was DEMO as predominantly
intraalternative (strategies OI, TOI, and S in the DEMO' code) or
intraattribute (strategies IC and TIS). Thus, the authors presented results
which do not correspond exactly to the data that DEMO other authors derived
on an aspect-to-aspect basis. Still, for illustrative purposes DEMO have under-
taken the same procedure to get the index with the trials classified by
Thorngate and Maki (Note 11), as was taken with the Payne (1976), Payne
and Braunstein (Note 7) and van Raaij (1976) data. The results indicated
that there was a DEMO overall tendency to process aspects in an intraat-
tribute way. This was illustrated by the fact that the majority of the index
values were DEMO than zero. In addition, there was a tendency towards
increasing intraalternative DEMO when the number of alternatives in-
creased. This tendency was nonexistent for two-attribute alternatives but
became clearer with an increasing number of attributes. Data DEMO
by other authors support these results (cf. Russo & Dosher, 1976; van
Raaij, 1976).
Search Pattern and Information Presentation
The presentation DEMO strongly affects information search patterns.
Bettman and Kakkar (1977) presented subjects with information about 11
alternatives, each characterized by 13 attributes (a) in matrix form with
aspect in an attributes x alternatives design, (DEMO) in an alternative centered
condition where each alternative was described in DEMO booklet, and (c) in an
attribute centered condition in which DEMO about each aspect was
given in a booklet. The results showed that when the information was given
in an alternative or an attribute centered DEMO, subjects adapted to the way
of presentation by processing the information DEMO an intraalternative and an
intraattribute way, respectively.
Another way of affecting DEMO information search was demonstrated by
Russo and Rosen (1975), who DEMO the similarity of six three-
attribute alternatives. The results showed that the greater the number of
similar pairs there were in a decision situation, the greater the probability
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS
OF DECISIONS
103
was that a decision maker started processing DEMO similar alternatives. This
trend was statistically significant from the increase which can be pre-
dicted from a simple random processing of the aspects when DEMO number
of similar pairs increases.
The comparability of attributes plays an important role in determining
information processing patterns. For instance, in a decision between du-
plex gambles (where each of the four attributes is represented by either a
dollar or a probability measure) comparisons in the same unit (e.g., dol-
lars and dollars) are easier than comparisons of different units (e.g., dollars
and probabilities) (cf. Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1968).
Search Pattern Changes during a Decision Process
As a result of DEMO application of different rules during different stages of
a decision process, DEMO information search pattern may change over time.
To study such changes, DEMO are sometimes partitioned into a number
of equal parts which are analyzed separately.
When van Raaij (1976, exp. 3) computed the proportions of different
processing patterns over quartiles of his protocols he found that the DEMO
portion of intraalternative processing increased with time. However, the
proportion of DEMO comparisons was stable and did not decrease
over time. When van Raaij partitioned another group of protocols into two
halves (van Raaij, 1976, exps. 6 & 7) the results were the same.
Tuggle, Barron, and Day (Note 12) noted that their subject first fixated
on DEMO alternatives which had distinguishing aspects, such as very large
or small DEMO This observation seems to be congruent with the general
finding that information processing behavior is contingent on the aspects
of the situation and may DEMO the initial use of a conjunctive or a
disjunctive (type I) rule. The first aspect attended to may determine which
rules the decision DEMO will use in the subsequent decision process.
When Payne (1976) and Thorngate and Maki (Note 11) studied changes
in information patterns over DEMO or decisions, they reported no differ-
ences. However, the numbers of trials in their experiments were quite
small due to the rather time-consuming DEMO processes being studied,
and their subjects probably did not have time to change their decision
strategies during four or five trials.
Decision Rules DEMO Metric Representation of Alternatives:
Some Examples
Up until now I have only discussed the order in which aspects are
searched. Now, the difficult issue of how the aspects are cognitively
represented by the decision maker DEMO how he uses them cannot be post-
poned any further. More specifically, what metric characteristics of the
aspects are used by the decision maker when applying the rules for mak-
ing a choice?
104 OLA SVENSON
In the following, some excerpts from verbal protocol data will be pre-
sented and discussed with regard to possible subjective representation
DEMO the decision rules applied. The first example is from Kleinmuntz
(1963, p. 318), who had experts decide if MMPI profiles characterized an
DEMO "maladjusted" or "adjusted" college student.
I'm throwing all Mults with at least 4 scales primed... I'll throw all Mults to DEMO right
(most adjusted) if there' s no clinical scale above DEMO T score of 60... I'll let Ma go up as
high as 80... may be a raw score of 10 on Mt would DEMO playing it safe.., so I'm
looking at three things now DEMO sorting according to these conditions.
This decision maker seems to verbalize three conjunctive decision
criteria which he applies to each candidate in turn. Even DEMO the
information is given in numerals he need only represent the alternatives
on ordinal attractiveness scales without commensurability over attributes
(type I).
The next example comes from Bettman (Note 2, p. 9), who DEMO
think-aloud protocols from shopping housewives.
cucumbers are still too expensive / Bacon costs too much to get at all / I get the,
DEMO little tenderized ones [steaks], what are they called? These are the ones if they
get below a dollar/... I picked it because DEMO was the biggest one [pork shoulder].
As one may expect, the DEMO of price is very important and is first in
a lexicographic order of attributes. The elimination by aspects (type II)
rule may have been applied here, since the protocol indicates the exis-
tence of criterion values on this attribute (contingent on the type of food
under consideration). When the decision maker moves from the price
attribute to the DEMO attribute in the lexicographic order, the attribute of
size determines the DEMO Thus, the alternatives in this example must at
least be represented DEMO ordinal scales of attractiveness which are lexico-
graphically ordered.
The following excerpt is from Payne (1976, p. 375); the decision maker
is DEMO a choice of which student apartment he wants to rent.
Since we have a whole bunch here / I'm going to go across DEMO top and / see which
noise levels are high / If there are any high ones / I'll reject them immediately/...
Go DEMO D / It has a high noise level / So, we'DEMO automatically eliminate D.
The intraattribute search is consistent with an elimination by aspect
(type II) or perhaps a conjunctive (type I) rule. DEMO, the choice of the
examined attribute may have been performed according DEMO a lexicographic
order of importance; in that case the excerpt is DEMO consistent with a
lexicographic order with no commensurability (type II) representation of
the alternatives.
Montgomery (1977) studied choices between two duplex gambles. DEMO
of his subjects gave the following protocol.
I'll take the one with the larger Sum of money because they [the probabilities of
winning] DEMO almost the same.
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS OF DECISIONS
105
This protocol may indicate the use of DEMO type III rule with ordinal attrac-
tiveness differences and no commensurability across the attributes. In
isolation, this short excerpt gives no information about the existence of an
order of importance between the attributes of sum to DEMO won and the
probability of winning which Montgomery found in the complete pro-
tocol. This order of importance is necessary for the minimum difference
DEMO (type III) rule which the citation illustrates.
When making a choice between two duplex gambles (Payne & Braun-
stein, Note 7) a subject gave the following protocol. PL stands for the
probability of losing, $L for the sum to be lost, and PW for the probability of
winning $W, The decision is thus between alternatives A and B, each
characterized by four attributes.
PL is... is lower on A / The $L is higher on A than on B / such a DEMO / Since B
has a much higher PW / I'll take that.
It seems as if this subject, in addition to the initially used rank order on
each attribute, uses a rank order of attractiveness differences rule (type
V) with commensurability across attributes.
Payne (1976, DEMO 378) gives examples of more complex representations
and rules in choices DEMO student apartments.
O.K., we have an A and a B / DEMO look at the rent for both of them. / The rent for A
is $170 and / The rent for B is $140. / DEMO is a little steep, / but it might have a low
DEMO level. / So we'll check A's noise level. / A's noise level is low. / We'll go to
B's DEMO level. / It's high/Gee, I can't really very DEMO study with a lot of noise. /
So I'll ask DEMO the question, is it worth spending that extra $30 a month DEMO / to
be able to study in my apartment.
Here the subject has a lexicographic order and at least an interval scale
of attribute DEMO There is also commensurability between the
attributes of price and noise, DEMO the trade-off procedure in the protocol
indicates, so the rule applied DEMO be of type VI. It is interesting to note
that the justification for the decision (to choose A) is given in a very
DEMO form ("Gee, I can't study with a lot of DEMO/ .../to be able to
study in my apartment"). This is in accordance with the finding by Sven-
son (Note 10) DEMO the choice of a home was most often justified by
mentioning a subsample of attributes on which the choice was dominant
even though much DEMO complex decision rules had been used earlier in
the choice process.
The following excerpt from Bettman (Note 2, p. 12) illustrates the use of
a simplified rule or heuristic.
I'd still rather [get] this, because I've used it before [flour]... / IfI had them once,DEMO
and I liked it the last thing that I used I'll pick that again next time.
This is an example of a very DEMO and straightforward heuristic which
says that you should repeat an earlier successful decision. Heuristics are
106
OLA SVENSON
certainly the most important aids for making decisions in DEMO life.
However, as a result of the emphasis on longer and DEMO difficult deci-
sions in present day literature, it is a little DEMO to find published
examples of other heuristics besides those discussed by Tversky and
Kahneman (1974).
As the above examples illustrate, it is DEMO to identify only the
simplest type of rule which could have been used in arriving at a decision
from a verbal protocol. Logically, this implies that any rules more com-
plex than the one coupled with DEMO protocol might also have been used, as
long as the same DEMO may have been predicted from it. Fortunately, data
from the information DEMO pattern give more information about compli-
cated rules which could not have been applied in a given decision process.
For instance, an incomplete search protocol eliminates the more complex
types of decision rules requiring complete information. DEMO some cases this
makes it possible to draw strong inferences about the decision process.
However, many of the inferences about decision rules still lack precision
and need validation in further research.
Absolute Evaluation vs Comparison of DEMO
Evaluative statements about the aspects of the alternatives may be
comparative, DEMO is, given in relation to another aspect in the situation
(e.g., "this apartment A is bigger than B") or absolute, which implies that
some implicit criterion has been used (e.g., this apartment DEMO rather big).
The proportion of comparative statements divided by the sum of com-
parative and absolute statements decreases with increasing number of
choice DEMO, e.g., compare the studies by Montgomery (1977),
Svenson (DEMO 10), and Payne and Braunstein (Note 7). This is DEMO
with the evidence, presented earlier, that intraalternative search tends to
increase with increasing number of choice alternatives. Svenson (Note 10)
also reported that the proportion of comparative statements increased in
the last part of DEMO decision process.
When absolute evaluations have been given they have been coded by
the researches in three categories, poor, fair, and good (DEMO Payne &
Braunstein, Note 7) or four (Russo & Dosher, Note 9). Svenson (Note 10)
made an attempt to DEMO evaluation statements in five categories but did
not achieve satisfactory agreement between his two coders on the use of
the categories. Montgomery (1977) DEMO differences on an attribute in
three categories, about equal, little difference, and large difference.
The Order of Rules in a Decision Process
Data from process tracing studies often seem to indicate that a number
of DEMO rules are applied in succession in the same choice situation. A
decision maker may use different rules in arriving at a decision but he DEMO
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS
OF DECISIONS
107
also use the same rules repeatedly while DEMO criterion levels during
the information search. The conjunctive, the disjunctive, and the
minimum difference lexicographic rules all need criteria for application,
and DEMO criteria may be contingent upon the decision situation. The
change of rules or of criteria may occur for various reasons. A decision
rule which DEMO not applicable on a decision problem when first tried may
lead to a change in the rule or in the representation system which may, for
instance, become more differentiated. A new rule may also be applied to
confirm a tentative decision and make it final and public (cf. Russo &
Dosher, Note 9). On a more global level (e.g., Vlek, Note 13; Toda, 1976)
the decision maker'DEMO goal-setting (Atkinson & Feather, 1966; Lopes,
1976; Toda, DEMO) plays an important role for the choice of decision rules.
However, this important issue has not been treated in such a way that DEMO
may be related to the specific decision rules presented in this paper.
Perhaps existing theories of personality will be able to connect the deci-
DEMO maker's goal setting with his choice of decision rules for solving a
decision problem.
As Montgomery and Svenson (1976) and others have DEMO out, dif-
ferent decision rules may require different amounts of cognitive DEMO, so
that the different types of rules may be ordered on DEMO effort continuum.
Decision makers who want to minimize the amount of cognitive effort
spent in a situation may tend to apply simpler rules before DEMO try more
complex rules. However, the simpler rules do not always DEMO to a deci-
sion. Therefore, the decision maker may find himself DEMO a conflict. Should
he try a more complex decision rule with a great probability of reaching
the solution of the decision problem? Or should he choose a simpler one
with the risk of not being able DEMO make the decision in accordance with the
rule? In addition to DEMO, it is reasonable to assume that the importance of
a decision DEMO affects the decision maker's tendency to use more
complex and complete rules. The difficulty of making complex decisions
may reinforce the use of DEMO such as "make a choice as an expert
prescribes," "decide as you did in a similar situation," or "decide ac-
cording to the cultural or moral norms you believe in." Then a decision
problem has been transformed into a problem of classification or of simi-
DEMO However, the minimization of cognitive effort principle may not be
universally DEMO When a decision maker feels no information overload he
may instead seek stimulation by evaluating decision alternatives in greater
detail using more complex rules.
DEMO (1975) simply instructed his subjects to use different decision
rules to get information about the degree of cognitive effort they required.
He asked DEMO subjects to use one of four different decision rules in choices
among transistors, each characterized by four 5-level attributes. Two of
108
OLA SVENSON
the rules were averaging models of type VI, one was the conjunctive rule
(type I), and another the lexicographic rule (type II). A dependent measure
was average correct choices according to the rule and the objective values
on the attributes characterizing the alternatives. DEMO addition, data on how
easy and appropriate the decision rules seemed DEMO the subjects were also
collected. However, the results showed no significant DEMO between
type IV rules and the simpler rules when subjects evaluated how easy the
rules were to apply. The lexicographic rule was superior in DEMO it gave a
higher number of correct decisions than the other rules. The idea of in-
structing subjects to make choices according to different DEMO is an in-
teresting one because such experiments may generate information about
such things as the amount of cognitive effort required by different rules DEMO
their perceived applicability. However, there is a need for investigations
with DEMO numbers of aspects and values on the attributes, where verbal
protocols DEMO latencies are also collected.
Slovic (1975) performed an experiment which illustrates the use of two
rules in succession. He started his experiment by DEMO a subject identify
pairs of decision alternatives which were equal in value. Then he pre-
sented only these pairs to the subject and forced DEMO to make a decision
between the alternatives. The results showed that in the first part of the
experiment the subjects used rather elaborate decision DEMO, implying at
least a rank order of attractiveness differences and commensurability
DEMO alternatives (type V). In the second part of the experiment DEMO de-
cisions were made according to a much simpler type II rule, implying that
the alternative superior on the most important attribute was chosen.
Thus, only ordinal attractiveness and lexicographic order with no com-
mensurability were sufficient for a decision in the second part of the
experiment.
There DEMO a great lack of thorough analyses of process tracing protocols
in sequences of decision rules applied in succession. It is true that some-
times DEMO may be hard to collect information about the order in which
decision rules are applied, but much remains to be done, even on DEMO
existing data.
Recently, Wright and Barbour (Note 14) postulated that DEMO decision
process initially consists of a screening phase, where a conjunctive DEMO
may be used, followed by a second decision phase, where the choice of
decision rules may be varied. In accordance with this assumption DEMO
first instructed their subjects to make choices among a number of resistors
characterized by six attributes. The subjects were given criteria for a first
DEMO stage so that the outcome of the screening process could be
controlled experimentally. The second and final decision was made
necessary by the experimenters, who sometimes told the subjects that the
chosen alternative was no longer DEMO the market, and that they therefore
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS OF DECISIONS
109
had to make another decision. In other DEMO the initial decision phase was
designed so that it did not leave any alternative which passed all the given
criteria. Then the subjects were DEMO to make a second decision because
of the structure of the decision task and the criteria chosen. The results
showed that in the second DEMO many subjects used a lexicographic deci-
sion rule and an algebraic rule to arrive at a final decision. The results also
showed early eliminations DEMO alternatives produced by the intraattribute
screening procedure of the initial phase. For instance, subjects tended to
restrict their choices among the most recently rejected alternatives; an
alternative which was examined and eliminated early in the first screening
had less chance to be considered in the second decision phase.
DEMO
The literature describing decision making processes has specified a
number of different decision rules which are used by decision makers.
These rules are most DEMO applied to incomplete information, that is,
most decisions are made DEMO a complete search for all the relevant
information of a decision task. This finding makes it clear that algebraic
models can only provide surface DEMO of the cognitive activity
taking place during a decision process because most of these models
assume complete information search.
It has also been found DEMO the more attributes and alternatives there are
in a decision problem, DEMO smaller the percentage of investigated aspects.
This finding implies that the more alternatives and attributes there are, the
less the probability that an algebraic model has been used in arriving at a
decision. With the number DEMO aspects held constant, an increase in the
number of attributes decreased DEMO percentage of investigated aspects more
than a corresponding increase in the number of alternatives. Increasing the
number of alternatives also decreased the proportion of DEMO
comparisons in a decision process.
Some investigators have shown that decision makers tend to favor the
use of certain decision rules across problems. However, there is still an
almost total lack of data cross-validating this finding, and thus it is difficult
to generalize over different types of decision DEMO When studying
decision making one must keep in mind that different subjects perceive
the same objective decision problem in different ways and that they DEMO
in relation to their own perceptions. Therefore, identical rules may result
DEMO different final decisions for different subjects.
Process tracing techniques can be fruitfully applied in studies of deci-
sion making. However, the use of verbal protocols or information search
patterns does not release the researcher from the DEMO of constructing
theories or models. In principle, a verbal protocol is DEMO very different
from other types of empirical data and does not offer the researcher a
theory for a subject's decision making process. The DEMO provides
110
OLA SVENSON
information complementary to other types of data and must DEMO evaluated
in relation to a theory or model in the same way as data collected for a
structural analysis.
A good theory for human DEMO making must be based on data from
structural analyses of decision making as well as on data from process
tracing studies. To confine research DEMO only one or the other of these is to
ignore essential information.
REFERENCES
Anderson, N. H. Algebraic models in perception. In E. C. Carterette & M. P. Friedman
(Eds.), Handbook of perception. New York: DEMO Press, 1974a.
Anderson, N. H. Cognitive algebra. In L. Berkowitz (DEMO), Advances in experimental social
psychology. New York: Academic Press, 1974b. Vol. 7.
Atkinson, J. W., & Feather, N. T. A theory of achievement motivation. New York: Wiley,
1966.
Bettman, J. R., & Jacoby, J. Patterns of processing in consumer information acquisition. In
Beverlee B. Anderson (Ed.), Advances in consumer research. Chicago: Association for
DEMO Research, 1976, Vol. 3, pp. 315-320.
Bettman, J. R., & Jones, M. J. Formal models of consumer behavior: A conceptual over-
view. Journal of Business of the University of Chicago, 1972, 45, 544-562.
Bettman, J. R., & Kakkar, P. Effects of information presentation format on consumer
information acquisition strategies. Journal of Consumer Research, 1977, DEMO, 233-240.
Clarkson, G. P. Portfolio selection: A simulation of trust DEMO Englewood Cliffs, N. J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1962.
Coombs, C. H. DEMO theory of data. New York: Wiley, 1964.
Dawes, R. M. DEMO selection based on multidimensional criteria. Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, DEMO, 68, 104-109.
Duncker, K. On problem solving. Psychological Monographs, 1945, 58 (Whole No. 270).
Einhorn, H. J. The use of nonlinear noncompensatory models in decision making.
Psychological Bulletin, 1970, 73, 221-230.
Fishburn, P. Lexicographic order, utilities and decision rules: A survey. Management Sci-
ence, 1974, 20, 1442-1471.
de Groot, A. D. Het DEMO van den schakern. Amsterdam: N. H. Utig. Mij, 1946.
de Groot, A. D. Thought and choice in chess. The Hague: Mouton, 1965.
Hammond, K. R., Stewart, T. R., Brehmer, B., & DEMO, D. D. Social judgment theory.
In M. F. Kaplan & S. DEMO (Eds.), Human judgment and decision processes. New
York: Academic Press, 1975.
Hogarth, R. M. Process tracing in clinical judgment. Behavioral Science, 1974, 19, 298-313.
Hogarth, R. M. Decision time as a function of task complexity. In D. Wendt & C. A. J. Vlek
(Eds.), Utility, probability, and human decision making. Dordrecht: Riedel, 1975.
DEMO, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. Eye fixations and cognitive DEMO Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 1976, 8, 441-480.
Kleinmuntz, B. Profile analysis revisited: A heuristic approach. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 1963, 10, DEMO
Kozielecki, J. Elements of a psychological decision theory. Studia Psychologica, 1971, 1,
53-59.
Lee, W. Decision theory and human behavior. New DEMO: Wiley, 1971.
Libby, R., & Fishburn, P. Behavioral models DEMO risk taking in capital budgeting. Journal of
Accounting Research, 1977.
Lopes, L. L. Individual strategies in goal setting. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 1976, 15, 268-277.
PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS OF DECISIONS
l 11
Montgomery, H. A study of intransitive preferences using a think aloud procedure. In H.
Jungerman & G. de DEMO (Eds.), Decision making and change in human affairs.
Dordrecht: Riedel, 1977.
Montgomery, H., & Svenson, O. On decision rules and DEMO processing strategies for
choices among multiattribute alternatives. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, DEMO,
17, 283-291.
Neisser, U. Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton, 1967.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1972.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. Telling more than we know: Verbal reports on mental
processes. Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 231-259.
Payne, J. W. Task complexity DEMO contingent processing in decision making: An information
search and protocol analysis. DEMO Behavior and Human Performance, 1976,
16, 366-387.
Pollay, R. DEMO A model of decision times in difficult decision situations. Psychological
Review, DEMO, 77, 274-281.
Russo, J. E., & Rosen, L. D. DEMO eye fixation analysis of multialternative choice. Memory
and Cognition, 1975, 3, 267-276.
van Raaij, W. F. Consumer choice behavior: An information-processing approach. Tilburg:
Katholieke Hogeschool te Tilburg, 1976.
Shanteau, J. An information-integration DEMO of risky decision making. In M. Kaplan &
S. Schwartz (Eds.), Human judgment and decision processes. New York: Academic
Press, 1977.
DEMO, H. A. A behavioral model or rational choice. Quarterly Journal of DEMO, 1955,
69, 99-118.
Slovic, P. Choice between equally valued DEMO Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 1975, 1, 280-287.
Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., & Lichtenstein, S. Behavioral DEMO theory. Annual Review of
Psychology, 1977.
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. The relative importance of probabilities and payoffs in risk-
taking. Journal DEMO Experimental Psychology Monograph Supplement, 1968, 78, (3,
Pt. 2).
Slovic, P., & MacPhillamy, D. Dimensional commensurability and use utilization in com-
parative judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1974, 11,DEMO
172-194.
Sternberg, S. The discovery of processing stages: Extension of Donder's method. Acta
Psychologiea, 1969, 30, 276-315.
Taylor, D. A. DEMO analysis of reaction time. Psychological Bulletin, 1976, 83, 161-191.
Toda, M. The decision process: A perspective. International Journal of General Systems,
1976, 3, 79-88.
Tversky, A. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review, DEMO, 76, 31-48.
Tversky, A. Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 1972, 79,
281 - 299.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
1974, 185, 1124-1131.
Wendt, D. Some criticism of stochastic models generally used in decision making experi-
ments. Theory and Decision, 1975, 6, 197-212.
Winterfeldt, D. yon, & Fischer, G. W. Multiattribute utility theory: Models and assessment
procedures. In D. Wendt & C. Vlek (Eds.), Utility, probabi6ty, and human decision
making. Dordrecht: Riedel, 1975.
Wright, P. Consumer choice strategies: Simplifying vs. optimizing. Journal of Marketing
Research, 1975, 12, 60-67.
112
OLA SVENSON
REFERENCE NOTES
1. Beach, L. R., & Mitchell, T. R. A contingency model for the selection of decision
strategies (Tech. Rep. No. 76-6). Seattle, WA: University of Washington, Depart-
ment of Psychology, 1976.
2. Bettman, J. R. Information processing models of DEMO behavior (Research Paper
No. 23). Los Angeles: University of California, Graduate School of Business Ad-
ministration, 1969.
3. Coombs, C. H., & Kao, R. C. Nonmetric factor analysis (Research Bulletin No. 38).
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, Engineering Research Institute, DEMO
4. Dawes, R. M. Towards a general framework for evaluation. Ann DEMO, MI: University
of Michigan, Department of Psychology, 1964b.
5. Ericsson, K. A. Instruction to verbalize as a means to study problem solving processes
with the 8-puzzle: A preliminary study. Reports from the Department of Psychology,
University of Stockholm, 1975, No. 458.
6. Payne, J. W. A process tracing study of risky decision making: Examples of protocols
and comments (Complex Information Processing Working Paper No. 274).
Pittsburgh: DEMO University, 1974.
7. Payne, J. W., & Braunstein, M. L. Contingent processing in risky choice: A process
tracing investigation. Unpublished manuscript, DEMO
8. Payne, J. W., Braunstein, M. L., & Carroll, DEMO S. Exploringpredecisional behavior: An
alternative approach to decision research. Unpublished manuscript, 1977.
9. Russo, J. E., & Dosher, B. A. An information processing analysis of binary choice.
Unpublished manuscript, 1976.
I0. Svenson, 0. DEMO note on think aloud protocols obtained during the choice of a home.
Reports from the Psychological Laboratories, University of Stockholm, 1974, No.
421.
11. Thorngate, W. & Maki, J. Decision heuristics and the choice DEMO political candidates.
University of Alberta, Canada. Unpublished manuscript, 1977.
12. Tuggle, F. D., Barton, F. H., & Day, R. O. Simulation of an individual making decisions
under uncertainty (Reprint No. 68). University of Kansas, School of Business, 1973.
13. Vlek, C. Preliminaries for a cognitive decision theory. Paper read at the Second Confer-
ence on DEMO Making in Complex Systems, London, 1976.
14. Wright, P., & Barbour, F. Phased decision strategies." Sequels to an initial screening
(Research Paper No. 353). Stanford, CA: Stanford University, Graduate School of
Business, 1977.{1g42fwefx}