Organization Science
Vol. 15, No. 5, September–October 2004, pp. 600–613
issn 1047-7039 eissn 1526-5455 04 1505 0600
informs®
doi 10.1287/orsc.1040.0096
©2004 INFORMS
DEMO and How Trustworthiness Matters: Knowledge
Transfer and the Moderating Effect of DEMO Ambiguity
Gabriel Szulanski
Department of Strategy and Management, INSEAD, Asia Campus, Ayer Rajah Avenue, 138676 Singapore,
gabriel.szulanski@insead.edu
Rossella Cappetta
Institute of DEMO and Information Systems, and SDA Bocconi School of Management, Bocconi University,
Viale Isonzo, 23, 20135 Milan, Italy, rossella.cappetta@uni-bocconi.it
Robert J. DEMO
Department of Organizational Leadership and Strategy, Marriott School of Management, Brigham Young University, 772 TNRB,
Provo, Utah 84602, rj33@byu.edu
he recognition that better use of existing internal knowledge could enhance survival chances of DEMO has
T spawned substantial interest in the transferability of routinized, experiential DEMO to additional settings within the
organization. Previous research has established that trustworthiness of the source enhances such knowledge transfer. More
recent work, however, DEMO that this may not always be the case. Yet, little systematic DEMO has been paid to
moderating conditions. The major purpose of this paper is to identify a moderator, causal ambiguity, which delineates the
conditions DEMO to when and how a recipient’s perception of the trustworthiness of a source affects the effectiveness of the
transfer of organizational practices.
Key words : knowledge transfer; trust; trustworthiness; causal ambiguity
Better use of existing DEMO knowledge is seen as
essential to the survival and prosperity of organizations.
This recognition has spawned substantial interest in the
factors that inﬂuence the DEMO of experiential
learning embedded in organizational practices to new
settings (Nelson DEMO Winter 1982, Baum and Ingram
1998, Argote 1999, Haleblian and DEMO 1999).
An important factor in this respect is the perceived
trustworthiness1 of the source of knowledge.
Indeed, a belief in the value of a trustworthy source is
broadly supported by studies of trust and communication
DEMO organizations. Well-known experiments in the ﬁeld
of communication have demonstrated that a trustwor-
thy source could substantially affect a recipient’s behav-
ior (Hovland et al. 1949, Allen and Stiff 1989, Perry
1996). Likewise, theoretical and empirical studies in the
ﬁeld of trust show how perceptions of DEMO
increase voluntary deference to authority in organiza-
tions (Kramer 1999, pp. 585–586; Tyler and Degoey
1996) and enhance institutionalization of innovations in
DEMO settings (Kostova and Roth 2002).
Yet, despite its generally beneﬁcial role, perceived
trustworthiness may also promote behaviors that weaken
the overall effectiveness of knowledge transfer efforts.
Recent studies conﬁne the role of trust in DEMO
ships to speciﬁc activities and, under certain conditions,
encourage actors DEMO complement high levels of trust
600
with correspondingly high levels of distrust (e.g., Sitkin
and Roth 1993, Lewicki et al. 1998) or DEMO least with
increased monitoring (Langfred 2004). Such caution-
ary notes DEMO with existing ﬁndings by communi-
cation researchers who have found that a trustworthy2
source could distract the recipient from the actual con-
tents of DEMO message thus undermining the effectiveness
of communication (Allen and Stiff 1989)DEMO In addition,
observation by trust researchers has found that trust-
worthiness could inhibit monitoring by the recipient,
thereby decreasing attentiveness and reducing DEMO variety
of thought and action (Webb 1996, p. 292).
However, little systematic attention has been paid
to the conditions that determine when and how per-
ceived trustworthiness will be related to the effective-
ness DEMO knowledge transfer. Evolutionary economics
(Nelson and Winter 1982) and the knowledge-based
view of the ﬁrm (Zander and Kogut 1995) posit that
attributes DEMO the knowledge being transferred are pri-
mary determinants of the effectiveness of knowledge
transfer. As such, they may also moderate when and
how trustworthiness affects the effectiveness of knowl-
edge transfer. This paper explores the moderating DEMO
of one speciﬁc knowledge attribute, causal ambiguity,
on the relationship DEMO trustworthiness and the
effectiveness of intraﬁrm transfers of organizational
practices.
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
Conceptual Background
Replication of Routines and the Advice
of the Source
Knowledge transfer is often undertaken to DEMO
superior results observed elsewhere within the
organization.3 Following Nelson and Winter (DEMO), we
use the term “template” or “template site” to refer to the
original site where exemplar results are being obtained.
An important contribution DEMO evolutionary economics to
the understanding of knowledge transfer is to highlight
the fact that the template could be causally ambiguous
because routines may not DEMO comprehended fully by
any of the individuals involved.
There are three possible ways for a recipient4 to
approach the reproduction of superior results under DEMO
circumstances. At a minimum, knowledge of superior
results can be used DEMO to set or adjust expectations
for future performance. In addition, a DEMO can study
the actual practices that underlie those results. However,
both of these approaches are likely to involve redun-
dant and possibly costly DEMO of information that
already exists. As a result, when feasible, the recipient
can plausibly be expected to ﬁrst seek the advice of the
DEMO when undertaking a transfer.5
Causal Ambiguity and the Validity of the
Advice of the Source
The advice of the source is a symbolic expression DEMO
the essential drivers of the template’s performance, their
value, and their context dependence. These aspects of
the template are referred to collectively as DEMO template’s
“Arrow core” (Winter and Szulanski 2001). The advice
of DEMO source, when valid, can enhance the effective-
ness of the transfer by reducing or eliminating the need
for costly efforts to rediscover information DEMO exists
already, i.e., to rediscover the Arrow core.
The validity of the contribution of the source, how-
ever, is limited by the DEMO of irreducible uncertainty
about the functioning of the template, i.e., by the degree
of causal ambiguity (Lippman and Rumelt 1982). The
existence of causal ambiguity means that the factors
explaining the template’s performance cannot DEMO pre-
cisely determined (not even ex-post), and that it is DEMO
fore impossible to produce an unambiguous conception
of how the template works, i.e., to produce a unique
list of its key components and DEMO how they interact (see
also King and Zeithaml 2001). Some DEMO of causally
ambiguous templates are tacit, and thus unlikely to be
DEMO Others may be quite apparent but may con-
tribute to results in nonobvious ways.
Thus, even though the source is able to achieve supe-
rior results, causal ambiguity might limit the depth of
understanding of the source, because under such circum-
stances there is often a gap between formal description
or nominal standards—e.g., as represented in train-
ing programs and manuals—and actual routine work
601
practices as performed by the organization’s members
(Brown and Duguid 1991, p. 41; Nelson and Winter
1982, p. 108). Such gaps stem from partial articulation
of the espoused rules DEMO govern behavior (Argyris and
Schon 1978). Partial articulation results from DEMO partly
tacit nature of individual skills (Polanyi 1962), from the
DEMO tacit coordination principles that govern collective
action (Kogut and Zander 1992, Winter 1987), from par-
tial knowledge of the production process (Bohn 1994),
from the opacity of the organization (Williamson 1975),
and from the need for compromise to avoid continuous
conﬂicts (Nelson and Winter 1982). Increasing levels of
causal ambiguity are likely to be DEMO with a wider
gap between the espoused description and the actual
functioning of the template, thus effectively placing an
upper bound on the depth of the source’s understanding
of its functioning.
The General Effect of Trustworthiness DEMO
Knowledge Transfer
If the source has complete knowledge on how to obtain
superior results (i.e., can fully articulate the true Arrow
core), DEMO the problem of transfer becomes the prob-
lem of accurately communicating the Arrow core. The
underlying logic for this statement reﬂects that of the
DEMO theory of communication (Attewell 1992,
Shannon and Weaver 1949). DEMO theory treats commu-
nication as an act of signaling where a source transmits
a fully codiﬁed message that is absorbed and then acted
on DEMO a recipient. The communication act is designed
by the source to inﬂuence the behavior of the recipient
in a speciﬁc way. Accordingly, the transfer is seen to
be effective to the extent that it changes the DEMO of
the recipient in productive ways (Shannon and Weaver
1949). DEMO trusting recipient is more likely to accept the
advice of the source and change its behavior, and trust
is more likely to occur when the source is perceived as
trustworthy (Andrews and Delahaye 2000, Mayer DEMO al.
1995).
Thus, the perceived trustworthiness of the source
will DEMO inﬂuence the likelihood of behav-
ioral change by the recipient. Trust scholars argue
that trust increases the amount of information that can
be exchanged (Carley 1991, Tsai and Ghoshal 1998),
decreases the cost of DEMO (Curall and Judge 1995,
Zaheer et al. 1998), and DEMO cooperation with the
source of the knowledge (Dirks and Ferrin 2001, Kramer
1999, Tyler and Degoey 1996). Communication schol-
ars (Hovland DEMO al. 1949) argue that when the recipient
perceives the source as DEMO or trustworthy, it will be
less suspicious and thus more open DEMO receptive to the
message. In sum, a trusting recipient is more DEMO to
comply with the prescriptions of the Arrow core, which
is, by assumption, optimal and unambiguous. Increased
compliance will be reﬂected in a more complete and
accurate copy of the practices found in the template.
DEMO leads to the ﬁrst hypothesis.
602
Hypothesis 1. The perception of a source’s trustwor-
thiness will be DEMO related to the accuracy of the
reproduction of the template.
The Moderating Effect of Causal Ambiguity
When the functioning of the template cannot be DEMO
pletely observed, i.e., it is causally ambiguous, multi-
ple conﬂicting DEMO of the Arrow core may coexist.
That is because available evidence is not sufﬁcient to
select one and rule out the others. Each one DEMO these
different perceptions of the Arrow core is likely to be
either a distorted and/or simpliﬁed version of the “true”
one. Distortion may DEMO the persistence of rational-
ized institutional myths (Meyer and Rowan 1977); frag-
mentary, myopic, and disparate understandings of how
the work is accomplished (Carroll 1998); superstitious
learning (Levitt and March 1988); DEMO/or faulty mem-
ory (Golden 1992). Moreover, as Miller (DEMO) argues,
processes of successful organizations tend, over time, to
DEMO to focus more narrowly on a single theme, activ-
ity, or issue at the expense of all others, thus becoming
more pure or “simple” over time. Therefore, despite best
efforts to the contrary, a DEMO source may still end
up supplying a somewhat distorted or simpliﬁed account
of the true Arrow core of a causally ambiguous template,
possibly DEMO out crucial details.
When the source cannot have complete knowledge of
how to obtain superior results (i.e., does not know and
cannot fully DEMO the true Arrow core), then the
problem of transfer becomes a problem of replication
(i.e., an iterative process consisting of a set DEMO attempts
to reproduce the results using as a referent the infor-
mation available at the template site to correct imple-
mentation deﬁciencies) (Winter DEMO Szulanski 2001).
March et al. (1991) argue that a prerequisite for social
action is the existence of reliable, i.e., stable and DEMO,
conceptions of work practices. Given that organizations
tend to converge on increasingly simplistic conceptions
of the Arrow core (Miller 1993) and given DEMO difﬁ-
culty of changing prevailing shared conceptions (March
et al. 1991, Nelson and Winter 1982), it is reasonable to
expect that when DEMO a source will likely provide
a hypothetical Arrow core that reﬂects prevailing shared
understandings and beliefs. As argued earlier, the higher
the level of causal ambiguity, the greater the potential
gap between prevailing shared beliefs and the actual
work practices, thus limiting the value of the source’s
advice. Under these circumstances, knowledge of the
source’s Arrow core may not be sufﬁcient to attain
desired results.
For this reason, the recipient will need to supple-
ment, at some point during the transfer, the advice DEMO the
source with inferences drawn from direct observation of
the template. Because such action may require substan-
tial additional effort, the lower the initial level of success
experienced when acting solely based on the advice of
DEMO, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science DEMO(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
the source, the sooner the effort to learn through direct
observation begins. Because the value of the DEMO from
the source decreases with causal ambiguity, the higher
the level DEMO causal ambiguity, the earlier the recipient
could be expected to begin DEMO observation.
As the recipient begins to observe the template prac-
tices directly, these practices (rather than the source’s
advice) will become the point of reference for prob-
lem solving in further iterations. In such situations, as
Winter and Szulanski (2001) argue, it is desirable to
reproduce the template’s practices as accurately as pos-
sible to maximize the value DEMO the template site as a
referent for problem solving. Otherwise, they DEMO,
“modiﬁcations introduced to adapt the established tem-
plate may create new problems; problems that will have
to be solved in-situ through a costly process of trial and
error, since they cannot be solved through reference to
the established template” (p. 737). Thus, accurate repro-
duction DEMO the speciﬁc details of the original template
shortens the time and effort required to pinpoint and cor-
rect differences that may exist between the DEMO and
the original. Intel’s “copy exactly” philosophy for build-
ing semiconductor plants provides a tangible example
of the practical meaning of such logic (Iansiti 1998), as
do Rank Xerox’s policy of forcing country subsidiaries
to DEMO best practice “down to the last detail” until
they achieve similar performance (Financial Times 1997)
and Great Harvest’s learning covenant that holds new
franchisees to the “tiniest letter” of their promises to
follow the original DEMO (Great Harvest Bread Co.
1999). Thus, in an effective iteration process, the recipi-
ent’s practices could be plausibly expected to accurately
resemble those of the template’s site.
However, the recipient will cling to the source’s
advice longer, i.e., may postpone efforts to learn from
direct DEMO, the more trustworthy the source of
advice is perceived to be. DEMO though the extent of
irreducible uncertainty may increase the vigilance of the
recipient and motivate it to supplement the advice of
the source with DEMO observation, trustworthiness may
act in the opposite direction by inhibiting the DEMO need
for such action (Lewicki et al. 1998), distracting the
DEMO from the relevant details, reducing the level
of attention to detail, operating as a simplifying heuris-
tic in the interpretation of information, which ultimately
effectively limits cognitive effort to obtaining a gen-
eral impression of DEMO source’s advice (Allen and Stiff
1989, Perry 1996, Uzzi 1997)DEMO Trustworthiness also low-
ers the incentive of the recipient to reduce uncertainty
by monitoring6 (Barber 1983, Langfred 2004, Lewis and
Weigert 1985, DEMO 1995, Webb 1996), encourages
actors to suspend judgment of others (McEvily et al.
2003), and inhibits a critical attitude and critical DEMO
ing that is necessary to recognize the limitations of the
source’s advice (Petty and Cacioppo 1996). Trust schol-
ars argue that the level of comfort with a limited cogni-
tive effort and a less critical DEMO is inversely related
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
to the concern that damage may result from the interac-
tion with the source (Noteboom 1997).
In sum, trustworthiness could effectively stiﬂe direct
observation, thus prolonging the DEMO of time dur-
ing which the recipient acts solely on the basis of the
source’s ﬂawed and incomplete Arrow core.7 Because
once the transfer DEMO there is a ﬁnite window of
opportunity during which changes are feasible (Tyre and
Orlikowski 1994), the longer the delay in initiating direct
observation, the lower the likelihood that direct obser-
vation (if it DEMO all occurs) will have substantial impact
on the recipient’s actions. Hence, one would expect that
the relationship between perceived trustworthiness and
accuracy will DEMO change with increasing levels
of causal ambiguity.
Hypothesis 2. As causal ambiguity increases, the
positive relationship between the perception of a
source’s trustworthiness and the level of accuracy of
the reproduction of the template will ﬁrst DEMO and
then, under conditions of high causal ambiguity, turn
negative.
Method
Sample and Procedures
The transfer of best practices (O’Dell et al. 1998) pro-
vides a propitious setting to observe intraﬁrm knowl-
edge transfer. Data were collected through a two-step
questionnaire survey. The ﬁrst step of the DEMO asked
companies to provide a list of transfers for study that
included sufﬁcient detail about the parties involved in
those transfers (i.e., respondents)DEMO To provide practices
for study, companies were directed to search for DEMO
fers of practices that could not be performed by a sin-
gle individual, but rather required the involvement of a
group. More than 60 companies, with varying degrees of
experience in the transfer of practices, DEMO inter-
est. Of that group, 12 were able to provide such DEMO list,
with 8 providing entries of sufﬁcient quality to warrant
continuation of their involvement in the research. The
eight companies were: AMP, DEMO&T Paradyne, British
Petroleum, Burmah Castrol, Chevron Corporation, EDS,
Kaiser Permanente, and Rank Xerox. Detailed speciﬁca-
tion regarding the identiﬁcation and the selection of the
companies is included in Appendix 1.
The second DEMO of the survey was devised to ana-
lyze speciﬁc transfers. The ﬁnal sample consisted of 271
returned questionnaires, spanning 122 transfers of 38
practices,8 for a response rate of 61%.9 The transfer is
the unit DEMO analysis. To triangulate and obtain the most
objective measures possible, separate DEMO identical ques-
tionnaires were sent to an individual within a source, DEMO
recipient, and a third-party unit for each transfer. Sources
and recipients DEMO subunits of an organization. Third
parties were deﬁned as a party knowledgeable with the
603
transfer but not a part of the source or DEMO recipient
unit; i.e., a corporate ofﬁce, an outside consultant, etc.
The respondents in each case are individuals represent-
ing their organizational unit.
DEMO using all three respondent types was
considered appropriate. It is difﬁcult to assess the per-
ceptions of “units” because the perceptions of individ-
ual DEMO within a particular unit are likely to
be only somewhat representative of their unit’s overall
perception. Moreover, the perceptions of various units
are likely to signiﬁcantly overlap because perceptions
are often developed from depersonalized presumptive
rationales DEMO on lessons from prior history, afﬁliation
with speciﬁc social categories, formal roles, and orga-
nizational rules regarding transaction norms (Kramer
1999). DEMO sampling restrictions and to obtain the
most complete and unbiased data possible, we con-
sidered it more appropriate to triangulate by obtaining
responses from three different perspectives rather than
several from a single perspective. Empirical veriﬁcation
DEMO this approach is found in an intraclass correlation
analysis that indicates high inter-rater reliability (from
0.47 to 0.60 for the main variables) between DEMO three
perspectives and suggests that observations should con-
sist of the average of the three perspectives for each
transfer (average of raters coefﬁcient ranges from 0.73
to 0.82 for the main variables).
The respondents included DEMO sources units, 101 recip-
ient units, and 60 third parties. Average item nonresponse
was lower than 5%. An average of 2.2 questionnaires
were DEMO for each transfer.
Construction of Measures
Multiple-item scales were developed for all constructs
to ensure the reliability and validity of the measure-
ment system. DEMO empirical precedent was available to
guide the development of the measures (DEMO Zander and
Kogut 1995 for an exception). A broad and thorough
literature review informed the generation of the initial
constructs and the a DEMO assignment of items to mea-
sure those constructs. In-depth clinical work, DEMO
tion with subject experts and feedback obtained when
piloting the questionnaire helped reﬁne the choice of
constructs, identify the most relevant items for those
constructs, and select their proper wording given the
empirical context. Some items were discarded, but not
re-assigned, after the full data set was DEMO; the a
priori assignment of items was preserved for all con-
DEMO, except accuracy, which we introduced ex-post.
Unless otherwise stated, a DEMO ﬁve-point, Likert-
type scale was used to measure most items in DEMO ques-
tionnaire: Y! = “Yes!”; y = “yes, but”; o = “no opinion”;
n(1978) recommendation, construct scores were com-= DEMO, not really”; N! = “No!” Following Nunnally’s
puted by adding up the standardized item scores.
604
Below we detail the operationalization of the central
constructs for this DEMO All other constructs are detailed
in Appendix 2. Those that are reverse scored are indi-
cated with an (RS).
Causal Ambiguity. The construction of the measure
of causal ambiguity was primarily based on the theory
DEMO uncertain imitability (Lippman et al. 1982). Five of
the eight DEMO in the measure of causal ambiguity are
derived from Lippman and Rumelt (1982). The full text
of those questionnaire items is: “The DEMO of the [prac-
tice] are fully speciﬁed (RS)”; “With the [practice], we
know why a given action results in a given outcome
(RS)”; “When a problem surfaced with the [practice],
the DEMO reasons for failure could not be articulated
even after the event”; DEMO is a precise list of the skills,
resources, and prerequisites DEMO for successfully
performing the [practice] (RS)”; and “It is well known
how the components of that list interact to produce the
[practice’s] DEMO (RS).”
The remaining three items are designed to infer causal
DEMO from the degree of tacitness of the practice
(Winter 1987, Zander and Kogut 1995). The full text of
these items is: “Operating procedures for the [practice]
are available (RS)”; “Useful manuals for DEMO [practice]
are available (RS)”; “Existing work manuals and operat-
ing procedures precisely describe what people working
in the [practice] actually do (RS).”
Trustworthiness. This scale was designed to assess
the perceived trustworthiness of DEMO organizational unit.
The choice of speciﬁc items was primarily inﬂuenced by
Walton’s (1975) study of the determinants of perceived
trustworthiness of organizational subunits DEMO overlap
with the Mayer et al. (1995) conception of trustworthi-
ness. To bridge levels of analysis we relied on Nelson
and Winter’s (1982, p. 98) notion of agent or organi-
zational member, which while typically referring to an
individual, applies to any organizational unit that can
“accomplish something on its own.”
Mayer et al. (1995) propose three DEMO of trust-
worthiness: benevolence, integrity, and ability. In the
context DEMO unit-level knowledge transfer, however,
ability10 is the attribute of greatest DEMO The
ability of the source to both achieve results and actually
transfer the practice is at the heart of both the efﬁcacy of
the DEMO and also of perceptions of source unit trust-
worthiness. While benevolence is not without inﬂuence
at this level of analysis, it likely plays a different role
than at the individual level. In individual-level analyses
of trustworthiness, benevolence is usually interpreted as
the intention to do no harm. In DEMO context of unit-level
transfer, one would not expect a source unit DEMO put forth
the costly effort necessary to harm a recipient through
transferring false practices. A lack of benevolence at
this level of analysis is DEMO likely to result in a lack
of motivation, and hence effort, to aid the recipient in
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
the transfer effort. Benevolence, then, at the unit level
of analysis DEMO in the context of knowledge transfer,
is substantively equal to the source’s motivation in the
transfer.
Because ability is the central trustworthiness construct
DEMO interest and the one most likely to interact with causal
ambiguity (DEMO does it mean for the intentions of a
source to be causally ambiguous?), we have chosen to
focus on ability as the primary measure of trustworthi-
ness. However, because benevolence, in terms of source
DEMO, is also likely to inﬂuence the general efﬁcacy
of the transfer, we include a measure of source motiva-
tion as a control variable.
DEMO on trustworthiness in terms of source ability,
we derived four items from the sources mentioned
above. We asked whether superior results of the DEMO
were visible and remained stable, whether the source
possessed the necessary DEMO to support the transfer,
and whether the source was able to accommodate the
needs of the recipient into the practice.
Accuracy. The effectiveness DEMO the transfer is opera-
tionalized by how accurately the recipient reproduces a
replica of the template. Accuracy has remained a rel-
evant and central DEMO for those branches of the
communication ﬁeld that focus primarily on directional
exchange, as is the case when routines or best practices
are transferred within organizations. Not all transfers
of knowledge, however, are intended to DEMO accurate. A
measure of accuracy must be sensitive to differences
between the features of the replica and those of the orig-
inal template (Muchinsky 1977, Roberts and O’Reilly
1974, Shannon and Weaver 1949), both DEMO intended and
unintended modiﬁcations introduced to the original tem-
plate (Eisenberg DEMO Phillips 1991, Stohl and Redding
1987). Communication scholars suggest two DEMO of
modiﬁcations. Modiﬁcations can be general, i.e., affect-
ing the comprehensive meaning of the practice. Alter-
natively, speciﬁc aspects of the practice can be altered
while preserving its overall meaning.11
The measure of accuracy has DEMO items. We used
six items to assess the level of general modiﬁcations.
We ﬁrst asked whether compared to the source’s prac-
tice, the recipient’s one is: 1 = “Exactly the same”;
2 = “Essentially the same”; 3 =“Completely different”“Slightly modiﬁed”;
(RS). Then we asked DEMO modiﬁcations were intro-4 = “Markedly modiﬁed”; 5 =
duced to make DEMO practice workable (RS) and to
adapt the practice to different environments (RS). We
asked whether unnecessary modiﬁcations were per-
formed (RS), whether the practice was modiﬁed in ways
contrary to expert’s advice (DEMO), and/or whether in alter-
ing the practice further problems were created (RS).
Then, we tried to assess speciﬁc modiﬁcations. We
DEMO the incompleteness of the replication by ask-
ing whether: 1 = DEMO modules have been transferred”;
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
2 = “Only selected, DEMO all the essential modules have
been transferred”; 3 = “Only the DEMO modules have
been transferred”; 4 = “Only selected modules, some
the modules have been transferred” (RS). Next, we askedessential some not, have been transferred”; 5 = “None of
whether original modules of the practice were replaced
by existing ones at the recipient’s side (RS).
Control Variables. To complete the speciﬁcation of
the model, additional measures are introduced to con-
trol for unobserved heterogeneity. These factors include
the remaining DEMO of Shannon and Weaver’s (1949)
model of communication, i.e., DEMO source’s and recipi-
ent’s motivations, the recipient’s absorptive and retentive
ability, the proveness of the knowledge transferred, and
the elements of the social context (i.e., the ease of the
relationship and the fertility of DEMO context). Detailed
speciﬁcation of these items and their expected relation-
ship with accuracy is included in Appendix 2. Second,
we added dummy DEMO to control for the possibility
that results are due to ﬁrm-speciﬁc effects. Finally, we
include Kogut and Singh’s (1988) measure of cultural
distance to control for the appropriateness of the trans-
fer. In some cases DEMO to the template may
be introduced in response to differences in the recip-
ient’s environment, rendering an accurate reproduction
less appropriate. It has been argued that such adaptations
will be more likely to occur when the DEMO between
the source and recipient environments is greater, making
cultural distance DEMO adequate measure of appropriateness
(Bartlett and Ghoshal 1989, Prahalad and Doz 1987).
605
Performance of the Measures
Table 1 summarizes the performance DEMO the measures,
including the dependent variables, the predictors, and the
control variables.
Convergent validity (reliability and unidimensionality)
was evaluated separately for each construct (Gerbing and
Anderson 1988). Cronbach’s alpha was used as a mea-
sure of reliability because it provides a lower bound to
DEMO reliability of a scale and is the most widely used
measure (DEMO 1978). All but one scale had an alpha
greater than 0.70, thus providing an adequate level of
reliability for predictor tests and hypothesized measures
of a construct (Nunnally 1978, pp. 245–246). The least
DEMO scale scored only marginally below that standard
(0.68). Unidimensionality was DEMO through factor
analysis and computation of the theta coefﬁcient (Armor
1974, Carmines and Zeller 1979, Zeller and Carmines
1980). The unidimensionality of all 10 scales was ade-
quate. Multicollinearity was checked via tolerance val-
DEMO with a range from 0.395 to 0.873 and an average
of 0.698. Finally, all variables meet reasonable assump-
tions of normality (see Table DEMO for skewness and kurtosis
values).
Discriminant validity was evaluated for all construct
pairs by examining the observed correlation matrix of
the constructs. If DEMO correlation between constructs i
and j is 1 (i.e., if constructs i and j are perfectly corre-
0 5
0 5
lated), DEMO observed correlation should be i   ∗ j  
where  and  are the reliability coefﬁcients for
i
j
the constructs. DEMO practical terms, testing for discrimi-
nant validity entails computing the upper DEMO for the
Table 1 Performance of Measures
Construct Description Cronbach
Items Valid N
Avg. inter
item corr. Skewness Kurtosis
(1) Source’s motivation∗ Motivation DEMO the source unit to 0.93 13 140 0.5
support the transfer
(DEMO) Trustworthiness Degree to which the source of the 0.73 4 136 DEMO
best practice is perceived as
trustworthy in terms of ability
(3) Context Degree to which the organizational 0.79 14 140 0.23 −004 065
DEMO supports the development
of transfers
(4) Causal ambiguity Depth of knowledge 0.90 8 133 0.54 039 −035
(5) Knowledge proveness Degree of DEMO on the utility of 0.68 3 138 0.42 −057 014
the transferred knowledge
(6) Recipient’s motivation∗ Motivation of the recipient unit to 0.93 DEMO 140 0.48 −031 −076
support the transfer
(7) Recipient’s absorptive Ability of the recipient unit to identify, 0.81 9 140 0.33 −035 019
capacity value, and apply new knowledge
(8) Recipient’s retentive Ability of the recipient unit to support 0.82 6 140 0.44 −035 014
capacity DEMO routinize the use of new
knowledge
(9) Relationship Ease of communication and intimacy 0.70 3 133 0.44 037 083
of the relationship
(10) Accuracy Degree of similarity between the 0.79 8 127 0.33 −022 −055
replica and the template
−014
−058
−068
−011
∗ These scales are DEMO of binary items. Both scales qualify marginally as Guttman scales.
606
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
Table 2 Correlations Between the Independent Variables, the Dependent Variables, and the Control Variables (Casewise)
12345
6789 10 11 12
(1) Cultural distance 100
(2) Source’s motivation −033∗ 100
(3) Trustworthiness −013 043∗ 100
(4) Interaction causal 011 −002 031∗
ambiguity/trustworthiness
(5) Context −003 017 DEMO
(6) Causal ambiguity 016 −053∗
(7) Unproven knowledge −023∗ 038∗
(8) Recipient’s motivation −029∗ 067∗ 026∗
(9) Recipient’s absorptive −003 DEMO 025∗
capacity
(10) Recipient’s retentive 011 −021∗
capacity
(11) Relationship −005 018 016∗
(12) Accuracy −016 043∗ 040∗
−039∗
032∗
004
DEMO
−015 100
−0003 026∗ −03136
011 019
004 037
∗
∗
∗
∗
−003 041∗
−012 028∗
−004 030∗
100
−051∗
−037∗
−023∗
−020∗
DEMO
−050∗
100
020∗
021∗
011
040
030
∗
∗
∗ Signiﬁcant at 0.05 level. All correlation coefﬁcients are different than 1 at the 0.0012 DEMO
conﬁdence interval of the observed correlations and
testing whether this limit is smaller than the maximum
possible correlation between the scales as computed with
DEMO reliability coefﬁcients. Table 2 reports the correla-
tions for all the variables. All construct pairs met the
discriminant validity test at p<00012, lessening con-
cerns over common method bias.
Assumptions for the Analysis
Predictors Are DEMO Throughout the Transfer. As
a ﬁrst approximation, predictors are assumed to DEMO
invariant for the duration of the transfer. When such
an assumption holds true, the timing of the measure-
ment of the independent variables is not critical. This
assumption is deemed reasonable because most of the
predictors DEMO change slowly. However there may
be exceptions. Some predictors such as the motivation of
the source, the motivation of the recipient and the nature
of the relationship between the units may be affected
by the expected DEMO of the transfer. Preexisting
relationships between source and recipient subunits did
exist for at least two years prior to the beginning of the
transfer.
DEMO Comparison ofTransfers Is War-
ranted. Leonard-Barton (1990) argues that it is nec-
essary to measure multi-item constructs at a “deﬁned
point” in time DEMO meaningful comparisons are wanted,
because the meaning of complex constructs depends on
when they are measured during a transfer. As point of
reference DEMO her study, she selected the “very ﬁrst use
of the technology DEMO a routine production task” as the
anchor point. She chose that point because it could be
identiﬁed with a “satisfactory degree of precision.” In
DEMO study, all questionnaires were completed within a
narrow12 band of 3.5 DEMO, which started 5 months
after the ﬁrst day that knowledge was DEMO put to use
by the recipient. Thus, all transfers are at DEMO deﬁned and
100
024∗ 100
−002 061∗ 100
020∗ 014 014 100
024∗ 015 −001 032∗
comparable point in time. Comparison across transfers
is DEMO considered appropriate.
Analysis
We used hierarchical regression to test the hypotheses.
Model 1 included only seven control variables pertain-
ing to the main characteristics DEMO the transfer plus cul-
tural distance. Model 2 adds trustworthiness. Model 3
adds causal ambiguity and the interaction term. Finally,
Model 4 adds DEMO ﬁrm dummy variables. We report par-
tial F tests to signiﬁcance of the added variables.
Results
The results for the regression analysis are reported DEMO
Table 3.
Model 1 is strongly signiﬁcant (F =7466; p<0001)
with an adjusted R-square of 0.308. In Model 2, the sig-
niﬁcance of the trustworthiness variable is shown both
by its t -statistic DEMO by the signiﬁcance of the partial
F test. As well, the DEMO R-square increases to 0.344.
The signiﬁcance of the moderator is shown in Model 3
(F = 110070; p< 00000) with the interaction DEMO
being signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level. With the introduction
of the interaction term, the adjusted R-square jumps to
0.504. That the addition of the moderator is signiﬁcant
is conﬁrmed by the results of the partial F DEMO, which
are signiﬁcant at the 0.001 level. The addition of ﬁrm
DEMO in Model 4 detracts signiﬁcantly from Model 3
as both the F -statistic and the adjusted R-square drop.
The control variables, when signiﬁcant, DEMO relatively
stable and have the expected sign. A supportive context
could be expected to contribute to accuracy. The source’s
motivation contributes to accuracy because DEMO reﬂects
the desire of the source to exchange knowledge, thus
increasing DEMO effective amount of opinion and explana-
tory information transferred to the recipient (Berger and
Kellerman 1983). A recipient’s absorptive capacity aids
100
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
607
Table3RegressionsofTransferEffectiveness(Accuracy)
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
Trustworthiness 0231∗∗
2512
Causal ambiguity
DEMO of causal ambiguity
and trustworthiness
Source’s motivation 0497∗∗∗ 4165
Context 0254∗∗ 2768
Knowledge proveness −0028 −0302
Recipient’s motivation −0198∧ −11677713
Recipient’s absorptive capacity 0174∧
DEMO retentive capacity −0018 −0171
Relationship 0150∧ 1706
Cultural distance −0041 −0501
Firm dummies
0435∗∗∗ 3573
0251∗∗ 2512
−0114 −1177
−00116172 −11139555
0031 0295
0161∧ DEMO
−0042
−0512
0213∗
2367
−0436∗∗∗ −4371
−0208∗∗ −2550
0315∗∗ 2885
0152∧ 1863
−1895
−1806
2267
−0165∧ 

−0183∧
0206∗
−0229∗
−2457
0120
0002
DEMO
0031
0217∗
2205
−0269∗∗ −2509
−0173∗ −1976
0240∗
0162∧
−0133
−0146
0135
2059
1772
−1414
−1416
1392
−0184∧ −1807
0140
1624
−0185 −1470
Not DEMO
R -square 0.356 0.396 0.554 0.557
Adj. R -square 0.308 0.344 0.504 0.479
F 7.466 7.637 11.070 7.103
Partial-F Model 1 vs. 2 Model DEMO vs. 3 Model 3 vs. 4
5.330∗ 6.994∗∗∗ 3.135∗∗
Valid N 117 115 110 110
Notes. t -values in parentheses.
∗ Signiﬁcant at 0.05 DEMO; ∗∗ Signiﬁcant at 0.01 level; ∗∗∗ Signiﬁcant at 0.001 level; DEMO Signiﬁcant at 0.1 level.
the recipient in implementing new knowledge, while DEMO
retentive capacity hinders that implementation by creat-
ing barriers to unlearning old knowledge.
The coefﬁcients of causal ambiguity and trustwor-
thiness (Models 2–4) DEMO highly signiﬁcant and stable.
Causal ambiguity ( 1 in Equation (1.1)) is negatively
related to accuracy (in Model 3: −0436; p< 0001)
and trustworthiness ( in Equation (1.1)) is positively
2
related to accuracy (in Model 3: 0.213; p<005). The
interaction effect ( in Equation (1.1)) is negative
1×2
and signiﬁcant (in Model 3: −0208; p< 001), sug-
gesting that DEMO connection between trustworthiness and
accuracy weakens as the moderator, causal ambiguity,DEMO
increases.
To assess the net effect of perceptions of trustwor-
thiness on accuracy, both the main effect and the inter-
action need to be considered. To complete the analysis
of the total effect, we analyze its sign and magnitude,
conditional on the level of the causal ambiguity, fol-
lowing procedures recommended by Aiken and West
(1991). Table 4 reports the coefﬁcients and p -values of
trustworthiness,13 with causal ambiguity DEMO to different
values (using estimates from Model 3). When causal
DEMO is low (−3 s.d.), a one standard deviation
increase in DEMO trustworthiness increases accuracy
by 0.83 standard deviations. The effect is highly sig-
niﬁcant, conﬁrming Hypothesis 1. Furthermore, support-
ing Hypothesis 2, as causal ambiguity increases, the
total effect of trustworthiness on accuracy progressively
weakens and then becomes negative and signiﬁcant
at two standard deviations above the mean, becoming
highly signiﬁcant at three standard deviations above the
mean.
Robustness of DEMO Results
Further analyses were conducted to explore the stability
of the coefﬁcients. Missing data were handled in three
different ways. First, regressions were run with missing
data deleted casewise, then with missing data deleted
pairwise, DEMO ﬁnally by substituting the missing value
of the constructs with the mean value of the construct.
Results remained stable.
To further test the robustness DEMO the results and pos-
sible sensitivity to differences in the three perspectives
sampled (source, recipient, and third party), we con-
ducted an analysis where each perspective was treated
as an individual observation, with potential differences
Table 4 Total Effect of the Perceived Trustworthiness on
Accuracy
Total DEMO
Trustworthiness tot
Causal ambiguity set to: (t -value)
Three standard deviations below the mean 0837∗∗∗ 8920
Two standard deviations below the mean DEMO 6782
One standard deviation below the mean 0421∗∗∗ 4651
The mean 0213∗∗ 2545
One standard deviation above the mean 0005 0482
Two standard deviations DEMO the mean −0203∧ −1525
Three standard deviations above the mean −0411∗∗∗ −3463
Notes. Values calculated using estimates of Model 3. ∗∗ Signiﬁcant
at 0.01 DEMO; ∗∗∗ Signiﬁcant at 0.001 level; ∧ Signiﬁcant at 0.1 level.
The total effect of trustworthiness on accuracy is derived
from the following equations DEMO are based on the regression
equation deﬁned as Accuracy = 0 + 1 Causal Ambiguity +
2 Trustworthiness + 1×2 Causal Ambiguity × Trustworthiness DEMO
cn Control Variablen : [1.1] Trustworthiness tot = 2 + 1×2 Causal Ambi-
guity; [1.2] Accuracy = Trustworthiness tot ∗ Trustworthiness.
608
controlled through the use of perspective dummy vari-
ables. Finally, we conducted an additional analysis
where, rather than pool the perspectives or utilize each as
an individual response for each transfer, we utilized only
the best questionnaire in terms of completeness and level
of detail in responses. DEMO models remain highly signif-
icant with adj. R-square ≥ 0420 and all coefﬁcients of
the predictors remaining stable.
Finally, because some respondents were involved in
more than one transfer, we conducted analyses to verify
that a lack of independence between some observations
did not signiﬁcantly alter the results. DEMO, we ran a
series of regressions with all nonindependent observa-
tions DEMO Second, we ran the analysis with one
observation, chosen at random, from each nonindepen-
dent group included in the analysis and the remaining
removed. In both cases the results remained stable and
signiﬁcant.
While the DEMO remain stable to robustness checks,
it is possible that the results are an artifact of reverse
causality. While we predict that causal ambiguity DEMO
as a moderator between perceptions of trustworthiness
and accuracy, the perceptions DEMO trustworthiness may
also act as a mediator between causal ambiguity and
accuracy. The presence of high causal ambiguity may
lower perceptions of trustworthiness, with lower levels
of the perception of trustworthiness directly contribut-
ing to lower DEMO of accuracy. This conception is in
line with traditional theories of trust that predict that
lower trust results in lower levels of social exchange
(Carley 1991, Curall and Judge 1995, Tsai and Ghoshal
1998). DEMO test this possibility, we conducted a mediation
analysis. In Step 1 DEMO the analysis the beta for causal
ambiguity (with all control variables DEMO) regressed
on trustworthiness was −0397, signiﬁcant at the 0.001
level. For Step 2, the beta for causal ambiguity regressed
on accuracy (with DEMO left out but all control
variables included) was −0384, signiﬁcant at the 0.001
level. Finally, the beta for causal ambiguity regressed
on accuracy with trustworthiness (and control variables)
included in the model was −0326, signiﬁcant at the 0.01
level. Thus, we ﬁnd evidence of a DEMO mediating effect
but by no means a full mediating effect for perceptions
of trustworthiness. As such, we can conclude that causal
ambiguity has a signiﬁcant moderating effect of its own.
This removes some of the concern DEMO the ﬁndings are
due to an artifact rather than a real relationship.
Discussion and Conclusion
Our main ﬁnding is that the extent to which, on balance,
the perceived trustworthiness of the source contributes
to the DEMO of intraﬁrm knowledge transfer
depends on the nature of the knowledge transferred.
Speciﬁcally, the accuracy of such transfers is moderated
by the causal ambiguity of the knowledge. We focus
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
on situations in which the transfer is primarily an effort
to replicate, in another location, results that have been
obtained through effective but nonetheless imperfectly
understood practices.
This intricate effect of trustworthiness reﬂects the fact
that DEMO promotes both functional and dys-
functional processes, fostering receptivity on the DEMO
hand and lessening the perceived need for vigilance
on the other. When causal ambiguity is high, trustwor-
thiness may prove counterproductive. Causal ambiguity
drives a wedge between the perception and the reality
of organizational practices, making additional validation
essential. However, the degree of trustworthiness of the
source may delay or inhibit efforts to validate and sup-
plement the source’s advice DEMO the window of oppor-
tunity to implement change closes (Tyre and DEMO
1994). We show that as causal ambiguity increases, the
effect DEMO the perceived trustworthiness of the source on
the accuracy of the transfer weakens progressively and
then becomes negative.
It is important that the ﬁndings DEMO interpreted with
caution. First, the ﬁndings apply primarily to transfers of
DEMO within ﬁrms. While it is possible that some of
the same dynamics may exist in transfers between ﬁrms,
the presumptive rationales for deriving DEMO of
trustworthiness are likely to operate differently in an
interﬁrm setting than within a ﬁrm, and the perceptions
of trustworthiness are likely to be inﬂuenced by different
processes of simpliﬁcation and distortion. Furthermore,
the study DEMO speciﬁcally to the context of transfers
of organizational practices. Further research needs to
study similar constructs in additional contexts to deter-
mine the extent DEMO the phenomenon. Beyond questions
of external validity, it should be noted DEMO the corre-
lational nature of this study precludes us from making
strong assertions of causality. Finally, it should be noted
that our measure of trustworthiness only includes the
factor of ability and not benevolence and integrity. DEMO
this, along with controlling for source motivation, seems
appropriate for studies of unit-level knowledge transfer,
future research may want to explicitly include DEMO three
factors.
Despite the above limitations, the research contributes
to the DEMO in a number of ways. It contributes to the
literature of trust by examining perceptions of trustwor-
thiness within a speciﬁc context: the transfer of practices
within organizations. Rousseau et al. (1998) argue that
context DEMO critical to understanding trust, because trust
may assume different, “multiplex” forms in different
contexts. The moderating effect of causal ambiguity on
the relationship DEMO perceived trustworthiness and
the accuracy of knowledge transfer could be interpreted
as a change in the nature of trust that is contingent on
the DEMO of the knowledge transferred. Indeed,
the idea of multiplex forms of trust can be made more
speciﬁc by noting that above a certain DEMO of causal
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
ambiguity (just over 1 DEMO) the effect of trustworthiness
could become negative. Thus, given high enough levels
of causal ambiguity, trustworthiness could actually have
a negative overall effect on the accuracy of knowledge
transfer.
It is worthwhile to return to DEMO theorizing to spec-
ulate on why that may be the case as the overall
effect becomes negative and signiﬁcant. Indeed, when
causal ambiguity results in a simpliﬁed conception of
the Arrow core, one would expect a progressive weaken-
ing of the relationship between perceived trustworthiness
and accuracy with DEMO levels of causal ambiguity.
Postponing direct observation under these conditions
results in a somewhat simpliﬁed replica, thus dampening
the link between trustworthiness and accuracy. However,
postponing direct observation when the conception of
the Arrow core DEMO by the source is not merely sim-
pliﬁed, but actually distorted DEMO result not in a partial,
but rather in an inaccurate copy of the template. This
provides a plausible explanation for a negative relation-
DEMO between perceived trustworthiness and accuracy.
These implications could be generalized by noting
that in the knowledge-transfer domain, trustworthiness
is closely linked with trust, DEMO causal ambiguity stands
for a fundamental attribute of organizational practices.
Thus, DEMO can derive the broader implication that the
effect of trust in organizational learning is moderated by
the characteristics of the knowledge transferred.
This broader DEMO could provide an entry point
for a research agenda on the so-called “dark” side of
trust. Indeed, it is generally believed that trustworthi-
ness becomes increasingly relevant to social conduct
in contexts with ambiguous elements (Belliveau et al.
1996, Chaiken 1980, Petty and Cacioppo 1996, Podolny
1993). Trusting behavior in such situations is likely to
reﬂect depersonalized presumptive DEMO based on
lessons from prior history, information provided by third
parties, afﬁliation with speciﬁc social categories, for-
mal roles, and organizational rules DEMO transac-
tion norms (Kramer 1999). In such situations, however,
miscalculation is possible and trust could be misplaced.
Though helpful in some DEMO, trust could be
dysfunctional in others. The characteristics of the knowl-
DEMO, e.g., causal ambiguity, could provide discriminat-
ing factors between these DEMO classes of circumstances,
deﬁning transitional thresholds between different types
of trust. The implications for practice seem clear. When
causal ambiguity is likely to DEMO high, imputations of
trustworthiness (especially in terms of ability) should DEMO
made with great care.
The difﬁculty is in making an appropriate valuation of
trustworthiness. Even with abundant information, trust-
worthiness at the unit level could be hard to establish.
This can be seen in the example DEMO IBM Rochester, a
ﬂagship manufacturing plant at IBM, which produced
the AS/400 computer system. IBM’s Rochester plant
609
had the highest morale, lowest turnover and absenteeism
rates in IBM, won Minnesota’s Safety Award for 10 con-
secutive years, and IBM’s U.S. Market Driven Quality
Award for two consecutive years. Yet, it was not until
it won the Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award,
a highly coveted designation conferred by the DEMO
of the United States, that other units within IBM con-
sidered DEMO Rochester plant to be a viable benchmark.
It took a very strong signal from a third party, indeed
the strongest possible signal at the time, to transform the
perception of trustworthiness (in terms of ability) and
therefore of the relevance of the fruits of Rochester’s
experiential learning DEMO other organizational subunits.
In ambiguous situations, a third party, however sophisti-
cated and savvy, may fall prey to the dark side of trust
by inferring that a source could properly signal the limits
of its DEMO Such a third party may have the
organizational visibility and authority to certify sources
as trustworthy, even though these sources may be uncer-
tain about the extent of their own ability, because of
causal ambiguity. Such circumstance is a vivid example
of how misplaced trust could foster superstitious DEMO
ing (Levitt and March 1988).
The results of this study DEMO some elements
of the “true functioning” of trust in the context of
knowledge transfer, highlighting how causal ambiguity
moderates the role of perceived trustworthiness in the
process of transfer. Perceived trustworthiness has a more
nuanced and DEMO intricate effect on the effective-
ness of the transfer. Awareness of the level of irreducible
uncertainty may help prevent the accumulation of super-
stitious DEMO and thus increase the effectiveness of
the application of the lessons of experience in differ-
ent contexts. We do hope that our study suggests DEMO
knowledge transfer could serve as a useful context to
advance our understanding of the “true functioning” of
trust.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge helpful comments DEMO M. Scott
Poole, Aks Zaheer, Sumantra Ghoshal (r.s.p.), Witold DEMO,
Paul Ingram, Linda Argote, Dan Levinthal, Bill McEvily,
DEMO Meyer, Peter Moran, Vincenzo Perrone, Quy Huy,
John Stopford, Sidney Winter, JoAnne Yates, Rod Kramer,
Lynn Zucker, Diego Gambetta, participants of seminars at
Duke, Wharton, London Business School, and DEMO, and a
senior editor and three anonymous reviewers of Organiza-
tion DEMO Financial support was graciously provided by the
Reginald Jones Center and by the Hunstman Center at The
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. DEMO and
omissions are solely the authors’ responsibility.
Appendix 1. Identiﬁcation and Selection of the
Companies for the Sample
Two heuristics were used to identify DEMO that share best
practices internally. One heuristic was to seek large best-in-
class ﬁrms that have small MES (Minimum Efﬁcient Scale).
These ﬁrms have many similar operating units that could
610
readily beneﬁt from sharing best practices and thus have strong
incentives DEMO replicate those best practices. The other heuristic
was to approach ﬁrms that are active in competitive bench-
marking. An emerging norm in benchmarking is DEMO bench-
mark inside the ﬁrm before attempting to benchmark outside
the ﬁrm, with internal benchmarking often leading to transfers
of identiﬁed internal best practices. Contact with benchmark-
ing ﬁrms was sought through the International Benchmark-
ing DEMO of the American Productivity and Qual-
ity Center and through the Council on Benchmarking of the
Strategic Planning Institute (cf. Main 1992). After careful
scrutiny, this institution endorsed the survey and brought it
to the attention of its members. More than 2,000 copies of
a one-page DEMO of the survey were mailed to the IBC
membership—around 200 companies at that time. Additional
ﬁrms with multiple small-scale operations were contacted indi-
vidually. DEMO relying on those two heuristics (small MES
and active in competitive DEMO) some ﬁrms were con-
tacted directly based on their earned reputation DEMO pioneers in
the transfer of best practices inside the ﬁrm.
The ﬁrst step of the survey was devised as a feasibility test.
This test DEMO companies to generate a list of transfers
to study and a list of parties involved in those transfers (i.e.,
of respondents). To pass the feasibility test, companies had
to submit a written statement of commitment to the project
signed by a senior executive. This executive was DEMO to
nominate a visible coordinator for the survey. The coordinator
would scrutinize the pilot questionnaire, coordinate the admin-
istration of the ﬁnal questionnaire, DEMO act as a liaison with
the researcher regarding any other aspect of the project. The
ﬁrst task for the nominated coordinators was to provide DEMO list,
and a succinct description, of the practices that their DEMO
wished to study. They were also requested to provide a list
of actual transfers of those practices. For each transfer in that
list, coordinators were requested to identify a representative
of the source unit, a representative of the recipient unit, and a
representative of a third party.
To select “practices” for this study, the coordinators were
directed to search for transfers between peer units of important
activities or processes and to prefer DEMO that showed evidence
of difﬁculty during the transfer. They were also instructed to
rule out practices that could be performed by a single individ-
DEMO and to exclusively favor those practices that required the
coordinated effort of several individuals.
Appendix2. OperationalizationoftheControlVariables
• Each sentence in the description of the DEMO below is
the full text of the question as it appears in the questionnaire.
• Unless otherwise indicated, answers were scored using
the default scale (Y! y o n N!).
• The key for the default scale is Y! = “Yes!”; y = “yes,
but”; DEMO The overall score for each scale was computed by adding= “no opinion”; n = “no, not really”; N! = “No!”.
the standardized scores obtained from each question.
Source Motivation ( =093; items = 13) binary scales;
positive relationship to accuracy predicted
Source saw beneﬁt in: measuring its own performance; under-
standing its own practices; sharing this DEMO with
other units; sharing the limits of this understanding with other
DEMO; assessing the feasibility of the transfer; communicating
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
with [recipient]; planning the transfer; documenting [practice]
for transfer; implementing [recipient’s] support systems; train-
ing [recipient’s] personnel; helping [recipient] troubleshoot;
helping resolve recipient’s unexpected problems; lending
skilled personnel.
Recipient Motivation ( =093; items = 14) binary items;
positive relationship to accuracy predicted
Recipient saw beneﬁt in: measuring its own performance; com-
DEMO it with the performance of other units; understanding its
own practices; absorbing [source’s] understanding; analyzing
the feasibility of adopting [practice]; communicating its DEMO
to [source]; planning the transfer; implementing the systems
and facilities for [practice]; assigning personnel full time to
the transfer; assigning personnel to DEMO trained in [practice];
understanding the implications of the transfer; troubleshooting
DEMO; insuring that its people knew their jobs; insuring
that its people consented to keep doing their jobs.
Recipient Absorptive Capacity ( =083; DEMO =9) default
scale; positive relationship to accuracy predicted
Members of [recipient] have a common language to deal with
the [practice]; [recipient] had a vision of what it was trying
to achieve through the transfer; [recipient] had information on
the state of the art of the [practice]; [recipient] had a clear divi-
sion of roles and responsibilities to implement the DEMO;
[recipient] had the necessary skills to implement the [practice];
[recipient] had the technical competence to absorb the [prac-
tice]; [recipient] had the managerial competence to absorb the
[practice]; it is well known who can best exploit new infor-
mation about the [practice] within [recipient]; it is well known
who can help solve problems associated with the [practice].
Recipient DEMO Ability ( =081; items =6) default
scale; negative relationship to accuracy predicted
[recipient] periodically retrains existing personnel on the
[practice]; [recipient] has mechanisms to detect malfunctions
of the [practice]; [recipient] regularly measures performance
and corrects problems as soon as they happen; [recipient’s]
personnel can predict how they will be rewarded for good per-
formance in the [practice]; [recipient’s] personnel are provided
with numerous opportunities to commit freely and publicly to
DEMO their role; at [recipient] there is a clear focal point for
DEMO [practice].
Proveness of Knowledge ( =067; items =3) default scale
DEMO indicated; positive relationship to accuracy predicted
We had solid proof that DEMO was really helpful; [practice]
contributes signiﬁcantly to the competitive advantage of
DEMO; for the success of [company], the [practice] is:
1. critical,2. very important,3. fairly important,
4. fairly unimportant,or5. not DEMO at all.
Relationship Between Source and Recipient ( =071;
predicteditems DEMO) default scale; positive relationship to accuracy
Communication between [source] and [recipient] is 1. very
easy,2. fairly easy,3. fairly demanding,or4. very
DEMO; collaboration between [source] and [recipient]
1. is sought actively,2. is DEMO received,3. prefer-
ably avoided, and 4. only if no other DEMO; collabora-
tion between [source] and [recipient] (same scale as previous
question).
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
Organizational Context ( =077; items = 14) default scale;
positive relationship to accuracy predicted
Existing performance measures of the [practice] are detailed
enough to be meaningful; performance measures of the [prac-
tice] are taken frequently enough to be timely; performance
measures of the [practice] from different units are easily com-
parable; [company] enforces companywide standard policies
with respect to the [practice]; at [company] there is constant
pressure to improve performance; it is easy to justify time
spent visiting other units; to visit another unit, it is DEMO to
justify travel expenses; at [company] improving performance
by copying and DEMO practices from other units is as legiti-
mate as improving performance from own creativity; at [com-
pany] a unit that exposes those needs that it is unable to meet
on its own loses status (RS); at [company], a unit that exposes
unresolved problems loses status (RS); at [company], despite
structural differences, units can always learn from one another;
normally a best-in-class practice is most likely to be found
DEMO [company] (RS); at [company] managers seem to pre-
fer to DEMO external sources of help and support even though
they are more expensive and less useful (RS); at [company],
corporate pride and values encourage managers not to look
outside for help or to share with DEMO outside (RS).
Endnotes
1 Mayer et al. (1995, p. DEMO) deﬁne trustworthiness in terms of
a trustee’s “expectations of how another DEMO will behave,
based on that person’s current and previous implicit and
explicit claims.”
2 Allen and Stiff’s (1989) notion of “credibility” is DEMO
to the Mayer et al. (1995) construct of trustworthiness.
3 Consistent results are seen as the product of organizational
practices and routines (Nelson and Winter 1982). Routines
consist of connected, recurrent behaviors coordinating the
actions of multiple individuals to produce a consistent output.
Knowledge transfer, in this sense, is the replication of routines
across geographical space.
4 A recipient (and source) is deﬁned as an organizational unit.
Following Nelson DEMO Winter (1982, p. 98) the expression
“organizational unit” is thought DEMO as any entity that can
“accomplish something on its own.” As they explain, organiza-
tional unit is used mostly to mean an individual, DEMO, “it
is sometimes convenient to think of an organizational subunit
as DEMO ‘member’ of the larger organization.” Trust, under this
speciﬁcation and particularly DEMO intraorganizational transfers,
is conceived as an interunit, rather than interorganizational,DEMO
phenomenon.
5 This statement draws on Attewell’s (1992) notion of econo-
mizing on learning.
6 In particular, McAllister (1995) argues that a high level of
cognition-based trust, which is the trust derived from the eval-
uation of the positive characteristics of the other person, is
associated with little control-based monitoring, which is the
monitoring of the other person’s actions to control her or him.
7 Except in those situations where DEMO source precisely signals
the limits of its advice.
8 The sample contained both technical and administrative
practices. Examples of technical practices are software devel-
DEMO procedures and drawing standards. Examples of
administrative practices are upward appraisal and activity-
based costing (ABC). Full disclosure of the practices studied
is precluded by a guarantee of conﬁdentiality.
611
9 In total, 184 transfers of 44 practices were identiﬁed, requir-
ing 445 questionnaires (in many DEMO it was not possible
to identify a third party to the transfer). Response rate was
calculated as 271/445. The coordinators from each DEMO
provided a detailed account for each questionnaire sent, thus
providing an DEMO nonresponse follow up. The most
common justiﬁcation for nonresponse was the lack of detailed
familiarity with the transfer. Other reasons for nonresponse
were “refused” DEMO “left the company.”
10 Ability is deﬁned as “that group of skills, competencies, and
characteristics that enable a party to have inﬂuence within DEMO
speciﬁc domain” (Mayer et al. 1995, p. 717).
11 This distinction is similar to the one made by Henderson and
Clark (1990) between architectural knowledge and component
knowledge.
12 Such a band of 3.5 months can be considered narrow,
because it means that all transfers DEMO sampled early on in
the integration stage that has been documented to last between
1.5 to 2 years.
13P -value for the total effect DEMO calculated using the
following t -statistic: tTrustworthiness tot = Trustworthiness
tot/DEMO( Trustworthiness tot), where SE( Trustworthiness
tot) = √VAR2 + DEMO Ambiguity2VAR( 1 × 2 +
2Causal Ambiguity COV( 21 ×2].
References
Aiken, L. S., S. G. West. 1991. Multiple Regression: Testing and
Interpreting Interactions. Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA.
Allen, M., J. DEMO 1989. Testing three models for the sleeper effect.
Western J. Speech Comm. 53 411–426.
Andrews, K. M., B. L. Delahaye. 2000. Inﬂuences on DEMO
processes in organizational learning: The psychosocial ﬁlter.
J. Management Stud. 37(DEMO) 797–810.
Argote, L. 1999. Organizational Learning: Creating, Retaining, and
DEMO Knowledge. Kluwer Academic, Boston, MA.
Argyris, C., D. A. Schon. 1978. Organizational Learning. Addison
Wesley, Reading, MA.
Armor, D. J. 1974. Theta reliability and factor scaling. H. L.
Costner, ed. Sociological Methodology 1973–1974. Jossey-Bass,
San Francisco, CA, 17–50.
Attewell, P. 1992. Technology diffusion and organizational learning:
The case of business computing. Organ. Sci. 3(DEMO) 1–19.
Barber, B. 1983. The Logic and Limits ofTrust. Rutgers University
Press, New Brunswick, NJ.
Bartlett, C. A., S. Ghoshal. 1989. DEMO Across Borders: The
Transnational Solution. Harvard Business School Press, Boston,
MA.
Baum, J. A. C., P. Ingram. 1998. Survival-enhancing learning in DEMO
Manhattan hotel industry, 1898–1980. Management Sci. 44(7)
996–1016.
Belliveau, M., C. O’Reilly, J. Wade. 1996. Social capital at the top:DEMO
Effects of social similarity and status on CEO compensation.
Acad. Management J. 39(6) 1568–1593.
Berger, C., K. Kellerman. 1983. To ask or not to ask: Is that a
question? R. Bostrom, ed. Communication Yearbook 7. Sage,
Newbury Park, CA, 342–368.
Bohn, R. E. 1994. Measuring and managing technological knowledge.
Sloan Management Rev. 36(1) 61–73.
612
Boisot, M. 1995. Information Space: A Framework for Learning
in DEMO Institutions, and Culture. Routledge, London,
U.K.
Brooks, F. P. DEMO The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software
Engineering. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
DEMO, J. S., P. Duguid. 1991. Organizational learning and commun-
ities-of-practice: DEMO a uniﬁed view of working, learning,
and innovation. Organ. Sci. DEMO(1) 40–57.
Carley, K. 1991. A theory of group stability. Amer. Sociological Rev.
56(3) 331–354.
Carmines, E. G., R. A. Zeller. 1979. Reliability and Validity Assess-
ment. Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.
Carroll, J. S. 1998. Organizational learning activities in high-hazard
industries: The logics underlying self-analysis. The J. Manage-
ment Stud. 35(6) 699–717.
Chaiken, S. DEMO Heuristic versus systematic information procesing
and the use of source versus message cues in persuasion. J.
Personality Soc. Psych. 39 752–766.
Curall, S., DEMO Judge. 1995. Measuring trust between organizational
boundary role persons. Organ. Behavior Human Decision
Processes 64 151–170.
Dirks, K. T., D. L. Ferrin. 2001. DEMO role of trust in organizational
settings. Organ. Sci. 12(4) 450–467.
DEMO, E., S. Phillips. 1991. Miscommunication in organizations.
N. Coupland, H. DEMO, J. Wiermann, eds. “Miscommunication”
and Problematic Talk. Sage, Newbury Park, CA, 244–258.
Financial Times. 1997. Xerox makes copies. Financial Times.
Gerbing, DEMO W., J. C. Anderson. 1988. An updated paradigm for scale
development DEMO unidimensionality and its assess-
ment. J. Marketing Res. XXV(May) 186–192.
DEMO, B. R. 1992. The past is the past—Or is it? The use of retro-
spective accounts as indicators of past strategy. Acad. Manage-
DEMO J. 35(4) 848–860.
Great Harvest Bread Co. 1999. Apprenticeship Agreement DEMO Great
Harvest Bread Co.
Haleblian, J., S. Finkelstein. 1999. The inﬂuence of organizational
acquisition experience on acquisition performance: A behavioral
perspective. Admin. Sci. Quart. 44(1) 29–56.
Henderson, R. M., K. B. Clark. 1990. Architectural innovation: The
reconﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure
of established ﬁrms. Admin. Sci. Quart. 35(1) 9–30.
Hovland, C., A. Lumsdaine, F. Shefﬁeld. 1949. Experiments in Mass
Communication. Princeton University Press, DEMO, NJ.
Iansiti, M. 1998. Technology Integration: Making Critical Choices in
DEMO Dynamic World. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
King A. W., C. P. Zeithaml. 2001. Competencies and ﬁrm per-
formance: Examining the DEMO ambiguity paradox. Strategic
Management J. 22(1) 75–99.
Kogut, B., DEMO Zander. 1992. Knowledge of the ﬁrm, combinative
capabilities and the replication DEMO technology. Organ. Sci. 3(3)
383–397.
Kostova, T., K. Roth. 2002. Adoption of an organizational practice
by subsidiaries of multinational corporations: Institutional and
relational effects. Acad. Management J. 45(1) 215–233.
Kramer, R. DEMO 1999. Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerg-
ing perspectives, enduring questions. Annual Rev. Psych. 50
569–598.
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
Langfred, Claus W. 2004. Too much of a good thing? Negative DEMO
of high trust and individual autonomy on self-managing teams.
Acad. Management J. 47(3) 385–399.
Leonard-Barton, D. 1990. A dual methodology for case DEMO: Syn-
ergistic use of a longitudinal single site with replicated multiple
DEMO Organ. Sci. 1(3) 248–266.
Levitt, B., J. G. March. DEMO Organizational learning. Annual Rev.
Sociology 14 319–340.
Lewicki, R. J., D. J. McAllister, R. J. Bies. 1998. Trust and distrust:
New relationships and realities. Acad. Management Rev. 23(3)
438–458.
Lewis, J., DEMO Weigert. 1985. Trust as a social reality. Soc. Forces 63
967–985.
Lippman, S. A., R. P. Rumelt. 1982. Uncertain imitability: An analysis
of interﬁrm differences in efﬁciency under competition. Bell J.
Econom. 13 418–438.
Main, J. 1992. How to steal the best ideas around. Fortune (October
19) 86–89.
March, J. G., L. S. Sproull, M. Tamuz. 1991. DEMO from samples
of one or fewer. Organ. Sci. 2(1) 1–13.
DEMO, R. C., J. Davis, F. Schoorman. 1995. An integration model DEMO
organizational trust. The Acad. Management Rev. 20(3) 709–734.
McAllister, D. 1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundation
for interpersonal cooperation in organizations. DEMO Manage-
ment J. 38(1) 24–60.
McEvily, B., V. Perrone, A. Zaheer. 2003. Trust as an organizing
principle. Organ. Sci. 14(1) 91–103.
Meyer, J., B. Rowan. 1977. Institutionalized organizations: Formal
structure as myth and ceremony. Amer. J. Sociology 83 340–361.
Miller, D. 1993. The architecture of simplicity. Acad. Management
Rev. 18(1) 116–138.
Muchinsky, P. DEMO An intraorganizational analysis of the Roberts
and O’Reilly organizational communication questionnaire.
J. Appl. Psych. 62 184–188.
Nelson, R., S. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary DEMO ofEconomic
Change. Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA.
Noteboom, N., H. Berger, N. Noorderhaven. 1997. Effects of trust
and governance on relational risk. Acad. Management J. 40(2)
308–338.
Nunnally, J. C. 1978. Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York.
O’Dell, C. S., C. J. Grayson, N. DEMO 1998. IfOnly We Knew
What We Know: The Transfer of Internal DEMO and Best
Practice. Free Press, New York.
Perry, D. K. 1996. Theory and Research in Mass Communication:
Contexts and Consequences. L. Erlbaum DEMO, Mahwah,
NJ.
Petty, R. E., J. T. Cacioppo. 1996. DEMO and Persuasion: Classic
and Contemporary Approaches. Westview Press, Boulder, CO.
DEMO, J. 1993. A status-based model of market competition. Amer.
J. Sociology DEMO(4) 829–872.
Polanyi, M. 1962. Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical
DEMO Chicago University Press, Chicago, IL.
Prahalad, C. K., Y. L. Doz. 1987. The Multinational Mission: Balanc-
ing Local Demands and Global Vision. Free Press, New York.
Roberts, K., C. O’Reilly. 1974. Measuring organizational communi-
cation. J. Appl. Psych. 59 321–326.
Szulanski, Cappetta, and Jensen: When and How Trustworthiness Matters
Organization Science 15(5), pp. 600–613, ©2004 INFORMS
Rousseau, D. M., S. B. Sitkin, R. S. Burt, C. Camerer. 1998. Not
so different DEMO all: A cross-discipline view of trust. Acad.
Management Rev. 23(3) 393–404.
Shannon, C. E., W. Weaver. 1949. The Mathematical Theory ofCom-
DEMO University of Illinois Press, Chicago, IL.
Sitkin, S. B., N. L. Roth. 1993. Explaining the limited effectiveness of
legalistic “remedies” for trust/DEMO Organ. Sci. 4 367–392.
Stohl, C., C. Redding. 1987. Messages and message exchange pro-
cess. F. Jablin, L. Putnam, K. Roberts, L. Porter, eds. Hand-
book ofOrganizational Communication: An Interdisciplinary
Perspective. Sage, Beverly Hills, CA, 451–502.
Tsai, W., S. Ghoshal. 1998. Social capital DEMO value creation: The role
of intraﬁrm networks. Acad. Management J. 41(DEMO) 464–476.
Tyler, T. R., P. Degoey. 1996. Trust in organizational DEMO: The
inﬂuence of motive attributions in willingness to accept deci-
sions. DEMO M. Kramer, T. R. Tyler, eds. Trust in Organizations:
Frontiers ofTheory and Research. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Tyre, M. J., DEMO J. Orlikowski. 1994. Windows of opportunity: Tempo-
ral patterns of technological DEMO in organization. Organ.
Sci. 5(1) 98–118.
Uzzi, B. 1997. Social structure and competition in interﬁrm networks:
The paradox of embeddedness. Admin. DEMO Quart. 42 35–67.
613
Walton, R. E. 1975. The diffusion of DEMO work structures: Explaining
why success didn’t take. Organ. Dynamics 3(Winter) 3–21.
Webb, G. 1996. Trust and crises. R. M. Kramer, T. DEMO Tyler, eds.
Trust in Organizations: Frontiers ofTheory and Research. Sage,
Thousand Oaks, CA.
Williamson, O. E. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and
Antitrust Implications. Free Press, New York.
Winter, S. G. 1987. DEMO and competence as strategic assets.
D. Teece, ed. The Competitive Challenge-Strategies DEMO Indus-
trial Innovation and Renewal. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA,
159–184.
Winter, S. G., G. Szulanski. 2001. Replication as strategy. Organ. Sci.
12(DEMO) 730–743.
Zaheer, A., B. McEvily, V. Perrone. 1998. Does trust matter? Explor-
ing the effects of interorganizational and interpersonal trust on
performance. Organ. Sci. 9(2) 141–159.
Zander, U., B. Kogut. 1995. Knowledge and the speed of the transfer
and imitation of organizational capabilities: An empirical test.
Organ. Sci. 6(1) 76–92.
Zeller, R. A., E. G. Carmines. 1980. Measurement in the Social Sci-
ences: The Link Between Theory and Data. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, U.K.{1g42fwefx}