Black Swans and the Domains of Statistics
Author(s): Nassim Nicholas DEMO
Source: The American Statistician, Vol. 61, No. 3 (Aug., DEMO), pp. 198-200
Published by: American Statistical Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/27643893 .
Accessed: 14/09/2014 12:15
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & DEMO of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/DEMO/terms.jsp
.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
DEMO in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about DEMO, please contact support@jstor.org.
.
American Statistical Association is collaborating with JSTOR DEMO digitize, preserve and extend access to The
American Statistician.
http://DEMO
This content downloaded from 155.247.166.234 on Sun, 14 Sep 2014 12:DEMO:43 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Black Swans and the
Domains of Statistics
Nassim Nicholas
lems based
In DEMO
its frequency.
TBS is critical of some statistics in the
1. The unrigorous use of statistics,
in domains where the current methods
quential
DEMO need to force ourselves
low probabilities.
on probability, not expectation or DEMO moments.
for instance, the outlier counts
experiments, as
a single observation, and does not cause a high impact beyond
following areas:
and reliance on probability
can lead us to make conse
mistakes (the "DEMO impact") where, on logical grounds,
to be suspicious of DEMO about
2. The psychological effects of statistical numbers in
lowering risk consciousness and the suspension of healthy
skepticism?in spite of the unreliability of DEMO numbers produced
about low-probability events.
3. Finally TBS is critical of the use of commoditized metrics
such as "standard deviation," "Sharpe ratio," "mean-variance,"
and so on in fat-tailed domains where these terms have little
practical meaning, and where reliance by the untrained has been
significant, unchecked and, alas, consequential.
Let me summarize the aims of TBS. What one of the review
ers calls "philosophy" (a term that generally alludes to the ster
ile character of some of the DEMO in philosophy departments),
owing perhaps to the lack of quantitative DEMO in TBS, I tend
to call "risk management." That is, practical wisdom and transla
tion of knowledge into responsible decision making. Again, for a
practitioner "philosophy" is, literally, "wisdom," not empty talk.
Nassim Nicholas Taleb is a veteran derivatives trader and researcher,
DEMO Business School and Empirica Laboratory Limited (E-mail:
gamma @fooledby randomness, com).
198 The American Statistician, August 2007, Vol. 61,
DEMO INTRODUCTION As put directly in TBS, it is about how "not to be a sucker." My
aim of the book is "how DEMO avoid being the turkey." It cannot get
The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable (hence more practical (and less "philosophical" in the academic sense)
TBS) is only critical of statistics, statisticians, or users of statistics than that.
in a very narrow (DEMO consequential) set of circumstances. It was Accordingly, TBS is meant to provide a roadmap for dealing
written by a veteran practitioner of uncertainty DEMO profes with tail events by exposing areas where our knowledge can be
sion (a mixture of quantitative research, derivatives pricing, and deemed fragile, and where tail events can have extreme impacts.
risk management) estimates DEMO deals with exposures to higher It presents methods to avoid such events by not venturing into
order statistical properties. Derivatives depend on some nonlin DEMO where our knowledge is not rigorous. In other words, it
ear DEMO of random variables (often square or cubes) and are offers a way to live safely in a world we do not quite understand.
DEMO extremely sensitive to estimation errors of the higher It does not get into the trap of offering another precise model
moments of probability distributions. DEMO is the closest to ap to replace another precise model; rather DEMO tells you where we
plied statistician one can possibly get. Furthermore, DEMO notes should have the courage to say "I don't know," or "I know less."
the astonishing success of statistics as DEMO engine of scientific
knowledge in (1) some well-charted domains such as measure 2. CONFIDENCE ABOUT SMALL PROBABILITIES
ment errors, gambling theory, thermodynamics, and quantum
mechanics (these fall under the designation of "mild random DEMO will next outline the "inverse problem" of the real world.
ness"), or (2) some applications in which our vulnerability to er Life is not an artificial laboratory in which we are supplied with
DEMO is small. Indeed, statistics has been very successful in "low probabilities. Nor is it an urn (alas) as in elementary statistics
moment" applications such as "significance testing" for prob textbooks.
and enforce some DEMO transparency (i.e., try to eliminate
the uncertainty about the probabilities). Empirical estimation of
probabilities poses a problem in domains with unbounded or
DEMO payoffs. (/ am not assuming, which is key, that
an DEMO or lower bound does not exist, only that we do not DEMO
where it is.)
Suppose that you are deriving probabilities of future occur
rences from the data, assuming (in the "rosy" case) that the past
is representative of the future. An event can be DEMO market crash,
a banking crisis, a loss for an insurance DEMO, a riot, peo
ple affected
in an epidemic,
an act of terrorism,
and so on. The
severity of the event here DEMO be inversely proportional to its
expected frequency: the so-called 10-year flood DEMO be more
frequent than the 100-year flood, and the 100-year flood DEMO be
more
devastating.
In these events, we are not sampling
from DEMO
problem-style
closed
urn of known
composition
and
impacts.
We don't even know if there is a 200-year flood, and what im
pact it are now subjected to the classical problem
of induction: making bold claims about the unknown based on
assumed properties of the known. So (1) the smaller the proba
bility, the larger we need the sample DEMO to be in order to make
inferences, and the smaller the DEMO, the higher the
error in estimating this probability. (2) Yet DEMO these
smaller the probability, the more consequential the
absolute probability error DEMO the moments of the
Estimation errors for tail probabilities are very important
their large impact is considered. The pair probability times im
pact is DEMO rectangle that gets thinner as probabilities becomes
relative
domains, the
impact
DEMO
when
of the
smaller, but its area can become
more
stochastic
DEMO the probabil
ities do not drop too quickly as the impact becomes larger. This
is clearly intractable. It can be solved on paper, of course, by as
suming a priori a certain class of distributions. Indeed the choice
Nor
is it a casino where
the state authorities
monitor
DEMO
No.
3
?American
Statisticial Association
DOI:
10.1198/000313007X219996
This content DEMO from 155.247.166.234 on Sun, 14 Sep 2014 12:15:43 PM
DEMO use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
may have.
We
of distributions
with characteristic
scale?that
brot defined
to
is, what Mandel
as "mild randomness," more on that later?appears
conveniently push such problems under the rug.
True fat-tailed
distributions
have a scale-free
or fractal DEMO
erty that I can simplify as follows: for X large enough, (i.e., "in
the tails"), P[X > nx]/P[X > DEMO depends on n, not on x. In
financial securities, say, DEMO X is a monthly return, there is
3. SELF-REFERENCE no reason DEMO P[X > 20%]/P[X > 10%] to be different from
P[X > 15%]/P[X > 7.5%]. This self-similarity at all scales
This problem has DEMO seemingly dealt away with the use generates power-law, or Paretian, tails; that is, above a crossover
of "off-the-shelf" probability distributions. But DEMO are point, P[X > x] = Kx~a. (Note that the same properties hold
self-referential. Do we have enough data? If the distribution is, for P[X < x] in the negative domain.)
say, the DEMO Gaussian, then yes, we may be able to say that The standard Poisson and stochastic volatility models are not
we have sufficient data?DEMO instance, the Gaussian itself tells us scale-invariant. There is a known DEMO of x beyond which these
how much data we need. But if the distribution is not from such distributions become thin-tailed?when in reality DEMO do not
a well-bred family, then we may not have enough DEMO But how know what the upper bound is. Further, the Poisson DEMO it
do we know which distribution we have on our hands? DEMO, self to in-sample overfitting: you can always use a Poisson jump
from the data itself. to fit, in past samples, would fail DEMO out largest of sample. realization For of instance, a fractal before DEMO the
So we can state the problem of self-reference of statistical process. But it
distributions in the following way. If (1) one needs DEMO to obtain 23% drop in the stock market crash of 1987, DEMO worst previous
a probability distribution to gauge knowledge about the future in-sample move was close to 10%. Calibrating a Poisson jump of
behavior of DEMO distribution from its past results, and if, at the 10% would not have prepared the risk manager for the ensuing
same time, (DEMO) one needs a probability distribution to gauge data large drop. On DEMO other hand, for someone using the framework
sufficiency and whether or DEMO it is predictive outside its sample, of Mandelbrot (1963), the crash of 1987 would not have been
then we are facing a DEMO regress loop. We do not know what surprising?nor would hundreds of large moves we've had in
weight regress, to this put one on additional can have data. severe And consequences unlike many when problems DEMO talk of currencies ture on dozens and of stocks empirical (TBS DEMO tests across an socioeconomic overview of the random litera
variables).
about risk management. Unless there are logical reasons to assume "Mediocristan," or
mild randomness, TBS advocates using a fractal distribution for
4. NOT ANY FAT TAILS WOULD DO the tails as a default, which is the opposite of what I've seen
practiced. Why? There is a logical asymmetry: a true fat-tailed
Although they do not share some aspects of the style of the distribution can camouflage as thin-tailed in small samples; the
message, the four discussants appear to agree with TBS about opposite is not true. If I see a "20-sigma" event, I can be con
the role of outliers and their primacy over the ordinary DEMO deter vinced that the data are not Gaussian. If I see no such deviation
mining the statistical properties. The discussants advocate the I cannot DEMO statements that the tails are necessarily thin?in
following: robust statistics, stochastic volatility or G ARCH, or fat-tailed distributions, nothing eventful takes DEMO most of the
Extreme Value Theory. These approaches either do not solve the time. The burden of proof is not on a fat-tailed distribution.
DEMO of confidence about small probability, or they create Decision makers are DEMO concerned about the cost of mis
new ones: many of these DEMO tools, not solutions. Robust statis takes, rather than exact knowledge about the statistical
tics are certainly more natural tools (Goldstein and Taleb 2007), erties. We are dealing with plenty of invisibles, so I do not use
but I fail to see how robust statistics will produce DEMO informa power-law tails as a way to estimate
tion about the probability of events that are not in the sample of the parameter a DEMO not easily computed?rather make
the past realizations (see Freedman and DEMO 2003). Moreover, decisions. How?
there is a major methodological DEMO between our stand First, we use power laws as risk-management
points: I do not believe in using any distribution that naively low us DEMO quantify sensitivity to left- and right-tail measurement
produces some extreme event (DEMO calibrates one from past data). errors and rank situations based on the full effect of the unseen.
From an operational (and risk management) standpoint, not any We can effectively get information about our vulnerability DEMO the
fat tails would do. tails by varying the power-law exponent a and looking at the
The central idea of TBS concerns the all-too-common DEMO effect on the moments or the shortfall (expected losses in excess
DEMO ofabsence of evidence with evidence of absence, asso of some threshold)DEMO This is a fully structured stress testing, as
ciated with the DEMO of confirmation. It tries to avert this logical the tail exponent a decreases, all possible states of the world are
error in the interpretation of statistical information. As it is im encompassed. And skepticism about the DEMO can lead to action
possible to make precise statements about unseen events, those and allow ranking situations based on the fragility of knowledge;
that lie outside the sample set, we need to make the richest pos as these errors are less consequential in some areas than others. DEMO
sible scenarios about them. For this TBS uses, on both logical DEMO as follows. If your left tail is "organically" truncated (i.e.,DEMO
and empirical grounds, the classification made by Mandelbrot the state of DEMO world is not possible or cannot affect you), then
(1963) between two classes of probability distributions: those you may not worry about negative low-probability events and
that have "true fat tails" and others DEMO do not. I had difficulty look forward to positive ones. In a business that benefits from
understanding why the statistical literature has neglected for DEMO the rare event (bounded left-tail exposure, unbounded right one),
DEMO the Mandelbrotian classification. rare events that the past did not reveal are almost certainly going
precise
probabilities?since
as an aid to
prop
tools;DEMO
they al
The American Statistician, August 2007, Vol. 61, No. DEMO
199
This content downloaded from 155.247.166.234 on Sun, 14 Sep 2014 DEMO:15:43 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
to be good for you. When you look at past biotech revenues,DEMO
for example, you do not see the superblockbuster in them, and
owing
probability that
larger than
by thickening the
the unseen.
On the DEMO hand, consider businesses negatively exposed to
rare events (bounded right tails). The track record you see is
likely to overestimate the properties?DEMO any thickening of the
left tail lowers your expectation. TBS discusses the 1982 blowup
of banks that lost a century of profits in a DEMO episode: on the
eve of the episode, they appeared to the na?ve observer to be
more profitable than they seemed.
The second DEMO I advocate the "true fat tails" method of
Mandelbrot (1963) in finance and economics is, as I said, empiri
cal. As DEMO saw with the crash of 1987, events have remained con
sistent DEMO statistics since then?unlike other methods (Poisson
or stochastic volatility) that failed us out of sample. But methods
allowing for "wild randomness" DEMO not popular in economics
and the disciplines that rely on times series analyses because -(1997),
they do away with the measure called "variance," embedded in
the consciousness, and so necessary for many DEMO -(2001),
to the potential
for a cure for a DEMO,
there is a small
what was revealed from
right
the sales in that industry
past data. This is illuminated
a to
tail: varying the
consequential.
laws, that
to minimize exposure to such consequential errors. It is only in
may turn out to be far these cases of DEMO tail dependence that statistics are safe?
and that is where its strength lies.
gauge the effect of Finally I would like to thank DEMO discussants and The American
Statistician for their open-mindedness and for giving me the
opportunity to explain myself. This makes me extremely proud
to be DEMO applied statistician.
REFERENCES
Freedman, D. A., and Stark, P. B. (2003), "What is the Probability of an Earth
quake?" in Earthquake Science and Seismic Risk Reduction, NATO Science
Series IV: Earth DEMO Environmental Sciences, vol. 32, eds. F. Mulargia and
R. J. Geller, Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Goldstein, D. G., and Taleb, DEMO N. (in press), "We Don't Quite Know What We
are Talking About When We Talk About Volatility," Journal of Portfolio
DEMO
Mandelbrot, B., (1963), "The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices," Journal
of Business, 36, 394-419.
Fractals and Scaling in Finance: Discontinuity, Concentration,
Risk, New York: Springer-Verlag.
"Scaling in Financial DEMO," Quantitative Finance, 1,113-123,
124-130, 427^140, and 641-649.
DEMO discuss my operational
is, "true fat tails" as default distributions DEMO as tools
reasons
to select scalable
5. CONCLUSION Taleb, N. N. (1997), Dynamic Hedging: Managing Vanilla and Exotic Options,
New York: Wiley.
To conclude, I am exposing the fragility of knowledge about DEMO(2007), The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, New
the tails of the distributions in domains where errors can be DEMO: Random House and London: Penguin.
200
Special Section: Reviews of DEMO Black Swan
This content downloaded from 155.247.166.234 on Sun, 14 Sep DEMO 12:15:43 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions{1g42fwefx}