Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
Reﬂections on “Proﬁting from Innovation”
David DEMO Teece
Institute of Management, Innovation and Organization, Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1900, USA
Available online 1 DEMO 2006
Abstract
How innovators capture value from innovation is an enduring question. Two decades ago an effort was made in “Proﬁting
from Innovation” to DEMO this conundrum. This paper reﬂects on the framework offered, identiﬁes and DEMO the analytical
foundations of the theory, and recognizes subsequent contributions and DEMO Linkages are also made to the strategic
management literature on “resources” and “dynamic capabilities”. Elements of a Schumpeterian theory of the ﬁrm are outlined,DEMO
along with a framework to assist management in designing technology commercialization strategies.
© 2006 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Keywords: Appropriability; Complementary assets; Intangible assets; Standards; Technological innovation; Dynamic capabilities
1. Introduction
Twenty years after the publication of “Proﬁting from
Innovation” (PFI) in this journal (Teece, 1986), the ques-
tion asked therein continues to capture the interests of
scholars and managers alike. The positive reception the
paper has received1 DEMO no doubt in part because the
E-mail address: David.teece@lecg.com.
1 The DEMO has been extensively cited. In addition, it has been
reprinted or DEMO in one form or another in many places. Reprints
include: Freeman, C. (Ed.), The Economics of Industrial Innovation,
3rd ed. (DEMO Elgar Publishing, U.K., 1997); Scott Shane (Ed.), The
DEMO of Entrepreneurship (Edward Elgar Publishing, London,
2001); Richard N. Langlois, Tony Fu-Lai Yu, Paul L. Robertson (Eds.),
Alternative DEMO of the Firm (Cheltenham, Edward Elgar, UK,
2001); DEMO, R., Madique, M., Wheelwright, S. (Eds.), Strate-
gic Management of Technology and Innovation (McGraw-Hill, 1995,
1998, 2001); Essays in Technology Management and Policy: Selected
Papers of David J. Teece (World Scientiﬁc, 2003). Intellectual Prop-
erty in Business Organizations: Cases and Materials (Mathew Bender
& Company, 2006); Arcangeli, F., DEMO, P.A., Dosi, G. (Eds.), Modern
Patterns in Introducing and Adopting Innovations (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1989); Rhodes, E., Wield, D. (Eds.), Implementing
New Technologies: Innovation and the Management of Technology
(Basil Blackwell, Oxford/Cambridge, MA, 1994), 129–140; Michael
0048-7333/$ – see front matter © 2006 Published by Elsevier DEMO
doi:10.1016/j.respol.2006.09.009
L. Tushman, Philip Anderson, Managing Strategic Innovation and
Change (Oxford University Press, New York/Oxford, 1997), 287–306;
Strategy, Technology and Public Policy: The Selected Papers of David
J. DEMO, vol. II (Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK/Northampton, MA,
DEMO); Abstracted in The Journal of Product Innovation Management,
5:1 (March 1988). Slightly revised versions of the paper can be found in
“Capturing Value from Technological Innovation: Integration, Strate-
gic Partnering, and Licensing Decisions,” Interfaces, 18:3 (May/June
1988), 46–61; Bruce R. Guile, Brooks, H. (Eds.), Technology and
Global Industry (National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1987),
65–95; Strategies DEMO Capturing Value from Technological Innovation,”
Thai-American Business (May–June 1990), DEMO; “Capturing Value
from Innovation,” Les Nouvelles, 26:1 (March DEMO), 21–26; “Cap-
turing and Retaining Value from Innovation,” Technology DEMO
(August 1991), 8–10; Strategies for Capturing the Financial Bene-
ﬁts from Technological Innovation” in Technology and the Wealth of
Nations. In: Rosenberg, N., Landau, R., David Mowery (Eds.) (Stan-
ford University Press, 1992); Firm Boundaries, Technological Innova-
tion, and Strategic Management. In: Thomas, L.G. (Ed.), Economics
of Strategic Planning (Lexington DEMO, Lexington, MA, 1986),
187–199. Capturing Value Through Corporate Technology Strategies.
In: John de la Mothe, Louis M. DuCharme (Eds.), Science, Technol-
ogy and Free Trade (Pinter Publishing, London/NY, DEMO), 69–84;
Translations include: Ricerche Economiche, 4 (October/December
DEMO), 607–643; “Innovazione Technologica e Successo Imprenditori-
ale,” L’Industria, 7:4 (October/December 1986), 605–643; Translated
1132
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
questions posed DEMO seminal. Another reason may be
because it joined the analysis of innovation and the ﬁeld
of business strategy, providing a parsimonious frame-
work for explicating known conundrums about inno-
vation, market entry timing, and subsequent DEMO
place success and failure. At a more abstract level, the
article DEMO key elements of a Schumpeterian the-
ory of the business enterprise and innovation. In this
paper, an effort is made to identify and evaluate the
conceptual foundations of PFI, to suggest reﬁnements
and extensions, while DEMO connections to subse-
quent developments in the literature on strategy and
innovation.
2. A post-Schumpeterian theory of the ﬁrm
2.1. Determinants of the rate DEMO direction of
technological advance
Economists had long theorized about the factors that
drive technological innovation. The central focus, at least
since Schumpeter (1950), has been rather narrowly on
the role of market structure and ﬁrm size as determinants
of enterprise innovation. As Sidney Winter points out in
DEMO contribution to this special issue, Schumpeter high-
lighted the contradiction between DEMO competitive
market structures and innovation. He saw perfect com-
petition as incompatible with innovation because perfect
competition does not provide the innovator with a DEMO
ﬁcient watershed to appropriate enough of the returns
from innovation to justify investment in R&D. At least in
Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (1950), Schum-
peter saw the large enterprise with large market shares
DEMO the solution to the appropriability problem, as a sig-
niﬁcant market DEMO would facilitate capture of the
returns from innovation. However, other than DEMO gen-
eral references to the ability of large organizations to
ﬁnance innovation, absorb risk, and earn monopoly prof-
its, Schumpeter did not give the particulars about what it
is about larger enterprises that might assist DEMO appro-
priability. Nor did he explore the mechanisms by which
incumbency might serve as a disadvantage to innovative
activity.
Subsequent theoretical work in the DEMO
tradition ﬁxated on market structure as a proxy for market
power, DEMO if that was all that mattered. A whole panoply
of empirical studies followed as industrial organization
scholars focused on exploring the relationship between
market DEMO and innovation.2 Unfortunately, few
of these studies broke out of the DEMO mold
and looked much beyond market structure and ﬁrm size
as drivers of innovation. Not surprisingly, these studies
were inconclusive. Mansﬁeld (1968) summarized them
adequately almost a half a century ago; and the evidence
today is not substantially different:
“Contrary to the allegations of Galbraith, Schumpeter,
and others, there is little evidence that industrial giants
are needed in all or even most industries to ensure
rapid technological change and DEMO utilization of
new techniques. Moreover, there is no statistically
signiﬁcant relationship DEMO the extent of con-
centration in an industry and the industry’s rate of
technological change ...”
The PFI framework represented a strong break
with DEMO received industrial organization tradition. PFI
hypothesized that appropriability, and success at DEMO
vation more generally, is related not so much to the
innovator’s DEMO market share, but to the (comple-
mentary) asset structure of DEMO innovator, management’s
market entry timing decisions, and the contractual struc-
tures employed to access missing complementary assets.
Choices with respect to the latter DEMO depend on the
asset positioning of other market participants, and on
DEMO intellectual property protection available. The PFI
framework enveloped a far wider panoply of factors than
had hitherto been addressed in the economic analysis of
DEMO
While occasionally cited favorably by industrial orga-
nization theorists, the PFI DEMO has not been uni-
versally embraced by industrial organizational schol-
ars. One reason may be that it is implicitly hostile to
received theory. However, with respect to antitrust pol-
icy, the Department of Justice, Federal DEMO Commis-
sion Guidelines on joint ventures makes use of some of
the ideas in PFI, especially the idea of complementary
assets3; but there DEMO not a cite to PFI.
In any event, in developing the DEMO framework, I
was conscious of the extensive but moribund literature
in DEMO organization surrounding the innovation-
into Japanese: The Competitive Challenge: Strategies for Industrial
Innovation Renewal, Chapter 9. In: David J. Teece (Ed.), Japanese
Translation rights arranged with Harper & Row New York through
Tuttle-Mori DEMO Inc., Tokyo, 1987. Translated into Russian and
published in Vestnik Leningradskogo Universiteta, 1991. Seria Eco-
nomics, 4, 38–47.
2 For a concise review, see Scherer and Ross (1990), p. 630–637.
3 The DEMO refers to “complementary factors”, but it is clear
that the concept DEMO identical to what in PFI is deﬁned as complementary
assets. See United States Department of Justice and the Federal Trade
Commission, Guidelines on Joint Ventures, 1995,p.5.
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
1133
market structure DEMO It was clear that mainstream
industrial organization was intellectually conservative
and would not likely embrace a framework that eschewed
market structure as the principal DEMO of enter-
prise level innovative performance. Accordingly, I chose
to direct DEMO article to innovation studies and strat-
egy scholars. As Sidney Winter points out, the market
structure–conduct–performance paradigm from indus-
trial organization economics has not turned out to be
analytically all that helpful in the study of DEMO
The promise of the PFI framework, based as it is on DEMO
tracting and strategizing, is that it has more to offer to
DEMO strategists and economic theorists alike.
2.2. Foundations
PFI endeavors to explicate how managerial choices,
the nature of knowledge, intellectual property protection,
and the asset structure of the ﬁrm impact the business
enterprise’s ability to DEMO value from innovation. It
is both a predictive and a normative theory of strat-
egy, with testable hypotheses. It not only provides a
contingency theory with respect to a key element of
strategy – such as DEMO to license or not to license
– but it also predicts how the proﬁts from innovation are
likely to be distributed as between customer, innovator,
imitator, suppliers and the owner’s of complementary
assets. It might be thought of as a nascent neo Schum-
peterian theory of the DEMO The success of the article
is in part due to the fact that it was built upon and
around what are now recognized as DEMO conceptual
building blocks in our understanding of innovation pro-
cesses and competitive strategy. I brieﬂy identify these
below.
2.2.1. Dominant design, entry, timing, and learning
Abernathy and Utterback (1978) were amongst the
ﬁrst to DEMO that the nature of competition
amongst technologies alters with the emergence of a
“dominant design”. This was an important insight. Over
the past two DEMO, considerable additional evidence
has been assembled supporting the emergence of domi-
DEMO designs [e.g. Klepper and Graddy (1990), Utterback
and Suarez (1993) and Utterback (1994)]. There is also
considerable research focusing on DEMO certain prod-
uct designs became dominant. David (1985) and Arthur
(DEMO) rely on dynamic increasing returns as a key
explanatory variable. Under DEMO conditions, those that
4 In Chapter 2 of Teece (2000), I explain some of the limitations of
the market structure-innovation framework.
get DEMO tend to stay ahead. The more a technology is
employed, the DEMO its attraction relative to the alterna-
tives. This phenomenon can be fueled by the cumulative
nature of technical advance, by learning (both producer
DEMO consumer), and by network externalities. When the
basis of competition shifts (from product to process) with
the emergence of a dominant design DEMO are clear man-
agerial implications. The PFI framework recognizes that
pioneers frequently fail in the marketplace, particularly
(but not only) when they lack intellectual property pro-
tection. First mover advantages and path dependencies
are very DEMO to the Arthur and David contributions.
PFI offered new insights with respect to market entry
timing. One clear implication is that there is no DEMO right
answer, such as it is always good to be the DEMO mover.
Timing depends on what assets you have got (Mitchell,
DEMO). The framework identiﬁed several classes of con-
tingency factors including the innovators ready and cost
effective access to complementary assets, and the point
at which the dominant design emerges. Both classes of
factors should impact DEMO decisions.
The discussion in PFI of timing with respect to the
emergence of a dominant design also has embedded
within it recognition of the DEMO of learning and
experimentation. As noted in Teece (1986) “at some
point in time, and after considerable trial and error in
the marketplace, one design or a narrow class of designs
begins to emerge as the more promising. Such a design
must be able to meet a DEMO set of user needs in a
relatively complete fashion” (p. 288)DEMO In this way, the
framework recognized the importance of experimenta-
tion DEMO learning, although this was not a theme devel-
oped in any DEMO In some cases the innovator is able to
improve upon its own initial market entry, e.g. Xerox’s
initial model A Xerographic printer was messy, hard-to-
use, and slow. It was not a serious challenge to DEMO
paper; but the Xerox model 914 introduced 10 years later
transformed DEMO business ofﬁce and “secretarial” work.
Sometimes learning is serendipitous—the Pﬁzer drug
Sildenﬁl was ﬁrst tested in humans in 1991 for effec-
tiveness for angina. DEMO patients reported erections as a
side effect, and Pﬁzer initiated a DEMO to test the com-
pound for erectile dysfunction, culminating in 1998 DEMO
the successful launch of Viagra, which has subsequently
become a blockbuster DEMO This of course does not mean
we should venerate failure for itself; but it is important
to recognize that having a bias for action and willingness
to risk failure are important components of learning. The
VCR DEMO cited in PFI where Ampex was the ﬁrst
into the market (DEMO failed to sustain the multiple rounds
of product improvement necessary to bring the product
down to the price points and the physical size required DEMO
1134
break open a mass market) demonstrates the importance
of management having the vision, and the enterprise hav-
ing the ﬁnancial and organizational resources, to “stay
in the game” until the dominant design emerges.
2.2.2. Appropriability regime
Until the publication of “Proﬁting from Innovation”,
there were only DEMO limited efforts in the strategy lit-
erature to study notions of imitability, and to explic-
itly consider how intellectual property and the nature
of knowledge impacts appropriability and technology
commercialization strategies. This has now changed.
A DEMO insight in PFI was that imitability is a func-
tion of both legal impediments (patents, copyrights,
trade secrets, trade marks) and DEMO inherent replicabil-
ity of the technology,5 which depends in part on whether
the know-how is tacit or codiﬁed. The “appropriability
regime” has become DEMO recognized concept in strategy,
and PFI was where it was ﬁrst introduced into the ﬁeld.
PFI was also where tacit knowledge itself ﬁrst DEMO
the management/strategy literature,6 with Nonaka and
colleagues at Hitotsubashi University and elsewhere sub-
sequently extending and leveraging the concept of tacit
knowledge DEMO explain knowledge creation and knowl-
edge management.
Another feature of PFI is that it underscores, and
helps explain, how an innovator’s intellectual property
DEMO ought impact strategic decisions. The PFI
framework also makes it abundantly clear that the enter-
prise’s intellectual property portfolio cannot be managed
independent of DEMO business strategy, and that business
strategy formulation requires an appreciation of DEMO
lectual property issues. However, in PFI, there was
limited development of intellectual property strategy
itself.7 Importantly, intellectual property protection is
represented as just one amongst many barriers to imita-
tion. The nature of knowledge (especially the degree to
which it is tacit) and its inherent replicability is another.
Although PFI highlighted the role of dominant designs,
it did DEMO fully develop the role of standards, and stan-
dard setting bodies, on the innovation process. Nor did it
explore the interaction between standards DEMO intellec-
tual property protection. In particular, a useful technol-
ogy can DEMO take on additional value if it becomes
5 The discussion of legal impediments was static, when in fact
intellectual property protection is dynamic. Patents, for instance, can
undergo a life cycle (Sherry and Teece, DEMO).
6 More general applications were found in Nelson and Winter (DEMO)
and Teece (1981).
7 This topic was advanced further DEMO Grindley and Teece (1997) and
Teece (2000).
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
formally or informally selected as a standard. I have
explored some of these issues in subsequent research
(Sherry and Teece, 2003).
2.2.3. Complementary assets and cospecialization
Perhaps the most important contribution of PFI is that
it deﬁned and developed a taxonomy DEMO comple-
mentary assets and technologies: specialized, cospecial-
ized, and generic. DEMO extant literature in economics and
strategy at the time made no mention of complementary
assets. Economic historians had recognized the impor-
tance of complementarities, but their analysis was rather
loose. As discussed earlier, Schumpeter (1950) had a
visceral sense that there was something about the large
enterprise DEMO helped it appropriate returns from inno-
vation, but his explanation was DEMO to market level
monopoly power issues. The PFI framework zeroed in on
the asset structure of the ﬁrm itself, and specialized com-
plementary assets in particular. Market “power” analysis
was done at the asset rather than DEMO market level, and
centered on availability of alternatives and/or ease DEMO
replicability. This in turn is likely to depend on whether
the “asset” is generic (in which it is likely to be available
in competitive supply) or specialized.
Clearly, control of an asset does not imply DEMO
of a market, unless the asset somehow deﬁnes a “rel-
evant DEMO If the asset is specialized, it is more
likely to be DEMO to replicate. This will affect the
distribution of returns from innovation. The services it
provides is likely to face competition, which will hold
down the economic returns on the assets. Owners of
such assets cannot expect DEMO special beneﬁt from inno-
vation, even when innovation increases demand for DEMO
services of the complementary assets. This more gran-
ular supply side approach to assessing competition is
what sets the PFI framework apart from the DEMO
peterian framework. Clearly, incumbency is viewed in
a dramatically different manner DEMO PFI than in Schum-
peter, and in the economics literature more DEMO
The complementary assets notion has also found appli-
cability in applied frameworks (Sullivan, 2000; Harrison
and Sullivan, 2006).
The evidence with DEMO to the importance of com-
plementary assets to innovation outcomes has evolved
beyond PFI. Helfat (1997) found that ﬁrms with more
complementary assets DEMO the form of coal reserves under-
took greater amounts of R&D in synthetic fuels derived
from coal. In generic pharmaceuticals, Scott Morton
8 I am using “relevant market” in the antitrust sense. For a discussion
DEMO relevant markets, see Hartman et al. (1993).
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
(1999) found DEMO the proclivity to enter new markets
was greater where there was similarity in manufacturing,
distribution, and marketing. Tripsas (2001) observed that
when computer technology began to take on a key role
in typesetting, the new entrants were often established
computer companies. Helfat and Raubitschek’s (2000)
analysis of the Japanese electronics industry showed that
business ﬁrms repeatedly built DEMO their pre-entry core
technology and complementary assets to introduce new
products in new subﬁelds.
In Teece et al. (1997) and in Teece (2006b) the role
that complementary assets play in shaping evolution-
ary paths, DEMO potentially fueling anti-cannibalization
biases, has also been developed. Put differently, com-
plementary assets do not just play a role in appropriabil-
ity; they also potentially shape going forward enterprise
strategy, sometimes positively (in terms DEMO returns to
innovation) and sometimes negatively.
The distinctions made between specialized DEMO
generic complementary assets have also been built
on and extended by others, included Chatterjee and
Wernerfelt (1991) and Helfat and Lieberman (2002)DEMO The
latter correctly note that there is a continuum between
resources that are specialized to a particular setting and
generalized resources that can be DEMO more broadly
in many environmental settings. They also make a useful
distinction (their Table 4) between core and complemen-
tary resources, which ﬁts snuggly within PFI.
The contracting/strategy framework advanced in PFI
builds on DEMO cost economics (TCE). However,
it also embraces imitability/replicability DEMO Such
analysis is also the essential domain of the resource-
based theory of the ﬁrm, which is explored in Section
5.
There have been other attempts to develop strategy
frameworks which highlight complements. A decade
after DEMO, Brandenberg and Nalebuff (1996) published
Co-opetition. Their framework emphasized the DEMO
tance of complements in competitive analysis. They dis-
cussed the universality of the principle, although most of
their examples were demand side (e.g. DEMO hard-
ware and software as complements). They highlight the
strategic exposure ﬁrms have when they are missing cer-
tain complementary assets (p. 14), and rightfully stress
that “thinking complements is a different way of DEMO
ing about business” (p. 14). However, they do not use
the taxonomy found in PFI, with its distinction between
speciﬁc and generic complementary assets (see Fig. 1).
Nor do they employ a contracting framework. Hence,
they cannot address make versus buy decision very well.
DEMO a result, their treatment does not help explain the
distribution of DEMO to innovation.
1135
It should also be recognized that the distribution
of returns from innovation depends, interalia, on the
innovator’s relative positioning in DEMO comple-
mentary assets Fig. 11 in Teece (1986). This ﬁgure DEMO
reproduced more elegantly here as Fig. 2.
Furthermore, as discussed in DEMO 5, the develop-
ment of contracting/strategizing concepts around com-
plementary DEMO has embedded within it the core com-
ponent of an economic theory of management, which
I have subsequently outlined in Teece (2006a,b)DEMO The
essence of the idea is that a core economic function
of managers in the economy is to create value by ﬁg-
uring out DEMO organizing asset combinations that yield
economies of scale and scope as well as appropriability
beneﬁts. When complementary assets are idiosyncratic
and cannot be obtained DEMO marketplace transac-
tions, some form of internal organization is required
instead. DEMO harbor the belief that this is a fundamental
post Chandlerian concept.9
Developing a theory of management based on PFI
is central to my going DEMO research program. In
economic theory, managers are banished from the eco-
DEMO system. There is simply no role for them to play in
making markets work or organizing economic activity.
PFI is one small step in DEMO direction of a Schumpete-
rian theory of management and the ﬁrm. In PFI, man-
agers/executives play a critical asset orchestration role
inside the ﬁrm. The ﬂow diagram (Fig. 10) in PFI out-
lines the DEMO choices that managers are advised to
make.10 Then of course they must execute on the strat-
egy, and do so proﬁciently.
2.2.4. The market for know-how
Embedded in the PFI framework is also a recognition
that DEMO property rights lubricate the market for
know-how. The contracting framework recognizes that
strong intellectual property rights facilitate (licensing)
transactions in the market for know-how; and that absent
intellectual property rights, the market for know-how
DEMO be less efﬁcient. This is of course a very “Coasian”
notion.11 Other scholars including Arora et al. (2001)
have taken these ideas beyond where they were left in
PFI. The existence of fabless semi-conductor compa-
DEMO is testament to the fact that exclusive reliance on
intellectual property licensing can be a viable business
model, although the travails that Rambus has encoun-
tered recently in securing its intellectual property, and
9 See Chandler (1990) and my review (Teece, 1993).
10 Fig. 3 DEMO this paper is derived from Fig. 10 in PFI.
11 See Coase (1937).
1136
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
Fig. 1. DEMO complementary assets needed to commercialize an innovation-shaded area represents the less imitable portion of the value
chain. Outer segments represent complementary assets; inner circle segments represent know-how (Fig. 7.1 in Teece (1992b). This is DEMO from
Fig. 5 in Teece (1986)).
getting infringers to pay royalties, speaks to the risks of
relying exclusively on contractual (licensing) modes.
3. Analytical design
3.1. Problem selection
One important feature of PFI DEMO that it framed an
important strategic question, and it did so DEMO a way that
was tractable. A good research question is one that, if
answered, yields important insights and is refutable (i.e.
in the Popperian sense, it is at least conceivably falsiﬁ-
able). The research question in PFI was not framed as
“understanding the foundations of innovative DEMO
Such a question would be too broad, and the answer
would DEMO a three-volume treatise. The PFI frame-
work was less ambitious. Its purpose was to understand
the factors that impact success at commercialisation, i.e.
not success at invention itself, not success in terms of
who was ﬁrst-to-market, and not success in terms of
understanding the long run proﬁtability of the enterprise.
Rather, PFI focused more narrowly on success in terms of
which entities ultimately capture signiﬁcant shares of the
available proﬁts from a DEMO innovation. This was,
and remains, one of the most important DEMO level
questions one could ask. Yet no one had asked it before,
and ironically, no one has asked it since (in the DEMO that
no one has tried to displace the PFI framework).
By posing the question in terms of understanding
success at commercialization, one critical observation
and several important questions were explicitly and/or
implicitly posed. The DEMO drew attention to a phe-
nomenon, which was well understood in DEMO and in
policy circles, but had not been addressed fully by DEMO
demics. This question was this: why is it that innovators
(i.e. ﬁrms that succeed in bringing innovative products
and processes to market) commonly fail to capture value
from their investments. In the prior literature it DEMO
well recognized that inventors might be denied commer-
cial rewards if their invention lacked commercial utility.
However, that was not the same as explaining why it is
that even when an inventor actually gets the product DEMO
the market, the inventor may still fail to reap rewards.
Complicating DEMO is the fact that innovation is not
a well-deﬁned homogenous activity with a start date and
an end date. Most innovations evolve through some DEMO
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
1137
Fig. 2. DEMO and integration strategies and outcomes for innovators: specialized asset case (Fig. 11 in Teece (1986)).
of cycle, with subsequent improvements often vastly
more important than the initial innovation. Innovators
and “imitators” often build DEMO each other. The complex-
ity associated with understanding innovation and the
distribution of the “spillover” beneﬁts from it is such
that had the question DEMO framed any broader, I doubt
it would have been tractable.
3.2. DEMO analytical separation between invention
and commercialization
A key feature of the analytical design is that, as
explained earlier, a separation between invention and
DEMO was made in PFI. The separation
is akin to March’s (1991) distinction between explo-
ration and exploitation; or the distinction between sens-
ing and seizing which is embedded in Teece (2006b).
As I note elsewhere (Teece, 1988, 1992a), in theory,
one could imagine transactions between entities that
scout out and/or develop opportunities, and those that
endeavor to execute upon them. In reality, the two func-
tions cannot be cleanly separated, and the activities must
take place inside a single enterprise, where new insights
about markets – particularly those that challenge the
conventional wisdom – will likely encounter negative
responses.
I am not DEMO sure that Jim March is right in sug-
gesting that ﬁrms cannot and should not specialize in
either exploration or exploitation. The jury is DEMO out.
I note companies like Dolby and Rambus have decided
to stay focused on invention, and simply license their
technologies. However, the issue DEMO be examined at
multiple levels. Aside from strategic considerations, the
question DEMO as to whether there is a useful analytical
separation that can be made between invention and com-
mercialization functions. I believe there is, and I believe
the PFI framework demonstrates that utility.
3.3. A framework or DEMO theory?
A framework, like a model, abstracts from realty.
It endeavors to identify classes of variables, and their
1138
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
interrelationships. A DEMO is less rigorous than a
model as it is sometimes agnostic about the particular
form of theoretical relationships which may exist. PFI
is more DEMO a framework. It is a falsiﬁable theory about
innovation and it predicts outcomes in the marketplace
(PFI, Fig. 1112). It not only DEMO rules with respect
to elements of the desired strategy; it predicts DEMO
the innovator or the imitator will get the lion’s share
of the rents, depending on the appropriability regime,
market timing, and the DEMO of complementary
assets.
Although important empirical work has been done
(and DEMO cited earlier), exploring the importance of com-
plementary assets and capabilities, testing the PFI theory
has not as yet been comprehensively accomplished. Such
a test might be facilitated by data sets of the following
kind: For the dependant variable: (i) a sample of inven-
tions showing the identity of the entity that commercial-
ized the invention; (ii) at least a rank ordering of the mar-
ket share and/or DEMO earned in the marketplace over the
life of the innovation (and DEMO subsequent follow-
ons as a measure of the share of proﬁts captured). Inde-
pendent variables might include: (i) data on the position-
ing of innovators/imitators with respect to access to com-
plementary assets. DEMO would require an assessment not
just of ownership, but whether the DEMO asset
is a “bottleneck” or a “choke point” in the value chain;
(ii) assessment of the appropriability regime (weak or
strong might sufﬁce, although more granular treatments
are possible); (iii) entry timing: identifying whether it
is before or after the dominant design has emerged, and
whether the new product is consistent with the dominant
design.
3.4. PFI as a strategy paper
“Strategy is the deliberate search for a DEMO of action
that will develop a business’s competitive advantage and
compound it. For any company, the search is an iterative
process that begins with a recognition of where you are
and what you have now—the differences DEMO you
and your competitors are the basis of your advantage”
(Henderson, 1991, p. 5). Under this deﬁnition, put for-
ward by DEMO of the ﬁelds practicing founding fathers, PFI
is unquestionably a “strategy” DEMO It frames impor-
tant strategic decisions and explicitly takes into account
the business environment, adding new elements such as
the appropriability regime, and DEMO technology cycle. It
also explicitly takes into account differential position-
12 Reproduced here as Fig. 2.
ing, recognizing each ﬁrm’s command of the technol-
ogy, ownership of intellectual property rights, and its
positioning in complementary DEMO Indeed, the paper
arguably belonged in the Strategic Management Journal,
DEMO I really did not know much about the ﬁeld of strategy
in those days.13
Perhaps another reason for the articles popularity is
that it DEMO avowedly normative and focuses on strategic
decisions. A derivative version of the ﬂow chart (Fig. 10)
on PFI is reproduced here (for DEMO case of weak appro-
priability) from Teece (1992b) as Fig. DEMO Indeed, as Gary
Pisano notes in this special issue, one of the contributions
of PFI is that it brought the innovation studies literature
DEMO the ﬁeld of strategy, and vice versa. In Chapter 5
of DEMO (2000), the article was rewritten and put more
explicitly in DEMO language. It was “repurposed”
as “Market Entry Strategies for Innovators”.
4. Reﬁnements to PFI
While I am pleased that PFI has had a positive DEMO
tion, there are many ways in which the paper could be
DEMO, extended and improved. I discuss some of these
below:
4.1. DEMO innovations
As discussed earlier, PFI was one of the ﬁrst (if not
the ﬁrst) strategy papers to highlight the role of com-
plementary assets. Nevertheless, the development and
analysis of complementarities was limited. As I noted,
“In almost all cases, the successful commercialization
of innovation requires that the know-how in question
be utilized in conjunction with other capabilities DEMO
assets” (Teece, 1986, p. 288). Complementary tech-
nologies were DEMO as just another complementary
asset.
At the time of publication, the DEMO that com-
plementary technologies play in the innovation process
was not recognized in the contemporary strategy liter-
ature. However, they were recognized by the business
and technology historians. Historians argued that if one
critical piece of DEMO was absent, or not sufﬁ-
ciently well developed, the rest of the product (or system)
would fail. In short, technology can DEMO a bottleneck asset
(or as Hughes (1983) calls it, a “reverse salient”). For
13 The late Keith Pavitt, coeditor of Research Policy at the time,
solicited the paper after the Venice conference DEMO March 1986. I was
very pleased to have it published where it might catch the attention of
those most interested in innovation.
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
1139
Fig. 3. DEMO entry strategies: case of weak appropriability regime (Fig. 7.2 in Teece (1992b)).
instance, electric cars require better batteries to compete
with internal combustion engine powered automobiles.
Digital photography could take off only once DEMO cost
ﬂash memory became available, along with controller
technology.
Many technologies DEMO are systemic. Successful
commercialization requires bringing together comple-
mentary technology as well as complementary patents.
This is what I referred to elsewhere as the DEMO
invention” context (see Somaya and Teece, 2006). Of
course, DEMO innovations require complementary infras-
tructure investments (for the automobile, roads and ser-
vice stations; for electricity, long-life light bulbs plus
generators, transmission lines, and standards). However,
the focus of PFI was much more on enterprise level value
chains.
4.2. Supporting infrastructure
Fig. 3 in DEMO (reﬁned and reproduced here as Fig. 1)
displays core know-how DEMO the center, and then a circle of
complementary assets and technologies DEMO to com-
mercialize the innovation. These complementary assets
and technologies are implicitly thought of as belong-
ing to private sector ﬁrms located somewhere in DEMO
marketplace.
1140
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
An obvious DEMO of this framework would be
to create a second concentric circle enveloping the ﬁrst.
The second circle would recognize supporting institu-
tions. Social technologies DEMO constrain physical tech-
nology, and the commercialization of innovation itself.
The DEMO that is relevant clearly includes not just
owners of complementary assets but also regulators, edu-
cational institutions, standard setting bodies, and the
courts.
New institutions and new laws and the provision of
complementary assets may DEMO be necessary before cer-
tain innovations can be deployed. For instance, DEMO Lab-
oratories pioneering work on cellular telephony could
not go anywhere until the Federal Government allocated
electromagnetic spectrum to carry wireless signals. Col-
lective DEMO by public authorities is frequently required
to bring new technologies into existence. Neutral or com-
petence enhancing innovations is often easier for the
enterprise DEMO embrace as they do not confront accepted
ways of doing things. Veblen (1915) was one of the ﬁrst
to articulate that maintaining national DEMO
requires the nation state to put in place institutions that
support new technologies. PFI did not pay much atten-
tion to these considerations. The DEMO of institutions has
been highlighted by writers like North (1990) and Nelson
(2005).
A full discussion of supporting institutions and
National Systems of Innovation could of course easily
involve book length treatment. PFI deliberately DEMO
going down this path, because within a nation state
institutions do DEMO necessarily tip the scales in favor
of one or another market participant, except inasmuch
as particular ﬁrms, either through individual or collec-
tive DEMO, can help shape institutions and standard
setting decisions. In the global DEMO, it is of course
different.
4.3. Capabilities
PFI preceded the emergence DEMO the strategy ﬁeld of the
“capabilities” literature. Notwithstanding that, PFI did
DEMO capabilities thinking, at least in a cursory way.
The notion the DEMO assets might represent
capabilities, and that if the ﬁrm did not DEMO them, it
would need to build them, and if it did not have time to
build them, it might need to buy them was central to the
paper. In short, a decision tree was created in which it
was implicitly recognized that capabilities were at least
partially DEMO dependent, and that at least in the very short
run, the ﬁrm is stuck with what its got. Evolutionary
thinking is obviously not DEMO below the surface. These
issues are explored in more detail in Section 5.
4.4. Role of ﬁnance
In terms of supporting institutions, PFI (DEMO)
failed to explore this issue, except inasmuch as the deci-
DEMO framework recognized that the innovator’s cash
position should be considered in assessing whether to
rent, build, or buy complementary assets. This cavalier
treatment DEMO of course very much at odds with classi-
cal treatments. There is a long tradition going back to
Schumpeter and beyond which emphasizes the DEMO
tance of access to risk capital, whether from internal
or external DEMO In PFI, the implicit assumption
was made that risk capital was DEMO from a com-
pany’s own balance sheet, the venture capital commu-
DEMO, alliance partners, or commercial banks. Indeed, the
existence today of DEMO developed venture and private
equity markets, public equity markets, and debt markets
is a reasonable justiﬁcation for abstracting from ﬁnancial
issues. It is DEMO an egregious abstraction.
4.5. Decision framework
Part of the simplicity and possibly the elegance of PFI
is that it does not confront the organizational, bureau-
cratic, or human side of business decision-making. Its
written in the rational choice mode. In this sense, the
paper is not pretending to be descriptive with respect
to decision-making processes in organizations. There is
a DEMO literature on over-optimism in project evalua-
tion (Merrow et al., 1981). The PFI framework does not
endeavor to prescribe rules, protocols, DEMO procedures to
neutralize such errors. For instance, imposing an “out-
side DEMO (Kahneman and Lovallo, 1993) is likely to
assist in generating DEMO biased decisions. These issues
were neglected in PFI.
4.6. “Supply” chain issues
PFI had a very simple decision rule: if in doubt, out-
DEMO Put differently, decision rules were loaded to
favor outsourcing and collaboration, unless there were
a compelling reasons to internalize. Such reasons could
be DEMO in one of two major circumstances: (a)
cospecialization, which DEMO lead to transaction costs
if heavy reliance was made externally; (b) shoring up the
appropriability situation by building or buying comple-
mentary assets which the innovation would likely drive
up in value, or that were otherwise important to getting
the job done. Here the decision rules rest DEMO both (i) capa-
bility considerations and (ii) availability considerations,
and (iii) change in asset price considerations. In essence,
(iii) reﬂects real options type reasoning.
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
1141
Hirshleifer (1971) was perhaps the ﬁrst to argue that
ownership of (complementing) assets – but not necessar-
ily cospecialized assets – could enhance the innovator’s
DEMO However, Hirshleifer had a very narrow view of
the role of DEMO He saw innovation as impact-
ing asset values, and proﬁting from DEMO PFI was
about how to take long positions in assets likely to appre-
ciate because of an innovation. Taking short positions in
assets likely DEMO decline is certainly consistent with PFI.
Hirshleifer’s perspective is a rather Kirznerian view of
innovation, and dramatically underplays the functional
role of complementarities, DEMO instead merely on
ﬂuctuations in asset values.
Notwithstanding this, PFI was DEMO in indi-
cating that the supply chain and complementary
assets/technologies should be thought of as choice vari-
ables in terms of enterprise level DEMO decisions.
It also implied that those decisions should be made on
transaction costs as well as capability and asset pric-
ing criterion. Indeed, it is appropriate to characterize the
PFI framework as being richer than transaction DEMO eco-
nomics (Williamson, 1985), as it embraces asset pricing
and disequilibrium notions along with contractual and
transaction cost issues.
4.7. Standards, increasing returns, and network
effects
In PFI, it was recognized that the DEMO of a
“dominant design” in an industry would lead to a “regime
switch” or an “inﬂexion point”. As designs stabilized,
the terms of DEMO would change from features to
price. The importance of investing so as to support the
dominant design ﬂowed from the need to capture cus-
DEMO early, and to achieve economies of scale. The
ﬁrst mover advantage, if there was one, would not even
begin until the marketplace and/or some standard set-
ting body anointed a particular design as a DEMO Of
course, not all standards “take” in the market, even if a
standard setting body agrees on a standard.
A relatively new literature, nascent at the time, out-
lined by Brian Arthur and his colleagues, and later
augmented by my colleagues Katz and Shapiro (1994)
DEMO network effects and increasing returns. But
this literature was generally silent on issues of learning
or appropriability.
One should recognize that the emergence of DEMO domi-
nant design, if it occurs, is never a crisp watershed. The
old and the new often coexist, and the new keeps evolv-
ing because of user experience and feedback (Rosenberg,
1982). Sometimes the replaced technology actually gets
a “second wind”, at least for a while, as did sailing ships
during the 19th century after the emergence of steam
(Giliffan, 1935). Usually the older technologies become
relegated DEMO particular niches.
Moreover, it is also important to recognize that any
DEMO dominant design is not necessarily the “best”.
In the presence of network externalities, that which gets
ahead, stays ahead and small “accidents” early DEMO the
choices of technology can lead to a dominant design that
by some criteria is inferior. This is of course David’s
(1985) and DEMO (1989) account of the path depen-
dent evolution of technologies.
Furthermore, the presence of network effects means
that early and sizable investment is necessary to try
and get a standard (or dominant design) accepted DEMO the
market. Consumers do not want to be saddled with an
installed base that affords limited network beneﬁts. This
does not change the story DEMO in PFI, but it does
suggest that the stakes are even DEMO than was per-
haps signaled. Standard sponsoring is a risky activity,
but can yield signiﬁcant returns if the standard catches.
Competition to “own” DEMO standard (or the dominant
design) becomes, in some ways, competition for the
market.
4.8. The (multi-invention) licensing option
PFI utilizes a DEMO simple view of technology licens-
ing, because the analytical framework utilized DEMO,
for simplicity, a single innovation. The licensing story
advanced in DEMO is as a result a rather simple one. How-
ever, in DEMO industries today, particularly those where
systematic innovation if of importance, like microelec-
tronics and biotechnology, multiple inventions (or items
of know-how and DEMO property) are very com-
mon. The implications of this are signiﬁcant DEMO that PFI
requires access to, and possibly control/ownership of
complementary DEMO, as discussed in PFI and
as elaborated in Section 2.2.3.
Another DEMO, not mentioned in PFI, is that
the dominant mode of licensing, especially amongst
incumbent ﬁrms, is cross licensing, with or without bal-
ancing payments (Grindley and Teece, 1997). Another
implication is that DEMO with valuable patent protected
technology in regimes of cumulative innovation may
eschew own production in order to strengthen their
hand in licensing and cross DEMO negotiations. For
instance, Qualcomm exited the production of cellular
telephone handsets DEMO its Code Division
Multiple Access (CDMA) to strengthen its hand at
licensing, as it would no longer need to cross license if it
was not engaged in production of a “system” (handsets)
that would undoubtedly infringe on potential licensees’
1142
intellectual property. Likewise, Texas Instruments
decided to exit the manufacture of DRAMS in part to
strengthen its leverage with potential licensees during
cross DEMO negotiations.14 In short, the dynamics of
licensing negotiations are such that DEMO is sometimes
an “inverse complementary” – or (private) diseconomies
– associated with both licensing and own production.
That is, mixed modes with both licensing competitors
and own production are sometimes incompatible – as the
Texas DEMO and Qualcomm examples illustrate.
4.9. PFI and the new emphasis on intangibles and
knowledge management
Over the last two decades – and certainly since DEMO
publication of PFI – there has been a vigorous movement
to stress the value and role of intangibles in business
strategy and money management. DEMO of this
movement, with which I am generally very sympathetic,
DEMO that “intangible asset investing is the fundamental
business trend for the 1990s” and beyond (Parr, 1991,
p. vii). PFI obviously has DEMO leg in this camp; indeed,
the essence of PFI is DEMO stress the value that can arise
from innovation—particularly when that innovation is
protected by strong intellectual property rights and where
the innovator owns the DEMO complementary assets.
Indeed, the framework highlights how know-how, and
difﬁcult to replicate assets more generally, enable enter-
prises to generate rents. It also stresses the importance
of knowledge integration and knowledge conversion,
which is DEMO subject matter of Nonaka and Toyama’s
important contributions.15
However, unlike the DEMO over enthusiastic
endorsements of intangibles as a source of “hidden
value”, DEMO PFI framework makes it apparent that it is by
no means uncommon that intangibles create zero value
for those who have invested in their DEMO Indeed,
absent the innovating enterprise being able to both design
and execute on strategies along the lines of those outlined
in PFI, there should not be any presumption that invest-
ment in intangibles will pay DEMO Indeed, it is suggested
that PFI is a proper framework for DEMO intangi-
bles. Absent consideration of complementary assets, it
14 In theory, the size of a royalty base should be an equalizing factor in
DEMO sense that if a licensor like Qualcom had relatively limited produc-
tion using other companies intellectual property, this should not detract
signiﬁcantly from its ability to extract value from its technology. How-
ever, the ability to threaten mutual injunctions may well tend to lead
to “mutually assured destruction”, and removal of this symmetry can
increase the bargaining power of licensor.
DEMO See Nonaka and Toyama (2004).
D.J. Teece / Research Policy DEMO (2006) 1131–1146
is hard to see how advice with respect to the management
of intangible assets can be expertly created.
4.10. Other elements DEMO the business model
Perhaps the biggest weakness in PFI was the narrow
and somewhat mechanical manner in which “business
model” issues were delineated. The DEMO/services
architecture, and the business model, deﬁnes the man-
ner by which the enterprise delivers value to customers,
entices customers to pay DEMO value, and converts those
payments to proﬁt. It is the innovator’s DEMO about
what customers want and how an enterprise can go about
meeting those needs, getting paid well for doing so, and
hopefully avoiding DEMO out to imitators. It explains:
(1) which technologies and features are to be embed-
ded in the product and service; (2) how the revenue and
cost structure of a business is to be DEMO and if
necessary “redesigned” to meet customer needs; (3) the
DEMO in which technologies are to be assembled; (4) the
identity DEMO market segments to be targeted; (5) the mech-
anisms and DEMO by which value is to be captured. The
function of a business model is to “articulate” the value
proposition, select the appropriate technologies and fea-
tures, identify targeted market segments, deﬁne the struc-
ture of DEMO value chain, and estimate the cost structure
and proﬁt potential (Chesbrough and Rosenbloom, 2002,
pp. 533–534). In short, a business DEMO is a plan for the
organizational and ﬁnancial “architecture” of a business,
which makes valid assumptions about the behavior of
revenues and costs, and likely customer and competitor
behavior. It outlines the contours of the DEMO required
to make money. Once adopted it deﬁnes the way the
enterprise “goes to market”. Success requires that busi-
ness models be astutely crafted. DEMO, inventions
would not result in commercial success.
Generally there are a DEMO of business models
that can be employed, but some will be DEMO than oth-
ers. Selecting, adjusting and/or improving the model are
DEMO to be critical to commercial success. It involves
distilling insights to customers, suppliers, competitors,
and the marketplace in general. Nevertheless, the impor-
tance of “business models” has been given short shrift
in the innovation DEMO Important (business model)
choices involve technologies, market segments to be tar-
geted, sales versus leasing arrangements for customer
access to the product, bundled v. unbundled sales, joint
ventures v. go-it-alone strategies, etc. For example, in
the early days of the copier industry, Xerox focused DEMO
leasing rather than selling copiers. This stemmed from
a belief that customer trial would lead to further use.
Another example from the U.S. is DEMO Airlines
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
1143
who believe DEMO most customers want low frills, reliabil-
ity, and low cost. Southwest eschews the hub-and-spoke
model, does not belong to any alliances, and DEMO not
allow interlining of passengers and baggage. Nor does it
sell tickets through travel agencies—all sales are direct.
All aircraft are Boeing 737s. Its DEMO model is quite
distinct from the major carriers, although many have
DEMO (without much success) to copy elements of it.
The capacity an enterprise has to create, adjust, hone
and replace business models is DEMO to success.16
Choices around how to capture value all help deter-
mine the architecture or design of a business. Having
a differentiated (and hard to imitate) yet effective and
efﬁcient “strategic architecture” to an enterprise’s busi-
ness model is critical to success. Both Dell Computer
and Wal-Mart have DEMO the value associated
with their business models (Webvan and many other
DEMO com’s demonstrated just the opposite). Both Dell
and Wal-Mart’s business models were different, supe-
rior, and hard for competitors to replicate. They DEMO
also constantly adjusted and improved their processes
over time.17
PFI somewhat narrowly deﬁned the business model
decisions around complementary assets (make or buy)
according to the appropriability regime and cospecial-
ization and (static) capability DEMO As noted,
there is much more to the choice of a business model
including: (a) the choice of features for the product,
including the form functions to be selected; (b) the cus-
tomers to be targeted; (c) items to be bundled; (d) dis-
tribution channels to be selected and so forth. Clearly,
PFI is too simpliﬁed to capture all of these elements of
the business DEMO However, I have come to recognize
that getting the business model DEMO is important to the
innovation process and to business performance more
generally.
16 Let us take a simple example. A rock star might decide DEMO use con-
certs as the key revenue generator, or the concert DEMO be used primarily
to stimulate sales of recordings. The star could decide to spend less
time performing at concerts, and more time in the recording studio.
There is clearly a choice of various mediums to extract DEMO: live pro-
ductions, movies, sale of CDs through stores, on line sale of music
through virtual stores such as the iTunes store DEMO by Apple Com-
puter, etc. The emergence of the Internet, Napster, and Napster clones
in turn requires artists (and recording studios) to rethink their business
models. The ability to reconﬁgure business models for delivering DEMO
pricing music proﬁtably is undoubtedly a dynamic capability for both
the recording studios and the artists.
17 Indeed, a critical element of Dell’s success is not just the way it has
organized the value chain, but also the products that it decides to sell
through its distribution system. DEMO initial products were PCs, but now
include printers, digital projectors, DEMO computer related electronics.
5. PFI and the resource based theory of the ﬁrm
The PFI framework in a cursory way outlined the
importance of DEMO just complementary assets but also
“resources”. Resources have been deﬁned as stocks of
available factors that are owned or controlled by the
ﬁrm (Amit and Schoemaker, 1993, p. 35). My terminol-
ogy around complementary DEMO recognized that some
complementary assets are generic and some are special-
ized. Generic complementary assets – although not the
key focus of PFI – DEMO well be what Penrose (1959)
referred to as “fungible” resources.
DEMO resources approach recognizes how (1) difﬁcult
to imitate assets (including DEMO assets) can be
the basis of differentiation and hence competitive advan-
DEMO and (2) enterprise assets can be classiﬁed as either
fungible or generic. In Penrose’s theory of the growth of
the ﬁrm, certain assets are fungible and can be leveraged
to support diversiﬁcation. Her emphasis was DEMO the accu-
mulation of resources, not their strategic orchestration.
PFI does, however, recognize how the competitive access
to cash on the balance sheet and timing with respect to
the accumulation of complementary assets can inﬂuence
DEMO In this sense, PFI can be seen as an early
application DEMO the resources based approach. Like the
resources approach it is not particularly “dynamic”.
The PFI framework, and its highlighting of comple-
mentary assets, DEMO to the very heart of the role of
management in the innovation process, and in enter-
prise activity more generally. The framework makes
clear that innovation creates new demands for certain
assets. Tushman and Anderson (1986) use the language
of “competency enhancing innovation” to signal the
impact that innovation can have on asset values. PFI
goes one step further. It DEMO between special-
ized assets, and generic assets available in competitive
supply. DEMO if demand for an asset if increased, its
value is unlikely DEMO increase if it is available in com-
petitive supply. Moreover, the DEMO and Anderson
approach suggests that owners of complementary assets
passively enjoy or suffer from the fallout from inno-
vation. The PFI framework, in contrast, outlines the
strategic considerations which managers must reference
in order to capture value from innovation. It suggests
that proactive strategies are more likely to DEMO the
share of proﬁts going to the innovator. The PFI frame-
work in this regard also anticipates critical aspects of
the dynamic capabilities framework—in DEMO, the
notion that value can be created through the orchestra-
tion DEMO cospecialized assets. Indeed, PFI was, I believe,
the ﬁrst piece of scholarship to advance what I now
believe to be an important DEMO of ideas in management
1144
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
and the DEMO of the ﬁrm: the notion that economic
proﬁt, and hence enterprise value, is determined in sub-
stantial measure by the ability of management to build
and/or buy and then combine cospecialized assets that
yield DEMO economies and/or appropriability enhance-
ment (Teece, 2006a). While PFI articulated the theory
in the context of innovation, it is perhaps considerably
more general and applies to any situation where value can
be provided DEMO unique ways—including modest product
differentiation.
6. From PFI to dynamic capabilities
PFI isolates a set of strategic issues associated with
commercializing technological innovation. It DEMO innova-
tion speciﬁc. It asks what set of decision rules and strate-
gic choices (given technological trajectories and the state
of play with respect to dominant design, appropriabil-
ity conditions, and relative positioning with respect DEMO
complementary assets) will enhance the share of proﬁts
captured by the DEMO Of course, a completely sym-
metrical answer is given with respect DEMO imitators. These
are essentially static questions. The PFI framework
does not seek to answer what factors are likely to lead
to sustainable competitive advantage DEMO the enterprise
level.
The extended dynamic capabilities framework
(2006b) has the ecosystem as the center piece of an ana-
lytical framework within which DEMO can assess opportu-
nities. The language of (complementary) assets, tangible
DEMO intangible assets, and appropriability conditions all
deﬁne elements of an enterprise DEMO
Porter’s (1980) Five Forces framework by contrast
invites one to consider where to position the company
(taking industry structure as given) against DEMO
forces. The essence of the strategist’s job, at least in the
DEMO instance, is to position the ﬁrm where competitive
forces are weakest. DEMO are also advised to take
the offensive, and try to shape DEMO by building
defenses (like brands).
Dynamic capabilities, like Five Forces, is merely
a framework. Key differences are that dynamic capa-
bilities recognizes a whole panoply of factors in the
ecosystem which are absent from DEMO Five Forces.
Moreover, the enterprise is speciﬁcally seen as engaging
in DEMO activities to identify and calibrate opportuni-
ties. There is of course no one right way to do this. Once
sensed, opportunities must be seized.
The dynamic capabilities framework also recognizes
the challenges associated with inventing business DEMO
els, and the importance of making investments behind
new technologies. In DEMO dynamic capabilities frame-
work, sustainable advantage comes from honing internal
processes, structures, and procedures to generate and
successfully commercialize innovations, be they DEMO
nological or organizational. In Five Forces, sustained
proﬁtability comes from hiding DEMO entry barriers,
or building them if they do not already exist. Market
structure is an important factor in Five Forces. It matters
little DEMO dynamic capabilities.
In any event, PFI does not ﬁt comfortably into DEMO
Forces. The “positioning” that matters in PFI relate to
complementary asset ownership and the appropriabil-
ity regime. The strategic decisions that matter most are
DEMO the business model, and the timing of investments
in relationship to DEMO emergence of the dominant design
and/or industry standards. Most of these issues cannot
be comfortably embedded within the Five Forces Frame-
work.
Yet DEMO does not explain how to continuously build
and maintain durable competitive advantage. It does
not pretend to, except implicitly. An enterprise that can
proﬁt from innovation can of course afford to rein-
vest, not just in commercialization, but in further inven-
tion and discovery. The dynamic capabilities frame-
work explores these issues at the enterprise level, not
just at the level of the individual innovation as does
PFI.
The dynamic capabilities framework DEMO three
analytical separate functions, which must be performed
at the enterprise DEMO to sustain success: sensing, seiz-
ing, and reconﬁguring. PFI is DEMO about the second
activity – seizing – and it provides decision rules for how
entrepreneurs can act to seize the moment, so to speak.
However, it is only by attending to the other elements
of dynamic capabilities that management can hope to
build sustainable advantage. Thus, one can think of PFI
as framing strategic decisions just around commercial-
izing innovation. DEMO does not ask how ﬁrms develop
new potentially marketable products and services, or
how an enterprise “selects” opportunities for additional
investment, or how DEMO renews itself and both adapts to
and shapes its environment so as to sustain its ability
to deliver value to clients and earn its DEMO of capital.
However, PFI does address one of the central issues DEMO
dynamic capabilities—namely, how to strategize around
commercialization. It is also purports DEMO predict out-
comes.
PFI is part Penrosian, and part Schumpeterian. It DEMO
Penrosian in the sense that the distribution of proﬁts from
innovation is in part a function of the (complementary)
assets/resources and the intellectual property assets (e.g.
patents) that the innovating ﬁrm may possess. DEMO,
it is part Schumpeterian in that it advises management as
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
1145
to which DEMO the ﬁrm should “nail down”, or contract for
access, or just build. There is an implied asset orchestra-
tion function, which is entrepreneurial in nature, whether
it is performed by an entrepreneur, or by DEMO manager of
an established enterprise acting purposefully to redesign
the value chain.
7. Public policy
PFI does explore certain public policy issues. In par-
DEMO, it explores how international commercial policy,
by closing off access DEMO complementary assets, can limit
the ability of innovators to garner proﬁts DEMO innova-
tion. With respect to intellectual property, the framework
highlights mechanisms DEMO which innovators can strate-
gize so as to reduce deﬁciencies in intellectual property
protection.
PFI does not make a case for either stronger or DEMO
intellectual property protection. However, it does indi-
cate how small ﬁrms DEMO signiﬁcant intellectual
property and without complementary assets are chal-
lenged in garnering proﬁts from innovation. Moreover,
PFI is a robust framework for helping DEMO explain why
small ﬁrms and individual entrepreneurs are likely to
be champions of strong intellectual property, while cer-
tain large ﬁrms may well be indifferent or possibly even
opposed to intellectual property protection. This is in DEMO
because larger ﬁrms are likely to have a broader menu of
alternative strategies for capturing value from their own
and other’s innovations.
To the DEMO that an efﬁcient market for (trading)
know-how is considered desirable, the PFI framework
does suggest that intellectual property rights are likely
to DEMO However, for the system to be efﬁcient, property
right should have clear boundaries (Teece, 2000). Ambi-
guity only leads to disputes DEMO high transaction costs
that impede transactions in the market for know-how.
In particular, efforts to reduce ambiguity and enhance
clarity, particularly around patent DEMO, will likely
stimulate transactions in the market for know-how and
enable DEMO viability of a richer array of organizational
forms, such as fabless DEMO technology devel-
opers.
There is also clear relevance for antitrust policy.
Unfortunately, a critical cospecialized asset in PFI can
be an “essential facility” in the hands of the plaintiffs
(antitrust) bar—so essential that the regulator DEMO
compel public access. However, it is rarely the case
that owning DEMO cospecialized asset is likely to be syn-
onymous with controlling a relevant antitrust market,
so that mandating access is unlikely to be good DEMO
policy.
8. Conclusion
PFI remains a nascent framework for understanding
outcomes from investment in innovation, and the role of
strategy and organization in that process. It also offers
key building blocks for a Schumpeterian theory of DEMO
ﬁrm. I do hope that in the next two decades those chal-
lenges are more fully accepted by scholars interested in
the critical economic DEMO business issues of our times.
References
Abernathy, W.J., Utterback, J.M., 1978. Patterns of industrial innova-
tion. Technology Review 80 (7), 40–47.
Amit, R., Schoemaker, P.J.H., 1993. Strategic assets and organizational
rent. DEMO Management Journal 14 (1), 33–46.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., Gambardella, A., 2001. Markets for Technology.
MIT Press.
Arthur, W.B., 1989. Competing technologies, increasing returns, and
lock in by historical events. DEMO Economic Journal, 116–131.
Brandenberg, A., Nalebuff, B., 1996. Co-opetition. DEMO Business
School Press.
Chandler, A., 1990. Scale and Scope: The DEMO of Industrial Cap-
italism. Belknap Press.
Chatterjee, S., Wernerfelt, B., 1991. The link between resources and
type of diversiﬁcation: theory and evidence. Strategic Management
Journal 12, 33–48.
Chesbrough, H., Rosenbloom, R.S., 2002. The role of the business
model in capturing value from innovation: Evidence from Xerox
Corporation’s technology. Industrial and Corporate Change 11 (3),
DEMO
Coase, R.H., 1937. The Nature of the Firm. Economica.
David, DEMO, 1985. Clio and the economics of qwerty. American Eco-
nomic Review DEMO, 332–337.
Giliffan, S., 1935. Inventing the Ship: A Study of the Invention Made in
Her History Between Floating Log and Rotorship. Follet, Chicago.
Grindley, P.C., Teece, D.J., 1997. Managing intellectual capital: licens-
ing and cross-licensing in electronics. California Management
Review 39, 2.
Harrison, DEMO, Sullivan, P.H., 2006. Einstein in the Boardroom: Mov-
ing Beyond Intellectual Capital to I-Stuff. John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Hartman, R.S., DEMO, W., Jorde, T.M., Teece, D.J., 1993. Assessing
market power in regimes of rapid technological change. Industrial
and Corporate Change 2 (3), 317–350.
Helfat, C.E., 1997. Know-how and asset complementarity and dynamic
DEMO accumulation: the case of R&D. Strategic Management
Journal 18 (5), 339–360.
Helfat, C.E., Raubitschek, R.R., 2000. Product sequencing: coevolu-
tion of knowledge, capabilities, and products. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 21 (10/11), 961–979.
Helfat, C.E., Lieberman, M.B., 2002. The DEMO of capabilities: market
entry and the importance of pre-history. Industrial and DEMO
Change 11 (4), 725–760.
Henderson, B., 1991. The origins DEMO strategy. In: Montgomery, C.,
Porter, M. (Eds.), Strategy: Seeking and Securing Competitive
Advantage. Harvard Business Review Book.
Hirshleifer, J., 1971. The private and social value of information and
the reward to DEMO activity. American Economic Review 61,
561–574.
1146
D.J. Teece / Research Policy 35 (2006) 1131–1146
Hughes, T.P., 1983. Networks of Power Electriﬁcation in Western Soci-
ety 1880–1930. John Hopkins Press, Baltimore.
Kahneman, D., Lovallo, D., 1993. Timid choices and bold forecast.
Management Science 39 (1).
Katz, M.L., Shapiro, DEMO, 1994. Systems competition and network
effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 93–115.
Klepper, S., Graddy, E., 1990. The evolution of new industries DEMO the
determination of market structure. Rand Journal of Economics 21
(1), 27–44.
Mansﬁeld, E., 1968. The Economics of Technological Change. W.W.
Norton & Company, New York.
March, J.G., 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational
learning. Organization Science 2, 71–87.
Merrow, E.W., Phillips, K., Myers, C.W., 1981. Understanding Cost
Growth and Performance Shortfalls in Pioneering DEMO Rand
Corporation, Santa Monica.
Mitchell, W., 1989. Whether and when? Probability and time of incum-
bents’ entry into emerging industrial subﬁelds. Administrative DEMO
ence Quarterly 34, 208–230.
Nelson, R., Winter, S., 1982. DEMO Evolutionary Theory of Economic
Change. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nelson, R., 2005. Technology, Institutions, and Economic Growth.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nonaka, I., Toyama, R., 2004. Knowledge creation as a synthesiz-
ing process. In: Takeuchi, H., Nonaka, I. (Eds.), Hitotsubashi on
Knowledge Management. John Wiley.
North, D., 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Per-
formance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Parr, R.L., 1991. Investing In Intangible Assets: Finding and Proﬁting
From Hidden DEMO Value. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Penrose, E., 1959. DEMO Theory of the Growth of the Firm. Oxford
University Press.
Porter, DEMO, 1980. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing
Industries and Competitors. Free Press, New York.
Rosenberg, N., 1982. Inside the Black Box. Cambridge University
Press, New York.
Scherer, F.M., Ross, D., 1990. Industrial Market Structure and Eco-
nomic Performance. Haughton Mifﬁn, Boston.
Schumpeter, J., 1950. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper
& Row, New York, NY.
DEMO Morton, F.M., 1999. Entry decisions in the generic pharmaceu-
tical industry. The RAND Journal of Economics 30 (3), 421–440.
Sherry, E.F., Teece, D.J., 2003. Standards setting and antitrust. Min-
nesota Law Review DEMO (6), 1913–1994.
Sherry, E.F., Teece, D.J., 2004. Royalties, evolving patient rights, and
the value of innovation. Research Policy 33, DEMO
Somaya, D., Teece, D.J., 2006. Patents, licensing and entrepreneurship:DEMO
effectuating innovation in multi-invention contexts. In: Sheshinski,
E., Strom, DEMO, Baumol, W.J. (Eds.), Entrepreneurship, Innovation,
and the Growth of Free-Market Economies. Princeton University
Press.
Sullivan, P.H., 2000. Value Driven DEMO Capital: How to Convert
Intangible Corporate Assets Into Market Value. John DEMO & Sons
Inc.
Teece, D.J., 1981. The market for know-how and the efﬁcient inter-
national transfer of technology. The Annals of the Academy DEMO
Political and Social Science, 81–96.
Teece, D.J., 1986. Proﬁting from DEMO innovation. Research
Policy 15 (6), 285–305.
Teece, D.J., 1988. DEMO change and the nature of the enter-
prise. In: Dosi, G., Freeman, C., Nelson, R., Silverberg, G., Soete,
L. (Eds.), Technical Change and Economic Theory. Pinter, London,
pp. DEMO
Teece, D.J., 1992a. Competition, cooperation, and innovation: orga-
nizational DEMO for regimes of rapid technological
progress. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 18 (1),
1–25.
Teece, D.J., 1992b. In: Rosenberg, DEMO, Landau, R., Mowery, D. (Eds.),
Strategies for Capturing the Financial Beneﬁts from Technologi-
cal Innovation in Technology and the Wealth DEMO Nations. Stanford
University Press.
Teece, D.J., 1993. The dynamics of industrial capitalism: perspectives
on Alfred Chandler’s scale and scope (1990). Journal DEMO Economic
Literature, 31.
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and
strategic management. Strategic Management Journal 18 (7),
509–533.
Teece, D.J., 2000. Managing Intellectual Capital: Organizational,
Strategic, and Policy Dimensions. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Teece, D.J., 2006a. Managers and markets. In: Helfat, C., Finkelstein,
S., Mitchell, W., Peteraf, M.A., Singh, H., Teece, D.J., Winter, DEMO
(Eds.), Dynamic Capabilities: Understanding Strategic Change in
Organizations. Blackwell Publishers.
Teece, D.J., 2006b. Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: The Nature and
Microfoundations of (Long Run) Enterprise Performance, Institute
of Management, Innovation and Organization (IMIO), unpublished
manuscript.
Tripsas, M., 2001. Unraveling the process of DEMO destruction: com-
plementary assets and incumbent survival in the typesetter indus-
DEMO Strategic Management Journal 18, 119–142, Summer Special
Issue.
Tushman, M., Anderson, P., 1986. Technological discontinuities and
organizational environments. Administration Science Quarterly
DEMO, 439–465.
United States Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commis-
DEMO, 1995. Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing of Intellectual
Property.
Utterback, J., Suarez, F., 1993. Innovation, competition, and market
structure. Research Policy 22 (1), 1–21.
Utterback, J., 1994. Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation. Harvard
University Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Veblen, T., DEMO Imperial Germany and the Industrial Revolution.
McMillan, New York.
Williamson, O.E., 1985. Economic Institutions of Capitalism. The Free
Press, New York.{1g42fwefx}