This material may be protected
by copyright
17 U.S.
Profiting from technological DEMO:
Implications for integration, collaboration,
licensing and public policy
David DEMO TEECE *
School of Business Administration,
Final version received June 1986
of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, U.S.A.
285
This paper attempts to explain why innovating firms often
fail to obtain significant economic returns from DEMO innovation,
while customers, imitators and other industry participants be-
nefit. DEMO strategy  particularly as it relates to the firm’s
decision to integrate DEMO collaborate  is shown to be an
important factor. The paper demonstrates DEMO when imitation
is easy, markets don’t work well, and the profits from innova-
tion may accrue to the owners of certain complementary assets,DEMO
rather than to the developers of the intellectual property. This
speaks to the need, in certain cases, for the innovating firm to
establish DEMO prior position in these complementary assets. The
paper also indicates that innovators with new products and
processes which provide value to consumers may sometimes DEMO
so ill positioned in the market that they necessarily will fail.
The analysis provides a theoretical foundation for the proposi-
tion that manufacturing often DEMO particularly to innovat-
ing nations. Innovating firms without the requisite
ing and related capacities may die, even though they are the
best at innovation. Implications for trade policy and domestic
economic policy are examined.
* I DEMO Raphael  Harvey Brooks, Chris
Therese Flaherty, Richard Gilbert, Heather  DEMO
Horwitch, David  Carl Jacobsen, Michael Porter,
Gary  Richard Rumelt, Raymond Vernon and Sid-
ney Winter for helpful discussions relating to the subject
matter of this paper. Three anonymous referees also pro-
vided valuable DEMO I gratefully acknowledge the
financial support of the National Science Foundation un-
der grant no. SRS-8410556 to the Center for Research in
Management, University of California Berkeley. Earlier
versions of this paper were presented at a DEMO Academy
of Engineering Symposium titled “World Technologies and
National Sovereignty,” February 1986, and at a conference
on innovation at the University of Venice, March 1986.
Research Policy 15 (1986) 285-305
North-Holland
It is quite common for innovators  those firms
which are first to commercialize a new product or
process in the market  to lament the fact that
competitors/imitators have profited more from
the innovation than the firm first to DEMO
it! Since it is often held that being first to market
is a source of strategic advantage, the clear ex-
istence and persistence of this phenomenon may
appear perplexing if not troubling. The aim of this
DEMO is to explain why a fast second or even a
slow third might outperform the innovator. The
message is particularly pertinent to those science
DEMO engineering driven companies that harbor the
mistaken illusion that developing new products
which meet customer needs will ensure fabulous
success. It may possibly do DEMO for the product, but
not for the innovator.
In this paper, a framework is offered which
identifies the factors which determine who wins
DEMO innovation: the firm which is first to market,
follower firms, or firms that have related capabili-
ties that the innovator needs. The DEMO firms
may or may not be imitators in the narrow sense
of the term, although they sometimes are. The
framework appears to have utility for explaining
the share of the profits from innovation accruing
to the DEMO compared to its followers and
suppliers (see fig.  as well as for explaining a
variety of interfirm activities such as joint ven-
tures, coproduction agreements, cross distribution
arrangements, and technology licensing. Implica-
tions for DEMO management, public policy, and
international trade and investment are then dis-
cussed.
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland)
286
What determines the share of profits captured by the
innovatof?
DEMO 1. Explaining the distribution of the profits from innova-
tion.
2. The phenomenon
Figure 2 presents a simplified taxonomy of the
possible outcomes from DEMO Quadrant 1
represents positive outcomes for the innovator. A
first-to-market advantage is translated into a sus-
tained competitive advantage which either creates
a new DEMO stream or enhances an existing
one. Quadrant 4 and its corollary quadrant 2 are
the ones which are the focus of this paper.
The DEMO CAT scanner is a classic case of the
phenomenon to be investigated.  By the early
the UK firm Electrical Musical Industries
Ltd. was in a variety of product lines
including phonographic records, movies, and ad-
DEMO electronics. EM1 had developed high reso-
lution TVs in the  pioneered DEMO radar
during World War II, and developed the UK’s
first all DEMO computers in 1952.
In the late 1960s Godfrey Houndsfield, an EM1
DEMO research engineer engaged in pattern recog-
nition research which resulted in his displaying a
scan of a pig’s brain. Subsequent clinical work
established that DEMO axial tomography
(CAT) was viable for generating cross-sectional
“views” of the human body, the greatest advance
in radiology since the discovery of X rays in 1895.
While  was initially successful with its CAT
The
story is summarized in Michael Martin,
Publishing Company,
VA, 1984).
scanner, within 6 years of its introduction into the
US in 1973 the company had lost market leader-
ship, and by the eighth year had dropped out of
the CT scanner business, Other companies suc-
cessfully dominated the market, though they were
late entrants, and are still DEMO in the business
today.
Other examples include RC Cola, a small DEMO
verage company that was the first to introduce
cola in a can, and the first to introduce diet cola.
Both Coca Cola and Pepsi followed almost im-
mediately and deprived RC of any significant
advantage from DEMO innovation.  which
introduced the pocket calculator, was not able to
withstand competition from Texas Instruments,
Hewlett Packard and others, and went out of
business. Xerox failed to succeed with its entry
into the office DEMO business, even though
Apple succeeded with the  which con-
tained many of Xerox’s key product ideas, such as
the mouse and icons. The de Havilland Comet
saga has some of the same features. The Comet DEMO
jet was introduced into the commercial airline
business 2 years or so before Boeing introduced
the 707, but de Havilland failed to capitalize on its
substantial early advantage. MITS introduced the
first personal computer, the Altair, experienced a
burst of sales, then slid quietly into oblivion.
If DEMO are innovators who lose there must be
followers/imitators who win. A classic example is
IBM with its PC, a great success since the time it
was introduced in 1981. Neither the architecture
nor components embedded DEMO the IBM PC were
considered advanced when introduced; nor was
the DEMO the technology was packaged a significant
departure from then-current practice. Yet the IBM
PC was fabulously successful and established
DOS as the leading operating DEMO for 16-bit
PCs. By the end of 1984, IBM has shipped DEMO
500000 PCs, and many considered that it had
irreversibly eclipsed Apple DEMO the PC industry.
3. Profiting from innovation: Basic building blocks
In DEMO to develop a coherent framework within
which to explain the distribution of outcomes
illustrated in fig. 2, three fundamental building
blocks must first be put in place: the
ity regime, complementary assets, and the domi-
nant design paradigm.
Lose
Fig.
lnnovator
Follower-Imitator
. Pilkington (Float Glass)
!" G.D. DEMO
1
.
(Teflon)
4
. RC Cola (diet cola)
!" (scanner)
(pocket calculator)
. Xerox (office computer)DEMO
.  (Comet)
2
!" IBM (Personal
Computer)
. Matsushita (VHS
video recorders)
. Seiko (quartz watch)
3
DEMO Kodak
(instant photography)
!" Northrup
!" DEC (personal
computer)
Taxonomy of outcomes from the innovation process.
3.
Regimes of appropriability
DEMO regime of appropriability refers to the en-
vironmental factors, excluding firm DEMO market
structure, that govern an innovator’s ability to
capture the profits DEMO by an innovation.
The most important dimensions of such a regime
are the nature of the technology, and the efficacy
of legal mechanisms of protection (fig. 3).
It has long been known that patents do not
work in practice as they do in theory. Rarely, if
ever, do patents confer perfect appropriability,
although they do afford considerable protection
on new chemical products and rather simple
mechanical inventions. Many patents can DEMO “in-
vented around” at modest costs. They are espe-
cially ineffective at protecting process innovations.
Often patents provide little protection because the
legal requirements DEMO upholding their validity or
for proving their infringement are high.
In some industries, particularly where the in-
novation is embedded in processes, trade DEMO
are a viable alternative to patents. Trade secret
protection is possible, DEMO, only if a firm can
put its product before the public DEMO still keep the
underlying technology secret. Usually only chem-
ical formulas and industrial-commercial processes
(e.g., cosmetics and recipes) can be protected as
trade secrets after they’re “out”.
The degree to which knowledge is tacit or DEMO
fied also affects ease of imitation. Codified
edge is easier to transmit and receive, and is more
exposed to industrial espionage and the like. Tacit
knowledge by definition is difficult to articulate,
and so transfer DEMO hard unless those. who possess
the know how in question can demonstrate it to
others (Teece  Survey research indicates that
methods of appropriability DEMO markedly across
industries, and probably within industries as well
(Levin et al.
The property rights environment within which
a firm operates can thus DEMO classified according to
the nature of the technology and the efficacy of
the legal system to assign and protect intellectual
property. While a gross DEMO, a dichot-
omy can be drawn between environments in which
the DEMO regime is “tight” (technology
is relatively easy to protect) and “weak” (tech-
nology is almost impossible to protect). Examples
of the former include the formula for Coca Cola
an example of the latter would DEMO the
Simplex algorithm in linear programming.
3.2. The dominant design paradigm
It is commonly recognized that tbere are two
stages in the evolutionary development DEMO a given
branch of a science: the preparadigmatic stage
when there DEMO no single generally accepted concep-
tual treatment of the phenomenon in a field of
study, and the paradigmatic stage which begins
when a body of theory appears to have passed the
canons of scientific acceptability. The DEMO
of a dominant paradigm signals scientific maturity
and the acceptance of agreed upon “standards”
by which what has been referred to as “normal”
scientific DEMO can proceed. These “standards”
remain in force unless or until the paradigm is
overturned. Revolutionary science is what over-
turns normal science, as when the Copernicus’s
theories of astronomy overturned Ptolemy’s in the
seventeenth century.
Abernathy DEMO Utterback  and Dosi  have
provided a treatment of the technological evolu-
tion of an industry which appears to parallel
Legal instruments
Patents
Trade DEMO
!"Nature of technology
Product
Process
Tacit
Codified
Fig. 3. Appropriability regime: Key dimensions.
.
288
notions of scientific evolution.  the
early stages of industry development, DEMO de-
signs are fluid, manufacturing processes are loosely
and adaptively organized, and generalized capital
is used in production. Competition amongst firms
manifests itself DEMO competition amongst designs,
which are markedly different from each other.
This might be called the preparadigmatic stage of
an industry.
At some point DEMO time, and after considerable
trial and error in the marketplace, one design or a
narrow class of designs begins to emerge as the
DEMO promising. Such a design must be able to
meet a whole set of user needs in a relatively
complete fashion. The Model T Ford, the IBM
360, and the Douglas DC-3 are examples of domi-
nant designs in the automobile, computer, and
aircraft industry respectively.
Once a DEMO design emerges, competition
shifts to price and away from design. Competitive
DEMO then shifts to a whole new set of variables.
Scale and learning become much more important,
and specialized capital gets deployed as in-
DEMO seek to lower unit costs through ex-
ploiting economies of scale and learning. Reduced
uncertainty over product design provides an op-
portunity toamortize specialized DEMO invest-
ments.
Innovation is not necessarily halted once the
dominant design emerges; as Clarke  points out,
it can occur lower down in DEMO design hierarchy.
For instance, a  cylinder configuration emerged
in automobile engine blocks during the 1930s with
the emergence of the Ford V-8 engine. DEMO
were quickly found for it. Moreover, once the
product design stabilizes, there is likely to be a
surge of process innovation as producers DEMO
to lower production costs for the new product (see
fig. 4)DEMO
The Abernathy-Utterback framework does not
characterize all industries. It seems more suited to
mass markets where consumer tastes are relatively
homogeneous. It would appear DEMO be less char-
acteristic of small niche markets where the ab-
sence of scale and learning economies attaches
much less of a penalty to DEMO designs. In
these instances, generalized equipment will be em-
ployed in DEMO
See Kuhn
The existence of a dominant design watershed
is of great significance to the distribution of
its between innovator and follower. The innovator
DEMO have been responsible for the fundamental
scientific breakthroughs as well as the basic design
of the new product. However, if imitation is rela-
tively easy, imitators may enter the fray, modify-
ing the product in DEMO ways, yet relying on
the fundamental designs pioneered by the innova-
DEMO When the game of musical chairs stops, and a
dominant design DEMO, the innovator might
well end up positioned disadvantageously relative
to a DEMO Hence, when imitation is possible
and occurs coupled with design modification
DEMO the emergence of a dominant design, fol-
lowers have a good DEMO of having their mod-
ified product annointed as the industry standard,
often to the great disadvantage of the innovator.
3.3. Complementary assets
J
DEMO the unit of analysis be an innovation. An
innovation consists of certain technical knowledge
about how to do things better than the existing
state DEMO the art. Assume that the know-how in
question is partly codified and partly tacit. In
order for such know-how to, generate profits, it
DEMO be sold or utilized in some fashion in the
market.
In almost all cases, the successful commerciali-
zation of an innovation requires that the know-how
in question be utilized in conjunction with other
capabilities or assets. DEMO such as marketing,
competitive manufacturing, and after-sales sup-
port are DEMO always needed. These services are
often obtained from complementary assets which
are specialized. For example, the commercializa-
tion of a new drug is likely to require the dissemi-
nation of information over a specialized
tion channel. DEMO some cases, as when the innova-
tion is systemic, the complementary assets may be
other parts of a system. For instance; computer
hardware typically requires specialized software,
both for the operating system, as well as for
applications. Even when an innovation is
as with plug compatible DEMO, cer-
tain complementary capabilities or assets will be
needed for successful DEMO Figure 5
summarizes this schematically.
Whether the assets required for least cost pro-
duction and distribution are specialized to the
A
289
.
preparadigmatic design
phase
Fig. 4. Innovation over the
paradigmatic DEMO phase
cycle.
innovation turns out to be important in the devel-
opment presented below. Accordingly, the nature
of complementary assets are explained in some
detail. Figure 6 differentiates between comple-
mentary assets which are generic, specialized, and
cospecialized.
Generic assets are general purpose assets which
do not need to be tailored to the innovation in
question. Specialized assets are those DEMO there
is unilateral dependence between the innovation
and the complementary asset. Cospecialized assets
are those for which there is a bilateral dependence.
For instance, specialized repair facilities were
needed to support the introduction of the rotary
DEMO by Mazda. These assets are cospecialized
because of the mutual dependence of the innova-
tion on the repair facility. Containerization simi-
larly required the DEMO of some
ized assets in ocean shipping and terminals. How-
ever, DEMO dependence of trucking on containerized
shipping was less than that of containerized ship-
ping on trucking, as trucks can convert from con-
tainers to flat beds at low cost. An example of a
generic asset would DEMO the manufacturing facilities
needed to make running shoes. Generalized
Fig. 5. Complementary assets needed to commercialize an
innovation.
Dependence of Innovation on
Assets
Fig. DEMO Complementary assets: Generic, specialized. and
cospecialized.
equipment can be employed in the main, excep-
tions being the molds for the soles.
4. Implications for profitability
These three concepts can now DEMO related in a
way which will shed light on the imitation process,
and the distribution of profits between innovator
and follower. We begin DEMO examining tight
propriability regimes.
4.1. Tight uppropriability regimes
In those few instances where the innovator has
an iron clad patent or copyright protection, or
where the nature of the product is such that trade
secrets effectively DEMO imitators access to the
relevant knowledge, the innovator is almost as-
DEMO of translating its innovation into market
value for some period of time. Even if the innova-
tor does not possess the desirable endowment of
DEMO costs, iron clad protection of intel-
lectual property will afford the DEMO the time
to access these assets. If these assets are generic,
contractual relation may well suffice, and the in-
novator may simply license its technology. Spe-
cialized R&D firms are viable in such an DEMO
ment. Universal Oil Products, an R&D firm de-
veloping refining DEMO for the petroleum in-
dustry was one such case in point. If, however, the
complementary assets are specialized or
ized, contractual relationships are exposed to
hazards, because one or both parties will have to
commit capital to certain irreversible investments
which will be valueless if the relationship DEMO
innovator and licensee breaks down. Accordingly,
the innovator may find it prudent to expand its
boundaries by integrating into specialized and
cospecialized assets. DEMO, the factors which
make for difficult -imitation will enable the in-
DEMO to build or acquire those complementary
assets without competing with innovators for their
control.
Competition from imitators is muted in this
type of regime, which sometimes characterizes the
petrochemical industry. In this industry, the pro-
tection offered by patents is fairly easily enforced.
One factor assisting the licensee DEMO this regard is
that most petrochemical processes are designed
around a specific variety of catalysts which can be
kept proprietory. An agreement not to DEMO the
catalyst can be extracted from licensees, affording
extra protection. However, even if such require-
ments are violated by licensees, the innovator is
still well positioned, as the most important proper-
ties of a catalyst are related to its physical struc-
ture, and the process for generating this structure
cannot be deduced from structural analysis alone.
Every reaction technology DEMO company acquires is
thus accompanied by an ongoing dependence on
the innovating company for the catalyst ap-
propriate to the plant design. Failure to DEMO
with various elements of the licensing contract can
thus result in a cutoff in the supply of the catalyst,
and possibly facility closure.
DEMO, if the innovator comes to market in
the preparadigmatic phase with DEMO sound product
concept but the wrong design, a tight
bility regime DEMO afford the innovator the time
needed to perform the trials needed to get the
design right. As discussed earlier, the best initial
design concepts often turn out to be hopelessly
wrong, but if the innovator possesses an impene-
trable thicket of patents, or has technology which
is simply difficult to copy, then the market may
well afford the innovator the necessary time to
ascertain the right design before being eclipsed by
imitators.
DEMO Weak appropriability
Tight appropriability is the exception rather
than the rule. Accordingly, innovators must turn
to business strategy if they are to keep imitators/
followers at bay. The nature of the competitive
process will vary DEMO to whether the in-
dustry is in the paradigmatic or preparadigmatic
phase.
4.2.1. Preparadigmatic phase
In the preparadigmatic phase, the innovator
must be careful to let the basic design “float”
until sufficient evidence has accumulated that DEMO
design has been delivered which is likely to be-
come the industry standard. In some industries
there may be little opportunity for product mod-
DEMO In microelectronics, for example, designs
become locked in when the circuitry is chosen.
Product modification is limited to “debugging”
and software modification. An DEMO must
begin the design process anew if the product
doesn’t fit the market well. In some respects,
however, selecting designs is dictated by the need
to meet certain compatibility standards so that
DEMO hardware can interface with existing appli-
cations software. In one sense, DEMO, the de-
sign issue for the microprocessor industry today is
relatively DEMO: deliver greater power
and speed while meeting the the computer in-
DEMO standards of the existing software base.
However, from time to time DEMO of opportun-
ity emerge for the introduction of entirely new
families of microprocessors which will define a
new industry and software standard. In these DEMO
stances, basic design parameters are less well de-
fined, and can be permitted to “float” until market
acceptance is apparent.
The early history DEMO the automobile industry
exemplifies exceedingly well the importance for
subsequent success of selecting the right design in
the preparadigmatic stages. None of the early
DEMO of steam cars survived the early shakeout
when the closed body internal  engine
automobile emerged as the dominant design. The
steam car, nevertheless, had numerous early
virtues, such as reliability, which the internal com-
DEMO engine autos could not deliver.
The British fiasco with the Comet I is also
instructive. De Havilland had picked an early
design with both DEMO and commercial flaws.
By moving into production, significant
bilities and loss DEMO reputation hobbled de Havil-
land to such a degree that it was unable to convert
to the Boeing design which subsequently emerged
as dominant. DEMO wasn’t even able to occupy second
place, which went instead to DEMO
As a general principle, it appears that
tors in weak appropriability DEMO need to be
i intimately coupled to the market so that user
needs can fully impact designs. When multiple
parallel and sequential prototyping is DEMO, it
has clear advantages. Generally such an approach
is simply prohibitively DEMO When development
costs for a large commercial aircraft exceed one
billion dollars, variations on a theme are all that is
possible.
Hence, the DEMO that an innovator
defined here as a firm that is first to commercial-
ize a new product design concept  will enter the
paradigmatic phase possessing the dominant
design is problematic. The probabilities will be
higher the DEMO the relative cost of prototyping,
and the more tightly coupled the firm is to the
market. The later is a function of organizational
DEMO, and can be influenced by managerial
choices. The former is embedded  the technol-
ogy, and cannot be influenced, except in minor
ways, by managerial decisions. Hence, in in-
dustries with large developmental and prototyping
, costs  and hence significant irreversibilities
and where innovation of the product concept is
. easy, then one would expect that the probability
that the innovator would emerge as the winner or
amongst the winners at DEMO end of the
stage is low.
4.2.2. Paradigmatic stage
. In the preparadigmatic phase, complementary
assets do not loom large. Rivalry is focused on
trying to identify the design which will be domi-
nant. Production volumes DEMO low, and there is
little to be gained in deploying specialized DEMO,
as scale economies are unavailable, and price is
not a DEMO competitive factor. However, as
the leading design or designs begin to DEMO revealed
by the market, volumes increase and opportunities
for economies of DEMO will induce firms to begin
gearing up for mass production by acquiring spe-
cialized tooling and equipment, and possibly spe-
cialized distribution as well. Since these invest-
ments involve significant irreversibilities, pro-
ducers are likely to proceed with caution. Islands
of specialized capital will begin to appear in DEMO
industry, which otherwise features a sea of general
purpose manufacturing equipment.
DEMO, as the terms of competition begin to
J change, and prices become increasingly unim-
.
portant, access to complementary assets becomes
absolutely critical. Since the core technology is
easy to imitate, by assumption, commercial DEMO
swings upon the terms and conditions upon which
the required complementary assets can be accessed.
It is at this point that speeialized and
ized DEMO become critically important. Gener-
alized equipment and skills, almost by definition,DEMO
are always available in an industry, and even if
they are DEMO, they do not involve significant
versibilities. Accordingly, firms have easy access
to this type of capital, and even if there is insuffi-
cient capacity available in the relevant assets, it
can easily be put in place as it involves few risks.
Specialized assets, on the other hand, involve sig-
nificant irreversibilities and cannot be easily
292
D.J. Teece
Profiting
accessed by contract, as the risks are significant
for the party making the dedicated investment.
The firms which control the DEMO assets,
such as distribution channels, specialized manu-
facturing capacity, etc. are clearly advantageously
positioned relative to an innovator. Indeed, in rare
instances where incumbent firms possess an
airtight monopoly over specialized assets, and the
innovator is in a regime of weak appropriability,
all of the DEMO to the innovation could conceiva-
bly innure to the firms possessing the specialized
assets who should be able to get the upper hand.
Even DEMO the innovator is not confronted by
situations where competitors or potential competi-
tors control key assets, the innovator may still be
disadvantaged. For instance, the technology em-
bedded in cardiac pacemakers was easy to imitate,
and so competitive outcomes quickly came to be
determined by who had DEMO access to the com-
plementary assets, in this case specialized market-
DEMO A similar situation has recently arisen in the
United States with respect to personal computers.
As an industry participant recently
“There are a huge DEMO of computer manufac-
turers, companies that make peripherals (e.g.
printers, DEMO disk drives, floppy disk drives), and
software companies. They are DEMO trying to get
marketing distributors because they cannot afford
to call on all of the US companies directly. They
need to go through retail DEMO channels,
such as Businessland, in order to reach the
marketplace. DEMO problem today, however, is that
many of these companies are not able to get shelf
space and thus are having a very difficult DEMO
marketing their products. The point of distribu-
tion is where the profit and the power are in the
marketplace today”. (Norman
5. Channel strategy issues
The above analysis indicates how access to
complementary assets, such as manufacturing and
on competitive teams is critical if the
innovator is to DEMO handling over the lion’s
share of the profits to imitators, and/DEMO to the
owners of the complementary assets that are spe-
cialized or cospecialized to the innovation. It is
now necessary to delve deeper into DEMO ap-
propriate control structure that the innovator ide-
ally ought to establish over these critical assets.
Fig. 7. Complementary assets internalized for innovation: Hy-
pothetical case  (innovator integrated into all complemen-
tary assets).
There DEMO a myriad of possible channels which
could be employed. At one extreme the innovator
could integrate into all of the necessary
Fig. 8. Complementary DEMO internalized for innovation: Hy-
pothetical case  (innovator subcontracts for manufacturing
DEMO service).
D.J.
from technological
293
mentary assets, as illustrated in fig. 7, DEMO just a few
of them, as illustrated in fig. 8. Complete DEMO
tion (fig. 7) is likely to be unnecessary as well as
prohibitively expensive. It is well to recognize that
the variety of assets DEMO  which need
to be accessed is likely to be quite large, even for
only modestly complex technologies. To produce a
personal computer, for instance, a company needs
access to expertise in semiconductor technology,
display technology, disk drive technology, net-
working technology, keyboard technology, and
DEMO others. No company can keep pace in all
of these areas by itself.
At the other extreme, the innovator could at-
tempt to access these assets through straightfor-
ward contractual relationships (e.g. component
supply contracts, DEMO contracts, service
contracts, etc.). In many instances such contracts
may suffice, although it sometimes exposes the
innovator to various hazards and dependencies J
that it may well wish to avoid. In between the
fully DEMO and full contractual extremes, there
are a myriad of intermediate forms DEMO channels
available. An analysis of the properties of the two
extreme forms is presented below. A brief synop-
sis of mixed modes then follows.
DEMO Contractual modes
The advantages of a contractual solution
whereby the innovator signs a contract, such as a
license, with independent suppliers, manufacturers
or distributors  are obvious. The innovator will
not have to make the  DEMO expenditures
needed to build or buy the assets in question. This
reduces risks as well as cash requirements.
Contracting rather than integrating is likely DEMO
be the optimal strategy when the innovators
propriability regime is tight and the complemen-
tary assets are available in competitive supply (i.e.
there is adequate capacity and a choice of sources).
Both conditions apply in DEMO for
instance, so an innovator doesn’t need to be in-
tegrated DEMO be a successful. Consider, first, the
appropriability regime. As discussed earlier, the
protection offered by patents is fairly easily en-
forced,  for process technology, in the
petrochemical industry. Given the advantageous
feedstock prices available in hydrocarbon rich pet-
rochemical exporters, and the appropriability reg-
ime characteristic of this industry, there is no
incentive or advantage in owning the complemen-
tary assets (production facilities) as they are not
typically highly DEMO to the innovation. Un-
ion Carbide appears to realize this; and DEMO re-
cently adjusted its strategy accordingly. Essen-
tially, Carbide is placing DEMO existing technology
into a new subsidiary, Engineering and Hydro-
carbons Service. DEMO company is engaging in
licensing and offers engineering, construction, and
management services to customers who want to
take their feedstocks and integrate them DEMO
into petrochemicals. But Carbide itself appears to
be backing away from an integration strategy.
Chemical and petrochemical product innova-
tions are not quite so DEMO to protect, which should
raise new challenges to innovating firms in DEMO
developed nations as they attempt to shift out of
commodity petrochemicals. There are already
numerous examples of new products that made it
to the DEMO, filled a customer need, but
never generated competitive returns to the innova-
tor because of imitation. For example, in the
1960s Dow decided to start manufacturing rigid
polyurethene foam. However, it was imitated very
quickly by numerous small firms which had lower
costs.  The absence of low cost manufacturing
capability left Dow vulnerable.
Contractual relationships can bring added
credibility DEMO the innovator, especially if the in-
novator is relatively unknown when DEMO contract-
ual partner is established and viable. Indeed,
arms-length contracting which embodies more than
a simple buy-sell agreement is becoming so com-
mon, and is so multifaceted, that the term stra-
tegic partnering has been devised to describe it.
Even large companies such as IBM are now DEMO
ing in it. For IBM, partnering buys access to new
technologies DEMO the company to “learn
things we couldn’t have learned without many
years of trial and error.”  IBM’s arrangement
with Microsoft to use the latter’s MS-DOS operat-
ing system software on the IBM PC facilitated the
timely DEMO of IBM’s personal computer
into the market.
Executive V.P. Union Carbide, DEMO D. Kennedy, quoted
in Chemical Week, Nov. 16, 1983,  DEMO
Comment attributed to Peter Olson III, IBM’s director of
business development, as reported in The Strategy Behind
IBM’s Strategic Alliances, Electronic Business, DEMO 1
(1985) 126.
294
D.J.
Smaller less integrated companies are often
eager to sign on DEMO established companies be-
cause of the name recognition and reputation
lovers. For instance Cipher Data Products, Inc.
contracted with IBM to develop a low-priced ver-
sion of IBM’s 3480 0.5 inch streaming cartridge
drive, which is likely to become the industry
standard. As Cipher management points out, “one
of the biggest advantages to dealing with IBM is
that, once you’ve created a product that meets the
high quality standards necessary to sell DEMO the
IBM world, you can sell into any arena.”  Simi-
larly, IBM’s contract with Microsoft “meant in-
stant credibility” to Microsoft  1985, p.
94).
It is most important to recognize, however, that
DEMO (contractual) partnering, which is cur-
rently very fashionable, is exposed to certain
hazards, particularly for the innovator, when the
innovator is DEMO to use contracts to access spe-
cialized capabilities. First, it may DEMO difficult to
induce suppliers to make costly irreversible com-
mitments which depend for their success on the
success of the innovation. To expect suppliers,DEMO
manufacturers, and distributors to do so is to
invite them to DEMO risks along with the innovator.
The problem which this poses for the innovator is
similar to the problems associated with attracting
venture capital. The DEMO must persuade its
prospective partner that the risk is a good one.
The situation is one open to opportunistic abuses
on both sides. The DEMO has incentives to
overstate the value of the innovation, while the
DEMO has incentives to “run with the tech-
nology” should the innovation be a success.
Instances of both parties making irreversible
capital commitments nevertheless exist. DEMO
Laser-writer  a high resolution laser printer which
allows PC users to DEMO near typeset quality
text and art department graphics  is a case DEMO
point. Apple persuaded Canon to participate in
the development of the Laserwriter by providing
subsystems from its copiers  but only after Apple
contracted to pay for a certain number of copier
engines and cases. In short, Apple accepted a
good deal of the financial risk in order to DEMO
Canon to assist in the development and
Comment attributed to Norman Farquhar, Cipher’s vice
president for strategic development, as reported in
October 1 (1985) 128.
.
tion of the LaserWriter. The arrangement
to have been prudent, yet there were clearly
hazards for both sides. It is difficult to write,
execute, and enforce complex development con-
tracts, particularly DEMO the design of the new
product is still “floating.” Apple was exposed to
the risk that its co-innovator Canon would fail to
deliver, and Canon was exposed to the risk that
the Apple design and marketing DEMO would not
succeed. Still, Apple’s alternatives may have been
rather limited, inasmuch as it didn’t command the
requisite technology to “go it alone.”
DEMO short, the current euphoria over “strategic
partnering” may be partially misplaced. DEMO ad-
vantages are being stressed (for example,
Kenna  without a balanced presentation of
costs and risks. Briefly, there is the risk that the
partner won’t perform according to the innovator’s
perception of what the DEMO requires; there is
the added danger that the partner may imitate DEMO
innovator’s technology and attempt to compete
with the innovator. This latter possibility is par-
ticularly acute if the provider of the complemen-
tary asset DEMO uniquely situated with respect to the
complementary asset in question and has the
capacity to imitate the technology, which the in-
novator is unable to protect. The innovator will
then find that it has created a DEMO who is
better positioned than the innovator to take ad-
vantage of the market opportunity at hand. Busi-
ness Week has expressed concerns along DEMO
lines in its discussion of the “Hollow Corpora-
tion.”
It is important to bear in mind, however, that
contractual or partnering strategies in DEMO cases
are ideal. If the innovator’s technology is well
protected, and DEMO what the partner has to provide
is a “generic” capacity available from many
potential partners, then the innovator will be able
to maintain the upper hand while avoiding the
costs of duplicating downstream capacity. Even if
DEMO partner fails to perform, adequate alternatives
exist (by assumption, the DEMO capacities are
commonly available) so the innovator’s efforts to
successfully commercialize DEMO technology ought to
proceed profitably.
See Business Week, March 3 (1986) 57-59.  Week
uses the term to describe a corporation which lacks DEMO
manufacturing capability.
D.J.
Profiting
5.2. Integration modes
Integration, which by definition involves own-
ership, is distinguished from pure contractual
modes in that it typically facilitates incentive
alignment and control. If an innovator owns rather
than rents the complementary DEMO needed to
commercialize, then it is in a position to capture
DEMO benefits stemming from increased de-
mand for the complementary assets caused by the
innovation.
Indeed, an innovator might be in the position,
at least before its innovation is announced, to buy
up capacity in the complementary assets, possibly
to its great subsequent advantage. If futures
markets exist, simply taking forward positions in
the complementary assets may suffice to capture ,
much of the spillovers.
Even after the innovation is announced, DEMO
innovator might still be able to build or buy
complementary capacities at competitive prices if
the innovation has iron clad legal protection (i.e. if
the innovation is in a tight appropriability regime).
However, if the innovation is not tightly protected?
and once “out” is easy to DEMO, then securing
control of complementary capacities is likely to be
the DEMO success factor, particularly if those
ties are in fixed supply  so called “bottlenecks.”
Distribution and specialized manufacturing
petences often become bottlenecks.
As a DEMO matter, however, an innovator
may not have the time to acquire or build the
complementary assets that ideally it would like to
control. DEMO is particularly true when imitation is
easy, so that timing becomes DEMO Additionally,
the innovator may simply not have the financial
resources to proceed. The implications of timing
and cash constraints are summarized in fig. DEMO
Accordingly, in weak appropriability regimes
innovators need to rank complementary assets DEMO
to their importance. If the complementary assets
are critical, ownership is DEMO, although if
the firm is cash constrained a minority position
may DEMO represent a sensible tradeoff.
Needless to say, when imitation is easy, stra-
tegic moves to build or buy complementary assets
which are specialized DEMO occur with due refer-
ence to the moves of competitors. There is no
point moving to build a specialized asset, for
instance, if DEMO imitators can do it faster and
cheaper.
295
It is hopefully self evident that if the innovator
is already a large enterprise with many DEMO the
relevant complementary assets under its control,
integration is not likely to be the issue that it
might otherwise be, as the innovating firm will
already control many of the relevant specialized
and cospecialized assets. DEMO, in industries
experiencing rapid technological change, technolo-
gies advance so rapidly that it is unlikely that a
single company has the full range DEMO expertise
needed to bring advanced products to market in a
timely and cost effective fashion. Hence, the in-
tegration issue is not just a small firm issue.
Time Required to Position
(Relative to Competitors)
Lona
Short
Investment
Required
Major
OK II Timing
Not Critical
Forget It
Full DEMO
Ahead
OK  Cost
Position
Tolerable
Optimum investment for Business
in
How DEMO
Minor
Major
to Success?
Not
Critical
Question
Internalize
ownership)
Internalize
(but if cash
take
position)
Da Not
Internalize
(contract out)DEMO
Fig. 9. Specialized complementary assets and weak
bility: Integration calculus.
296
Integration versus contract strategies: An ana-
lytic summary
Figure 10 summarizes some of the relevant
considerations in the form of a decision flow
DEMO It indicates that a profit seeking innovator,
confronted by weak intellectual property protec-
tion and the need to access specialized comple-
mentary assets DEMO/or capabilities, is forced to
expand its activities through integration if DEMO is to
prevail over imitators. Put differently, innovators
who develop new DEMO that possess poor intel-
lectual property protection but which requires spe-
cialized complementary capacities are more likely
to parlay their technology into a commercial DEMO
vantage, rather than see it prevail in the hands of
imitators.
DEMO 10 makes it apparent that the difficult
strategic decisions arise in situations where the
D.J.
Profiting from technological
appropriability regime is weak and where DEMO
ized assets are critical to profitable commercializa-
tion. These situations, which DEMO reality are very
common, require that a fine-grained competitor
analysis be DEMO of the innovator’s strategic assess-
ment of its opportunities and threats. This is car-
ried a step further in fig. 11, which looks only at
situations where commercialization requires cer-
tain specialized capabilities. It indicates the DEMO
propriate strategies for the innovators and pre-
dicts the outcomes to be expected for the various
players.
Three classes of players are of interst: innova-
tors, imitators, and the owners of cospecialized
assets (e.g. distributors). All three can potentially
benefit or lose from the innovation process. DEMO
latter can potentially benefit from the additional
business  the innovation may DEMO in the
asset owners direction. Should the asset turn out
INNOVATION
REQUIRES ACCESS
TO COMPLEMENTARY
ASSETS FOR
COMMERCIAL
SUCCESS
CONTRACT
ACCESS
CONTRACT
ACCESS
CONTRACT
DEMO
COMPETITORS
Fig. 10. Flow chart for integration versus contract decision.
CONTRACT
ACCESS
D.J.
Profiting from
to be a bottleneck with respect to commercializing
the DEMO, the owner of the bottleneck
ties is obviously in a position DEMO extract profits
from the innovator and/or imitators.
The vertical axis in fig. 11 measures how those
who possess the technology (the innovator or pos-
sibly its imitators) are positioned vis  vis those
firms that DEMO required specialized assets. The
horizontal axis measures the “tightness” of the
appropriability regime, tight regimes being evi-
dence by iron clad legal protection coupled with
technology that is simply difficult to copy; weak
regimes offer little in the way of legal protection
and the essence of the technology, once released,
is transparent to the imitator. Weak regimes are
further DEMO according to how the innovator
and imitators are positioned vis  vis DEMO other.
This is likely to be a function of factors such as
lead time and prior positioning in the requisite
complementary assets.
key:
DEMO
outcomes
297
Figure 11 makes it apparent that even when
firms pursue the optimal strategy, other industry
participants may take the jackpot. This possibility
is unlikely when the intellectual property in ques-
tion is tightly protected. DEMO only serious threat to
the innovator is where a specialized complemen-
tary asset is completely “locked up,” a possibility
recognized in cell 4. DEMO can rarely be done
without the cooperation of government. But it
frequently occurs, as when a foreign government
closes off access to a foreign market, forcing the
innovators to license to foreign firms, but with DEMO
government effectively cartelizing the potential
licensees. With weak intellectual property protec-
tion, however, it is quite clear that the innovator
will often loose DEMO to imitators and/or asset
holders, even when the innovator is DEMO the
appropriate strategy (cell 6). Clearly, incorrect
strategies can compound problems. For instance,
if innovators integrate when they should contract,
DEMO Legal/Technical Appropriability
innovators
and imita-
tors advan-
tageously
positioned
vis a
independent
owners of
complemen-
tary assets
innovators
and imita-
tors disad-
vantageously
DEMO
vis a vis
independent
owners of
complemen-
tary assets
contract if can
do  on
contract
contract
(to limit
exposure)
innovator
or imita-
DEMO;
asset
owners
won’t
benefit
innovator
will prob-
ably lose
to imita-
tors and/
or asset
holders
degree of intellectual property protection
Fig. DEMO Contract and integration strategies and outcomes for innovators: Specialized asset case.
DEMO
298 D.J.  Profiting from
a heavy commitment of resources will be incurred
for little if any strategic benefit, thereby exposing
the innovator to even greater losses than would
otherwise be the case. On the other hand, if an
innovator tries to contract for the supply of a
critical DEMO when it should build the capa-
bility itself, it may well DEMO it has nutured an
imitator better able to serve the market than the
innovator itself.
5.4. Mixed modes
The real world rarely provides extreme DEMO pure
cases. Decisions to integrate  license involve
tradeoffs, compromises, and DEMO approaches. It
is not surprising therefore that the real world is
characterized by mixed modes of organization,
involving judicious blends of integration and DEMO
tracting. Sometimes mixed modes represent transi-
tional phases. For instance, because DEMO the conver-
gence of computer and telecommunication tech-
nology, firms in DEMO industry are discovering that
they often lack the requisite technical capabilities
in the other. Since the technological interdepen-
dence of the two requires collaboration DEMO
those who design different parts of the system,
intense cross-boundary coordination and informa-
tion flows are required. When separate enterprises
are involved, agreement must be reached on com-
plex protocol issues amongst parties who see DEMO
interests differently. Contractual difficulties can
be anticipated since the selection of common tech-
nical protocols amongst the parties will often be
followed by transaction-specific DEMO in
hardware and software. There is little doubt that
this was the motivation behind IBM’s purchase of
15 percent of PBX manufacturer Rolm in DEMO, a
position that was expanded to 100 percent in
1984. IBM’s DEMO in Intel, which began with a 12
percent purchase in 1982, is most probably not a
transitional phase leading to 100 percent purchase,DEMO
because both companies realized that the two cor-
porate cultures are not very compatible, and IBM
may not be as impressed with Intel’s technology as
it once was.
5.5. The CAT scanner, the IBM PC, DEMO
Sweet: Insights from the framework
failure to reap significant returns from
DEMO CAT scanner can be explained in large mea-
sure by reference to the concepts developed above.
The scanner which EM1 developed was of a DEMO
nical sophistication much higher than. would nor-
mally be found in a hospital, requiring a high level
of training, support, and servicing.  DEMO none
of these capabilities, could not easily contract for
them, and was slow to realize their importance. It
most probably could have formed DEMO partnership
with a company like Siemens to access the re-
quisite capabilities. Its failure to do so was a
strategic error compounded by the DEMO limited
intellectual property protection which the law af-
forded the scanner. Although subsequent court
decisions have upheld some of  patent
claims, once the DEMO was in the market it
could be reverse engineered and its essential fea-
tures copied. Two competitors, GE and
nicare, already possessed the DEMO ca-
pabilities that the scanner required, and they were
also technologically DEMO In addition, both
were experienced marketers of medical equipment,
and DEMO reputations for quality, reliability and
service. GE and Technicare were thus DEMO to
commit their R&D resources to developing a
competitive scanner, DEMO ideas from
scanner, which they undoubtedly had access to
through cooperative DEMO, and improving on it
where they could while they rushed to DEMO GE
began taking orders in 1976 and soon after made
inroads on  In 1977 concern for rising health
care costs caused the Carter Administration to
introduce “certificate of need’ regulation, which
required HEW’s approval on expenditures on big
ticket items like CAT scanners. This severely cut
the size DEMO the available market.
By 1978 EM1 had lost market share leadership
to Technicare, which was in turn quickly over-
taken by GE. In October 1979, Godfrey
field of EM1 shared the Nobel prize for invention
of the CT scanner. Despite this honor, and the
public recognition of its role in bringing this medi-
cal breathrough to the world, the collapse of its
scanner business forced EM1 in the same year into
the DEMO of a rescuer, Thorn Electrical Industries,
Ltd. GE subsequently acquired DEMO was
scanner business from Thorn for what amounted
to a pittance.  DEMO royalties continued to flow
to  the company had failed to capture DEMO
See GE Gobbles a Rival in CT Scanners, Business Week,
DEMO 19, 1980, issue no. 2637.
299
lion’s share of the profits generated by the innova-
tion it DEMO pioneered and successfully commercial-
ized.
If EM1 illustrates how a company with out-
standing technology and an excellent product can
fail to profit from DEMO while the imitators
succeeded, the story of the IBM PC indicates DEMO
a new product representing a very modest techno-
logical advance can yield remarkable returns to
the developer.
The IBM PC, introduced in 1981, DEMO a success
despite the fact that the architecture was ordinary
and the components standard. Philip Estridge’s
design team in  Florida, decided to
use DEMO technology to produce a solid, reliable
micro rather than state of DEMO art. With a one-year
mandate to develop a PC, Estridge’s team DEMO
do little else.
However, the IBM PC did use what at DEMO time
was a new  microprocessor (the Intel 8088)
and a new disk operating system (DOS) adapted
for IBM by Microsoft. Other DEMO the micro-
processor and the operating system, the IBM PC
incorporated DEMO micro “standards” and used
off-the-shelf parts from outside vendors. IBM did
write its own BIOS (Basic Input/Output System)
which is embedded in ROM, but this was a rela-
tively straightforward programming exercise.
The key to the PC’s success was not the tech-
nology. It was the DEMO of complementary assets
which IBM either had or quickly assembled around
the PC. In order to expand the market for PCs,
there was DEMO clear need for an expandable, flexible
microcomputer system with extensive applications
DEMO IBM could have based its PC system on
its own patented hardware and copyrighted soft-
ware. Such an approach would cause complemen-
tary products DEMO be cospecialized, forcing IBM to
develop peripherals and a comprehensive library
DEMO software in a very short time. Instead, IBM
adopted what might DEMO called an “induced con-
tractual” approach. By adopting an open system
architecture, as Apple had done, and by making
the operating system information DEMO availa-
ble, a spectacular output of third part software
was induced. DEMO estimated that by mid-1983, at
least 3000 hardware and software products DEMO
available for the PC.  Put differently, IBM pulled
F. Gens and C. Christiansen, Could
Users Be Wrong.  November 1983, 88.
IBM PC
together the complementary assets, particularly
software, which success required, without even
using contracts, let alone integration. This was
despite the fact that the software developers were
creating assets that were in part cospecialized with
the DEMO PC, at least in the first instance.
A number of special DEMO made this seem a
reasonable risk to the software writers. A critical
one was IBM’s name and commitment to the
project. The reputation behind DEMO letters I.B.M. is
perhaps the greatest cospecialized asset the com-
pany possesses. The name implied that the prod-
uct would be marketed and serviced DEMO the IBM
tradition. It guaranteed that PC-DOS would be-
come an industry standard, so that the software
business would not be solely dependent on IBM,
because emulators were sure to enter. It guaran-
teed access DEMO retail distribution outlets on compe-
titive terms. The consequences was that IBM was
able to take a product which represented at best a
modest DEMO accomplishment, and turn
into a fabulous commercial success. The case dem-
DEMO the role that complementary assets play
in determining outcomes.
The spectacular success and profitability of
G.D. Searle’s NutraSweet is an uncommon story
which is DEMO consistent with the above frame-
work. In 1982, Searle reported combined DEMO of
$74 million for NutraSweet and its table top ver-
sion, DEMO In 1983, this surged to $336 million.
In 1985, NutraSweet sales exceeded $700 million
and Equal had captured 50 percent of the U.S.
DEMO substitute market and was number one in
five other countries.
NutraSweet, DEMO is Searle’s tradename for
aspartame, has achieved rapid acceptance in each
DEMO its FDA approved categories because of its
good taste and ability to substitute directly for
sugar in many applications. However, Searle’s
earnings from NutraSweet and the absence of a
strategic challenge can be traced in part DEMO Searle’s
clever strategy.
It appears that Searle has managed to establish
!" an exceptionally tight appropriability regime a-
round NutraSweet  one that may DEMO continue
for some time after the patent has expired. No
competitor appears to have successfully “invented
around” the Searle patent and commercialized an
alternative, no doubt in part because the FDA
See
1985.
300
D.J.
from
approval process would  begin anew for an
imitator who was not violating Searle’s patents. A
competitor who tried to replicate the DEMO
molecule with minor modification to circumvent
the patent would probably be forced to replicate
the hundreds of tests and experiments which
proved aspartame’s safety. DEMO patent
tion, FDA approval would provide no shield
against imitators coming DEMO market with an identi-
cal chemical and who could establish to the FDA
that it is the same compound that had already
been approved. DEMO FDA approval on the
other hand, the patent protection would be DEMO
‘! less for the product would not  for human
consumption.
Searle DEMO aggressively pushed to strengthen its
patent protection. The company was granted U.S.
patent protection in 1970. It has also obtained
patent protection in Japan, Canada, Australia,
U.K., France, Germany, and a number of DEMO
countries. However, most of these patents carry a
life. Since the DEMO was only approved
for human consumption in 1982, the  patent
life was effectively reduced to five. Recognizing
the obvious importance of its patent, Searle pressed
for and obtained special legislation in November
1984 extending the DEMO protection on aspar-
tame for another 5 years. The U.K. provided a
similar extension. In almost every other nation,
however, 1987 will mark the expiration of the
patent.
When the patent expires, however, Searle DEMO
still have several valuable assets to help keep
imitators at bay. Searle has gone to great lengths
to create and promulgate the use of DEMO NutraSweet
name and a distinctive “Swirl” logo on all goods
licensed to use the ingredient. The company has
also developed the “Equal” tradename for DEMO table
top version of the sweetener. Trademark law in
the U.S. provides protection against “unfair”
competition in branded products for as long as the
DEMO of the mark continues to use it. Both the
NutraSweet and Equal trademarks will become
essential assets when the patents on aspartame
expire. Searle DEMO well have convinced consumers
that the only real form of sweetener is
Sweet/Equal. Consumers know most other artifi-
cial sweeteners by their generic DEMO  saccharin
and cyclamates.
Clearly, Searle is trying to build a position in
complementary assets to prepare for the competi-
tion which will surely DEMO Searle’s joint venture
with Ajinomoto ensures them access to that com-
pany’s many years of experience in the production
of biochemical agents. Much of DEMO knowledge is
associated with techniques for distillation and
synthesis of the delicate hydrocarbon compounds
that are the ingredients of NutraSweet, and is
therefore more tacit than codified. Searle has be-
\ gun to put these techniques DEMO use in its own $160
million Georgia production facility. It can be
expected that Searle will use trade secrets to the
maximum to keep DEMO know-how proprietary.
By the time its patent expires, Searle’s extensive
research DEMO production techniques for
and its  years of experience in the Geor-
DEMO plant, should give it a significant cost ad-
vantage over potential DEMO competitors.
Trade secret protection, unlike patents, has no
fixed lifetime and may well sustain Searle’s posi-
tion for years to come.
Moreover, Searle has wisely avoided renewing
contracts with suppliers when they have expired.
Had DEMO subcontracted manufacturing for
NutraSweet, it would have created a manufacturer
who DEMO then be in a position to enter the
aspartame market itself, DEMO to team up with a
marketer of artificial sweeteners. But keeping
manufacturing  and by developing a valu-
able tradename, Searle has a good DEMO of pro-
tecting its market position from dramatic inroads
once patents expire. Clearly, Searle seems to be
astutely aware of the importance of maintaining a
“tight appropriability regime” and using
cialized assets strategically.
6. Implications for DEMO&D strategy, industry struc-
ture, and trade policy
6.1. Allocating R&D resources
The analysis so far assumes that the firm has
developed DEMO innovation for which a market ex-
ists. It indicates the strategies which the firm must
Purification Engineering, which had spent $5 million to
build a phenylalanine production facility, was told in
January 1985 that their contract would not be renewed. In
May, Genex, which claimed to have DEMO $25 million,
was given the same message, A Bad Aftertaste, Business
Week, July 15, 1985, issue 2903.
D.J.
follow to maximize its share of industry profits
relative to imitators DEMO other competitors. There
is no guarantee of success even if optimal strate-
gies are followed.
The innovator can improve its total return to
R&DEMO, however, by adjusting its R&D investment
portfolio to maximize the probability that techno-
logical discoveries will emerge that are either easy
to DEMO with existing intellectual property law,
or which require for commercialization
ized assets already within the firm’s repertoire of
capabilities. Put differently, if an innovating firm
does not target its R&D resources towards new
products DEMO processes which it can commercial-
ize advantageously relative to potential imitators
and/or followers, then it is unlikely to profit from
its investment in R&D. In this sense, a firm’s
history  and the assets DEMO already has in place
ought to condition its R&D investment decisions.
Clearly, an innovating firm with considerable as-
sets already in place is free to strike out in new
directions, so long as in doing so it is cognizant of
the kinds of capabilities required to successfully
DEMO the innovation. It is therefore rather
clear that the R&D investment decision cannot be
divorced from the strategic analysis of markets
and industries, and the firm’s position within them.
6.2. Small firm versus large firm DEMO
Business commentators often remark that many
small entrepreneurial firms which generate new,
commercially valuable technology fail while large
multinational firms, often with a less meritorious
record with respect to innovation, survive and
prosper. One set of reasons for this phenomenon
is now clear. Large firms are more DEMO to possess
the relevant specialized and cospecialized assets
within their boundaries at the time of new product
introduction. They can therefore do a better DEMO of
milking their technology, however meager, to max-
imum advantage. Small domestic firms are less
likely to have the relevant specialized and cospe-
DEMO assets within their boundaries and so will
either have to incur the expense of trying to build
them, or of trying to develop coalitions with com-
petitors/owners of the specialized assets.
.
301
6.3. Regimes DEMO appropriability and industry struc-
ture
In industries where legal methods of protection
are effective, or where new products are just hard
to copy, DEMO strategic necessity for innovating firms
to integrate into cospecialized assets would appear
to be less compelling than in industries where
legal protection is weak. DEMO cases where legal
protection is weak or nonexistent, the control of
DEMO assets will be needed for long-run
survival.
In this regard, it DEMO instructive to examine the
U.S. drug industry (Temin  Beginning in the
the U.S. Patent Office began, for the first
time, to grant DEMO on certain natural sub-
stances that involved difficult extraction proce-
dures. Thus, in 1948 Merck received a patent on
streptomycin, which was a DEMO substance.
However, it was not the extraction process but the
drug DEMO which received the patent. Hence,
patents were important to the drug industry in
terms of what could be patented (drugs), but they
did not prevent imitation  Sometimes
just changing one molecule will enable a company
to come up with a different substance which does
not violate DEMO patent. Had patents been more
all-inclusive  and I am not suggesting DEMO should
licensing would have been an effective mecha-
nism for Merck to extract profits from its innova-
tion. As it turns out, the emergence of close sub-
stitutes, coupled with FDA regulation which had
the de facto effect of reducing the elasticity of
demand for drugs, placed high rewards on a prod-
uct differentiation strategy. This required exten-
sive marketing, including a sales force that could
directly contact doctors, who were the purchasers
of drugs through their ability to create prescrip-
tions.  The result was exclusive production (i.e.,
the earlier industry practice of licensing was
dropped) and forward integration into marketing
(the relevant cospecialized asset).
DEMO, if legal protection of the innovator’s
profits is secure, innovating firms can select their
In the period before FDA regulation, all drugs other than
narcotics were available over-the-counter. Since the end
user could purchase drugs DEMO, sales were price sensi-
tive. Once prescriptions were required, this price sensitivity
collapsed; the doctors not only did not have to pay for the
drugs, but in most cases they were unaware of the prices of
the drugs they were prescribing.
302
D.J.
from
boundaries based simply on their ability to iden-
tify DEMO needs and respond to those through
research and development. The weaker the legal
methods of protection, the greater the incentive to
integrate into the relevant cospecialized assets.
Hence, as industries in which legal protection is
weak begin to mature, integration into
specific cospecialized assets will occur. Often this
will take the form of backward, forward and lateral
integration. (Conglomerate DEMO is not part
of this phenomenon.) For example, IBM’s pur-
chase of Rolm can be seen as a response to the
impact of DEMO change on the identity of
the cospecialized assets relevant to IBM’s future
growth.
6.4. Industry maturity, new entry, and history
As technologically progressive DEMO ma-
ture, and a greater proportion of the relevant
cospecialized assets DEMO brought in under the cor-
porate umbrellas of incumbents, new entry DEMO
comes more difficult. Moreover, when it does oc-
cur it is DEMO likely to involve coalition formation
very early on. Incumbents will for sure own the
cospecialized assets, and new entrants will find it
necessary to forge links with them. Here lies the
explanation for the sudden surge DEMO “strategic
partnering” now occurring internationally, and
particularly in the computer and
, tions industry. Note that it should not be
ted in anti-competitive terms. Given existing in-
structure, coalitions ought to be seen not as
attempts to stifle competition, but as mechanisms
for lowering entry requirements for innovators.
In industries in which technological change of a
particular kind has occurred, which required de-
ployment of specialized and/or cospecialized as-
sets at DEMO time, a configuration of firm boundaries
may well have arisen which DEMO longer has compell-
ing efficiencies. Considerations which once dic-
tated integration may no longer hold, yet there
may not be strong forces leading to divestiture.
Hence existing firm boundaries may in some in-
dustries  especially those where the technological
trajectory and attendent specialized asset require-
ments has changed  be rather fragile. In short,
history matters in terms of understanding DEMO
structure of the modern business enterprise. Ex-
isting firm boundaries cannot always be assumed
to have obvious rationales in terms of today’s
requirements.
6.5. DEMO importance of manufacturing
tional competitiveness
interna-
Practically all forms of technological know-how
must be embedded in goods and services to yield
value to the DEMO An important policy for
the innovating nation is whether the identity of
the firms and nations performing this function
matter.
In a world of DEMO appropriability and zero
transactions cost  the world of  trade
theory  DEMO is a matter of indifference whether an
innovating firm has an in-house manufacturing
capability, domestic or foreign. It can simply en-
gage in arms-length contracting (patent licensing,
know-how licensing, co-production, etc.) for the
DEMO of the output of the activity in which it has a
comparative advantage (in this case R&D) and
will maximize returns by DEMO in what it
does best.
However, in a regime of weak DEMO,
and especially where the requisite manufacturing
assets are specialized to the innovation, which is
often the case, participation in manufacturing may
be DEMO if an innovator is to appropriate the
rents from its innovation. Hence, if an innovator’s
manufacturing costs are higher than those of its
imitators, the innovator may well end up ceding
the lion’s share of profits to the imitator.
In a weak appropriability regime, low cost
itator-manufacturers may end up capturing all of
the profits from innovation. In a weak
DEMO regime where specialized manufacturing ca-
pabilities are required to produce new products,
an innovator with a manufacturing disadvantage
may find that its advantage DEMO early stage research
and development will have no commercial value.
This will eventually cripple the innovator, unless it
is assisted by governmental processes. For exam-
ple, it appears that one of the reasons why U.S.
color TV manufacturers did not capture the lion’s
share of the profits from DEMO innovation, for which
RCA was primarily responsible, was that RCA
and its American licenses were not competitive at
manufacturing. In this context, concerns that the
decline of manufacturing threatens the entire
economy appear to be DEMO founded.
A related implication is that as the technology
gap closes, DEMO basis of competition in an industry
will shift to the cospecialized assets. This appears
to be what is happening in microprocessors. Intel
J
is no longer out ahead technologically. As Gordon
Moore, CEO of Intel points out, “Take the top 10
[semiconductor] companies in the world.. . and it
is hard to tell at any time who is DEMO of whom.. . .
It is clear that we have to be pretty damn close to
the Japanese from a manufacturing standpoint to
compete.” DEMO is not just that strength in one area
is necessary to compensate for weakness in
another. As technology becomes more public and
less proprietary DEMO easier imitation, then
i strength in manufacturing and other capabilities is
DEMO to derive advantage from whatever tech-
\ nological advantages an innovator may possess.
Put differently, the notion that the United States
can adopt a “designer role” in international com-
merce, while letting independent firms in other
countries such as Japan, Korea, Taiwan, or Mexico
do the manufacturing, is unlikely to be viable as a
long-run strategy. This is because profits will
accrue primarily to the low cost manufacturers (by
providing a larger sales base over which they can
exploit their special skills). DEMO imitation is
easy, and even where it is not, there are obvious
problems in transacting in the market for
how, problems which are described in more detail
elsewhere  In particular, there are difficulties in
DEMO an intangible asset whose true perfor-
mance features are difficult to ascertain ex ante.
The trend in international business towards
what Miles and Snow  call “dynamic networks”
characterized by vertical disintegration and con-
tracting  ought thus be viewed with concern.
(Business Week, March 3, 1986, has DEMO to
the same phenomenon as the Hollow Corporation.)
“Dynamic networks” may not so much reflect
innovative organizational forms, but the
bly of the modern corporation because of
terioration in national capacities, manufacturing
I in particular, which are complementary to techno-
logical innovation. Dynamic networks may there-
fore signal not so much the rejuvenation of
American enterprise, but its piecemeal demise.
6.6. How trade and investment barriers can impact
innovators’ profits
In DEMO of weak appropriability, govern-
ments can move to shift the distribution DEMO the
Revolution, Forbes. June 16, 1986,
Institutionalizing
35.
gains from innovation away from foreign innova-
tors and towards domestic firms by denying DEMO
novators ownership of specialized  The for-
eign firm, which by assumption is an innovator,
will be left with the option of selling DEMO intangible
assets in the market for know how if both trade
and investment are foreclosed by government
policy. This option may appear better than DEMO
alternative (no renumeration at all from the market
in question). DEMO may then appear profit-,/
able, but only because access to the complemen-
tary assets is blocked by government.
Thus when an innovating DEMO generating prof-
its needs to access complementary assets abroad,
host governments, by limiting access, can some-
times milk the innovators for a DEMO of the prof-
its, particularly that portion which originates from
sales DEMO the host country. However, the ability of
host governments to do DEMO depends importantly
on the criticality of the host country’s assets to the
innovator. If the cost and infrastructure character-
istics of the host country DEMO such that it is the
world’s lowest cost manufacturing site, and DEMO
domestic industry is competitive, then by acting as
a de facto DEMO the host country govern-
ment ought to be able to adjust the terms of access
to the complementary assets so as to appropriate a
DEMO share of the profits generated by the in-
novation.
If, on DEMO other hand, the host country offers
no unique complementary assets, except access to
its own market, restrictive practices by the govern-
ment will only redistribute profits with respect to
domestic rather than worldwide sales.
6.7. DEMO for the international distribution of
the benefits from innovation
The above analysis makes transparent that in-
novators who do not have access to the DEMO
specialized and cospecialized assets may end up
ceding profits to imitators and other competitors,
or simply to the owners of the specialized or
DEMO assets.
Even when the specialized assets are possessed
by the innovating firm, they may be located .
abroad. Foreign factors of production are thus
If the host country market structure is monopolistic in the
first instance, private actors might be able to achieve the
same benefit. What government DEMO do is to force collusion
of domestic enterprises to their mutual benefit.
304
likely to benefit from research and development
activities occurring across borders. DEMO is little
doubt, for instance, that the inability of many
American multinationals to sustain competitive
manufacturing in the U.S. is resulting in declining
DEMO to U.S. labor. Stockholders and top
management probably do as well if not better
when a multinational accesses
in the firm’s foreign subsidiaries; however, if there
is unemployment in the factors of production
supporting the specialized and cospecialized assets
in question, then the foreign factors of production
will benefit from innovation originating beyond
national borders. This speaks to the importance DEMO
, innovating nations of maintaining competence and
competitiveness in the assets which complement
technological innovation, manufacturing being a
case in point. It also speaks to the importance to
innovating nations of enhancing the protection
afforded worldwide DEMO intellectual property.
However, it must be recognized that there are
inherent DEMO to the legal protection of intellect-
: ual property, and that DEMO and national
strategy are therefore likely to the critical factors
in determining how the gains from innovation are
shared worldwide. By making the correct DEMO
decision, innovating firms can move to protect the
interests of stockholders; however, to ensure that
domestic rather than foreign cospecialized assets
capture the lion’s share of the externalities spilling
over to complementary assets, the supporting in-
frastructure for those complementary assets must
not be allowed to decay. DEMO short, if a nation has
prowess at innovation, then in the absence of iron
clad protection for intellectual property, it must
maintain well-developed complementary assets if
it is to capture the spillover benefits from innova-
DEMO
7. Conclusion
The above analysis has attempted to synthesize
from recent research in industrial organization
and strategic management a framework within
which to analyze DEMO distribution of the profits
from innovation. The framework indicates that
the boundaries of the firm are an important
tegic variable for innovating firms. The DEMO
of complementary assets, particularly when they
are specialized and/or cospecialized, help estab-
lish who wins and who loses from innovation.
Imitators can DEMO outperform innovators if they
are better positioned with respect to critical com-
plementary assets. Hence, public policy aimed at
promoting innovation must focus not only on
R&D, but also on complementary assets, as well
DEMO the underlying infrastructure. If government
decides to stimulate innovation, it would DEMO
important to clear away barriers which impede the
development of complementary assets which tend
to be specialized or cospecialized to innovation.
To fail to DEMO so will cause an unnecessary large
portion of the profits from innovation to flow to
imitators and other competitors. If these firms lie
beyond DEMO national borders, there are obvious
implications for the internal distribution of DEMO
come.
When applied to world markets, results similar
to those obtained DEMO the “new trade theory” are
suggested by the framework. In particular, DEMO
and other restrictions on trade can in some cases
injure innovating firms while simultaneously be-
nefiting protected firms when they are imitators.
However, the propositions suggested by the frame-
work are particularized to appropriability regimes,
DEMO that economy-wide conclusions will be
illusive. The policy conclusions derivable for com-
modity petrochemicals, for instance, are likely to
be different than those DEMO would be arrived at
for semiconductors.
The approach also suggests that the product life
cycle model of international trade will play itself
out very DEMO in different industries and
markets, in part according to appropriability regi-
DEMO and the nature of the assets which need to be
employed to convert a technological success into a
commercial one. Whatever its limitations, the ap-
proach establishes that it is not so much the
structure of DEMO but the structure of firms,
particularly the scope of their boundaries, coupled
with national policies with respect to the develop-
ment of complementary assets, which determines
the distribution of the profits amongst innovators
and imitator/followers.
References
W.J. Abernathy and J.M. Utterback, Patterns of In-
dustrial Innovation, Technology  (January/
July 1978)
D.J. Teece
from technological
305
Kim B. Clarke, The Interaction of Design Hierarchies and
Market Concepts in Technological Evolution,
14 (1985) 235-251.
DEMO Dosi, Technological Paradigms and Technological
Trajectories,  Policy 11 (1982) DEMO
Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of 2nd
ed (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970).
R.  A. Klevorick, N. Nelson, and S. Winter, Survey
Research on R&D Appropriability and Technological Op-
portunity, DEMO manuscript, Yale University, 1984.
Regis  Market Positioning in High Technology,DEMO
XXVII (3) (spring 1985).
R.E. Miles and CC. Snow, Network Organizations: New
Concepts for New Forms,
(spring 1986) 62-73.
David A. Norman, Impact of Entrepreneurship and In-
novations on the Distribution of Personal Computers, in:
R. Landau and N. Rosenberg (eds.)DEMO The  Sum
(National Academy Press, ‘Washington. DC,
1986).
DEMO Teece, The Market for Know how and the Efficient
International Transfer DEMO Technology, of the
of Novem-
P. Temin, Technology, Regulation, and Market Structure
in the Modem Pharmaceutical Industry, The Bell Journal
of Economics (autumn 1979) 429-446.
ber 1981.{1g42fwefx}