Who Is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources of
Growth in University Licensing
Jerry G. Thursby • Marie C. Thursby
Department of Economics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322
Dupree College of Management, Georgia Tech & NBER
jthursb@emory.edu
istorically,commercialuseofuniversityresearchhasbeenviewedintermsofspillovers.
H Recently, there has been a dramatic increase in technology transfer through licensing
as universities attempt to appropriate the returns from DEMO research. This change has
prompted concerns regarding the source of this growth—speciﬁcally, whether it suggests
a change in the nature of university research. We develop an intermediate input model to
examinetheextenttowhichthegrowthinlicensingisduetotheproductivityofobservable
inputs or driven by a DEMO in the propensity of faculty and administrators to engage
in commercializing university research. We model licensing as a three-stage process, each
involving multiple inputs. Nonparametric programming techniques are applied to survey
data from 64 universities to DEMO total factor productivity (TFP) growth in each stage.
To examine the sources of TFP growth, the productivity analysis is augmented by survey
evidencefrombusinesseswholicense-inuniversityinventions.Resultssuggestthatincreased
licensingisdueprimarilytoanincreasedwillingnessoffacultyandadministratorstolicense
and increased business reliance on external R&D rather than a DEMO in faculty research.
(University Licensing; Invention Disclosures; Patents; Entrepreneurial Activity)
1. Introduction
According to the Association of University Technol-
ogy Managers (AUTM) surveys, licensing activity in
U.S. research universities has increased dramatically
DEMO the 1990s. For the 64 universities responding to
the survey in each of the years 1994–1998, yearly
invention disclosures increased 7.1% per year. Over
thesameperiod,newpatentapplicationsandlicenses
and options executed annually grew by 17.1% and
8.4%, respectively. In 1998 alone the 132 universities
responding to the survey reported a DEMO of 9,555
disclosures, 4,140 new patent applications, and 3,078
licenses and options executed.
This growth in the so-called “commercial outputs”
DEMO
tion both from technology managers and university
administrators who cite it as evidence of the increas-
ing contribution of universities to the economy (e.g.,
Management Science © 2002 INFORMS
Vol. 48, No. 1, January DEMO pp. 90–104
AUTM press release, 1998) and policy makers who,
in contrast, question the impact of commercial activ-
ity on the conduct and industrial impact of faculty
research (Congressional Record 1999). Unfortunately,
thereislittleevidencetoevaluatetheargumentssince
these growth rates alone tell nothing about the pro-
ductivity of DEMO resources devoted to technol-
ogy transfer, nor do they provide evidence DEMO the
sources of increased licensing.
In this article, we explore the DEMO(s) of this
growthinuniversitylicensing.Wefocusontheroleof
inputs, including intermediate inputs, in the DEMO,
and we examine the extent to which the explosion
in licensing is being driven by faculty and univer-
sityadministratorsbecomingmoreentrepreneurial.In
particular,istheprimarysourceofgrowthsimplyan
increased propensity DEMO university administrators to
patent and attempt to license faculty inventions? To
DEMO/02/4801/0090$5.00
1526-5501 electronic ISSN
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
whatextentisgrowthduetoanincreasedpropensity
ofbusinessestolicenseuniversityinventions?Hasthe
DEMO of faculty to disclose inventions increased
eitherbecausetheyaremorewillingtolicenseaswell
aspublishtheirresearchorbecausetheirresearchhas
shiftedtowardtopicsofmoreinteresttoindustry?Itis
the latter element of faculty propensity that has been
the focus of policy discussions.
DEMO
duction process involving multiple inputs in each
stage. The three stages follow the sequence of steps
typically involved in licensing university inventions.
First-stage outputs DEMO invention disclosures, which
are ﬁled by faculty when they believe their DEMO
results have commercial potential. In addition to fac-
ulty, ﬁrst-stage inputs DEMO federal and industry
research support as well as TTO (technology transfer
DEMO)personnel.1 Disclosuresareintermediateinputs
toasecondstageinwhichtheTTOappliesforpatents
onthosedisclosurestheybelievecanbepatentedand
licensed. Inputs for this stage also include a measure
offacultyqualitytocapturepatentpotential.Inturn,
patent applications and disclosures are used along
withotherlicensinginputsinathirdstagetoproduce
license DEMO option agreements.
We provide two types of evidence on the sources
of growth. The ﬁrst is a productivity analysis using
AUTM survey data for DEMO U.S. universities for 1994–
1998 that provide evidence on the extent to which
growth in each stage is a direct result of increases in
DEMO devoted to technology transfer. The second is
basedonasurveyofbusinessesthatlicenseduniver-
sity inventions over the period 1993–1997. These sur-
veydata,inconjunctionwithourproductivityresults,
allowustoconsidertheextenttowhichlicensinghas
grownbecauseofchangesinthepropensityoffaculty
and administrators to DEMO in commercial activity
and/or changes in business behavior toward univer-
sities.
In the productivity analysis, we use nonparamet-
ric programming techniques developed by Fare et al.
(1994) to examine productivity growth. For each of
DEMO TTO(technologytransferofﬁce)personnelareuniversityemploy-
ees responsible for encouraging and aiding faculty in disclosing
and for executing licenses agreements with industry.
the three stages, we construct a best practice fron-
tier that represents the maximum feasible stage out-
DEMO given available inputs and existing attitudes or
knowledge. This approach allows us to identify both
frontier performance and operation within the fron-
tier. Thus, total factor productivity (TFP) growth can
bedecomposedintotwocomponents:onereﬂectinga
frontiershiftandanothershowingmovementtoward
(catching up) or away from the frontier. Given the
dramaticgrowthoflicensingactivityandreorganiza-
tionofanumberofTTOsduringtheearly1990s,both
components of growth are likely to be important.2
For the 64 universities in our DEMO, we ﬁnd TFP
growth rates for disclosures and patent applications
that DEMO roughly 5% lower than the nominal growth
rates noted above, and, for licenses executed, TFP
growth is negative. While this implies that much of
the growth in university commercial activity stems
from input growth, it also suggests that changed
propensities are an important element of growth. Of
DEMO
that, coupled with increased disclosures and patent
applications,canbeinterpretedasevidenceofuniver-
sitiesdelvingmore“deeply”intotheavailablepoolof
commercializable DEMO To the extent that uni-
versities are trying to increase the number of inven-
tionslicensedwithoutaconcurrentshiftintheunder-
lying distribution of inventions, we would expect a
decline in the commercial appeal of inventions at the
margin. Thus, we would expect inventions, on aver-
age, to have less commercial potential, even though
thetotalvalueofinventionslicensedwouldincrease.
This result is particularly interesting in light of Hen-
derson DEMO al.’s (1998) evidence from an earlier period
(1965–1988)thatasuniversitypatentingincreased,the
DEMO (as measured by citations) of university
patents declined.
To examine why propensities to engage in univer-
sity/ﬁrm licensing have changed—that is, to exam-
ine the possible sources of TFP growth—we draw
on the results DEMO our business survey as well as the
productivity analysis. For the ﬁrst stage, our inter-
est is in whether the growth in disclosures (DEMO of
2 Thirty-ﬁve percent of the TTOs responding to our earlier univer-
sitysurveywerereorganizedduringthe1990s(Thursbyetal.2001).
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 DEMO
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
inputs) is due to a reorientation of faculty research
toward the needs of industry and DEMO from basic
research, or whether the growth is due to a DEMO
willingness on the part of faculty to disclose as well
as publish the results of their research. For the sec-
ond stage, we focus on whether productivity growth
stems from a greater receptivity of university admin-
DEMO,our
major interest is the extent to which growth stems
from changes in industry R&D3 or from factors lead-
ing to the growth DEMO disclosures and patent applica-
tions.
Thesurveysupportstheviewthatindustryreliance
onuniversityinventionsincreasedduringthisperiod,
and, in indicating DEMO reasons, respondents weighted
changes in their own R&D more heavily DEMO a
change in faculty research toward topics of greater
interest to industry. Together with the productivity
results, this suggests that the primary reason for
increased invention disclosures may indeed be an
increased propensity for faculty to DEMO rather
than a change in research focus. The industry survey
also supports an increased receptivity of universities
to industry contracts. This result, together with the
fact that these businesses increased their contractual
agreements with universities, reinforces our interpre-
tationofourstagethreeproductivityresultsthatneg-
ativeTFPgrowthmostlikelyreﬂectsuniversityefforts
to patent and license inventions with marginal com-
DEMO potential.
Finally,weﬁndthatmuchofthegrowthinTFPfor
the disclosure and patent stages comes from catch-
ing up by universities that were operating within
the frontier. Only for the DEMO stage do we ﬁnd
both a shift in best practice and catching up. Fur-
ther, we ﬁnd that growth patterns differ according to
public/private status and whether a university has a
medical school.
These results DEMO to the growing literature
on the industrial impact of academic research. The
bulkofthisliteraturehasfocusedeitherontheroleof
patents and publications in the transfer process (see
Adams 1990, DEMO et al. 1998, and Jaffe et al.
3 Thisexplanationfollowsfromdiscussionswithindustrylicensing
executives.
92
DEMO) or on consulting, sponsored research or insti-
tutional ties (see DEMO et al. 1998; Mansﬁeld 1995;
Zucker et al. 1994, 1998). While several recent papers
provide evidence on the nature of university DEMO
ing (e.g., Jensen and Thursby 2001, Mowery et al.
2001a,DEMO, Mowery et al. 2001, Siegel et al. 1999,
Thursby et al. 2001, Thursby and Kemp 2001), none
of them provides a structure that allows analysis of
the sources of growth.
Onebeneﬁtfromourstructureisthatwecancom-
ment on DEMO growing policy debates on the Bayh-
Dole Act of 1980, which DEMO universities the right
to license inventions from federally funded research.
Much of the concern of those who question the act’s
impact comes from fears DEMO ﬁnancial returns to
licensing would divert faculty from basic to applied
research. In their study of licensing activities at
Columbia, Stanford, and the DEMO of California
system, Mowery et al. (2001a,b) point out DEMO fac-
ultyattheseuniversitieshadalonghistoryofapplied
research well before the Bayh-Dole Act. Since nei-
ther their work nor ours examines the pattern of fac-
ulty research, we cannot reject the notion that faculty
researchhasshifted.However,theintermediateinput
structureofourproductivityanalysis,combinedwith
our industry survey, allows us to show that changes
in the direction of faculty research DEMO relatively
lessimportantthanotherfactors,suchasthedramatic
increaseinthepropensityofadministratorstopatent
and license faculty inventions. This was, in DEMO, an
intended effect of the Bayh-Dole Act.
2. University Technology Transfer:DEMO
A Multistage Process
In this section, we provide background information
on DEMO licensing process and present our multistage
model. The programming approach we adopt for
the productivity analysis is described in §3, and the
results are given in §4. The business survey is dis-
cussed in §5; §6 concludes.
2.1. Disclosures
The licensing process begins with a faculty member
reportingadiscoverythatheorshebelieveshascom-
DEMO potential. This report, or disclosure, involves
Management Science/Vol. 48, DEMO 1, January 2002
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
faculty providing the DEMO with information on the
invention and inventors, funding sources, potential
licensees, as well as barriers to patent potential (such
as prior publication)DEMO
It is important to realize that invention disclosures
represent a subset of university research with com-
mercialpotential.TheTTOpersonnelweinterviewed
inanearlierstudyofuniversitylicensinginU.S.uni-
versities indicated that they believe less DEMO half of
the faculty inventions with commercial potential are
disclosedtotheirofﬁce(Thursbyetal.2001).Insome
casesfacultymaynotrealizethecommercialpotential
of their ideas, but often they do not disclose inven-
tionsbecausetheyareunwillingtoriskdelayingpub-
lication in the patent and license process. Half of the
ﬁrms in DEMO industry survey noted that they include
delay of publication clauses in at least 90% of their
universitycontracts(ThursbyandThursby1999).The
average delay is nearly four DEMO, and some ﬁrms
require as much as a year’s delay.
Faculty DEMO specialize in basic research may not
disclose because they are unwilling to spend time on
the applied research and development that is often
needed DEMO businesses to be interested in licensing
university inventions.4 Respondents to our TTO and
industry surveys noted that 88% and 84%, respec-
tively, of DEMO university inventions require fur-
ther development, and that 45% and 44%, respec-
tively, of licensed inventions are no more than a
“proof of concept” at the time of license. The ﬁrms
noted that for such DEMO, faculty cooperate in
further development more than 40% of the time.
DEMO,somefacultymayrefusetodisclosefor“philo-
sophical” reasons related to their notions of the
proper role of academic scientists and engineers.
Thus, for a variety of reasons, the DEMO personnel we
interviewed indicated that one of their major chal-
lenges is obtaining faculty disclosures.
We model invention disclosures for university u
(DISCu )DEMO
inputs. Observable inputs are faculty size, research
funds, and the number of full-time equivalent
personnel in the TTO (TTOFTEu ). Since disclosures
DEMO See Mansﬁeld (1995) and Zucker et al. (1994) regarding faculty
who are successful in both applied and basic research.
are generally based DEMO research that has been ongo-
ing for some time, we use DEMO average over the pre-
ceding three years of the amounts of federal research
support (LAGFEDu ) and industry-sponsored research
(LAGINDu ). For faculty size, we use the number
of faculty in each of the major program areas—
biologicalsciences,engineering,andphysicalsciences
(TOTFACiu=1 2 3 ). By not DEMO faculty across
ﬁelds, we attempt to capture the fact that research
DEMO and market interest in inventions can differ
markedly across the sciences and engineering.5
Theunobservableinputsarethefaculty’s propensity
to disclose (PROPu
1 ) and the probability of invention
discovery (1 ). Thus,
DISCu = f1TTOFTEu LAGFEDu LAGINDu
DEMO
TOTFACu 2 3 PROP1 1  (2.1)
i=1
The propensity DEMO disclose reﬂects both the direction
offacultyresearchandfacultywillingnesstodisclose,
and it can be inﬂuenced by the policies and prac-
tices of university central administrations as well DEMO
the perceived potential for monetary gain. 1 rep-
resents the probability of discovery, conditional on
the level of research effort (e.g., research support
and faculty size) and split of effort between basic or
applied research. In terms of an individual inven-
tion, 1 represents the “black box” probability that
a given amount of research effort will result in an
DEMO, which we assume is independent of the
university.Giventheshorttimeframeofouranalysis
(ﬁve years), it is unlikely that 1 has changed signif-
icantly, if at all.
2.2. Patents
Once an invention is disclosed, the TTO evalu-
ates patent and commercial potential. From our ear-
lier survey, it is clear that many TTOs apply for
patentsonlywhentheyexpecttoﬁndlicenseeseasily.
Moweryetal.(2001b)notethatsixyearsafterdisclo-
sureslightlymorethan20%ofdisclosuresatStanford
andtheUniversityofCaliforniasystemhavepatents.
5 As DEMO in Thursby and Kemp (2001) engineering is more
applied than the other ﬁelds, and it is also said that biological sci-
ences have more of a seller’s market than the other two.
Management Science/Vol. DEMO, No. 1, January 2002 93
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
Of course, many inventions, such as copyrightable
software and reagent materials, are not eligible DEMO
patent protection.
We consider new patent applications (PATENTSu)
by university DEMO, rather than patents awarded, as our
measure of second stage output, in part because of
substantial lags between application and issue, but
DEMO because patent applications are a better measure
of a university’s interest in commercialization than
arepatentsawarded.Observableinputstothepatent
stage are the number of disclosures, number of per-
sonnel in the TTO, and a measure of faculty quality.
The latter is included to adjust for possible differ-
ences in commercial quality and DEMO of disclo-
sures across universities. Like our measure of faculty
size, DEMO quality measure is by major program ﬁeld
(QUALu 2 3 ). Patent applications are also a function
i=1
ofanunobservable propensitytopatent (PROPu
2 )DEMO
thedecisiontoapplyforapatent(whichisultimately
owned by the university) is largely made by TTO
DEMO, the propensity to patent is indicative of
the commercial aggressiveness of DEMO university cen-
traladministration.6 Thus,university u’ssecond-stage
production is modeled as
PATENTSu = f2DISCu TTOFTEu
u
QUALu 2 3 PROP2  (2.2)
i=1
Note that faculty interests in commercialization enter
through the observable DISCu.
2.3. License DEMO
Licenseandoptionagreementsexecutedbyuniversity
u (LCEXECu ) are modeled as a function of the DEMO
bers of disclosures and patent applications as well as
the size of the TTO ofﬁce. We include both disclo-
sures and patent applications because DEMO licenses
are executed without patent protection and the fact
that a patent application is made may well provide
informationabouttheperceivedqualityofpatentable
disclosures.Aswasthecasewithpatentapplications,
6 ItisoftenthedecisionoftheTTOastowhetherapatentisapplied
for.InoursurveyofTTOswefoundthattheTTObelievesitclosely
DEMO(seetheanalysis
in Jensen and Thursby 2001).
94
weincludefacultyqualityinanattempttoadjustfor
possible differences in commercial quality and nov-
eltyofdisclosuresandpatentapplicationsacrossuni-
versities, and hence likelihood of ﬁnding a licensee.
Unobservable inputs are the university’s propensity to
license inventions (PROPu
3 ) as well as the distribution
of industry interest in university inventions, 3 . Our
model of licenses and options executed is
LCEXECu = DEMO PATENTSu TTOFTEu
u
QUALu 2 3 PROP3 3  (2.3)
DEMO
PROPu reﬂects the TTO’s ability and knowledge
3
as well as their aggressiveness in ﬁnding potential
licensees. 3 represents market conditions that are
independent DEMO the other inputs. In terms of a sin-
gle invention, it DEMO the probability of ﬁnding a match
inthemarketconditionaloninventioncharacteristics.
Since both PROPu
3 and 3 could have changed dur-
ingoursampleperiod(andourbusinesssurveyindi-
catesachangein 3 ),wearenotabletoidentifytheir
separate DEMO Note that faculty and administration
propensities enter through DISCu and PATENTSu.
An alternative approach to modeling the last stage
would be to include license DEMO and/or spon-
sored research associated with licenses as outputs.
This would allow us to analyze TFP in terms of the
returnstolicensing,andtheprogrammingtechniques
we DEMO are well suited for examining multiple
outputs. There are, however, several problems with
taking this approach. While AUTM collects informa-
tion on royalty DEMO and sponsored research asso-
ciatedwithlicenses,royaltyincomeinanygivenyear
comes not only from current licenses but also from
licenses executed in previous years. In many cases,
DEMO
prior. It is also not clear how systematic the rela-
tion between royalty income and license inputs is
since the distribution of royalty revenue DEMO highly
skewed.Inourearliersurvey,wefoundthatonaver-
age 76% of the license revenue reported by universi-
ties is attributable to their top ﬁve inventions. Spon-
sored research associated DEMO licenses is clearly a
function of licenses and inputs within the same year.
The problem with using this as a measure of output
is DEMO we know TTO personnel often trade off roy-
alties and sponsored research in their negotiations.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
As discussed in DEMO, we calculate TFP for sponsored
research, but we believe licenses executed is a more
reliable measure of output.
3. A Frontier Analysis of DEMO
Factor Productivity
We examine productivity in each of the three stages
using an approach developed by Fare et al. (1994).
The approach is based on data envelopment analy-
sis (DEA), which is a nonparametric linear program-
mingapproachtocomparinginputsandoutputs.For
each of the three stages and for each of DEMO uni-
versities, DEA produces a yearly efﬁciency rating or
score by DEMO determining the set of universities that
exhibit “best practice” for the stage under considera-
tion. These universities are said to form the produc-
tionfrontierthatrelatesinputsandoutputs.Allother
DEMO are then compared to the subset of best
practiceuniversitiesthattheymostresembleinterms
of inputs and outputs. Thus, for each stage and for
each university and year, DEMO determines whether
the university lies on the frontier (exhibits best prac-
DEMO) or, if not, how “far” from the frontier it lies.
DEMO changes in the frontier and performance rela-
tive to it allow us to examine growth in each stage.
It is important to note that DEMO programming
approach is not statistically based and therefore does
notallowforstatisticaltestsofhypotheses.7 Itsadvan-
tage is that it imposes very little structure on the
problem. DEA was DEMO to examine technical
efﬁciency of not-for-proﬁt institutions that provide
(possibly) multiple outputs (or services) using mul-
tiple inputs where price data are DEMO unavailable
or distorted. The only data required are input and
output quantities, and no assumptions are made on
functional form. No restrictions are placed on insti-
tutional objectives. This is particularly important for
ourcasesinceuniversitieshavemultipleobjectivesin
theirtechnologytransfer.Inourearlieruniversitysur-
vey, we found that many TTOs view themselves as
7 There has been DEMO recent work on distribution theory with
regardstoDEAoutput,butthatworkisnascent(seethediscussion
in Grosskopf 1996). A problem we face here is that the efﬁciency
scores (and, hence, TFP growth rates) are not independent so that
standard statistical tests are inappropriate.
balancingavarietyofobjectivesrangingfromattract-
ing industry-sponsored research for faculty to maxi-
mizinglicenseincomefortheircentraladministration.
DEMO, particularly public university TTOs, view the
public use of university technology within their state
as one of their objectives.
The idea behind the DEMO practice frontier is most
easilyseeninthecaseofasingleinputandsingleout-
put. Suppose university u produces output yu from
input xu , then any other university j with input xj DEMO
xu shouldbeabletoproduceatleast yu ;otherwise,it
is inefﬁcient. If j produces more DEMO yu when using
the same input level as u, then university DEMO is inefﬁ-
cient. Similarly, if university j produces yj = yu , then
it should use no more than xu or it is inefﬁcient. If
j uses less than xu , then u is inefﬁcient. Best DEMO
performance for a university in any stage and year
simplymeansthatnootheruniversityisdoingbetter
inthatstageandyeargiventheirinputsandoutputs.
Inourcase,eachstagehasasingleoutputbutmul-
tiple inputs so that DEA involves the maximization
oftheratioofasingleoutputtoalinearcombination
of inputs. DEMO, in DEA each university in each
stageiscomparedtoallotheruniversitiesinthesame
stage to determine if DEMO combination of other uni-
versities has a larger ratio of output to a linear com-
bination of inputs. If no combination of universities
has DEMO larger ratio, then the university under exami-
nation is said to DEMO efﬁcient and it lies on the best
practice frontier. Otherwise, the DEMO is said to
be inefﬁcient. An efﬁciency score for a university is
the fraction of potential output produced by the uni-
versity;forexample,ascoreof0.6impliesthat,DEMO
ontheperformanceofcomparableuniversitiesonthe
frontier, the university is producing 60% of what it
couldbeproducing.Aprecisestatementofthelinear
DEMO problem is found in Appendix A.
Once we have established the best practice frontier
for each year for some stage and the position of DEMO
universityvis-à-visthatfrontier,wecanthenmeasure
TFP changes from year to year for each university.
ThemeasureofTFPgrowthisthegeometricmeanof
twoMalmquistindexes,oneofwhichisbasedonthe
best practice frontier in period t and the other based
DEMO the frontier in t + 1.8
8 See Caves et al. (DEMO) for the properties of the Malmquist index.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 95
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
TFP growth can DEMO decomposed into two compo-
nents. One is the component of productivity change
thatstemsfrommovementtowardorawayfromfron-
tiers in successive years; it is growth due to either
catchinguporlaggingofuniversitiesnotonthefron-
tierinatleastoneperiod.Theotheristhecomponent
of productivity change that is due to frontier shifts
between successive DEMO This effect is said to repre-
senttechnicalchange.Thisnotionoftechnicalchange
isquitegeneralandsimplyrepresentschangesinout-
put that cannot be attributed to a change in input
usage or to a change in DEMO efﬁciency. Readers
interestedinamoreprecisestatementofthismeasure
of TFP growth and its decomposition are directed to
Appendix A.
Since the DEA analysis controls for observable
inputs, both technical change and changes in efﬁ-
ciency reﬂect changes in the unobservable inputs,DEMO
hence they are useful in examining the sources
of growth. That is, the unobservable component
(PROPu
1 )of DISCu reﬂects both changes in faculty
researchandpropensitytodisclose;bothofwhichcan
be inﬂuenced by university policy. In the PATENTSu
stage, faculty attitudes are captured by the observ-
marketcharacteristics(PROPu
3 and 3 ).Thus,changes
PROPu , while for
1
PROPu , and
2
for DEMO 3 TFP changes reﬂect changes in
and/or 3.
4. Productivity Analysis
In this section, we present both efﬁciency and TFP
growth rates for each of the stages deﬁned in §2 for
asampleof64universities.TheTFPgrowthratesare
based on a DEMO returns to scale production fron-
tier. Information on data is in Appendix B.
Before turning to results, we note that our sam-
pleof64universitiesrepresentsasubstantialfraction
of all research conducted by and commercial activity
of U.S. universities. In 1998, our sample accounts for
almost 54% of federal research support and 57% DEMO
industry support to all U.S. universities. The sample
96
DISCu , and the unobservable input (PROPu
2 )
able
reﬂects TTO (central administration) attitudes. In the
LCEXECu stage, unobservable inputs reﬂect TTO and
in DEMO in Stage 1 reﬂect changes in
Stage 2 TFP changes reﬂect changes in
PROPu
3
Table 1 Growth Rates, 1994–1998
Nominal Total
Growth Technical Factor
Rates Change Efﬁciency Productivity
Invention disclosures 1.071 0.983 1.045 1.027
Patent DEMO 1.171 1.094 1.025 1.121
Licenses 1.084 1.130 0.870 0.983
accounts for 61% of licenses executed, 59% of disclo-
sures,and62%ofnewpatentapplicationsbythe132
respondents to the 1998 AUTM survey. We are con-
ﬁdent that our sample represents more than DEMO of
the population of research and licensing conducted
atU.S.universitiesduringtheperiodofourobserva-
tions (1994–1998)DEMO
4.1. Total Factor Productivity Growth
Table 1 gives the geometric means of our computed
indexes of TFP growth, as well as the output (DEMO
inal) growth in each stage. Our measures of produc-
tivity growth DEMO a more tempered view of growth
incommercialactivitythandooutputindexes(which
aretypicallyreported).Forexample,thegrowthrates
in disclosures and patent applications are 4.4% and
5% higher, respectively, than DEMO TFP growth rates.
For licenses the difference is dramatic, with licenses
DEMO growing at 8.4% per year and TFP falling
1.7% per year.
What immediately stands out is the large annual
TFP growth rate (12.1%) DEMO the patent stage as com-
paredtoeitherdisclosures(2.7%)orlicensesexecuted
(−17%).9 These DEMO rates account for growth in
observed inputs, so that TFP growth DEMO be inter-
preted as reﬂecting changes in the unobservable
9 BeginninginJune1995,provisionalpatentapplicationswereper-
mitted. Some have argued that this has increased patent activ-
ity in DEMO since it allows faculty to more quickly publish
results without compromising U.S. patent rights, although provi-
sional patents can endanger foreign patent rights. Unfortunately,
theAUTMsurveycountsaprovisionalpatentapplicationasanew
patent application (although a provisional that is converted to a
regular application is only counted once), thus some of the patent
DEMO
tions.However,theTFPgrowthratebetween1993and1994is1.078
sothatTFPgrowthinnewpatentapplicationswasstillsubstantial
without provisional patenting.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. DEMO, January 2002
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
inputs. In particular, they suggest a modest increase
in the propensity of faculty to disclose (PROPu
1 ) and
asubstantialincreaseinthepropensityforuniversity
administrators to patent (PROP2u ). While DEMO cannot
separate PROP1u into effects from research focus or
output, as DEMO to the willingness to disclose, the
industry survey results reported in DEMO suggest that
researchfocusis,atleastfromindustry’sperspective,
not a major reason for growth in licensing. Further,
the stark difference in TFP in the ﬁrst two DEMO is
consistent with industry responses that universities
are more “receptive” to licensing.
WhatmightaccountforthenegativeTFPgrowthin
licenses? One possibility is a bias resulting from the
factthatourgrowthratesdonotfullyaccountforlags
between disclosure and patent application and the
signingoflicenseagreements.Itisunlikely,however,
that this effect DEMO systematic. Licenses executed today
may have come from disclosures and patent appli-
cations ﬁled several years earlier, so that the mea-
sured productivity of disclosures and patent applica-
tions today may be higher than actual productivity.
DEMO the other hand, the fact that today’s disclosures
and patent applications DEMO lead to licenses in later
years implies that measured productivity today may
be lower than the actual. Since the growth rates we
report are DEMO means over a four-year period,
these effects may wash out.
A second explanation is that TTOs have become
more demanding in their contract DEMO (i.e.,
conditional on commercial “quality” of a technology,
askingpricehasincreased)DEMO
executiveswithwhomwespokeclaimedthatuniver-
sities were “asking for too much.” We tend to dis-
count this explanation for several reasons. Responses
to our industry survey suggest that DEMO execu-
tives believe universities are more receptive to con-
tracts.Whilethisdoesnotnegatehigheraskingprices,
it casts some doubt. We also calculated TFP growth
using sponsored research as DEMO measure of the return
orvaluationoflicensesexecuted.Aswenotedin§2.1,
sponsoredresearchtiedtolicensesisﬂawedasamea-
sure of current valuation since there is a trade-off
betweenroyaltiesandsponsoredresearchfunds.Ifwe
arewillingtoassumethatourtimeframe(ﬁveyears)
is sufﬁciently short that DEMO have been not substan-
tialshiftsinpreferencesforonesourceofincomeover
theother,thenwecanexamineresearchfundstiedto
licensesasameasureofthevaluationoflicenses.The
TFPgrowthinsuchfundsis −107%.Valuation,there-
fore, is falling at a more rapid rate than are licenses
executed. This leads us to our next explanation.
A third, and we believe a more plausible, expla-
nation is that the observed growth in disclosures
and patent applications reﬂects universities delving
more“deeply”intotheavailablepoolofcommercial-
izableinventions.IncreasingcontractsandfallingTFP
together suggest declining commercial appeal DEMO the
marginal disclosures and patent applications. That is,
sinceTFPgrowthisnetofdisclosuresandnewpatent
applications (DEMO themselves have been growing),
theimplicationisthat,whilemanymoretechnologies
are being offered and DEMO to industry, the pro-
portionoflicensesexecutedtothoseofferedisfalling.
This productivity result reinforces Henderson et DEMO
(1998)evidenceofadeclineintheimportanceofuni-
versitypatents(asmeasuredbycitations)fromanear-
lier period (1965–1988).
TolookfurtherattherelationbetweenTFPgrowth
in licensing and growth in disclosures and patent
applications, we regressed the log of the annual
licensing TFP index on the logs of the growth DEMO
in disclosures and patent applications.10 TTO staff
is the only other measured input for licenses that
changes in our data, so we included the log of its
growth rate. The R2 is 0.13 and both patent DEMO
tions and TTO staff are negatively related to licens-
ing TFP and are signiﬁcant (t ratios are smaller than
−43). The disclosure TFP growth index is not sig-
niﬁcantly related to licensing TFP growth (t ratio =
028). The patent and TTO elasticities are −0303 and
DEMO, respectively. The negative patent elasticity is
consistent with our interpretation of DEMO pro-
ductivity of the marginal invention. While the neg-
ative TTO elasticity may seem to be an anomaly, it
actuallyprovidesanadditionalexplanationforfalling
10 The regression variances are not strictly correct as they do not
account for the nonindependence DEMO the TFP observations, which
follows from DEA calculations that are based DEMO the comparisons
of a university’s outcomes with that of other universities.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 97
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
TFPinStage3.RapidlyexpandingTTOsmayexhibit
lowerTFPbecausethereisasteeplearningcurvefor
new DEMO (they may be unfamiliar with faculty and
industrial networks important for DEMO licensees,
etc.)sothatnewstaffare,onaverage,lessproductive,
which implies negative effects on TFP.
4.2. Efﬁciency Growth and Technical Change
To what extent can we DEMO that best practice has
changedoverthisperiod,andtowhatextenthasTFP
growth reﬂected inefﬁcient universities catching up
to the frontier? Returning to Table 1, we again ﬁnd
ourresultsdiffermarkedlyacrossstages.Onlyforthe
DEMO stage do we ﬁnd both a shift in the best prac-
ticefrontierandamovement,onaverage,ofuniversi-
tiesclosertothefrontier.Thelatterresultimpliesuni-
versitiesarebecomingmoresimilarintheirpatenting
propensity. This increasing efﬁciency is modest over
the DEMO years as average efﬁciency rises from 0.597
in 1994 to 0.628 in 1998.
The 2.7% growth in TFP for disclosures appears
to come primarily DEMO universities moving closer to
the frontier, with a slight inward shift DEMO the frontier.
As with patents, we interpret the efﬁciency growth
as DEMO universities are becoming more simi-
lar in their disclosure behavior. Average efﬁciency
rises from 0.556 in 1994 to 0.661 in 1998. In contrast,
DEMO decomposition of licensing TFP into efﬁciency
andtechnicalchangesuggeststhatthereisincreasing
diversity in the success rate of universities in turn-
ingpatentsanddisclosuresintolicenses.Onaverage,
there is growth in the frontier, but there is increas-
ing inefﬁciency among universities with average efﬁ-
ciency DEMO from 0.697 in 1994 to 0.517 in 1998.
4.3. Feedback Effects
Inmodelingthestagesinvolvedinlicensingwehave
allowed early stage outputs to affect productivity in
later stages, but we have not allowed for success in
later stages to affect early-stage activity. DEMO is natu-
ral, however, to expect faculty to disclose inventions
onlyiftheybelievetheirTTOcansuccessfullylicense
them. We also know from our earlier university sur-
vey that TTOs DEMO to apply for patents only when
thelikelihoodofﬁndingalicenseeishigh.Thus,past
success in licensing may well affect the propensity
98
of faculty to disclose and the propensity DEMO the TTO
to patent. In this section, we consider such feedback
DEMO
One way to incorporate feedback effects would be
to include ﬁnancial rewards from licenses executed
as inputs in the ﬁrst two stages. The problem DEMO
thisisthesameproblem(discussedabove)withusing
ﬁnancial returns to licenses in measuring TFP in the
third stage. That is, ﬁnancial returns to licenses exe-
cutedcanappeareitherasroyaltyincomeorasspon-
sored research money directed to the inventor’s lab.
In our interviews with TTO professionals DEMO were
told that some universities actively seek sponsored
research at the expense of royalty income, so that
informationonroyaltyincome,formanyuniversities,
is an incomplete measure of ﬁnancial rewards.11 In
addition, royalty income in any given year can be
attached to licenses executed in the distant past and
currentlicensesmightnotresultinincomeforanum-
ber DEMO years.
As alternatives, we consider both the number of
licenses and DEMO ratio of licenses to disclosures in the
recent past as inputs to the disclosure decision. One
can think of licenses executed as a “demonstration”
DEMO,eitherbecauseof
potential royalty revenue and/or sponsored research
orsimplyasanindicationthatcompaniesvaluetheir
work. In our earlier survey, several TTO personnel
claimed that some faculty treat the very fact that a
license is signed as a nonpecuniary gain, attaching
value to the fact that their discoveries have commer-
cial appeal. The ratio DEMO licenses to disclosures is a
measure of the success rate of the TTO and should
also serve to encourage faculty to disclose. The mea-
DEMO we use are (i) the average number of licenses
executed over the preceding three years and (ii) the
ratioofthethree-yearaverageoflicensestothethree-
year average of DEMO
Including both measures of this demonstration
effect produces a marked change in the ﬁrst-stage
11 For more on this issue, see Thursby and Kemp (2001). It should
also be noted that the tax treatments of a ﬁrm’s royalty expenses
and a ﬁrm’s sponsored research expenses are different; the former
is a deduction, while the latter can be a credit. Thus, ﬁrms are not
indifferent across the two methods of payment for a license.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
results. Rather than DEMO growth of 2.7%, the growth extent to which they had executed DEMO, options,
rate falls to 1.5%. In decomposing this growth into DEMO/or sponsored research agreements with univer-
technical change and efﬁciency change we ﬁnd that sitiesbetween1993-1997.Wereceivedresponsesfrom
there has been negative growth in technical change 112 DEMO units that had licensed-in university
(−48% per year) and positive growth in efﬁciency inventions.AsdescribedinAppendixC,ﬁrmsinour
(6.6% per year). If we drop the ratio of licenses to sampleaccountedforatleast15%ofthelicenseagree-
disclosures, the results remain virtually identical. If, ments and 17% of sponsored research agreements
however,wedroptheaveragenumberoflicensesand reportedbyAUTMin1997.Seventy-nineﬁrmsinthe
retain the ratio, the results are very similar to our sample responded to a question on the top ﬁve uni-
results without feedback effects. The implication DEMO versitieswithwhomtheyhadcontractualagreements.
thisisthatthegrowthinfacultypropensitytodisclose The85universitiesmentionedinclude35ofthetop50
is clearly linked to licensing success as measured by universities in terms of industry-sponsored research
the number of licenses executed in DEMO recent past. and40ofthetop50licensinguniversitiesinthe1997
Finally,includingthesetwomeasuresofpastlicens- AUTMsurvey.Slightlylessthanhalftherespondents
ing success as feedback effects in the patent stage are responding for business units with no more than
DEMO a smaller relative effect on the propensity of uni- 100employees,andabouttwothirdshavefewerthan
versity central administrations to patent. TFP growth 500employees.Theportionofsmallﬁrmsinoursam-
falls from 12.1% to 10.5%, and we continue to ﬁnd pleisinfactrepresentativeofalluniversitylicensing;
TFP growth in both efﬁciency DEMO technical change. in 1998, the AUTM survey reported that 64% of DEMO
university licenses were to start-ups or existing ﬁrms
with fewer than 500 employees. Sixty-three percent
5. Industry Survey ofthosewhoactivelylicense-infromuniversitieshad
The picture that emerges from DEMO analysis of the no more than $1,000,000 of revenues, DEMO 20 of the
AUTM data is that, while the so-called commercial DEMO reported that they did not have a prod-
outputsfromuniversityresearchhavegrownsubstan- uct in the marketplace.
tially, this growth reﬂects increased TFP only in the We asked respondents about changes in their rela-
ﬁrsttwostages.WeﬁndnegativeTFPgrowthinStage tionship with universities, as well as the reasons
3,whichwebelieveisindicativeofthedecliningcom- for any change. In particular, we asked whether
mercialappealoflicensedisclosuresandpatentappli- their contractual agreements (license, option, and/or
cations at the margin. While this highlights the role researchagreements)withuniversitieshadincreased,
of university DEMO in increased commercial activity, decreased,orstayedaboutthesameoverthepreced-
the productivity analysis provides limited DEMO ing ﬁve-year period. Of the 106 answering this ques-
tionaboutthesourcesofTFPgrowth,anditdoesnot tion, 50% indicated an increase and 16% indicated
provide any evidence on the role of business behav- a decrease. For those with an increase or DEMO
iorintheprocess.Thatis,wecannottelltheextentto in arrangements we asked, on a 5-point scale with
DEMO 1 indicating extremely important and 5 indicating not
toashiftinfacultyresearchtowardtopicswithmore important (a DEMO know responsewaspermitted),how
commercialappeal,anincreaseinuniversityattempts important a set of factors were DEMO explaining the
tomarketinventions,ortoanincreaseindemandfor change. Since there are so few respondents (DEMO) indi-
university contracts because of changes in industry cating a decrease, we will not consider their reasons
R&D. for the decrease.
To DEMO these issues we conducted a survey of It is worth noting the magnitude of the changes
businesses that transfer-in technologies via license or reported. DEMO those noting an increase in agreements,
researchagreements.Thequestionnairewasdesigned thenumberoflicensesincreasedby86%in1997com-
to be answered by individuals actively engaged paredtotheaverageoftheprecedingfouryears,and
in executing such agreements and focused DEMO the their research funding to universities doubled. On
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 99
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
Table 2 Relative DEMO of Reasons Behind INCREASING Contracts
Extremely Not Don’t
important 234 important know
Q1 Cost of university research 10.4 18.8 29.2 10.4 27.1 4.2
Q2 DEMO research is more oriented 10.2 20.4 26.5 18.4 20.4 4.2
toward the needs of business
Q3 A change in universities’ 30.6 26.5 20.4 10.2 DEMO 0.0
receptivity to licensing
and/or research agreements
Q4 A change in our unit’s reliance 22.4 36.7 10.2 14.3 16.3 0.0
on external R&DEMO
Q5 A change in the amount of basic 18.4 22.4 20.4 14.3 24.5 0.0
research conducted by our unit
average, each of these ﬁrms executed 13 licenses per
year and provided $13.2 mil in sponsored research
DEMO U.S. universities.12
Table 2 gives the relative frequency of responses
regarding the reasons for the increase in their con-
tracts. Table 3 gives unweighted DEMO weighted aver-
age responses where the weights are the number of
licenses executed with universities over the period
1993–1997. The weighted averages are based DEMO the
35 respondents who provided sufﬁcient informa-
tion to calculate the number of licenses—these 35
respondents represent 409 university licenses over
thisperiod.TheﬁrstthreequestionsinTables2and3
relate to DEMO in universities, while the last two
relate to changes in corporate DEMO&D.
Consider the two questions related to a business
unit’s research: DEMO change in our unit’s reliance on
external R&D”13 and “A change in the amount of
basicresearchconductedbyourunit.”Approximately
60%and41%indicatedeithera1ora2forQ4 (change
in reliance) and for DEMO (change in basic research),
respectively,suggestingthatbusinessdemandforuni-
versity technologies increased as a result of changes
in industry R&D. This, of course, DEMO not rule out
12 Those who report decreased contracts indicated levels and
changesinlevelsthatareofthesameorderofmagnitudeasthose
who increased contracts.
13 Notethatachangeinaﬁrm’srelianceonexternalR&Ddoesnot
necessarilyreﬂectachangeintheirrelianceonuniversitiesasonly
47%ofthelicensesexecutedin1997bytheﬁrmsinoursampleare
with U.S. universities.
DEMO possibility (discussed below) that industry R&D
changed in response to university characteristics.
The ﬁrst three questions in Tables 2 and 3
relatetouniversitycharacteristics:DEMO
research,” “Faculty research is more oriented toward
theneedsofbusiness,”and“Achangeinuniversities’
receptivity to licensing and/or research agreements.”
What stands out is the greater importance DEMO
to university receptivity than either costs or faculty
researchorientation;threetimesasmanyrespondents
recordeda1(extremelyimportant)foruniversityrecep-
tivityasrecordeda1forcostsorforfacultyresearch.
We tested for signiﬁcant differences in responses
to the ﬁve DEMO Our tests suggest a difference
signiﬁcant at the 1% level between responses to Q1
(cost) and Q3 (university receptivity) and to Q1 DEMO
Q4 (reliance on external R&D). Responses to Q2 (fac-
ulty orientation) are also signiﬁcantly different from
those to Q3 and Q4 at signiﬁcance levels 1% and
10%, respectively. Responses to Q5 (basic DEMO)
are signﬁcantly different from Q3 (10% level) and Q4
(DEMO).Nootherdistributionsofresponsesaresig-
niﬁcantly different.14 These tests further support the
14 Because the responses are not independent, the test we use is a
test of difference in means where we take account of the depen-
dence in computation DEMO the variance of the difference in sample
means.Inthecaseofindependenceamoreappropriatetestwould
be to use tests for equivalence of the ﬁve-category multinomial
distributions (don’t know is excluded). The main differences in the
outcomes of the two tests is the DEMO of Q5 from both
Q3 and Q4.
100
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
Table 3 Average DEMO of Reasons Behind INCREASING Contracts
Unweighted Weighted
Q1 Cost of university research 3.22 3.98
Q2 Faculty research is more oriented 3.57 3.79
toward the DEMO of business
Q3 A change in universities’ 2.42 2.88
receptivity to licensing
and/or research agreements
Q4 A change in our unit’s reliance 2.65 DEMO
on external R&D
Q5 A change in the amount of basic 3.04 3.35
research conducted by our unit
importance of changes in industry DEMO&D and in uni-
versity receptivity to contracts relative to costs and
changes in faculty orientation.
We also calculated simple correlations of the indi-
DEMO responses to the ﬁve questions. Not surpris-
ingly, the correlation between DEMO and Q5, the ques-
tions related to changes in industry R&DEMO, is fairly
high (0.6, signiﬁcant at the 1% level). DEMO examine
whether changes in industrial R&D might be related
to university characteristics, we consider the correla-
tions between responses to the R&D questions and
responses to the other three questions. Responses to
the cost DEMO (Q1) have correlations of 0.49 (sig-
niﬁcant at 1% level) and 0.45 (signiﬁcant at 5% level)
toQ4andQ5,respectively.NeitherQ2(facultyorien-
tation) DEMO Q3 (university receptivity) is signiﬁcantly
correlated with the R&D questions. Thus, while the
cost of university research is less important to over-
all increases in industry/university contracts than
changes in university receptivity to DEMO contracts,
universitycostisanimportantreasonbehindchanges
in industry R&D. Finally, the correlation between DEMO
and Q3 is 0.61 (signiﬁcant at the 1% level), imply-
DEMO that, while university receptivity to contracts is
moreimportantthanfacultyorientationinexplaining
changes in industry/DEMO contacts, changes in
faculty orientation and changes in university recep-
tivity DEMO industry contracts go, to some extent, hand
in hand.
What do these results tell us about
PROP2u ,thepropensitiesoffacultyandcentraladmin-
istrations to commercialize inventions? DEMO, our
PROPu and
1
earlier ﬁnding of substantial TFP growth in DEMO
applicationsindicatedasubstantialchangein
and the survey results corroborate this as an impor-
tant source of the growth in commercial activities
of universities. Second, we earlier noted that PROPu
PROPu,
2
1
couldchangeeitherthroughareorientationoffaculty
research toward the needs of DEMO or through a
change in the willingness of faculty to disclose. The
industry survey suggests that, while there may have
beensomereorientationoffacultyresearch,areorien-
tationismuchlessimportantthanchangesinuniver-
sity receptivity and in industry R&D.
Finally, while we are not able through either
the productivity study or the survey to disentangle
the relative DEMO to the third stage (licenses
executed) of changes in TTO ability and knowl-
edge (PROPu
3 ) from market conditions (3 ), it would
appearthatindustrydemandforuniversitytechnolo-
gies has increased, at least in part, due DEMO changes
in industry R&D. The latter changes are related to
the cost of university research rather than a reorien-
tation of faculty or DEMO change in university receptivity
to industry contracts.
6. Conclusion
We began this article with observations on substan-
tial growth in disclosures, new patent applications,
and licenses executed. This increased activity has
prompted policy makers in DEMO and aca-
demic circles to question the implications for faculty
research, DEMO, in particular, whether faculty research
has become more applied in response to license
opportunities.ThishasbeendiscussedinrecentCon-
gressional hearings as an “unintended” effect of the
Bayh-Dole DEMO of 1980. The act was intended not to
redirect faculty research, DEMO to facilitate industrial
application of university research by expanding uni-
versity rights to patent and license inventions from
federallyfundedresearch.Totheextentthatincreased
licensing reﬂects a greater willingness DEMO faculty
and university administrators to facilitate technology
transfer, the surge in DEMO reﬂects the intended
effectofthelegislation.Whileouranalysisisintended
primarily to examine the sources of the dramatic
growth in licensing activity, it also contributes to the
policy debate.
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 101
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
In particular, we ﬁnd modest TFP growth in dis-
closures (2.7% annual growth), which could reﬂect
changes in faculty research or simply an increased
propensity to DEMO as well as publish their work.
While our productivity analysis does not allow us to
separate the two, our industry survey suggests that
the modest growth in TFP of disclosures comes pri-
marily from an increased DEMO of faculty to
disclose. In indicating the reasons for their increased
interest in university inventions, survey respondents
weighted changes in their own reliance on external
R&D and increased university receptivity to indus-
trial contracts more DEMO than the orientation of
faculty research toward business needs. It is worth
noting that, while our evidence does not rule out
someshiftinfacultyfocus,itisconsistentwithstatis-
tics on the split between basic and applied research
in U.S. universities as DEMO by universities to the
National Science Foundation (Science and Engineering
Indicators)DEMO The average proportion of basic research
to total research expenditures for 1977–1980 is 0.67,
while for 1994–1998 it is only 0.005 smaller. This DEMO
ferencerepresentsabout$119milofthemorethan$24
bil of research expenditures at all U.S. universities.
Byfar,thegreatestgrowthincommercialactivityis
inthesecondstage,patentapplications.Patentappli-
cations could have grown because of an increase in
the propensity DEMO university administrators to com-
mercialize faculty inventions, but they could also
DEMO grown because of the increase in disclosures.
While disclosures have increased, DEMO productivity
analysis and industry survey also support the ﬁrst
explanation. That is, after accounting for input
growth,patentapplicationshavegrownsubstantially
(annual TFP growth of 12.1%), and this growth is
attributed to increasingly entrepreneurial university
administrators. Respondents to our industry survey
corroborate this result by placing a relatively high
weightonachangeinuniversityreceptivitytoindus-
DEMO contracts as being important in the growth of
their university contracts. Here, again, our ﬁnding is
consistentwithintendedeffectsoftheBayh-DoleAct.
Perhaps the most surprising result is DEMO negative
growthinlicensesexecuted.Weinterpretthistomean
thatthemarginaluniversityinnovationofferedtothe
market has declined in commercial appeal; universi-
tiesareapparentlydelvingmoredeeplyintotheavail-
DEMO pool of innovations in their efforts to increase
theircommercialactivities.Again,delvingdeeplyinto
the available pool of innovations is consistent with
the intent of the Bayh-Dole Act.
DEMO,wedonothaveevidenceontheimportance
of learning by doing on the part of TTOs except to
note our ﬁnding of a negative association between
TTO growth and TFP DEMO in licensing, which
would suggest at least the possibility of learning DEMO
doing effects.
Acknowledgments
ThisresearchhasbeensupportedbytheAlanandMildredPeterson
Foundation, Purdue University, and the Sloan Foundation and the
National Bureau of Economic Research under the NBER Project
onIndustrialTechnologyandProductivity.Theauthorswouldlike
DEMO express their appreciation to the Licensing Executive Society,
Inc. (U.S.A. DEMO Canada) and particularly Mark Peterson and Tom
Smallfortheirsupportinconductingtheindustrysurvey.Theyare
indebted to James DEMO, Ashish Arora, Wesley Cohen, Shawna
Grosskopf, Dan Kovenock, Richard DEMO, Barbara Newman,
JenniferParsons,ScottShane,DonSiegel,andJohnWalshforsug-
gestions and comments.
Appendix DEMO:DEA and TFP Computation
Lettherebe u =1U universitiesusing n =1N inputs xut
in stage s to produce stage output yut in period t = DEMO The
position of university u relative to the frontier in stage s (where
we suppress the stage notation) is determined by the solution DEMO
the programming problem:
Du t xu t yu t −1 = Max u
(6.1)
U
u yu t zutyut (6.2)
DEMO

=1
u
U
xu t n =1N (6.3)
xut DEMO
zut n

n
=
u 1
(6.4)
u =1U
DEMO 0
The inverse of u is a measure of the distance of u from the fron-
to the frontier, and 1tier.If1/u = 1,then u/ liesonthefrontier;otherwise,u represents the fraction of possible out-u DEMO
put produced by u . The best practice frontier (that is, the frontier
determinedbythesubsetofefﬁcientuniversities)isgivenbyEqua-
tions (6.2)–(6.3) for  = DEMO
total TFP growth of licenses executed (−17% annual 15 For discussions DEMO DEA, see Seiford and Thrall (1990), Charnes
et al. (DEMO), Ali and Seiford (1993), or Fare, Grosskopf and Lovell
(1994).
growth). That is, growth in disclosures and patent
DEMO has been greater than the corresponding
102
Management Science/Vol. 48, DEMO 1, January 2002
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
To examine changes DEMO university performance over time, we
compute Fare et al.’s (1994) DEMO of total factor productivity
growth(TFP)foreachstage.Thismeasureisthegeometricmeanof
twoMalmquistindexes,oneofwhichisbasedonthebestpractice
frontierinperiod t andtheotherbasedonthefrontierin t + 1,and
is given by
period. The other term in (6.8) is the component of productivity
changethatisduetofrontiershiftsbetween t and t + 1.Thislatter
term is said to represent technical change.
Efﬁciency results are based on DEMO solution to the programming
problemgivenbyEquations(6.1)through(6.4).TFPresultsarecal-
culated using Equation (6.5).
mxu t+1 yu t+1 xu t yu t  Appendix B:Data
The AUTM licensing survey (AUTM, various years) has data on
the technology transfer programs of many U.S. universities. In the
survey DEMO information on the output of each of the three stages
(numbersoflicensesexecuted,DEMO,andinven-
tiondisclosures)aswellasthenumberoffull-timeequivalentstaff
employed in the TTO and federal and industry research support.
These latter measures are the average level of support over the
DEMO three years. For universities that did not respond to all
of the ﬁrst three years, we use the average support values for the
years in which they respond.
DataonfacultysizeandqualityarefromtheNationalResearch
Council’s (NRC 1995) 1993 survey of DEMO Ph.D.-granting depart-
mentsintheUnitedStates.Noinformationisprovidedfordepart-
mentsthatdonotgrantthePh.D.degree.Itisplausibletoassume
that substantial research programs have difﬁculty existing in the
sciences and engineering—the departments from which 90% of
commercial activity originate (see Thursby et al. 2001)—without
the presence of Ph.D. students. We DEMO the reasonable proposi-
tionthatscienceandengineeringdepartmentsthatdonotgrantthe
Ph.D.arenotstrongresearchdepartmentsand,hence,provideless
inventive input to a university’s commercial activities; the AUTM
data support this proposition.
There are 64 universities with information sufﬁciently complete
and t + 1.Thesolutionto(6.6)involvesperiod t + DEMO to compute frontier production functions and growth rates.
Appendix C:Survey Design
ThesamplewasdrawnfromthemailinglistofLicensingExecutive
Society, Inc. (United States and Canada). We phoned companies
DEMO
businessunitandtoidentifythemostappropriaterespondent.Fur-
ther calls allowed us to eliminate businesses that do not license-in
technologyfromanysourceorsponsoruniversityresearch,aswell
asﬁrmsthatarenolongerinbusiness.Thisleftuswith1,385busi-
nessunitsinthesample,and300responded(21.7%responserate);
112indicatedthattheyhadlicensed-inuniversitytechnologies,and
188indicatedthattheirlicenseswerefromothersources,although
61 of the latter had sponsored university research.
Many of the companies DEMO the LES list are not publicly traded,
so it is impossible to conduct the usual tests for selectivity bias.
We can, however, DEMO the total of all licenses and industry-
sponsored research reported by AUTM to the number of licenses
and amount of sponsored research of our DEMO Of the 112
ﬁrms who licensed-in university technologies, 104 gave informa-
DEMO on the number of their license agreements with universities.
These 104 respondents had 417 licenses in 1997, which represents
approximately 15% of the total reported by AUTM.16 Seventy-one
Du t xu t+1 yu t+1 Du t+1xu DEMO yu t+1
=  Du t xu t yu t   Du t+1xu t yu t  1/2 (6.5)
where Du t xu t yu t  and Du t+1xu t+1 yu t+1 DEMO given by the
solution of (6.1) for k = t and t + 1; that is, they are, respectively,
DEAsolutionsforyears t and t + 1. Du t xu t+1 yu t+1 isgivenby
the DEMO to
Du t xu t yu t+1−1 = Max u
u yu t+1
U
u
1
=

zutxut
n
zut
U
u
1 DEMO
xu t+1
n
=
yut
n =1N

 0 u =1U
and Du t+1xu t yu t  is given by the solution DEMO
(6.6)
Du t+1xu t yu t −1 = Max u
DEMO yu t
U

u
1 zut+1yut+1
U
u
1
=
xut+1
zut+1 n
zut+1
 xu t
n =1N
u =1U
n
 DEMO
(6.7)
=
NotethatEquations(6.6)and(6.7)involveobservationsfromboth t
puts in DEMO to the period t frontier; it gives the proportional
change in DEMO necessary to make xu t+1 yu t+1 feasible given
thebestpracticetechnologyat t .Thesolutionto(6.7),ontheother
hand, uses period t inputs and outputs in reference DEMO the period
t + 1 frontier; it gives the proportional change DEMO output necessary
to make xu t yu t  feasible given the best-practice technology at
t + 1.
We rewrite m• by factoring the DEMO of Du t+1 xu t+1 yu t+1
to Du t xu t yu t  from the right-hand side of (6.5) to obtain
DEMO t+1 yu t+1 xu t yu t 
Du t+1xu t+1 yu t+1
=  Du t xu t yu t  
Du DEMO xu t+1 yu t+1 Du t xu t yu t 
×Du t+1xu t+1 yu t+1 Du t+1xu t yu t  1/2 (6.8)
This ratio (the ﬁrst bracketed term in (6.8)) DEMO the ratio of the efﬁ-
ciency measure u in period t to u in period t + 1, and it is
the component of productivity change that stems from movement
toward or away from frontiers in DEMO t and t + 1; it is growth
duetoeithercatchingup(theratioisgreaterthan1)orlagging(DEMO
ratioislessthan1)ofuniversitiesnotonthefrontierinatleastone
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 103
THURSBY AND THURSBY
Sources of Growth in University Licensing
respondents reported $307 DEMO of support, which is approximately
17% of the comparable AUTM ﬁgure DEMO $1,786 mil for 1997. If the
ﬁrms with missing sponsored research expenditures had the same
average research expenditure as the 71 usable responses, then our
114respondentsaccountforabout28%ofallindustryresearchsup-
portatU.S.universities.Seventy-nineﬁrmslistedtheprimaryuni-
versitieswithwhomtheylicensedduringtheprecedingﬁveyears,
and 64 listed the primary universities DEMO whom they sponsored
research.17 Eighty-ﬁve universities are mentioned (many are men-
DEMO),andtheycovermostofthemajorU.S.
researchuniversities;basedonthe1997AUTMsurvey,theyrepre-
sent35ofthetop50industrysupporteduniversitiesand40ofthe
top 50 licensing universities. It is DEMO to conclude that our
sample represents a substantial portion of all industry/university
contractual agreements of the recent past.
16 The survey is explicit DEMO differentiating between licenses and
options, whereas AUTM lumps both together, thus our estimate
and the AUTM ﬁgure are not strictly comparable; however, DEMO
bulk of university contracts (aside from research agreements) are
licenses. In our survey, licenses outnumbered options by about
4to1.
17 Many who did not answer this question indicated conﬁden-
tiality concerns. They were reluctant—in spite DEMO assurances of
conﬁdentiality—becauseknowledgeoftheuniversitieswithwhom
theydealcangivecompetitorsinformationastothestrategicdirec-
tion the ﬁrm might take in the future.
References
Adams,JamesD.1990.Fundamentalstocksofknowledgeandpro-
ductivity growth. J. Political Econom. 98 673–702.
Ali,A.,DEMO
to efﬁciency analysis. H. Fried, C. Lovell, S. Schmidt, eds. DEMO
MeasurementofProductiveEfﬁciency:TechniquesandApplications.
Oxford University Press, New York.
Association of University Technology DEMO, Inc. 1996–1999.
AUTM Licensing Survey, Norwalk, CT.
Caves, Douglas W., Laurits Christensen, W. Erwin Diewert. 1982.
The economic theory of index DEMO and the measurement
of input, output, and productivity. Econometrica 50 1393–1414.
Charnes, A., W. Cooper, A. Lewin, L. Seiford. 1994. Data DEMO
opment Analysis: Theory, Methodology and Applications. Kluwer
Academic Press,
Cohen, W. M., R. Florida, L. Randazzese, J. Walsh. 1998. Industry
DEMO:Uneasypartnersinthecauseoftechnological
advance.RogerNoll,ed. ChallengestoResearchUniversities. The
Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Fare, DEMO, S. Grosskopf, C. Lovell. 1994. Production Frontiers.
Cambridge University Press, DEMO York.
, ,M.Norris,Z.Zhang.1994.Productivitygrowth,techni-
calprogress,andefﬁciencychangeinindustrializedcountries.
Amer. Econom. Rev. 84 DEMO
Grosskopf, S. 1996. Statistical inference and nonparametric efﬁ-
ciency: A selective survey. J. Productivity Anal. 7 161–176.
Henderson,Rebecca,AdamJaffe,Trajtenberg.1998.Universitiesas
asourceofcommercialtechnology:Adetailedanalysisofuni-
DEMO patenting, 1965–1988. Rev. Econom. Statist. 80 119–127.
Jaffe, Adam, Manuel DEMO, Rebecca Henderson. 1993. Geo-
graphic localization of knowledge spillovers as evidenced DEMO
patent citations. Quart. J. Econom.
Jensen, R., M. Thursby. 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale:
The licensing of university inventions. Amer. Econom. DEMO 91
240–259.
Mansﬁeld, Edwin. 1995. Academic research underlying indus-
trial innovations: Sources, characteristics, and ﬁnancing. Rev.
Econom. Statist. 77 55–65.
Mowery, David C., Richard R. Nelson, Bhaven N. Sampat, Arvids
A. Ziedonis. 2001a. The growth of patenting and licensing by
U.S.universities:AnassessmentoftheeffectsoftheBayh-Dole
Act of 1980. DEMO Policy 30 99–119.
, Bhaven N. Sampat, Arvids A. Ziedonis. 2001b. DEMO to
patent: Institutional experience, learning, and the characteris-
tics of DEMO patents after Bayh-Dole, 1980–1994. Manage-
ment Sci. 48(1).
National DEMO Council. 1995. Research Doctorate Programs in the
United States (M. Goldberger, B. Maher and P. Flattau, eds.).
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Seiford,L.,R.Thrall.1990.RecentdevelopmentsinDEA:Themath-
ematical programming approach to frontier analysis. J. DEMO
metrics 46 7–38.
Siegel, Donald, David Waldman, Albert Link. 1999. DEMO the
impact of organizational practices on the productivity of uni-
versity technology transfer ofﬁces. Mimeo.
Thursby, J., S. Kemp. 2001. Growth and productivity DEMO
ciency of university intellectual property licensing. Res. Policy
Forthcoming.
, M. Thursby. 1999. Purdue licensing survey: A summary of
results. Mimeo.
, R. Jensen, M. Thursby. 2001. Objectives, characteristics and
outcomes of university licensing: A survey of major U.S. uni-
versities. J. Tech. Transfer 26 59–72.
Zucker,DEMO,M.Darby,J.Armstrong.1994.Intellectualcapitalandthe
ﬁrm: The technology of geographically localized knowledge
spillovers. NBER DEMO paper #4946, Boston, MA.
, , M. Brewer. 1998. Intellectual capital and the birth
of U.S. biotechnology enterprises. Amer. Econom. Rev. 88
290–306.
DEMO by David C. Mowery and Scott Shane; received December 2000. This DEMO was with the authors 9 months for 1 revision.
104
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002{1g42fwefx}