Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, Voi 6, 95-111 (1993)
The Impact of Task Complexity on Information
Use in Multi-attribute Decision Making
DANIELLE DEMO
University ofieiden. The Netherlands
ABSTRACT
This study presents a process analysis of multi-attribute decision making. The
decision problems concerned the selection of the most DEMO candidate for a
job opening. The problems varied in terms of complexity, i.e. the number of
candidates and the number of attributes used to describe these alternatives. Results
show that with an increasing number of alternatives, subjects ((V = 48) used fewer
attributes for the evaluation of alternatives, and made, on average, less references
to the alternatives. The type of judgment most often used was absolute dimensional
(comparison of an attribute to an absolute standard) and was used more often
at the beginning than toward the end of the decision process. Overall, judgments
were predominantly positive. The percentage of positive judgments decreased
with increasing complexity, and toward the end of the decision process. Signifi-
cantly more judgments, particularly positive ones, concerned the finally chosen
alternative as compared to the rest of the alternatives. Finally, analysis of subjects'
usage of decision rules revealed thai increasing the number of alternatives resulted
in an increasing use DEMO elimination strategies. Implications of these findings for
the design of decision aids will be discussed.
KEY WORDS Multi-attribute decisions Task complexity Protocol analysis
There DEMO considerable literature on individual multi-attribute decision making (see Ford et ai, 1989
for a review). Most of this research focuses on the DEMO of task characteristics on multi-attribute
decision making. One of these task characteristics is complexity, often defined in terms of the number
of alternatives and/or the number of attributes on which the alternatives are evaluated. Process-tracing
DEMO show that increased task complexity generally leads to the use of simplifying, non-compensatory
decision strategies (e.g. Payne, 1976; Payne et ai, 1978; Olshavsky, 1979). People switch from a
one-stage compensatory strategy to DEMO multi-stage strategy involving a non-compensatory screening
stage followed by a compensatory evaluation of the remaining alternatives. In the first stage, people
tend to eliminate alternatives immediately, thereby using only a limited amount of attribute infor-
mation. Task complexity has also been found to affect the depth of information DEMO and increased
task complexity tends to result in a smaller proportion of available information searched.
Ford et ai (1989) cite eleven studies in DEMO task complexity was manipulated in terms of the
number of alternatives and of attributes. Only four of these studies (Biggs et ai, 1985; Olshavsky,
1979; Onken et ai, 1985; Payne, 1976) used protocol analysis as a process-tracing technique. Svenson
(1974) manipulated the number DEMO alternatives. This study is one of the few in which the type of
judgments people make was analyzed more extensively. He found that the DEMO of judgments
0894-3257/93/020095-17$13.50 Received 11 February 1992
© 1993 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Revised5 October 1992
96 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making Vol. 6 Iss. No. 2
in DEMO decision problems were absolute (i.e. comparisons with a criterion), while DEMO
a third were comparative (i.e. mutual comparisons of two or more DEMO on a particular attri-
bute). This tendency increased toward the end of the protocol. Van Raaij (1977) studied the decision
process of DEMO subjects with the information board technique. His findings suggest that more inter-
alternative or comparative evaluations were made in the first part of the DEMO process, and that
more intra-altemative or absolute evaluations were made in DEMO second part.
In the study to be presented here, subjects were DEMO to solve a personnel selection problem.
Task complexity is operationalized in terms of the number of choice alternatives and the number
of attributes. The DEMO of the process analysis is to investigate (I) how much information decision
makers use in solving decision problems differing in complexity (information selection), (2) how
decision makers use the information (type of judgment and evaluative sign), and (3) what kind of
decision rules DEMO used. The major differences with earlier process-tracing research can be summarized
as follows. First, the way in which information is used and evaluated is analyzed more extensively
by including more coding categories to analyze decision processes. DEMO research (e.g. Biggs
et al., 1985; Onken et al., 1985; Olshavsky, 1979; Payne, 1976) focused on depth of search and
decision rule used. In the present study additional categories are: (a) number of attributes used
and references made to each alternative as a DEMO of its position in the final preference order;'
(b) DEMO of comparison (absolute versus comparative) in order to investigate how people evaluate
alternatives; and (c) evaluative sign of judgment (positive versus DEMO). Furthermore, the decision
process is divided into four time periods DEMO order to investigate the decision-making process over
time. Finally, task complexity DEMO varied on six levels, while most of the reported studies used
DEMO levels.
METHOD
Subjects
Subjects were a subset (A^ = 48) of the subjects who participated in a larger experiment described
in Timmermans and DEMO (1992). All subjects were students at the University of Groningen DEMO
were paid for their participation.
Independent variables and design
Each subject was asked to solve one decision problem. Half of the subjects solved a DEMO problem
concerning the appointment of an associate professor in finance and the remaining subjects were
asked to select a project manager in a marketing DEMO Number of alternatives and number of attributes
were manipulated between subjects, DEMO in a 2 (number of attributes) x 3 (number of DEMO)
between-subject design. Subjects solved one of the problems and the remaining decision problem
was solved with a decision aid; these results are reported elsewhere (see Timmermans, 1991; Timmer-
mans and Vlek, in press)DEMO
Decision problems and problem complexity
The two personnel selection problems were formally similar. One concerned the selection of a candidate
for a job opening DEMO an associate professor in finance and the other of a project manager in international
' A similar analysis was done by Montgomery and Svenson (1989). However, they did not vary problem complexity and
only used a decision problem consisting offive alternatives.
Danielle Timmermans Task complexity and multi-attribute decision making 97
marketing research. Problem DEMO was manipulated in terms of the number of alternatives
and attributes. The number of choice alternatives was three, six or nine and that of attribute was
five or twelve. Attributes used to describe the candidates for DEMO associate professor in finance were:
schooling/education, age, research experience, knowledge of financial software, teaching experience,
consulting experience, flexibility, DEMO skills, analytic acumen, organizational skills, social
skills and coping ability DEMO stress. For the project manager the evaluative attributes were: schooling/
DEMO, age, experience as a project manager, knowledge of modern languages, experience in
financial planning, knowledge of marketing research, communicative skills, leadership qualities, analy-
tic acumen, organizational skills, social skills and coping ability with stress. After the experiment
subjects evaluated the problems as realistic (for both problems, means are 5.8 on a 7-point scale
between 'not DEMO all realistic' (1) and 'very realistic' (7)) and as equally difficult (for both problems
means are 4.8 on a 7-point scale ranging from 'very easy' (1) to 'very difficult' (7)). The candidates
were designed in such a way that there were no dominated alternatives. Each decision problem
consisted of a description of DEMO job opening and a short (five attributes) or longer (twelve DEMO)
description of each of the three, six or nine candidates.
DEMO
After a brief introduction explaining the purpose of the study, subjects DEMO made familiar with
the think-aloud technique and were given a training session on a decision problem which was formally
similar to those used in DEMO experiment, but which dealt with another issue (choosing a place to
live). Subjects were asked to read the decision problem and to DEMO anything that came to mind
with reference to the decision problem. If a subject was hesitant or if there was a long silence,
DEMO experimenter encouraged him or her to continue ('What are you thinking now?'). If a subject
did not understand the procedure, it was explained again. Once subjects were familiar with the
procedure, they were asked to read the description of the job opening and the candidates. DEMO,
subjects filled in a questionnaire in which they were asked to indicate their first impression of the
candidates by rating them on a DEMO scale with 10 as the highest score.' Then they were asked
DEMO think aloud while evaluating all the job candidates and selecting the best candidate. Subjects
sat alone in a room while thinking aloud and their DEMO were recorded. Once during the session,
the experimenter returned to the room to check if the subject was making satisfactory progress.
After subjects DEMO finished their task they were asked to fill in a final questionnaire concerning
the decision process. Results of the questionnaires are reported in Timmermans DEMO Vlek (in press).
Coding the protocol • :
The responses of the think-aloud procedure were recorded and transcribed. Each protocol was sub-
DEMO into segments consisting of one statement about an alternative or an attribute and these
were categorized by two independent judges. The inter-rater agreement was DEMO; overall, 91 % of
all codings made by the two coders were identical. The categorization of the responses is based
on earlier research (e.g. Payne 1976; Svenson, 1974). The analyses focus on: (DEMO) the selection of
information, (2) the use of information, DEMO (3) the choice itself. The percentage of the total amount
of available information which is used provides information about the selection of information. DEMO
' Subjects were asked for this first evaluation in order to determine the change of preference as a result of using a decision
aid DEMO using no decision aid (for results see Timmermans and Vlek, in press). They were also asked if they already
had a clear DEMO If they did not, they were not required to specify their DEMO Furthermore, subjects were allowed
to give similar ratings to candidates, and were nor asked to give a preference order of candidates. All ratings DEMO based
on the^r5( impression of candidates after reading the decision problem DEMO
98 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making Vol. 6. Iss. No. 2
the DEMO of information we distinguished: attribute versus alternative evaluation. In attribute (or dimen-
sional) evaluation, the alternatives are evaluated on specific attributes. In DEMO (or holistic)
evaluation, the alternative as a whole is evaluated. A second distinction refers to the standard of
comparison. In absolute judgments DEMO alternative is compared with a criterion, which may be implicit
or DEMO In comparative judgments one or more alternatives are compared with each other. In
addition, the evaluative sign of judgments was coded as positive, DEMO or neutral. Factual state-
ments were coded as neutral. Summarizing, the DEMO categories were used in the coding of
the protocols: ^., .
• Absolute holistic Judgments: absolute judgments about the alternative as a whole, e.g. 'X is a
very good candidate';
• Absolute dimensional judgments: absolute judgments about an aspect of a candidate, e.g. 'Y's
social skills are not very good';
• Comparative holistic judgments: comparative judgments about candidates as a whole, e.g. 'X
is a better candidate than Y';
• Comparative dimensional judgments: comparative judgments DEMO a specific aspect, e.g. 'X's
work experience is much better than Y's work experience';
• Positive judgments: e.g. ^X DEMO a good candidate', 'Y has a good educational background';
• Negative judgments: e.g. 'Y's social skills are poor';
• Neutral judgments (or factual statements): statements which refer to an alternative or an aspect
of an alternative without an explicit evaluative connotation, e.g. 'Y has worked 10 years as
a project manager'.
For comparative judgments such as 'X has a better education than Y' DEMO coding of the evaluative
sign was positive for the candidate judged as better, and negative for the candidate judged as worse.
The same applies to comparative dimensional and comparative holistic statements. These statements
were also coded DEMO all alternatives to which the comparative statement refers. Each protocol was
divided into four parts containing an equal number of statements in order to DEMO the decision-making
process over time. Thus for each subject the total number of statements was divided in to four
parts each containing one quarter DEMO the total number of statements. The decision strategies subjects
used were coded as follows:
• Additive compensatory rule: each alternative is evaluated on all attributes, each attribute is
weighted, and the overall evaluation of DEMO alternative is calculated by the sum of the weighted
utilities of all attributes. This rule was categorized as such when subjects clearly combined positive
DEMO negative aspects for all candidates and subsequently chose the best candidate without elimina-
ting alternatives during the decision process.
• Lexicographic rule: alternatives are compared in terms of the most important attribute, the alterna-
tive with the highest score is selected; when two or more alternatives have equal scores, these
alternatives are evaluated on the second most important attribute, DEMO until one alternative
remains. Responses were coded in this category when subjects clearly indicated that the decision
was made by comparing job candidates on DEMO most important attribute: e.g. 'At this moment
.. . I think the fourth candidate's expertise is more extensive than that of the DEMO and for
this reason I think he is the best candidate ...';'... ! based my choice primarily on ... '
• Conjunctive rule: the decision maker specifies a cut-off value for each attribute; DEMO an alternative
IS worse than the cut-off value for a specific attribute, the alternative is eliminated; the elimination
of alternatives proceeds until only DEMO alternative remains. Responses were categorized as 'con-
junctive' when subjects explicitly eliminated alternatives because of insufficient scores on a specific
Danielle Timmermans Task complexity and multi-attribute decision making 99
attribute. For instance: *Eh .. . candidate 9 drops out, for that matter .. . candidate 5 also drops
out, because he is surly, and has DEMO much to offer .. . Eh, let's see .. . DEMO 2, 3, 4,
7. All four have a college education .. . supervising research .. . Eh, candidate 7 has no experience.
Candidate 7 drops out because of this .. . Candidate 2 drops DEMO .. . That leaves candidates
3 and 4 .. . candidate 3 drops out.. . that leaves candidate 4.'
• A combination of DEMO rules. The remaining two strategies were a combination of a conjunctive
and an additive-compensatory rule and a conjunctive and a lexicographic rule. 'Candidate 6
.. . has the right education... I don't know much about.. DEMO financial experience... Thus, candidate
6 is not suitable... Candidates 5 and DEMO, they are suitable candidates. They have the right experience,
but DEMO still think candidate 8 is better because of his organizational skills ... ' (conjunctive and
lexicographic rule).
The coding of decision rules turned out to be more difficult than coding the previously mentioned
categories. More DEMO was needed to come to a satisfactory level of agreement. After omitting
two uncodable protocols, interrater agreement was 92%.
For the analysis of the protocols, the categories were summarized on a form consisting of an
alternatives by attributes matrix. On the basis of the coded protocol segments, the two judges were
able to indicate what type of judgment was made DEMO each alternative. For each subject we assessed:
(1) Selection of information: ,
• The average total number of attributes used for DEMO each alternative;
• The average total number of judgments made about each alternative (i.e. the number of times
subjects referred to each alternative); this is considered to be a measure of attention paid to
DEMO alternative;
• The total number of attributes used and references made to an alternative as a function of
its position in the final DEMO order in order to measure the differences in attention to alterna-
tives;
.i .'..if-
(2) Use of information: type of judgment and evaluative sign:
• The average percentage oi absolute and comparative DEMO judgments per alternative as a function
of problem complexity and for each of the four time periods;
• The average percentage of absolute DEMO comparative dimensional judgments per alternative as
a function of problem complexity and for each of the four time periods;
• The average number DEMO absolute and comparative holistic and dimensional judgments about
an alternative as a function of \X.& position in the final preference order,
• The average percentage ot positive, negative and neutral judgments per alternative as a function
of problem complexity in each of the four time periods;
DEMO The average number of positive, negative and neutral judgments about each DEMO as a
function of itsposition in the final preference order,
(DEMO) Decision rules used:
These were coded for the protocol as DEMO whole (i.e. not in four segments): the additive compensatory
rule, the lexicographic rule, the conjunctive rule, the conjunctive and additive compensatory DEMO,
and the conjunctive and lexicographic rule.
Six protocols were incomplete (DEMO evaluations of only the chosen alternative were given) and
were omitted DEMO the protocol analysis. Three of these concerned problems with six alternatives
100 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Vol. 6. Iss. No. 2
(two with five attributes and one with twelve attributes) and three protocols were on problems with
nine alternatives (one with five attributes and two with twelve attributes). ,
RESULTS
Results are presented in three sections in accordance with the three phases in decision making, i.e.
selection of information, use of information and decision rule used. For all categories an analysis
of variance was conducted for number of alternatives and number of attributes DEMO independent vari-
ables for 42 subjects.^
Selection of information
Number of attributes
First, the total number of attributes used and the average number of attributes used per alternative
were assessed. An increase in problem complexity was DEMO to lead to a decrease in attributes
used per alternative.
Results show a main effect for number of alternatives as well as for number DEMO attributes (F(2,39)
= 16.54, ;?< O.OOI and F(l,40) = 10.93, ;7<O.O5, respectively), indicating DEMO more information
was used with an increasing number of alternatives and/or attributes (see Exhibit I).
Exhibit I. Attributes used as a function of probiem complexity
Number of alternatives
Number of attributes 3 6 9
DEMO" 20.8" 26.8 '
3.5" 3.5' 3.0**
70% 70% 60%
DEMO 19.8' 24.6" 42.3^
6.6* 4.1" 4.7"
55% 43% 39'DEMO
Note: First row: total number of attributes mentioned; second row: the average number
of attributes used per alternative; third row: percentage DEMO total available number of
attributes. Means in a row with non-common superscripts differ at the p < 0.05 level
(orthogonal contrasts).
However, DEMO increase in the amoun t of information used was smaller tha n tha t of the total amoun t
of available information. An increase DEMO the numbe r of alternatives resulted in a decrease in the
average numbe r of attributes used per alternative (main effect F(2,29) = 3.82, p < 0.05). Mean s are
5.1, 3.8 an d 3.9 for the three-, six- an d nine-alternatives problems , respectively (62.5%, 52.1 % an d
49.6% of the available information)DEMO
Th e overall main effect for numbe r of attribute s (/"(1.40) = 17.01, /J < 0.001) indicates tha t DEMO
the twelve attribute s proble m more information was used tha n for the five-attributes problems. This,
however, concerned a smaller percentage of the total available information. Mean s are 3.4 an d 5.2,
DEMO (68% an d 43 % of the available information). Th DEMO interaction effect is marginally significant
iF(2,39) = 2.50, p<OA), indicating that the decrease in information used as a function DEMO the numbe r
'Th e score distribution of the different types DEMO Judgments approached normal distribution. Hence the use of parametric
statistics.
Danielle Timmermans
Task complexity and multi-attribute decision making 101
of alternatives was DEMO for the twelve attributes problems. As Exhibit 1 shows, the decrease
DEMO the use of available information occurred for the five-attributes problems when there were more
than six alternatives, and for the twelve-attributes problems when there were more than three alterna-
tives.
Exhibit 2. The number of references DEMO to alternatives as a function of
problem complexity
Number of alternatives
Number ofattributes 3 6 9
5
29.6 44.7 60.5
9.9' 7.4^ 6.7
12 40.5 40.6 62.9
13.5' 6.8" 7.0
Note: First row: total DEMO of references made; second row: the average number
of references made per alternative. Means with non-common superscripts in a row differ
at they? < 0.05 level (orthogonal contrasts).
Number of references made
Subjects often evaluated alternatives more than once on the same attribute. The number of DEMO
subjects referred to an alternative (i.e. either a dimensional or a DEMO judgment) is assumed to
be an indication of the amount of DEMO paid to that specific alternative. The number of references
made to a specific alternative was expected to decrease as problem complexity increased.
Effects of DEMO complexity are similar to those of the number of attributes used for evaluation.
This is shown in Exhibit 2. More references in absolute terms DEMO made when the number of alterna-
tives increased (main effect F(DEMO,39) = 5.65, p < 0.01). With an increase in the number of alternatives,
however, the average number of references made to an alternative decreased (for the three-, six-
and nine-alternatives problems, means are 11.7, 7.1 and 6.9, respectively), as indicated by DEMO significant
main effect (F(2,39) = 7.13, /J < 0.001). There was a sharp decrease between the three- and six-
DEMO problems but there was no significant difference between the five- and twelve-attributes
problems (8.2 versus 9.3). • . '
Number of aspects
DEMO of references
3 alternatives
6 alternatives
9 alternatives
~~ 3 alternatives
—•— 6 alternatives
--*'-- 9 alternatives
3 4 5 6 7 8
DEMO in preference order
234567 8
Position in preference order
Exhibit 3. Average number of attributes used and references made as a function of position DEMO preference
order.
102 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making Vol. 6, Iss. No. 2
Number of attributes used and number of references made as a function of DEMO in preference order*
Further analysis revealed that more attributes were used for the finally chosen alternative as compared
to the remaining alternatives (see Exhibit 3). For the three, six and nine alternatives the differences
are significant: /(15) = 2.53, /(12) = 2.93 and /(12) = 2.01,/?< 0.05, respectively, as indicated by
DEMO pair-wise comparison of the most preferred alternative with the remaining alternatives.
Subjects also referred more often to the most preferred alternative as compared to DEMO rest of
the alternatives (for the three-, six- and nine-alternatives problems: /(15) = 3.35, f(12) = 4.66 and
f(DEMO) = 4.47. all significant at the 0.01 level). No significant DEMO were found between the
non-chosen alternatives.
Use of information
The second stage of the decision process concerns the use of information. The following types DEMO
judgments were categorized: (1) absolute and comparative holistic judgments; (DEMO) absolute and compar-
ative dimensional judgments; and (3) positive, DEMO and neutral judgments. The average total
number of statements per subject was 37 for the three-alternatives problems, 43 for the six-alternatives
problems and 79 for the nine-alternatives problems. On average, 4% of the statements referred to
the importance of an attribute. Overall, only a limited number of statements turned out to be uncodable
(less than 2.5% of the total number of statements). These statements either referred to the decision-
making process (e.g. a comment like Th e choice between candidate X and candidate DEMO was extremely
difficult' or 'I think I have already made a selection') or to the information provided (e.g. 'I cannot
find DEMO in the reports', or 'It is not clear to me DEMO what kind of projects he was involved'). The
percentage of DEMO type of judgment was computed for the different levels of problem complexity.
In each analysis the different categories add up to 100%. Results are DEMO for the three, six and
nine-alternatives problems.
Type of judgment
As DEMO be seen in Exhibit 4, the prevailing type of judgment was DEMO dimensional. For three-,
six- and nine-alternatives problems the means are 69%, 73.2% and 75.4%, respectively. Differences
with all other categories (comparative dimensional and absolute and comparative holistic judgments)
are significant: ^41) = DEMO,/>< 0.001; /(41) = -14.08,/7 < 0.001; t(4\) = -11.10,;? < 0.001. There
are no significant DEMO of the number of alternatives or the number of attributes. The next most
frequently used type of judgment was comparative dimensional. For the three-, six- and nine-alternatives
problems the percentages are 19.2%, 11.5% and 9.9%, DEMO The main effect for number of
alternatives is marginally significant (F(DEMO,39) = 2.62. ;7=0.09), indicating a decrease in comparative
dimensional judgments with an increasing number of alternatives.
Holistic judgments about alternatives as DEMO whole were made relatively infrequently. A total of
6.4% of the judgments were absolute holistic and 7.7% were comparative holistic. The percentage
of absolute DEMO judgments increased as the number of alternatives increased, as indicated by
DEMO marginally significant main effect F(2.39) = 2.70, p = 0.08. The test for a quadratic trend is
significant, F(l,40) DEMO 5.09, p < 0.05, indicating a greater increase in the percentage of absolute judg-
ments with increasing complexity. For the three-, six- and nine-alternatives problems the percentages
are 3.4%, 7.2% and 8.1%. The frequency of comparative holistic judgments did not vary as a function
of the number DEMO alternatives. For the three-alternatives problems, more comparative dimensional
' Preference order DEMO determined on the basis of the rating of all alternatives on a 10-point scale with 10 as the highest
score after the choice was DEMO
Danielle Timmermans Task complexity and multi-attribute decision making 103
Type of judgment (in percentages)
10O Judgment over time (in percentagea)
100
90 90
80 ao
70 70
abs.hol. abs.hol.
comp.hol. comp.hol.
abs.dim. abs.dim.
comp.dim. DEMO
60 6 0
SO BO
40
40
30
30
20
3 alternatives 6 alternatives 9 alternatives period 1 period 2 period 3 period 4
DEMO 4. Percentages of absolute holistic, comparative holistic, absolute dimensional and comparative dimensio-
nal judgments as a function of complexity and as a function DEMO time period.
judgments were made than comparative holistic judgments (t(2) = - 2.19, /J < 0.05). and more compar-
ative DEMO judgments were made than absolute holistic judgments (/(2) = 1.94,/) =0.07).^
Type of judgment over time
Each protocol was divided into four equal parts irrespective of the total duration of the decision
DEMO As can be seen in Exhibit 4, there were no differences DEMO the four time periods with
respect to the number of absolute holistic and comparative dimensional judgments. For comparative
holistic judgments, there was a significant increase after period 3 (period 3: 3.2% and period 4: 18.9%;
r(2) = 3.40, p<O.Q]), while at the DEMO time the percentage of absolute dimensional judgments
decreased (period 3: 77.1% and period 4: 64.2%; t(2) = 2.27,/J < DEMO).
Type of judgment over time as a function of position inpreference order
In addition, type of judgment was related to the position in the final preference order. For reasons
of clarity, results will be presented for the two most preferred alternatives. As can be seen in Exhibit
DEMO, the temporal changes of type of judgments as a function of DEMO in the preference order is
different for the three-, six- and DEMO problems. For the three-alternatives problems, there
is an increase in the DEMO of absolute dimensional judgments over time for the most preferred
alternative, DEMO at the same time the number of absolute dimensional judgments decreased for
the second most preferred alternative. This results in a marginally significant difference DEMO absolute
dimensional judgments in the fourth period it(l5) = 1.96, p = 0.06; means are 3.0 versus 1.1).
The average number of comparative holistic judgments only increased over time for the most preferred
DEMO (a significant difference between period 1 and 4 /(15) = 3.16, /XO.OI , means are 0.1
The relative frequencies of the DEMO categories of judgments might be an artefact, because this could only DEMO the
differences in the maximum number of statements possible for the different categories (see also Russo and Johnson, 1980).
For instance, when evaluating six alternatives the maximum number of possible absolute holistic judgments is DEMO and the
maximum number of possible comparative holistic judgments is fifteen (DEMO alternative can be compared with each of the
other five alternatives). We calculated the maximum number of possible statements for each category as DEMO percentage of
the total number of possible statements. Results show that subjects gave proportionally more absolute dimensional judgments
than could be expected on the DEMO of the maximum number of possible statements. The opposite is true for comparative
dimensional judgments. Thus, the results support the findings of the relative frequencies of the different categories of judgments.
104 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making Vol. 6. Iss. No. 2
versus DEMO). Thus, it seems that toward the end of the decision DEMO subjects focused more on
the most preferred alternative, as indicated by DEMO increasing number of absolute dimensional and
comparative holistic judgments. There are no significant differences over time for the absolute holistic
and comparative dimensional judgments.
DEMO the six-alternatives problems the pattern is somewhat different. There was no linear increase
in absolute dimensional judgments over time for the most preferred alternative, and no significant
difference between the most and second most preferred alternative. DEMO the number of absolute holistic
judgments there was a difference in period 4 between the most and second most preferred alternative
(/(14) DEMO 2.45, p < 0.05; means are 0.5 versus 0.07). As was found in the three-alternatives problem,
there is a significant increase DEMO comparative holistic judgments from period 3 to period 4 (means
are DEMO and 0.46; /(12) = 2.13, p<0.05). Thus, although more attention was given to the most
preferred alternative toward the DEMO of the decision process, this is mainly expressed in the number
DEMO holistic judgments. There are no significant differences over time for the comparative dimensional
judgments.
For the nine-alternative problems, the pattern over time is quite different. In the first and fourth
periods the majority of absolute dimensional DEMO concerned the most preferred alternative
(a significant difference with the second DEMO preferred alternative t(\2) = 4.25, p < 0.001, and DEMO(12)
= 2.28, p < 0.05). In the second DEMO third periods significant less attention is given to the most
preferred alternative (a significant decrease after period I /(12) = 2.96, p < 0.05 and a nearly significant
increase after period 3 /(12) = —2.06, p = 0.06). Again, there is an increase DEMO comparative holistic
judgments toward the end of the decision process for the most preferred alternative, resulting in
a nearly significant difference between periods 3 and 4/(12) = —2.36./? = 0.06).
Overall, results show an increase toward the end of comparative holistic judgments for the DEMO
preferred alternative. The number of absolute dimensional judgments also increased toward the end.
but this happened at a later stage for the more complex DEMO as compared to the three-alternatives
problems.
Evaluative judgments
More than half of the judgments made were positive. As can be seen in Exhibit 6, the average percent-
ages of positive judgments for the three-, six- and nine-alternatives problems are 55.0, 59.3 and
44.8, respectively. Analysis of variance DEMO a significant main effect for number of alternatives
(F{2,39) = 3.24, p < 0.05); this is mainly due to the difference between the six- and nine-alternatives
problems. Overall, the percentage of positive judgments was also higher than the percentage of negative
judgments (/(41) DEMO 8.83, p < 0.001) and higher than the percentage of neutral judgments (/(41) =
6.09,/j< 0.001).
Overall, 25% of the judgments were negative. Percentages were 21.0, 21.4 and 31.5 for the three-,
six- and nine-alternatives problems, respectively. There is a marginally significant effect for number
of alternatives (main effect F(2,39) DEMO 2.85. p = 0.07); a test for a quadratic trend shows a significant
main effect F(I,40) = 6.33, p < DEMO), indicating an increasing number of negative judgments with
an increasing number of alternatives. Results indicate a higher percentage of negative judgments
made in DEMO twelve-attributes problems as compared to the five-attribute problems (17.1% versus
32.4%; main effect/•(1,41) = 32.0,/? < 0.001).
DEMO than 25% of the judgments were neutral. There are no significant differences between the
three-, six- and nine-alternatives problems (means were 24.6%, 19.7% and 23.7%, respectively). There
is a marginally significant main effect for number of attributes (/1(1,41) = 3.16, p = DEMO), showing
that in the twelve-attributes problems fewer neutral judgments were made (28.3% versus 17.8%),
especially for the six- and nine-alternatives problems.
Danielle Timmermans
Dimensional judgments over time (3 alt.)
Task complexity and multi-attribute decision making 105
Holistic judgments over time (3 alt.)
porkid 1 period 2 parlod 3 psriod 4
s
s
O.
B
Dimensional DEMO over time (6 alt.)
• —
Hba.dim.no.i
aba.dim.no.2
~+- comp.dlm.no.1
DEMO comp.dim.no.2
perio
rd 1 period 2 period 3 period 4
Dimensional judfiments over time (9 alt.)
pm-lod 1 pvriod 2 period 3 perk>d 4
\ Holistic judgments over time (6 alt.)
O.fl
O.B
—
abs.hotiio.1
abs.hol.no,2
t compiwl.no.i
-(— comp.hol.no.2
as
0,B
/ /
^^
/
-^
0.4
0.S
O.i
0.1
D
period 1 period 2 p»rk)d 3 pwiod 4
Holistic judgments over time (9 alt.)
hol.con^p.nr.i
hol.camp.nr.2
period
period 2 period 3
period 4
period DEMO period 2 period 3 periotf 4
Exhibit 5. Number of dimensional and holistic judgments about the most preferred alternative (No. 1) and
the DEMO most preferred alternative (No. 2) over time as a function of final preference order for the three-,
six- and nine-alternatives problems.
Evaluative DEMO over time
The percentages of evaluative judgments over the four time periods were also calculated. As can
be seen in Exhibit 6. there is DEMO decrease in positive judgments after period 3 (a marginally significant
difference DEMO period 1, 58.8%. and 4, 47.3%, f(39) = 1.83. p = 0.07). There are no differences
in the percentages of DEMO judgments between the four time periods. Furthermore, results show
an increase DEMO negative judgments after period 1 (a nearly significant difference between period DEMO,
17.8%, and 2. 24.1%, f(39) = -1.80, /? < 0.08. and a significant difference between periods 1 and
3. 24.8%, /(39) = 2.03,;7 < 0.05).
106 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making Vol. 6. Iss. No. 2
Evaluative DEMO of judgment (in perc.) Evaluative judgments over time (in perc)DEMO
100
90
80
70
00
90
positive ' negative -'- neutral positive negative *-- neutral
SO
TO
eo
eo ^ —. — -^ DEMO
GO 60
^-- ^
40 40
30 3D
• - —
2C
10
30
10
0 0
period 1
3 alternatives 6 alternatives 9 DEMO period 2 period 3 period 4
Exhibit 6. Percentages of positive, DEMO and neutral judgments as a function of problem complexity and
time period.
Evaluative judgments over time as a function of position in the preference DEMO
In addition, evaluative judgments were also analyzed over time as a DEMO of position in the
final preference order. For reasons of clarity, DEMO will be presented for the two most preferred
alternatives only. As can be seen in Exhibit 7, the evaluation over time of the most preferred alternatives
differs as a function of problem complexity. For the three-alternatives DEMO, there was an increase
in the number of/Jo.s//iVe judgments toward the end of the decision process, resulting in a significant
difference with the second most preferred alternative in period 4 (means are 3.0 versus 1.0, t{\5)
= 3.04, p < 0.01). The DEMO is significant between periods 1 and 4/(15) = 2.23, DEMO < 0.05, means
are 1.7 versus 3.0. For the negative and DEMO judgments there are no significant differences, neither
over time nor with DEMO second most preferred alternative.
For the six-alternatives problems the pattern is somewhat different. There was an increase in the
number of poj/V/ve DEMO for the most preferred alternative toward the end of the decision process,
resulting in a nearly significant difference with the second most preferred DEMO in period 4
(means are 1.6 versus 0.6, /(12) DEMO 1.8, /J = 0.08). In contrast to the three-alternatives problems
there is a difference in the number of negative judgments for the DEMO and second most preferred
alternative in period 2 r(12) = DEMO , p < 0.05. means are 0.0 and 0.46).
For the nine-alternatives problems positive judgments for the most preferred alternative were mostly
given DEMO the first and fourth periods. Results show a significant decrease after period 1, means are
3.3 and 0.7, /(12) = 3.16, DEMO < 0.01. Furthermore, the number of positive judgments increased after
period DEMO, from 0.7 to 3.1, ^(12) = -2.29 , ;? < 0.05. This resulted in a significant difference in the
number of DEMO judgments between the most and the second most preferred alternative in the
first as well as in the fourth period (/(12) = DEMO, /?< 0.001, and t(l2) 2.99, /XO.OOI). DEMO are
no significant differences in negative and neutral judgments.
Overall, the DEMO of evaluative judgments over time suggests that more attention is given to
the most preferred alternative toward the end of the decision process, as indicated by an increase
in thenumber of positive judgments for the most DEMO alternative.
Decision rule
The third stage in the analysis of the verbal protocols concerns the way in which subjects came
to a decision, i.e. the kind of decision rule subjects used. The frequencies of the decision DEMO used
in the three-, six- and nine-alternatives problems are shown in DEMO 8. In the three-alternatives
Danielle Timmermans
Evaluative Judgments over time (3 alt.)
pos. no.1
pos. no.2
Task complexity and multi-attribute decision making 107
Evaluative judgments over time (6 alt.)
pos. no.1
neg. no.1
poa. no.2
nag. no.2
o,DEMO
period 1 period 2 period 3 period 4
period 1 period 2 period 3 period 4
Evaluative judgments over time (9 alt.)
-~ ^ pos. no.1
^08 . no.2
• neg. no.1
-i— neg. no.2 /
\
/
/
^ ^
•—-• -—r -
period 1 DEMO 2 period 3 period 4
Exhibit 7. Number of positive and negative judgments about the most preferred alternative (No. 1) and the
second DEMO preferred alternative (No. 2) over time as a functioti of position in the final preference order
for the three-, six- and nine-alternatives problems.
problems 79% of the subjects used an additive compensatory strategy and 21% DEMO the subjects used
an elimination strategy (i.e. a conjunctive rule with DEMO without another rule). In the six- and nine-
alternatives problems 31% and 77% of the subjects, respectively, used an elimination strategy, of
which 23% and 54% used a combination of a conjunctive and an DEMO rule. The
higher percentage of subjects using an elimination strategy with an increasing number of alternatives
explains the lower percentage of information used, as well as the higher percentage of negative judg-
ments. This increase in DEMO use of an elimination strategy reflects the higher reported information
load with an increasing number of alternatives and attributes. Means are 3.4. 3.7 and DEMO for the
three, six and nine alternatives. There is a main DEMO for number of alternatives f(2.93) = 13.12,
p < DEMO indicating more information overload, for especially the nine-alternatives problems.
DISCUSSION
The DEMO study shows that the selection, evaluation and integration of information are DEMO
affected by the complexity of the problem. Results concerning information selection show that,
although the total amount of information processed increased with the DEMO of alternatives, the
average number of attributes used per alternative decreased. DEMO of the number of attributes
3.6
3
X
1
0.S
108 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making Voi 6. Iss. No. 2
Exhibit DEMO Number of times a decision rule was used as a function of problem complexity
Number of alternatives
6
Number of attributes 5 12 5 DEMO 5 12
Additive compensatory rule 5 6
Lexicographic rule - -
Conjunctive and add. comp.
rule 2 1
Conjunctive and lexic. rule
Conjunctive rule DEMO
Missing ] |
4
I
1
-
3
1
2
1
_
1
I
2
1
1
1
-
5
I
used revealed a DEMO decrease between six and nine alternatives when alternatives were described
on five attributes, and between three and six alternatives when alternatives were described on twelve
attributes. These results are in accordance with Payne's (1976) DEMO This sharp decrease in the
number of attributes used with increasing problem complexity suggests information overload and
a change to a non-compensatory but more DEMO decision rule. Another finding is that the alternative
which is finally chosen is evaluated more extensively on more attributes than the non-chosen alterna-
tives. DEMO addition, more references were made to the selected alternative as compared DEMO the remaining
alternatives.
Further analysis of the decision process revealed that the evaluation of the information was most
often absolute (i.e. no comparisons were made between alternatives) and usually referred to a specific
aspect of an alternative and not to the alternative as a whole. Less than 15% DEMO the judgments
compared two or more alternatives on a specific aspect. This roughly agrees with the findings obtained
by Svenson (1974). Increasing the number of alternatives reduced the tendency to compare alternatives
on a specific DEMO (comparative dimensional judgments) and increased the tendency to evaluate
alternatives as a whole (absolute holistic judgments). This switch to a greater number of absolute
and holistic judgments seems to be an effect of information (over)load. Only toward the end of
the protocol did the subjects DEMO alternatives as a whole more often (see also Svenson, 1979).
This increase in comparative holistic judgments was most dominant for the most DEMO alternative.
Analysis also shows an increase in absolute dimensional judgments toward the end of the decision
process for the most preferred alternative.
It would DEMO interesting to interpret these findings in the context of the taxonomy of knowledge
about alternatives, as suggested by Russo and Johnson (1980). DEMO taxonomy for consumers' know-
ledge about products uses inferential level as DEMO central classifying concept. Russo and Johnson
described the level of inference as a continuum extending from basic, initial knowledge to the ultimate
goal state, i.e. the choice of the most preferred alternative. Higher-level knowledge needs to be inferred
from information at a lower level. Their taxonomy of statements DEMO five levels from low to higher
levels of knowledge: (1) DEMO evaluations, (2) single-attribute or alternative pair-wise com-
parison (or ranking); (3) whole-attribute or alternative evaluation; (4) whole-attribute or alternative
pair-wise comparison (or ranking); (5) statements about the best alternative. This categorization
roughly compares to that used in the present research, and the taxonomy can be interpreted as
follows: level (1), absolute DEMO judgments; level (2), comparative dimensional judgments;
level (3), absolute holistic judgments; level (4), comparative holistic judgments. The increase in the
number of absolute holistic judgments and the decrease of the DEMO of comparative dimensional
judgments with increasing problem complexity might be explained by relying more on lower-level
Danielle Timmermans Task complexity and multi-attribute decision making 109
(i.e. absolute) DEMO as complexity increases. The increase in comparative holistic judgments
and the decrease in absolute dimensional judgments toward the end might be interpreted as relying
DEMO on higher-level knowledge (i.e. comparative and holistic knowledge).
With respect DEMO the evaluative sign of judgments, more than half of the judgments DEMO positive
and only a quarter were negative. Other studies (e.g. Skowronski DEMO Carlston, 1989) also found
that subjects generally make more positive judgments. However, the higher percentage of positive
judgments might partly be explained by the higher number of positive characteristics of candidates
as compared with negative DEMO Candidates were 'constructed' in such a way that there
were no dominated alternatives and all candidates were potentially suitable. Increased complexity
was accompanied DEMO a decrease in the percentage of positive and an increase in the percentage
of negative judgments. This tendency could be related to the use DEMO a different decision rule, i.e.
an elimination strategy to reduce the DEMO of alternatives. Analysis shows a decrease in the number
of positive judgments after the first time period, while at the same time the number of negative
judgments increased.
The analysis of decision rules shows that in DEMO nine-alternatives problems subjects relied more
on an elimination strategy as compared to the three-alternatives problems. This result is in accordance
with the higher percentage DEMO negative judgments mentioned above and the lower number ofattributes
used to evaluate each alternative in the nine-alternatives problems. An alternative is eliminated when
one DEMO more relevant aspects are negatively evaluated and the sooner it is eliminated, the fewer
attributes one needs to consider (see also Payne, 1976). As Paquette and Kida (1988) have shown,
this change DEMO decision rule is a sensible one, because more errors are made DEMO subjects are forced
to use an additive compensatory rule. In their study, the elimination-by-aspects rule was found to
be the most effective strategy for highly complex problems. The elimination stage is the first stage
of a DEMO strategy and is shown to be more prominent with more complex problems. A screening
or elimination stage is followed by a second, in which the remaining alternatives are more thoroughly
evaluated. Subjects thus adapted their decision DEMO to the complexity of the problem and the
phase of the decision process.
As mentioned earlier, the number of attributes used and references made to the most preferred
alternative were significantly higher than for the rest DEMO the alternatives. There may be two reasons
for this. At the end of the decision process many subjects recapitulated their decision by re-evaluating
their DEMO alternative, which increased the number of references made. This is supported DEMO the
increase in the number of absolute dimensional judgments in the last period for the most preferred
alternative. It may also be the case DEMO subjects simply used more information for their chosen
alternative (see also DEMO and Montgomery, 1984). Montgomery (1983) suggested that decision
makers DEMO to construct a dominance structure. He found that subjects tended to enhance their
attention to and evaluation of the finally chosen alternative long before DEMO actual choice. This
may be the case for the three-alternatives problems. For these problems there is a linear increase
in the number of positive DEMO toward the end of the decision process. Note that the dominance
of the most preferred alternative was not achieved by increasing the number of DEMO judgments
of the second most preferred alternative. Dominance structuring seems to be emphasizing the positive
aspects of the final choice without emphasizing the negative DEMO of the non-chosen alternatives.
For the six- and nine-alternatives problems, results DEMO not show a gradual increase in the number
of positive judgments for the most preferred alternative toward the end of the decision process,
DEMO only an increase in the later periods. However, this result suggests DEMO dominance structuring
does not take place throughout the decision process but only after other alternatives are evaluated.
This increase in positive judgments in the DEMO periods might also be interpreted as a re-evaluation
or justification after the choice is made. Overall, results seem to support the adaptive and constructive
nature of decision making as described by Payne et al. (1992). Subjects adapted to the complexity
110 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making Vol. 6, Iss. No. 2
of the decision problem by relying more often on an elimination strategy and DEMO lower-level infor-
mation. The constructive nature of decision making is shown in the pattern of type of judgment
over time.
It is interesting to DEMO these findings to a more applied issue, i.e. the design of DEMO aids.
The results of this study provide some suggestions for designing more user-friendly, rational decision
aids. Such aids should enable users to tackle problems differing in complexity while using different
strategies depending on the needs and DEMO of the user. Process analysis of unaided decision
making may contribute to the development of intelligent, psychologically valid decision aids which
are based not only on the underlying decision model but also on an analysis of DEMO unaided decision-
making process.
AUTHOR NOTE
Research reported here was carried out when the author was at the Department of Social Psychology,
University DEMO Groningen, and was supported by a grant from the Netherlands Organization DEMO
Scientific Research (NWO), No. 560-266-005. The author wishes to thank DEMO Vlek, John Michon,
Joop van der Pligt and two anonymous DEMO for their critical comments on earlier drafts of
this paper, and DEMO Hoeksma for his help in carrying out the experiment and for his assistance
in coding the protocols. Requests for reprints should be addressed to DEMO author at: Medical Decision
Making Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University DEMO Leiden, PO Box 9600, Bldg 43, 2300 RC Leiden,
DEMO Netherlands.
REFERENCES
Dahlstrand, U. and Montgomery, H. "Information Search and DEMO Processes in decision making; a com-
puter based process tracing study', Acta Psychologica. 56 (1984), 113-123.
Biggs, S. F., Bedard, J. C , Gaber, B. G. and Lingsmeier. T. J. 'The DEMO of task complexity on the decision
behavior of bank loan officers'. Management Science, 31 (1988). 970-978.
Ford, J. K., Schmitt, N., Schechtman, S. L., Hults, B. and Doherty. M. L. 'Process tracing methods: contributions,
problems, and neglected research questions'. DEMO Behavior and Human Decision Processes 43 (1989)
75-117.
Montgomery, H. 'Decision rules and the search for a dominance structure: towards a DEMO model of decision
making', in Humphreys, P.. Svenson, O. and Vari, A. (eds). Analysing and Aiding Decision Processes, Amster-
dam: North-Holland, 1983.
Montgomery. H. and Svenson, O. (eds). 'A think-aloud study of dominance structuring in decision processes',
in Montgomery H. and Svenson, O. (eds). Process and Structure in Human Decition DEMO, Chichester
John Wiley, 1989.
Olshavsky, R. W. 'Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making: a replication and extension'.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 24 (\919), 300-316.
Onken, J., Hastie DEMO and Revelle, W. 'Individual differences in the use of simplification strategies in a complex
decision-making task'. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance II (19851
1.14-27. . V A
Paquette, L. and DEMO, T. Th e effect of decision strategy and task complexity on DEMO performance'. Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 41 (1988), 128-142.
Payne. J. W. "Verbal protocols and direct observation of supermarket shopping behavior: some findings and
a discussion of methods'. Proceedings of the Association for Consumer Research, Annual Conference of the
Association for Consumer Research, Provo, Utah, 1974.
Payne, J, W. Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making: an information search and protocol
analysis'. Organizaiional Behavior and Human Performance, 16 (1976), 366-387,
Payne, J. W., Braunstein, M. L. and Caroll, J, S. 'Exploring predecisional behavior: an alternative approach
to decision research'. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 22 (1978). 17-44.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R. and Johnson, E. J. "Behavioral decision research: a constructive processing perspec-
tive',-4 nn. ^ev./»j>'cAo/. 43(1992)DEMO 87-131.
Danielle Timmermans Task complexity and multi-attribute decision making 111
Raaij, W. F. van. 'Informatieverwerking en keuzegedrag van consumenten (Information processing and choice
in DEMO behavior)", in Jaarboek van de Nederlandse Vereniging van Marktonderzoekers, 217-233, 1977.
Russo, J. E. and Johnson, E. J, 'What do consumers know about familiar products?' Advances in Consumer
Research, Vol. 7 Michigan: Ann Arbor, 1980,
Skowronski. J. J. and Carlston. D. DEMO 'Negativity and extremity biases in impression formation'. Journal of
Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 44 (1989), 736-745,
Svenson. O. 'A DEMO on think aloud protocols obtained during the choice of a home'. Report from the Psychological
Laboratories SW ISSN 0081-5756, University of Stockholm, DEMO
Svenson, O. 'Process descriptions of decision making'. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 23
(1979), 86-112.
Timmermans. D. Decision Aids for DEMO Rationalists. An evaluation study of multi-attribute decision support
in individual and group settings, P/ii) dissertation. University of Groningen, 1991.
Timmermans, D. DEMO Vlek, Ch, 'Multi-attribute decision support and complexity: An evaluation and process
analysis of aided versus unaided decision making." Acta Psychologica, 80(DEMO), 49-65.
Timmermans, D, and Vlek, Ch. 'An evaluation study of the effectiveness of multi-attribute decision support
as a function of problem DEMO'. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (in press).
Author'DEMO biography:
Danielle Timmermans is Assistant Professor at the Medical Decision Making Unit of the Medical Faculty of
the University of Leiden. She received DEMO PhD in Psychology from the University of Groningen. Her areas
of interest include multi-attribute decision making and decision support, and diagnostic reasoning in a medical
setting.
Author's address:
Danielle Timmermans, Medical Decision Making Unit. Faculty of Medicine, University of Leiden. PO Box
9600, BIdg 43. DEMO RC Leiden, The Netherlands
{1g42fwefx}