Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
www.elsevier.com/locate/cogbrainres
Research report
DEMO theory on the brain? Toward a cognitive neuroscience of
decision under DEMO
Christopher Trepela, Craig R. Foxa,b, Russell A. Poldrackb,c,T
a Anderson School of Management, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481, USA
b Department of Psychology, UCLA, Franz Hall, Box DEMO, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563, USA
cBrain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
Accepted 10 January 2005
Abstract
Most decisions must be made without advance knowledge of their consequences. Economists DEMO psychologists have devoted much
attention to modeling decisions made under conditions of risk in which options can be characterized by a known probability distribution DEMO
possible outcomes. The descriptive shortcomings of classical economic models motivated the development of prospect theory (D. Kahneman,
A. Tversky, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 4 (1979) 263–291; A. DEMO, D. Kahneman, Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. DEMO of Risk and Uncertainty, 5 (4) (1992) 297–323) the most successful
behavioral model of decision under risk. In the prospect theory, subjective value is modeled by a value function that is concave for DEMO,
convex for losses, and steeper for losses than for gains; the impact of probabilities are characterized by a weighting function that overweights
DEMO probabilities and underweights moderate to high probabilities. We outline the possible neural bases of the components of prospect theory,
surveying evidence from human DEMO, lesion, and neuropharmacology studies as well as animal neurophysiology studies. These results
provide preliminary suggestions concerning the neural bases of prospect theory that DEMO a broad set of brain regions and neuromodulatory
systems. These data suggest that focused studies of decision making in the context of quantitative models DEMO provide substantial leverage
towards a fuller understanding of the cognitive neuroscience of decision making.
D 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Theme: Neural basis of behavior
Topic: Cognition
Keywords: Prospect theory; fMRI; Risk; Decision making; Reward; Punishment
1. Introduction
Most decisions entail some degree of DEMO Should one
purchase an extended warranty on a new car or take one’s
chances? Dash through the middle of a busy street or take
the long way via a crosswalk? Opt for surgery or radiation
therapy for a tumor? Invest retirement savings in the stock
market or treasury bills? From mundane dilemmas to life-
defining decisions, we are usually DEMO to choose without
knowing in advance what the consequences will be.
T Corresponding author. UCLA Department of Psychology, Franz Hall,
Box 951563, DEMO Angeles, CA 90095-1563, USA.
E-mail address: poldrack@ucla.edu (R.A. Poldrack).
0926-6410/$ - see front matter D 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights DEMO
doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.01.016
The study of decision making under risk has been a major
thrust of microeconomics for most of the last century;
DEMO, it has only received significant attention from
psychologists in the last DEMO decades. Early behavioral
studies provided simple cognitive accounts of preferences
between chance gambles, with more recent studies exploring
the role of affect, motivation, and social context in such
decisions. The newest, and possibly most exciting, frontier in
this research area is the effort to understand the ways in
which neural processes mediate risk-taking behavior. The
last few years have DEMO a tremendous push by neuro-
scientists and their collaborators to apply modern neuro-
physiology methods (e.g., ERP, fMRI, and animal models) to
economic decisions. The purpose of this paper is to take
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
DEMO
stock of some of these early efforts and relate them to more
traditional behavioral research on decision making under
risk.
The lay concept of DEMO is associated with hazards that
fill one with dread and/or are poorly understood [112].Ina
financial context, people tend to think of risk as increasing
with the magnitude and probability of potential losses [79].
Decision theorists, in contrast, view risk as increasing with
the variance in the probability distribution of possible
outcomes. Thus, a bet that offers $100 if a fair coin lands
heads and nothing if it lands tails is more DEMO than an
option that offers $60 if a fair coin lands heads and $40 if it
lands tails. Economists following Knight [68] distinguish
risk DEMO uncertainty. Decisions under risk entail options
that have well-specified or transparent outcome probabi-
lities, such as a bet on a coin toss or a lottery with a known
number of tickets. Decisions under uncertainty, by contrast,
entail options whose outcomes depend on natural events
such as a DEMO by the home team or a rise in interest rates,
so that probabilities must be estimated by the decision
maker with some degree DEMO vagueness or imprecision. In the
present paper, we focus our attention DEMO on decisions
under risk for the following practical reasons: (1) DEMO is a
simpler domain that is better understood and more
thoroughly characterized by behavioral decision theorists,
(2) most extant work in cognitive DEMO at this early
juncture speaks more directly to decisions under risk than to
decisions under uncertainty.
The following section of this paper provides a DEMO
historical overview of traditional models of decision making
under risk, culminating DEMO prospect theory [61,123], the
most influential descriptive account that has DEMO to
date. Next, we distill the most important facets of prospect
DEMO and map them onto relevant neuroscience studies. In
particular, we draw DEMO basic neurophysiology, computa-
tional modeling, and clinical neuroimaging to advance a
novel framework that describes several candidate mecha-
nisms underlying risky choice behaviors. DEMO, we
conclude by suggesting promising avenues for future
research. Naturally, at this early juncture, our conclusions
are preliminary and highly speculative.
2. The Classical theory of decision under risk
The primitives in most traditional models DEMO decision
under risk and uncertainty are acts, states, and consequen-
ces. An act is an action that is associated with a set of
DEMO consequences that depend on which one of a set of
possible states of the world obtains. To illustrate, consider a
gambler who considers betting a dollar on a single spin of a
roulette wheel (see Table 1). The gambler considers two
possible acts: Bet on bredQ or bet on bblack.Q The
consequence of this decision depends on which state DEMO
the world will occur after the roulette wheel is spun: The
DEMO will land in one of the 18 red numbers, one of DEMO 18
Table 1
A decision matrix for a hypothetical roulette gambler
ACTS States
Red Black Green
(P = 18/38) (P = 18/38) (P = 2/38)
Bet $1 on red Gain DEMO Lose $1 Lose $1
Bet $1 on black Lose $1 Gain $1 Lose $1
Acts are listed as row headings, states as column headings and possible
consequences are listed as cell entries (in italics).
black numbers, or one of the two green numbers (0 or 00)DEMO
Our roulette gambler faces a decision under risk because
the objective probabilities of each relevant state of the
world are transparent. If she were DEMO considering a bet
on either the home team or visiting team winning an
upcoming basketball game, our hypothetical gambler would
be facing a decision under uncertainty because she would
be forced to assess the probability that DEMO team wins with
some degree of subjectivity and vagueness.
The origin of decision theory is usually traced back to a
17th century correspondence between DEMO and Fermat that
laid the mathematical foundation for probability theory.
Following this work, theorists asserted that decision makers
ought to choose the option that offers the highest expected
value (EV).
EV ¼ x1p1 þx2p2 þ N þxnpn
n
¼ iX
1
xipi
ð1Þ
¼
where xi is DEMO (monetary) outcome of state i and pi is the
probability of state i.
A decision maker is said to be brisk neutralQ if DEMO is
indifferent between a gamble and its expected value; she is
DEMO to be brisk averseQ if she prefers a sure payment to a
risky prospect of equal or higher expected value; she is said
to be brisk-seekingQ if she prefers a risky prospect to a sure
payment DEMO equal or higher expected value. Thus, expected
value maximization assumes a DEMO attitude toward risk.
For instance, a decision maker who employs this DEMO will
prefer to receive $100 if a fair coin lands heads (DEMO nothing
otherwise) to a sure payment of $49, because the expected
value of the gamble ($50 = .5  $100) is higher DEMO the
value of the sure thing ($49). Expected value maximization
DEMO problematic because it does not allow decision makers to
exhibit risk aversion—it cannot explain, for example, why
people would prefer a sure $49 DEMO a .5 probability of $100
or why they would purchase insurance. Swiss mathema-
tician Daniel Bernoulli [17] advanced a solution to this
problem when DEMO asserted that people do not evaluate
options by their objective value but rather by their utility or
bmoral value.Q Bernoulli observed that a particular DEMO
of money (say, 100 ducats) is valued more when a DEMO is
poor than when she is wealthy and, therefore, marginal
utility decreases as wealth increases. This gives rise to a
36
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) DEMO
utility function that is concave over states of wealth (see
Fig. DEMO). In Bernoulli’s model, decision makers choose the
option with highest DEMO utility (EU):
n
EU ¼ iX
1
ðÞ
i pi
ux
ð2Þ
¼
where u(xi ) represents the utility of obtaining DEMO xi.
For example, a concave utility function implies that the
utility DEMO by receiving $50 is more than half the utility
gained by receiving $100 and, therefore, a decision maker
with such a utility function DEMO prefer $50 for sure to a .5
probability of receiving $100.
Expected utility gained greater currency in economic
theorizing when von Neumann and Morgenstern DEMO
articulated a set of axioms that are necessary and sufficient
to allow one to represent preferences by expected utility
maximization. The axioms were relatively DEMO and on
their surface seemed unassailable. For instance, one
prominent formulation DEMO expected utility theory [107]
relies on an axiom known as the bsure-thing principleQ:If
two acts yield the same consequence when a particular state
DEMO, then a person’s preferences among those acts
should not depend on DEMO particular consequence (i.e., the
bsure thingQ ) that they have in common. To illustrate,
consider a game in which a coin is DEMO to determine
which fruit will be included in your lunch. Suppose that you
would rather receive an apple if a fair coin lands heads DEMO
a cantaloupe if it lands tails (a, H; c, T ) than receive a
banana if the coin lands heads and a DEMO if it lands
tails (b, H; c, T ). DEMO this is the case, you should also prefer to
receive an DEMO if the coin lands heads and dates if the coin
lands tails (a, H; d, T ) to a banana if it DEMO heads and
dates if it lands tails (b, H; d, T).
The sure-thing principle is necessary to establish that
utilities of DEMO are weighted by their respective
probabilities. However, it was not long DEMO the descriptive
validity of expected utility theory and its axioms were called
into question. The most powerful challenge has come to be
Fig. 1. DEMO hypothetical utility function, demonstrating the concave relation-
ship between wealth and DEMO
Table 2
The Allais Paradox presented as a lottery
Ticket numbers
1 2–11 12–100
A $1M $1 M $1M
B0 $5M $1M
C$1M $1M DEMO
D0 $5M 0
known as the bAllais ParadoxQ [4,5]. Consider the following
choices:
Decision 1. Choose between (A) $1 million for DEMO and;
(B) a 10% chance of receiving $5 million, DEMO 89% chance
of receiving $1 million, and a 1% chance of DEMO
nothing.
Decision 2. Choose between (C) an 11% chance of receiving
$1 million and; (D) a 10% chance of receiving $5 million.
Most people choose (A) over (B) in the first decision
DEMO (D) over (C) in the second decision, which violates DEMO
sure-thing principle. To see why, consider options (A)
through (DEMO) as being payment schemes attached to different
lottery tickets that are DEMO consecutively from 1 to
100 (see Table 2). Note that DEMO can transform options (A)
and (B) into options (C) and (D), respectively, merely by
replacing the common consequence (DEMO $1 M if the
ticket drawn is 12–100) with a new DEMO consequence
(receive $0 if the ticket drawn is 12–100). Thus, according
to the sure-thing principle, a person should favor option (C)DEMO
over option (D) if and only if he or she prefers option (A) to
option (B), and the dominant pattern of preferences violates
this axiom. Typically, people explain their choice in
decision (DEMO) as a preference for certainty over a possibility
of receiving nothing; meanwhile, they explain their choice
in decision (2) as a preference for a higher possible prize
given that the difference between a probability DEMO .10 and
.11 is not very large.
The Allais Paradox is perhaps the starkest and most
celebrated violation of expected utility theory. In the DEMO
since it was articulated, numerous studies of decision
under risk have DEMO that people often violate the
principle of risk aversion that underlies much economic
analysis. Table 3 illustrates a common pattern of risk
aversion and DEMO seeking exhibited by participants in
studies of Tversky and Kahneman [123]. Let C(x, p )be
the certainty equivalent of the prospect (x, p ) that offers to
pay $x with probability p (i.e., the sure payment that is
deemed equally attractive to the risky prospect)DEMO The upper
left-hand entry in the table shows that the median
participant was indifferent between receiving $14 for sure
and a 5% chance of DEMO $100. Because the expected
value of the prospect is only $5, DEMO observation reflects
risk-seeking behavior.
Table 3a reveals a fourfold pattern of risk attitudes: Risk
seeking for low-probability gains and high-probability
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
DEMO
Table 3
Depiction of risk attitudes for pure and mixed gambles (DEMO [123])
Gain Loss
(a) Pure gambles
Low probability
High probability
C ($100, .05) = $14
risk seeking
! Overweight low
probabilities
! (Concave value
function)
C ($100, .95) = $78
DEMO aversion
! Concave value
function
! Underweight high
probabilities
C($100, DEMO) = $8
risk aversion
! Overweight low
probabilities
! (Convex value
function)
C($100, .95) = $84
risk seeking
! Concave DEMO
function
! Underweight high
probabilities
(b) Mixed gambles
0~($100, DEMO; $202)
risk aversion
! Loss aversion
The primary mechanisms driving DEMO risk attitudes, according to prospect
theory, are listed as bullet points below each entry (with mechanisms that
temper these patterns listed in parentheses). (a) The fourfold pattern of risk
attitudes for pure gain DEMO pure loss gambles. C(x, p) is the median certainty
equivalent of the prospect that pays $x with probability p . (b) DEMO
pattern for mixed (gain/loss) gambles. The median participant required a
50% probability of $202 to make up for a 50% probability of DEMO $100
(that is, a possible gain of $202 made this gamble equally attractive to
receiving nothing).
losses, coupled with risk aversion for high-probability
gains and low-probability losses. Choices consistent with
this fourfold pattern have DEMO observed in several
studies [41,52,61,92]. Risk seeking for low-probability
gains may contribute to the attraction of gambling,
whereas risk aversion DEMO low-probability losses may
contribute to the attraction of insurance. Risk aversion for
high-probability gains may contribute to the preference
for certainty, as in the Allais [4] paradox, whereas risk
seeking for high-probability losses is consistent with the
common tendency to undertake risk to avoid facing a
sure loss.
DEMO Prospect theory
The Allais Paradox and fourfold pattern of risk attitudes
are accommodated neatly by prospect theory [61,123], the
leading behavioral model of decision making under risk,
and the major work for which psychologist DEMO Kahne-
man was awarded the 2002 Nobel Prize in economics.
According to prospect theory, the value V of a simple
prospect that pays $x with probability p (and nothing
otherwise) is given by
Vx
ðÞ¼
DEMO
ðÞ ðÞ;
vx wp
ð3Þ
where v measures the subjective value of the consequence
x , and w measures the impact of probability DEMO on the
;
attractiveness of the prospect (see Fig. 2).1 Prospect theory
differs from expected utility theory in a number of ways.
DEMO, the utility function u (.) over states of wealth is
DEMO with a value function v (.) over gains and losses
relative to a reference point (usually the status quo), with
v (DEMO) = 0. Second, this subjective value function is not
weighted by outcome probabilities but rather by a decision
weight, w, that represents DEMO impact of the relevant
probability on the valuation of the prospect. Decision
weights are normalized so that w (0) = 0 and w (1) = 1. Note
that w is not interpreted as a measure of degree of belief—a
person may believe that the probability of a DEMO coin
landing heads is one-half but afford this event a weight of
less than one-half in the evaluation of a prospect. Third,
unlike DEMO utility theory, prospect theory explicitly
incorporates principles of framing and editing DEMO allow for
different descriptions of the same choice to give rise to
different decisions.
3.1. Characterizing the value and weighting functions
According to prospect DEMO, the shapes of the value
function v (.) and weighting DEMO w (.) reflect the
psychophysics of diminishing sensitivity. That is, DEMO
marginal impact of a change in outcome or probability
diminishes with distance from relevant reference points.
For monetary outcomes, the status quo generally serves as
the reference point distinguishing losses from gains, so that
the function is concave for gains and convex for losses
(see Fig. 2A). Concavity for gains contributes to risk
aversion for gains as with the DEMO utility function
( Fig. 1 ). Convexity for losses, on the other hand,
contributes to risk seeking for losses. For instance, the
disvalue of losing $50 is more than half the disvalue of
losing DEMO, which will contribute to a preference for the
gamble (lose $100 with probability .5) over the sure loss
(lose $50 for sure)DEMO
The prospect theory value function is also steeper for
losses than gains, a property known as loss aversion.
People typically require more compensation to give up a
possession than they would have been willing to pay DEMO
obtain it in the first place (e.g., [65]) and the DEMO for
the relative disadvantages of alternatives to loom larger
than the relative advantages supports a bias toward the
status quo (e.g., [106]). DEMO the context of decision under
risk, loss aversion gives rise to DEMO aversion for mixed
(gain–loss) gambles so that, for example, people typically
reject a gamble that offers a .5 chance of gaining $100 DEMO
a .5 chance of losing $100 (see Table 3b).
1 DEMO are a number of subtle differences between the original
formulation of prospect theory advanced in Kahneman and Tversky [61]
and the cumulative version advanced DEMO Tversky and Kahneman [123].In
the present paper, we will confine most DEMO our discussion to choices among
risky prospects that offer a single positive and/or negative outcome, for
which these formulations coincide.
38
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) DEMO
Fig. 2. Value and weighting functions from prospect theory. (A) Value
function v as a function of gains and losses. (B) Weighting DEMO w for
gains as a function of the probability p of a chance event.
Following Kahneman and Tversky [63], we can para-
meterize the value function as a power function2:
x a x z0
x DEMO 0
ðÞ¼ 
ð4Þ
vx
k
x b
ðÞ
where a, DEMO N 0 measure the curvature of the value function
for gains and losses, respectively, and k is the coefficient of
loss aversion. Thus, the value function for gains (losses) is
increasingly concave (convex) DEMO smaller values of a(b) b
1, and loss aversion is more pronounced for larger values of
k N 1. Tversky and Kahneman DEMO estimated median
values of a = .88, b = .88, and k = 2.25 among their sample
of college students.
For probability, there are two natural reference points:
Impossibility and certainty. Hence, diminishing sensitivity
implies an inverse-S-shaped weighting function that is
concave near zero and convex DEMO one, as depicted in
Fig. 2B. It explains the fourfold pattern DEMO risk attitudes
(Table 3a), because low probabilities are overweighted
(leading to risk seeking for gains and risk aversion for
losses) and high probabilities are underweighted (leading to
risk aversion for gains and risk seeking for losses). It also
explains the Allais Paradox because the weighting DEMO
is steeper between .99 and 1 than it is between .10 and .11
(so that the difference between a 0.99 chance of a prize and
a certainty of a prize in Decision 1 looms larger than DEMO
difference between a .10 and .11 chance of a prize in
Decision 2). This inverse-S-shaped weighting function
seems to be consistent with a DEMO of empirical findings
(see [1,23,49,96,126,128,129])DEMO
Following Lattimore et al. [74], the weighting function can
be parameterized DEMO the following form (which assumes that
the relation between w and DEMO is linear in a log-odds metric):
dpc
ðÞ¼ dpc þ DEMO
ð5Þ
wp
p c
1
where d N 0 measures the elevation of the weighting
function and c N 0 measures its degree of DEMO The
2 The power function implies constant relative risk aversion—as the
stakes of a prospect (x,p ) are multiplied by a constant k then so is the
certainty equivalent of that prospect, C(x,p ) so that C(kx,p)= kC(x,p).
weighting DEMO is more elevated (exhibiting less overall
risk aversion for gains, more overall risk aversion for losses)
as d increases and more curved (exhibiting more rapidly
diminishing sensitivity to probabilities around the bounda-
ries of DEMO and 1) as c b 1 decreases (the function exhibits an
S-shaped pattern that is more pronounced for larger values
of c N DEMO). Typically, the decision weights of complementary
events sum to less DEMO 1 (w( p)+ w(1  p) b 1), a property
known as subcertainty ([61]). This property is satisfied
DEMO d b 1. For chance prospects entailing possible
gains, Tversky and DEMO [122] estimated values of d and c
for gains from the median responses of their sample of
college students to be .69 and .69, respectively. Tversky and
Kahneman [123] found similarly shaped weighting func-
tions for DEMO and gains when they fitted a single parameter
function to their data. A more recent investigation using the
two-parameter function above suggests that whereas DEMO
curvature parameter c does not vary significantly between
losses and gains, DEMO elevation parameter d tends to be
significantly higher for losses than gains [3].
The prospect theory parameters a, b, k, c , and d can all
be estimated for individuals using simple choice tasks on
DEMO Although the typically measured values of these
parameters suggest an S-shaped value function (0 b a, b b 1)
with loss aversion (k N 1) andaninverse-S-shaped
weighting function (0 b c b 1) that crosses the identity line
below .5 (0 b d b 1), there is considerable heterogeneity
between individuals in these measured parameters. For
DEMO, in a sample of ten psychology graduate students
evaluating gambles involving DEMO the possibility of gains,
Gonzalez and Wu [49] obtained measures of a ranging from
.23 to .68, d ranging from .21 to 1.51, and c ranging from
.15 to .89.
In sum, prospect theory DEMO attitudes toward risk
via distortions in the shapes of the value and weighting
functions. The parameters obtained by Tversky and Kahne-
man [123] and DEMO and Fox [122] suggest that the
fourfold pattern of risk attitudes for simple prospects that
offer a gain or a loss with low or DEMO probability (Table
3 a) is driven primarily by curvature of the weighting
function because the value function is not especially curved
for the DEMO participant in those studies (with a = b =
.88). DEMO risk aversion for mixed prospects that
offer an equal probability of a gain or loss (Table 3b) is
driven almost entirely by loss DEMO because the
curvature of the value function is similar for losses versus
gains and the decision weights are similar for gain versus
loss components.
DEMO Framing and editing operations
Expected utility theory and most normative models of
decision making under risk assume the principle of
description invariance: Preferences among prospects
should not be affected by how they are described. Decision
makers DEMO as if they are assessing the impact of options on
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
DEMO states of wealth. Prospect theory, in contrast, explicitly
acknowledges that choices are influenced by how prospects
are cognitively represented in terms of losses DEMO gains
and their associated probabilities.
First, this representation can be systematically DEMO
by the way in which options are described or bframed.Q
Recall that the value function is applied to a reference point
that distinguishes between DEMO and gains. A common
default reference point is the status quo. However, by
varying the description of options, one can influence how
they DEMO perceived. For instance, decisions concerning
medical treatments can differ depending on DEMO
possible outcomes are described in terms of survival versus
mortality rates [84]. Second, the weighting function is
applied to probabilities of risky outcomes that a decision
maker happens to identify. The description of gambles can
influence DEMO probabilities are integrated or segregated
and, therefore, affect the decisions that people make [62].
For instance, people were more likely to favor a .25
chance of $32 over a .20 chance of $40 when this DEMO
was described as a two-stage game in which there was a
.25 chance of obtaining a choice between $32 for sure or
an .80 DEMO of $40 (in the two-stage game version
people are apparently attracted DEMO the pseudo-certainty of
receiving $32). People may also actively reframe pros-
pects, adopting aspirations as reference points [51] or
persisting in the adoption of old reference points, viewing
recent winnings as bhouse moneyQ [120].3
Third, people may mentally transform or beditQ the
description of prospects they have been presented. The
original formulation of prospect theory [61] suggested that
decision DEMO edit prospects in forming their subjective
representation. Consider prospects of the form ($x1, p1;$x2,
p2;$x3, p3) that offer $xi DEMO (disjoint) probability pi (and
nothing otherwise). In particular, decision makers are
assumed to (1) combine common outcomes of a pros-
DEMO example, a prospect that offers ($10, .1; $10, .1)DEMO
would be naturally represented as ($10, .2); (2) segregate
sure outcomes from the representation of a prospect—for
instance, a prospect that offers ($20, .5; $30, .5) would be
naturally represented as $20 for sure plus ($10, .5); (3)
cancel shared components of options that are offered
together—for example, a choice between (DEMO, .1; $50,
.1) or ($10, .1; $20, DEMO) would be naturally represented as a
choice between ($50, .1) or ($20, .2); (4) simplify prospects
by rounding uneven DEMO or discarding extremely
unlikely outcomes—for example, ($99, .51; $5, DEMO)
might be naturally represented as ($100, .5); (5) reject
options without further evaluation if they are obviously
dominated by other DEMO instance, given a choice
between ($18, .1; $19, .1; $20, .1) or ($20, .3), most people
would naturally DEMO the first option because it is
stochastically dominated by the second.
3 For examples of framing effect in a riskless context, see Thaler
[118,119]).
39
3.3. Summarizing the key elements of prospect theory
Prospect DEMO has been very successful in explaining a
wide range of empirical regularities that have been
documented outside the laboratory (see [22])—from the
premium that equities demand over annuities in the market
[16] and the tendency DEMO hold on to losing stocks too long
while selling winners too early [90] to the attractiveness of
state lotteries (cf. [25]). It also provides a flexible frame-
work for modeling empirical regularities and individual
differences DEMO have been observed in laboratory studies.
The key elements of prospect theory may be summarized
as follows (see Table 4). The first two elements refer to the
valuation of outcomes, the next two refer to the weighting of
probabilities, and the last two refer to the representation of
prospects.
3.3.1. Curvature of the value function
The value function is DEMO for gains and convex for
losses (e.g., [1,2,49]). This has been typically attributed to the
psychophysics of diminishing sensitivity. Generally, the cur-
vature of the value function is relatively small and, therefore,
may not contribute substantially to measured risk attitudes;
Tversky and DEMO [123] estimated a = b = .88 using the
median response of participants, which are close to values
obtained by several other researchers (DEMO, Gonzalez and
Wu [49] estimated a = .49). Curvature of DEMO value function
plays a greater role in riskless choice (see e.g., [118,119]).
3.3.2. Loss aversion
Losses loom larger than equivalent gains. DEMO is
modeled by a value function with a loss limb that is steeper
than the gains limb (the parameter k N 1 in Eq. (4) above).
In risky choice, this is manifested as strong risk aversion for
mixed (gain–loss) gambles. For instance, most people
would reject a gamble for which they gain $100 if a fair
coin DEMO heads and lose $100 if a fair coin lands tails.
Typically, DEMO have at least twice the impact of equivalent
gains (i.e., k z 2) so that people would require a 50%
chance of gaining at least $200 to make up for a 50% of
losing $100 ([123], see also [2,64,63] for an explanation of
why loss aversion is needed to explain risk aversion for
mixed gambles see [97])DEMO
3.3.3. Curvature of the weighting function
The inverse-S-shaped weighting function is characterized
by a tendency to overweight low probabilities and under-
weight moderate to DEMO probabilities (modeled by c b 1in
Eq. (5)). This DEMO is typically attributed to the psychophy-
sics of diminishing sensitivity [1,19,49,122,123]. The robust
fourfold pattern of risk attitudes (Table 3) suggests that
distortions in probability weighting are more pronounced
than distortions in value: Although the shape of the value
function implies risk aversion for gains and risk seeking for
losses, this pattern seems to be reversed for low-probability
events and reinforced for high-probability events.
40
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) DEMO
Table 4
Summary of the major components of prospect theory
Component Phenomenon Description Manifestations in risky choice Relevant parameters
Value function Sensitivity to
gains DEMO losses
Value function is:
- Concave for gains
- Convex for losses
! Risk aversion for medium probability gains 0 b a b DEMO for gains
! Risk seeking for medium probability losses 0 b b b 1 for losses
Loss aversion Value function steeper
for losses than DEMO
Risk aversion for mixed (gain–loss) gambles
k N 1
Weighting function Diminishing
sensitivity to
probability
near 0, 1
Weighting function is Fourfold pattern of risk attitudes
- Convex near 0
- Concave near 1
c DEMO 1
Subcertainty
w( p)+ w(1p) b 1 Overall tendency toward risk aversion for gains
and risk-seeking for losses
d b 1
DEMO representation Framing effects Choices are influenced
by perceived reference
points and associated
probabilities
Editing operations People spontaneously
edit their representations
to simplify decision tasks
DEMO
N/A
Passive framing (e.g., reflection and
pseudocertainty effects)
! Active framing (e.g., house money and aspiration
effects)
Combination of DEMO outcomes N/A
Segregation of sure outcomes
Cancellation of identical outcomes
Simplification and rounding
Detections of dominance
!
!
!
!
!
3.3.4. Elevation DEMO the weighting function
The sum of decision weights for complementary proba-
bilities is typically less than one (i.e., w( p)+ w(1  p) b 1),
a principle known as bsubcertainty.Q This DEMO a weight-
ing function that crosses the identity line below .5 (DEMO
by d b 1 in Eq. (5)). Loosely speaking, DEMO reflects a more
pronounced tendency to underweight probabilities than to
overweight them. The overall attractiveness of risky
prospects varies from individual to individual, and this is
modeled by individual differences in the elevation of the
weighting DEMO (see [49]).
3.3.5. Framing effects
Cognitive representations of prospects influence DEMO
they are evaluated, in terms of losses and gains relative to
DEMO reference point and the association of probabilities
with consequences. These representations can be systemati-
cally influenced by the way in which options are described
DEMO that people make different choices among the same
prospects that are characterized in different ways.
3.3.6. Editing operations
When subjectively representing prospects, decision mak-
ers may actively edit prospects from the way in which they are
DEMO described, usually to simplify the representation.
3.4. Affective substrates of prospect DEMO
Prospect theory provides a characterization of decision
making under risk that emphasizes cognitive operations of
representation and the psychophysics of diminishing sensi-
tivity. However, it is becoming increasingly evident that
affect plays a prominent role in DEMO choice (for reviews,
see [76,85,105]). In particular, a number of recent studies
point to an affective component underlying observed
DEMO of the value and weighting functions. This is of
particular interest given the involvement of limbic brain
regions in decision making, to be discussed further below.
3.4.1. Curvature of the value function
The degree of curvature DEMO the value function represents a
decision maker’s sensitivity to increasing units gained or lost.
Although cognitive appraisal of scope (i.e., number of units)DEMO
surely plays a role in the representation of value for fungible
resources such as money, several researchers have argued that
people may also rely on their affective response to possible
outcomes as a bcommon currencyQ for DEMO value and
making tradeoffs among disparate items (e.g., [93,113] cf.
[87]). To the extent that decision makers assess value based
on DEMO reactions, they should be relatively insensitive to
the quantity of the DEMO being evaluated (for several
examples, see [66]) and the corresponding DEMO function
will, therefore, be relatively flat. Indeed, Hsee and Rotten-
DEMO [55] find that the value function exhibits greater
curvature (i.e., lower slope above a minimum number of units
gained or lost) for consequences that are more baffect-rich.Q
For instance, in one study, participants were DEMO how much
they would be willing to pay to save various numbers of
pandas that were each represented either by cute pictures (an
baffect-richQ representation) or dots (an baffect-poorQ repre-
sentation). In the affect-poor (dots) conditions, participants
were willing to donate about twice as much DEMO they had been
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
DEMO about four pandas than if they had been asked about a
single panda. However, in the affect-rich condition (photos),
participants were willing to pay about the same amount if
they had been asked about DEMO panda or four pandas.
3.4.2. Loss aversion
Although the affective sources of loss aversion are poorly
understood, loss aversion does appear to be moderated by
affect. For example, the affective richness of consumption
goods seems to enhance differences in perceived value of
gaining versus losing these items. Dhar DEMO Wertenbroch
[29] report that loss aversion is more pronounced for
bhedonic goodsQ (goods rated bpleasant and fun, something
that appeals to the senses...Q) than utilitarian goods (goods
rated buseful, practical, functional....Q). For instance, in one
study, participants were about equally likely to choose a DEMO
gift certificate for a music CD or audio tape (a hedonic
DEMO) over a $7 gift certificate for computer disks (a
functional good), suggesting that these two goods were
viewed as equally attractive when DEMO as potential
gains. In contrast, participants who were given both gift
DEMO were then later asked to give one up were five
times as likely to surrender the computer disk certificate as
the music certificate, suggesting that loss aversion was more
pronounced for the more affect-laden option. In DEMO context
of risky choice, ambient affective states seem to moderate
loss DEMO Isen et al. [57] report that participants placed
in a positive mood (for instance, by giving them an
unexpected small bag of candy) tend to exhibit greater risk
aversion for mixed (gain–loss) gambles and DEMO this effect
appears to be driven by greater sensitivity to possible losses
rather than greater appreciation of possible gains.
3.4.3. Curvature of the weighting DEMO
Although traditional accounts of the curvature of the
weighting function stress the psychophysics of diminishing
sensitivity (e.g., [123]), others have speculated that DEMO
responses to gambles, such as hope and fear ([122], p. DEMO) or
anticipated elation versus disappointment [20], may play a
role. Indeed, Rottenstreich and Hsee [104] report that the
curvature of the weighting function seems to be more
pronounced for more baffect-richQ consequences, such as a
kiss from a movie star or an electrical shock, than for baffect-
richQ consequences such as money. In one study, participants
were asked to price a .01 and a .99 chance of receiving a
hypothetical $500 DEMO certificate. For one group, the
certificate would go toward payment of DEMO tuition
(an affect-poor prize) and for a second group the certificate
would go toward a European vacation (an affect-rich prize).
For the .01 chance, the median participant in the vacation
condition was willing to pay more ($20) than the median
participant in the tuition condition ($5). However, for the .99
chance, the median participant in DEMO vacation condition was
willing to pay less ($450) than the median participant in the
tuition condition ($478). In a similar vein, DEMO and Rotten-
streich [37] find that people anticipate that others’ decisions
41
will reflect a less pronounced fourfold pattern of risk attitudes
than their DEMO decisions (i.e., more linear weighting of
probabilities), but people who score higher on a standard
empathy concern scale (and are therefore better able to
bappreciate others’ emotional reactionsQ) tend to be more
accurate.
3.4.4. Elevation of the weighting function
There is some evidence that overall risk DEMO for
pure gain and loss gambles are influenced by affective
states, DEMO may be reflected in differences in the elevation
of the weighting function (or possibly the degree of
curvature of the value function). For instance, Mano [78]
finds that participants reporting higher states of arousal were
willing to pay more to play lotteries of various probabilities
(indicating greater risk seeking, consistent with a more
elevated weighting function for gains) DEMO were willing to
pay less to insure against possible losses of various
probabilities (indicating less risk aversion, consistent with
a less elevated weighting DEMO for losses). Lerner and
Keltner [75] report that people who score higher on a scale
of dispositional fear tend to be more risk-averse DEMO
people who score higher on a scale of dispositional anger
tend to be more risk-seeking.
4. The neural basis of risky decision making
Although DEMO study of decision making using cognitive
neuroscience techniques is relatively young, DEMO growing body
of evidence suggests that decision making under risk is
mediated by a network of cortical and limbic structures
devoted to processing sensory, cognitive, and affective
information, as well as widely-projecting neuromodulatory
systems. In DEMO discussion to follow, we will outline a set of
preliminary hypotheses DEMO the neural systems that
may underlie some of the specific features of prospect
theory. These hypotheses are summarized in Table 5.We
first outline the DEMO distinction between decision
utility and experience utility. We then describe the state of
current knowledge regarding the representation of utility, the
representation of probability, and the processes involved in
prospect representation.
It should be noted at the outset that, whereas much of
the literature cited here comes from experimental studies of
non-human animals, prospect theory has to date only been
applied to human decision making. However, because
fundamental psychological processes are likely to be at
least partially conserved between human and non-human
decision making (for example, see Marsh and Kacelnik
[80] for a prospect theory-informed study of risky decision
making in birds; Real [98] for a discussion of the Allais
Paradox relating to the foraging behavior of bumblebees;
Weber DEMO al. [127] for a comparison of risk sensitivity in
humans versus foraging birds and insects), the appeal to
neuroscientific data from animals can DEMO useful insights
42
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) DEMO
Table 5
Summary of neural systems hypothesized to be involved in the major
aspects of prospect theory
Component Prospect theory Brain areas Neurotransmitter
feature DEMO
Value function ! Representation
of value
- Anticipated
gains
- Anticipated
losses
- Experienced
losses
! Loss Aversion
! DA (increase)
- Experienced
gains
! DA (decrease)
! NA
- Ventral striatum
- ACC
- Amygdala
- Dorsal/ventral
striatum
- VMPFC
- ACC
- Amygdala
DEMO Dorsal striatum
! Amygdala
Weighting
function
! Diminishing
sensitivity
- Overweight
low p
- Underweight
high p
- Ventral striatum
(hope?)
- DEMO
(fear?)
! DA (hope?)
! Subcertainty
! 5-HT
(impulsivity)
! Editing
! DLPFC
! ACC
! DLPFC
! VLPFC
! DA
! 5-HT
(inhibition)
Abbreviations: Dopamine (DA), Serotonin (5-HT), Noradrenaline (NA),
Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), DEMO cingulate cortex (ACC),
Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC).
Representation
DEMO Framing
into the basic neural mechanisms underlying these psycho-
logical processes.
4.1. Neural representations of utility
Kahneman et al. [65] distinguish between bdecision
utility,DEMO which refers to the weight of an outcome in a
decision, DEMO bexperience utility,Q which refers to its hedonic
quality. Although it is decision utility that is the primary
focus of prospect theory, both forms of utility are important
for understanding the neural basis of decision making.
DEMO utility may be derived from predictions of the
experience utility of different options, which in turn may be
influenced by retrospective evaluations of similar past
experiences. However, Kahneman et al. [65] review a
number of contexts in which people’s retrospective evalua-
tions and their decisions do not accord DEMO their on-line
ratings of experience utility—for instance, retrospective
evaluations are dominated DEMO evaluations of salient moments
(the peak and end of an experience) and underweight the
duration of experiences (e.g., [59]). Thus, it is important to
distinguish the representation of experienced reward and
punishment (which may correspond to experience utility)
from anticipated reward and punishment (which may
correspond to predicted or decision utility). Results from
cognitive neuroscience DEMO that this distinction may be
reflected in the roles of different brain systems in decision
making. Of particular relevance, Berridge and Robinson [19]
have distinguished between the bwantingQ (presumably
reflecting decision utility) and blikingQ (presumably reflect-
ing experience utility) aspects of motivation. We now review
the neural bases of each of these forms of utility in turn.
4.1.1. Decision DEMO
Regions involved in decision utility should exhibit
activity related to the anticipation of rewards or the assess-
ment of subjective value of future events. DEMO and non-
human animal studies provide evidence for the roles of the
dopamine system, ventral striatum, prefrontal cortex, and
amygdala in the representation of decision utility.
4.1.1.1. Dopamine system. Dopamine (DA) is a modu-
DEMO neurotransmitter that is produced by regions in the
midbrain (the substantia DEMO pars compacta and the ventral
tegmental area) and transmitted broadly to DEMO set of cortical
and subcortical regions [26]. The dopaminergic system
appears to be a primary substrate for the representation of
decision utility. A number DEMO studies (reviewed by [108])
have shown that dopamine neurons increase DEMO firing for
unexpected rewards and for stimuli that predict future
rewards, DEMO they decrease their firing in the absence of
an expected reward. However, it is critical to note that DA
does not appear to code directly for the hedonic value of
rewards, as blockade of DA receptors does not reduce the
desirability of rewarding stimuli [56]. Rather, DA blockade
results in blikingQ without bwantingQ [18]; animals will fail
to act to obtain rewards but will nonetheless express
pleasure at receipt of the reward. DEMO possibility is that
DA codes for the incentive value of stimuli, DEMO
subsequently guides action selection (e.g., [18,82]).
4.1.1.2. Ventral striatum. The ventral striatum (including
the nucleus accumbens or NAc) serves as DEMO locus for signal
integration between the prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and
hippocampus (for review, see [125]) and a wealth of recent
data suggest that it plays a critical role in the representation of
anticipated reward DEMO (reviewed by [69]). In one
study, Breiter et al. [21] visually represented several gain and
loss outcomes using different roulette wheel bspinnersQ.
DEMO fMRI, these authors found modulation of ventral stria-
tal responses to DEMO expectation and experience of monetary
gains and losses, and a clear DEMO increase in activity
during exposure to a riskless bgains onlyQ stimulus (DEMO see
[31]). Similarly, using a monetary incentive delay task,
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
DEMO et al. [70] demonstrated that NAc activity increases
in anticipation of larger rewards. The ventral striatum is a
primary target of the DA system, and changes in ventral
striatal activity seen during neuroimaging may reflect either
DEMO activity or the intrinsic activity of ventral striatal neurons.
4.1.1.3. Prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex is a large
and heterogeneous brain region, and it appears that different
regions may play different roles in decision making. The
DEMO prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) is particularly
important for the maintenance and manipulation of cogni-
tive representations in working memory and the planning of
future DEMO based on those representations. One possi-
bility is that this region plays a role in decision making
related to the representation of prospects and DEMO
decision utility computations. On the Iowa Gambling Task
(IGT), a DEMO neuropsychological test of decision making
[12], patients with lesions to the DEMO prefrontal
cortex show decision making impairments. In this task,
subjects are presented with four decks of cards with varying
monetary payoff values and DEMO choose among the decks
to maximize their total payout. Two of the decks have
negative expected value and high risk, whereas the
remaining decks are less risky and have positive expected
values. Patients with DLPFC lesions DEMO not learn to choose
optimally on this task [39,77]. These deficits may reflect an
inability to use strategies or rules to control behavior DEMO
that DLPFC patients behave in a disorganized manner; for
example, patients with DLPFC lesions were able to
accurately assess the quality of financial DEMO on a task
involving the management of a simulated business but were
unable to actually use the advice in making decisions [48].
The ventromedial DEMO cortex (VMPFC) also
appears to be involved in the development of anticipatory
responses to losses. Patients with lesions to the ventrome-
dial prefrontal DEMO exhibit normal skin conductance
responses (SCR4) to experienced losses in the IGT but fail
to develop anticipatory SCRs to risky choices as normal
DEMO do [13]. However, imaging studies have associated
VMPFC more strongly with DEMO reward than with
reward anticipation, as discussed below.
4.1.1.4. Amygdala. The DEMO is a complex subcortical
structure that is heavily involved in emotion and learning,
particularly for negative outcomes (but also possibly for
positive outcomes, see [11]). The amygdala is essential for
both the production of fear responses and for the learning of
associations between particular stimuli and DEMO responses
(see Fanselow and LeDoux [36] for review). It is DEMO
involved in the perception of fearful facial expressions [88].
As discussed in greater detail below, it appears that the
amygdala plays a key role in the representation of experience
utility for losses. However, the amygdala also appears to be
4 The SCR is a measure of electrical conductance DEMO 2 points on the
skin and is sensitive to physiological arousal, DEMO, and anxiety.
43
important for decision utility regarding negative outcomes.
In DEMO IGT, patients with amygdala lesions do not learn to
choose the DEMO risky, positive expected value decks.
Whereas normal (control) subjects develop DEMO
SCRs in response to choices from the risky decks following
practice, DEMO with amygdala lesions do not develop such
responses nor do they exhibit normal increases in SCRs to
losses [14]. These results suggest that the DEMO of
fearful anticipatory SCRs to losses requires the amygdala.
Neuroimaging results have shown that the amygdala is active
during the anticipation of losses ([21,58]).
4.1.2. Experience utility
Regions sensitive to experience utility should exhibit
DEMO during the experience of positive or negative
outcomes and show modulation according to the valence
and/or magnitude of the outcome. The neural basis DEMO
experience utility has been associated with a network of
limbic, brainstem, and cortical areas. In particular, neuro-
imaging results have implicated the striatum and orbital and
ventromedial prefrontal cortices in the processing of
experienced rewards DEMO the amygdala in the processing
of experienced losses.
4.1.2.1. Striatum. The striatum is a complex structure that
can be separated into the dorsal striatum (including the
caudate nucleus and dorsal putamen) and the ventral
striatum (DEMO the nucleus accumbens and ventral
putamen), each of which participates in different cortico-
striatal loops (e.g., [50]). In particular, the ventral striatum
receives inputs primarily from limbic structures such as the
hippocampus, amygdala, and VMPFC, whereas the dorsal
striatum receives inputs primarily from dorsal DEMO lateral
prefrontal cortices. The ventral striatum appears to respond
to both anticipated rewards [70] and experienced rewards
[21], whereas the dorsal striatum (including DEMO caudate
nucleus) appears to play a distinct role in the processing DEMO
experienced reward magnitude and valence. For example,
Delgado et al. [28] described a direct relationship between
reward magnitude and valence, and activity in the dorsal
striatum. These authors employed an event-related fMRI
procedure in which DEMO received monetary rewards and
punishments of varying size dependent upon performance in
a gambling task. Their findings showed that the degree of
activation of DEMO caudate nucleus varied consistently with
both the magnitude and valence of the reward; the caudate
nucleus responded most for large rewards and least for large
punishments. Similarly, Knutson et al. [70] found that dorsal
striatal areas respond differentially to the receipt of large
gains and losses. As with DEMO DA system, it is thought that
the role of the striatum DEMO closely tied to action selection; for
example, the response of the striatum to rewards that are
contingent upon behavior is greater than for DEMO that are
not contingent upon behavior ([121,131]. It is also DEMO
to what degree these striatal responses reflect DA activity
versus cortical inputs to the striatum.
44
4.1.2.2. Prefrontal cortex. The ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (VMPFC) has been DEMO with the receipt of
rewards [71,91,100] and with the evaluation of desirable
stimuli [34]. Furthermore, activity in this region correlates
with subjective taste preferences for beverages [83],
suggesting that activity in the region DEMO sensitive to the
relative subjective desirability of experienced stimuli.
Patients with lesions to the VMPFC are impaired at the
Iowa Gambling Task [12,15], that is, they never develop a
preference for the bsafeQ decks in the IGT (i.e., those with
positive expected value), tending to DEMO choosing from
the briskyQ decks (i.e., those with negative expected value).
However, these patients do exhibit normal SCR responses to
experienced losses [13], suggesting that VMPFC is not
necessary for the emotional experience of a loss. Rather, the
impairment of VMPFC patients on the IGT appears to
reflect an impairment of executive control over behavior
rather than one DEMO value representation per se. Fellows and
Farah [38] used a shuffled version of the IGT in which the
losses associated with each deck were DEMO within
the first few trials, thereby reducing the reversal learning
aspect DEMO the task. Although VMPFC lesion patients were
impaired at the standard IGT, they were unimpaired at the
shuffled version, suggesting that their impairment DEMO related
to the reversal requirement.
The anterior cingulate cortex is also sensitive to the
experience of negative outcomes, as reflected in the feed-
back error-related negativity (ERN) event-related brain
potential. The ERN is greater for DEMO than for gains in a
gambling task [45]. Of particular interest in this study is the
fact that the ERN occurred even when the DEMO loss was
smaller than an alternative possible loss (i.e., a relatively
positive outcome), suggesting that it uniquely reflects the
negative aspect of DEMO value. One recent proposal
suggests that the increased ERN for negative feedback
reflects decreases in phasic dopaminergic signals to the
anterior cingulate cortex which, in turn, signal negative
prediction error [54]. Thus, ERN responses for DEMO
outcomes may be a reflection of dopaminergic activity.
4.1.2.3. Amygdala. Theamygdalamay be involved
specifically in the representation of negative outcomes.
The primary evidence in DEMO of this is that patients with
lesions to the amygdala show learning impairments on
the IGT. The amygdala appears to play a role in DEMO
processing of losses per se, as patients with amygdala
lesions do DEMO exhibit normal SCRs to losses in the IGT
[14]. This may reflect the amygdala’s more general role
in the processing of fear-related stimuli, reflected in its
mediation of fear conditioning [72,81] andinthe
processing of fearful DEMO expressions [88]. Interestingly,
there is some evidence to suggest that the amygdala may
also encode information concerning gains ([44]; see also
[6] DEMO data suggesting that the amygdala’s apparent
negative bias may result, in DEMO, from the higher average
intensity of negative stimuli).
C. Trepel DEMO al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
4.2. Neural representation of outcome probability
From the standpoint of prospect theory, the important
aspects of probability representation are the curvature of the
weighting function (reflecting the underweighting of high
probabilities and overweighting of low probabilities) and the
elevation of the weighting function (representing the overall
willingness to entertain risk). Current neuroscientific re-
search does not provide direct evidence regarding the
mechanisms DEMO these phenomena, but recent work
has begun to elucidate the regions DEMO are involved in the
representation of outcome probabilities.
A substantial body of recent work examining the cortical
representation of outcome probability has examined oculo-
DEMO tasks in primates. This work has focused on the lateral
intraparietal area (LIP), a region that shows modulated
activity during oculomotor tasks [102,109] and that acts to
guide saccadic eye movements in a manner DEMO to
reflect motor planning activity [47,114]. The importance of
LIP in the representation of reward probability was
demonstrated by Platt and Glimcher [94], who trained
monkeys to make visual saccades into and out of the
DEMO fields of individual LIP neurons in exchange for
juice rewards of varying magnitude and delivery probability.
Significantly greater activation was seen in LIP neurons
DEMO saccades were instructed with a reward probability of
80% compared to when equivalent movement was
instructed with a reward probability of 20%. That is, the
activity of individual LIP neurons changed according to the
probability that DEMO particular response would result in a
reward. Remarkably, movement amplitude, latency, and
velocity did not change with outcome probability and, thus,
DEMO seems apparent that LIP neuronal activity is correlated
with the probability that a particular (rewarded) response
will be required regardless of the movement DEMO made.
Subsequently, Sugrue et al. [117] also affirmed a convincing
role DEMO the LIP in the representation of reward probability
as assayed through saccades. After training rhesus
monkeys in a visual discrimination task involving a
fixation, delay, and saccade routine, unit recordings were
made in LIP as DEMO animals made choices between stimuli
linked to high and low-probability rewards. LIP neurons
matched for receptive field properties showed differential
activity depending on anticipated DEMO probability and,
moreover, in the presence of low-probability reward the
DEMO of these units became tonic as their discrim-
inability declined. It must be noted that, because these
studies did not vary magnitude as well as probability, it is
not possible to determine whether LIP is representing
probability per se or some function of probability (e.g.,
expected utility). In addition, it is not clear how these
findings extend to other task domains or whether they are
specific to eye movements.
Reward DEMO may also be represented less directly
by the dopamine system. In a discrimination learning task,
Fiorillo et al. [40] found that dopaminergic neuronal DEMO
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
DEMO monotonically with reward outcome probability.
These authors trained monkeys on a visual discrimination
task and recorded the activity of single dopaminergic
neurons under conditions DEMO which the receipt of a reward
was maximally uncertain (50% reward) and maximally
certain (0% or 100% reward). These neurons responded to
rewards when they were unexpected (i.e., 0% condition) and
to cues that predicted reward (i.e., 100% condition). In
addition, dopaminergic neurons showed monotonically
increasing phasic activation during the delay period for
stimuli that DEMO maximally unpredictable (i.e., 50%
condition). Similar results were found in humans using
fMRI by Aron et al. [9]. In this study, activity in the
midbrain (putatively dopaminergic regions) was modulated
by the predictability DEMO subsequent cognitive feedback
during a probabilistic learning task. That both of these
studies find greatest activity during conditions of maximal
uncertainty suggests that the DEMO system, rather than
directly coding probability, may be coding for the degree of
risk associated with a decision.
4.3. Prospect theory and the DEMO
The foregoing review outlines a relatively complex set of
neural structures and interactions involved in the represen-
tation of decision and experience utility and DEMO We
now turn to examine how these data might be related to the
value and weighting functions of prospect theory.
4.3.1. Shape of the DEMO function
Curvature of the value function in prospect theory
appears to be similar for gains and losses [2,123]. This
suggests that a common DEMO may be involved in the
representation of value magnitude regardless of valance
(i.e., equally for both gains and losses). Consistent with
this DEMO, there is evidence from neuroscience to
suggest that several neural systems DEMO in value
representation may separately represent valence and
magnitude, at least DEMO experienced outcomes. Analyzing
human event-related potentials, Yeung and Sanfey [130]
demonstrated DEMO the well-characterized P300 event-
related potential is sensitive to reward magnitude but not
valence, whereas the subsequent feedback-related ERN
showed the reverse pattern. Thus, the neuroscientific data
provide at least qualified support for the existence of
systems that respond uniquely to magnitude regardless of
valence. However, this segregation is not complete, as the
striatum appears to be sensitive to both the magnitude and
valence of outcomes (e.g., [28]).
4.3.2. Loss DEMO risk aversion
In prospect theory, the value function is typically 2–3
DEMO steeper for losses than for equivalent gains. For mixed
(gain/loss) prospects, loss aversion gives rise to pronounced
risk aversion. From a neural standpoint, one might surmise
that loss aversion arises from the differential influence of
45
responses in the various systems that code for positive and
DEMO expected values. The ventral striatum may be a
central locus for the integration of these signals, as it
receives inputs from amygdala, hippocampus, and prefrontal
cortex as well as dopaminergic inputs from the midbrain and
DEMO has access to signals coding for both positive and
negative value. For learning tasks involving reward associ-
ations (e.g., the IGT), it DEMO clear that lesions to the amygdala
and ventromedial prefrontal cortex result in decreased risk
aversion. However, no published studies have examined
these patients on pure or mixed gambles of the sort
discussed above and, thus, DEMO is not known whether these
deficits persist when the learning demands are removed.
Recent results showing that VMPFC lesion patients can
perform the IGT DEMO under particular circumstances
[39] suggest that their deficits reflect learning problems
more than they reflect a general modulation of loss aversion.
These findings are DEMO with those of Rolls and
colleagues (e.g., [103]) suggesting that DEMO orbitofrontal
cortex may be specifically involved in reversal of reward
associations.
Recent evidence also suggests that the noradrenergic
system may be important for loss DEMO Noradrenaline is
known to mediate anxiety and stress (for reviews, see
[46,89]) and has been shown to play a role in post-
traumatic stress reactions [115] and the consolidation of
fear memories [73]. Rogers DEMO al. [101] examined the effect
of central NA blockade on decision making in healthy
volunteers through the administration of propranolol (a h-
adrenergic antagonist). Subjects were presented with mixed
gain–loss gambles as well as pure DEMO and loss gambles.
Participants administered a single 80 mg dose of propra-
nolol appeared to be less sensitive to the magnitude of
possible losses DEMO mixed (gain–loss) gambles when the
probability of loss was high (DEMO not when it was low),
whereas their sensitivity toward the DEMO of possible
gains was not significantly affected. In contrast, propranolol
and DEMO participants displayed roughly equal tendencies
toward risk aversion for pure gain gambles and risk seeking
for pure loss gambles. Taken together, this pattern is
consistent with the hypothesis that the drug affects loss
aversion (k in prospect theory) rather than curvature of the
value function (a and DEMO ). Further studies are necessary to
determine whether manipulation of other DEMO
systems also affects loss aversion. For example, although
the modulatory neurotransmitter DEMO is thought to
underlie the response to punishment (e.g., [27]), studies of
decision making following tryptophan depletion (which
reduces serotonin levels) DEMO that loss aversion is not
affected [99].
4.3.3. Curvature of the weighting function
The weighting function in prospect theory is inverse-S-
shaped, reflecting overweighting of low probabilities and
underweighting of high probabilities. A critical question
arising DEMO prospect theory is why the probability
46
weighting function takes this particular shape. The stand-
ard explanation for DEMO finding has appealed to the
psychophysics of diminishing sensitivity, but other DEMO
dence suggests that it may instead (or in addition) reflect
emotional aspects of the decision. In particular, the
underweighting of high-probability gains and overweight-
ing of low-probability losses may reflect fear, whereas the
overweighting of low-probability gains and high-proba-
bility losses may reflect hope. The neural bases DEMO these
functions are not currently known. However, one might
hypothesize that DEMO would involve the amygdala, whereas
hope would involve the ventral striatum. DEMO is also possible
that the risk-related DA activity observed by Fiorillo et al.
[40] in anticipation of uncertain rewards may reflect
bhopeQ , although DEMO is speculative at present.
4.3.4. Elevation of the weighting function
The weighting function is generally characterized by
bsubcertaintyQ in which decision weights for complemen-
DEMO prospects sum to less than 1. This is manifested as a
more pronounced tendency toward risk aversion than risk
seeking for simple gambles involving DEMO (and presum-
ably a more pronounced tendency toward risk seeking than
DEMO aversion for simple gambles involving losses). There is
little current evidence regarding the neural substrates for
elevation of the weighting function in general, or sub-
certainty in particular. However, we speculate that elevation
of the weighting function may be related to impulsivity,
given that the impulsive DEMO of gambles would
result in an increase in weighting function elevation
(DEMO theory parameter d ). This would suggest that
elevation may be DEMO to the dopaminergic and seroto-
nergic systems, both of which are DEMO with impul-
sivity [24,35]. It is also of great interest that there is a
substantial degree of individual variability in weighting
function elevation DEMO If a link between DA/5-HT systems
and elevation is established, DEMO future genetic association
studies focused on these transmitter systems could possibly
provide an explanation for some of the individual differ-
ences observed in elevation.
DEMO Framing and editing operations
The representational aspects of prospect theory, encom-
DEMO framing effects and editing operations, concern
how the representations of prospects DEMO their utility and
how these representations can be manipulated or altered by
the decision maker. Although there is little evidence
regarding the neural basis DEMO these components, several
results provide the basis for preliminary speculations. In
DEMO, recent dual-process models of judgment and
choice have distinguished spontaneous, associative, affec-
tive processing (bSystem IQ) from effortful, rule-based, and
cognitive processing (bSystem IIQ;see [33,111,116]).
Kahneman [60] argues that many judgment and decision
processes may be governed by a combination of DEMO forms
of processing. For instance, the use of memory accessibility
C. DEMO et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
or similarity judgment to assess likelihood (the availability
and representativeness heuristics) or the DEMO of affective
responses to make choices (the affect heuristic) may reflect
System I processing. On the other hand, the use of higher-
order reasoning to detect inconsistencies in judgment or
dominance in choice may reflect DEMO II processing. In
the context of prospect theory, we surmise that DEMO
framing, valuation, and probability weighting processes
may be governed primarily by System I, whereas active
framing and editing may be governed primarily by System
II. As the foregoing review suggests, System I operations
are likely to rely upon limbic and basal ganglia regions.
The more controlled processes DEMO with System II
are more likely to rely upon the lateral and dorsomedial
prefrontal cortices (e.g., [86]).
Although no neuroscientific studies have DEMO exaQ
mined framing effects, there is suggestive evidence that
the degree DEMO which an outcome is viewed as a relative
gain or loss affects the neural processing of the outcome.
Breiter et al. [21] compared the DEMO to a $0 outcome
when it was either the best or worst outcome among three
possible outcomes. The response to the outcome in the
DEMO striatum was greater when it was viewed as a gain
than as a loss. Similarly, the response to rewards in ventral
striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex differs when
the reward occurs in the context of a DEMO streak
[30]. Thus, there is suggestive evidence that the processing
of DEMO depends upon the context in which it occurs.
There are no current results that address the issue of
reframing.
Editing processes, which involve the spontaneous
reformulation of prospects, are likely to heavily involve
working memory and executive control processes and, thus,
may be reliant upon dorsolateral prefrontal cortices. In
addition, editing processes likely require inhibition of
prepotent (automatic) responses to allow manipulation of
the prospect before making a decision. To DEMO degree that
editing requires controlled processing, it may be necessary
to DEMO a relatively fast and automatic response driven by
System I. Such inhibition is likely to involve the right
lateral prefrontal cortex [8], as well as the DA and NA
systems [7]. Consistent with this proposal is DEMO fact that
patients with VMPFC lesions appear to be impaired at
suppressing their initial response on the basis of new
information in the IGT DEMO
5. Future directions
As the foregoing review outlines, there is a DEMO body
of suggestive evidence regarding the neural basis of
decision making, DEMO it is possible to at least weakly
associate neural systems with the different components of
prospect theory. Further work will be needed to better
DEMO the degree to which this theory provides leverage
towards understanding the neural basis of decision making.
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
DEMO of the most interesting outstanding questions
include:
5.1. How can we extend the present account from decisions
under risk to decisions under uncertainty?DEMO
In this paper, we have focused on decision making under
risk, where the probabilities of possible outcomes are
known precisely by the decision DEMO Indeed, the
probability weighting function from prospect theory applies
only to DEMO contexts. It is an important question how to
extend the treatment from risk to uncertainty, where
decision makers must judge for themselves the probabilities,
with some degree of vagueness or imprecision. Cumulative
prospect theory [123] DEMO such an extension and a
characterization of decision weights under uncertainty can
be found in both Tversky and Fox [122] and Wu and
Gonzalez DEMO . Subsequent studies have found that
decisions under uncertainty adhere reasonably closely to
the predictions of a btwo-stage modelQ in which decision
makers first DEMO the probabilities of events themselves,
then weight these judged probabilities according to the same
inverse-S-shaped function that they use for decisions under
risk ([42,43,122,128]; but see [67]).5
Recently, Barron and DEMO ([10]; see also [53])
examined bsmall feedback-basedQ decisions in which
small decisions are repeated many times so that the
probabilities of relevant DEMO are learned over time
from experience rather than provided explicitly to
participants. Similarly, Hertwig et al. [53] examined
decisions in which participants were allowed to learn
the probability distribution of possible outcomes by
sampling from a DEMO with replacement before
making a choice among prospects. In an intriguing set of
studies, these authors observed patterns of behavior that
on their surface seem to reverse the patterns of over- and
underweighting previously documented by DEMO and
Tversky and others. We say bon their surfaceQ because it
is important to recognize that these studies entailed
uncertainty rather than risk. Although DEMO could, in
principle, compare decision weights to the probability
distributions from which outcomes were sampled with
replacement, such a comparison is not particularly mean-
ingful in prospect theory. For one thing, the sample that a
particular participant observes is unlikely to coincide with
the process that generated DEMO Moreover, even if the sample
does perfectly reflect the process that DEMO it, there is
5 Although the two-stage model fits the data DEMO well, a third stage is
needed to accommodate ambiguity aversion [32] DEMO the preference to
bet on more familiar domains of uncertainty such as the domestic, rather
than a foreign, stock market. This third stage DEMO be modeled as a
shift in the elevation of decision weights in situations where the decision
maker feels especially knowledgeable or ignorant relative to DEMO
domains or people (for more detailed discussions, see [43], pp. DEMO;
[42]).
47
no particular reason to believe that a participant’s
subjective beliefs will necessarily coincide with the
relative frequency of events that DEMO observed. Thus, it
appears that these effects are driven primarily by
DEMO in belief rather than distortions in the weight-
ing of probabilities. Indeed, when Fox and Tversky ([43],
Study 2) presented participants with an entire distribution
of events, participants subsequently overestimated the
probability of drawing low-frequency events and under-
estimated the probability of drawing high-frequency
events. Moreover, decision weights under uncertainty
reflected the same over- and underweighting of these
DEMO probabilities as did decision weights under risk in
which participants were provided with probabilities.
At the neural level, it is likely that experience-based and
description-based decisions may rely upon overlapping but
partially separate sets of neural DEMO In particular, the
dorsal striatum and DA system are important for DEMO
based on trial-by-trial feedback [95,110]. Examination of
feedback-based decision making would allow a greater
connection between the substantial literature on the cogni-
tive DEMO of learning. Particularly exciting is the
possibility that quantitative models of decision making, such
as prospect theory, could be interfaced with computational
learning DEMO, providing a compound model of both
learning and decision making.
5.2. DEMO are affective and cognitive signals integrated in
probability weighting?
A substantial body of work cited in this paper suggests
that decisions under risk, as modeled by prospect theory,
may be driven by both cognitive DEMO affective signals.
Future research is needed to tease out the relative
contribution of these factors. For instance, Hsee and
Rottenstreich [55] distinguish bvaluation by calculationQ
from bvaluation by feelingQ and observe that the charac-
teristic concave DEMO of the value function for gains may
reflect a weighted average of a linear function derived by
cognitive appraisals of quantity and a step DEMO
implied by affective assessment of the nature of con-
sequences. Likewise, DEMO surmise that the characteristic
inverse-S shape of the weighting function may stem from
the combination of a cognitive assessment of probability
or expected value DEMO adjustments due to the anticipatory
emotions hope (that a small probability DEMO might be
realized) and fear (that a large probability gain may not
be realized). These insights suggest that the neural
systems involved DEMO probability weighting will likely
include convergence zones for emotional and cognitive
signals. As noted above, the ventral striatum is a likely
candidate for this sort of integration, given its connections
and its receipt of substantial DA inputs (cf. [125]). Future
work using paradigms that combine objective probability
weighting with emotionally laden stimuli could address
this issue.
48
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) DEMO
5.3. What is the role of inhibition in decision making?
A number of studies have begun to focus on the role of
cognitive DEMO processes in decision making, but rela-
tively little attention has been DEMO to the role of response
inhibition (although see [39]). However, there a number of
clinical syndromes (e.g., attention deficit disorder, drug
abuse, and compulsive gambling) in which impairments of
decision making seem DEMO largely reflect the inability to
inhibit immediate responses in favor of more optimal
delayed responses. The relationship between response
inhibition and the temporal discounting DEMO rewards is not
currently known, and understanding this issue could provide
DEMO leverage towards the characterization and treat-
ment of decision making disorders.
Acknowledgments
Preparation of the manuscript was supported by NSF
Grant DMI-0433693. Thanks to DEMO Tom for assistance
with manuscript preparation and Adam Aron, Liat Hadar,DEMO
and Elizabeth Phelps for helpful comments.
References
[1] M. Abdellaoui, Parameter-free DEMO of utility and probability
weighting functions, Manage. Sci. 46 (11) (2000) 1497–1512.
[2] M. Abdellaoui, H. Bleichrodt, C. Paraschiv, Measuring DEMO aversion
under prospect theory: a parameter-free approach. Unpublished
manuscript, CRNS-GRID, DEMO, France (2004).
[3] M. Abdellaoui, F. Vossmann, M. Weber, Choice-based elicitation and
decomposition of decision weights for gains and losses under
uncertainty. Management Science, forthcoming (in press).
[4] M. Allais, Le comportement de l’homme rationel devant le risque,
critique des postulates et DEMO de l’ecole americaine, Econo-
metrica 21 (1953) 503–546.
[5] M. DEMO, O. Hagan, The so-called Allais Paradox and rational
decisions under uncertainty, in: O.H.M. Allais (Ed.), Expected Utility
Hypothesis and the Allais Paradox, Reidel Publishing Company,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1979, pp. DEMO
[6] A.K. Anderson, K. Christoff, I. Stappen, D. Panitz, D.G. Ghahremani,
G. Glover, J.D. Gabrieli, N. Sobel, Dissociated neural representations
of intensity and valence in human olfaction, Nat. Neurosci. 6 (2003)DEMO
196–202.
[7] A.R. Aron, R.A. Poldrack, The cognitive neuroscience of response
inhibition: relevance for genetic research in ADHD. Biological
Psychiatry (in press)DEMO
[8] A.R. Aron, T. Robbins, R.A. Poldrack, Inhibition and the DEMO
inferior frontal cortex, Trends Cogn. Sci. 8 (2004) 170–177.
[9] DEMO Aron, D. Shohamy, J. Clark, C. Myers, M.A. Gluck, DEMO
Poldrack, Human midbrain sensitivity to cognitive feedback and
uncertainty during classification DEMO, J. Neurophysiol. (2004)
1144–1152.
[10] G. Barron, I. Erev, Small feedback-based decisions and their limited
correspondence to description-based decisions, J. Behav. Decis.
Mak. 16 (3) (2003) 215–233.
[11] M.G. Baxter, E.A. Murray, The amygdala and reward, Nat. Rev.,
Neurosci. 3 (7) (2002) 563–573.
[12] A. Bechara, A.R. Damasio, H. Damasio, DEMO Anderson, Insensi-
tivity to future consequences following damage to human prefrontal
DEMO, Cognition 50 (1–3) (1994) 7–15.
[13] A. Bechara, D. Tranel, H. Damasio, A.R. Damasio, Failure to
respond autonomically to anticipated future outcomes following
damage to prefrontal cortex, Cereb. Cortex 6 (2) (1996) 215–225.
[14] A. Bechara, H. Damasio, A.R. Damasio, G.P. Lee, Different
contributions of the human amygdala and ventromedial pre-
frontal cortex to decision-making, J. Neurosci. 19 (13) (1999)
5473–5481.
[15] DEMO Bechara, D. Tranel, H. Damasio, Characterization of the decision-
making DEMO of patients with ventromedial prefrontal cortex
lesions, Brain 123 (Pt. 11) (2000) 2189–2202.
[16] S. Benartzi, R.H. Thaler, Myopic loss aversion and the equity
premium puzzle, Q. J. Econ. 110 (1) (DEMO) 73–92.
[17] D. Bernoulli, Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis, DEMO
Acad. Sci. Imp. Petropolitanae 5 (1738) 175–192 (Translated by L.
DEMO as New exposition on the measurement of risk. Econo-
metrica, 22 (1738) 23–26).
[18] K.C. Berridge, T.E. Robinson, What is the role of dopamine in
reward: hedonic impact, reward learning, or incentive salience?
Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 28 (3) (1998) DEMO
[19] H. Bleichrodt, Utility of gains and losses: measurement—
Theoretical and experimental approaches, J. Econ. Lit. 39 (1)
(2001) 130–131.
DEMO E. Brandst7tter, A. Kqhberger, F. Schneider, A cognitive–emotional
account of DEMO shape of the probability weighting function, J. Behav.
Decis. Mak. 15 (2002) 79–100.
[21] H.C. Breiter, I. Aharon, D. Kahneman, A. DEMO, P. Shizgal,
Functional imaging of neural responses to expectancy and
DEMO of monetary gains and losses, Neuron 30 (2) (2001)
619–639.
[22] C.F. Camerer, Prospect theory in the wild, in: D. Kahneman, A.
Tversky (Eds.), Choices, Values, and Frames, Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000, Chap. 16.
[23] C.F. Camerer, T.H. Ho, Violations of the betweenness axiom and
nonlinearity in probability, DEMO Risk Uncertain. 8 (2) (1994) 167–196.
[24] R.N. Cardinal, DEMO Winstanley, T.W. Robbins, B.J. Everitt, Limbic
corticostriatal systems and delayed DEMO, Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 1021 (2004) 33–50.
[25] C. DEMO, P. Cook, Selling hope: state lotteries in America,
Harvard DEMO Press, Cambridge, MA, 1989.
[26] J.R. Cooper, F.E. Bloom, DEMO Roth, The Biochemical Basis of
Neuropharmacology, Oxford University Press, New DEMO, NY, 2002.
[27] N.D. Daw, S. Kakade, P. Dayan, DEMO interactions between
serotonin and dopamine, Neural Netw. 15 (4–6) (2002) 603–616.
[28] M.R. Delgado, H.M. Locke, V.A. Stenger, J.A. Fiez, Dorsal striatum
responses to reward and punishment: effects of valence and
magnitude manipulations, Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 3 (1)
(2003) 27–38.
DEMO R. Dhar, K. Wertenbroch, Consumer choice between hedonic and
utilitarian goods, J. Mar. Res. 37 (2000) 60–71.
[30] R. Elliott, K.J. DEMO, R.J. Dolan, Dissociable neural responses in
human reward systems, J. DEMO 20 (16) (2000) 6159–6165.
[31] R. Elliott, J.L. Newman, O.A. Longe, J.F. Deakin, Differential
response patterns in the striatum and DEMO cortex to financial
reward in humans: a parametric functional magnetic resonance
DEMO study, J. Neurosci. 23 (1) (2003) 303–307.
[32] D. DEMO, Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms, Q. J. Econ. 75
(1961) 643–669.
[33] S. Epstein, Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic
unconscious, Am. Psychol. 49 (1994) 709–724.
[34] S. Erk, DEMO Kiefer, J. Grothe, A.P. Wunderlich, M. Spitzer, H. Walter,
Emotional context modulates subsequent memory effect, Neuro-
Image 18 (2003) 439–447.
[35] J. Evenden, Impulsivity: a discussion of clinical and experimental
findings, J. Psychopharmacol. 13 (2) (1999) 180–192.
[36] M.S. Fanselow, J.E. LeDoux, Why we think plasticity underlying
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 34–50
DEMO
Pavlovian fear conditioning occurs in the basolateral amygdala,
Neuron 23 (DEMO) (1999) 229–232.
[37] D. Faro, Y. Rottenstreich, Affect, empathy, and regressive mis-
predictions of others’ preferences under risk. Working Paper, DEMO
School of Business, Duke University (2005).
[38] L.K. Fellows, DEMO Farah, Ventromedial frontal cortex mediates
affective shifting in humans: evidence from a reversal learning
paradigm, Brain 126 (Pt. 8) (2003) 1830–1837.
[39] L.K. Fellows, M.J. Farah, Different underlying impairments in
decision-making following DEMO and dorsolateral frontal
lobe damage in humans, Cereb. Cortex (2005) DEMO
[40] C.D. Fiorillo, P.N. Tobler, W. Schultz, Discrete coding of DEMO
probability and uncertainty by dopamine neurons, Science 299
(5614) (2003) 1898–1902.
[41] P. Fishburn, G. Kochenberger, Two-piece von Neumann–Morgen-
stern utility functions, Decis. Sci. 10 (1979) 503–518.
[42] C.R. Fox, K.E. DEMO, Belief and preference in decision under
uncertainty, in: D. Hardman, L. Macchi (Eds.), Reasoning and
Decision Making: Current Trends and DEMO, Wiley, New
York, 2003.
[43] C.R. Fox, A. Tversky, DEMO belief-based account of decision under
uncertainty, Manage. Sci. 44 (1998) DEMO
[44] H. Garavan, J.C. Pendergrass, T.J. Ross, E.A. Stein, R.C. Risinger,
Amygdala response to both positively and negatively valenced
stimuli, NeuroReport 28 (2001) 2779–2783.
[45] W.J. Gehring, A.R. Willoughby, The medial DEMO cortex and the
rapid processing of monetary gains and losses, Science DEMO (5563)
(2002) 2279–2282.
[46] G.B. Glavin, Stress and brain noradrenaline: a review, Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 9 (2) (1985) DEMO
[47] J.W. Gnadt, R.A. Andersen, Memory related motor planning activity
in posterior parietal cortex of macaque, Exp. Brain Res. 70 (1)
(1988) 216–220.
[48] M. Gomez-Beldarrain, C. Harries, J.C. Garcia-Monco, E. DEMO, J.
Grafman, Patients with right frontal lesions are unable to assess and
use advice to make predictive judgments, J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16
(DEMO) 74–89.
[49] R. Gonzalez, G. Wu, On the shape of DEMO probability weighting
function, Cogn. Psychol. 38 (1999) 129–166.
[50] S.N. DEMO, M.J. Gdowski, The Basal Ganglia, in: G. Paxinos, J.K.
DEMO (Eds.), The Human Nervous System, 2nd edition, Elsevier
Science/DEMO Press, San Diego, 2003.
[51] C. Heath, R.P. Larrick, G. Wu, Goals as reference points, Cogn.
Psychol. 38 (1999) 79–109.
DEMO J.C. Hershey, P.J. Schoemaker, Prospect theory’s reflection hypo-
thesis: a DEMO examination, Org. Behav. Human Decis. Process. 25
(3) (1980) DEMO
[53] R. Hertwig, G. Barron, E.U. Weber, I. Erev, Decisions from
experience and the effect of rare events in risky choice, Psychol.
Sci. 15 (8) (2004) 534–539.
[54] C.B. Holroyd, M.G. Coles, The neural basis of human error
processing: reinforcement learning, dopamine, DEMO the error-related
negativity, Psychol. Rev. 109 (4) (2002) 679–709.
DEMO C.K. Hsee, Y. Rottenstreich, Music, pandas, and muggers: on DEMO
affective psychology of value, J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 133 (1) (2004)
23–30.
[56] S. Ikemoto, J. Panksepp, Dissociations between appetitive DEMO consu-
mmatory responses by pharmacological manipulations of reward-
relevant brain regions, DEMO Neurosci. 110 (2) (1996) 331–345.
[57] A.M. Isen, T.E. DEMO, F.G. Ashby, Influence of positive affect on
the subjective utility of gains and losses: it is just not worth the risk,
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 55 (1988) 710–717.
[58] I. Kahn, Y. Yeshurun, P. Rotshtein, I. Fried, D. Ben-Bashat, T.
Hendler, The role of the amygdala in signaling prospective outcome
of choice, Neuron 33 (DEMO) (2002) 983–994.
[59] D. Kahneman, New challenges to the rationality assumption, J. Inst.
Theor. Econ. 150 (1994) 18–36.
[60] D. Kahneman, A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping
bounded rationality, Am. Psychol. 58 (9) (2003) 697–720.
[61] D. Kahneman, A. Tversky, DEMO theory: an analysis of decision
under risk, Econometrica 4 (1979) 263–291.
[62] D. Kahneman, A. Tversky, Rational choice and the framing DEMO
decisions, J. Bus. 59 (1986) S251–S278.
[63] D. Kahneman, A. Tversky, Loss aversion in riskless choice: a
reference-dependent model, Q. J. Econ. 106 (1991) 1039–1061.
[64] D. Kahneman, J.L. Knetsch, R.H. DEMO, Experimental tests of the
endowment effect and the Coase theorem, J. Polit. Econ. 98 (1990)
1325–1348.
[65] D. Kahneman, P.P. Wakker, R. Sarin, Back to Bentham?—Explora-
tions of experienced utility, Q. DEMO Econ. 112 (1997) 375–405.
[66] D. Kahneman, I. Ritov, D. Schkade, Economic preferences or
attitude expressions? An analysis of dollar responses DEMO public issues,
in: D. Kahneman, A. Tversky (Eds.), DEMO, Values, and Frames,
Cambridge Univ. Press, New York, 2000, pp. 642–672.
[67] M. Kilka, M. Weber, What determines the shape of the probability
weighting function under uncertainty? Manag. Sci. 47 (2001)DEMO
1712–1726.
[68] F. Knight, Risk, uncertainty, and profit, Houghton-Mifflin, DEMO,
MA, 1921.
[69] B. Knutson, R. Peterson, Neurally reconstructing DEMO utility.
Games and Economic Behavior (in press).
[70] B. Knutson, C.M. Adams, G.W. Fong, D. Hommer, Anticipation of
increasing monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus accumbens,
J. Neurosci. 21 (16) (2001) DEMO
[71] B. Knutson, G.W. Fong, S.M. Bennett, C.M. Adams, D. Hommer,
A region of mesial prefrontal cortex tracks monetarily rewarding
outcomes: characterization with rapid event-related fMRI, Neuro-
Image 18 (2) (2003) 263–272.
[72] K.S. LaBar, J.E. LeDoux, D.D. Spencer, E.A. Phelps, DEMO
fear conditioning following unilateral temporal lobectomy in
humans, J. Neurosci. 15 (10) (1995) 6846–6855.
[73] R.T. LaLumiere, T.V. Buen, J.L. McGaugh, Post-training intra-
basolateral amygdala infusions of norepinephrine enhance consoli-
dation of memory for contextual fear conditioning, J. Neurosci. 23
(17) (2003) 6754–6758.
[74] P.K. Lattimore, J.R. Baker, A.D. Witte, The influence of probability
on risky choice—A parametric examination, J. Econ. Behav. Organ.
17 (3) (1992) 377–400.
[75] J.S. Lerner, D. Keltner, Fear, anger, DEMO risk, J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
81 (1) (2001) 146–159.
DEMO G.F. Loewenstein, E.U. Weber, C.K. Hsee, N. Welch, Risk as
feelings, Psychol. Bull. 127 (2001) 267–286.
[77] F. Manes, B. DEMO, L. Clark, R. Rogers, N. Antoun, M. Aitken,
T. Robbins, Decision-making processes following damage to the
prefrontal cortex, Brain 125 (2002) 624–639.
[78] H. Mano, Risk taking, framing effects, and DEMO, Org. Behav. Hum.
Decis. Process. 57 (1994) 28–58.
[79] J.G. DEMO, Z. Shapira, Managerial perspectives on risk and risk-
taking, Manage. DEMO 33 (1987) 1404–1418.
[80] B. Marsh, A. Kacelnik, Framing effects and risky decisions in
starlings, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A.
99 (2002) 3352–3355.
[81] S. Maren, G. Aharonov, M.S. DEMO, Retrograde abolition of
conditional fear after excitotoxic lesions in the basolateral DEMO
of rats: absence of a temporal gradient, Behav. Neurosci. 110 (DEMO)
(1996) 718–726.
[82] S.M. McClure, N.D. Daw, P.R. Montague, A computational substrate
for incentive salience, Trends Neurosci. 26 (8) (2003) 423–428.
[83] S.M. McClure, J. Li, D. Tomlin, K.S. DEMO, L.M. Montague, P.R.
Montague, Neural correlates of behavioral preference for DEMO
familiar drinks, Neuron 44 (2) (2004) 379–387.
[84] B.J. DEMO, S.G. Pauker, H.C. Sox Jr., A. Tversky, On the
elicitation of preferences for alternative therapies, N. Engl. J. Med.
306 (1982) 1259–1262.
50
C. Trepel et al. / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) DEMO
[85] B.A. Mellers, Choice and the relative pleasure of consequences,
DEMO Bull. 126 (2000) 910–924.
[86] E.K. Miller, J.D. Cohen, An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex
function, Annu. Rev., Neurosci. 24 (2001) 167–202.
[87] R.P. Montague, G.S. Berns, Neural economics and the biological
substrates of valuation, Neuron 36 (2002) 265–284.
[88] J.S. Morris, DEMO Frith, D.I. Perrett, D. Rowland, A.W. Young, A.J.
Calder, DEMO al., A differential neural response in the human amygdala
to fearful DEMO happy facial expressions, Nature 383 (6603) (1996)
812–815.
[89] S.I. Neophytou, S. Aspley, S. Butler, S. Beckett, C.A. Marsden,DEMO
Effects of lesioning noradrenergic neurones in the locus coeruleus on
conditioned and unconditioned aversive behaviour in the rat, Prog.
Neuro-Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 25 (DEMO) (2001) 1307–1321.
[90] T. Odean, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? J. Finance
53 (1998) 1775–1798.
[91] J. O’Doherty, DEMO Critchley, R. Deichmann, R.J. Dolan, Dissociating
valence of outcome from DEMO control in human orbital and
ventral prefrontal cortices, J. Neurosci. 23 (21) (2003) 7931–7939.
[92] J.W. Payne, D.J. Laughhunn, R. Crum, Further tests of aspiration
level effects in risky choice, Manage. Sci. DEMO (1981) 953–958.
[93] E. Peters, The functions of affect in DEMO construction of preferences.
Chapter to appear, in S. Lichtenstein and P. DEMO (Eds.), The
Construction of Preference, New York: Cambridge University DEMO
(in press).
[94] M.L. Platt, P.W. Glimcher, Neural correlates DEMO decision variables in
parietal cortex, Nature 400 (6741) (1999) DEMO
[95] R.A. Poldrack, J. Clark, E.J. Pare-Blagoev, D. Shohamy, J. Creso
Moyano, C. Myers, et al., Interactive memory systems in the human
brain, Nature 414 (6863) (2001) 546–550.
[96] D. Prelec, The probability weighting function, Econometrica 66
(1998) 497–527.
[97] M. DEMO, Diminishing marginal utility of wealth cannot explain risk
aversion, in: DEMO Kahneman, A. Tversky (Eds.), Choices, Values, and
Frames, DEMO Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000, Chap. 11.
[98] L.A. Real, Paradox, performance, and the architecture of decision
making in animals, DEMO Zool. 36 (1996) 518–529.
[99] R.D. Rogers, E.M. Tunbridge, Z. Bhagwagar, W.C. Drevets, B.J.
Sahakian, C.S. Carter, Tryptophan depletion alters DEMO decision-
making of healthy volunteers through altered processing of reward
cues, DEMO 28 (1) (2003) 153–162.
[100] R.D. Rogers, M. Lancaster, J. Wakeley, Z. Bhagwagar, Effects of
beta-adrenoceptor blockade on components of DEMO decision-
making, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 172 (2) (2004) 157–164.
DEMO R.D. Rogers, N. Ramnani, C. Mackay, J.L. Wilson, P. Jezzard, C.S.
Carter, et al., Distinct portions of anterior cingulate cortex and medial
prefrontal cortex are activated by reward processing in separable
phases of DEMO cognition, Biol. Psychiatry 55 (6) (2004)
594–602.
[102] J.D. Roitman, M.N. Shadlen, Response of neurons in the lateral
intraparietal area DEMO a combined visual discrimination reaction
time task, J. Neurosci. 22 (21) (2002) 9475–9489.
[103] E.T. Rolls, The orbitofrontal cortex and reward, Cereb. Cortex 10
(2000) 284–294.
[104] Y. Rottenstreich, C.K. Hsee, DEMO, kisses, and electric shocks:
on the affective psychology of risk, Psychol. Sci. 12 (3) (2001)
185–190.
[105] Y. Rottenstreich, S. Shu, Nine affect-based decision phenomena, in:
Nigel Harvey, Derek Koehler (Eds.), Handbook of Judgment and
Decision Making, Blackwell, Malden, MA, 2004, pp. 444–463.
[106] W. Samuelson, R. Zeckhauser, Status quo bias in decision making, J.
Risk Uncertain. 1 (1988) 7–59.
[107] L.J. Savage, The foundations of statistics, Wiley, New York, DEMO
[108] W. Schultz, Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons, J.
Neurophysiol. 80 (1) (1998) 1–27.
[109] M.N. Shadlen, W.T. Newsome, DEMO basis of a perceptual decision
in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey, J. Neuro-
physiol. 86 (4) (2001) 1916–1936.
[110] D. Shohamy, C.E. Myers, S. Grossman, J. Sage, DEMO Gluck, R.A.
Poldrack, Cortico-striatal contributions to feedback-based learning:
converging data from neuroimaging and neuropsychology, Brain 127
(Pt. 4) (2004) 851–859.
[111] S.A. Sloman, The empirical case for two systems of reasoning,
Psychol. Bull. 119 (1996) 3–22.
[112] P. Slovic, Perception of risk, Science 236 (4799) (1987) 280–285.
[113] P. Slovic, M. DEMO, E. Peters, D. MacGregor, The affect
heuristic, in: T. DEMO, D. Griffin, D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics
of Intuitive Judgment: Extensions and Applications, Cambridge
Univ. Press, New York, 2002, pp. DEMO
[114] L.H. Snyder, A.P. Batista, R.A. Andersen, Coding of intention
DEMO the posterior parietal cortex, Nature 386 (6621) (1997)
167–170.
[115] S.M. Southwick, J.D. Bremner, A. Rasmusson, C.A. Morgan III,
A. Arnsten, D.S. Charney, Role of norepinephrine in the patho-
physiology DEMO treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder, Biol.
Psychiatry 46 (9) (1999) 1192–1204.
[116] K.E. Stanovich, Who is Rational? Studies of Individual Differences
in Reasoning, Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 1999.
[117] L.P. Sugrue, G.S. Corrado, W.T. Newsome, Matching behavior and
the representation of value in DEMO parietal cortex, Science 304 (5678)
(2004) 1782–1787.
[118] R.H. Thaler, Mental accounting and consumer choice, Mark. Sci. 4
(1985) DEMO
[119] R.H. Thaler, Mental accounting matters, J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 12
(1999) 183–206.
[120] R.H. Thaler, E.J. Johnson, Gambling with the DEMO money and
trying to break even: the effects of prior outcomes DEMO risky choice,
Manage. Sci. 36 (1990) 643–660.
[121] E.M. Tricomi, M.R. Delgado, J.A. Fiez, Modulation of caudate
activity by action contingency, Neuron 41 (2) (2004) 281–292.
[122] A. Tversky, C.R. DEMO, Weighing risk and uncertainty, Psychol. Rev.
102 (1995) 269–283.
[123] A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, Advances in prospect theory cumu-
lative representation DEMO uncertainty, J. Risk Uncertain. 5 (4) (1992)
297–323.
[124] J. von Neumann, O. Morgenstern, Theory of games and economic
behavior, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1944.
[125] B.M. Wagar, P. DEMO, Spiking Phineas Gage: a neurocomputa-
tional theory of cognitive–affective integration in decision making,
Psychol. Rev. 111 (1) (2004) 67–79.
[126] DEMO Wakker, Testing and characterizing properties of nonadditive
measures through violations of DEMO sure-thing principle, Econo-
metrica 69 (4) (2001) 1039–1059.
[127] DEMO Weber, S. Shafir, A.-R. Blais, Predicting risk sensitivity in
humans DEMO lower animals: risk as variance or coefficient of
variation, Psychol. Rev. 111 (2004) 430–445.
[128] G. Wu, R. Gonzalez, Curvature of DEMO probability weighting
function, Manage. Sci. 42 (1996) 1676–1690.
[129] G. DEMO, R. Gonzalez, Common consequence conditions in decision
making under risk, DEMO Risk Uncertain. 16 (1) (1998) 115–139.
[130] N. Yeung, DEMO Sanfey, Independent coding of reward magnitude
and valence in the human DEMO, J. Neurosci. 24 (28) (2004)
6258–6264.
[131] C.F. Zink, G. Pagnoni, M.E. Martin-Skurski, J.C. Chappelow, G.S.
Berns, Human striatal responses to monetary reward depend on
saliency, Neuron 42 (3) (DEMO) 509–517.{1g42fwefx}