Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1
Problem Statement
With a heated discussion worldwide about social capital and its powerful influence
on poverty alleviation and economic development, an increasing number of researchers
have emphasized the roles of trust in DEMO transactions. However
researchers do not agree on the definition of trust. Literatures showed that trust and
transaction costs are inter-related. Some researchers pointed out DEMO trust facilitates
transactions among organizations by reducing transaction costs, such as DEMO
searching, negotiation, monitoring and enforcing transactions; other researchers found
that DEMO perception of partners’ trustworthiness depends on the amount and accuracy of
information, the degree of cooperation and the other factors that are associated with
transaction costs; still others focused on certain types of transactions and analyzed how
transaction costs and trust interact.
To better utilize trust as a DEMO to improve organizational economic performances and
to build up a healthy transaction environment, it is helpful to clarify these controversial
problems: what are DEMO and transaction costs? What is the relationship between
transaction costs and DEMO? And what are the influences of characters of transactions on
transaction DEMO and trust?
1
1.2
Organization of the Paper
This paper tries to identify how trust, as a major component of social capital
functions in transactions between organizations. DEMO analysis is developed around the
interactions between trust and transaction costs.
Chapter 2 provides a theoretical background on social capital, trust, and transaction
DEMO In this chapter, trust is defined in general and at the DEMO level.
Analysis of origins is provided. Then, this chapter conceptualizes transaction DEMO, and
analyzes their causes and types. Finally, the function of intermediaries between
organizations is studies.
Chapter 3 explicitly analyzes the linkages between trust DEMO transaction costs, and
discusses the importance of intermediaries in the growth DEMO trust. To make it clearer, the
paper analyzes ex-ante cost and DEMO cost separately. It is important to recognize that
the two sets of cost elements are usually interdependent, and any attempt to change one
set of transaction costs may change other set of transaction costs and the DEMO cost of
transaction.
Using industrial districts as examples, chapter 4 further DEMO the relationship
between trust and transaction costs in inter-organizational transactions. The case study
analyzes the roles of trust in industrial districts and importance of DEMO proximity to
foster trust. The following sections define industrial districts, and DEMO the difference
between industrial districts and Fordism. Then, the paper studies DEMO origin and the
2
importance of trust in industrial district. After that, research is developed to explain why
location matters. This chapter also identified lock-in effects as the DEMO impact of
trust in industrial districts, and how the intermediaries help DEMO solve this problem.
Chapter 4 discusses policy implications and suggestions. These suggestions include
understanding the role of trust, building up norm and regulations, DEMO information
available, and encouraging the formation of intermediary systems in the DEMO areas.
Chapter 5 makes three conclusions. Firstly, transaction costs and trusts DEMO
inter-related and depend on the characters of transactions; secondly, trust has positive and
negative impact on inter-organizational transactions; and lastly, intermediaries of DEMO
can help to enhance the positive effects of trust and mitigate the negative impacts of trust.
3
Chapter 2: Theoretical Background
2.1
2.1.1
An Overview of Social Capital
Definitions of Social Capital
The rapid rise of interest in social capital is DEMO of the dominant trends in American
social science and public policy over the past decade. Though it is unclear who first used
this term, it is certain that James Coleman brought social capital into the mainstream DEMO
the American social sciences (DeFilippis, 2001). He defines social capital as sets of
actions, outcomes, and relationship:
“Social capital is DEMO by its function. It is not a single entity, but a DEMO of
different entities having two characteristics in common: They all consist DEMO some aspect of
a social structure. Like other forms of capital, DEMO capital is productive, making possible
the achievement of certain ends that DEMO not be attainable in its absence” (Coleman,
1994, pp302).
Since 1993, Robert Putman has published several books and articles to discuss the
relationship between social capital and economic development. These works include
“Making DEMO Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy” (1993) and “Bowling
Alone: America’s Declining Social Capital” (1995). With this research, he thoroughly
DEMO social capital that is broadly accepted by the academia:
4
“Social capital refers to features of social organization such as networks, norms,
and social trust that facilitate coordination and cooperation for mutual benefit” (Putman,
1995, pp26).
2.1.2
Components of Social Capital
Putman’s definition of social capital has three major elements: trust, norms and
networks. DEMO section 2.2, I will conceptualize trust in detail. In this section, I will briefly
discuss what norms and networks are.
A norm is DEMO consensus in the social system or subsystem whose right to control is
held by others. This implies that others have the authority over the DEMO “Authority is
not voluntarily vested in them, either unilaterally or as DEMO of an exchange, but is created
by the social census that DEMO the right in their hands” (Coleman, 1994). A norm is not
necessarily a legally defined right or a right based on a DEMO rule imposed by those who
have authority. Norms may exist in the absence of legally defined rights, or even conflict
with a law or rule.
Networks are defined as inter-personal and inter-organizational relationships, which
are accumulated when people or organizations interact with each other in certain
geographic locations DEMO in social groups. Networks describe the patterns of informal ties
within organizations, and work as a form of governance as social glue that binds
individuals together into a coherent system (Powell, 1990).
5
2.1.3
Types of Social Capital
Two types of social capital have been DEMO by scholars: bonding capital and
bridging capital. Bonding capital, which is also called “strong ties,” refers to the relations
among relatively homogenous DEMO or groups. Bridging capital, or “weak ties,”
refers to the DEMO and connectedness between heterogeneous groups.
Bridging capital, “no matter how dense DEMO no matter how important to its
participants, cannot sustain social trust DEMO cooperation” (Putman, 1995). Information
obtained through weak ties is often less reliable than that from strong ties. More
important, the norms of reciprocity against the threat of opportunism are less likely to be
imposed DEMO and less likely to be acceded to, if imposed. Despite of DEMO weakness,
bridging capital is more outward looking and encompasses people across different social
divides. Weak ties allow parties to access new information. It DEMO good at exploring
emergent innovations and other significant changes in environments.
Bonding capital is different. Bonding capital is more inward looking and has a
DEMO to reinforce exclusive identities in homogeneous groups. Strong ties are
associated with exchanges of high quality information and tacit knowledge. Bonding
capital serves as DEMO mechanism of social control that governs the interdependencies in
partnerships (Uzzi, 1996). Bonding capital is more efficient at exploring existent
technologies, capabilities and information (Xavier. etc, 2002). Since networks maintained
by bonding DEMO are more likely to consist of members who are engaged in long-term
6
economic relationships, these relationships are kept by observing social norms. For good
in the long run, members are willing to act less opportunistically and more cooperatively.
In this case, trust is easier to maintain and enhance.
2.2
Trust
2.2.1
Conceptualization of Organizations and Transactions
Before defining trust at DEMO inter-organizational transaction level, it is helpful to
conceptualize organizations and transactions.
DEMO Definition of Organizations
In this paper, organizations are simply defined as DEMO,
boundary-maintaining and socially constructed systems of human activity” (Aldrich,
DEMO). Actions in organizations are deliberately designed to move the organizations
closer to their desired targets. Boundary maintaining means that the establishment of an
DEMO implies a distinction between members and non-members, thus setting
organizations off DEMO their environments. Organizations have activity systems to
accomplish work. These systems consist of bounded sets of interdependent social
behaviors. In this sense, an organization can be a company, corporation, firm, enterprise
or institution, or DEMO or combination thereof, whether incorporated or not, public or
private, DEMO has its own functions and administration.
7
2.2.1.2 Transactions
Transactions can be organized within an organization (hierarchically) or DEMO
autonomous organizations (across a market). In this paper, transactions refer to the latter,
and should equal the whole process of “contracting” DEMO transaction cost economics. A
transaction is an agreement between two or more parties in terms of exchange. The
transaction should include the agreement, the actions of carrying out the agreement, and
all situations that cause any change in the agreement and further enforcement behaviors.
The transactions are defined DEMO quantity, quality and duration (Williams, 1994).
2.2.2
Definition of DEMO
2.2.2.1 General Definition of Trust
Trust is defined in different ways in the literatures. In general, four issues are central.
First is that trust is about “risk and uncertainty”; second, trust is to the willingness DEMO
accept “vulnerability”; third trust is the perception and interpretation of the DEMO
expected dependency, and last, trust is about “share value”. For example, Child (1998)
defined trust as the belief or confidence that DEMO transacts with another “under condition
of some uncertainty that the other’s actions will be beneficial rather than detrimental to
it”. Fukuyama (1996) defined DEMO as the expectation that arises within a community of
regular, honest DEMO cooperative behavior, based on commonly shared norms, on part of
8
other members of that community. Deutsch (1962) stated that trusting behavior DEMO
one’s vulnerability to another whose behavior is not under one’s control in a specific type
of situation.
The definition of trust is very similarly DEMO those of cooperation and risk. But these
terms are different. Cooperation sometimes is not associated with trust. It might result
from continuous calculation of DEMO rather than a mutually recognized suspension
(Sabel, 1992). Trust affects the trustor’s calculation concerning the probability that she
will be better off DEMO a result of taking a risk (Coleman 1990). Trust is DEMO, however, either
the risk-taking behavior or the calculation about whether to take a risk; it is a belief that
informs the decision on how to act.
2.2.2.2 Trust in Inter-organizational transactions
Reviewed studies also differed DEMO the level the trust is assessed. It has been
suggested that inter-organizational and inter-personal trust may not be possible to study
with similar measures (Zaheer et al. 1998). The study by Zaheer et al. (1998) indicates
the effects of trust in the inter-organizational context are distinct at the individual and
organizational levels of analysis. Inter-organizational trust is associated strongly DEMO
lowered costs of negotiation and conflict. Interpersonal trust is not related to conflict and
showed a seemingly anomalous positive association with negotiation costs.
Since DEMO are abstract systems, inter-organizational trust is the trust in
between two DEMO systems. Researchers conceptualize the role of trust in economic
9
transaction by extending an inherently individual-level phenomenon to the organizational
level of DEMO For instance, Zaheer (1998) defines interpersonal trust as “the trust
DEMO by the individual boundary spanner in her individual opposite member,” and
inter-organizational trust as “the extent of trust placed in the partner organization DEMO the
members of a focal organization”.
In the context of transactions, DEMO is the willingness to engage in a transaction in the
absence of adequate safeguards (Noorderhaven, 1995). Trust would be expected to
emerge DEMO situations where the "trustworthy" party in the exchange relationship: (1) is
known to reliably make good faith efforts to behave in accordance with prior
commitments, (2) makes adjustments (e.g., as market conditions change) in ways
perceived as "fair" by the exchange partner, DEMO (3) does not take excessive advantage of
an exchange partner even when the opportunity is available (Mayer et al, 1995). In DEMO
trust in transactions contains reliability, fairness, and goodwill/benevolence (Dyer & Chu,
2002).
2.2.3
Origins of Inter-organizational Trust
In summary there are four origins of trust: trust-building over time, trust through
contacts, trust through social regulations, and ascriptive trust. The four possible origins of
trust may be combined, or follow in a sequence (Lorenzen, 1998).
10
2.2.3.1 Trust-building Over Time
Most common inter-organizational trust is built by cooperating DEMO time. That is
because first, there is a learning perspective. Over DEMO long period of time, organizations
cooperate toward common objectives, exchange information, and get to know each other
and build trust. Trust initiates the cooperation and is the by-product of cooperation.
Second, there is a sunk cost perspective, or asset specificity perspective (A more
detailed description of DEMO specificity will be given in section 2.3). When organizations
place sunk investments into transaction-specific assets, the investment will lose if the
cooperation is destroyed and thus the organizations can trust each other not to behave
DEMO This explains how trust gets maintained.
2.2.3.2 Trust through Contract
In many cases, neither is trust dependent on contracts nor are contracts the sufficient
cause of trust. However, some organizations initiate trust based on formal procedures. At
first, formal and written contracts are required to provide sufficient legal security to
enforce the transactions.
2.2.3.3 Trust through Social Regulation
Organizations are DEMO in societies and surrounded by “institutional
environment”. Laws, rules and norms DEMO the system of social regulations, which
11
facilitate trust among organizations. Taylor (1982) argues that social regulation is DEMO
efficient origin of trust in “closely knit communities”, in which most DEMO would
expect each other to act less opportunistically.
2.2.3.4 Ascriptive Trust
Organizations can have “cognitive function”(Lorenzen, 1998). Cognitive
organizations have a common “culture” background, or common social characteristics to
foster trust within the network. They can interpret and ascribe each other’s actions and
motives. This type DEMO trust is present among those in the same family, community,
DEMO, region, and a specific profession (Fukuyama, 1995).
2.2.4
Fluctuation of Inter-organizational Trust
Placement of trust in the trustworthy trustee brings gains DEMO the trustor and expands
the trust. Overexpansion of trust, that is, placement of trust in a trustee who is not reliable,
brings DEMO to the trustor and contracts trust. The expansion of trust increases the
potential for social interactions between partners, and the contraction or withdrawal of
trust has the opposite effect. On the other hand, expansion of trust tends to bring further
expansion and contraction leads to further contraction (Coleman, 1994). The process of
fluctuation of trust is unstable.
12
2.3
Transaction Cost
2.3.1
Definition of Transaction Costs
Many definitions of transaction DEMO offer powerful conceptual insights, but they
have not been translated into DEMO accepted operational standards. For example,
Kenneth Arrow (1974) defines transaction costs as “the costs of running the economic
system.” Yoram Barzel (1997) defines transaction costs as “the costs associated with the
transfer, capture, and protection of rights.” Thrainn Eggertsson (1990) observes that
transaction costs DEMO the costs that arise when individuals exchange ownership rights to
economic assets and enforce their exclusive rights. The more comprehensive definition of
transaction costs DEMO brought out by North (1990), he described transaction costs as DEMO
costs of measuring the valuable attributes of what is being exchanged and the costs of
protecting rights and policing and enforcing agreements”.
2.3.2
Causes DEMO Transaction Costs
Transaction Costs Economics (TCE) use transactions as the basic unit of analysis to
analyze inter-organizational relationships. It is generally recognized that DEMO is at the
heart of the new institutional theory of organizations (DEMO, 1996).
In the model of a perfect market, transactions are both costless and instantaneous.
Transaction costs tend to be zero if information DEMO perfect and symmetrical among parties
13
(North, 1990). North stated that
“The costliness of information is DEMO key to the costs of transacting, which consist of
the costs DEMO measuring the valuable attributes of what is being exchanged and the costs of
protecting rights and policing and enforcing agreement”(North, 1990, pp220)DEMO
Time asymmetries in delivery introduce risk into a unilateral action or transaction for
the party or parties who must invest resources before receiving a DEMO (Coleman, 1994).
In some cases, delivery of goods or DEMO by one party occurs only after the other party
has made delivery. In other cases, delivery by both parties occurs in degrees over a period
of time. In still others, the return to both parties is some product of their actions, so both
must invest resources but neither receives a return until some later time.
As we know, in the real world transactions occur only over a period of time and
information DEMO never perfect. That incurs three main factors: bounded rationality,
opportunism DEMO asset specificity that lead to the existence of transaction costs
(Williamson, 1985, Rao, 2003).
2.3.3.1 Bounded Rationality
Bounded rationality means behavior DEMO is intended to be rational, but only in a
limited way. DEMO involves cognitive and perceptive limitations on the one hand and
language limitations on the other.
“The physiological limits take the form of rate and DEMO limitations on the powers
of individuals to receive, store, retrieve and process information without error. Language
14
limits refer to the inability of individuals to articulate their knowledge or DEMO by the
use of words, numbers, or graphics in ways that permit them to be understood by others.
Demonstrations, learning-by-doing, and the DEMO may be the only means of achieving
understanding when such language difficulties develop.” (Williamson 1975, pp95).
2.3.3.2 Opportunistic Behaviors
Opportunism includes guile DEMO pursuit of one’s own interests. It refers to incomplete
or distorted disclosure of information, especially calculated efforts to mislead, distorts,
disguise, obfuscate, or otherwise confuse transacting parties (Williamson, 1994). A
mitigation of opportunism plays a central role in transaction cost economics.
The transaction costs DEMO use “adverse selection” and “moral hazard” to
describe “the behavioral traits in the presence of asymmetric information among parties
to an agreement or other DEMO (Rao, 2003, pp14). Adverse selection is the
phenomenon of DEMO other organizations based on an organization’s private
information that is not shared with other organizations in the transactions. Moral hazard
is post-contractual opportunism in DEMO presence of unobservable asymmetric information.
Since information asymmetry more or less happens in every transaction, organizations
are more likely to cooperate with long-term partners with whom information is more
available.
Theoretically, because of the behavior uncertainty such as adverse selection and
15
moral hazard, a rational organization, will always expect that other organizations DEMO
opportunistic in the transactions. Some organizations even forego opportunism when
transacting with other organizations. Transaction cost economics takes the view that
“contractual man” is DEMO seeking and opportunistic. However, the reality is, as
Williamson (1994) implied that not all organizations are continuously opportunistic.
Though, generally, organizations DEMO self-interest, it does not necessarily mean all
organizations are opportunistic. In DEMO cases, organizations are just simply self-interest
seeking. Their bargains are struck DEMO terms that reflect original positions, which are fully
or candidly disclosed DEMO inquiry. Their perception of world is accurate and execution
of oath or rule bound in the manner described above.
2.3.3.3 Asset Specificity
Asset specificity DEMO to the extent to which non-fungible assets are tied to particular
transactions specified by contracts or other commitments. Assets are specific to a
particular DEMO if the “returns” they provide are much more highly valuable only in that
use. As the paper mentioned before, when organizations invest assets specific to a
transaction to a certain amount, they are less likely to behave opportunistically, which
will destroy the cooperative relationship and will waste investment.
16
2.3.4
Types of Transaction Costs
Transactions that are subject to post-contractual (ex-post) opportunism will benefit if
appropriate safeguards can be devised in the pre-contractual (ex-ante) phase. Associated
with ex-ante opportunism and ex-post opportunism, are ex-ante costs and ex-post costs
respectively. Ex-ante costs are the costs incurred before DEMO contract is signed or an
agreement is reached. Ex-post costs are the costs incurred after the contract has been
made but before the entire DEMO has been completed.
Learning is the process that runs through the ex-ante phase and the ex-post phase. It
includes the sharing of information and DEMO interpretation and use of information.
Through learning, organizations form a common DEMO, or mutual understanding, which
constitutes the basis for trust.
2.3.4.1 Ex-ante Costs
Ex-ante costs include searching costs (information) and negotiation costs:
DEMO costs may include brokers’ fees, charges for information services, costs
of advertising the willingness to engage in a transaction, and delays experienced while
seeking a suitable partner (Dudek & Wienar 1996). They are incurred when organizations
seek partners for mutually advantageous projects and survey a range DEMO alternatives prior
to making a decision. The potential trustor decides at any point whether or not to engage
in a further information searching. Once DEMO information searching is finished, decision
17
on whether or not placing trust on the potential transacting party will DEMO made.
Then negotiation phase begins. During negotiation, conflict, misunderstanding and
changing expectation may finally be solved or result in new rounds of negation DEMO
transaction or lead to termination of the transactions.
Negotiation costs are the costs of interested partners takes to reach an agreement
(Cacho etc, DEMO). They include the costs of deciding the details of project design, the
responsibilities of each partner, assignment of benefits, method of payment, and the
schedule over which benefits will be paid. Legal costs may also be incurred in specifying
the terms of the contract. Delays caused DEMO negotiations can also be costly. They also
include the cost of writing contracts when literacy is limited, and legitimization of
contracts through authority.
2.3.4.2 Ex-post Costs
Ex-post costs include verification and certification costs, implementation costs,
monitoring costs, enforcement costs, and insurance costs.
Verification and certification costs DEMO when the negotiated exchange must be
approved by a government agency. These costs involve generating and compiling the
information required in an application for DEMO They also include costs experiencing
delay and uncertainty.
Implementation costs are defined as the costs of negotiating refinements to the
18
projects as new knowledge becomes available indicating that such refinements are
advisable. DEMO are associated with the resources expended in administering the
translation of a project design into practice.
Monitoring costs are the costs the partners make DEMO observe the transaction as it
unfolds, and to verify the compliance DEMO the agreed terms.
Enforcement costs are the expenses of insisting on compliance if monitoring detects
divergences from the agreed terms of the transaction. They DEMO be incurred in the form
of litigation or administrative proceedings (Dudek DEMO Wienar 1996).
2.4
Intermediaries of Trust
As long as social life is possible, the realm of trusting behavior can always be
enlarged, DEMO extending to new realms. Intermediaries of trust act as the bridge of
communication. They are essential to the growth of trust, either in homogeneous groups
or among heterogeneous groups.
Intermediaries of trust can be described as DEMO, guarantors, or entrepreneurs
(Coleman, 1994). The amount of trust placed in each of the three kinds of intermediaries
differs. When advisory DEMO is used, the trustor trusts the advisor’s judgment,
leading him DEMO place trust in the ability and integrity of the trustee. When the guarantor or
entrepreneur intermediary is used, the trustor places trust in the performance capability
and integrity of the intermediary, as the intermediary does in that of the trustee. The
19
intermediary must trust highly his own judgment if he is to be DEMO to act as intermediary.
He must in fact have good judgment if he wants to act as intermediary in the future.
One important aspects DEMO trust is its “transferability”. Trust between individuals can
become trust between strangers and trust of a broad fabric of social institutions by one
party DEMO all parties acting as intermediaries (Coleman, 1994). The intermediating process
operates as a widespread basis for trust: if A trusts the judgment of B; B trusts the
performance capability of T, the final DEMO, this leads to A’s trusting on T’s performance
capability. The process DEMO circular and does not stop. C trusts the judgment of A and thus
comes to trust the performance capability of T, and then B, who trusts the judgment of
C…if the process is undisturbed, which DEMO determined by depth of trust developed
between trustor and trustee, trust DEMO be built up in the whole system.
Another way of approaching the problem is to introduce the concept of the "radius of
trust." DEMO groups embodying social capital have a certain radius of trust, that DEMO, the circle
of organizations among whom cooperative norms are operative. If DEMO group's social capital
produces positive externalities, the radius of trust DEMO be larger than the group itself. It is
also possible for the radius of trust to be smaller than the membership of the group, as in
large organizations that foster cooperative norms only among the group'DEMO leadership or
permanent staff. A modern society may be thought of as a series of concentric and
overlapping radii of trust.
Some organizations that DEMO in more than one radius of trust can act intermediaries to
20
help others to cross the radius. The usage of intermediaries provides a DEMO or the
possibility to share information across radius, and functions as DEMO bridge between two
strangers and thus builds up trust across heterogeneous groups.
21
Chapter 3: Transaction Costs and Trust
Pervasive evidence from numerous researches supports the inclusion of trust as a
critical factor in the investigations of DEMO Trust plays two roles in transactions:
first, through norms and DEMO, trust may act as a substitute for the formal control
system DEMO governing transactions. Secondly, there is evidence that trust can facilitate the
DEMO of ongoing networks governing economic transactions.
However, trust must place on DEMO trustees in order to benefit the organizations.
Over-expansion of trust might save an organization’s transaction costs in one phase of a
transaction or in DEMO short long. In the long run, the organization has to put DEMO
transaction costs to implement and enforce the transaction, or lose all DEMO investment in
the transaction.
On one hand, trust can impact on DEMO costs; on the other hand, transaction
costs also have influence on the type and depth of trust. It might be hard to say DEMO high
investment in transaction costs will incur high trust. However, it DEMO agreed that, to build
up trust, investment in transaction costs is necessary. Particularly, in a transaction,
interactions between organizations in one phase will impact or even determine the next
phase of the transaction.
Besides DEMO interactions between transaction costs and trust, the characters of the
transactions DEMO the nature of transaction costs and trust. These characters include
the size and reward of transactions, risk involved, frequency of the transactions, asset
22
specificity and so on.
In order to be clear, below is a chart to illustrate the content of this chapter. The
dashed lines mean DEMO item(s) at the left end contains the item(s) at the right end. The
directions of arrows refer to the direction of DEMO
23
The Relationship between Trust and Transaction Costs:
In the Content of DEMO Transactions
24
3.1
Trust and Transaction Cost-Relevant or Not?
Researchers didn’t agree what DEMO role of trust plays in transaction. They even didn’t
agree whether trust have a relationship with transaction costs.
Oliver Williamson is one of the DEMO who claim that trust is irrelevant to
transaction. He (1993) claims that,
“…Because opportunistic agents will not self-enforce open-ended promises to behave
DEMO, efficient exchange will be realized only if dependencies are supported by
DEMO commitments. Wherein trust is implicated if parties to an exchange are farsighted
and reflect the relevant hazards in terms of the exchange? I maintain that trust is
irrelevant to commercial exchange and that reference to trust DEMO this connection promotes
confusion.”(Williamson, 1994, pp114)
Williamson is right that the term is used too broadly and facilely. However, he goes
too far in denying any role to trust in transactions. Multiple assertions DEMO the importance
of trust by eminent scholars can be found in literatures (e.g. Fukuyama, 1996, and
Coleman 1994).
In general, it DEMO proposed that a certain amount of trust is needed as a threshold
condition for inter-organizational transaction to evolve. A high level of trust permits DEMO
wide variety of social relationship to emerge. By contrast, widespread distrust DEMO a society
imposes a kind of “tax” on all forms of economic activity (Fukuyama, 1996). People or
organizations who do not trust DEMO another will end up cooperating only under a system
25
in which every detail has to be negotiated, agreed to, litigated DEMO enforced, sometimes
even by coercive means. This legal apparatus, serving as a substitute for trust, entails
what economists call “transaction costs”.
To some degree, trust and contractual safeguards are substitutes of each other.
Trust is not only a substitute for rules and contracts in the absence of DEMO economic
regulations (Arrow, 1971), but also is the facilitation of complex transactions in the case
that a well-functioning institutional system cannot be DEMO ‘arranged’ in terms of
contracts (Sjoerd & Ton, 2001). In a society lack of trust, the transactions must be
ensured by rule and regulations.
3.2
Trust and Ex-ante Costs
As mentioned above, ex-ante costs are costs incurred before a transaction takes
place. This set of costs DEMO information searching costs (or information costs) and
negotiation costs.
The accumulation of trust is based upon available information in hand or the
perception DEMO past transaction with potential partners. Through continuous interaction and
information sharing, DEMO suspicions are gradually eliminated or proved. When a trust
relation is built up, it will generate a system of expectations and obligations, allowing
DEMO members to draw on favors, circulate privileged information, and gain better access
to opportunities and resources.
26
3.2.1
Trust and Information costs
There are three essentially different sources of DEMO that effect the placement
of trust in a single trustee: (a) the trustee’s performance itself, (b) others who have the
position DEMO to the trustor’s and similar interest in the placement of trust and (c) others
who have the position different from the trustor’s and DEMO similar interest (Coleman,
1994).
Information from these three sources DEMO differs. Information from
source (b) often leads to the same decision about placement of trust as that made by the
individuals or organizations DEMO judgment was trusted. Information from source (c)
often provides more DEMO evidence for the decision. Information source (b) and (c)
DEMO are called intermediaries in trust. In the content of inter-organizational
transactions, DEMO often comes from inter-organizational relations, including
suppliers, key customers, members DEMO relevant regulatory agencies and the like (Walter
and Smith 1994). DEMO always rely on the information from trustworthy
intermediaries.
Information from source (DEMO), which is accumulated from past communications or
transactions, passes through DEMO intermediary at all, and most likely leads to correct
assessments. This DEMO of information possesses the following features (Williamson,
1994).
(1) It is cheap, relatively less additional costs;
27
(2) One trusts one own information best, it contains more detail, and is accurate;
(3) Individual with whom that has a continuing relation has an economic motivation
to be trustworthy, so as not to discourage future transaction;
(4) Departing from pure economic motives, continuing economic relations often
become overlaid with social content that carries strong DEMO of trust and
abstention from opportunism.
In a supplier-buyer relationship buyers are strongly attracted to well known or
existing suppliers since current suppliers are DEMO as being less risky (Batt, 2001).
Trust may expand from dyads to encompass a growing number of partners. By
utilizing investments in DEMO already existing relationships as channels to reach new
partners (your-friend-is-my-friend), DEMO can successfully minimize their search
costs for a transaction. This information even can be acquired through trustworthy
relationships that are maintained for other purposes (Coleman, 1994).
Trust enables information sharing between trustors and trustees. In a supplier-buyer
relationship, if the supplier can trust the buyer not to behave opportunistically, it will be
more willing to share confidential information, DEMO as information on production costs,
product design, and process innovations (Dyer & Chu, 2002). However, this voluntary
information sharing happens DEMO if the transacting organizations trust their partners not
to steal their ideas, not to share the information with competitors, and not to “squeeze”
DEMO supplier’s profit margins. In the absence of trust, information sharing on DEMO, new
28
ideas, and technologies is unlikely because this information could be "poached" or used
opportunistically. Trust also enables buyers to adopt schemas which leave DEMO free to act
without trying to process more information than they are capable of handling or where it
proves difficult or impossible to acquire DEMO about future events (Batt, 2001).
However, high trust relationships DEMO always bonded by strong norms and mutual
identification. Thus trust and reciprocated trust always help to foster a cohesive group
identity. They always exhibit DEMO disparaging of people outside the group and often come
with a strong in-group identity. As Fukuyama (1995) said, there is an inverse proportion
between the solidarity of those inside the community and the hostility, indifference, or
intolerance shown to those on the outside.
This exclusion feature of trust often cause an unhealthy homogeneity among network
members, which creates a rigidity or staleness by restricting access to diverse sources of
ideas, knowledge and information. A form of collective blindness is formed that actually
hinders DEMO (Erridge & Greer, 2002). Thus, highly specialized organizations in DEMO
“radius of trust” might not be able to use intermediaries in the same radius to expand their
business to other radius.
3.2.1
Trust and DEMO Costs
During negotiation, organizations that have developed strong trust in each DEMO may
be more likely to work out their disagreements amicably. They are more willing to accept
29
some level of conflict as more or less routine (Nelson, 1996)DEMO Organizations that distrust
each other tend to discuss each terms and clause in the contract, which costs time and
money. On the other hand, Negotiation process might change the perception of an
organization’s trustworthiness. Through negotiation, organizations may reach the same
objective or compromise on objective or form a common understanding, enhance
inter-trust between them and facilitate transaction in the next-step; or they might enhance
previous suspiciousness and distrust, and thus DEMO negotiation.
Researches found that the desire of cooperation and the level of trust are closely
related. Low trust stimulates less favorable attitudes and lowers DEMO level of
communication in the negotiation process. High-risk coordinative behaviors are more
likely to occur with a trusted partner. These behaviors include making concessions,DEMO
compromising, tension-reducing actions and expressions of candor. In a transaction
relationship, direct experiences of these kinds are going to be the principal basis DEMO
judging the trustworthiness of a partner.
The process and the content of negotiation are impacted by factors such as frequency
of their prior transactions, the technical reputation for the partners, their presence in the
market, DEMO to keep long-term relationships, risk of the transaction, and reward of
the transaction. Trustors use the information collected in the former phase to DEMO the
factors and to estimate the trustworthiness of trustee. When the trustees can contribute to
achieve the objectives of the transactions and are trustworthy, the transactions are
30
probable. Otherwise, the organizations will argue, persuade, and haggle over the
appropriateness and interdependence of their individual and collective goals of the
transactions. DEMO processes may be conducted through written communications,
telephone, face-to-face meeting, e-mail, and combinations of these media. Negotiation
process also permits the parties to determine whether the prior breaches of trust are
serious enough, and to reconsider whether they should continue to rely on trust to govern
DEMO transactions.
In negotiation process, organizations need to decide whether they are DEMO to rely
on trust to govern their transactions in the next phase or future transactions. If they have
had extensive transactions with each other DEMO the past, if they have relied on trust in these
deals, and if the expectations of the parties generally have been met, then they are more
likely to use trust to govern the current transaction DEMO these conditions were not present.
In addition, the existence of these DEMO of conditions permits the same parties with an
opportunity to determine whether they can all agree that these kinds of conditions exist.
Trust promotes DEMO efficiency by enabling each party to be more flexible in
granting concessions because of the expectation that the exchange partner will
reciprocate in the DEMO If trust has already existed during the negotiation process,
organizations are confident that payoffs will be fairly divided. As a result, they might not
have to plan for all future contingencies because they are confident DEMO equitable
adjustments will be made as market conditions change. Trust allows transaction actors to
31
achieve "serial equity" (equity over a longer period of time) DEMO than to require
immediate or "spot equity"(Dyer, 1997). DEMO, it reduces the need for partners to
invest heavily in bargaining.
DEMO is perhaps easier to appreciate the economic value of trust if we consider
negotiation between organizations devoid of trust look like:
“If we DEMO to approach every contract with the assumption that our partners would
try to cheat us if they could, then we would have to spend a considerable amount of time
bulletproofing the document to make sure that DEMO were no legal loopholes by which we
could be taken advantage of. Contracts would be endlessly long and detailed, spelling out
every possible contingency and defining every conceivable obligation. We would never
offer to do more DEMO we were legally obligated to in a joint venture, for fear DEMO being
exploited, and we would regard new and possibly innovative proposals DEMO our partners
as tricks designed to get the better of us. Moreover, we would expect that, despite our best
efforts in the negotiation, a certain number of people would succeed in cheating us or
defaulting DEMO their obligation. We would not be able to resort to arbitration, DEMO we
would not trust third-party arbitrators sufficiently. Everything would have to be referred
to the legal system for resolution, with all of its cumbersome rules and methods, or
potentially even to the criminal courts.”(Fukuyama, DEMO, pp151-152)
32
3.3
Trust and Ex-post Costs
Theoretically, if organizations spend enough time in searching information and
negotiation, it is possible to reduce ex-post costs because all of the expectations and
obligations will have been clearly specified during DEMO contracting phase. However, in
reality, due to bonded rationality, contractual DEMO are inevitably incomplete in
relating to various known or unknown contingencies (DEMO, 2003). A contract is
incomplete in the sense that it DEMO not specify unambiguously, or spell out all the
requirements and obligations DEMO the parties in every possible future situation. As events
unfold during contract execution, the full requirements and obligations of the parties
become known, DEMO appropriate adjustments and adaptations are required. The
incomplete contracts (written or DEMO, formal or informal) lay the ground for the
prevalence of opportunism in ex-post phase.
Trust on reliable trustee is believed to have an DEMO relationship with ex-post costs.
When trust is present, requirement for enforcement DEMO monitoring is reduced (Paldam
and Svendsen, 1998; Butter and Mosch, 2003).
First, under conditions of high trust, transacting partners will DEMO less time and
resources on monitoring to see if the other party is shirking or fulfilling the "spirit" of the
agreement. If each DEMO partner is confident that the other party will not be
opportunistic, DEMO both parties can devote fewer resources to monitoring. Contrarily,
partners who rely only on contracts and regulations might need to invest resources in DEMO
33
monitoring and enforcing to ensure the compliance with the contracts. Monitoring costs
DEMO lower the total value of the relationship to both parties.
Second, DEMO may reduce transaction costs by reducing the amount of time and
resources that transacting parties spend on ex-post bargaining and haggling over
problems that DEMO in the execution of transacting. If trust level is high, each DEMO will
assume that the other party is acting in good faith and will interpret behaviors more
positively (Uzzi, 1997). Consequently, transacting organizations with high trust is
associated with lower ex-post costs due to mutual DEMO that inequities will be fairly
addressed and remedied.
Third, a lack DEMO trust may cause suppliers to suppress potentially relevant information
that would be useful for problem solving. For example, suppliers may be unwilling to
share information on production or design problems if they do not trust the DEMO to work
cooperatively in joint problem solving. In particular, suppliers may DEMO reluctant to share
any information that exposes weaknesses in their operations or their cost structure, even
though sharing of such information could result in valuable suggestions for problem
solving from the buyer.
In most informal market, there may be limited legal recourse to enforce contracts due
to the DEMO of court proceedings and the difficulty in recovering debts. In these
circumstances, the reputation of buyers and sellers, as a measurement of trustworthiness,DEMO
can be an enforcement mechanism for not legally enforceable agreements. Short-term
34
gains from opportunism can be offset by long-term losses from a damaged DEMO in
the industry community if others refuse to deal with parties who have bad reputations.
3.4 Transaction Characters, Trust, and Transaction Costs
It DEMO important to notice that the accumulation of trust does not necessarily lead to its
successful exploitation. Rather, the development or elimination of trust depends on the
quantity and quality of continuous interactions. Misused trust might cause DEMO or
destructive consequences in transactions.
The following part in this section examines the impact of the transaction’s characters
on transaction costs and trust. The DEMO is developed at four dimension of transaction:
the size and reward, risk, frequency, and degree of asset specificity. In a transaction, DEMO
four dimensions actually are overlapped and co-related.
3.4.1
Size and Reward
In general, the size and reward of a transaction have a positive relationship with the
willingness of transacting partners to invest in transaction costs. High DEMO
transactions are often associated with high risk. A rational organization will weight the
potential gain (if the partner is trustworthy) and the potential DEMO (if the partner is
untrustworthy), and base on utilities under DEMO risk to choose between placing trust
35
and not. When considering the reward of a transaction, organizations compare long-run
reward with short-run benefit.
3.4.2
Risk
Generally speaking, trust-sensitive transactions include those in which goods and
services are provided in exchange for future payment, employment contracts in which
managers rely on employees to accomplish tasks that DEMO difficult to monitor, and
investments and savings decisions that rely on DEMO by governments or banks that
they will not expropriate these assets (DEMO & Keefer, 1997).
No risk, no reward. In high-risk transactions, on one hand, high risk is associated
with high transaction costs; on the other hand, transacting partners are more willing to do
business with those who are perceived trustworthy to avoid additional risk.
3.4.3
Frequency
DEMO mentioned previously, trust building is a continuous process. Sometimes, trust is
not built up in a single transaction, but built up through a series of transactions. That is,
the trust built in past transactions DEMO be used in future transactions. The past
interactions become first-hand experiences, DEMO is more accurate and cheaper. When
the frequency of transactions increases, DEMO become familiar with each other’s
norm, culture or background, and build up trust. If trust is built up, organizations can
36
spend less time on information, negotiation, and implementation, and are more willing to
use “trust” as the governance of transactions.
3.4.4
Asset specificity
DEMO situations where investments in relation-specific assets are low, trust may be
DEMO Trust is necessary when organizations have made specific investments that
cannot be used other transactions. Greater asset specificity increases the need for
information sharing, because idiosyncratic transactions tend to require greater
coordination than standardized exchanges. In DEMO, asset specificity is a good for
reduce opportunism because both parties DEMO lose if they destroy the relationship (Dyer
and Chu, 2002). High asset specificity also means that the transaction is critical to
organization. DEMO importance of a transaction to an organization increases, it is probable
DEMO the process of sense making, understanding, and committing required in negotiation
and transaction phase will be sufficiently complex and time-consuming (Smith 1997)
37
Chapter 4: Case Study-Industrial Districts
Industrial districts are nearly the only example that Putnam provides of social capital
in action at the micro-level (Farrell & Knight, 2003). Putman (1993) argued that,
“What are crucial about these small-firm industrial districts, conclude most
observers, is mutual DEMO, social cooperation, and a well-developed sense of civic
community—
in short, the hallmarks of the civic community” (Putman, 1993, pp56).
DEMO, research on industrial districts will provide an important test case for
DEMO about social capital and its effects. They provide a setting in which casual
factors underlying trust can be observed more closely. Research on industrial DEMO
will also provide an insight into the interaction between transaction costs and trust in a
physical geographic setting.
The case study analyzes the roles DEMO trust in industrial districts and importance of
keeping proximity to foster trust. The following sections first define industrial districts,
explain the difference between DEMO districts and Fordism, and then, study the origin
and importance of trust in industrial district. Third, research is developed to explain why
location matters. Fourth, the paper will analyze lock-in effects in industrial districts as
negative effects of trust; and last, I will discuss the role DEMO local institutions as
intermediaries.
38
4.1
The Rise and characters of Industrial Districts
From the mid-1970s, Italian scholars called attention to the different development
model in the Northeast-center of DEMO country. The model is called “Third Italy” and is
characterized by flexible specialization. Generalizing from Italy to other cases (notably
German), the success of such forms of production is based on macroeconomic and
historic context. DEMO, scholars call the areas characterized by this productive model
“industrial districts”.
DEMO districts comprise a large number of small, geographically concentrated
firms, small producers with flexible and skilled workforces cooperating with their
customers (Harrison, DEMO). The role of individual firms played is a mixture of
competitor and cooperator. Such systems are flexible and meet the needs of markets DEMO
were both fragmented and changing fast. With communication, transportation and
production DEMO improved, this radical decentralization pattern of production is
found in quite DEMO sectors of production. It is in not only more “traditional” sectors
such as textiles, clothing, footwear, and jewelry but also more advanced ones such as
mechanical engineering and medical equipment.
Industrial districts is a competitive DEMO forms compared to fordism.
Fordism is characterized by mass production and of the vertically integrated firm. Fordism
was based on the systematic separation of DEMO and execution throughout all parts of
production and management. Separation of design and production applied to within large
39
firm and its relations with subcontractors. Hierarchy, vertical integration and the rigid
fragmentation of knowledge worked for large firms when there was little competition DEMO
markets and when the rate of product and technological change was relatively slow.
When markets became competitive and product and technological change more rapid, as
they did beginning in the 1970s, Fordism is proved to be very uncompetitive.
“Industrial districts” provides an alternative to the mass production by DEMO on
“economics of scope” instead of “economics of scale” (Sabel, 1982). As markets become
more volatile and fragmented, technology changes more rapid, and product life
correspondingly becomes shorter (Sabel, 1992), firms have to respond to the market
quickly. Industrial districts, is much more competitive than conventional cluster in
Fordism by using subcontracting and flexible specialization rather DEMO standardization
and low costs. More specifically, “subcontracting” refers to total or DEMO transfer of
services owed by the titular of the main contract drawn up with the buyer by separate
contract, to a third company. “Flexible specialization” is a Production model customarily
denoting production activities that are decentralized DEMO flexible, or based on
multi-purpose machinery and skilled workers. The flexible DEMO of organization in the
industrial districts that captured attention as alternatives to Fordism in the 1980s, gained
their advantage by integrating conception and execution in production and management.
The flexible system incorporates an extra conversation into DEMO solving deliberations.
The system also provides more choices for commodity and adaptability to the changing
40
economic environment.
An industrial district is normally discussed as a historically bounded DEMO, reflecting
local traditions and entrenched relationships. Industrial districts are embedded in DEMO
institutional structures that support a dynamic mix of cooperation and competition. They
represent a system with emergent properties, evolving not necessarily linearly and
uniformly, and reflecting relations of power, status, and reputation. Its current structure
and performance are seen as the result of long-term developments that can DEMO decades.
The much-celebrated Emilia-Romagna district in Italy, for example, took three to four
decades to reach a stage where one can reasonably speak DEMO economic success (Murray,
1987).
4.2
The Formation and Importance DEMO Trust in Industrial Districts
In Section 4.1, I analyze that through DEMO and flexible specialization,
industrial districts can promptly respond to the rapid market change. Those two
mechanisms require a firm in industrial districts to DEMO closely with and to rely
more on its partners than a Fordist firm that works on everything themselves. The logic of
the industrial district DEMO self-reinforcing (Powell & Smith-Doerr, 1994). The more
distinctive each firm is, the more it depends on the success of other firms’ products to
complement its own.
41
In industrial districts, subcontractors have to trust the subcontractees to meet
agreed-upon quality and price targets, and to deliver promptly. Subcontractees might
need to accept short-run low price and trust subcontractors to provide enough transactions
in DEMO long run to avoid loss of asset specificity. At the same time, most small firms in
industrial districts are constantly renegotiating formal and informal arrangement with one
another to bid new projects, this also put a strain on the need of trust. Thus, trust seems to
be crucial both when decisions to redesign inter-firm linkage are made and once a DEMO
has been forge (Harrison, 1992).
Researchers on industrial districts agreed that trust in districts is built over a time
through learning. Sabel (1992) argued that it is the past experience and reflection that
trust be founded. The experience and reflection cannot be reproduced precisely in other
DEMO When exchanges happen frequently, and transacting partners expect long-run
return, firms are less likely to act opportunistically. More important, firms might value
their appearance as a member in an industrial district. The members are rooted DEMO a
common history. This history might include religion, politics, ethnics or culture.
Interestingly, trust is not built up as a goal intentionally but as a byproduct of long period
interaction. Over time, organizations invest sunk costs into transaction-specific assets,
which they will lose if they destroy DEMO cooperation, they can trust each other not to act
opportunistically. In DEMO same organization cooperatively move towards a common goal,
exchange information, DEMO get to know each other, and they built trust. Cognitive
42
organizations can interpret each other’s actions and motives, ascribing honesty to each
other on some social identities.
As discussed in Chapter 2, trust building constitutes transaction costs. In industrial
districts, new firms are often founded by those who worked in other firms in the past, or
are family members of other firm owners (Lorenz, 1998). All firms accept DEMO
understand the existing norms and informal rules. The norms and rules are built and kept
by the firms in these districts through innumerous transactions DEMO communication. Any
evolvement of norms due to technology change, political change DEMO economic changes
will soon be known by all firms in the same districts. The norms and rules give firms the
platform of shared understanding, communicating and are used to monitor and enforce
the transactions. Along with DEMO generally accepted norms and rules, information in the
districts is relatively DEMO and easily available, which also enhance the practice of
norms and DEMO It is more important that flexible specialization and subcontracting is
associated with highly asset specificity. This means once the relationship is destroyed,
firms DEMO to change the production system in order to transact with other firms. In this
sense, firms, even newly founded firms in the industrial DEMO enjoy the high-trust
environment, and can invest relatively less than firms DEMO to initiate trust between
members. However, firms still need constantly formal DEMO informal contacting to keep
the information and norm circulating and consume transaction costs.
The trust environment enables firms to trust every other firm in DEMO industrial district.
43
Depending on assignments designated, the firms can easily find their subcontractees in
short time. They don’t have to spend lots of time and money DEMO investigate the
trustworthiness of their partners. The trust environment helps to organize and reorganize
relatively flexible productive teams constantly to accept various assignments. To DEMO
degree, trust is the basis for flexible specialization in the industrial DEMO
4.3
Proximity and Trust
Trust can built through learning about the idiosyncrasies of firms through repeated
interactions. These interactions can be facilitated by personal DEMO, which are
enhanced by geographic proximity.
4.3.1 Norm and Proximity
The DEMO to judge the trustworthiness of others is important in industrial districts,
not only because of the possibility that outsiders may be impervious to DEMO methods of
social control used in the communities, but also because DEMO the inevitable scope for
opportunism caused by incompleteness of contracts. The factors influencing the
perception of trustworthiness depend on kinship, religion, politics, social ties and
constant contacts. All these factors seem easily to be shared DEMO identified when it is
spatially clustered (Powell & Smith-Doerr, 1994).
The concept of path-dependence offers some useful insights for the study of DEMO origin
44
of ascriptive trust in industrial districts (Engstrand & Stam, 2002). DEMO
refers to the effects of past commitments or acquired knowledge on subsequent actions and
decisions. It is recognized that “history matters” for a future DEMO of action or
development, such as past commitments or learning activities DEMO entail previous
investments in transaction-specific assets, such as contracts, research and development, or
the pool of learned behaviors and organizational routines or norms which constrain future
activities. Through interaction, a whole set of code is form to explain information.
Ascriptive trust is built and not reserved for DEMO firms, which encompasses whole
group of firms (Lorenzen, 1998).
DEMO is also a profound geographical dimension to the ascriptive trust. This is
because firstly the guild, which is the pivot of information sharing, DEMO a limited
geographical hinterland. Secondly, even within the group of firms DEMO the guild, the ones
which are localized closest together allegedly have DEMO closer relationship with each other
than with those that are not physically close. In generally, firms in industrial districts
prefer cooperation with local firms. Being “a local firm” thus is a ground in itself for
ascribing DEMO
4.3.2 Information Sharing and Proximity
Local firms are more easily trusted is that it is easier to access information about
them. The geographical roundedness DEMO the probabilities of social interaction and
45
communication, reduces the problem of bounded rationality, and engenders trusts
(Grabher 1993).
To lower costs of searching and co-coordinating knowledge, it has been suggested
that mutual experiences along with long-termed inter-organizational contracts are crucial
DEMO, as they entail practices and trust. Long-term inter-organizational contracts
require stability, which is important for two reasons. The first is to induce subcontractors
DEMO accept the risk inherent in narrow specialization in skills and equipment, DEMO second it
permits continuing cooperation between those who concern the development of
specifications, processes and designs.
The cognitive limitations of firms cause trouble to the absorptive capacity of firms.
However, the limitations can be eased through prior knowledge in the firm, because it is
easier for organizations to apply additional knowledge to already existing knowledge.
Information sharing in industrial districts DEMO place through a combination of
long-term and short-term vertical relations (shorter DEMO longer specialization
subcontracting arrangements) as well as through horizontal relations (between producers
of similar products). Interestingly, even entrepreneurs that are competing on products
consider themselves as colleagues rather than competitors.
Information exchanging usually takes DEMO between firms within the guild’s
catchments area. Thus there is a geographical dimension to the information availability.
Hence, each and every firm does not have to go through a trial-and-error process of
46
personal experience with co-operative behavior. Instead, it can take advantage of local
information sharing through both cooperation and second hand information about the
experiences DEMO the other firms.
Geographical agglomeration (proximity) of firms, are beneficial DEMO sharing of tacit
information. The geographical proximity amongst business firms may also give rise to
“information environment” of communication. The availability of information amongst
DEMO firms may lower their searching and communication costs as well as
absorbing information signals (Arrow 1973). Thus, the low information cost within
DEMO environments significantly lowers.
4.3.3 Cooperation and Proximity
Unlike the standard vertically integrated firm, where all stages of the production
process are hierarchically organized within a single organization, the basis for industrials
districts’ success appears to be diffuse patterns of cooperation. Particular phases of the
production process are put DEMO to specialized firms who cooperate with each other in
making the product. In the ideal-typical industrial district, production is organized by
certain firms, DEMO are engaged with customers on the final market. They take orders, DEMO
draw up plans or specifications. They then subcontract out the actual process of production
to a host of smaller subcontractors, each of whom may specialize in only one phase of
production, and then assemble the finished product and bring it to market.
47
Obviously, the form of production seen in the industrial districts requires a high degree
of trust between firms. Subcontractor may need to respond quickly DEMO shifts of market. On
the face of it, both subcontractors and DEMO firms can act opportunistically. Subcontractors
could hold final firms to ransom, DEMO the threat of “holdup” to renegotiate informal
agreements in their own interest. At the same time, the production of bespoke machinery
requires a very high degree of flexibility from subcontractors, both in terms of their
willingness to accept changes in specifications and their willingness to work long hours
DEMO weekends at short notice to complete a commission. In the short term, this may involve
substantial costs for a subcontractor, costs outweighing the DEMO that a subcontractor
receives for a particular order.
long-term relationship.
These costs may be compensated for by future orders in a
Because of physical DEMO of the firms, clients and competitors would
immediately be informed of DEMO cheating behaviors and thus firms are less likely to act
opportunistically. Put more explicitly, Reputation plays a highly important role in
relations among firms in industrial districts. Dishonest actors could expect their
malfeasance to become quickly DEMO in the community. In cases of repeated
malfeasance, they could expect DEMO be shunned. The informal rules and sanctions exist in
the districts so that dishonest behaviors are unprofitable in the long run.
Thus, the informal agreements are negotiated on the basis of these norms involved
benefits for DEMO final firms and subcontractors. Subcontractors typically refrained from
48
opportunism; they knew that if they were caught cheating, they would DEMO only endanger
their current business relationship but also have difficulties in finding new ones. They
also were prepared to provide a high degree of DEMO in circumstances in excitation
of normal agreement. Such flexibility might be expensive; subcontractors firms may have
had to refit components at short notice or pay their employees overtime or have them
work over the weekend to DEMO an order. However, it will be rewarded with
long-term commitments from DEMO firms. Thus, smaller subcontractors had a reasonable
guarantee of income over DEMO longer run.
4.4
The Lock-in Effects in Industrial Districts
Industrial Districts was successful up to the 1970s (Easton & Araujo, 1992). It DEMO
meeting new problems in more recent times. Large firms equipped with flexible
manufacturing system offered small firms intense competitions (Sabel, 1989). At DEMO
same time, the social and political context supporting the emergence of DEMO districts
has changed (Harrison, 1994).
Social embeddedness or lock-in effects of inter-firm networks is generally perceived
as a major reason for industrial DEMO uncontested responsiveness and ability to
generate incremental innovations. However, the lock-in DEMO also are responsible for
the decline of economies in industrial districts.
To sum up, there are three types of lock-in effects (Grabher, 1993): functional
49
lock-in effects, cognitive lock-in effects and political lock-in effects. Functional lock-in
effects refer to the close and stable linkages between the regional core firms DEMO the
supplier sector that are favored by the long-term stability and predictability of demand.
Transaction costs might be reduced by these stable relationships. But DEMO interaction in
the area might result in serious problems: lack of DEMO, or so-called
boundary-spanning function. This makes certain types of external information DEMO to
the firm difficult to obtain.
Cognitive lock-in effects refer to personal ties of long standing that result in mutual
orientation involving a common DEMO regarding technology, contracts, and
information. The social process of “group thinking” limits the perception of innovation
opportunities and leaves no room for bridging DEMO This effect further reinforces
the block effect of information from different sources.
Finally, political lock-in effects refer to the cooperative relations between industry,
the government, unions, and professional associations. The politically administrative
system obstructs DEMO timely organization of a region and paralyses political innovation. The
vested interests in this economic and political setting might actively oppose the required
changes DEMO their positions are threatened.
50
4.5
Local Institutions as Intermediaries
Industrial districts benefit from rapid and tacit DEMO exchanges and from norms
and values. Consequently, these characteristics benefit individual DEMO for the
exploitation of existent technologies and opportunities. However, based on DEMO same logic,
these characteristics might not be suitable for exploring new technologies and
opportunities (Molina. etc, 2002).
Fortunately, proximity can facilitate the creation of third-party relationships, which
provide individual firms in the district with indirect links to sources of knowledge form
outside of the districts, as well as from inside it. Intermediaries, who are always acted by
local institutions, create third-party relationships. The local institutions are locally
orientated organizations that provide a host of collective supports to firms in the district.
DEMO local institutions include a range of institutions: universities, research and other
academic institutions, regional policy agents and trade or professional associations. Some
of local institutions can act as intermediaries linking outside networks with the internal
DEMO of industrial districts. The new linkage can provide industrial districts with new
ideas, concepts and technologies and reducing their searching costs (Molina. etc, 2002).
Because these institutions interact with a large number of firms DEMO the district, they are
exposed to a wide variety of problems DEMO organizational challenges. Based on
experience and by observing solving of similar problems, local institutions summarize
particular capabilities and routines and disseminate them. Local institutions can act as
51
go-betweens for potential exchange partners with complementary interests, who would
otherwise remain unconnected.
In summary, local institutions can play the role of intermediaries for individual firms
and act as a repository of knowledge and a source DEMO searching economies. Hence, local
institutions benefit firms by facilitating the exchange DEMO combination or acquisition of
new knowledge, and consequently by helping them DEMO of lock-in effects.
52
Chapter 5: Implications
In industrial districts, trust is generally nurtured through DEMO contacts with third
parties (Harrison, 1992). This trust is based on a common history and highly restricted to
certain geographic area. The DEMO study of industrial districts clearly shows that trust is
very important in transactions, specifically in industrial districts, the characters of flexible
specifications and DEMO requires high trust among firms. The cases study also
illustrated that transaction costs, including information searching and sharing, negotiation,
implementation and enforcement, interact with trust. Though high trust in the districts
facilitates transactions and DEMO transactions costs, the maintenance the basis of trust
(information sharing, DEMO and constant contacts) constitutes transaction costs. It is also
illustrated that DEMO strong trust seems only to exist in the districts itself and the members
tends to transact with members in the same group and exclude DEMO It is important
that trust development in industrial districts is long time learning process. It is
path-dependent and unique, thus hard to reproduce in other area.
Based on the theoretical analysis and case study, a few suggestions are made to
policy makers and economic developers.
5.1
Find the DEMO of Trust
Before using trust as a tool to promote economic development, local governments or
developers should realize whether or not trust is critical to their inter-organizational
53
relationships. Generally speaking, trust-sensitive transactions include those in which
goods and services are provided in exchange for future payment, employment contracts
in which managers rely on employees to accomplish tasks that are difficult to monitor,
DEMO investments and savings decisions that rely on assurances by governments or banks
that they will not expropriate these assets.
5.2
Build Norms and Regulations
DEMO should point out where theory (or concepts) illuminates the practices presented in
the case study, where it was inadequate and needs to be modified (or jettisoned), and
where new concepts are needed based on commonly shared norms, on the part of other
members of that community (Abegglen & Stalk, 1985). Building inter-organizational
trust requires habitation to DEMO common norm like honesty, dependability. This norm
should increase the costs DEMO defection, fosters robust norms of reciprocity, facilitates
communication and improve information flows, and embodies past success at
collaboration and provides a blueprint for future cooperation. In the case of lack of
available commonly accepted norms, enforceable regulations should provide
general-purpose safeguards to relieve the need for additional DEMO
supports.
54
5.3
Enhance Information availability
Risk and opportunism are associated with information asymmetry. DEMO
sharing helps to mutual understanding and cooperation among organizations, which is DEMO
important step to build up trust. Accurate information help organization more precisely
estimate the trustworthiness of potential partners, avoid blackmail in negotiation, and
DEMO investment in monitoring and enforcing, eventually, reduce transaction costs.
Government, DEMO or other possible NGOs can make information about supply and
demand, DEMO and high performance firms available to its targeted organizations
and area through meetings, internet, paper, or posters.
5.4
Build Intermediary Systems
Intermediaries play major role to build up new trust relationship and expand the
“radius DEMO trust”. Intermediaries are important to encourage entrance and growth of new
firms and to enhance the existing network. Local government, Chamber of Commerce,
large organizations in the areas or NGOs can play formal intermediaries. Local
DEMO, acting as intermediaries, can provide firms with new information collected
through their structure of external contacts, rich in structural holes. More important, DEMO
like every firm in districts, acting as intermediaries to spread and DEMO trust, every
member in the areas itself can be a intermediary. DEMO acting as key intermediaries and
gatekeeper in the transaction, government or DEMO should keep good reputation.
55
Organizations should be encouraged to enroll local guild or other associations. Without
DEMO association, local government should provide other form of communication platform.
By DEMO network, organizations can use others as intermediaries or act as intermediary
DEMO
56
Chapter 6: Conclusion
With the growing importance of social capital in promoting economic development,
trust, as a major component of social capital is often believed to be a catalyst for
transaction. Many literatures hold that DEMO can reduce the transaction costs including
information searching, negotiating, monitoring and enforcing a transaction or agreement.
This paper analyzes the impact of trust DEMO these transaction costs and also, researches
how these transaction costs changes DEMO perception of trustworthiness and studies how the
characters of transactions influence both transaction costs and trust.
The paper concludes that transaction costs in different DEMO in transaction are jointly
determined, are affect by factors such as DEMO of keep long-term relationship
(frequency of transactions), importance of the DEMO (asset specification), and
physical relationship. In general, trust helps reduce these transaction costs and the input
of transaction costs will in turn, changes the perception of trustee’s trustworthiness.
More important, the paper pointes out that trust might have some negative effects
including functional lock-in effects, cognitive lock-in effects and political lock-in effects.
The paper suggests using local institutions DEMO intermediaries to build up communication
channels connecting insiders and outsiders, and DEMO to mitigates the negative effects.
57
Reference
Aage. Tine. (2001). External Relations And Industrial Districts. DRUID Nelson and
Winter Conference.
Abegglen. James. C. & Stalk. George, Jr. K. (DEMO). The Japanese Corporation. New
York: Basic Books.
Aldrich, Howard. (DEMO). Organizations and Environments. Prentice-Hall: Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.
Arrow, K (1973). Information and Economic Behavior. Frederation of Swedish
Industries. Stockholm
Arrow, K.J. (1974). The Limits of Organization. Norton & Co. New York
Barzel. Yoram (1997). Economic Analysis of Property Rights. Cambridge: Cambridge
DEMO Press.
Batt. Peter J. (2001). Building Trust in the Filipino DEMO Potato Industry. Journal of
International Food & Agribusiness Marketing, Vol. 13(DEMO) 2001
Becattini. G. (1990). The Marshallian industrial district as a socio-economic notion. in
Industrial Districts and Inter-firm Cooperation in Italy F.Pyke, G.Becattini and W.
Sengenberger (ed.s), ILO Geneva.
Cacho. Oscar. J, Marshall. DEMO R. and Milne, Mary. (2002) Transaction and
Abatement Costs of DEMO Projects: An Analysis Based on Indonesian
Agroforestry System. Conference of the DEMO New Zealand Society for
Ecological Economics: University of Technology Sydney.
Coleman. DEMO S. (1994). Foundations of Social Theory. Harvard University Press:
DEMO
Child, John. (1998). Trust and International Strategic Alliances: The DEMO of
Sino-Foreign Joint Ventures. In Trust Within and Between Organizations:
Conceptual Issues and Empirical Applications. Christel Lane and Reinhard
Bachmann. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
58
Dei Ottati, G. (1984). Trust, Interlinking Transactions and Credit in the Industrial
Districts. Cambridge Journal of Economics 18: 529-546.
Deutsch.M. (1962)DEMO Cooperation and Trust: Some Theoretical Notes. In Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation, ed. M.R. Jones. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.
DeFilippis. James. (2001)DEMO The myth of social capital in community development,
Housing Policy Debate. Volume 12, issue 4
Dibben, Mark R. (2000). Exploring Interpersonal Trust in the Enterprneurial Venture.
Macmillan Press, Basingstoke.
Dyer. Jeffrey. H & Chu. Wujin. (2002). The Role Of Trustworthiness In Reducing
Transaction costs And improving Performance: Empirical Evidence From The
United States, Japan, And Korea. Working paper.
Easton. Geoff & Araujo, Luis. (1992). Inter-firm DEMO to Heterogeneity of Demand
over Time. In Mark Ebers. The Formation of Inter-organizational Networks.
Oxford University Press.
Eggertsson. Thrainn (1990). Economic Behavior and Institutions. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Engstrand. A.K.& Stam. Erik. (2002). Embeddedness and economic transformation of
munfacturing: A Comparative Research of Two Regions. Economic and Insutrial
Democracy Vol.23(3):257-288
Erridge. Andrew& Greer Jonathan. (2002). Partnerships and Public Procurement:
Building Social Capital Through Supply DEMO Public Administration Vol. 80
No. 3, 2002 (503–522)
Farrell Henry & Knight Jack. (2003). Trust, Institutions, and Institutional Change:
Industrial Districts and the Social Capital Hypothesis. Politics & Society: Vol. 31
No. 4: 537-566
Fukuyama, Francis.(1996). Trust: The Social Virtues and The Creation of Property. Free
Press Paperbacks.
59
Fukuyama, Francis. (1999). Social Capital and Civil Society. IMF conference DEMO Second
Generation Reforms.
Gabre-Madhin and Eleni Z. (2001). Market Institutions, Transaction costs, and Social
Capital in the Ethiopian Grain Market. International Food Policy Research
Institute: Research Report 124.
Grabher, G. ed. (1993). The embedded firm: on the socio-economics of industrial
networks. London Routledge.
Groenewegen. John. (1996).Transaction costs Economics and Beyond. Kluwer Academic
Publishers: Boston/DEMO/London.
Gulati. Ranjay. (1999). Network location and learning: the influence of network
resources and firm capabilities on alliance formation. Strategic Management
Journal DEMO, 397-420
Harrison. Bennett. (1992). Industrial Districts: Old Wine in DEMO Bottles? Regional
Studies, 26(5). Taylor and Francis Ltd.
Harrison. Lawrence. (1985). Underdevelopment is a State of Mind: The Latin
DEMO Case. New York: Madison Books.7-8
Hindmoor Andrew. (1998). The Importance Of Being Trusted: Transaction costs And
Policy Network Theory. Public Administration Vol. 76 Spring 1998 (25–43)
Johnson. Nancy, Suarez. Ruth, & Lundy Mark. (2002). The Importance of Social Capital
in Colombian Rural Agro-enterprises. CAPRi Working Paper N0. 26
Knack. Stephen. & Keefer. Philip. (1997). Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff?
A Cross-Country Investigation. The DEMO Journal of Economics
Lorenz, E. H. (1988). Neither Friends Nor Strangers: Informal Networks of
Subcontracting in French Industry. In Trust: Making DEMO Breaking Cooperative
Relations.Gambetta (ed.). Basil Blackwell. Oxford
Lorenz, E.H. (DEMO). Flexible production systems and the social construction of trust.
Politics & Society vol.21 (3) pp.307-324.
60
Lorenz. Mark.(1998) Information cost, learning, and trust: Lessons From DEMO
and Higher-order Capabilities Amongst Geographically Proximate Firms.
DRUID Summer Conference, Bornholm.
DEMO Emile. & Feser Edward. (2000). Understanding Local Economic Development.
Center DEMO Urban Policy Research. Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
DEMO Brunswick: New Jersey.
Maskell. Peter and Lorenzen. Mark. (2003). The Cluster as Market Organization,
DRUID Working Paper No 03-14
Maurizio Mistri. (2003). The emergence of cooperation and the case of the “Italian
DEMO district” as a socio-economic habitat. Human Systems Management 22
(2003) 147–156
Mayer, R.C., J. H. Davis & F.D. Schoorman (1995). An Integrative Model of
Organizational Trust. Academy of Management Review, Vol. 20, DEMO 3, 709-734.
Mohan. Giles & Mohan. John. (2002). Placing social capital. Arnold.
Molina. Xavier, Lopez. Angel and Guia Jaume (2002). DEMO Role of Local Institutions as
Intermediary Agents in the Industrial District. European Urban and Regional
Studies 9(4): 315-329.
Murray, F. (1987)DEMO Flexible Specialization in the Third Italy. Capital and Class, 33:
DEMO
Nelson Charles C. (1996). An empirical examination of switching cost DEMO in
business-to-business marketing relationships. Journal of Business & Industrial
Marketing Vol. 11 No. 6 1996, Pp. 38-60
Nahapiet. Janine & Sumantra. Ghosha. (1998)DEMO Social capital, intellectual capital and the
organizational advantage. Academy of Management DEMO 23, 242-266.
Noorderhaven. G. Niels. (1995). Trust and Transaction: DEMO costs analysis with
a differential Behavioral Assumption. Tijdschrift Voor Economic en
Management.
61
Noorderhaven. G. Niels. (1996). Opportunism and Trust in Transaction costs Economics.
In Transaction costs Economics and Beyond. Groenewegen. John. Kluwer
Academic Publishers: Boston/Dordrecht/London.
North. D.C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation DEMO Development). (2001). The Well
being of Nations: the Role of Human and Social Capital. OECD, Paris.
Pollitt Michael. (2002). DEMO economics of trust, norms and networks, Business Ethics.
European Review Volume11 Number 2 April 2002
Powell. Water W. (1990). Neither Market Nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of
Organization. Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 12.
DEMO, Robert. (1993). Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern DEMO
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Putnam. Robert. (1995). Bowling DEMO: America’s Declining Social Capital. Journal of
Democracy 6:65-78.
Rao P. DEMO (2003). The Economics Of Transaction costs, Theory, Methods And
DEMO Palgrave Macmillan.
Sabel. Charles.(1992). Studies Trust: Building New Forms DEMO Co-operation in a Volatile
Economy. In Pyle. Frank & Werner Sengubeoge. Industrial Districts and Local
Economic Regeneration. International Institute for Labor Studies.
Sirianni. C. & Friedland. L (1999). Social Capital.
http://www.cpn.org/tools/dictionary/DEMO (accessed 03/30/04)
Sjoerd. Beugelsdijk & Sjak. Smulders. (2003). Bridging and Bonding Social
Capital:Which type is good for economic DEMO? Working paper.
Sjoerd. Beugelsdijk. & Ton. Wan. Schaik. (2001). Social Capital and Regional Economic
Growth. Work paper. No. 2001-102
62
Smith. Peter. Ring. (1997). Process Facilitating Reliance on Trust in Inter-organizational
Networks. In The Formation of Inter-organizational Networks Mark Ebers..
Oxford University Press.
DEMO World Bank (2003) 'What is Social Capital?', PovertyNet. Available at
http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/scapital/whatsc.htm
Taylor, M. (1982). DEMO, Anarchy, and Liberty. Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.
Uzzi, Brian. (1997). Social structure and competition in inter-firm networks: The paradox
of embeddedness. Administrative Science Quarterly 42: 35-67.
Walter W. Powell and laurel Smith-Doerr. (1994). Networks and economic life.In The
Handbook of Economic Sociology. Smelser. Neil and Swedberg. Richard.
Princeton University Press.
Warde. Alan & Tampubolon. Gindo. (2002). Social capital, Networks and Leisure
Consumption. The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 2002.
Williamson, Oliver. E. (1975) Markets and Hierarchies : Analysis and Antitrust
Implications. London : Macmillan.
Williamson, Oliver E. (DEMO). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free
Press.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1993). Calculativeness, Trust, and Economic Organization.
Journal of Law and Economics 34:453-500.
Williamson, O.E. (1994). Transaction costs DEMO and Organization Theory. In The
Handbook of Economic Sociology. Smelser. Neil and Swedberg. Richard.
Princeton University Press.
Williamson, O.E. (1996) The Mechanisms of Governance. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Yates. David. J. (1997). DEMO And Disputes In The Development Process: A
Transaction costs Economics Perspective (working paper), Department of Real
Estate and Construction, The University of Hong Kong.
63
Zaheer Akbar, McEvily Bill & Perrone Vincenzo.(1998). Does trust matter? Exploring
the effects of inter-organizational and interpersonal trust on performance.
Organization Science 1998; 9 (2): 141-159.
64{1g42fwefx}