Trust
1
A MULTIDISCIPLINARY ANALYSIS OF THE NATURE, MEANING,
AND MEASUREMENT OF TRUST
Megan Tschannen-Moran
The College of William and Mary
and
Wayne DEMO Hoy
The Ohio State University
June 15, 2000
Trust 2
American society entrusts its children to schools to teach, guide, counsel, and protect. Yet we know
very little about the nature DEMO trusting relationships in a school once the children arrive and the doors
are shut. Do the faculty trust one another and do they trust DEMO principal? Do the teachers trust their
students? What is the impact if students do not feel trusted by their teachers? Can students learn from
teachers they don’t trust? Trust is an important element in human learning because much of what is
learned is based on the verbal DEMO written statements of others that the learner is asked to believe
without independent evidence (Rotter, 1967). Do parents trust their children’s teachers DEMO to what
extent do the teachers trust the parents? What are DEMO consequences if they do not? Have changes in
society undermined the DEMO trust in the schools, and, if so, what can be DEMO to begin to repair that
trust? These are some of the DEMO that prompted this investigation.
This review brings to bear the literature on trust as it relates to relationships within schools. This
analysis is a DEMO one; that is, we draw upon the trust literature from psychology,
sociology, philosophy, economics, organizational science, and education. It is DEMO extensive review of
both theoretical and empirical articles spanning the past four decades. Our understanding of trust is
enriched by a wide variety of DEMO from experimental studies and surveys to interviews and
longitudinal case studies. Articles were included that helped clarify the meaning of trust in an
organizational DEMO, and informed the practice of trust in the context of K-12 DEMO First, we
examine the importance of trust in schools. Then, we explore the nature and meaning of trust--the facets,
bases, and degrees of trust. Next we examine the dynamics of trust--initiating, sustaining, breaking DEMO
repairing trust. Finally, we synthesize the research on trust as it DEMO to organizational processes such
as communication, collaboration, climate, organizational citizenship, efficacy and effectiveness.
TRUST AND SCHOOLS
Trust is pivotal as American society DEMO its schools. Baier (1986) defines trust as the
reliance on others’ competence and their willingness to look after rather than harm what is DEMO to
their care.
Since the things we typically do care about and value include such things as we cannot single-
handedly either create or DEMO must allow many other people to get into positions
where they can, if they choose, injure what we care about, since those are the same positions
that they must be in order to help us DEMO care of what we care about. (p. 236)
What we DEMO about may be things tangible, such as our children or our DEMO, or things intangible
such as democracy, or norms of respect and tolerance. Schools look after all of these for our society, and
consequently, the issue of trust is vital in the study of schools.
Trust
3
Schools are also vested with our increasing vision of equality. DEMO has created new roles and
expectations for our schools. Goodlad (1984) observed that society used to be content with schools that
functioned to DEMO and rank students for various strata of our society. That goal is being supplanted by a
newer goal of fostering equality of opportunity for DEMO students, even those with disabilities or those
from lower socioeconomic strata. DEMO yet, schools struggle to realize these new aspirations. Almost a
half DEMO after the Brown decision to desegregate the schools, the dream of DEMO eliminating class
distinctions and providing equal opportunities to learn seems far from becoming reality. The
professional knowledge possessed by teachers is held suspect as DEMO touted innovations (e.g. open
classrooms or new math) fail to bring the dramatic results they promised (Tyack & Cuban, 1995). Values
DEMO by schools may be at odds with the conflicted values of a diverse society. Growing distrust of
schools is evidenced in the exploding population DEMO people unwilling to entrust their children to schools
at all. From a phenomenon that was virtually unheard of in the early 1980s, in 1997 an estimated 1.23
million American children were taught at home (Ray, DEMO).
Lack of trust is a serious impediment to many of the reforms taking shape in American schools.
Traditional management practices have tended to DEMO social distance and divergent interests
among competing parties, and so they DEMO engendered distrust or a low expectation of responsiveness
on the part of other parties. New forms of governance are taking shape, with greater expectations of
shared interests and goals, greater effectiveness, and greater flexibility to DEMO demands and
environmental pressures (Powell, 1990, 1996). These new DEMO increasingly require an atmosphere of
trust. Moves to site-based management and shared decision making require administrators to trust those
who are granted decision-making discretion (Smylie & Hart, 1999). Including parents in school
governance requires trust that they will be motivated to work for the common good, not just the narrow
interests of their own child. As school reformers ask DEMO to change their fundamental beliefs and
instructional techniques, they need to DEMO a community of support in which to challenge and debate
new practices (Little, 1990; Putnam & Borko, 1997); this kind of DEMO requires trust among
teachers. And teaching methods that emphasize collaborative learning and reducing students’
alienation by giving them a greater voice in their lives DEMO school require teachers to trust their students.
In short, for schools DEMO realize the kinds of positive transformation envisioned by reform efforts, attention
DEMO be paid to issues of trust.
THE IMPORTANCE OF TRUST
Trust is fundamental to functioning in our complex and interdependent society. We count on DEMO
people who grow and process our food and medicines to do so properly; we depend on those who build
our houses to do so sensibly; we rely on other people with whom we share the roadways to obey traffic
laws; we trust those who hold and invest our money to deal with us honestly; we depend on our
Trust 4
government to maintain the safety of our infrastructure and to DEMO us from aggressors. In short, in
every facet of our lives DEMO are dependent on other people to behave in accordance with our
expectations. It is imperative that we have confidence that our expectations of other DEMO will be met.
Trust is not a feeling of warmth or affection but the conscious regulation of one’s dependence on
another (Zand, 1971)DEMO In situations of interdependence, trust functions as a way of reducing DEMO
(Holmes & Rempel, 1989; Luhmann, 1979). The philosopher Baier (1986) has observed that we notice
trust as we notice air, only when it becomes scarce or polluted (p. 234). As life has grown more complex,
as changing economic realities and changing expectations DEMO society have made life less predictable, and
as new forms of DEMO dissemination have increased both the desire for and availability of
negative information, we are beginning to notice trust more.
Although themes of trust, DEMO, and suspicion have long been the subject of philosophers,
poets, and politicians, the systematic study of trust by social scientists is of relatively recent vintage. In
the late 1950s and early 60s, the empirical study of trust and mistrust was spawned, in part, out of DEMO
escalating suspicion created by the Cold War and by an optimism that science could find a solution to
the dangerous and costly arms race DEMO had resulted (Deutsch, 1958). Then in the late 1960s, DEMO
response to a generation of young people who had become disillusioned and suspicious of contemporary
institutions and authorities, the study of trust changed to an individual focus, conceptualizing trust as a
generalized personality trait (Rotter, 1967). By the 1980s, with soaring divorce rates and radical changes
in the American family, research on trust next turned to interpersonal relationships (Johnson-George &
Swap, 1982; Larzelere & Huston, 1980; Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna, 1985). In the 1990s, with shifts in
technology and society, trust has again emerged as a subject of study in sociology (Coleman, 1990), in
economics (Fukuyama, 1995) and in organizational science (Kramer & Tyler, 1996; Rousseau, Sitkin,
DEMO & Camerer, 1998).
Increasingly, trust is recognized as a vital element in well-functioning organizations. Trust is
necessary for effective cooperation and communication, which are the foundations for cohesive and
productive relationships in organizations (Baier, 1986; Parsons, 1960). It functions as a “lubricant”
greasing the way for efficient operations when people can have confidence in other people’s DEMO and
deeds (Arrow, 1974). Trust reduces the complexities of transactions and exchanges far more quickly and
economically than other means of managing DEMO life (Powell, 1990, 1996; Williamson, 1993).
In ongoing DEMO within organizations, the social network can exert both formal and informal
DEMO that encourages people to act in a trustworthy manner. There is incentive to behave in ways that
are trustworthy, to develop a reputation for trustworthiness, and to reap the benefits of trusting
relationships (Coleman, 1990; Fukuyama, 1995; Putnam, 1993).
To be effective and productive, schools, like other organizations, must be cooperative, cohesive,
efficient, DEMO well managed (Goldring & Rallis, 1993; Louis, Kruse, & DEMO, 1996). Trust is pivotal in
Trust
5
the effort to improve education. And yet, trust seems ever more difficult to achieve and maintain. As
changed economic realities and social DEMO have led to increasing expectations for schools, new
standards and measures DEMO accountability have emerged. Attention from the media has produced
negative perceptions of the contribution schools are making to society and has lead to increasing DEMO
of schools and their mission. In such as climate, the nature DEMO meaning of trust in schools has taken on
added urgency and importance.
The Cost of Distrust
Engendering distrust can be costly. As trust declines DEMO costs of doing business increase
because people must engage in self-protective actions and continually make provisions for the
possibility of opportunistic behavior on the DEMO of others (Limerick & Cunnington, 1993). In the absence
of trust “people are increasingly unwilling to take risks, demand greater protections against the
possibility of betrayal, and increasingly insist on costly sanctioning mechanisms to defend their
interests” (Tyler & Kramer, 1996, pp. 3-4).
Distrust tends to provoke feelings of anxiety and insecurity, causing people to feel uncomfortable and ill
at ease, and to expend energy on monitoring the behavior and possible motives of others (Fuller, 1996;
Govier, 1992). When students feel unsafe, energy that could be devoted to learning is diverted to self-
protection. People may use various means to protect DEMO from the possible harm of the distrusted
person and to minimize their vulnerability. Subordinates may withhold information, use pretense or
even deception to protect their interests (Bartolme, 1989; Govier; Mellinger, 1956). Administrators and
teachers often resort to alternative control mechanisms such as rules and the DEMO agreements to
protect themselves. Although such steps may be necessary and important, they are typically
dysfunctional and counterproductive (Govier).
Distrust is not DEMO an irrational or unwise response but may be based on knowledge,
experience, and a real difference in values (Barber, 1983). One of the most difficult things about distrust,
however, is that once it is established it has a strong tendency to be self-perpetuating. When DEMO
with a distrusted person, even normally benign actions are regarded with DEMO The behavior of
the distrusted person is systematically interpreted in such a way that distrust is confirmed. “Distrust
impedes the communication which could overcome DEMO so that suspiciousness builds on itself and our
negative beliefs about the other tend in the worst case toward immunity to refutation by evidence”
(Govier, 1992, p. 56). Although we sometimes have no choice DEMO to rely on someone we distrust, those
are situations we normally DEMO prefer to avoid.
There is a growing perception that American society has become increasingly distrustful of its
institutions and leaders. Barber (1983) argued DEMO this perception is the result not of less trustworthiness
Trust 6
on the part of particular people or institutions but of DEMO rapid changes in our society. These changes
include changing values, higher DEMO, and a greater awareness of inequality on the part of the
DEMO person. Barber asserted,
There are at least three major reasons for the decline in public trust. One has to do with the ever
DEMO powerful knowledge that the professions now have to influence individual and public welfare.
Another has to do with the increasing strength of the value DEMO equality in our society, the increasing
desire of the less powerful DEMO all kinds to have a little more control over those whose greater power
vitally affects them. Ours is revolutionary time for the value of DEMO Finally, a third is the increased
knowledge and competence that a DEMO educated public brings to its relations with professionals and
other experts and leaders. (p. 132)
Higher expectations create the demand for higher levels of trustworthiness from all citizens.
These expectations are especially brought to bear DEMO those who would educate our children. The actions
of these professionals influence not only our children’s current welfare, but their future potentialities as
well.
THE MEANING OF TRUST: IT’S FACETS, BASES, AND DEGREES
Hosmer (DEMO) observed the difficulty of defining trust: “There appears to be widespread
agreement on the importance of trust in human conduct, but unfortunately there also appears to be an
equally widespread lack of agreement on a DEMO definition of the construct” (p. 380). A review of
articles DEMO trust spanning the last four decades revealed a wide variety of definitions as well as a
number of common aspects or facets of trust. DEMO has been difficult to define because it is a complex
concept. It seems by now well established that trust is a multi-faceted construct, which may have
different bases and degrees depending on the context of the DEMO relationship.
We began the conceptual investigation of trust by searching the multidisciplinary literature for
definitions. From a philosophical perspective, trust has to do with ethically and morally justifiable
behavior (Baier, 1986; Hosmer, 1995), DEMO in economic terms trust is a rational calculation of costs and
benefits (Coleman, 1990; Williamson, 1993). In individual terms, trust is conceived as the extent to
which an individual is willing to rely DEMO and make oneself vulnerable to another (Rotter, 1967; Frost,
DEMO, & Maugham, 1978). In an organizational context, trust is DEMO a collective judgment that
another group will not act opportunistically, is DEMO in negotiations, and makes a good faith efforts to
behave in DEMO with commitments (Bradach and Eccles, 1989; Cummings & Bromily, 1996). Table
1 summarizes the range of definitions of trust.
There are DEMO reoccurring themes that emerge regardless of the context of study, that DEMO,
whether philosophical, economic, organizational, or individual. Vulnerability is a DEMO aspect of trust
Trust
7
that emerges among most definitions (Bigley & Pearce, 1998)DEMO The level of comfort a person feels in the
midst of vulnerability speaks to the level of trust. Mishra (1996) suggests this comfort DEMO based upon a
belief or confidence that the other party is competent, reliable, open, and concerned. Honesty is yet
another common feature of many of definitions of trust (Butler & Cantrell, 1984; Cummings & Bromily,
1996). Table 1 summarizes the extent to which each DEMO encompasses these aspects or facets of
trust. The analysis of definitions led us to the following multidimensional definition of trust: Trust is one
party’s willingness to be vulnerable to another party based on the confidence that DEMO latter party is
(a) benevolent, (b) reliable, (c) competent, (d) honest, and (e) open (Hoy & Tschannen-Moran, 1999;
Tschannen-Moran & Hoy, 1998).
FACETS OF TRUST
A DEMO complete comprehension of trust requires a depth of understanding of each facet. A
strategy of facet mapping was used to capture the fullness of DEMO found in the extant literature (e.g.
Clark & Payne, 1997; DEMO & Guttman, 1985, Shye, 1978). Hence, we explore the key elements of trust.
Moreover, there is empirical evidence that all of these facets are important aspects of trust relations in
schools. A factor DEMO study (Hoy & Tschannen-Moran, 1999) demonstrated that all of the DEMO
covary together and form a coherent construct of trust.
Willingness to Risk Vulnerability. A necessary condition of trust is interdependence,
where the interests DEMO one party cannot be achieved without reliance upon another (Rousseau, Sitkin,
Burt, & Camerer, 1998). Where there is no interdependence, there is no need for trust. The degree of
interdependence may alter DEMO form trust takes. Interdependence brings with it vulnerability.
Vulnerability in a matter of importance or value to the trusting person is assumed by most DEMO of
trust (Baier, 1986; Coleman, 1990; Deutsch, 1958; DEMO, Davis, Schoorman, 1995; Mishra, 1996; Zand,
1971). The trustor is cognizant of the potential for betrayal and harm from DEMO other (Granovetter, 1985;
Kee & Knox, 1970; Lewis & Weigert, 1985) and uncertainty concerning whether the other intends to and
DEMO act appropriately is the source of risk (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer). Risk is the perceived
probability of loss, as interpreted by the decision maker (Coleman; Williamson, 1993). Risk creates an
opportunity for trust, which leads to risk taking. Moreover, risk taking DEMO a sense of trust when
the expected behavior materializes (Coleman). DEMO, then, is a willingness to be vulnerable under
conditions of risk and interdependence (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer).
Confidence. One DEMO the early puzzles concerning trust was whether it was an individual’s
behavior or attitude in a situation of vulnerability. For example, when a parent leaves his or her child
with a childcare provider but with significant DEMO, can the parent be said to have trusted the
provider? By taking action the parent has voluntarily increased his or her risk to DEMO outcomes;
however, he or she has done so with a DEMO level of anxiety. Deutsch (1960) suggested that when a
Trust 8
person makes a move that increases vulnerability to another, it is hard to infer the motivation for such a
choice. The decision DEMO place oneself at risk to another could be based on many factors including need,
hope, conformity, impulsivity, innocence, virtue, faith, DEMO, or confidence. Although the
behavior of the parent who anxiously left DEMO child with the caregiver was the same as that of a parent
with no such misgivings, the level of trust is very different. There is growing consensus that trust lies in
the degree of confidence one DEMO in the face of risk rather than in the choice or action that increases
one’s risk (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998). Confidence extends across a gap of time. Most
interactions do not DEMO place simultaneously but unfold over a matter of time. There is a lag between
when a commitment is made and when the recipient knows DEMO it has been fulfilled. The degree to
which a person can rest in that uncertainty with a certain amount of confidence is the degree DEMO which
that person can be said to trust (Kee & Knox, 1970).
Benevolence. Perhaps the most common facet of trust is a DEMO of benevolence, the confidence
that one’s well-being, or something one cares about, will be protected and not harmed by the trusted
party (DEMO, 1986; Butler & Cantrell, 1984; Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Cummings & Bromily, 1996;
Deutsch, 1958; Frost, Stimpson, & Maughan, 1978; Gambetta, 1988; Hosmer, 1995; Hoy & Kupersmith,DEMO
1985; Hoy & Tschannen-Moran, 1999; Mishra, 1996; Zand, 1971). Trust is the assurance that the other
will not exploit one’s DEMO or take excessive advantage of one even when the opportunity is
available (Cummings & Bromily, p. 4). One can count on the DEMO will of another to act in one’s best
interest. In an ongoing relationship the future actions or deeds may not be specified but only DEMO there
will be a mutual attitude of good will. It is the “accepted vulnerability to another’s possible but not
expected ill will” (Baier, DEMO 236). In situations of interdependence this faith in the altruism of the other is
particularly important.
Reliability. At its most basic level trust DEMO to do with predictability, that is, consistency of
behavior and knowing what to expect from others (Butler & Cantrell, 1984; Hosmer, DEMO). In and of
itself, however, predictability is unsatisfying as a definition of trust. We can trust a person to be
invariably late. DEMO we can count on someone to be consistently malicious, self-serving, or dishonest.
When our well-being is diminished or damaged in a predictable way, our expectations may be met but
the sense in which we trust DEMO other person or group is weak. Reliability, or dependability, combines a
sense of predictability with benevolence. In a situation of interdependence, when something is required
from another person or group, the individual can be counted on to supply it (Butler & Cantrell; Mishra,
1996; Rotter, 1967). There is a sense of confidence that one’s needs will be met. One need not invest
energy worrying whether the person will DEMO through or making mental provisions in case he or she
does not.
Competence. There are times when good intentions are not enough. When a DEMO is
dependent on another but some level of skill is involved in fulfilling an expectation, then a person who
Trust
9
means well may nonetheless not be trusted (Baier, 1986; Butler & Cantrell, 1984; Mishra, 1996). For
example, the DEMO of a young surgeon may feel that the doctor wishes very much to heal her, but if
the doctor’s success record has not been good, the patient may not feel a great deal of trust in the
physician. Many of the situations in which we speak about trust DEMO an organizational context have to do
with competence. In a work context, if a person’s or team’s project depends on others, they may DEMO may
not feel an “assured confidence” that the deadlines will be met or that the products will be of adequate
quality to complete the DEMO
Honesty. Honesty speaks to the person’s character, integrity, and authenticity. Rotter (1967)
defined trust as “the expectancy that the word, promise, verbal or written statement of another
individual or group can be relied DEMO (p. 651). The implication is that statements made were truthful
DEMO conformed to “what really happened” at least from that person’s perspective, DEMO that commitments
made about future actions would be kept. A correspondence between a person’s statements and deeds
characterizes integrity. An acceptance of responsibility for DEMO actions and avoiding distorting the
truth in order to shift blame to another characterizes authenticity (Tschannen-Moran & Hoy, 1998).
Many scholars and DEMO see honesty as a pivotal facet of trust (Baier, 1986; DEMO & Cantrell,
1984; Cummings & Bromily, 1996; Hoy & DEMO, 1999).
Openness. Openness is the extent to which relevant information DEMO not withheld; it is a process
by which people make themselves DEMO to others by sharing personal information with others, a
giving of DEMO (Butler & Cantrell, 1984; Mishra, 1996). Such openness signals a kind of reciprocal
trust, a confidence that neither the information nor the individual will be exploited, and recipients can
feel the same confidence in return. People who are guarded in the information they share provoke
DEMO; people wonder what is being hidden and why. Just as trust DEMO trust, so too does distrust
breed distrust. People who are unwilling DEMO extend trust through openness end up living in isolated
prisons of their own making (Kramer, Brewer, & Hanna, 1996).
Although all DEMO facets of trust are important and go together, the relative weight DEMO the facets
will depend upon the nature of the interdependence and the vulnerability in the relationship. For
example, in a surgeon, competence is DEMO the prime concern, whereas, in an accountant, honesty is
just DEMO important as competence. In teachers and principals, all aspects of trust DEMO to carry significant
importance (Hoy & Tschannen-Moran, 1999).
BASES AND DEGREES OF TRUST
Even once we have a common definition of trust, the reality of trust will not be the same in all
times DEMO in all places. The importance of each of the facets depends on the referent of trust (who is
being trusted) and the nature DEMO the interdependence between the parties. One is differentially
vulnerable to an intimate friend, a boss, an investment broker, or a surgeon. Trust may be based on
Trust 10
one’s disposition to trust, on moods and emotions, on DEMO and attitudes, on calculative motives, on
institutional supports for trust, DEMO knowledge of, or a sense of identification with the other. Even DEMO
a single relationship, trust and distrust may be uneven. One must DEMO wisdom to discern the optimal
level of trust in any given relationship.
Disposition to trust. Certain people have an attitude that makes them inclined DEMO extend
trust more readily--a “disposition to trust” (McKnight, Cummings, & DEMO, 1998). Rotter (1967)
predicted that expectations growing out of people’s history of experiences where others had either
fulfilled or broken promises DEMO generalize from one societal actor to another (e.g., from one’s parents
to teachers, doctors, the media, etc.). A child whose parents had been consistent would grow up to be
generally trusting, while a child who had been regularly disappointed by broken promises would grow
up DEMO a generalized suspicion of people’s motives and promises. A person with a disposition to trust
would likely have both a faith in humanity, believing that others are typically well-meaning and
reliable (Wrightsman, 1966), and DEMO trusting stance, believing that, regardless of whether people are
reliable or not, one will obtain better interpersonal outcomes by dealing with people as though they
were well-meaning and reliable (McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany).
A disposition to trust is particularly salient in making trust judgments when DEMO do not
know each other and no more specific situational information is available (Johnson-George & Swap,
1982; Rotter, 1980). A disposition to trust does not mean that people will be more gullible or DEMO
what Deutsch (1958) called “pathological trust.” Regardless of their trusting disposition, people are able
to make use of information in a given situation and about the behavior of people in that situation to
guide their DEMO For example, when trust was studied using mixed-motive games, high trusters were
more likely to make a cooperative initial move, but they did not continue to trust once they had been
tricked. When the proportion DEMO broken promises was varied in the game, the situational variable of
DEMO credibility produced much stronger effects on participants’ cooperative behavior than did
disposition to trust (Schlenker, Helm, & Tedeschi, 1973). When behavioral DEMO of trust were used,
generalized trust was related to the number of seconds it took for a person to fall backwards into the
DEMO of a waiting partner but was not related to the willingness to disclose personal information to a
stranger (Cash, Stack, & Luna, DEMO). Trusting disposition, however, was found to have an impact on
behavior. People with a trusting disposition tended to be more trustworthy than DEMO, even when they
could increase their gain by being untrustworthy; and suspicious people had a greater tendency to be
untrustworthy in their choices (Deutsch, 1958, 1960; Rotter; Wrightsman). People who scored high DEMO
trusting disposition were less likely to lie, cheat, or steal. In general, high trusters seemed to be
happier, to be more popular, and to be considered a better friend than low trusters; moreover, DEMO
were less likely to be conflicted, maladjusted, or dependent on others (Rotter; Wrightsman).
Trust 11
Moods and emotions . Moods and emotions can provide a DEMO foundation of trust
judgments because they provide signals concerning trust relevant information in ongoing relationships
and situations (Jones & George, 1998). Emotions DEMO intense affective states tied to particular events or
circumstances that interrupt ongoing cognitive processes and behaviors, while moods are less intense,
generalized affective states that are not explicitly linked to particular events or circumstances (Jones &
George). People experience an emotional response to trust relationships because they are by definition
are in a position of vulnerability. When people DEMO a sense of confidence about those relationships, it is
based in DEMO on the assumption of genuine caring and concern for one’s well-being by the other party
which is likely to lead to liking that person (McAllister, 1995). There is not complete overlap, however,
between DEMO and affection. Although several studies have found a correlation between trust and liking,
especially where the dimension of benevolence has been assessed (Deutsch, 1958; Rotter, 1967), affection
does not seem to be necessary for trust to develop. In a study of CEOs and their subordinates, Gabarro
(1978) found that friendship often followed the establishment of trust. DEMO some cases, however, trust
based on competence, good judgment, or reliability was maintained in spite of personal dislike. In a
mixed-motive game, participants reported having less liking for an opponent who chose an
unconditionally DEMO strategy than for one with a conditionally cooperative strategy. Participants
reported not understanding the motives of the unconditionally cooperative players and therefore liked
them DEMO (Soloman, 1960).
Values and attitudes.  People make trust judgments, in part, on the basis of the assumption
of shared values. Values are general standards or principles that are considered intrinsically desirable
ends, such as loyalty, helpfulness, or fairness (Jones & George, 1998). DEMO and Roth (1993) proposed
that distrust would arise in an organizational setting when an individual or group was perceived as not
sharing key DEMO values. When a person challenges an organization’s fundamental assumptions and
values, DEMO person may be perceived as operating under values so different from the group’s that the
violator’s underlying world view becomes suspect (Gabarro, 1978; Lindskold, 1978). Threat of future
violations of expectations arises because the person is now seen as a cultural outsider, one who “doesn’t
think like us,” and may therefore, do the “unthinkable” (Sitkin & DEMO, 1993, p. 371).
Attitudes are the knowledge structures containing the thoughts and feelings people have about other
people, groups, or organizations DEMO the means through which they define and structure their
interactions with others. Attitudes are evaluative in nature and values are a key means people DEMO to
evaluate other people and organizations (Jones & George). Because DEMO within organizations
involve interdependence and a certain amount of uncertainty, the DEMO that people form toward
each other in an organizational context are likely to contain information concerning the other party’s
trustworthiness based on perceptions of DEMO values. In schools research suggests that social trust
between principals and teachers emanates from a variety of sources including fairness, a clear vision
Trust 12
that formed the basis of shared values, and consistency of behavior in living out the school ideals (Bryk
& Driscoll, 1998; Bryk & Schneider, 1996; Evans, 1996; Smylie & Hart, 1999).
Trust and diversity. People have a tendency to extend trust more DEMO to people they
perceive as similar to themselves—what Zucker (1986) called characteristic-based trust. This kind of trust
is based on norms of obligation DEMO cooperation rooted in social similarity, where similarity may
depend on characteristics DEMO as family background, social status, or ethnicity. Trust is more difficult in
situations of diversity because people are uncertain about the cultural norms DEMO others (Kipnis, 1996).
People’s knowledge of one another’s culture may be limited and based on stereotypes or partial and
misleading images. This DEMO leave people unsure about what to expect.
In order to simplify a complexity of relationships, people tend to divide others into two groups: DEMO
with whom they share group membership, and those who are outside DEMO group. Once others have
been categorized, people make biased assumptions based DEMO group membership about the others’
values, preferences, behavior, and trustworthiness. DEMO are more likely to regard out-group
members with suspicion and to stereotype them more readily and negatively than in-group members.
Biased attributions about the DEMO, intentions, and actions of out-group members can fuel feelings
of distrust. People tend to attribute the motivations for the behavior of out-group members DEMO
underlying attitudes or values while for in-group members they are more likely to consider situational
factors that might have influenced behavior (Allison & Messick, 1985). Furthermore, people are more
likely to seek information that DEMO to their attitudes about their own and other groups, and to
DEMO information that disconfirms it (Klayman & Ha, 1997). Larson (DEMO) described a school
administration’s unwillingness to trust minorities. As a consequence, legitimate protest was defined as
disruption meriting expulsion of students rather than DEMO legitimate civil rights issue.
Group biases can be destructive not only by causing people to regard out-group members with
suspicion, they can also lead to too much trust for in-group members. People develop a “leniency-bias”
for DEMO of the in-group (Brewer, 1995), and tend to give other in-group members the benefit of the
doubt when confronted with information that DEMO otherwise be viewed as diagnostic of a lack of
trustworthiness. An overconfidence in the collective can lead individuals to “defer too readily to other
DEMO, and may inhibit expressions of doubt or engage in inappropriately severe DEMO
rather than press their claims as vigorously as they might” (Kramer, Brewer, & Hanna, 1996, p. 381).
The resulting culture has been exposed as a factor in some disastrously poor decisions (Janis, DEMO). In
the Larson (1997) study of schools cited above, DEMO within the administrative team produced a
“groupthink” orientation in which only a limited range of alternatives were considered, which led to a
disastrous conflict with the civil rights leaders of the community.
Trust judgments based on DEMO or group membership can have very real consequences on
organizational functioning. In an organizational context, superiors expressed less trust for subordinates
who were lower in job status or predominately from a minority group and they were DEMO less
Trust 13
willingness to use participative approaches to decision making with these DEMO (Rosen & Jerdee,
1977). When teachers in an urban DEMO made trust judgments about students and parents,
socioeconomic status was a much starker dividing line of difference than race (Tschannen-Moran, 1998).
DEMO schools face increasing diversity of languages, ethnic groups, races, and DEMO status.
This diversity brings a richness, but it also brings with DEMO challenges in the development of trust. People
who perceive themselves as different need time, support and structures to come to view themselves as
part of the same collective.
Calculative trust. In calculative trust, individuals accept a certain level of vulnerability based
on calculations of the relative costs of DEMO or severing the relationship (Williamson 1975, 1993).
Trust is based on a rational choice, calculating that even based on strictly utilitarian motives it is to the
other party’s benefit to behave in a trustworthy DEMO because the costly sanctions in place for breach
of trust exceed any potential benefits from opportunistic behavior (Gulati, 1995; Shapiro, Sheppard, &DEMO
Cheraskin, 1992). This kind of trust is strengthened when the DEMO or punishment available if
either party breaks trust is clear, possible, and likely to occur (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996). If trust DEMO
defined as a positive expectation about another’s motives, Rousseau, et al. (1998) have pointed out that
reliance on strict controls and deterrents DEMO not be trust at all but may be instead a low level of
distrust. Calculative trust may remain the default value in an ongoing DEMO if continued contact
and communication do not result in increased trust.
Institution-based trust.  When a person extends trust based on the belief that the necessary
impersonal structures are in place to enable one to act in DEMO of a successful outcome, it is
referred to as institution-based trust (McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany, 1998; Shapiro, 1987; Zucker,
DEMO). Institution-based trust is supported by formal social structures that confer trust, such as having a
license or certification to practice a profession, DEMO mechanisms such as guarantees, insurance or contracts
(Creed & Miles, DEMO). Informal social structures also contribute to trust. The trustor feels assured that
because of socially learned behavior patterns the trusted person will act DEMO to the norms
surrounding promise in the social setting or risk reaping sanctions through social disapproval (Baier,
1986). The individual’s belief that the situation is “normal” provides additional comfort, enabling the
person to readily accept interdependence with another person or party (McKnight, Cummings, &
DEMO). Institutional factors can act as broad supports that sustain a cycle of risk-taking and
fulfillment that enables the development of knowledge-based trust (Gulati, 1995; Sitkin, 1995).
Knowledge-based trust.  Knowledge-based trust emerges on DEMO basis of the quality of the
social exchanges in recurring interactions between trustor and trustee over time (Zucker, 1986). It takes
root DEMO actors get to know one another and come to feel able to predict how the other is likely to behave
in a given situation. DEMO and dependability in previous interactions with the trustor give rise to
positive expectations about the trustee’s intentions. Knowledge-based trust grows through regular
Trust 14
communication and the expectation that good will be returned in DEMO (Creed & Miles, 1996). A kind of
courtship takes place in which each party is careful not to violate the other’s developing DEMO (Shapiro,
Sheppard, & Cheraskin, 1992). The more points DEMO contact parties have, the better the chances they will
come to DEMO and be able to predict each others’ behavior (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996; Rempel,
Holmes, & Zanna, 1985). A self-reinforcing pattern of trust emerges as repeated cycles of exchange, risk
taking, and DEMO fulfillment of expectations strengthen the willingness of trusting parties to rely
upon each other. Even unmet expectations can be survived when trust is based DEMO history and
knowledge of one another, particularly if parties make an DEMO to restore a sense of good faith and fair
dealing to their interactions (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998). Knowledge that accumulates
over repeated interactions where expectations are fulfilled leads to a reputation DEMO trustworthiness,
which can then facilitate and reinforce trust with others in a wider social context.
Uneven trust. As interdependent partners in an ongoing DEMO gather experience with
one another, they will come to have a DEMO pool of trust relevant evidence to draw upon. However,
the trust picture that emerges may not be a simple one. Different levels of DEMO may emerge across
different facets of trust. Relationships are multifaceted; therefore, parties may hold simultaneously
different views of each other that may be DEMO but, nonetheless, inconsistent among them. A person
may come to trust another person in some areas of interdependence and not in others. “Within DEMO same
relationship, we have different encounters in different contexts with different DEMO that lead to
different outcomes. These encounters accumulate and interact to create a rich texture of experience”
(Lewicki, McAllister, & Bies, 1998, p. 442). This rich texture is described as the “bandwidth” of DEMO
relationship, meaning the scope of the domains of interpersonal relating and DEMO that are
relevant to a single relationship. As relationships mature, trust DEMO from impressionistic and highly
undifferentiated to more finely grained and differentiated among specific facets (Gabarro, 1978).
Relationships mature with interaction frequency, duration, and the diversity of challenges that
relationship partners encounter and face together in the process gathering greater specification and
detail in trust relevant information (Lewicki, McAllister, & Bies).
For trust to form, it may not be necessary to have a high level of confidence in all DEMO, only in
those areas where there is critical interdependence. There are DEMO thresholds across which trust turns
to distrust (Shaw, 1997), however, different facets of trust may have different thresholds depending on
the level of reliance in that area and the consequences of one’s expectations not DEMO met. Lindskold
(1978) suggested that if a person’s actions and intentions were perceived as benevolent, even if that
person’s credibility was less than perfect, he or she could nonetheless be trusted. In a study of CEOs and
key subordinates, people tended to have a sense of which areas individuals could be relied upon and in
which they could not. DEMO that setting, the bottom line was competence. If the CEO did DEMO develop a
confidence in a subordinate’s competence within the first few months, it was unlikely that the
subordinate would remain with the company (DEMO, 1978).
Trust 15
Unconditional trust. Unconditional or identification-based trust emerges when parties move
DEMO simple willingness to transact exchanges with one another provided each behaves appropriately
to a state of trust where each comes to identify with the DEMO There is complete empathy with the other
party’s desires and intentions and there is mutual understanding such that each can effectively act in
each DEMO stead (Jones & George, 1998; Lewicki & Bunker, 1996; DEMO, Sheppard, & Cheraskin,
1992). Jones and George speculate that as a result of this mutual identification, organizational citizenship
behavior improves in a climate of unconditional trust because individuals define their roles more
broadly DEMO expected job behaviors and duties. In an environment of unconditional trust, DEMO are
more likely to be open with information because they feel more confident that others will not exploit the
information for their own benefit, especially when that knowledge (particularly if it is hard to come by)
is a source of power. With unconditional trust, people will not hesitate to seek help because they won’t
fear that others will think DEMO are inadequate. They will not feel threatened by being seen as
dependent upon another person, nor be as concerned about incurring indebtedness to another person.
Optimal trust. What is the proper level of trust? Is more trust always better? Not necessarily.
There are dangers in both trusting too much and trusting too little. Trusting too much provides too few
incentives DEMO deter opportunism and invests too many resources in creating or sustaining trust given the
level of interdependence. If trust can be easily created, with little cost and without sustaining
unacceptable risks, then overinvestment is not a concern (Wicks, Berman, & Jones, 1999). Trusting too
little DEMO undesirable because organizations miss out on the potential to use trust to lower costs as well as
to enable certain organizational processes that would, if utilized, confer a competitive advantage
(Barney & Hansen, 1994). Too little trust can also be dangerous because one’s trust attitudes can DEMO a
self-fulfilling prophecy (Baier, 1994). Discerning the proper level of trust requires wisdom and
discernment. Organizational members need to know not only DEMO to trust others, and in what
respects, but also when to monitor others closely (Lewicki, McAllister, & Bies, 1998). Optimal DEMO is
defined as Aristotle’s “golden mean” between excess and deficiency. “It implies that trust levels should
be appropriate to the context and may fall DEMO on the spectrum, from minimal trust to high trust,
depending DEMO the person and situation” (Wicks, Berman, & Jones, p. 102). Trust needs to be tempered
by a willingness to punish exploitive DEMO “A bias toward trust, shaped by prudence” offers an
appropriate balance DEMO organizational relationships.
The complexity of trust has perplexed scholars and researchers for decades. Greater
understanding has lead to a multifaceted picture of trust. Different DEMO of trust, different sources of
trust relevant information, and uneven degrees of trust make it an even more challenging construct to
grasp.
Trust 16
MEASURES OF TRUST
It is not surprising, with the complexity of the construct of trust, that researchers have struggled
with how to capture it for study. As in the various definitions, each measure emphasizes different
elements or dimensions of trust. Early measures of trust were experimental DEMO conceived of trust as
observable behaviors. These measures looked at trust reactions in interactions with strangers. As
conceptions of trust became more refined, measures of trust shifted in focus to the relationships between
specific persons. Paper-and-pencil DEMO emerged, usually asking for respondents’ level of
agreement with a series DEMO statements. The referents of these scales have varied, from judgments about
DEMO in general” or various social actors (Heretick, 1981; Rotter, 1967) to specific intimate partners
(Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Larzelere & DEMO, 1980; Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna, 1985). Recent
research DEMO trust has focused on trust within organizations, spawning a number of DEMO trust
measures (Butler, 1991; Cook & Wall, 1980; Cummings & Bromily, 1996; Hoy & Tschannen-Moran,
1999; Shaw, 1997).
EXPERIMENTAL MEASURES OF TRUST
Deutsch (1958) measured trust as a rational DEMO to make a cooperative move in a two-person
mixed-motive game. A mixed-motive game is a game where there is a possibility of mutually beneficial
DEMO, but the temptation to compete to exploit another person’s cooperation. If DEMO parties select
an uncooperative move, the result is mutual loss (Lindskold, 1978). Self-interest (maximization of gains)
calls for eventual cooperation DEMO the temptation to exploit the opponent inevitably results in the
opponent imposing costs through defensive competition. These kinds of games are commonly referred
to DEMO Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) games because of a game originally published by Luce and Raiffa (1957).
The PD game posits a player as a prisoner in custody who has been accused of a crime and DEMO has
been separated from his or her partner. The district attorney is certain the two partners are guilty of the
crime but does not DEMO enough evidence to convict them at trial. The prisoner faces a dilemma – to
confess in exchange for leniency but a longer sentence for DEMO partner or to risk a longer sentence by
not confessing and being betrayed by one’s partner. If neither confesses they will be booked on DEMO
minor fabricated charge, and if they both confess they will be DEMO less than the maximum sentence.
Another version of this game frames the situation as two trucking companies that must share a single
one-lane road DEMO get goods in and out of their respective factories. Again, cooperation DEMO for mutual
gain, while non-cooperation can lead to mutual destruction. Still, exploiting a cooperative partner leads
to the greatest gain for any player.
DEMO version of the mixed-motive game employed by Deutsch (1958, 1960) DEMO financial
payoffs or losses. If both partners cooperated they each received $9, however, if they each made an
uncooperative choice, they both lost $9. If one player cooperated and his or her partner did not, the
Trust 17
uncooperative partner gained $10, and the cooperative player lost $10. Thus, players were said to trust
the other player if they made a cooperative choice because they had made themselves vulnerable to
possible but DEMO expected exploitation of the other player. Players were said to be untrustworthy if they
took advantage of a partner’s cooperative choice to increase their DEMO gains at the expense of the
partner. Games were played for either one or ten trials, and participants recorded not only their own
choice but also what they expected the other player to choose. This simple DEMO allowed for a number
of experimental manipulations. Deutsch’s work set off an avalanche of experiments using mixed-motive
games. It has been estimated that, before they began to wane in popularity in the early 1980's, over
2,000 studies were conducted using these games (Dawes, Van de DEMO, & Orbell, 1990). Many of these
studies were used to test alternative courses of action for breaking the cycle of suspicion and DEMO that
had led to the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Despite the fruitfulness of the studies using mixed-motive games DEMO supporting the tenets of
suspicion reduction strategies, several researchers have questioned DEMO validity of inferring trust and
suspicion on the basis of observing participants’ choice to cooperate or compete in a mixed-motive game.
They complained that DEMO participants in PD games reacted to the situation as a competitive game rather
than an opportunity to be trusting or trustworthy (Dawes, et DEMO, 1990; Fisher & Brown, 1988; Rotter,
1967). A person’s competitive or cooperative behavior in a game situation may be of DEMO predictive
value concerning that person’s trustworthiness in interpersonal relationships. A person may be
intensely competitive and utilize all exploitative means within the rules of DEMO play of a sport or game
and still be highly trustworthy when it comes to familial or work relationships. Or a person may be
DEMO cooperative in a game of monopoly and nonetheless be dishonest or exploitative of coworkers
or friends. In the PD games the opponent was a DEMO who was often an accomplice of the
experimenter or even an imaginary person played by a machine and whose play was frequently
prescribed by DEMO preordained strategy. The intentions of the other party had to be inferred from their
behavior or from highly constrained communication. Although these conditions were DEMO to be
faithful on some level to situations arising in foreign policy, they are not true to the conditions of most
interpersonal relationships. Most relationships in which trust is of interest are ongoing relationships, and
most take place in a social context where the consequences of untrustworthy behavior DEMO beyond
the effects in the immediate situation. In defending against the charge of unreality of the games,
researchers have reported that people were DEMO enough in the game to report affective responses to
the situations, DEMO anger and betrayal (Deutsch, 1958) or liking and disliking (Soloman, 1960) in
response to the game strategy of the other player DEMO of whether the rewards were imaginary or
real (Evans, 1964; DEMO, 1966). However, an emotional response on the part of players is not
necessarily evidence that the games are a valid measure of DEMO true behavior because people have
affective responses to competitive games as well as to real-life situations of betrayal or trust.
Trust 18
In addition to framing trust as making a cooperative move DEMO a mixed-motive game, trust has
been inferred from other behaviors as DEMO Trust was assessed as the number of seconds a person
would wait before falling backwards into the arms of a partner (Cash, Stack, & Luna, 1975). Trust has
also been measured as the willingness to disclose personal information either to a stranger (Cash, Stack,
& Luna) or a group of strangers who had participated in trust-building DEMO (Scott, 1980).
SURVEYS OF TRUST
Rotter (1967) introduced the use of a paper-and-pencil questionnaire to study trust as a
personality trait. DEMO interest was sparked by the cynicism and distrust of a generation of young
people in the late 1960s who were alienated from the institutions DEMO society. He conceived of trust as a
generalized expectancy that others in various segments of society could be relied upon. Rotter’s
questionnaire asked participants DEMO make judgments about the trustworthiness of a variety of social
actors, DEMO politicians, the media, parents, and people in general.
Although Rotter’s DEMO was a beginning, the notion of trust as a personality trait DEMO not as
predictive as anticipated. Thus the focus of the study of trust shifted to assessing individual perceptions
of the characteristics and qualities of DEMO others (Clark & Payne, 1997). At first, the concern DEMO for
trust in intimate relationships sparked by soaring divorce rates and the toll that social changes were
extracting on such relationships. Researchers asked participants DEMO make judgments about the
trustworthiness of a specific intimate partner (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Larzelere & Huston, 1980;
Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna, 1985).
In the past two decades interest in trust DEMO expanded to the study of trust as a collective
property of organizations. Value accrues to organizations with high levels of trust by facilitating
productive DEMO relations (Arrow, 1974; Barney & Hansen, 1994; Coleman, 1990; Powell, 1990,
1996; Williamson, 1993). The hierarchical nature DEMO relationships in a work setting complicates the study
of trust because it affects the expectations of what people feel they owe to one another. DEMO, between
and within organizational levels, has been examined as perceptions of the characteristics of significant
others within the work context. Some researchers have DEMO workers’ trust in their employer
(Athos & Gabarro, 1978), while others have examined both trust in peers in the workplace and in
DEMO (Cook & Wall, 1980; Hoy & Kupersmith, 1985). Cummings and Bromily (1996) measured
trust between departments or units in an DEMO In a school setting, Hoy and Tschannen-Moran
(1999) have assessed DEMO trust in the principal and in colleagues, as well as trust DEMO students and
parents.
Not only have the referents of trust varied, DEMO facets of trust these measures have sought to
capture have varied as well. Various researchers have assessed benevolence, good will or positive
intentions (DEMO & Bromily, 1996; Athos & Gabarro, 1978; Shaw, 1997)DEMO Others have included
reliability, dependability or consistency (Butler, 1991; Cook & Wall, 1980; Cummings & Bromily, 1996;
Trust 19
Athos & Gabarro, 1978) as well as competence or DEMO ability to achieve results (Butler, 1991; Cook &
Wall, DEMO; Shaw, 1997). Honesty or integrity has frequently been assessed (DEMO, 1991; Cummings &
Bromily, 1996; Athos & Gabarro, 1978; Shaw, 1997), while openness has much less frequently been
included (Butler, 1991; Athos & Gabarro, 1978).
We have summarized and divided measures of trust into four categories in Table 2. First, we
described the early experimental operational measures of trust; and then we examined three kinds of
survey instruments. The survey measures are grouped according to DEMO referent of trust—generalized
trust, trust in intimate relations, and organizational trust. Finally, we list the dominant measures of trust
in each category, DEMO the facets of trust tapped, as well as the nature and DEMO of items for each
measure.
Coping with the complexity of trust has been a challenge for all who study the construct. One
must deal DEMO only with a multiplicity of dimensions of trust, but also with DEMO dynamic character of
trust. The next section explores the changes trust can undergo over the course of a relationship.
DYNAMICS OF TRUST: INITIATING, DEMO AND REPAIRING
TRUST
Trust has been difficult to study, not only DEMO it is a multi-dimensional construct, but it is a
dynamic one DEMO well. The nature of the vulnerability can change over the course of a relationship as the
level of interdependence increases or decreases. Trust depends DEMO what one expects of another based on
norms of behavior or role expectations. In addition, most relationships of trust do not take place in a
vacuum; they are embedded in social contexts that impose constraints, DEMO, and sanctions that affect
the trust relationship. Finally, relationships of trust ebb and flow as participants choose how to respond
to instances of DEMO trust, either in engaging in the effort required to repair the DEMO or to
choose various forms of revenge. An understanding of the dynamic quality of trust is essential to
understanding the construct.
Trust is a DEMO phenomenon that takes on a different character at different stages of a
relationship. As a relationship develops, trust “thickens” (Gambetta, 1988). The bases of trust may
change over time as the parties get to DEMO one another. At the beginning of a relationship, trust will
rely DEMO deterrents or institutional structures. As the parties have experience with one another, trust
based on knowledge of one another over the history of the relationship can develop. Finally, the
partners may come to have a greater understanding and empathy for one another’s purposes and
unconditional trust may come DEMO characterize the relationship (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996). During some
periods of time a relationship may be ripe for rapid change. A fragile DEMO level is one that is likely to
undergo large changes during a given time frame. It is unstable and may change quickly in either
Trust 20
direction. In contrast, there are likely to be stable periods in an ongoing relationship in which a robust
trust level is evident (McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany, 1998).
In a study of newly appointed company presidents and their key subordinates, Gabarro (1978)
found DEMO the nature of trust became more differentiated over time. In describing the stages of the
development of working relationships, Gabarro found that in the beginning there was an initial period
of impression making, followed by a period of more intense exploration. The exploration stage evolved
into a third DEMO that was “characterized by tacit testing of the limits of trust and influence, and
attempts to arrive at a mutual set of expectations” (DEMO 301). Most relationships that lasted for more than
eighteen months became stable and underwent relatively little change thereafter. Similarly we expect
that when DEMO principals are appointed, their expectations of teachers and students will follow DEMO similar
path: initial impressions, exploration, limit testing, and stability.
Although theorists have proposed that trust grows gradually over time, several researchers
have been surprised to find higher levels of initial trust than expected (Berg, Dickhaut, & McCabe,
1995; Kramer, 1994). In explaining DEMO paradoxical finding, it has been suggested that when interacting
with a DEMO, people do not simply assume that the other is trustworthy, but instead suspend belief
that the other is unworthy of trust (Jones & George, 1998). People overlook the possibility that the other
may not share the same values. Luhmann (1979) explained that trusting another and DEMO shared
values is often preferred to initial distrust because trust is the easier option. Initial trust is not based so
much on evidence as DEMO the lack of contrary evidence (Gambetta, 1988). As parties interact, experience
supplies facts that either reinforce the initial trusting assumptions or that quickly displace illusions of
trustworthiness. Once people have evidence that leads them DEMO perceive a value incongruence, distrust
is likely to emerge (Sitkin & Roth, 1993). A person with a high disposition to trust is more likely to see
good points and to overlook flaws in another DEMO or situation that could threaten the development of
trust (McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany, 1998). In schools, we expect that high initial trust is a
function not only of the efficiency of assumed trustworthiness DEMO also by the institutional bases of trust,
that is, the DEMO has such mechanisms as norms, rules, and regulations that support trust.
INITIATING TRUST
If we are to understand trust, it would be useful to explore what actions are required to establish
trust. A primary impetus DEMO work with the mixed-motive games was the identification of factors that
would lead to the establishment of trust. Swinth (1967) demonstrated that trust DEMO established through
a commitment period in which each partner had the opportunity to signal to the other a willingness to
accept personal risk and DEMO to exploit the vulnerability of the other for personal gain.
Trust 21
Administrators’ behavior. If organizations hope to garner the benefits of DEMO trusting work
environment, it is management’s responsibility to initiate trusting relationships DEMO trustworthy
behavior on the part of managers (Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, & Werner, 1998). Whitener, et al.,
suggest five behaviors DEMO can engage in to cultivate trust: (1) consistency, (2) integrity, (3)
concern, (4) communication, and (5) DEMO control. These mirror the facets of trust discussed earlier.
Employees will have greater confidence when they feel they can predict the behavior of their
DEMO and when they perceive their superior to have integrity. In a study of leadership in schools,
Evans (1996) found that trust derived DEMO consistency in personal beliefs, organizational goals, and
work performance. Similarly, DEMO and his colleagues (1988; 1993; 1996) found that consistency,
competence and even handed in the principal’s behavior promoted strong and healthy DEMO
communities. Attributions of integrity result from telling the trust and keeping promises (Dasputa,
1988). Integrity will also involve authenticity, that is, accepting responsibility for one’s actions and
avoiding distorting the truth in order DEMO shift blame to another. Authenticity has been linked to trust in
principals in schools (Hoy & Kupersmith, 1985; Tschannen-Moran & Hoy, 1998)DEMO
Superiors can promote trust by demonstrating benevolence through showing consideration and
sensitivity for employees’ needs and interests, acting in a way that protects employees’ rights, and
refraining from exploiting others for the benefit of one’s own interests. Trust is also enhanced by a
willingness to apologize for unpleasant DEMO (Greenberg, 1993; Konovsky & Puch, 1994).
Tschannen-Moran (1998) found that the story of a principal’s willingness to apologize for an DEMO
remark to a teacher was well-known among the faculty in a school and helped to cultivate trust in the
principal even among those who DEMO not received such an apology.
Patterns of communication have an impact on employee’s trust. Employees see managers as
trustworthy when their communication is accurate DEMO forthcoming. Adequate explanations and timely
feedback on decisions lead to higher levels of trust (Sapeienze & Korsgaard, 1996). In addition, open
communication, in which managers exchange thoughts and ideas freely with employees, enhances
DEMO of trust (Butler, 1991; Gabarro, 1978). Principals can foster trust by actively encouraging
their teachers to voice their frustrations candidly, which include criticisms of the principal’s own
decisions. Principals who are open and DEMO promote supportive and trusting climates for teachers
(Bryk et al, 1993; Rosenholz, 1989).
Finally, research has shown that subordinates perceive greater trustworthiness on the part of
superiors who share control, including participation in decision making and delegating control.
Employees’ trust is higher when they are DEMO with their level of participation in decisions (Driscoll,
1978). DEMO, teachers trust is positively related to empowerment and shared decision making (Short,
Greer & Melvin, 1994; Tschannen-Moran, in press). Authentic empowerment provides greater
Trust 22
protection of the employee’s interests and reduces the risk of DEMO on the part of superiors. In
addition, such collaboration allows teachers DEMO responsiveness to student needs (Mark & Louis,
1997). Schools DEMO which the principals engage in authentic shared decision making also produced high
levels of faculty trust in students (Short, Greer & Melvin; Tschannen-Moran). The symbolic value of
sharing and delegation of control should not DEMO overlooked. When managers share control, they
demonstrate significant trust in and DEMO for their employees (Rosen & Jerdee, 1977).
Teacher behavior. Administrator behavior is important in setting the general tone of school
trust, but teacher behavior will have a more direct impact on student learning. Studies DEMO teachers in
schools have suggested that some facets of trust are more salient in teachers’ trust judgments of
colleagues than others. A sense of DEMO or caring laid a foundation of trust among teachers. In
high trust settings, teachers expressed support or benevolence in a variety of ways: DEMO covering classes
for one another, socializing outside of school, taking meals to families that were experiencing illness,
and even contributing sick days DEMO allow a seriously ill colleague to have more time to recover (DEMO,
1997; Tschannen-Moran, 1998). Among teachers openness was also an important facet of trust. In high
trust schools, teachers were pleased to share professional secrets, successful teaching strategies,
materials, and equipment in DEMO interest of helping students learn (Kratzer; Short & Greer, 1997,DEMO
Tschannen-Moran). Honesty was presumed among colleagues. When it was violated, DEMO was difficult
to regain (Tschannen-Moran). Authenticity of teacher behavior also DEMO been linked to teacher trust in
colleagues (Tschannen-Moran & Hoy, 1998). Teachers who distorted the truth in order to make another
colleague DEMO bad or who spread negative gossip were cut off form the circle of trusting relationships
within a school (Louis & Kruse, 1995; Tschannen-Moran). Tschannen-Moran (1998) found that teaching
competence was not necessarily a DEMO component of trust judgments when teachers did not perceive a
great deal of interdependence in this area. With both greater emphasis on school collaboration
(Pounder, 1998) and greater school-wide accountability, the competence of one’s colleagues is likely to
become more salient in trust judgments.
SUSTAINING TRUST IN DEMO
Evidence suggests that a high level of trust pays dividends for organizations. And yet
organizational dynamics can complicate trust judgments. The power differential imposed DEMO hierarchical
relationships in organizations adds complexity to developing and sustaining trust relationships.
However, there are several organizational attributes that cultivate trust. These are explored below, as
are strategies that group members sometimes use to facilitate trust in the collective. In addition, the
importance of reputation is discussed.
Trust 23
Trust in hierarchical relationships. Baier (1986) complained that much DEMO the
philosophical work on trust and morality has been based on contractual relationships between people of
roughly equal power. And yet the reality of DEMO in organizations is that individuals are invested with
varying degrees of power and authority. Baier found a moral code of trust based on assumptions DEMO
equal power inadequate for many social contexts. People at different organizational levels may look to
one another with different expectations on which to build DEMO Gabarro (1978) found that company
presidents and their subordinates used different criteria in making their trust judgments of the other.
Both found integrity DEMO be important, however, beyond that the presidents were more concerned with
the competence and reliability of subordinates, while subordinates placed more importance on
benevolence and openness. Likewise in schools, principals based their trust on teacher competence and
commitment whereas teachers’ view of principals was anchored in kindness, friendliness, and integrity
(Blake, & MacNeil, 1998; Spuck & MacNeil, 1999).
Not only are there potentially different bases for trust across organizational levels,
organizational actors at different levels may invest differential importance DEMO information gained
through interactions. Kramer (1996) found that subordinates were hypervigilant in their trust
assessments of superiors, and that even relatively minor gestures, either positive or negative, took on
considerable diagnostic import. Subordinates were DEMO to recall more trust related incidents than
superiors, and trust violations DEMO likely to “loom larger” than confirmations of trustworthiness.
Similarly, Tschannen-Moran (1998), in her study of urban schools, found that teachers emphasized
different facets of trust in their trust judgments of their principals, colleagues, DEMO students. For
example, teachers looked for benevolence and openness on the DEMO of their principals whereas teachers
were more concerned with competence and reliability of their students.
Trust also seems to play a role in employee DEMO to supervision. In a study of the
perceptions of fairness of performance evaluations by supervisors, the level of trust in the supervisor
was more important to perceived fairness than any other characteristics of the performance evaluation
DEMO (Fulk, Brief, & Barr, 1985). Close supervision may serve to drive down the level of trust across
organizational levels. In an DEMO study of the effects on trust of surveillance by supervisors,
Strickland (1958) found that when supervisors were constrained to monitor one of DEMO “subordinates”
more closely on the first set of trials, on the DEMO trial when there was a choice of whom to monitor
they also chose to more closely monitor that same subordinate. Although the performance of DEMO had
been equal and had met or exceeded standards on all but one trial, supervisors expressed greater trust
of the less-monitored subordinate. It is not surprising, then, that principals who demonstrate collegial
leadership enjoy high DEMO of faculty trust (Hoy, Sabo & Barnes, 1996).
Trust 24
Organizational attributes. By designing organizations in ways that cultivate trust,DEMO
organizations can reap the benefits of greater adaptability and reduced costs. Unfortunately, “the very
conditions that necessitate or are conducive for the emergence of trust also allow for the abuse of trust”
(Elangovan, & Shapiro, 1998, p. 547). Organizational systems can help overcome potential barriers to
trust through attention to structure, policies, and culture (Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, & Werner, 1998).
Structural supports may include creating greater DEMO and actual interdependence across
organizational levels. Structures to facilitate greater shared decision making must distribute not only
authority but accountability for shared decisions. For DEMO, Louis, Kruse & Marks, (1996) found that
delegating authority DEMO teachers and joint deliberation in decision making were effective means to
promote trust in schools.
Both policy and norms are important in development of DEMO trust. Policies must be in
place that demonstrate an expectation of trustworthy behavior on the part of organizational participants,
but means must also DEMO available to respond to breaches of trust (Coleman, 1990). Cultural norms can
facilitate trust by encouraging parties to interact frequently face-to-face, in positive ways, demonstrating
benevolence, support, and concern. When parties interact in a cordial way, they establish a feeling and
appearance that everything is normal and in proper order (Lewis & Weigert, 1985). For DEMO,
visible and accessible principals can more readily demonstrate support and concern. Open and healthy
school climates have been found to be positively related DEMO faculty trust (Hoy, Tarter & Kottkamp, 1991;
Hoy & DEMO, 1998).
Trust is likely to be sustained as people interact DEMO cooperative ways, and the trusting cycle
become self-sustaining. Creating an organizational DEMO of cooperation rather than competition is
likely to have a significant impact on the trusting and trustworthy behavior of participants. One of the
experimental DEMO Deutsch (1958, 1960) made was to induce participants toward one DEMO three
motivational orientations through differing sets of instructions. Participants were led to believe that the
other person shared the same orientation and that the DEMO or level of concern was mutual.
Participants in the cooperative orientation were led to feel concerned not only for their own welfare but
for DEMO welfare of the other person as well. In the individualistic condition, DEMO were to be
concerned only for their own welfare without regard for the other person. And in the competitive
orientation, each participant was led to feel not only that he or she wanted to do the DEMO for themselves,
but also to do better than the other player. Deutsch found that the participants in the cooperative
condition were very likely DEMO make a cooperative choice that resulted in mutual gain, while in DEMO
competitive condition participants rarely made the cooperative choice. In the individualistic condition,
when choices were made in sequence or without communication, participants tended to act
competitively, but when there was communication and the ability to reverse one’s choices
individualistic participants tended to act cooperatively. A cooperative orientation DEMO to produce both
Trust 25
trusting and trustworthy behavior even when situational factors such as DEMO inability to communicate or
lack of knowledge of the other’s choices made cooperation more difficult.
Although teaching has historically been a rather individualistic enterprise, greater cooperation
and trust emerge when situational conditions emphasize communication and collaboration. DEMO fact, the
cooperative orientation found in collaborative school cultures tends to DEMO associated with greater trust
(Louis, Kruse & Associate, 1995; Tschannen-Moran, in press). In the context of schools, cooperative
strategies are DEMO with strong professional communities, in which there is an equitable distribution DEMO
power and joint deliberation and decision making. Such professional communities broaden and enhance
trust that teachers and principals will act in the best interest DEMO each other (Louis, Kruse & Marks, 1996;
Goldring and DEMO, 1993; Elmore, et al, 1996).
Building collective trust. Kramer, Brewer, and Hanna (1996) recognized that trust operates
not only DEMO individuals, but also within and between groups. They were interested in DEMO trust
was cultivated in a collective and identified three processes of trust that serve to maintain solidarity and
sustain trust in a group--elicitative trust, compensatory trust, and moralistic trust. In elicitative trust, one
takes the DEMO to make oneself vulnerable with the hope that it will build more trust in the
collective. The belief or expectation is that, by engaging in acts of trust oneself, one may be able to
induce others to do the same (Kramer, Brewer, & Hanna). Horsburgh (DEMO) defined such vulnerability
as a reliance aimed at increasing the trustworthiness DEMO the person in whom it is placed. He explained,
“Such trust is based on a belief in the possibility of stirring someone’s conscious DEMO an extent sufficient to
affect his or her conduct” (p. 352)DEMO When engaging in compensatory trust individuals are willing to
engage in actions to offset the behavior of other individuals they think might threaten the DEMO or
survival of the collective trust. Moralistic trust emphasizes the beliefs held by members of a collective
about what responsible membership in a social DEMO entails. Although there is virtually no research on
elicitative trust on the part of principals and teachers, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that elicitative
trust could have a powerful effect in instituting trusting norms within a DEMO
Reputation. A reputation of trustworthiness is a valuable asset to individuals and businesses
alike. Relationships within organizations tend to be ongoing, in that people expect to continue to relate
to the same network of people over DEMO When this is the case, there is incentive to behave in DEMO
that are trustworthy, to develop a reputation for trustworthiness, and to reap the benefits of trusting
relationships. When many people perceive that an DEMO has a good reputation, it is harder for a
negative event DEMO significantly reduce a high level of trust in that individual (McKnight, Cummings, &
Chervany, 1998). The trust between two individuals is significantly influenced by the social context in
which that relationship is embedded. DEMO network of mutual friends and acquaintances can enhance the
likelihood that a trusting relationship will develop and will strengthen trust as it develops but DEMO a
Trust 26
context can also amplify the effects of a breach of DEMO In a study of urban schools, Tschannen-Moran
(1998) found evidence DEMO the role of reputational networks in furthering a cycle of trust or distrust
through the stories that were told and retold about organizational players DEMO events. The judgment,
observations, and gossip of others can tend DEMO “lock in” relationships at positive and negative extremes
(Burt & Knez, 1996).
Individuals tend to be more alert to negative information and DEMO negative gossip to positive.
This can be an impediment to the development of trust. New technologies, such as e-mail, voice mail or
the DEMO allow the spread of gossip farther and faster and can amplify the impact of broken trust.
The propensity of the news media to capitalize DEMO this desire for negative information has made the
cultivation of trust more difficult for schools and their publics.
BETRAYAL
Trust involves placing with some DEMO of confidence or assurance something one cares about in
the care or control of another (Baier, 1986). At least in part, the outcome one desires is determined by
someone else. But what if one’s DEMO are not met? What if the one who is trusted acts
DEMO, taking advantage of the confidence that was placed in him or DEMO? Situations
inevitably arise when the thing cared for is harmed (even if by accident) or vulnerability is exploited
for the gain of the trusted at the expense of the one who has extended trust. The DEMO of a trusting
relationship can be altered instantaneously with a simple comment, a betrayed confidence, or a decision
that violates the sense of DEMO one has expected of another. When a violation occurs trust is often
shattered, leaving distrust in its place (Burt & Knez, 1996). Such a violation can leave the victim feeling
stunned and confused, and with a sense of unreality. Upon reflection, those feelings turn to anger or
even rage (Bies & Tripp, 1996; Govier, 1992).
DEMO is defined as “a voluntary violation of mutually known pivotal expectations of the
trustor by the trusted party (trustee), which has the potential to threaten the well-being of the trustor”
(Elangovan, & Shapiro, 1998, p. 548). Betrayal involves a behavior (an actual violation), DEMO than just
the thought of betraying. Betrayal has the potential to harm the well-being of the trustor, even if other
factors mitigate the actual harm experienced. And even if the violation of expectations is not detected DEMO
the trustor, it still constitutes a betrayal. Betrayal is voluntary, in that trustees either lack the motivation
to conform to the expectations of DEMO trustor or become motivated to violate these expectations.
Elangovan and Shapiro proposed that a person would be motivated to betray another based on a
DEMO assessment of the current situation such that the person believes there is more to be gained
than lost by betraying the other person’s expectations. DEMO satisfaction with the current situation will
increase the likelihood of betrayal by lowering the benevolence and integrity of the trusted person. A
drop in DEMO implies that the trustee cares less for the good of the trustor and may be willing to
Trust 27
engage in behaviors that might harm him or her. Similarly, a drop in integrity implies that the trustee
is less committed to DEMO acceptable to the trustor and may search for justification to switch to an
alternate set of principles, even if it means harming the trustor’s best interests.
Trust violations within organizations stem from two broad categories: a damaged sense of civic
order or a damaged identity (Bies & Tripp, 1996). Trust violations that result in a damaged sense of civic
order involve a breech of rules or norms governing behavior and what DEMO owe to one another in a
relationship. These include honor violations such as broken promises, lying, shirking of job
responsibilities, stealing ideas or credit from others, the disclosure of private confidences and secrets or
changing the rules “after the fact.” A damaged sense of civic order could DEMO result from abusive
authority, coercive or threatening behavior, sexual harassment, DEMO dismissal, and favoritism
(Harris, 1994). Trust violations that result DEMO a damaged identity include public criticism, wrong or
unfair accusations, blaming of employees for personal mistakes, or insults to one’s self or the collective
of which one was a part.
Incidents of betrayal can have DEMO effects on organizational functioning. Robinson
(1996) found that when broken promises led to lost trust, distrust was significantly related to a
deterioration in the employee’s performance and to intentions to leave the employer. And the DEMO of
betrayal are lasting. In a study focusing on betrayal in the workplace, 50% of the incidents recounted by
participants had occurred more than 20 years earlier, and 25% had occurred more than 30 years before
(Jones & Burdette, 1994).
The organizational context of relationships can DEMO the likelihood of betrayals occurring.
Organizational norms that emphasize ethical behaviors and a work environment of openness, trust, and
respect discourage the violation DEMO trust, whereas organizations characterized by goal incongruence,
internal politics and DEMO, and shifting coalitions lend themselves to a greater number of betrayals.
DEMO organizational culture and norms, however, may not always be congruent with the trustor’s
personal expectations of the trustee or the trustee’s own values. DEMO betrayal involves a violation
of personal trust, it is not necessarily DEMO or antisocial (Elangovan, & Shapiro, 1998). Teachers may
find DEMO in situations where they have to choose between betraying a colleague or violating
organizational norms. For example, a teacher may be faced with deciding how to respond after
witnessing a teacher friend’s indiscretion with a student, or becoming aware of a friend’s misuse of
school funds.
REVENGE
Trust 28
Trust has to do with expectations of other people in DEMO of vulnerability. When those
expectations are not met some kind of response is likely. Whether that response leads to the restoration
of trust or DEMO a further escalation of conflict depends on the choices made by the actors in the situation.
When a violation of trust has occurred, the way the victim understands the cause of the violation will
affect the DEMO response, and specifically whether there is a desire for revenge. Among DEMO
recounting on-the-job experiences of violation, Bies and Tripp (1996) found DEMO when a victim concluded
that an action was outside the control of the perpetrator, revenge was not sought; however, when the
victim held the perpetrator responsible for the violation, there was always motivation for revenge.
Blame was assigned and revenge sought when the victim perceived the behavior DEMO have grown out of
selfishness or malevolence on the part of the perpetrator. Victims also assigned responsibility to the
system or organization as a DEMO for hiring or failing to constrain the perpetrator. The victim’s act of
revenge may provoke a sense of betrayal on the part of the DEMO, fueling a spiral of distrust.
Revenge is not solely an emotional DEMO to violation; cognitive processes play a prominent
and mediating role in DEMO seeking of revenge as well (Bies & Tripp, 1996). At the time a violation
occurred, people reported having been stunned and confused as well as angry. Contrary to stereotypic
notions of revenge, victims’ choice of revenge strategy was “cool and calculated, ... it appeared to be
quite rational in both deliberation and delivery” (p. 259). There was evidence, however, of “different
arithmetics” between victim and perpetrator, each assessing the cost of the perceived damage
differently. These different calculations, and the responses they evoked, played a role in the escalation
process of a conflict. Upon reflection people were likely to “discover” more malevolence on the DEMO of
the perpetrators, thus enhancing blame, paranoid cognitions, and conspiracy DEMO that led victims to
seek social support and reinforcement for their perceptions.
Victims considered a variety of responses to violation (Bies & Tripp, DEMO). Some simply
withdrew from any social contact with the person who had betrayed them. Others enjoyed indulging in
revenge fantasies or did nothing. DEMO others either sparked or continued a self-perpetuating cycle of
feuding. Some victims arranged for a private confrontation or sought the restoration of their reputation.
DEMO, some offered forgiveness. Bies and Tripp noted that there is power DEMO forgiveness because the
victim, not the perpetrator, restores trust. They also concluded that some harms appear to be
irreversible -- trust is no DEMO possible in these circumstances.
Rather than seeing revenge in an altogether negative light, Bies and Tripp (1996) asserted that
revenge can play a potentially positive role in organizational life. Not only can revenge act as DEMO
constraint against the abuse of power and injustice, it can also DEMO cooperation and be a potent
motivator for constructive change. Revenge has a way of equalizing some of the power differential in
organizations. It gives DEMO a choice of how to respond to a breach in trust and it gives them some
Trust 29
control over if and when they will again offer their DEMO Schools attempt to control the revenge motive
by creating formal mechanisms such as union grievance procedures to address abuse of power and
injustice.
TRUST DEMO
How can trust, once broken, be repaired? Will it forever DEMO weaker than it was before it was
broken or can it grow back stronger than it was to begin with? To be sure, DEMO repair can be a difficult
and time-consuming process. It is a bilateral process in which each party must perceive that the short-
term and/DEMO long-term benefits to be derived from the relationship are valued highly enough to be
worth the investment of time and energy required by the DEMO process. Each party must decide that
the benefits of restoring the relationship are preferred to finding ways of having the needs that were
fulfilled DEMO the relationship met in another manner (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996). Osgood offered a strategy
for reestablishing trust, even in a situation that had previously fostered suspicion.
The Osgood Proposal . Osgood (1959) observed DEMO trust was fundamental to cooperation,
and yet trust could be difficult to establish once a cycle of suspicion, competition, and retaliation had
DEMO When one party suspects the other of harboring exploitative intentions, then DEMO must take
defensive action to protect one’s interests. However, these actions DEMO the suspicions of the other
party that the first is being exploitative. Thus, an escalating cycle of distrust and competition ensues. If
the two parties were able to establish trust, they could engage in a cooperative search for a mutually
beneficial solution and the cycle could be reversed. DEMO both parties could gain rather than lose.
However, without trust, negotiating a bilateral agreement to reverse this escalating cycle is unlikely.
Osgood proposed DEMO, even in the midst of such tension and conflict, trust could be fostered
through the conciliatory initiatives of one party acting unilaterally signaling DEMO desire to establish trust
without sacrificing genuine security interests. The proposal is quite simple. To overcome distrust one
party announces a clear, conciliatory initiative and carries it out reliably. This is followed by an explicit
invitation (but not a demand) to reciprocate. If after several conciliatory attempts the other party remains
hostile, the first party matches their actions one for one, being careful not to overreact. The Osgood
proposal seems especially useful in schools where there has been has been a major labor-management
dispute DEMO mutual distrust is high.
Communication. One of the key components of the Osgood proposal was the use of
announcements in building a mutually cooperative DEMO Several studies tested the impact of
communication on the establishment of a cooperative, mutually beneficial strategy (trust). A
combination of a conciliatory DEMO with honest prior announcements was the most effective in
inducing reciprocal trust (Pilisuk, & Skolnick, 1968). Trust was much harder to establish in the absence
Trust 30
of communication, but communication was not always used honestly in a competitive situation (Deutsch,
1958). Participants with a competitive orientation frequently used communication deceptively to exploit
the opponent. Participants who received dishonest DEMO were likely to become evasive in
their own communication. However, when DEMO prior announcements of cooperative intentions were
made they induced in the partner greater reciprocation of promises of cooperative intentions, greater
reciprocation of honesty, DEMO greater actual cooperation than did the dishonest announcement of
cooperative intentions (DEMO, Helm, & Tedeschi, 1973). Without honest communication Deutsch
found DEMO once two players had made choices that were out of step, DEMO is, one choosing cooperatively
and the other not, it was extremely difficult for them to get together again.
Credible threats. Deutsch proposed that DEMO conditions must be met for cooperation to be
maintained in a stable ongoing system. Each person must have a way of reacting to violations, a
credible threat, which is known to the other and which can serve to inhibit violations. And the system
must have a method of DEMO to restore cooperative relations once lost. Deutsch reasoned that in
any ongoing system violations are likely to occur, if only by chance, but DEMO system of interchange will
break down if violations are frequent and go unchecked. In the mixed-motive games, an unconditional
strategy of cooperation tended to be exploited, especially when there was no way for the cooperative
player to retaliate for violation (Soloman, 1960; Lindskold & Bennett, 1973)DEMO However, when the highly
cooperative player demonstrated a willingness on even DEMO single occasion to retaliate for broken trust, the
other player tended DEMO respond cooperatively to preserve the possibility of mutual gain. Therefore, the
DEMO of a relatively unused threat capability had the effect of enhancing both the participant’s
credibility in terms of attributions of trustworthy intentions and the DEMO behavior of the
participant (Coleman, 1990; Lindskold & Bennett). DEMO have the capacity to punish inappropriate
behavior, but they must use DEMO judiciously if they are to foster and maintain trust within the school
community because coercive principal behavior is likely to alienate teachers (Hoy, DEMO, &
Newland, 1983).
Constructive attitudes and actions. Fisher and DEMO (1988) suggested that even in
situations of mutual suspicion, each DEMO has the opportunity of improving the level of trust in the
relationship. They noted that there are many contexts in which we have to DEMO with individuals and
groups of whose conduct we disapprove. Although relationships necessarily have two parties, it takes
only one of these parties to change the quality of the relationship. To this end, Fisher and Brown
recommended what they called “unconditionally constructive attitudes and actions.” These include
trying to DEMO the other side’s interests, attitudes and beliefs; taking an attitude of acceptance
toward the other side; working for good communication; being meticulously DEMO; and using
persuasion rather than coercion. Fisher and Brown recommended against DEMO reciprocity in
relationships, because such expectations risk disillusionment or even escalation DEMO the conflict. They
Trust 31
pointed out that the tit-for-tat strategy that proved effective in DEMO Prisoner’s Dilemma games does not
work in most real-life situations because most relationships are not well-modeled by the constraints of
the prisoner’s dilemma games. DEMO principals are in a position to initiate such a unilateral strategy
provided they have the security and confidence to do so, but there is little evidence that they pursue
such a strategy.
In trying to understand DEMO other party and their motivations Fisher and Brown (1988)
recommended DEMO one assume that others do not see themselves as “bad people pursuing immoral
ends through illegitimate means” but that they have what they consider DEMO reasons for doing as they
do. Blind trust, or extending trust DEMO what is reasonable given the information available about the
others’ actions and motivations is dangerous, but each side has the opportunity to be completely
trustworthy. Whether distrust has grown from hurt pride over a damaged sense DEMO identity,
disillusionment growing out of a damaged civic order or perceived value incongruence, attention will
need to be paid to these issues in the restoration of trust (Sitkin & Stickel, 1996).
Reparation. The DEMO and the victim have different roles and responsibilities in the
reestablishment of trust. Lewicki and Bunker (1996) argued that the violator must start DEMO recognizing
and acknowledging that a violation has occurred. Listening carefully to the victim, the violator then
must determine the nature of the violation and admit to having caused the event. He or she must also
admit DEMO the act was destructive. Finally, the perpetrator must accept responsibility for DEMO effects of
his or her actions. These acknowledgments made, the victim DEMO determines what is required to restore
trust. According to Lewicki and Bunker there are four alternative courses of trust repair:
• The victim DEMO to accept any actions, terms, or conditions for reestablishing the relationship.
• The victim acknowledges forgiveness but specifies “unreasonable” acts of reparation
• DEMO victim acknowledges forgiveness and specifies “reasonable” acts of reparation
• The victim simply acknowledges forgiveness and indicates that no further acts of reparation are
DEMO
The acts of reparation are usually designed to demonstrate that the violator is sincere and
committed in the desire to rebuild the relationship, and to demonstrate a willingness to incur a certain
amount of personal loss DEMO do so. The victim then has the opportunity to judge the sincerity and
commitment of the violator in carrying out these actions. Reparations also DEMO an opportunity for the
violator to work out any guilt that he or she may have over the harm that was done, whether it was
intentional or unintentional.
Understanding the dynamic nature of trust is as DEMO as understanding its facets.
Awareness of the issues involved in the development, dissolution, and repair of trust will help theorists
Trust 32
and practitioners alike. Particularly in a school context, it is important to understand the role played by
organizational structure, policies, and DEMO in the development and sustenance of trust. With greater
understanding of the importance of trust and the costs of distrust, principals and teachers should be
more willing to invest in the effort required maintain trust and DEMO repair  trust that has been damaged.
TRUST AND SOCIAL PROCESSES IN DEMO
Although research on trust in schools is relatively recent, interest in DEMO dynamics of trust in
organizations has been underway for a longer time. Research on trust in organizations can be brought
to bear on the DEMO of trust in schools. The relationship of trust in organizations to processes such
as communication, collaboration, climate, organizational citizenship, and the proliferation DEMO rules are all
subjects addressed below. When relationships are embedded in an organizational context the
dimensions and dynamics of trust make a very real DEMO on the effectiveness and collective sense of
efficacy of the organization.
TRUST AND COMMUNICATION
Trust is necessary for open communication in an organization. People DEMO a high degree of
trust are more likely to disclose more accurate, relevant, and complete data about problems. They will
also be more DEMO to share their thoughts, feelings or ideas (Wrightsman, 1974; Zand, 1971). Distrust,
on the other hand, is likely to DEMO a deleterious effect on communication. When interacting with a
distrusted person, DEMO if that person holds more power within an organizational hierarchy, the
DEMO of communication becomes the protection of one’s interest and the reduction of one’s anxiety rather
than the accurate transmission of ideas (Bartolme, 1989; Mellinger, 1956). A person may feel compelled
to be evasive or to distort attitudes or information in communicating with a distrusted person.
Patterns DEMO communication across levels of a hierarchy within an organization are affected by
differential levels of trust. When there was a high level of trust DEMO superiors and subordinates,
Roberts and O’Reilly (1974) found that subordinates expressed high levels of confidence in the accuracy
of information coming from DEMO superior, a desire for interaction with the superior, and satisfaction with
communication with the superior. When there was low trust, subordinates disclosed a great tendency to
withhold information and acknowledged significant forces to distort upward DEMO Empirical
evidence supports the claim that trust is affected by the amount and quality of communication in a
relationship. Using a mixed-motive game, Loomis (1959) found that the level of perceived trust
increased as communication DEMO Trustworthy or cooperative behavior increased as well. When
Schlenker, Helm and DEMO (1973) varied the accuracy of information in a mixed-motive game,
participants tended to make choices either to cooperate or to compete based DEMO their perception of the
Trust 33
trust relationship. When participants received promises that were only 50% DEMO, they cooperated
less and were more likely to be evasive or DEMO in their own communications.
When high trust allows for the open exchange of information, problems can be disclosed,
diagnosed, and corrected before DEMO are compounded. Principals can help foster the flow of information
to them by being open with communication that flows from them (Bartolme, 1989)DEMO Principals who want
to encourage candor among their staffs must cultivate an atmosphere of trust. In a study of urban
elementary schools, Tschannen-Moran (DEMO) found that communication between principals and teachers
was hindered in a DEMO of distrust; teachers were guarded in whom they talked to and DEMO they
said. Although teachers acknowledged such significant problems as children being left unsupervised on
the playground and teachers arriving after the start of the DEMO day, they were unwilling to reveal
those problems for fear of DEMO Communication was often blocked or distorted to avoid
confrontation.
TRUST AND COLLABORATION
Shared decision-making, as it has typically been exercised in schools, has DEMO criticized as
affording teachers little real influence over organizational decisions that matter to them (Bartunek &
Keys, 1979; Bacharach, Bauer, & DEMO, 1988; Duke, Showers, & Imber, 1980). Teachers are DEMO to be
involved in decision making simply to increase their satisfaction, DEMO, and acceptance of decisions.
This might be called contrived collaboration.
Recent DEMO for collaboration seem to be pressing for a more genuine sharing of decision making
authority, where principals and teachers make decisions jointly (Pounder, 1998; Short & Greer, 1997).
This model highlights teachers’ competence DEMO bringing valuable knowledge and insights to contribute
to decisions. Higher quality decisions are the goal of this more genuine form of collaboration in which
DEMO have actual influence over the outcome of decisions that affect them. The Hoy and Tarter (1995)
model of shared decision making suggests that principals must trust their faculty before they will be
willing to engage DEMO a collaborative process in which they share authority and have the same vote as
every other member of the committee. There are also calls DEMO greater collaboration among teachers in
fostering a spirit of professional community in schools (Louis & Kruse, 1995; Marks & Louis, 1997).
DEMO, such collaboration is unlikely to develop in the absence of trust DEMO teachers (Leonard,
1999; Short & Greer). Trust plays an important role in overcoming barriers to collaboration, including
conflict avoidance, destructive DEMO, and low levels of teacher efficacy (Leonard).
In an elicitative fashion, when principals extend trust to teachers through shared control, they DEMO
greater trust in response. In a study of urban elementary schools, DEMO level of collaboration on school-
level decisions was significantly related to the level of trust in the principal. An environment of trust
Trust 34
also led to greater inclusion of parents into the decision DEMO process. In schools where there was a
high level of faculty trust in parents and students, there tended to be a higher level of shared decision
making on school-level decisions with both the parents and the DEMO (Hoy & Tschannen-Moran, 1999;
Tschannen-Moran, in press).
TRUST DEMO SCHOOL CLIMATE
The climate of the school can be one that cultivates trust or that makes trust difficult to foster. As
the climate of DEMO school becomes more open, trust is reinforced (Hoy, Hoffman, Sabo, & Bliss, 1996;
Tarter, Bliss, & Hoy, 1989). Empirical evidence links openness of the climate and faculty trust (Hoffman,
Sabo, Bliss, & Hoy, 1994; Tarter, Bliss & Hoy, DEMO; Tarter, Sabo, & Hoy, 1995). In addition, healthy
DEMO relationships have been related to the levels of faculty trust in the principal and in
colleagues (Hoy, Sabo, & Barnes, 1996). DEMO of school climate and trust have demonstrated that the
behavior of the principal and the behavior of teachers have differential impacts on the quality DEMO
trusting relationships in schools. Supportive leadership on the part of the principal influenced the
degree of trust teachers felt for the principal, and collegial and engaged teacher behavior helped to
create trust in colleagues (Hoy, DEMO, & Witkoskie, 1992; Tarter, Bliss, & Hoy, 1989; DEMO, Sabo, &
Hoy, 1995; Tschannen-Moran & Hoy, 1998). These studies indicate the significant relationship between
trust and a positive school DEMO
TRUST AND ORGANIZATIONAL CITIZENSHIP
Organizational citizenship describes instances when a worker spontaneously goes beyond the
formally prescribed job requirements and performs non-mandatory behaviors without DEMO of
receiving explicit recognition or compensation. Organ (1988, 1997) emphasized DEMO importance of
organizational citizenship in promoting organizational effectiveness. “Organizational citizenship
behaviors are vital for productivity because organizations cannot forecast through stated job descriptions
the DEMO spectrum of subordinate behaviors needed for achieving goals” (p. 4). DEMO kinds of
behaviors are particularly important for schools, where formal job DEMO can, at best, delineate
broad parameters of the expectations of teachers’ responsibilities. Organizational citizenship behaviors
include altruism, courtesy, conscientiousness, sportsmanship and civic virtue. When these behaviors are
absent, organizational life is likely to be strained and fraught with tension. If schools attempt, however,
to require citizenship activities, they may engender resistance and resentment.
Transformational leadership behaviors describe a leader who has articulated a clear vision, is
able to foster an acceptance of group goals and holds high performance expectations, while providing an
appropriate model for followers to emulate, individualized support, and intellectual DEMO
Trust 35
Transformational leadership behaviors were found to lead to greater citizenship DEMO of
subordinates if and only if the employees trusted the leader. When employees did not trust the leader
these leadership behaviors did not lead DEMO greater citizenship (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Moorman, &
Fetter, 1990). The implications for schools are significant. For principals or superintendents to be
DEMO in producing a kind of organizational culture in which employees are inspired to go beyond
the explicit requirements of their job they must earn DEMO trust of organizational participants (Deluga,
1994; Walker, 1999).
DEMO AND THE PROLIFERATION OF RULES
Organizations must continually balance extending trust to employees at various levels of the
organization with the creation of safeguards DEMO the possibility of opportunistic behavior.
Organizations adopt rules and formal organizational mechanisms to act as substitutes for interpersonal
trust and to restore damaged trust DEMO the organization (Shapiro, 1987; Zucker, 1986). However,
formal controls instituted to increase performance reliability can undermine trust and interfere with DEMO
achievement of the very goals they were put in place to serve. Extreme elaboration of bureaucratic rules
are likely to be counterproductive because they DEMO distrust to those to whom they are
directed. They are based on the premise that workers desire to evade responsibilities and withhold
proper and DEMO performance of obligations (Fox, 1974). In a study of a professional organization where a
system of bureaucratic rules was introduced, conflict and hurt feelings resulted from the use of
standardized procedures that threatened workers’ DEMO of professionalism. When employees perceived
a mismatch between the tasks they performed and the management control systems they had to
accommodate, distrust was the result (Sitkin & Stickel, 1996). Rules and regulations are likely DEMO be
effective only when the requirements of a task are understood well enough to be specified clearly and
concisely, but they may engender distrust and resentment in situations where workers need a certain
amount of discretion DEMO order to function effectively (Fox).
The work of schools is DEMO and changes with the needs of each student. Discretion is
required and resentment and distrust are likely to result when teachers perceive a proliferation DEMO rules
interfering with their ability to do their jobs well. The consequence of such a stance impacts
organizational participants’ affiliation with the organization. Teachers DEMO well as students may respond
to a proliferation of rules with feelings of alienation, disloyalty, and lack of commitment, which
ironically can make dishonesty and cheating more prevalent (Govier, 1992; Hoy, Blazovsky, &DEMO
Newland, 1983; Walker, 1999).
COLLECTIVE EFFICACY, ACHIEVEMENT, AND DEMO
EFFECTIVENESS
Trust 36
Not only has trust been linked to effectiveness and quality DEMO, in the past decade
empirical evidence has demonstrated the significant role DEMO trust in school effectiveness and student
achievement. Teachers’ trust in their colleagues as well as their principal have been linked to general
school effectiveness, including the quality of teaching and the flexibility and adaptability of the DEMO
(Hoy, Tarter & Witkoskie, 1992; Tarter, Sabo, & Hoy, 1995). Faculty trust has also been found to have a
direct impact on student achievement (Goddard, Tschannen-Moran, & Hoy, 2000). DEMO greater the
faculty trust in students and parents, the higher was DEMO level of school achievement in reading and
mathematics. Even when controlling for SES, faculty trust was significantly related to mathematics
achievement.
Faculty trust also has an indirect influence on student achievement. The level of trust is DEMO
to the collective efficacy of the faculty, that is, the extent to which teachers perceive they can make a
positive contribution to student DEMO (Tschannen-Moran & Goddard, 2000). Teachers’ collective sense
of efficacy has been powerfully linked to student achievement (Bandura, 1993, 1997; Goddard, Hoy, &
Woolfolk Hoy, in press), even controlling for the socioeconomic status of students. Student demographics
also have an interesting relationship to DEMO trust. In a study of urban schools, low socioeconomic
status was DEMO greater barrier to the development of teacher trust than membership in a minority racial
group (Tschannen-Moran, 1998).
In sum, there is compelling evidence that trust is important to the processes required for the
smooth DEMO of schools. Trust is related to a positive school climate, to DEMO communication,
to participative decision processes, and to organizational participants’ willingness DEMO go beyond the
minimum requirements of their job descriptions. When trust is absent, organizations may see a
profusion of rules as a substitute means to keep participants in line, which can be counterproductive to
the purposes of school. Trust makes a difference in student achievement, teacher’s collective sense of
efficacy, and to overall school effectiveness. For schools to function well, they need trust.
CONCLUSION
Trust is a critical factor as we consider school improvement and effectiveness. At all levels of the
organization, trust facilitates productivity, and its absence impedes progress. Without trust, a student’s
energy DEMO diverted toward self-protection and away from learning. A proliferation of rules stemming
from a lack of trust causes resentment and alienation among teachers and DEMO alike. Without trust,
communication becomes constrained and distorted, making problems DEMO difficult to resolve. Even
where leaders work to build a common vision and foster acceptance of group goals, absent trust these
Trust 37
leaders do not inspire workers to go beyond the minimum DEMO of their jobs. When distrust
pervades a school culture it is unlikely the school will be effective.
Trust is required for many of the DEMO taking shape in American schools. New forms of governance
such as site-based management, collaborative decision making, and teacher empowerment depend
upon trust. Parents DEMO pressing for involvement in school governance; this too requires trust. Even
DEMO the classroom, relationships are shifting to forms that require greater trust. DEMO learning
and project-based learning create higher levels of interdependence, which demand DEMO levels of
trust. As teachers are asked to change their fundamental beliefs and instructional techniques, they need
to build new professional communities anchored in trust and teamwork. In short, for schools to realize
the kinds of positive transformation envisioned by reform efforts, attention must be paid to issues of
trust.
At the same time that schools face a greater need DEMO trust, they encounter many obstacles. The
difficulties of achieving new and DEMO societal expectations for equity and equality in schools have led
to distrust of schools and school personnel. Higher standards and more accountability have fostered
DEMO of suspicion and blame. Moreover, schools have to cope with greater DEMO and transience.
A multicultural society with diverse values and shifting populations makes the generation of trust a
major challenge. Adding to this formidable task DEMO the tendency for distrust, once established, to be self-
perpetuating. Not only is there a propensity for news of broken trust to spread DEMO and further than
news of intact or restored trust but the media feed off and aggravate the spiral of distrust. Finding ways
to overcome DEMO many obstacles to trust will be important if we hope for schools to reach the
aspirations we hold for them.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Evidence of DEMO importance of trust to organizational productivity, and to such important
outcomes DEMO student achievement requires greater knowledge and understanding. Research on trust is
just beginning in the school context. There are a host of unanswered issues DEMO questions.
Understanding the facets and dynamics of trust in the linkages between organizational levels in schools
is important: between boards and superintendents, between DEMO and principals, between
principals and teachers, between teachers and students, DEMO between parents and schools.
Understanding trust within organizational levels is also important: teacher to teacher as well as student
to student relationships. Both quantitative and qualitative studies are needed. Quantitative studies are
needed to explore the DEMO facets of trust and their relationship to other constructs across a large
number of schools. Qualitative studies are helpful in exploring the dynamic nature DEMO trust within
particular school buildings. We turn to a few illustrative examples of areas in need of further study.
Trust 38
One area in need of greater understanding is the relationship DEMO trust and leadership. For
example, how is trust linked to leader DEMO? How is trust fostered when a new principal or
superintendent enters DEMO school setting? What strategies do expert principals employ for establishing
trust DEMO a new faculty? What impact does the existing level of trust DEMO a building make on the
decisions and strategies of a new principal coming into that building?
The development of faculty trust is another DEMO in need of inquiry. What is the impact of a
school’s culture of trust on new faculty members in such realms as teacher efficacy, commitment,
satisfaction, and motivation? What can principals do to cultivate DEMO trust in colleagues? What kind of
school structures facilitates faculty trust? As teachers collaborate more, what communication and conflict
resolution skills are needed to nurture greater teacher trust in one another?
The study of DEMO trust has also has been neglected. There is intriguing evidence that trust
matters in facilitating student learning, yet we know little about the structural, cultural, and individual
characteristics of teachers and schools that promote student DEMO For example, do school structures such
as academic teams and block DEMO cultivate greater student trust? What kind of teacher and
student values DEMO norms foster student trust? Are certain teaching styles more or less DEMO to the
development of student trust? What community factors are linked DEMO levels of student trust? These and
other questions concerning how trust DEMO in the context of schools are important as schools struggle
to rise to the challenge of a changed and changing world. The four decades DEMO research upon which this
review is based lays a solid conceptual and empirical foundation for continuing the quest to understand
trust in schools.
Trust 39
REFERENCES
Allison, S.T. & Messick, D. M. (1985). The group attribution error. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 21, 563-579.
DEMO, A.G. & Gabarro, J. J. (Eds.). (1978). Interpersonal behavior: Communication and
understanding in relationships. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Arrow, K. J. (1974). The limits of organization. New York: Norton.
Bacharach, S.B., Bauer, S. & Shedd, J. B. (1988). The work environment and school reform.
Teachers College Record, 88, 241-256.
DEMO, A. C. (1986). Trust and antitrust. Ethics, 96, 231-260.
Baier, A. C. (1994). Moral prejudices. Cambridge, MA: Harvard DEMO Press.
Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning.
Educational Psychologist, 28(2), 117-148.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: W.H. Freeman & Co.
DEMO, B. (1983). The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Barney, J. B., & Hansen, M. H. (1994). Trustworthiness as a source of competitive advantage.
Strategic Management Journal, 15, 175-190.
Bartolme, F. (1989). Nobody trusts the DEMO completely--now what? Harvard Business Review,
67(2), 135-142.
Bartunek, J. M. & Keyes, C.B. (1979). Participation in decision making. DEMO Education, 14,
52-75.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., & DEMO, K. (1995). Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Unpublished
working paper, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
Bies, R.J., & Tripp, T.M. (1996). Beyond distrust: “Getting even” and the need for revenge. DEMO
R. Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Bigley, G. A., & Pearce, J. L. (1998). Straining for shared meaning in organization science:
Problems of trust DEMO distrust. The Academy of Management Review, 23,  405-421.
Trust 40
Blake, M., & MacNeil, A. J. (1998) .Trust: The quality required for successful management. In
Y. Cano, F. H. DEMO, & J. C. Simmons. Creating High Functioning Schools: Practice and
Research (pp 29-37). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Bradach, J. DEMO, & Eccles, R. G. (1989). Price, authority, and DEMO: From ideal types to plural
forms. Annual Review of Sociology, 15, 97-118.
Brewer, M. B. (1995). In-group favoritism: The subtle DEMO of intergroup discrimination. In D.M.
Messick & A Tenbrunsel (Eds.) Behavioral research and business ethics, (pp. 101-117), New
York: Russell Sage.
Bryk, A. S. & Driscoll, M. E. (1988). The high school as community: Contextual influences and
consequences for students and teachers. Madison: National Center on Effective Secondary
Schools, University of Wisconsin.
Bryk, A. S., Lee, V. E. &  Holland, P. B. (1993). Catholic schools and the common good.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
DEMO, A. S. & Schneider, B. (1996). Social trust: A moral resource of school improvement.
Chicago: University of Chicago, Center for DEMO Improvement.
Burt, R.S. & Knez, M. (1996). Trust and DEMO gossip. In R. Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.),
Trust DEMO Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Butler, J. K. (1991). Towards DEMO and measuring conditions of trust: Evolution of a
conditions of trust DEMO Journal of Management, 17, 643-663.
Butler, J. K. & Cantrell, R.S. (1984). A behavioral decision theory approach to modeling dyadic
trust in superiors and subordinates. Psychological Reports, 55, 81-105.
Cash, T. F., Stack, J. J., & Luna, G. C. (1975). Convergent and discriminant behavioral aspects of
interpersonal trust. Psychological Reports, 37, 983-986.
DEMO, M. C., & Payne, R. L. (1997). The nature and structure of workers’ trust in management.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 18, 205-224.
Coleman, J. S. (1990), Foundations of social theory, DEMO Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cook, J. & Wall, T. (1980). New work attitude measures of trust, DEMO commitment and
personal need non-fulfillment. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 53, 39-52.
Trust 41
Creed, W.E.D, & Miles, R.E. (1996). Trust DEMO organizations: A conceptual framework linking
organizational forms, managerial philosophies, and DEMO opportunity costs of controls. In R.
Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Cummings, L.L. & Bromily, P. (1996). “The organizational trust inventory (OTI): Development
and DEMO, in Kramer, R. and Tyler, T. (Eds.), Trust in Organizations, Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Dasgupta, P. (1988). DEMO as a commodity. In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking
cooperative relations, pp. 213-238.Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Dawes, R.M., van de Kragt, A. J. C., & Orbell, J. M. (DEMO). Cooperation for the benefit of us –
not me or my conscience. In J. Mansbridge (Ed.) Beyond self-interest. (Pp. 16-55). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
De Furia, G. L. (1997). DEMO Trust Surveys. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Deluga, R.J. (1994). Supervisor DEMO building, leader-member exchange and organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Occupational and DEMO Psychology, 67 (4), 315.
Deutsch, M. (1958). Trust and suspicion. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 2, 265-279.
Deutsch, M. (DEMO). The effect of motivational orientation upon trust and suspicion, Human
DEMO, 13, 123-39.
Driscoll, J.W. (1978). Trust and participation in organizational decision making as predictors of
satisfaction. Academy of Management Journal, 21, 44-56.
Duke, D.L., Showers, B.K., & Imber, M. (1980). Teachers and shared decision making: The costs
and benefits of involvement. Educational Administration Quarterly, 16, 93-106.
Elangovan, A. R., & Shapiro, D. L. (1998). Betrayal of trust in organizations. Academy of
Management Review, 23, 547-566.
Elmore, R. F., Peterson, P. L., & McCarthey, S. J. (1996). Restructuring the classroom:
Teaching, DEMO, and school organization. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Evans, G. (1964). Effect of unilateral promise and value of rewards upon cooperation and trust.
DEMO of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 69, 587-590.
Evans, R. (1996). The human side of change: Reform, resistance, and real-life problems of
innovation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Trust 42
Fisher, R. & Brown, S. (1988). Getting Together. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Fox, A. (1974). Beyond contract: Work, power and trust relations. London: Farber & Farber.
Frost, T., Stimpson, D. V., & Maughan, M. R. (1978). Some correlates DEMO trust. The Journal of
Psychology, 99, 103-108.
Fukuyama, F. (1995). Trust: The social virtues and the creation of prosperity. New York: Simon
& Schuster.
Fulk, J., Brief, A.P., & Barr, DEMO (1985). Trust in the supervisor and perceived fairness and
accuracy DEMO performance evaluations. Journal of Business Research, 13, 301-313.
Fuller, E. DEMO (1996). Conflict or congruence? Faculty, parent, and student trust in the principal.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American DEMO Research Association, New
York.
Gabarro, J. J. (1978). The DEMO of trust, influence, and expectations. In A.G. Athos &
J.J. DEMO (Eds.), Interpersonal behavior: Communication and understanding in relationships.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 290-303.
Gambetta, D. (1988). Can we trust? In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking
cooperative relations, 213-238.Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Goddard, R.D., Hoy, W.K., & Woolfolk Hoy, A. (in press). Collective teacher efficacy: Its
meaning, measure, and impact on student achievement. American Journal of Educational
Research.
DEMO, R.D., Tschannen-Moran, M. & Hoy, W. K. (2000, under review). The relationship of
trust to student achievement in urban elementary DEMO: A multilevel analysis.
Goldring, E. B., & Rallis, S. F. (1993). Principals of dynamic schools: Taking charge of change.
Thousand DEMO, CA: Corwin.
Goodlad, J. I. (1984). A place called school: Prospects for the future. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Govier, T. (DEMO). Distrust as a practical problem. Journal of Social Philosophy, 23(DEMO), 52-63.
Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic action and social structure: The problems of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481-510.
Trust 43
Greenberg, J. (1993). The social side of fairness: Interpersonal and informational classes of
organizational justice. In R. Cropanzano (Ed.), Justice in the workplace (pp. 79-103). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence DEMO
Gulati, R. (1995). Does familiarity breed trust? The implications DEMO repeated ties for contractual
choice in alliances. Academy of Management Journal, DEMO, 85-112.
Harris, g. G. (1994). Trust and betrayal in DEMO workplace. Unpublished Dissertation, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City.
Heretick, DEMO (1981). Gender-specific relationships between trust-suspicion, locus of
control, and DEMO distress. Journal of Psychology, 108, 267-274.
Hoffman, J., Sabo, DEMO, Bliss, J., & Hoy, W. K. (1994). Building DEMO culture of trust. Journal of
School Leadership, 4, 484-501.
Holmes, DEMO, & Rempel, J. K. (1989). Trust in close relationships. DEMO C. Hendrick (Ed.), Close
Relationships, 187-220. Newbury Park: Sage.
DEMO, H. J. N. (1960). The ethics of trust. Philosophical Quarterly, 10, 343-354.
Hosmer, L.T. (1995). Trust: The connecting link between organizational theory and
philosophical ethics. Academy of Management Review, 20 (DEMO), 379-403.
Hoy, W. K., Blazovsky, R., & Newland, DEMO (1983). Bureaucracy and alienation: A comparative
analysis. The Journal of Educational Administration, 21, 109-120.
Hoy, W. K., & Kupersmith, W.J. (1985). The meaning and measure of faulty trust. Educational
and Psychological Research, 5, 1-10.
Hoy, W. K. & Sabo, D. J. (1998). Quality middle schools: Open and healthy. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Corwin.
Hoy, W. K., Sabo, D, & Barnes, K. (1996) Organizational health and faculty trust: A view from
the middle DEMO Research in Middle Level Education Quarterly, Spring, 21-39.
Hoy, W. DEMO & Tarter, C.J. (1995). Administrators Solving the Problems of Practice: Decision-
making concepts, cases, and consequences. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
DEMO, W. K., Tarter, C. J., & Kottkamp, R. B. (1991). Open schools, healthy schools: Measuring
organizational climate. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Trust 44
Hoy, W. K., Tarter, C.J., Witkoskie, L. (DEMO). Faculty trust in colleagues: Linking the principal
with school effectiveness. DEMO of Research and Development in Education, 26 (1), 38-45.
Hoy, W. K., & Tschannen-Moran, M. (1999). Five faces of DEMO: An empirical confirmation in
urban elementary schools. Journal of School Leadership, 9(3), 184-208.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and Fiascos. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Johnson-George, C.E., & Swap, W.C. (1982). Measurement of specific interpersonal trust:
Construction and validation of a scale to assess trust in a specific DEMO Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 43, 1306-1317.
Jones, G. DEMO, & George, J. M. (1998). The experience and evolution DEMO trust: Implication for
cooperation and teamwork. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 531-546.
Jones, W., & Burdette, M. P. (DEMO). Betrayal in relationships. In A. Weber & J. Harvey (Eds.),
Perspectives on close relationships (pp. 243-262). Boston: Allyn and DEMO
Kee, H.W., & Knox, R.E. (1970). Conceptual and methodological considerations in the study of
trust and suspicion, Journal of Conflict Resolution, 14, 357-365.
Kipnis, D. (1996). Trust and technology. In DEMO Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Klayman, J. & Ha, Y.W. (1997). Confirmation, disconfirmation, and information in hypothesis
testing. In W. M. Goldstein and R. M. Hogarth (Eds.), Research on judgment and decision
making: Currents, connections, and controversies. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press.
Konovsky, M. A., & Pugh, S. D. (1994). Citizenship behavior and social exchange. DEMO of
Management Review, 37, 656-669.
Kramer, R. M. (1994). The sinister attribution error: Paranoid cognition and collective distrust in
organizations. Motivation and Emotion, 18, 199-230.
Kramer, R. M. (1996). Divergent DEMO and convergent disappointments in the hierarchic
relation: Trust and the intuitive DEMO at work. In R. Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Kramer, R. M., Brewer, M. DEMO, & Hanna, B.A. (1996). Collective trust and collective action: The
decision to trust as a social decision. In R. Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations.
Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Trust 45
Kramer, R. M. & Tyler, T. (Eds.)(1996)DEMO Trust in Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Kratzer, C. C. (1997, March). A community of respect, caring, and trust: One school’s story.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research DEMO,
Chicago.
Larson, C. L. (1997). Is the land of oz an alienation nation? A sociopolitical study of school
community conflict. Educational Administration Quarterly, 33, 312-350.
Larzelere, R.E., & Huston, T.L. (DEMO). The dyadic trust scale: Toward understanding
interpersonal trust in close DEMO Journal of Marriage and the Family, 42, 595-604.
Leonard, P. DEMO (1999, November). Do teachers value collaboration? The impact of DEMO Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the University Council for Educational Administration,
Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Levy, S., & Guttman, L. (1985). A faceted cross-cultural analysis of some core social values. In
D. DEMO (Ed.) Facet Theory: Approaches to Social Research, New York: DEMO, pp
205-222
Lewicki, R.J. & Bunker, B.B. (1996). Developing and maintaining trust in work relationships. In
R. Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Lewicki, R. J., McAllister, D. J., & Bies, R. J. (1998). Trust and distrust: New relationships and
realities. The Academy of Management Review, DEMO(3), 438-458.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. (1985). Trust as a social reality. Social Forces,63, 967-985.
Little, DEMO W. (1990). The persistence of privacy: Autonomy and Initiative in Teachers’
Professional Relations, Teachers College Record, 91, 509-536.
Limerick, D. & Cunnington, B. (1993). Managing the new organization. San Francisco: DEMO
Bass.
Lindskold, S. (1978). Trust development, the GRIT proposal, and the effects of conciliatory acts
on conflict and cooperation. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 772-793.
Lindskold, S., & Bennett, R. (1973). Attributing trust and conciliatory intent from coercive
power capability. Journal of Personality and DEMO Psychology, 28(2), 180-186.
Loomis, J. L. (1959). DEMO, the development of trust, and cooperative behavior.
Human Relations, 52, 305-315.
Trust 46
Louis, K. S., Kruse, S., & Associates. (1995). Professionalism and community: Perspectives on
reforming urban schools. Thousand Oaks, DEMO: Corwin.
Louis, K. S., Kruse, S., & Marks, H. M. (1996). School-wide professional community: Teachers
work, intellectual quality and commitment. In F. W. Newman & Associates, Authentic
achievement: Restructuring schools DEMO intellectual quality (pp 179-203). San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.
Luce, DEMO D. & Raiffa, H. (1957). Games and decisions: Introduction DEMO critical survey. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Luhmann, N. (DEMO). Trust and power. Chichester, New York: Wiley.
Malen, B., Ogawa, R. T., & Kranz, J. (1990). Evidence says DEMO management hindered by
many factors. The School Administrator, 47 (2), 30-32, 53-56, 59.
Marks, H. M., & Louis, K. S. (1997). Does teacher empowerment affect the classroom? The
implications of DEMO empowerment for instructional practice and student academic
performance. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 19, 245-275.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational
trust. Academy of Management Review, 20, 709-734.
McAllister, D.J. (1995). DEMO and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal
cooperation in organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 24-59.
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, DEMO L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust formation DEMO new
organizational relationships. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), DEMO
Mellinger, G. D. (1956). Interpersonal trust as a factor in communication. Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 52, 304-309.
Mishra, A.K. (1996). Organizational responses to crisis: The centrality of trust. In DEMO Kramer, &
T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations. Thousand DEMO: Sage.
Organ, D. W. (1988). Organizational citizenship behavior: The good soldier syndrome.
Lexington, MA.: Lexington Books.
Organ, D. W. (DEMO). Organizational citizenship behavior: It’s construct clean-up time. Human
Performance, 10, 85-97.
Trust 47
Osgood, C. E. (1959). Suggestions for winning the DEMO war with communism. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 3, 295-325.
Parsons, DEMO(1960). Structure and process in modern societies. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Pilisuk, M. & Skolnick, P. (1968). Inducing trust: DEMO test of the Osgood proposal. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO, 121-133.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Moorman, R.H., & DEMO, R. (1990). Transformational
leader behaviors and their effects on followers’ trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational
citizenship behaviors. Leadership Quarterly, 1, 107-142.
Pounder, D. G. (1998). Restructuring schools for collaboration: DEMO and pitfalls. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Powell, DEMO W. (1990), “Neither Market nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of Organization”, in
B.M. Staw and L.L. Cummings (Eds.) Research in Organizational Behavior, JAI, Greenwich,
CT, Vol 12, pp.295-336.
Powell, W.W. (DEMO). Trust-based forms of governance. In R. Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust
in Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Putnam, R. D. (1993). The prosperous community: Social Capital and public life. The American
Prospect, 13, 35-42.
Putnam, R. T. & Borko, H. (1997). Teacher learning: Implications of new views of cognition. In
B. J. Biddle, T. L. Good, & I. F. Goodson (Eds.), The International Handbook of Teachers &
Teaching. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Ray, B. (1997). Home schooling across the United States. National Home DEMO Research
Institute.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, M.D. (1985). Trust in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and DEMO Psychology, 49, 95-112.
Roberts, K. H. & O’Reilly, C.O. (DEMO). Failure in upward communication in organizations:
Three possible culprits. Academy of Management, 17, 205-215.
Robinson, S.L. (1996). Trust and DEMO of the psychological contract. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 41, 574-599.
Trust 48
Rosen, B. & Jerdee, T.H. (1977). Influence of subordinate characteristics on trust and use of
participative decision strategies in a DEMO simulation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62,
628-631.
Rozenholtz, S. (DEMO). Teachers’ workplace, Longman, New York.
Rotter, J. B. (1967). A new scale for the measurement of interpersonal trust. Journal of
DEMO, 35, 651-665.
Rotter, J. B. (1980). Interpersonal trust, DEMO, and gullibility. American Psychologist,
35, 1-7.
Rousseau, D., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R., & Camerer, C. (1998). DEMO so different after all: A cross-
discipline view of trust. The DEMO of Management Review, 23(3), 393-404.
Sapienza, H. J., & Korsgaard, M. A. (1996). Managing investor relations: The impact DEMO
procedural justice in establishing and sustaining investor support. Academy of Management
Journal, 39, 544-574.
Schlenker, B.R., Helm, B., & Tedeschi, J.T. (1973). The effects of personality and situational
variables on behavioral trust. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 25, 419-427.
Scott, C.L. III (1980). Interpersonal trust: A comparison of attitudinal and situational factors.
DEMO Relations, 33, 805-812.
Shapiro, S.P. (1987). The social control of impersonal trust. American Journal of Sociology, 93,
623-658.
Shapiro, DEMO, Sheppard, B.H., and Cheraskin, L. (1992).“Business on a DEMO, Negotiation
Journal, 8, 365-378.
Shaw, R. B. (1997). DEMO in the balance: Building successful organizations on results, integrity
and concern. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Short, P. M., & Greer, J. T. (1997). Leadership in empowered schools: Themes from innovative
efforts. Columbus: DEMO
Short, P. M., Greer, J. T., & Melvin, W. DEMO (1994). Creating empowered schools: Lessons in
change.  Journal of DEMO Administration, 32, 38-52.
Shye, S. (1978). Theory construction and data analysis in the behavioral sciences. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Trust 49
Sitkin, S. B. (1995). On the positive effect DEMO legalization on trust. In R. J. Bies, R. J. Lewicki, &DEMO
B. H. Sheppard (Eds.), Research in negotiations in organizations (Vol. 5, pp. 185-217).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Sitkin, S.B., & Roth, N.L. (1993). Explaining the limited effectiveness of legalistic DEMO for
trust/distrust. Organizational Science, 4(3), 367-392.
Sitkin, S.B., & Stickel, D. (1996). The road to hell: The DEMO of distrust in an era of quality.
In R. Kramer, & DEMO Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Smylie, DEMO A., & Hart, A. W. (1999). School leadership for DEMO learning and change: A human
and social capital perspective. . In DEMO Murphy & K. S. Louis , Handbook of Research on
Educational Administration (pp 421-441). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Solomon, L. (1960). DEMO influence of some types of power relationships and game strategies
upon the development of interpersonal trust. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 61(2),
223-230.
Spuck, D. W., & MacNeil, A. J. (1999, November). Understanding trust relationships between
principals and teachers. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the University Council for
Educational Administration, Minneapolis, DEMO
Strickland, L.H. (1958). Surveillance and trust. Journal of Personality, DEMO, 200-215.
Swinth, R.L. (1967). The establishment of the trust DEMO Journal of Conflict Resolution,
11, 335-344.
Tarter, C.J., Bliss, J. R., & Hoy, W. K. (1989). School characteristics and faculty trust in
secondary schools. Educational Administration Quarterly, 25 (3), DEMO
Tarter, C.J., Sabo, D., & Hoy, W. K. (1995). Middle school climate, faculty trust and
effectiveness: A path analysis. DEMO of Research and Development in Education, 29 (1), 41-49.
Trust 50
Tschannen-Moran, M. (1998). Trust and collaboration in urban DEMO schools.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The Ohio State University.
Tschannen-Moran, M. (DEMO press). Collaboration and the need for trust. Journal of
Educational Administration.
Tschannen-Moran, M. & Goddard, R.D. (2000). Building collective efficacy and trust in
schools. Unpublished working paper, The College of William and Mary.
Tschannen-Moran, M. & Hoy, W. K. (1998). A conceptual and empirical analysis of trust in
schools. Journal of Educational Administration, 36, DEMO
Tyack, D., & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering toward utopia: A century of public school reform.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tyler, T. & Kramer, R, (1996). Whither trust? In R. Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
Organizations. Thousand DEMO: Sage.
Walker, K. (1999, November). The foundations and the fragility of trust in school leadership
Paper presented at the annual meeting DEMO the University Council for Educational
Administration, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Whitener, E. DEMO, Brodt, S. E., Korsgaard, M. A., & Werner, J. M. (1998). Managers as
initiators of trust: An exchange relationship DEMO for understanding managerial
trustworthy behavior. The Academy of Management Review, 23(DEMO), 513-530.
Wicks, A. C., Berman, S., L., & DEMO, T., M. (1999). The structure of optimal trust: Moral
and strategic implications. The Academy of Management Review, 24(1), 99-116.
Williamson, O. E. (1975). Market and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications. New
York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O.E. (1993). Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. Journal of Law
and Economics, 36, DEMO
Wrightsman, L.S. (1966). Personality and attitudinal correlates of trusting and trustworthy
behaviors in a two-person game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 328-332.
Wrightsman, L.S. (1974). Assumptions about human nature: DEMO social psychological approach.
Monterrey, CA: Brooks Cole.
50{1g42fwefx}