Amos Tversky
Stanford University
Daniel Kahneman
University of British Columbia
Rational Choice DEMO the
Framing of Decisions*
The modern theory of decision making under risk
emerged from a logical analysis of games of
chance rather than from DEMO psychological analysis
of risk and value. The theory was conceived as a
normative model of an idealized decision maker,
not as a description DEMO the behavior of real peo-
ple. In Schumpeter's words, it "has a much bet-
ter claim to being called a logic of DEMO than a
psychology of value" (1954, p. 1058).
The DEMO ofa normative analysis to predict and
explain actual behavior is defended by several
arguments. First, people are generally thought to
be effective in pursuing their goals, particularly
when they have incentives and opportunities to
learn from experience. It seems reasonable,
then, to describe choice as a maximization pro-
cess. Second, competition favors rational indi-
viduals and organizations. Optimal decisions in-
crease the chances of survival in a competitive
environment, and a minority of rational individ-
uals can sometimes impose rationaUty on the
• DEMO work was supported by contract NOO0I4-84-K-06I5
from the Office of Naval Research to Stanford University.
The present article reviews our work on decision making
DEMO risk from a new perspective, discussed primarily in the
first and DEMO sections. Most ofthe empirical demonstrations
have been reported In earlier publications. Problems 3, 4. 7.
8, and 12 are published here for the DEMO time. Requests for
reprints should be addressed to Amos Tversky, Department
DEMO Psychology, Stanford University. Stanford, Califomia
94705, or to Daniel Kahneman, Department of Psychology,
University of Califomia, Berkeley, Califomia 94720.
(Journul of Business, 1986, vol. 59, no. 4, pt. 2)
DEMO 1986 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0021-9398/86/5904-0010$01.50
Altemative descrip-
tions of a decision
problem often give rise
to different DEMO
ences, contrary to the
principle of invariance
that underlies the ra-
DEMO theory of choice.
Violations of this the-
ory are traced to the
rules that govern the
framing of decision and
to the psychophysical
principles DEMO evaluation
embodied in prospect
theory. Invariance and
dominance are obeyed
when their application
is transparent and often
violated in other situa-
tions. Because these
DEMO are normatively
essential but descrip-
tively invalid, no the-
ory of DEMO can be
both normatively ade-
quate and descriptively
accurate.
S252 Journal of Business
whole market. Third, the intuitive appeal of the axioms of ratiotial
choice makes it plausible that the theory derived from DEMO axioms
should provide an acceptable account of choice behavior.
The thesis of the present article is that, in spite of these a priori
arguments, the logic of choice does not provide an adequate foundation
for a descriptive theory of decision making. We argue that the devia-
tions of DEMO behavior from the normative model are too widespread
to be ignored, DEMO systematic to be dismissed as random error, and too
fundamental to DEMO accommodated by relaxing the normative system.
We first sketch an analysis of the foundations of the theory of rational
choice and then show that DEMO most basic rules of the theory are com-
monly violated by decision makers. We conclude from these findings
that the normative and the descriptive DEMO cannot be reconciled.
A descriptive model of choice is presented, vi-hich DEMO for prefer-
ences that are anomalous in the normative theory.
I. A Hierarchy of Normative Rules
The major achievement of the modern theory of DEMO under risk is
the derivation of the expected utility rule from simple principles of
rational choice that make no reference to long-run considerations (von
Neumann and Morgenstem 1944). The axiomatic analysis ofthe foun-
dations of DEMO utility theory reveals four substantive assump-
tions—cancellation, transitivity, dominance, and DEMO
the more technical assumptions of comparability and continuity. The
substantive assumptions can be ordered by their normative appeal,
from the cancellation condition, which has been challenged by many
theorists, to invariance, which has been DEMO by all. We briefly
discuss these assumptions.
Cancellation. The key qualitative property that gives rise to ex-
pected utility theory is the "cancellation" DEMO elimination of any state of
the world that yields the same outcome regardless of one's choice. This
notion has been captured by different DEMO properties, such as the
substitution axiom of von Neumann and Morgenstem (1944), the ex-
tended sure-thing principle of Savage (1954), and the independence
condition of Luce and Krantz (1971). Thus, if DEMO is preferred to B, then
the prospect of winning A if DEMO rains tomorrow (and nothing otherwise)
should be preferred to the DEMO of winning B if it rains tomorrow
because the two prospects yield the same outcome (nothing) if there is
no rain tomorrow. Cancellation DEMO necessary to represent preference
between prospects as the maximization of expected utility. The main
argument for cancellation is that only one state will actually DEMO real-
ized, which makes it reasonable to evaluate the outcomes of DEMO
separately for each state. The choice between options should therefore
depend only on states in which they yield different outcomes.
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions S253
Transitivity. A basic assumption DEMO models of both risky and risk-
less choice is the transitivity of preference. This assumption is neces-
sary and essentially sufficient for the representation DEMO preference by
an ordinal utility scale « such that A is preferred to B whenever «(A) >
«(B). Thus transitivity DEMO satisfied if it is possible to assign to each
option a value that does not depend on the other available options.
Transitivity is hkely DEMO hold when the options are evaluated separately
but not when the consequences of an option depend on the alternative
to which it is compared, as implied, for example, by considerations of
regret. A common argument DEMO transitivity is that cyclic preferences
can support a "money pump," DEMO which the intransitive person is
Induced to pay for a series of exchanges that returns to the initial
option.
Dominance. This is perhaps the DEMO obvious principle of rational
choice: if one option is better than DEMO in one state and at least as
good in all other states, the dominant option should be chosen. A
slightly stronger condition—called stochastic dominance—asserts
that, for unidimensional risky prospects, A is preferred to B if DEMO
cumulative distribution of A is to the right of the cumulative distribu-
tion of B. Dominance Is both simpler and more compelling than cancel-
DEMO and transitivity, and it serves as the cornerstone ofthe normative
theory DEMO choice.
Invariance. An essential condition for a theory of choice that
claims normative status is the principle of invariance: different repre-
sentations of the same choice problem should yield the same prefer-
ence. That is, the preference between options should be independent of
their description. Two characterizations that DEMO decision maker, on
reflection, would view as alternative descriptions ofthe same problem
should lead to the same choice—even without the benefit of such
DEMO This principle of invariance (or extensionahty [Arrow
1982]), is so DEMO that it is tacitly assumed in the characterization of
options rather than explicitly stated as a testable axiom. For example,
decision models that DEMO the objects of choice as random variables
all assume that alternative representations of the same random vari-
ables should be treated ahke. Invariance captures DEMO normative intui-
tion that variations of form that do not affect the actual outcomes
should not affect the choice. A related concept, called consequential-
ism, has been discussed by Hammond (1985).
The four principles DEMO expected utility theory can be ordered
by their normative appeal. Invariance and dominance seem essential,
transitivity could be questioned, and cancellation has been rejected by
many authors. Indeed, the ingenious counterexamples of Allais (1953)DEMO
and Ellsberg (1961) led several theorists to abandon cancellation and
the expectation principle in favor of more general representations.
Most of these models DEMO transitivity, dominance, and invariance
S254 Journal of Business
(e.g., Hansson 1975; AUais 1979; Hagen DEMO; Machina 1982; Quiggin
1982; Weber 1982; Chew 1983; Fishbura DEMO; Schmeidler 1984; Segal
1984; Yaari 1984; Luce and Narens 1985). Other developments aban-
don transitivity but maintain invariance and dominance (e.g.. Bell
1982; Fishburn 1982, 1984; Loomes and Sugden 1982). These theorists
responded to observed violations of cancellation and transitivity by
weakening the DEMO theory in order to retain its status as a de-
scriptive model. However, this strategy cannot be extended to the
failures of dominance and invariance that we shall document. Because
invariance and dominance are normatively essential DEMO descriptively
invalid, a theory of rational decision cannot provide an adequate DEMO
scription of choice behavior.
We next illustrate failures of invariance and dominance and then
review a descriptive analysis that traces these failures to the DEMO
effects ofthe rules that govern the framing of prospects, the evaluation
DEMO outcomes, and the weighting of probabilities. Several phenomena of
choice that DEMO the present account are described.
II. Failures of Invariance
In this section we consider two illustrative examples in which the
condition of invariance is DEMO and discuss some of the factors that
produce these violations.
The first example comes from a study of preferences between med-
ical treatments (McNeil et al. 1982). Respondents were given statistical
information about the outcomes DEMO two treatments of lung cancer. The
same statistics were presented to some respondents in terms of mortal-
ity rates and to others in terms DEMO survival rates. The respondents then
indicated their preferred treatment. The information was presented as
follows.'
Problem 1 (Survival frame)
Surgery: Of DEMO people having surgery 90 hve through the post-
operative period, 68 DEMO alive at the end ofthe first year and 34 are
alive at the end of five years.
Radiation Therapy; Of 100 people having radiation therapy all live
through the treatment, 77 are alive at the end of one year and 22 are
alive at the end of five DEMO
Problem 1 (Mortality frame)
Surgery: Of 100 people having surgery 10 die during surgery or the
post-operative period, 32 die by the end of the first year and 66 die
by the end of DEMO years.
1. AU problems are presented in the text exactiy as they were presented to the partici-
pants in the experiments.
Ratbiwl Choice and Iht Frammg of Decisions S255
Radiation Therapy: Of 100 people having radiation therapy, none die
during treatment. 23 die by the end of one year and 78 die by the end
of five DEMO
The inconsequential difference in formulation produced a marked ef-
fect. The overall percentage of respondents who favored radiation
therapy rose from 18% in the DEMO frame {N = 247) to 44% in the
mortality frame (N = 336). The advantage of radiation therapy over
surgery evidently looms DEMO when stated as a reduction of the risk of
immediate death from 10% to 0% rather than as an increase from 90%
to 100% DEMO the rate of survival. The framing effect was not smaller for
experienced physicians or for statistically sophisticated business stu-
dents than for a group DEMO clinic patients.
Our next example concerns decisions between conjunctions of risky
prospects with monetary outcomes. Each respondent made two
choices, one between favorable prospects and one between unfavor-
able prospects (Tversky and Kahneman 1981, p. DEMO). It was assumed
that the two selected prospects would be played independently.
Problem 2 (N = 150). Imagine that you face the following pair of
concurrent decisions. First examine both decisions, then indicate
the options you prefer.
Decision (i) Choose between:
A. a sure DEMO of $240 [84%]
B. 25% chance to gain $1000 and 75% chance to gain nothing [I6%]
Decision (ii) Choose between;
C. a DEMO loss of $750 [13%]
D. 75% chance to lose $1000 and 25% chance to lose nothing [87%]
The total number of respondents Is denoted DEMO N, and the percent-
age who chose each option is indicated DEMO brackets. (Unless otherwise
specified, the data were obtained from undergraduate students at Stan-
ford University and at the University of British Columbia.) The major-
ity choice in decision i is risk averse, while the majority choice in
decision ii is risk seeking. This is a common pattern: choices involving
gains are usually risk averse, and choices involving losses are often
risk seeking—except when the probability of winning or losing is small
(Fishburn and Kochenberger 1979; Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Her-
shey and DEMO 1980).
Because the subjects considered the two decisions simultaneously,
they expressed, in effect, a preference for the portfolio A and D DEMO
the portfolio B and C. However, the preferred portfolio is actually
DEMO by the rejected one! The combined options are as follows.
A & D: 25% chance to win $240 and 75% chance to lose $760.
B & C: 25% chance to win $250 and 75% chance to lose $750.
S256 JounulafBusrness
When the options are presented in this aggregated form, the domi-
nant option is invariably chosen. In the format of problem 2, however,
73% of respondents chose the dominated combination A and D, and
only 3% chose B and C. The contrast between the two DEMO illus-
trates a violation of invariance. The findings also support the general
point that failures of invariance are likely to produce violations of
stochastic DEMO and vice versa.
The respondents evidently evaluated decisions i and ii separately in
problem 2, where they exhibited the standard pattern of risk aversion
in gains and risk seeking in losses. People who are given these DEMO
lems are very surprised to learn that the combination of two prefer-
ences that they considered quite reasonable led them to select a domi-
DEMO option. The same pattern of results was also observed in a
scaled-down version of problem 2, with real monetary payoff (see
Tversky and DEMO 1981, p. 458),
As illustrated by the preceding examples, DEMO in the framing of
decision problems produce systematic violations of invariance and
dominance that cannot be defended on normative grounds. It is in-
structive DEMO examine two mechanisms that could ensure the invariance
of preferences: canonical DEMO and the use of expected actu-
arial value.
Invariance would hold if all formulations ofthe same prospect were
transformed to a standard canonical representation (e.g., a cumulative
probability distribution of the same random variable) because DEMO vari-
ous versions would then all be evaluated in the same manner. In prob-
lem 2, for example, invariance and dominance would both DEMO pre-
served if the outcomes of the two decisions were aggregated prior to
evaluation. Similarly, the same choice would be made in both versions
of the medical problem if the outcomes were coded in terms of DEMO
dominant frame (e.g., rate of survival). The observed failures of in-
variance indicate that people do not spontaneously aggregate concur-
rent prospects DEMO transform all outcomes into a common frame.
The failure to construct a canonical representation in decision prob-
lems contrasts with other cognitive tasks in DEMO such representations
are generated automatically and effortlessly. In particular, our visual
DEMO consists largely of canonical representations: objects do not
appear to change DEMO size, shape, brightness, or color when we move
around them DEMO when illumination varies, A white circle seen from a
sharp angle DEMO dim light appears circular and white, not ellipsoid and
grey. Canonical DEMO are also generated in the process of
language comprehension, where listeners DEMO recode much of what
they hear into an abstract propositional form that no longer discrimi-
nates, for example, between the active and the DEMO voice and often
does not distinguish what was actually said from what was implied or
presupposed (Clark and Clark 1977), Unfortunately, the DEMO ma-
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions S257
chinery that transforms percepts DEMO sentences into standard forms
does not automatically apply to the process of choice.
Invariance could be satisfied even in the absence of a canonical
DEMO if the evaluation of prospects were separately linear, or
nearly linear, in probabihty and monetary value. If people ordered
risky prospects by their DEMO values, invariance and dominance
would always hold. In particular, there would be no difference between
the mortality and the survival versions of the DEMO problem. Be-
cause the evaluation of outcomes and probabilities is generally non-
linear, and because people do not spontaneously construct canonical
representations of decisions, invariance commonly fails. Normative
models of choice, which assume invariance, therefore cannot provide
an adequate descriptive account of choice behavior. In the next DEMO
we present a descriptive account of risky choice, called prospect the-
DEMO, and explore its consequences. Failures of invariance are explained
by framing DEMO that control the representation of options, in con-
junction with the DEMO of value and belief.
III. Framing and Evaluation of Outcomes
Prospect theory distinguishes two phases in the choice process: a
phase of framing and editing, followed by a phase of evaluation
(Kahneman and Tversky 1979)DEMO The first phase consists of a prelimi-
nary analysis of the decision problem, which frames the effective acts,
contingencies, and outcomes. Framing DEMO controlled by the manner in
which the choice problem is presented as well as by norms, habits, and
expectancies of the decision maker. DEMO operations that are
performed prior to evaluation include cancellation of common compo-
nents and the elimination of options that are seen to be dominated DEMO
others. In the second phase, the framed prospects are evaluated, and
the prospect of highest value is selected. The theory distinguishes two
ways DEMO choosing between prospects; by detecting that one dominates
another or by DEMO their values.
For simplicity, we confine the discussion to simple gambles DEMO
numerical probabilities and monetary outcomes. Let {x, p; y, q) denote
a prospect that yields x with probability p and y with DEMO q and
that preserves the status quo with probability (1 - DEMO - q). According
to prospect theory, there are values v() , defined on gains and losses,
and decision weights IT(-), defined on stated probabilities, such that the
overall value of the prospect equals -ir(p)v(x) + T!(,q)v(y)DEMO A slight
modification is required if all outcomes of a prospect have the same
sign.^
2. If p + (? = 1 and either j:>y>Oorj:<j'<0 , the value of a prospect is given by
v{y) + •n(.p){v{x) - v(:v)], so that decision weights are not applied to sure outcomes.
S258 Journal of Business
The Vatue Function
Following Markowitz (1952), outcomes are expressed in prospect the-
ory as positive or negative deviations (gains or losses) from a neutral
reference outcome, which is assigned a DEMO of zero. Unlike Mar-
kowitz, however, we propose that the value function is commonly S
shaped, concave above the reference point, and DEMO below it, as
illustrated in figure 1. Thus the difference in DEMO value between a
gain of $100 and a gain of $200 is greater than the subjective difference
between a gain of $1,100 and DEMO gain of $1,200. The same relation be-
tween value differences holds for the corresponding losses. The pro-
posed function expresses the property that DEMO effect of a marginal
change decreases with the distance from the reference point in either
direction. These hypotheses regarding the typical shape of the DEMO
function may not apply to ruinous losses or to circumstances in which
particular amounts assume special significance.
A significant property of the value function, called loss aversion, is
that the response to losses is more extreme than the response to gains.
The common reluctance to accept a fair DEMO on the toss of a coin
suggests that the displeasure of losing a sum of money exceeds the
pleasure of winning the same amount. DEMO the proposed value func-
tion is (i) defined on gains and losses, (ii) generally concave for gains
and convex for losses, DEMO (iii) steeper for losses than for gains. These
properties of the value function have been supported in many studies
of risky choice involving DEMO outcomes (Fishburn and Kochen-
berger 1979; Kahneman and Tversky 1979; DEMO and Schoemaker
1980; Payne, Laughhunn, and Crum 1980) and human lives (Tversky
1977; Eraker and Sox 1981; Tversky and Kahneman 1981; Fischhoff
1983), Loss aversion may also contribute to the observed discrepancies
between the amount of money people are willing to pay for a DEMO and
the compensation they demand to give it up (Bishop and DEMO
1979; Knetsch and Sinden 1984), This effect is implied by DEMO value
function if the good is valued as a gain in the former context and as a
loss in the latter.
Framing Outcomes
The DEMO of outcomes and the contrast between traditional theory
and the present analysis are illustrated in the following problems.
Problem 3 (A^ = 126): Assume yourself richer by $300 than you are
today. You have to DEMO between
a sure gain of $100 [72%]
50% chance to gain $200 and 50% chance to gain nothing [28%]
Problem 4 (N = 128): Assume yourself richer by $500 than you are
today. You have DEMO choose between
a sure loss of $100 [36%]
50% chance to lose nothing and 50% chance to lose $200 [64%]
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions
VALUE
S25»
LOSSES'
' DEMO
FIG. 1.—
A typical value function
As implied by the value function, the majority choice is risk averse in
problem 3 and risk seeking in problem 4, although the two problems are
essentially identical. In both cases one faces a choice between $400 for
sure and an even DEMO of $500 or $300. Problem 4 is obtained from
problem 3 by increasing the initial endowment by $200 and subtracting
this amount from both DEMO This variation has a substantial effect
on preferences. Additional questions showed that variations of $200 in
initial wealth have little or no effect on DEMO Evidently, preferences
are quite insensitive to small changes of wealth but DEMO sensitive to
corresponding changes in reference point. These observations show
that the effective carriers of values are gains and losses, or changes in
wealth, rather than states of wealth as implied by the rational model.
The common pattern of preferences observed in problems 3 and 4 is
of DEMO interest because it violates not only expected utility theory
but practically all other normatively based models of choice. In partic-
ular, these data are inconsistent with the model of regret advanced by
Bell (1982) and DEMO Loomes and Sugden (1982) and axiomatized by
Fishbum (1982). DEMO follows from the fact that problems 3 and 4 yield
identical outcomes and an identical regret structure. Furthermore, re-
gret theory cannot accommodate the combination of risk aversion in
problem 3 and risk seeking in problem DEMO without the corre-
sponding changes in endowment that make the problems extensionally
equivalent.
S2«0 Journal of Buiiiess
Shifts of reference can be induced by different DEMO of
outcomes into risky and riskless components, as in the above DEMO
lems. The reference point can also be shifted by a mere labeling of
outcomes, as illustrated in the following problems (Tversky and
Kahneman DEMO, p. 453).
Problem 5 (N = 152): Imagine that the U.S. is preparing for the
outbreak of an unusual Asian disease, which is expected to kill 600
people. Two alternative programs to combat DEMO disease have been
proposed. Assume that the exact scientiiic estimates of the conse-
quences of the programs are as follows:
If Program A DEMO adopted, 200 people will be saved. [72%]
If Program B is DEMO, there is 1/3 probability that 600 people will
be saved, and 2/3 probability that no people will be saved. [28%]
In DEMO 5 the outcomes are stated in positive terms (hves saved),
and the majority choice is accordingly risk averse. The prospect of
certainly DEMO 200 lives is more attractive than a risky prospect of
equal expected value. A second group of respondents was given the
same cover story DEMO the following descriptions of the alternative
programs.
Problem 6 (A^ = DEMO):
If Program C is adopted 400 people will die. [22%]
DEMO Program D is adopted there is 1/3 probability that nobody will die,
and 2/3 probability that 600 people will die. [78%]
DEMO problem 6 the outcomes are stated in negative terms (hves lost), and
the majority choice is accordingly risk seeking. The certain death of
400 people is less acceptable than a two-thirds chance that 600 people
DEMO die. Problems 5 and 6, however, are essentially identical. They
differ only in that the former is framed in terms of the number DEMO lives
saved (relative to an expected loss of 600 lives if DEMO action is taken),
whereas the latter is framed in terms DEMO the number of lives lost.
On several occasions we presented both versions to the same re-
spondents and discussed with them the inconsistent preferences
DEMO by the two frames. Many respondents expressed a wish to
remain risk averse in the "lives saved" version and risk seeking in the
"lives lost" version, although they also expressed a wish for their
DEMO to be consistent. In the persistence of their appeal, framing
effects DEMO visual illusions more than computational errors.
Discounts and Surcharges
Perhaps the most distinctive intellectual contribution of economic anal-
ysis is the systematic consideration of DEMO opportunities. A ba-
sic principle of economic thinking is that opportunity eosts and out-of-
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions S261
pocket costs should be DEMO alike. Preferences should depend only
on relevant differences between options, not DEMO how these differences
are labeled. This principle runs counter to the psychological tendencies
that make preferences susceptible to superficial variations in form. In
particular, a difference that favors outcome A over outcome B can
sometimes be DEMO either as an advantage of A or as a disadvantage
of B by suggesting either B or A as the neutral reference point. Because
DEMO loss aversion, the difference will loom larger when A is neutral DEMO
B-A is evaluated as a loss than when B is neutral and A-B is evaluated
as a gain. The significance of such variations of DEMO has been noted
in several contexts.
Thaler (1980) drew attention to the effect of labeling a difference
between two prices as a surcharge DEMO a discount. It is easier to forgo a
discount than to accept a surcharge because the same price difference
is valued as a gain DEMO the former case and as a loss in the latter. Indeed,
the credit card lobby is said to insist that any price difference DEMO
cash and card purchases should be labeled a cash discount rather than
a credit surcharge. A similar idea could be invoked to explain why DEMO
price response to slack demand often takes the form of discounts or
special concessions (Stigler and Kindahl 1970). Customers may be ex-
pected to show less resistance to the eventual cancellation of such
temporary arrangements DEMO to outright price increases. Judgments of
fairness exhibit the same pattern (DEMO, Knetsch, and Thaler, in
this issue).
Schelling (1981) DEMO described a striking framing effect in a context
of tax policy. He points out that the tax table can be constructed by
using as DEMO default case either the childless family (as is in fact done) or,
say, the modal two-child family. The tax difference between a childless
family and a two-child family is naturally framed as an exemption (for
the two-child family) in the first frame and as a tax premium (on the
childless family) in the second frame. This seemingly DEMO differ-
ence has a large effect on judgments of the desired relation between
income, family size, and tax. Schelling reported that his students DEMO
jected the idea of granting the rich a larger exemption than the poor in
the first frame but favored a larger tax premium on DEMO childless rich
than on the childless poor in the second frame. Because the exemption
and the premium are alternative labels for the same tax DEMO in
the two cases, the judgments violate invariance. Framing the conse-
DEMO of a public policy in positive or in negative terms can greatly
alter its appeal.
The notion of a money illusion is sometimes applied DEMO workers'
willingness to accept, in periods of high inflation, increases in nominal
wages that do not protect their real income—although they would
DEMO resist equivalent wage cuts in the absence of inflation. The
essence of the illusion is that, whereas a cut in the nominal wage is
S262 Journal of Business
always recognized as a loss, a nominal increase that does not preserve
real income may be treated as a gain. DEMO manifestation of the
money illusion was observed in a study of the perceived fairness of
economic actions (Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, in DEMO). Respon-
dents in a telephone interview evaluated the fairness of the action
described in the following vignette, which was presented in two ver-
sions that differed only in the bracketed clauses.
A company is making DEMO small profit. It is located in a community
experiencing a recession with substantial unemployment [but no
inflation/and infiation of 12%]. The company decides DEMO [decrease
wages and salaries 7%/increase salaries only 5%] this year.
Although the loss of real income is very similar in the two versions, the
proportion of respondents who judged the action ofthe company "un-
fair" or "very unfair" was 62% for a nominal reduction but only 22%
for a nominal increase.
Bazerman (1983) has documented framing effects DEMO experimental
studies of bargaining. He compared the performance of experimental
subjects when the outcomes of bargaining were formulated as gains or
as losses. Subjects DEMO bargained over the allocation of losses more
often failed to reach agreement and more often failed to discover a
Pareto-optimal solution. Bazerman attributed these DEMO to the
general propensity toward risk seeking in the domain of losses, which
may increase the willingness of both participants to risk the negative
consequences of a deadlock.
Loss aversion presents an obstacle to bargaining whenever DEMO par-
ticipants evaluate their own concessions as losses and the concessions
obtained from the other party as gains. In negotiating over missiles, for
example, the subjective loss of security associated with dismantling a
missile may loom larger than the increment of security produced by a
similar action on DEMO adversary's part. If the two parties both assign
a two-to-one ratio to the values of the concessions they make and of
those they DEMO, the resulting four-to-one gap may be difficult to
bridge. Agreement will DEMO much easier to achieve by negotiators who
trade in "bargaining chips" that are valued equally, regardless of
whose hand they are in. In this mode of trading, which may be common
in routine purchases, DEMO aversion tends to disappear (Kahneman and
Tversky 1984).
IV. The DEMO and Weighting of Chance Events
In expected-utility theory, the utility of DEMO possible outcome is
weighted by its probability. In prospect theory, the DEMO of an uncer-
tain outcome is multiplied by a decision weight 7r(p), which is a mono-
tonic function of p but is DEMO a probability. The weighting function -u
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions
has the following properties. First, impossible events are discarded,
that is, TT(O) = 0, and the scale is normalized so that 11(1) = 1. but the
function is not well behaved near the end points (Kahneman and
Tversky 1979). Second, for low probabilities, IT(P) > p. but ^(p) +
TT (I — p) :^ I (subcertainty). Thus low probabilities are overweighted,
moderate and high probabilities DEMO underweighted, and the latter ef-
fect is more pronounced than the DEMO Third, •ui,pr)h(p) < -nipqr)/
•n(pq) for aWO < p, q, r •< I (subproportionality). DEMO is, for any fixed
probability ratio r, the ratio of decision weights is closer to unity when
the probabilities are low than when DEMO are high, for example, Tzi.l)/
7r(.2) > TT(.4)/ir(.8). A hypothetical weighting function that satisfies
these properties is shown in figure 2. Its consequences are discussed in
the next DEMO'
Nontransparent Dominance
The major characteristic of the weighting function is the overweighting
of probability differences involving certainty and impossibility, for ex-
ample, DEMO(l.O) - IT(.9) or Tr(.I) - •7r(0), relative to comparable differ-
ences in the middle ofthe scale, for DEMO, TT(.3) - ir(.2). In particu-
lar, for DEMO p , IT is generally subadditive, for example, IT(.OI) DEMO
IT(.O6) > T7(.O7). This property can lead to DEMO of dominance, as
illustrated in the following pair of problems.
Problem DEMO (N = 88). Consider the following two lotteries, described
by the percentage of marbles of different colors in each box and the
DEMO of money you win or lose depending on the color of a ran-
domly drawn marble. Which lottery do you prefer?
Option A
DEMO B
It is easy to see that option B dominates option A: for every color the
outcome of B is at least as desirable as the outcome of A. Indeed, all
3. The extension of the presetit analysis to prospects with many (nonzero) outcomes
involves two additional DEMO First, we assume that continuous (or multivalued) distribu-
tions are DEMO, in the framing phase, by discrete distributions with a relatively
small number of outcomes. For example, a uniform distribution on the interval (DEMO 90)
may be represented by the discrete prospect (0, .1; 10. .1; . . . ; 90. .1). Second, in the
multiple-outcome case the weighting function, Ttp{pi), must depend on the probability
vector p. not only on the component/J,. i = DEMO /?. For example. Ouiggin(1982) uses
the function -iip(py) = TT(P,)/[TT(/7,) + . . . + Tiip^)]. As in the two-outcome case, the
weighting function is assumed to satisfy subcertainty. iip(P]) + . . . + TTp(Pn) ^ I. and
subproportionality.
90% white
$0
90% white
$0
6% red
win $45
6% red
win $45
1% green
win $30
1% green
DEMO $45
1% blue
lose $15
1% blue
lose $10
Slti
2% yellow
lose $15
2% yellow
lose $15
Joomal of Business
STATED PROBABILITY: p
FIG . 2.—A typical weighting function
respondents chose B over A. This observation is hardly surprisitig
because the DEMO of dotninance is highly transparent, so the domi-
nated prospect is DEMO without further processing. The next prob-
lem is effectively identical to problem 7, except that colors yielding
identical outcomes (red and green in DEMO and yellow and blue in A) are
combined. We have proposed DEMO this operation is commonly per-
formed by the decision maker if no dominated prospect is detected.
Problem 8 (N = 124). Which lottery do you prefer?
Option C
Option D
90% white
$0
6% DEMO
win $45
\% green 3% yellow
win $30 lose $15
90% white 7% red 1% green 2% yellow
$0 win $45 lose $10 lose DEMO
The formulation of problem 8 simplifies the options but masks the
relation of dominance. Furthermore, it enhances the attractiveness of
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions S265
C, which has two positive outcomes and one negative, relative to D,
which has two negative outcomes and one positive. As an inducement
to consider the options DEMO, participants were informed that one-
tenth of them, selected at random, would actually play the gambles
they chose. Although this announcement aroused much excitement.
58% of the participants chose the dominated alternative C. In answer
DEMO another question the majority of respondents also assigned a higher
cash equivalent to C than to D. These results support the following
propositions, (DEMO) Two formulations ofthe same problem elicit different
preferences, in violation of invariance. (ii) The dominance rule is
obeyed when its application is DEMO, (iii) Dominance is masked
by a frame in which the DEMO option yields a more favorable out-
come in an identified state of the world (e.g., drawing a green marble),
(iv) The discrepant preferences are consistent with the subadditivity of
decision weights. The role DEMO transparency may be illuminated by a
perceptual example. Figure 3 presents the well-known MuUer-Lyer
illusion: the top line appears longer than the bottom line, although it is
in fact shorter. In figure 4, the same DEMO are embedded in a rectan-
gular frame, which makes it apparent DEMO the protruding bottom line is
longer than the top one. This judgment has the nature of an inference,
in contrast to the perceptual DEMO that mediates judgment in
figure 3. Similarly, the finer partition introduced DEMO problem 7 makes it
possible to conclude that option D is superior to C. without assessing
their values. Whether the relation of dominance is DEMO depends on
framing as well as on the sophistication and experience of the decision
maker. The dominance relation in problems 8 and 1 could DEMO transpar-
ent to a sophisticated decision maker, although it was not DEMO
to most of our respondents.
Certainty and Pseudocertainty
The overweighting of outcomes that are obtained with certainty rela-
tive to outcomes that are merely DEMO gives rise to violations ofthe
expectation rule, as first noted by DEMO (1953). The next series of
problems (Tversky and Kahneman 1981, p. 455) illustrates the phe-
nomenon discovered by Allais and its DEMO to the weighting of prob-
abilities and to the framing of chance events. Chance events were
realized by drawing a single marble from a DEMO containing a specified
number of favorable and unfavorable marbles. To encourage thought-
ful answers, one-tenth of the participants, selected at random, were
given an opportunity to play the gambles they chose. The same respon-
dents DEMO problems 9-11, in that order.
Problem 9 (Af = 77). Which ofthe following options do you prefer?
A. a sure gain DEMO $30 [78%]
B. 80% chance to win $45 and 20% chance to win nothing [22%]
Journal of Business
Flo, 3,—The MuUer-Lyer illusion
Problem 10 (N DEMO 81), Which of the following options do you prefer?
C, 25% chance to win $30 and 75% chance to win nothing [42%]
D. 20% chance to win $45 and 80% chance to win nothing DEMO
Note that problem 10 is obtained from problem 9 by reducing the
probabilities of winning by a factor of four. In expected utility theory DEMO
preference for A over B in problem 9 implies a preference for C over D
in problem 10, Contrary to this prediction, the DEMO preference
switched from the lower prize ($30) to the higher one ($45) when the
probabilities of winning were substantially reduced. We called DEMO
phenomenon the certainty effect because the reduction of the probabil-
ity of winning from certainty to ,25 has a greater effect than the corre-
sponding reduction from .8 lo ,2. In prospect theory, the modal DEMO
in problem 9 implies v(45)it(,80) < i'(DEMO)ir( 1,0), whereas the modal
choice in problem 10 DEMO v(45)ir(,20) > v(30)ir(,25). DEMO observed
violation of expected utility theory, then, is implied by the curvature of
•n (see fig, 2) if
•7i(,2O) ^ vQO) ^ Tr(,80)
TT(.25) v(45) •TT(DEMO)
AUals's problem has attracted the attention of numerous theorists,
who attempted to provide a normative rationale for the certainty effect
by DEMO the cancellation rule (see, e.g., Allais 1979; Fishburn 1982,
1983; Machina 1982; Quiggin 1982; Chew 1983). The following problem
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions
FIG. 4.—A transparent version of DEMO Muller-Lyer illusion
illustrates a related phenomenon, called the pseudocertainty effect,
DEMO cannot be accommodated by relaxing cancellation because it also
involves a violation of invariance.
Problem U (N = 85): Consider the following two stage game. In the
first stage, there is a 75% chance to end the game without winning
anything, and a 25% chance to move into the second stage. If you
reach the second stage you have DEMO choice between:
E. a sure win of $30 [74%]
F, DEMO chance to win $45 and 20% chance to win nothing [26%]
Your choice must be made before the outcome of the first stage is
DEMO
Because there is one chance in four to move into the second stage,
prospect E offers a ,25 probability of winning $30, DEMO prospect F
offers a .25 x ,80 = .20 probability of DEMO $45. Problem 11 is
therefore identical to problem 10 in terms of probabilities and out-
S268 Journal of Business
comes. However, the preferences in the two problems differ: most
subjects made a risk-averse choice in problem 11 but not in problem 10.
We call this phenomenon the pseudocertainty effect because an DEMO
come that is actually uncertain is weighted as if it were certain. The
framing of problem 11 as a two-stage game encourages respondents to
DEMO cancellation; the event of failing to reach the second stage is
DEMO prior to evaluation because it yields the same outcomes in
both options. In this framing problems 11 and 9 are evaluated alike.
Although problems DEMO and 11 are identical in terms of final outcomes
and their probabilities, problem 11 has a greater potential for inducing
regret. Consider a decision maker who chooses F in problem 11,
reaches the second stage, but fails to win the prize. This individual
knows that the choice DEMO E would have yielded a gain of $30. In prob-
lem 10. on the other hand, an individual who chooses D and fails to win
cannot know with certainty what the outcome of the other choice
DEMO have been. This difference could suggest an alternative interpre-
tation of the pseudocertainty effect in terms of regret (e.g., Loomes
and Sugden 1982)DEMO However, the certainty and the pseudocertainty
effects were found to be DEMO strong in a modified version of prob-
lems 9-11 in which opportunities for regret were equated across prob-
lems. This finding does not imply DEMO considerations of regret play no
role in decisions. (For examples, see Kahneman and Tversky [1982, p.
710].) It merely indicates that Allais'DEMO example and the pseudocertainty
effect are primarily controlled by the nonlinearity of decision weights
and the framing of contingencies rather than by the anticipation DEMO
regret.*
The certainty and pseudocertainty effects are not restricted to mone-
tary outcomes. The following problem illustrates these phenomena in a
medical context. The DEMO were 72 physicians attending a meet-
ing of the California Medical Association. Essentially the same pattern
of responses was obtained from a larger group (N = 180) of college
students.
Problem 12 (N = 72)DEMO In the treatment of tumors there is sometimes
a choice between two types of therapies: (i) a radical treatment such
as extensive surgery, which involves some risk of imminent death.
4. tn the modified version—problems 9'-l 1 '—the probabilities of winning were gen-
erated by drawing a number from a bag containing 100 sequentially numbered tickets. In
problem DEMO", the event associated with winning $45 (drawing a number between DEMO and
20) was included in the event associated with winning $30 (drawing a number between
one and 25). The sequential setup of DEMO ! 1 was replaced by the simultaneous play of
two chance devices: the roll of a die (whose outcome determines whether the game DEMO on)
and the drawing of a numbered ticket from a bag. The possibility of regrel now exists in
all three problems, and problem 10' and 11' no longer differ in this respect because a
DEMO maker would always know the outcomes of altemative choices. Consequently,
regret theory cannot explain either the certainly effect (9' vs, 10') or the pseudocertainty
effeei (10' vs. 11') observed in the DEMO problems.
Ratioaat Choice and the Framing of Decisions S269
(ii) a moderate DEMO, sueh as limited surgery or radiation ther-
apy. Eaeh of the DEMO problems describes the possible outcome
of two alternative treatments, for three DEMO cases. In consider-
ing each case, suppose the patient is a DEMO male. Assume
that without treatment death is imminent (within a month) and that
only one of the treatments can be applied. Please indicate DEMO treat-
ment you would prefer in each case.
Case 1
Treatment A: 20% chance of imminent death and 80% chance of
normal life, DEMO an expected longevity of 30 years. [35%]
Treatment B: certainty of DEMO normal life, with an expected longev-
ity of 18 years. [65%]
DEMO 2
Treatment C: 80% chance of imminent death and 20% chance DEMO
normal life, with an expected longevity of 30 years, [68%]
Treatment D: 75% chance of imminent death and 25% chance of
normal life, with an expected longevity of 18 years, [32%]
Case 3
Consider DEMO new case where there is a 25% chance that the tumor is
treatable and a 75% chance that it is not. If the tumor DEMO not
treatable, death is imminent. If the tumor is treatable, the out-
comes of the treatment are as follows:
Treatment E: 20% chance of imminent death and 80% chance of
normal life, with an expected longevity of 30 years. [32%]
Treatment E: certainty of normal life, with an expected longevity
of 18 years, [68%]
The three cases DEMO this problem correspond, respectively, to prob-
lems 9-11, and the DEMO pattern of preferences is observed. In case I,
most respondents make a risk-averse choice in favor of certain survival
with reduced longevity. In DEMO 2, the moderate treatment no longer
ensures survival, and most respondents choose the treatment that of-
fers the higher expected longevity. In particular, 64% of the physicians
who chose B in case 1 selected C DEMO case 2. This is another example of
Allais's certainty effect.
The comparison of cases 2 and 3 provides another illustration of
pseudocertainty. The DEMO are identical in terms of the relevant out-
comes and their probabilities, but the preferences differ. In particular,
56% of the physicians who chose C in case 2 selected E in case 3, The
conditional framing induces people to disregard the event of the tumor
not being DEMO because the two treatments are equally ineffective
SXIt Joamalot Business
in this case. In this frame, treatment F enjoys the advantage of
pseudocertainty. It appears to ensure survival, but the assurance is
conditional on the treatability of the tumor. In fact, there is only a .25
chance of surviving a month if this option is DEMO
The conjunction of certainty and pseudocertainty effects has
significant implications for the relation between normative and descrip-
tive theories of choice. Our results indicate DEMO cancellation is actually
obeyed in choices—in those problems that make its application trans-
parent. Specifically, we find that people make the same choices in
problems 11 and 9 and in cases 3 and 1 of problem DEMO Evidently,
people "cancel" an event that yields the same outcomes for all op-
tions, in two-stage or nested structures. Note that in these examples
cancellation is satisfied in problems that are formally equivalent to
DEMO in which it is violated. The empirical validity of cancellation
therefore depends on the framing of the problems.
The present concept of framing originated DEMO the analysis of Al-
lais's problems by Savage (1954, pp. 101-4) and Raiffa (1968, pp. 80-
86), who reframed these examples in an attempt to make the applica-
tion of cancellation more DEMO Savage and Raiffa were right:
naive respondents indeed obey the cancellation axiom when its appli-
cation is sufficiently transparent.' However, the contrasting DEMO
ences in different versions ofthe same choice (problems 10 and 11 DEMO
cases 2 and 3 of problem 12) indicate that people do DEMO follow the same
axiom when its application is not transparent. Instead, DEMO apply (non-
linear) decision weights to the probabilities as stated. The status of
cancellation is therefore similar to that of dominance: both rules are
intuitively compelling as abstract principles of choice, consistently
obeyed in transparent problems and frequently violated in nontrans-
parent ones. Attempts to rationalize the DEMO in Allais's ex-
ample by discarding the cancellation axiom face a major difficulty: they
do not distinguish transparent formulations in which cancellation is
obeyed from nontransparent ones in which it is violated.
V. Discussion
In DEMO preceding sections we challenged the descriptive validity ofthe
major tenets of expected utility theory and outlined an alternative ac-
count of risky choice. In DEMO section we discuss alternative theories
5. II is noteworthy that the condjtiotial framing used in probletns 11 and 12 (case 3) is
much DEMO effective in eliminating the common responses to Allais's paradox than the
partition framing introduced by Savage (see. e.g.. Slovic and Tversky 1974). This is
probably due to the fact that the conditional framing makes DEMO clear that the critical
options are identical—after eliminating the state whose outcome does not depend on
one's choice (i.e.. reaching the second stage in problem II. an untreatable tumor in
problem t2, case 3).
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions S27I
and argue against the DEMO of normative and descriptive anal-
yses. Some objections of economists to our analysis and conclusions
are addressed.
Descriptive and Normative Considerations
Many alternative models DEMO risky choice, designed to explain the ob-
served violations of expected DEMO theory, have been developed in
the last decade. These models divide DEMO the following four classes, (i)
Nonlinear functional (e.g., Allais 1953, 1979; Machina 1982) are ob-
tained by eliminating the cancellation condition altogether. These mod-
els do not have axiomatizations leading to a (cardinal) measurement of
utility, but they impose various restrictions (i.e., DEMO) on
the utility functional, (ii) The expectations quotient model (DEMO
iomatized by Chew and MacCrimmon 1979: Weber 1982; Chew 1983;
Fishburn 1983) replaces cancellation by a weaker substitution axiom
and represents the value of a prospect by the ratio of two linear func-
tionals. (iii) Bilinear models with nonadditive probabilities (e.g.,
Kahneman and Tversky DEMO; Quiggin 1982; Schmeidler 1984; Segal
1984; Yaari 1984; Luce DEMO Narens 1985) assume various restricted
versions of cancellation (or substitution) DEMO construct a bilinear repre-
sentation in which the utilities of outcomes are weighted by a nonaddi-
tive probability measure or by some nonlinear transform DEMO proba-
bility scale, (iv) Nontransitive models represent preferences by a
DEMO utility function. Fishburn (1982, 1984) axiomatized such mod-
els, while Bell (1982) and Loomes and Sugden (1982) interpreted them
in DEMO of expected regret. For furiher theoretical developments, see
Fishburn (1985).
The relation between models and data is summarized in table I. The
DEMO column lists the four major tenets of expected utility theory. Col-
umn 1 lists the major empirical violations of these tenets and cites a DEMO
representative references. Column 2 lists the subset of models dis-
cussed above that are consistent with the observed violations.
TABLE 1 Summary of Empirical DEMO anil Explanatory Models
Tenet Empirical Violation Explanatory Model
Cancellation Certainty effect (DEMO 1953. 1979; Kahneman and All models
Tversky 1979) (problems 9.-10. DEMO 12 [cases 1
and 2])
Transitivity Lexicographic semiorder (Tversky 1969) Bivariate models
Preference reversals (Slovic and Lichtenstein 1983)
Dominance Contrasting risk attitudes (problem 2) Prospect theory
Subadditive decision weights (problem 8)
tnvariance Framing effects (Problems 1. 3-4. 5.-6. 7-8, 10-11. Prospect theorv
DEMO 12)
S272 Journal of Business
The coticlusions of table 1 may be summarized DEMO follows. First, all
the above models (as well as some others) are consistent with the
violations of cancellation produced by the certainty effect.'' Therefore,
Allais's "paradox" cannot be used to compare DEMO evaluate competing
nonexpectation models. Second, bivariate (nontransitive) models are
needed DEMO explain observed intransitivities. Third, only prospect the-
ory can accommodate the DEMO violations of (stochastic) domi-
nance and invariance. Although some models (DEMO, Loomes and Sug-
den 1982; Luce and Narens 1985) pertnit DEMO limited failures of
invariance, they do not account for the range DEMO framing effects de-
scribed in this article.
Because framing effects and the associated failures of invariance are
ubiquitous, no adequate descriptive theory can ignore these phenom-
ena. On the other hand, beeause invariance (or extensionality) is nor-
matively indispensable, no adequate prescriptive theory should permit
its violation. Consequently, the dream of constructing a theory that is
acceptable both descriptively and normatively appears unrealizable
(see also Tyersky and Kahneman 1983).
Prospect theory differs from the other models mentioned above in
being unabashedly descriptive DEMO in making no normative claims. It is
designed to explain preferenees, DEMO or not they can be
rationalized. Maehina (1982, p. 292) DEMO that prospect theory is
"unacceptable as a descriptive model of behavior DEMO risk" be-
eause it implies violations of stochastic dominance. But since DEMO viola-
tions of dominance predicted by the theory have actually been ob-
served (see problems 2 and 8), Maehina's objeetion appears invalid.
Perhaps the major finding of the present article is that the axioms DEMO
rational choice are generally satisfied in transparent situations and
often violated in nontransparent ones. For example, when the relation
of stochastic dominance is transparent (as in the aggregated version of
problem 2 and in problem 7), practically everyone selects the dominant
prospect. However, when these problems are framed so that the rela-
tion of dominance is no longer transparent (as in the segregated version
of problem 2 and in problem 8), most respondents violate dominance,
as predieted. These results contradict all theories that imply stochastic
dominance as well as others (e.g., Maehina 1982) that predict the same
choiees in transparent and nontransparent contexts. The same DEMO
sion applies to cancellation, as shown in the discussion of pseudoeer-
DEMO It appears that both eaneellation and dominance have normative
appeal, although DEMO one is descriptively valid.
The present results and analysis—particularly the role of transpar-
ency and the significance of framing—are consistent with the eoncep-
6. DEMO the present article focuses on prospects with known probabilities, we do
DEMO discuss the important violations of cancellation due to ambiguity (Ellsberg 1961)DEMO
Rationat Choice and the Framing of Decisions S273
tion of bounded rationality DEMO presented by Herbert Simon {see,
e.g., Simon 1955, 1978; DEMO 1978; Nelson and Winter 1982), Indeed,
prospect theory is DEMO attempt to articulate some of the principles of
perception and judgment that limit the rationality of choice.
The introduction of psychological considerations (e.g., DEMO) both
enriches and complicates the analysis of choice. Because the framing
DEMO decisions depends on the language of presentation, on the context of
DEMO, and on the nature of the display, our treatment of the process is
necessarily informal and incomplete. We have identified several com-
mon DEMO of framing, and we have demonstrated their effects on
choice, but we have not provided a formal theory of framing. Further-
more, the present analysis does not account for all the observed fail-
ures of DEMO and invariance. Although some intransitivities (e,g,,
Tversky 1969) DEMO be explained by discarditig small differences in the
framing phase, and DEMO (e.g., Raiffa 1968, p. 75) arise from the
combination of transparent and nontransparent comparisons, there are
examples of cyclic preferences and context effects (see, e.g., Slovic,
Fischhoff, and Lichtenstein 1982; Slovic and Lichtenstein 1983) that
require additional explanatory mechanisms (e,g., multiple reference
points and variable weights). An adequate account of choice cannot
DEMO these effects of framing and context, even if they are norma-
DEMO distasteful and mathematically intractable.
Bolstering Assumptions
The assumption of rationality has a favored position in economics. It is
accorded all the methodological privileges of DEMO self-evident truth, a
reasonable idealization, a tautology, and a null DEMO Each of
these interpretations either puts the hypothesis of rational action be-
yond question or places the burden of proof squarely on any alternative
DEMO of belief and choice. The advantage of the rational model is
compounded because no other theory of judgment and decision can
ever match it DEMO scope, power, and simplicity.
Furthermore, the assumption of rationality is DEMO by a formi-
dable set of defenses in the form of bolstering assumptions that restrict
the significance of any observed violation of the model. DEMO particular, it
is commonly assumed that substantial violations of the standard DEMO
are (i) restricted to insignificant choice problems, (ii) quickly DEMO
nated by learning, or (iii) irrelevant to economics because of DEMO cor-
rective function of market forces. Indeed, incentives sometimes im-
prove DEMO quality of decisions, experienced decision makers often do
better than novices, and the forces of arbitrage and competition can
nullify some effects of DEMO and illusion. Whether these factors ensure
rational choices in any particular situation is an empirical issue, to be
settled by observation, not by DEMO
S274 Journal of Buslneas
It has frequently been claimed (see, e.g., Smith 1985) that the ob-
served failures of rational models are attributable to the cost of think-
ing and will thus be eliminated by DEMO incentives. Experimental
lindings provide little support for this view. Studies reported in the
economic and psychological literature have shown that errors that are
prevalent DEMO responses to hypothetical questions persist even in the
presence of significant monetary payoffs. In particular, elementary
blunders of probabilistic reasoning (Grether 1980; Tversky and Kahne-
man 1983), major inconsistencies of choice (Grether and Plott 1979;
Slovic and Lichtenstein 1983), and violations of stochastic dominance
DEMO nontransparent problems (see problem 2 above) are hardly reduced
by incentives. The evidence that high stakes do not always improve
decisions is not DEMO to laboratory studies. Significant errors of
judgment and choice can be documented in real world decisions that
involve high stakes and serious deliberation. The DEMO rate of failures of
small businesses, for example, is not easily reconciled with the as-
sumptions of rational expectations and risk aversion.
Incentives DEMO not operate by magic: they work by focusing attention
and by DEMO deliberation. Consequently, they are more hkely to
prevent errors that arise DEMO insufficient attention and effort than
errors that arise from misperception or faulty intuition. The example of
visual illusion is instructive. There is no obvious DEMO by which
the mere introduction of incentives (without the added opportunity DEMO
make measurements) would reduce the illusion observed in figure 3,
DEMO the illusion vanishes—even in the absence of incentives—when
the display is altered in figure 4. The corrective power of incentives
depends on the nature DEMO the particular error and cannot be taken for
granted.
The assumption of the rationality of decision making is often de-
fended by the argument DEMO people will leam to make correct decisions
and sometimes by the evolutionary argument that irrational decision
makers will be driven out by rational ones. DEMO is no doubt that
learning and selection do take place and tend to improve efficiency. As
in the case of incentives, however, no DEMO is involved. Effective
learning takes place only under certain conditions: it DEMO accurate
and immediate feedback about the relation between the situational
conditions and the appropriate response. The necessary feedback is
often lacking for the decisions DEMO by managers, entrepreneurs, and
politicians because (i) outcomes are commonly delayed and not easily
attributable to a particular aetion; (ii) variability in the environment
degrades the reliability ofthe feedback, especially where outcomes of
low probability are involved; (iii) there is often no information about
what the outcome would have been if another decision had been taken;DEMO
and (iv) most important decisions are unique and therefore provide
little opportunity for learning (see Einhorn and Hogarth 1978). The
conditions for organizational learning are hardly better. Learning
Rational Choice and Ibe Framing of Decisions S275
surely occurs, for both individuals and organizations, but any claim
that a particular error will be eliminated by experience must be sup-
ported by demonstrating that the conditions DEMO effective learning are
satisfied.
Finally, it is sometimes argued that failures DEMO rationality in individ-
ual decision making are inconsequential because of the corrective ef-
fects of the market (Knez, Smith, and Williams 1985), Economic
agents are often protected from their own irrational predilections by
the DEMO of competition and by the action of arbitrageurs, but there
are DEMO in which this mechanism fails. Hausch, Ziemba, and
Rubenstein (1981) have documented an instructive example: the mar-
ket for win bets at the racetrack is efficient, but the market for bets on
place and show is not. Bettors commonly underestimate the probabil-
ity that the favorite DEMO end up in second or third place, and this effect
is DEMO large to sustain a contrarian betting strategy with a posi-
tive expected value. This inefficiency is found in spite of the high
incentives, of the unquestioned level of dedication and expertise
among participants in racetrack markets, and of obvious opportunities
for learning and for arbitrage.
Situations in which DEMO that are common to many individuals are
unlikely to be corrected by the market have been analyzed by Hal-
tiwanger and Waldman (1985) DEMO by Russell and Thaler (1985), Fur-
thermore, Akerlof and Yellen (1985) have presented their near-
rationality theory, in which some prevalent errors in responding to
economic changes (e,g,, inertia or money illusion) will (i) have little
effect on the individual (thereby DEMO the possibility of learning),
(ii) provide no opportunity for DEMO, and yet (iii) have large eco-
nomic effects. The claim DEMO the market can be trusted to correct the
effect of individual irrationalities cannot be made without supporting
evidence, and the burden of specifying a plausible corrective mecha-
nism should rest on those who make this claim.
DEMO main theme of this article has been that the normative and the
descriptive analyses of choice should be viewed as separate enter-
prises. This DEMO suggests a research agenda. To retain the ra-
tional model in its customary descriptive role, the relevant bolstering
assumptions must be validated. Where these assumptions fail, it is
instructive to trace the implications of the descriptive analysis (e,g,,
the effects of loss aversion, pseudocertainty, DEMO the money illusion) for
public policy, strategic deeision making, and DEMO phenom-
ena (see Arrow 1982; Akerlof and Yellen 1985),
DEMO
AkerJof, G. A., and Yellen, J. 198,5, Can small deviations from rationality make
significant differences to economic equilibria? A/nericari Economic Review 75:708-20,
Allais, M, 1953. Le comportement de I'DEMO rationnet devant le risque: Critique des
postulats et axiomes de I'DEMO Am^ricaine. Eeonometrica 21:503-46.
Journal of Busi
Allais, M. 1979. The foundations of a positive theory of choice involving risk and a
criticism of the postulates and axioms DEMO the American School. In M. Allais and O.
Hagen (eds.), DEMO Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Arrow, K. J. 1982. Risk perception in psychology and economics. Economic Inquiry
20:1-9.
Bazerman, M. H. 1983. Negotiator judgment. American Behavioral Scientist 27:211-28.
Bell, D. E. 1982. Regret in decision making under uncertainty. Operations Research
30:961-81.
DEMO, R. C . and Heberlein, T. A. 1979. Measuring values of extra-market goods: Are
indirect measures biased? American Journal of Agricultural Economics DEMO:926-30.
Chew, S. H. 1983. A generalization ofthe quasilinear mean with DEMO to the
measurement of income inequality and decision theory resolving the Allais paradox.
Econometrica 51:1065-92.
Chew, S. H., and MacCrimmon, K. 1979. Alpha utility theory, lottery composition, and
the Atlais paradox. Working Paper DEMO 686. Vancouver: University of British Colum-
bia.
Clark, H. H.. and Clark, E. V. 1977. Psychology and Language. New York: Harcourt
Brace DEMO
Einhom, H. J., and Hogarth, R. M. 1978. Confidence in DEMO: Persistence ofthe
illusion of validity. P.sychoiogical Review 85:395-416.
Ellsberg. D. DEMO Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 75:643-69.
Eraker, S. E., and Sox, H. C. 1981. Assessment of patients' preferences for therapeutic
outcomes. Medical Decision Making 1:29-39.
Fischhoff, B. 1983. Predicting frames. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory DEMO Cognition 9:103-16.
Fishbum, P. C. 1982. Nontransitive measurable utility. Journal DEMO Mathematical Psy-
chology 2f,:'i\-61.
Fishburn, P. C. 1983. Transitive DEMO utility. Journa/of Economif Theory 3l:29i~
317.
Fishbum, P. C. DEMO SSB utility theory and decision making under uncertainty. Mathe-
matical Social Sciences 8:253-85.
Fishbum. P. C. 1985. Uncertainty aversion and separated effects in DEMO making
under uncertainty. Working paper. Murray Hill, N.J.: AT & T Bell Labs.
Fishbum, P. C and Kochenberger, G. A. 1979. Two-piece DEMO Neumann-Morgenstem
utility functions. Decision Sciences 10:503-18.
Grether, D. M. 1980. DEMO rule as a descriptive model: The representativeness heu-
ristic. Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics 95:537-57.
Grether, D. M., and Plott, C. R. DEMO Economic theory of choice and the preference
reversal phenomenon. American Economic Review 69:623-38.
Hagen, O. 1979. Towards a positive theory of preferences under risk, in M. Allais and O.
Hagen (eds.). Expected Utility DEMO and the Allais Paradox. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Haltiwanger, J., and Waldman, M. 1985. Rational expectations and the limits of rational-
ity: An analysis of heterogeneity. American Economic Review 75:326-40.
Hammond, P. 1985. Consequential behavior in decision trees and expected utility. Insti-
tute for Mathematical Studies in DEMO Social Scienees Working Paper no. 112. Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University.
DEMO, B. 1975. The appropriateness ofthe expected utility model. Erkenntnis 9:175-
DEMO
Hausch, D. B.; Ziemba, W. T.; and Rubenstein, M. DEMO 1981. Efficiency ofthe market for
racetrack betting. Management Science 27:1435-52.
Hershey, J. C , and Schoemaker, P. J. H. 1980. Risk taking DEMO problem context in the
domain of losses: An expected utility analysis. DEMO of Risk and Insurance 47:111-
32.
Kahneman, D.; Knetsch, DEMO L.; and Thaler, R. H. In this issue. Fairness and the assump-
tions of economies.
Kahneman, D.; Knetsch, J. L.; and DEMO, R. In press. Perceptions of faimess: Entitle-
menls in the market. American Economic Review.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
risk. Econometrica 47:263-91.
RaHoaal Choice and the Framing of Decisions S277
Kahneman, D., aod DEMO, A. 1982. The psychology of preferences. Scientific Ameri-
can 246: \eO-n.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. 1984. Choices, values, and frames. American Psycholo-
gist 39:341-50.
Knetsch, J. L.. and Sinden, J. DEMO 1984. Willingness to pay and compensation demanded:
Experimental evidence of an unexpected disparity in measures of value. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 99:507-21.
DEMO P.; Smith, V. L.; and Williams. A. W. 1985. Individual DEMO, market ration-
ality and value estimation. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings
75;397_4O2.
Loomes, G., and Sugden, R. 1982. Regret theory: An alternative theory of rational
choice under uncertainty. Economic Journal 92:805-24.
Luce, R. D., and Krantz, D. H. 1971. Conditional expected utility. Econometrica
39:253-71.
Luce, R. D., and Narens, L. 1985, DEMO of concatenation measurement struc-
tures according to scale type. Journal of Mathemical Psychology 29:1-72.
Machina, M. J. 1982. "Expected utility" analysis without the independence axiom,
Econometrica 50:277-323.
McNeil, B. J.; Pauker, S. G.; Sox. H. C . Jr.; and Tversky, A. 1982. On the elicitation of
preferences for alternative therapies. New England Journal of DEMO 306:1259-62.
March, J. G. !978. Bounded rationality, ambiguity, and DEMO engineering of choice. Bell
Journal of Economics 9:587-608.
Markowitz. H. 1952. The utility of wealth. Journal of Political Economy 60:151-58.
Nelson. R. DEMO, and Winter. S. G. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.
DEMO Mass.: Harvard University Press,
Payne. J. W.; Laughhunn. D. J.; and Crum. R. 1980. Translation of gambles and aspira-
tion level effects in risky choice behavior. Management Science 26:1039-60.
Quiggin. J. 1982. A DEMO of anticipated utility. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 3:323-43.
Raiffa, H. 1968. Decision Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices under Uncer-
tainty. DEMO, Mass.: Addison-Wesiey.
Russell, T.. and Thaler, R. 1985. The relevance of quasi-rationality in competitive mar-
kets. American Economic Review 75:1071-82.
Savage, L. J. 1954. The Foundation.'! of Statistics. New York: Wiley.
Schelling, T. C. 1981. Economic reasoning and the ethics of policy. Public Interest
63:37-61.
Schmeidler. D. 1984, Subjective probability and expected utility without additivity. Pre-
print Series no. 84. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. Institute for Mathematics
and Its Applications.
Schumpeter. J. A. 1954. History of Economic Analysis. New DEMO: Oxford University
Press.
Segal, U. 1984. Nonlinear decision weights with the independence axiom. Working
Paper in Economics no. 353. Los Angeles: University of California. Los Angeles.
Simon. H. A. 1955. A behavioral model of rational DEMO Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics 69:99-Wi.
Simon, H. A. 1978. DEMO as process and as product of thought. American Eco-
nomic Review: DEMO and Proceedings 68:1-16.
Slovic, P.; Fischhoff. B.; and Lichtenstein, S. 1982. Response mode, framing, and infor-
mation processing effects in DEMO assessment. In R. M. Hogarth {ed.). New Directions
for Methodology of Social and Behavioral Science: Question Framing and Response
Consistency. San Francisco: DEMO
Slovic, P., and Lichtenstein. S. 1983. Preference reversals: A broader DEMO
American Economic Review 73:5%-605.
Slovic. P.. and Tversky, A. 1974. DEMO accepts Savage's axiom? Behavioral Science
19:368-73.
Smith, V. L. 1985. Experimental economics: Reply. American Economic Review
75:265-72.
Stigler, G. DEMO and Kindahl, J. K. 1970. The Behavior of Industrial Prices. New DEMO:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
S278 Journal nf Business
Thaler, R. H. 1980. Towards a positivetheory of consumer choice. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 1:39-60.
Tversky, A. 1969. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review 76:105-10.
Tversky, A. 1977. On the elicitation of preferences: Descriptive and prescriptive consid-
erations. In D. E. Bell, R. L. Keeney, and H. Raiffa (eds.). Conflicting Objectives in
Decisions. New York: Wiley.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. DEMO The framing of decisions and the psychology of
choice. Science 211:453-58.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. 1983. Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: DEMO con-
junction fallacy in probability judgment. Psychological Review 90:293-315.
von Neumann, J., and Morgenstem, O. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Weber, R. J. 1982. The Allais paradox, Dutch auctions, and alpha-utility theory. Work-
ing paper. Evanston, 111.: Northwestem University.
Yaari, M. E. 1984. Risk aversion without decreasing mai^inal DEMO Report Series in
Theoretical Economics. London: London School of Economics.
{1g42fwefx}