PSYCHOLOGICAL
REVIEW
VOL. 79, No. 4
JULY 1972
ELIMINATION BY ASPECTS:
A THEORY OF CHOICE l
AMOS TVERSKY «
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
DEMO probabilistic analyses of choice are based on the assumption of simple
scalability which is an ordinal formulation of the principle of independence
from irrelevant DEMO This assumption, however, is shown to be in-
adequate on both theoretical and experimental grounds. To resolve this
problem, a more general theory of choice based on a covert elimination process
is developed. In this DEMO, each alternative is viewed as a set of aspects. At
each DEMO in the process, an aspect is selected (with probability proportional
to its weight), and all the alternatives that do not include the DEMO aspect
are eliminated. The process continues until all alternatives but one are
eliminated. It is shown (a) that this model is expressible purely DEMO terms of the
choice alternatives without any reference to specific aspects, (i) that it can be
tested using observable choice probabilities, and (c) that it generalizes the
choice models of R. D. Luce and of F. Restle. Empirical support from a study
of psychophysical and preferential DEMO is presented. The strategic im-
plications of the present development are sketched, and the logic of elimina-
tion by aspects is discussed from both psychological and decision-theoretical
viewpoints.
When faced with a choice among several
alternatives, people often experience un-
certainty and exhibit inconsistency. That
is, people are often not sure which alterna-
tive they should select, nor do they always
make the same choice under seemingly
1 The research was supported, in part, by National
Science Foundation Grant GB-6782. Much of the
work reported in this paper was accomplished while
the author was a Fellow DEMO the Center for Advanced
Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford, Cali-
fornia, during 1970-1971. I wish to thank the
Center for the generous hospitality. I am grateful
to David H. Krantz for many invaluable discussions
DEMO the years, to Maya Bar-Hillel for her
assistance in both theoretical DEMO experimental
phases of the investigation, and to Edward N.
Pugh for DEMO help in the analysis of the data. I have
also benefited from discussions with Clyde H.
Coombs, Robyn M. Dawes, R. Duncan Luce,DEMO
Jacob Marschak, J. E. Russo, and Paul Slovic.
1 Requests for reprints should be sent to Amos
Tversky, who is now at the Oregon Research
Institute, P. O. Box 3196, Eugene, Oregon 97403.
identical conditions. In order to account
for the observed inconsistency and the
reported DEMO, choice behavior has
been viewed as a probabilistic process.
Probabilistic theories DEMO preference differ
with respect to the nature of the mechanism
that is assumed to govern choice. Some
theories (e.g., Thurstone, 1927, 1959) at-
tribute a random element to the determina-
tion of subjective value, while others (e.g.,
Luce, 1959) attribute a random element to
the decision rule. Most theoretical work
on probabilistic preferences has been based
DEMO the notion of independence among
alternatives. This notion, however, is
incompatible with some observed patterns
of preferences which exhibit systematic
dependencies among alternatives.
DEMO paper develops a probabilistic
theory of choice, based on a covert DEMO
tion process, which accounts for observed
281
1972 by the American DEMO Association, Inc.
282
AMOS TVERSKY
dependencies among alternatives. The
first section analyzes the independence DEMO
sumption ; the second section formulates a
theory of choice and discusses its con-
sequences ; some experimental tests of the
theory are reported DEMO the third section ;
and its psychological implications are ex-
plored DEMO the fourth and final section.
We begin by introducing some notation.
Let T = {x,y,z, • • •} be a finite set, inter-
preted as the total set of alternatives under
consideration. We use A, B, C, ••• , to
denote specific nonempty subsets of T, and
A,, BJ, Ck, • • • , to denote variables ranging
over nonempty subsets of T. Thus,
{Ai\Ai~2.B} is DEMO set of all subsets of T
which includes B. The number of elements
in A is denoted by a. Proper and non-
proper set DEMO are denoted, respec-
tively, by D and I>. The empty set is
denoted by <t>. The probability of choosing
an alternative x from an offered set A C T
is denoted P(x,DEMO). Naturally, we assume
P(x,A) > 0, EP(DEMO,A) = 1 for any A,
x£A
and P(x,DEMO) = 0 for any x ($! A. For
brevity, we DEMO P(x\y) for P(x,{x,y}),
P(x;y,z) for P(x,{x,y,z}), etc. A real-
valued, nonnegative function in one argu-
ment is called a scale. Choice probability
is typically estimated by relative frequency
in repeated choices. It should be DEMO in
mind, however, that other empirical inter-
pretations of choice probability, such as
confidence judgments (which are applicable
to unique choice situations), might also be
adopted.
Perhaps the most general formulation of
the notion of independence from irrelevant
alternatives is the assumption that the
alternatives can DEMO scaled so that each
choice probability is expressible as a
monotone function of the scale values of
the respective alternatives. This assump-
tion, called simple scalability, was first
investigated by Krantz (1964, Appendix
A). Formally, simple scalability holds if and
only if there exists a scale u defined on the
alternatives of T and functions Fn in n
DEMO, 2 < n < t, such that for any
A = {x,---,z } C T,
P(x,A) =*•„
[1]
where each Fa is strictly increasing in the
first argument and strictly DEMO in
the remaining a — 1 arguments provided
P(x,A) DEMO 0, 1. This assumption underlies
most theoretical work in the field. DEMO
theory of Luce (1959), for example, is a
special case of this assumption where
P(x,A) = ^.[M (*),••-,«(«) ]
u(x)
[2]
u(y)
Despite its generality, simple scalability
(Equation 1) has strong testable con-
sequences. In particular, it implies that
for all x, y G A,
DEMO(x;y) > l/2ifiP(x,A ) >P(y,A),
provided P(y,A} ^ 0. [3]
Equation 3 asserts that the ordering of x
and y, by choice probability, is independent
DEMO the offered set.3 Thus, if x is preferred
to y in DEMO context (e.g., P(x;y) > 1/2),
then x is preferred to y in any context.
Furthermore, if P(x;y) = 1/2 then P(x,A)
= P(y,A) for any A which contains both
x and y. Thus, DEMO an individual is indiffer-
ent between x and y, then he DEMO choose
them with equal probability from any set
which contains them.
This assumption, however, is not valid in
general, as suggested by several counterex-
amples and demonstrated in many experi-
ments (see Becker, DeGroot, & Marschak,
1963b; Chipman, 1960; Coombs, 1958;
Krantz, 1967 ; Tversky & Russo, 1969). To
motivate the present development, let us
examine the arguments against simple
scalability starting with an example pro-
posed by Debreu (1960).
Suppose you are offered a choice among
the following three records: a suite by De-
bussy, denoted DEMO, and two different re-
cordings of the same Beethoven symphony,
DEMO BI and B2. Assume that the two
Beethoven recordings are of equal quality,
3 Simple scalability is, in fact, equivalent (see
Tversky, 1972) to the following order independence
assumption. For x, y G A — B, and z £ B,
P(x,A) > P(y,A) iSP(z,B U {*}) < P(z,B U {y})
provided the terms on the two sides of DEMO in-
equality are not both 0 or 1.
A THEORY OF CHOICE
283
and that you are undecided between adding
DEMO Debussy or a Beethoven to your record
collection. Hence, P(Bi;DEMO) == P(D;Bi)
= P(D;B 2 ) DEMO 1/2. It follows readily from
Equation 3 that P(D ; 61,62) = 1/3. This
conclusion, however, is unacceptable on
intuitive grounds because the basic con-
flict between Debussy and Beethoven is
DEMO likely to be affected by the addition
of another Beethoven recording. In-
stead, it is suggested that in choosing
among the three records, DEMO and B2 are
treated as one alternative to be compared
with D. Consequently, one would expect
that P(D; Bi,B2) will be close to one-half,
while P(Bi;B 2l D ) = DEMO(B 2 ;Bi,D ) will be
close to one-fourth, contrary to simple
scalability (Equation 1). Empirical sup-
port for Debreu's hypothesis was presented
by Becker et al. (1963b) in a study DEMO
choice among gambles. Although Debreu's
example was offered as a criticism of Luce's
model (Equation 2), it applies to any model
based on simple scalability.
Previous efforts to resolve this problem
(e.g., DEMO, 1960) attempted to redefine
the alternatives so that BI and Ba are no
longer viewed as different alternatives.
Although this idea has some DEMO, it does
not provide a satisfactory account of our
problem. First, BI and B2 are not only
physically distinct, but they can also be
perfectly discriminable. Hence, there is
no independent basis for treating them as
indistinguishable. Second, the process of
redefining choice alternatives itself re-
quires an adequate theoretical analysis.
Finally, data show that the principle of
independence from irrelevant alternatives
is violated in a manner that cannot be
readily DEMO for by grouping choice
alternatives. More specifically, it appears
that the DEMO of an alternative to an
offered set "hurts" alternatives that are
similar to the added alternative more than
those that are dissimilar to DEMO Such an
effect (of which Debreu's example is a
special DEMO) requires a more drastic re-
vision of the principles underlying our
DEMO of choice.
The following example provides another
illustration of the inadequacy of simple
scalability. Suppose each of two travel
agencies, denoted 1 and 2, offers tours of
Europe (E) and of the Far East (DEMO). Let
T = {Ei,Fi,E2,F2} where letters denote the
destination of the tours, and the subscripts
denote the respective agencies. Let us
assume, for simplicity, that the decision
maker is equally attracted DEMO Europe and
by the Far East, and that he has no DEMO
to prefer one travel agency over the other.
Consequently, all binary DEMO prob-
abilities equal one-half, and the probability
of choosing each tour DEMO the total set
equals one-fourth. It follows from Equa-
tion 3, DEMO this case, that all trinary prob-
abilities must equal one-third. However,DEMO
an examination of the problem suggests
that in fact none of the trinary probabilities
equals one-third; instead, some of them
equal one-half while DEMO others equal
one-fourth.
Consider, for example, the set {Ei.Fi.Fz}.
Since the distinction between the agencies
is treated as irrelevant, the problem re-
duces to the choice between a tour of
Europe and a tour of DEMO Far East. If
the latter is chosen, then either one of
DEMO agencies can be selected. Consequently,
P(Ei; FlfF2) = 1/2, and P(Fi; F,,Ei)
= P(F2;Fi,Ei) = 1/4. An identical argu-
ment applies to all other triples. Besides
violating simple scalability, this example
demonstrates that the same set of binary
(or quarternary) probabilities can give rise
to different trinary DEMO and hence
the latter cannot be determined by the
former. Put differently, this example shows
that the probabilities of choosing alterna-
tives from a given set, A, cannot be com-
puted, in general, from DEMO probabilities of
choosing these alternatives from the subsets
and the supersets of A. This observation
imposes a high lower bound on the com-
plexity DEMO any adequate theory of choice.
A minor modification of an example due
to L. J. Savage (see Luce & Suppes, 1965,
pp. DEMO), which is based on binary
comparisons only, illustrates yet another
DEMO encountered by simple scalability.
Imagine an individual who has to choose
between a trip to Paris and a trip to Rome.
Suppose he is DEMO between the two
284
AMOS TVERSKY
trips so that P(Paris; Rome) = 1/DEMO When
the individual is offered a new alternative
which consists of the trip to Paris plus
a $1 bonus, denoted Paris +, he DEMO un-
doubtedly prefer it over the original trip
to Paris with certainty so that P (Paris + ;
Paris) = 1. It follows from Equation 3,
then, that P (Paris + ; Rome) = 1, which is
counterintuitive. For if our individual can-
not decide between Paris and Rome, it is
unlikely that a relatively small bonus would
resolve the conflict completely and change
the choice probability from 1/DEMO to 1.
Rather, we expect P (Paris +; Rome) to
be closer to 1/2 than to 1. Experimental
data (e.g., DEMO & Russo, 1969) support
this intuition. Choice probabilities, there-
fore, reflect not only the utilities of the
alternatives in question, but also the
difficulty of comparing them. Thus, an
extreme choice probability (i.e., close to 0
or 1) can result from either a large dis-
crepancy in value or from an easy com-
parison, as in the case of the added bonus.
The comparability of the alternatives,
however, cannot be captured by their scale
values, and hence simple -scalability must
be rejected. The above examples demon-
strate that the substitution of one DEMO
tive for another, which is equivalent to it in
some contexts, does not necessarily preserve
choice probability in any context. The
substitution affects DEMO comparability
among the alternatives, which in turn in-
fluences choice probability.
DEMO alternative approach to the develop-
ment of probabilistic theories of choice
treats the utility of each alternative as a
random variable rather than a DEMO
Specifically, it is assumed that there exists
a random vector U DEMO (Ux,- • -,U 2 ) on
T - (x, • • • ,z] (i.e., for any y G T, Uv is
a random variable) such that
P(x,A) = DEMO(U* > Ua for all y £ A). [4]
Models of this type are called random
utility models. The only random utility
models DEMO have been seriously in-
vestigated assume that the random vari-
ables are independent. However, an ex-
tension of the last example (see Luce &
Raiffa, 1957, p. 375) is shown to violate
any independent random utility model. To
demonstrate, consider the trips to Paris and
Rome with and without the added bonus.
The expected binary choice probabili-
ties DEMO this case are P (Paris + ; Paris) = 1,
P(Rome +; Rome) = 1 but P (Paris +;
Rome) < 1 and P(Rorne + ; Paris) < 1.
DEMO an independent random utility
model, the first two equations above imply
DEMO there is no overlap between the dis-
tributions representing Paris and Paris +,
nor is there an overlap between the distribu-
tions representing DEMO and Rome +.
The last two inequalities above imply
that there must be some overlap between
the distributions representing Rome and
Paris +, as well as between the distribu-
tions representing Paris and Rome +. It
DEMO easy to verify that these conclusions are
mutuall y inconsistent, and DEMO the above
choice probabilities are incompatible with
any independent random utility model.
The representation of choice alternatives by
independent random variables, therefore,
appears too restrictive in general since,
like simple scalability, it is incompatible
with some eminently reasonable patterns of
preference. In discussing the difficulties
encountered DEMO probabilistic theories of
choice, Luce and Suppes (1965) wrote :
It appears that such criticisms, although usually
directed toward specific models, DEMO really much
more sweeping objections to all our current prefer-
ence theories. They suggest that we cannot hope
to be completely successful in dealing DEMO prefer-
ences until we include some mathematical structure
over the set of outcomes that are simply sub-
stitutable for one another and those that DEMO special
cases of others. Such functional and logical rela-
tions among the outcomes seem to have a sharp
control over the preference probabilities, and they
cannot long be ignored [p. 337].
THEORY
The present development describes DEMO
as a covert sequential elimination process.
Suppose that each alternative consists of a
set of aspects of characteristics,4 and that
4 The representation DEMO choice alternatives as
collections of measurable aspects was developed by
Restle (DEMO) who formulated a binary choice model
based on this representation. As DEMO be shown
later, the present theory reduces to Restle's in DEMO
A THEORY OF CHOICE
285
at every stage of the process, an aspect is
selected (from those included in the avail-
able alternatives) DEMO probability that is
proportional to its weight. The selection
of an aspect eliminates all the alternatives
that do not include the selected aspect, and
the process continues until a single alterna-
tive remains. If a selected DEMO is in-
cluded in all the available alternatives, no
alternative is DEMO and a new aspect
is selected. Consequently, aspects that are
common DEMO all the alternatives under con-
sideration do not affect choice probabilities.
Since the present theory describes choice
as an elimination process governed by suc-
DEMO selection of aspects, it is called the
elimination-by-aspects (EBA) model.
DEMO contemplating the purchase of a new
car, for example, the first aspect selected
may be automatic transmission: this will
eliminate all cars that do not have this
feature. Given the remaining alternatives,
another aspect, say a $3000 price limit, is
selected and all cars whose price exceeds
this limit are excluded. The process con-
tinues until all cars DEMO one are eliminated.
This decision rule is closely related to the
lexicographic model (see Coombs, 1964;
Fishburn, 1968), where an ordering of the
relevant attributes is specified a priori.
One chooses, then, DEMO alternative that is
best relative to the first attribute; if some
DEMO are equivalent with respect to
the first attribute, one chooses from DEMO
the alternative that is best relative to the
second attribute, and DEMO on. The present
model differs from the lexicographic model
in that here no fixed prior ordering of as-
pects (or attributes) is assumed, and the
choice process is inherently probabilistic.
More formally, consider a mapping that
associates with each x G T a nonempty set
x' = (a,/3, • • •} of elements which are inter-
preted as the aspects of x. An alternative
x is said to include DEMO aspect a whenever
a G x'. The aspects could represent values
two-alternative case. A related representation of
choice alternatives was developed by Lancaster
(1966) who assumed that economic goods possess,
or give rise to, multiple characteristics (or aspects)
in fixed proportion, and that these characteristics
determine the consumer's choice. Lancaster's
theory, however, is DEMO
FIG. 1. A graphical representation of aspects
in the three-alternative case.
along some fixed quantitative or qualitative
dimensions (e.g., price, quality, comfort),
or they could be arbitrary features of the
alternatives that do DEMO fit into any simple
dimensional structure. The characteriza-
tion of alternatives in terms of aspects is
not necessarily unique. Furthermore, we
generally do not know what aspects are
considered by an individual in any particu-
lar DEMO problem. Nevertheless, as is
demonstrated later, this knowledge is not
required in order to apply the present
model, and its descriptive validity can be
determined independently of any particular
characterization of the alternatives.
To clarify DEMO formalization of the model,
let us first examine a simple example. Con-
sider a three-alternative set T = {x,y,z},
where DEMO collections of aspects associated
with the respective alternatives are
and
x' DEMO {ai,a2,0i,02,pi,p2,a>},
y' = DEMO,j32,0i,02,<n,<T2,w},
A graphical representation of the struc-
ture of the alternatives and their aspects is
presented in DEMO 1. It is readily seen
that a,, /3», and y» (* = 1, 2) are, respec-
tively, the unique aspects of x, y, and 2;
that Oi, <ri, and pi are, respectively, the
286
AMOS TVERSKY
aspects shared by x and y, by y and z, and
by x and z; and that u is shared DEMO all three
alternatives. Since the selection of co does
not eliminate any alternative, it can be
discarded from further considerations. Let
u be a scale which assigns to each aspect a
positive number representing its utility DEMO
value, and let K be the sum of the scale
values DEMO all the aspects under considera-
tion, that is, K = 53 u(a) where the sum-
a
mation ranges over all the aspects except
co. Using these notations we now compute
P(x,T).
DEMO first that x can be chosen directly
from T if either a\ or aa is selected in the
first stage (in which case both y and z are
eliminated). This occurs with probability
P(x;DEMO) =
tt(pi)
More generally, let T be any finite set of
alternatives. For any A C T let .4' =
(DEMO(E.x' for some #(E^} , and A° =
{a a DEMO' for all xEA}. Thus, .4' is
the set of aspects DEMO belongs to at
least one alternative in A, and A° is
DEMO set of aspects that belongs to all the
alternatives in A. In particular, T' is
the set of all aspects under considera-
tion, while T° is the set of aspects shared
by all the alternatives DEMO study. Given
any aspect a G T', let A a denote those al-
ternatives of A which include a, that is,
Aa = {x\x EA&a Ex'}.
The elimination-by-aspects model asserts
that there DEMO a positive scale u defined
on the aspects (or more specifically DEMO
T' - r°) such that for all x £ A C T
u(a)P(X,Aa)
ra
provided the denominator does DEMO vanish.
Note that the summations in the numerator
and the denominator of Equation 6 range,
respectively, over all aspects of x and A
except those that are shared by all elements
of A. Hence, the denominator of Equa-
tion 6 vanishes only if all elements of A
DEMO the same aspects, in which case it is
assumed that P(DEMO,A) = I/a.
[_u(a.\) +«(«2)]/K. Alternatively, x can be
chosen via {x,y} if either 61 or 62 is selected
in the first stage (in which case z is elimi-
nated), and then x is chosen over y. This
occurs with DEMO \ju(Bi) + u(6%)~\
X P(x ', y)/K. Finally, x can be chosen via
(x,z) if DEMO pi or pa is selected in the
first stage (in which DEMO y is eliminated),
and then x is chosen over z. DEMO occurs
with probability [w(pi) + u(p?)~]P(x\ z)/K.
Since the above paths leading to the choice
of x from T are all disjoint,
P(x,T) =
where
etc.
[5]
Equation 6 is a recursive formula. It
expresses the probability of choosing DEMO from
A as a weighted sum of the probabilities of
choosing x from the various subsets of A
(i.e., Aa for a Ex'), where the weights
(i.e., u(a)/ Z «(/3)) correspond to the prob-
abilities of selecting the respective aspects
of DEMO
Consider a special case of the elimina-
tion-by-aspects model where all pairs of
alternatives share the same aspects, that is,
x' fl DEMO' — z> n w' f°r aii x> y> z> w S T.
Since aspects that are common to all the
alternatives DEMO T do not affect the choice
process, the alternatives can be DEMO as
(pairwise) disjoint, that is, x' f*l y1 = <t> for
all x, y G T. In this case, Equation 6
reduces to
P(x,A) = «£« '
Z
since DEMO G x' implies A„ = {x} , and P(x,{x})DEMO
= 1. Letting
u(a)
yields
Hence, in the present DEMO, Luce's model
A THEORY OF CHOICE
287
(Equation 2) holds whenever the alterna-
DEMO can be regarded as composed of dis-
joint aspects.
Next, examine DEMO special case of the
model where only binary choice prob-
abilities are considered. In this case, we
obtain
U(ct)
P(*',DEMO) =
*
£'
-
«(« y
r
0)
DEMO
£ 6
: y —
«0s *
'
)
«(*' - /)
«(*'-/)+«(/-*') . C7]
7-—^
where #' — y' = {a \a G x' & a £JE y'} is
the set of aspects that belongs to DEMO but not
toy; / - *' = {/3|/3 G/&/ 3 $ *'} is the
set of aspects that belongs to y but not to x;
and «(*' — y') — £ «(«). Equation
« G*' -y
7 coincides with Restle's (1961) model.
The EBA model, therefore, generalizes DEMO
choice models of Luce and of Restle.
The elimination-by-aspects model has
been formulated above in terms of a scale «
defined over the set DEMO relevant aspects.
It appears that the application of the model
presupposes prior characterization of the
alternatives in terms of their aspects.
However, it turns out that this is not
necessary because the EBA model can be
DEMO purely in terms of the alterna-
tives, or more specifically, in terms of the
subsets of T.
To illustrate the basic idea, consider the
example presented in Figure 1. There we
assume that on, Pi, • • • (i = I , 2) are all
distinct aspects. According to the elimina-
tion-by-aspects model, however, there is no
DEMO to distinguish between aspects that
lead to the same outcome. For example,
the selection of either on or a2 eliminates
both y and DEMO; the selection of either 61 or 62
eliminates 2; and the selection of either pi
or p2 eliminates y. From the standpoint of
DEMO elimination-by-aspects model, therefore,
there is no need to differentiate between DEMO
and «2, between 6\ and 62, or between pi
and p2. Thus we can group all the aspects
that belong to x alone, all the aspects that
belong to x and y but not to DEMO, etc. Let
{x} denote the aspects that belong to *
alone (i.e., ai and « 2 ), {x^y} the aspects that
belong DEMO to x and y (i.e., 0i and On),
{x^z} DEMO aspects that belong only to x and
2 (i.e., pi and p 2 ), etc.6 The representation
of the grouped aspects in the three-alterna-
tive case is displayed in Figure 2.
The scale value of DEMO collection of aspects
is defined as the sum of the scale value of
its members, that is, U(x) = u(a\) DEMO w(a2),
U(xjy) = «(0i) +u(6i), etc. For sim-
plicity of notation we write U(x) for
DEMO(&}), U(xjy) for U((x~y}), etc. Thus,DEMO
Equation 5 is expressible as
where
P(x;y) =
etc.
DEMO(x)
U(x) + U(y)
U(x)
DEMO(x) + U(y) + U(z)
The essential difference between Equations
5 and 8 lies in the domain of the scales: in
Equation 5, u is defined over individual
aspects, whereas in DEMO 8 U is de-
fined over collections of aspects which are
associated, respectively, with the subsets of
5 In this paper, the superbar is used exclusively
to denote collections of aspects. It should not be
DEMO with a common use of this symbol to
denote set complement.
P(x,T) =
U(x7z)P(x;z)
U(y7z)
[8]
T. The method by which Equation 5 is
translated into Equation DEMO can be applied
in general.
Each proper subset A of T is associated
with the set A of all aspects that are in-
cluded DEMO all the alternatives of A and are
not included in any of the alternatives that
do not belong to A. That is, A = {a £7"' |
a G *' for all * £ A & a $ y' for any
y £ A}. The scale Uis defined by U(A) =
£ u(a). It is shown in the appendix that
a 6 A
the elimination-by-aspects model, defined in
Equation 6, holds if and only if there exists
a scale U defined on {Ai\AiC.T} such
288
AMOS TVERSKY
them has with the Debussy record. As-
sume, for simplicity, that any aspect
shared by D and one of the B records is
also shared by the other B record, hence D
can be treated as (aspectwise) disjoint
of both Bi and B2. Suppose DEMO/(B_i) =
Z7(B,) = a, £/(Bi,B2) = b, and Z7(D) =
a + b. A graphical illustration of this
representation is shown in Figure 3.
It follows readily, under these assump-
tions, that all the binary choice probabilities
are equal, since
a 1 a + b
FIG. 2. A graphical representation of the grouped
aspects in the three-alternative case.
that for all * £ DEMO C T
P(X,A) =
V(Bt)P(x,A
DEMO
eZ
a
[9]
where a = (Aj\A j ("} A DEMO A, 4>}, provided
the denominator does not vanish. (Ac-
DEMO to the present theory, the de-
nominator can vanish only if DEMO(x,A)
= I/a.) The significance of this result
DEMO in showing how the elimination-by-
aspects model can be formulated in terms of
the subsets of T without reference to_specific
aspects. Note that for DEMO C T, U(A) is not
a measure of the value of the alternatives of
A ; rather it is a measure of DEMO the evalua-
tive aspects that are shared by all the
alternatives of A and by them only. Thus,
U(A) can be viewed as a measure of the
unique advantage of the alternatives of A.
DEMO reader is invited to verify that in the
three-alternative case, Equation DEMO reduces
to Equation 8.
Before discussing the consequences of
the EBA model, let us examine how it re-
solves the counterexamples described in
the previous section. First, consider
Debreu's record selection problem where
T = {D,Bi,B2}. Naturally, the two Bee-
thoven recordings have much more in
common with each other than either of
= P(D;B DEMO =P(D;B 2 ) ,
yet the trinary choice probabilities DEMO
unequal, since
= P(Bi;B,,D) =P(B 2 ;Bi,D) .
In fact, as a (or a/b) DEMO 0, the
left-hand side approaches 1/2 while the
right-hand side DEMO 1/4. Hence,
according to the elimination-by-aspects
model, all three DEMO can be pairwise
equivalent, and yet the probability of
choosing D DEMO the entire set can be as
high as 1/2 whenever Bi and B2 include
the same aspects.
Second, consider Savage's problem of
choosing between trips, and let T = {P, R,
P DEMO, R +}, where P and R denote, respec-
tively, trips to Paris and Rome, while +
denotes a small monetary bonus. Here it is
natural to suppose that Paris + includes
Paris (in the sense that all aspects of the
1
1
b 1
1
1
DEMO
.._]_
L° J
Beethove n 2
Beethove n I
~\
0
a + b
Debussy
FIG. 3. A graphical illustration of the analysis
of DEMO record selection problem.
A THEORY OF CHOICE
latter trip are included in the former). DEMO
the other hand, Paris + does not include
Rome because each DEMO these trips has some
aspects that are not shared by the other.
Similarly, Rome + includes Rome but not
Paris. The relations among the four al-
ternatives are illustrated in Figure 4.
Letting U(P~+) = £/(R+) = a, and
U(P,P +) = DEMO(R,R +) = b, yields
P(p.R) - A DEMO * _ a+b
^ r ' K ; 2b 2~2(a+b)
Paris +
A
Paris
289
1
P(P+;P ) =P(R+;DEMO ) = - = 1, and
P(P+;R ) = DEMO(R+ ; p ) = a + b
a + 2b
which can take any value between 1/2 and
1, depending on the relative weight of the
bonus. Thus, the above pattern of binary
choice probabilities, which violates simple
scalability (Equation 1) and any in-
dependent random utility model (Equa-
tion 4), arises naturally in the present
model. Essentially the same solution to
this problem (which involves only binary
probabilities) has been proposed by Restle
(1961).
The reader is DEMO to show how the
elimination-by-aspects model can accom-
modate the example described earlier of
choice among tours of Europe or the Far
East with DEMO of two travel agencies.
Consequences
In the following discussion we assume
that the elimination-by-aspects model is
valid, and list some of its testable conse-
quences. The derivations of these proper-
ties are presented in Tversky (1972).
Regularity: For all * £ A C B,
P(x,A) > P(x,B). [10]
Regularity asserts that the probability of
choosing an alternative from a given set
cannot be increased by DEMO the
offered set. This is probably the weakest
form of noninteraction among alternatives.
Although regularity seems innocuous, it is
v
Rome
V
Rome +
FIG. 4. A graphical illustration of the analysis
of the choice between DEMO
worth noting that the replacement of > by
> in Equation 10 violates the expected
preference pattern in the record selection
problem.
The following DEMO of the elimina-
tion-by-aspects model involves binary prob-
abilities only. Since it generalizes the
algebraic notion of transitivity, it is called
moderate stochastic transitivity.
Moderate stochastic transitivity :
P(x;y ) > 1/2 and P(y;z) > 1/2 imply
P(*;«) > DEMO(x;y), P(y;a)]. [11]
If we replace min by max in the con-
clusion of Equation 11, we obtain a
stronger condition called strong stochastic
transitivity. This latter property (which
is not a consequence of the present model)
is essentially equivalent to simple DEMO
ability in the binary case. If we replace the
conclusion of Equation 11 by P(x;z)
> 1/2, we obtain a weaker condition called
weak stochastic transitivity, which is a con-
290
AMOS TVERSKY
sequence of the existence of an ordinal
utility scale DEMO u(x) > u(y) iff
P(x\y) > 1/DEMO
The next consequence of the EBA model
has not been investigated previously to
the best of my knowledge. It relates
binary and trinary choice DEMO
by a property called the multiplicative
inequality.
Multiplicative inequality:
P(x;y,z)>P(x',y)P(x;s). [12]
The DEMO inequality asserts
that the probability of choosing x from
{x,y,z} is at least as large as the prob-
ability of choosing x DEMO both {x,y} and
{x,z} in two independent choices. It is
conjectured that the elimination-by-aspects
model implies a much stronger form
of the DEMO inequality, namely,
P(x,A \JB) >P(x,A)DEMO(x,B) for all A,
B C T.
Equations 10 DEMO 12 can be combined to
yield
mm[P(x;y),P(x;DEMO)~] > P(x;y,z)
>P(x;y)P(DEMO;z). [13]
Thus, trinary choice probabilities are
bounded from above DEMO regularity, and
from below by the multiplicative inequality.
A geometric representation DEMO Equation 13
FIG. 5. A geometric representation of the ad-
missible values (shaded region) of the Irinary prob-
ability P(x;y,z) given the binary probabilities
P(x;y') and P(x\z), DEMO Equation 13.
which displays the admissible range of
P(x;y,z) given the values of P(x;y) and
P(x; z) is given in Figure 5. It shows that
the trinary probability must lie between
the lower and upper surfaces generated,
respectively, by the multiplicative in-
equality (Equation 12) and regularity
(Equation 10).
The significance of the above conse-
quences stems from the fact that they DEMO
vide measurement-free tests of the elimina-
tion-by-aspects model, that is, tests which
do not require estimation of parameters.
For a given set of DEMO T, the
elimination-by-aspects model has 2' — 3
free parameters, DEMO £7 values (the number of
proper nonempty subsets of T minus DEMO
arbitrary unit of measurement), while the
number of independent data points of the
form P(xA), x £ A C T, is
Hence, there are always at least as many
data points as parameters in the present
model; the former exceeds the latter
whenever t > 3. In general, therefore, the
scale values are uniquely determined by
DEMO choice probabilities except in some
particular situations, for example, when
P(x,A) = I/a for all x G A C T.
Even in the case where t — 3, in which
the number of parameters (five) equals the
number of data points, the choice prob-
abilities are severely constrained. The
volume of the subspace generated by DEMO
present model is less than 1/2% of the
volume of the entire parameter space which
is a five-dimensional unit hypercube. The
probability that DEMO point sampled at random,
from a uniform distribution over the
parameter space, satisfies the present
model, therefore, is less than .005 in this
case.
Additional consequences and furthe r
developments of the elimination-by-aspects
model DEMO presented in Tversky (1972).
They include a generalization of the DEMO
model, an extension to ranking, and a
proof that the EBA model is a random
utility model, though not an independent
one.
A THEORY OF CHOICE
3.50
I M
291
A dot patter n DEMO gambl e A scor e profil e
FIG. 6. Typical stimulus slides from each of the three tasks.
TESTS
In contrast to the many DEMO
studies of probabilistic models of preference
(see, e.g., Becker et DEMO, 1963a; Luce &
Suppes, 1965; Marschak, 1960; Morrison,DEMO
1963), there have been relatively few
empirical studies in which these models
were tested. Moreover, much of the
available data are limited to binary choices,
and most studies report and analyze only
group data (see, e.g., Rumelhart & Greeno,
1971). Unfortunately, group data usually
do not permit adequate testing of theories
of individual choice behavior DEMO, in
general, the compatibility of such data
with the theory is neither a necessary nor a
sufficient condition for its validity. (For
an instructive illustration of this point, see
Luce, 1959, p. 8.) DEMO scarcity of appro-
priate data in an area of considerable
theoretical interest is undoubtedly due to
the difficulties involved in obtaining ade-
quate estimates DEMO choice probabilities for
an individual subject, particularly outside
the domain of DEMO
Two consequences of the present model
were tested in previous studies. In an ex-
periment involving choice among gambles,
Becker et al. (1963b) showed that although
simple scalability (Equation 1) is sys-
tematically violated, the regularity condi-
tion (Equation 10) is generally satisfied.
Similarly, DEMO strong stochastic transi-
tivity was violated in several studies (e.g.,
DEMO, 1958; Krantz, 1967; Tversky &
Russo, 1969), moderate stochastic transi-
tivity was usually supported. (For some
specified conditions under which moderate
stochastic transitivity, as well as weak
stochastic transitivity, is violated, see
Tversky, 1969.) The fact that simple
scalability and strong stochastic DEMO
tivity are often violated while regularity
and moderate stochastic transitivity are
typically satisfied provides some support,
albeit nonspecific, for the present theory.
The following experimental work was de-
signed to obtain a more direct test DEMO the
EBA model.
Method
To test the model, three different tasks DEMO
selected. The stimuli in Task A were random dot
patterns, in DEMO square frame, varying in size (of
square) and density (of dots). Subjects were pre-
sented with pairs and triples of frames DEMO in-
structed to choose, in each case, the frame which
contained the largest number of dots. The stimuli
in Task B were profiles DEMO college applicants with
different intelligence (I) and motivation (M) scores.
The scores were expressed in percentiles (relative
to the population of college applicants), and dis-
played as bar graphs. Subjects were presented with
DEMO and triples of such profiles and asked to select,
in each case, the applicant they considered the
most promising. The stimuli in Task C were two-
outcome gambles of the form (p,x), in which one
wins $x with probability p and nothing otherwise.
Each gamble DEMO displayed as a pie diagram, where
the probabilities of winning and DEMO winning were
represented, respectively, by the black and white
sectors of the pie. Subjects were presented with
pairs and triples of gambles and DEMO asked to
choose the gamble they would prefer to play. (At
DEMO end of the study, each subject actually played
for money five DEMO the gambles chosen by him in the
course of the study. The gambles were played by
spinning an arrow on a wheel of fortune DEMO the
subjects won the indicated amont if the arrow
landed on the black sector of the wheel.) Examples
of the three types of stimuli are shown in Figure 6.
The same eight subjects participated in all DEMO
tasks. They were students in a Jerusalem high
school, ages 16-18. DEMO were run in a single
group. The stimuli were projected on slides and
each subject indicated his choices by checking an
appropriate box on DEMO response sheet. The study
consisted of 12 one-hour sessions, three times DEMO week,
292
for four weeks. The first two sessions were practice
sessions in DEMO the problems and the procedure
were introduced and the subjects familiarized
themselves with the stimuli of the task.
Each experimental session included all three
DEMO, and the ordering of the tasks was randomized
across sessions. Within DEMO task, subjects were
presented with various pairs and triples formed from
DEMO basic set of 4 X 4 = 16 two-dimensional stimuli.
One set of three stimuli of each type was isolated
and replicated more than DEMO sets. The entire
triple was replicated 30 times (three per session)DEMO
while each of the pairs within this triple was repli-
cated 20 times (two per session). The following
discussion is concerned with the analysis of these
triples. Each triple was constructed so that no
alternative DEMO another one with respect to
both dimensions, and so that two DEMO the elements,
called x and y, are very similar to DEMO other, while
the third element, z, is relatively dissimilar to DEMO
of them.6
The subjects were paid a flat fee for the completion
of all the sessions. In addition, each subject re-
ceived a bonus proportional to the number of correct
numerosity judgments made by him, and was
allowed to play, for money, five gambles selected
randomly from DEMO chosen by him during the
study.
Results
The analysis of the results begins by
testing the constant-ratio rule which is
essentially equivalent to Luce'DEMO (1959)
model. According to this rule,
P(x;y) _ P(x,A)
P(y;x) P(y,A) DEMO,yEA, [14]
provided the denominators do not vanish.
The constant-ratio rule DEMO a strong version
of the principle of independence from ir-
relevant alternatives. It requires that the
ratio of P(x,A) and P(y,A) (not merely
their order as required by simple scalability)
DEMO independent of the offered set A.
6 The following stimuli were employed in the study.
Task A : x = (13 X 13, DEMO/5), y = (14 X 14, 3/4),
DEMO z = (28 X 28, 1/5) where the first DEMO of
each stimulus is the size of the underlying matrix
used to generate the pattern, and the second com-
ponent is the proportion of cells of the matrix that
contain dots. TaskB:* = (78,25), y = (75,35), and
z = (60,90) where the first and second components of
each pair denote, respectively, DEMO and
motivation scores of the applicants. Task C:
x = (DEMO/5, 4.00), y = (1/4,3.50), and z = (2/3, 1.00),
where the first and second component of each pair
are, respectively, the probability of winning^and the
amount DEMO be won in each of the gambles in Israeli
pounds.
AMOS TVERSKY
Let T = {x,y,z}, and define
n ,...^ _ DEMO)
p(*,r) + P(z,zy
P(y,T)DEMO
P*(y;s) = P(y,T) + P(z,T)'
Hence, by the constant-ratio rule,
P(x\z) = Pv(x;z)
[15]
P(y;z) = Px(y;z}.
and
Put differently, the binary probability
P(x\z) should equal P y (x;z) , computed
from the trinary probabilities, since under
Equation DEMO the presence of y is "ir-
relevant" to the choice between x and z.
In the present study, the alternatives
were designed so that x and y are much
more similar to each other than DEMO of
them is to z. Hence, the similarity hy-
pothesis that DEMO incorporated into the
elimination-by-aspects model predicts that
the addition of alternative y to the set
{x,z} will reduce P(x,T) proportionally
more than P(z,T). That is, the similar
alternative, x, will lose relatively more
than the dissimilar alternative, z, by the
DEMO of y. Likewise, y is expected to
lose relatively more than DEMO by the introduc-
tion of x. Contrary to the constant-ratio
rule, DEMO, the similarity hypothesis
implies
and
P(x;z) > Py(x;z)
[16]
P(y;z) > Px(y;z).
To test the constant-ratio rule, the ob-
served (binary) relative frequencies P (x,z)
and P(y,z) were compared, respectively,
with Py(x\z) and Px(y\z) computed from
the trinary relative DEMO, separately
for each one of the subjects. The observed
and the DEMO values for all subjects
are shown in Table 1 for each of the three
tasks.
It seems that the constant-ratio model
(Equation 14) DEMO in the psychophysical
task (A), and that it fails in DEMO two prefer-
ence tasks (B and C) in the manner pre-
dicted by the similarity hypothesis (Equa-
tion 16). Out of 16 individual comparisons
in each task (two per subject), Equation 16
was satisfied in 13 and 15 cases, respec-
A THEORY OF CHOICE
293
TABLE 1
OBSERVED AND PREDICTED PROPORTIONS (UNDER THE CONSTANT-RATIO MODEL) FOR EACH TASK
Task .4 (dots)
Subject
DEMO(*yi) £.(*;«> £(?;») r*(yy)
DEMO .50
2 .60
3 .25
4 .70
5 .65
6 .40
7 .15
8 .15
Overall
proportion .425
.43 .45 .43
.27 .35 .33
DEMO .40 .41
.75 .30 .67
.52 .35 .39
.39 .45 .52
.26 .45 .44
.14 .45 .57
.405 .400 .466
P ns ns
tively, in Tasks B and C (p < .05 in each
case7), and only in 7 cases in Task A.
Essentially the same result DEMO found in
additional analyses.
The relatively small number of observa-
tions does not permit an adequate test of
individual comparisons. Hence, the ob-
served and the computed choice frequencies
were pooled over subjects. The results of DEMO
chi-square test of Equation 15 against
Equation 16, based on these DEMO, are
shown in the last row of Table 1 for each
DEMO in each of the tasks. The same
pattern emerges from the analysis of the
pooled data: the observed proportions are
significantly higher than the computed ones
in Tasks B and C, but not in Task A.
Since the constant-ratio model is not
acceptable, in general, the simplest DEMO
of the elimination-by-aspects model, which
is compatible with the similarity hypothe-
DEMO, was selected next. Recall that the test
stimuli were designed so DEMO x and y are
very similar to each other while z is rela-
tively dissimilar to either of them (see
Footnote 6). Thus, we assume that neither
x nor y share with 2 any aspect that they
do not share with each other. Con-
sequently, aside from the aspects shared
by all three stimuli, 2 can be regarded
as (aspectwise) disjoint from both x and
y. That is, we assume that, to a reason-
7 This significance level should be interpreted
with caution because of the potential dependency
between the observations of each subject.
DEMO B (applicants)
Task C (gambles)
£<*;«)
£»(*;«)
.65
.55
.55
.40
.65
.35
.75
.55
DEMO
.37
.38
.46
.45
.20
.77
.52
.556
.463
< .05
P(y;»)
&.(?;»)
.30
.75
.60
.40
.55
.40
.35
.40
.26
.58
.41
.32
.40
.38
.40
.29
.469
DEMO
< .10
P(*-f)
P,(x-f)
.35
.60
.25
DEMO
.20
.65
.55
.55
.12
.53
.26
.43
.16
.54
.42
.35
.469
.354
< .01
P(yy)
£»(?;«>
.50
DEMO
.50
.70
.50
.60
.65
.70
.46
.68
.29
.35
.41
.44
.50
.43
.606
.466
< .01
able degree of approximation, U(x,z) =
U(y~&) = 0. This assumption reduces the
number of free parameters (from five to
three) at the cost of DEMO loss in generality.
Let U(x) = a, U(y) DEMO b, U(z) = c, and
U(x^y) = d (see Figure 7). Under this
special case of the model, DEMO exist non-
negative a, b, c, and d such that
DEMO +d
P(x\y ) = a +b' b + d + DEMO'
a + d
P(x;z ) = a + d + c'
and
a +d-
P(x;y,z) = a + b + c + d'
P(*\x,y) = a + b +c+d'
For three alternatives, there are five in-
dependent data points (three binary and
two trinary). In the absence of any re-
strictions on the parameters, the likeli-
hood function of the data is maximized by
using the observed relative frequencies as
estimates of DEMO parameters, in which case
the dimensionality of the parameter space,
DEMO rf(fl), equals five. In the above
version (Equation 17) of the elimination-
by-aspects model, we can set c, say, ar-
bitrarily, whence the observed proportions
are all expressible in terms of three parame-
[17]
294
AMOS TVERSKY
FIG. 7. A graphical illustration of the tested
version DEMO the EBA model (Equation 17).
ters (a, b, and d), and the dimensionality
of the restricted parameter space, denoted
d (u), equals three. Let A be the likelihood
ratio L(<DEMO)/L(Q), where L denotes the
maximum value of the DEMO function
under the respective model. If Equation
17 holds, then the DEMO — 2ln\ has an
approximate chi-square distribution with
d (0) — d (to) = 2 degrees of freedom.
Chandler's (1969) DEMO program was
employed to obtain maximum likelihood
estimates of the parameters under Equa-
tion 17 with c = 1. The values of the test
DEMO are reported in Table 2, along
with the estimates of d, for each subject
in all tasks.
Table 2 exhibits a very good DEMO
ence between the observed proportions and
the tested version (Equation 17) of the
EBA model: only 2 out of 24 tests permit
rejecting the model at the conservative
.1 level. It should perhaps be noted DEMO
TABLE 2
VALUES OF THE TEST STATISTIC AND THE
ESTIMATED VALUES OF d FOR EACH
SUBJECT IN EACH OF THE TASKS
Task A Task DEMO TaskC
(dots) (applicants) (gambles)
Subject
X2
X* d DEMO X2 d
1 .133 .29 2.179 .14 .040 .46
2 3.02S .89 1.634 .92 .001 .58
3 .849 0 .159 1.18 2.022 .14
4 DEMO 0 6.864* .51 1.053 1.56
5 .951 0 .428 1.23 .887 0
6 .401 0 .405 .42 .157 1.18
7 3.740 0 .083 0 DEMO 1.00
8 4.112 0 .038 .37 1.241 1.44
Note.— d f = 2.
*#=.! .
a correspondence between observed choice
probabilities and the elimination-by-
DEMO model does not necessarily imply
that the subjects are actually following a
strategy of elimination by aspects. They
might, in fact, employ a DEMO strategy
that is well approximated by the elimina-
tion-by-aspects model. The study of the
actual strategies employed by subjects in
choice experiments may perhaps DEMO ad-
vanced by investigating choice probabili-
ties in conjunction with other data such
as reaction time, eye movements, or verbal
protocols.
The relation DEMO the predictions of
the constant-ratio model (Equation 15)
and the DEMO hypothesis (Equation
16) can be further investigated using the
obtained estimates of the parameter d,
reported in Table 2. It is easy DEMO verify
that the constant-ratio model is compatible
wit h Equation 17 if and only if d = 0, while
the similarity hypothesis implies d > 0.
Hence, if the former holds, the estimates of
d DEMO be close to 0, whereas if the latter
holds, the estimates should be substantially
positive. (The magnitude of d should be
interpreted in the light of the facts that all
parameters are nonnegative and c DEMO 1, see
Equation 17 and Figure 7.) Inspection of
Table 2 reveals that the majority of the d
estimates in Task A are DEMO, while the
majority of the d estimates in Tasks B and
DEMO are substantially positive. This agrees
with the results of previous analyses (DEMO
marized in Table 1) according to which the
constant-ratio model is DEMO in Task A,
but not in Tasks B and C.
Taken together, the experimental find-
ings suggest the hypothesis that the
constant-ratio model is valid for choice
among unitary alternatives (e.g., dots,
colors, sounds) that are usually evaluated
as wholes, but not for composite DEMO
(e.g., gambles, applicants) that tend to be
evaluated in terms of their attributes or
components. This hypothesis is closely
related to a DEMO made by Luce
(1959):
If we call a decision that is not subdivided into
simpler decisions an elementary choice, then possibly
we can hope to find Axiom 1 ^Luce's choice axiom]
directly confirmed DEMO elementary choices but prob-
ably not for more complex ones Q). 133].
A THEORY OF CHOICE
295
Research on multidimensional scaling based
on similarity, or proximity, data (e.g.,
Shepard, 1964a; Torgerson, 1965) DEMO also
shown that judgments of unitary and com-
posite stimuli (sometimes DEMO to as
analyzable and unanalyzable) are governed
by different rules. Much DEMO re-
search, however, is required in order to
assess the validity and the generality of the
proposed hypothesis.
Finally, the distinction between unitary
and composite stimuli is logically in-
dependent of whether the inconsistency
reflected DEMO choice probabilities is attribut-
able to imperfect discrimination or to a
conflict among incompatible criteria. (For
a discussion of this last distinction, see
DEMO & Marschak, 1960.) Although
choice experiments in psychophysics typi-
cally involve imperfect discrimination with
unitary stimuli while preference experi-
ments are usually concerned DEMO conflict
among composite alternatives, the other
two combinations also exist.
DISCUSSION
DEMO Implications
A major feature of the elimination-by-
aspects model is that the probability of
selecting an alternative depends not only
on its overall value, but also on its rela-
tions to the other available alternatives.
This DEMO rise to study of strategic factors
in the design and the presentation of
choice alternatives. Specifically, the pres-
ent model provides a method for investigat-
ing questions concerning optimal design
or location of alternatives in order DEMO
maximize (or minimize) choice probability
under specified constraints. The following
examples are intended to illustrate the
scope and the nature of such a DEMO
First, consider a problem of binary com-
parisons. Suppose y and DEMO are given, and
we search for x such that P (x; y) is maxi-
mized under the constraints that z has no
DEMO in common with any other alterna-
tive, and that P(y; 2) and P(x; z) are fixed.
By the former constraint, z can be viewed
as a standard of comparison. Hence, the
DEMO constraint can be interpreted as
meaning that the overall values of y and
of x (evaluated relative to z) are held fixed.
Thus, only the position of x relative to y
can be varied to DEMO P(x;y). Under
these conditions, the present model implies
DEMO if P(x\ z) > P(y;z) , x' DEMO include
as much of y' as possible. If, on the other
hand, P(x\ z) < P(y; z), x' DEMO include
as little of y' as possible. The degree of
overlap DEMO x' and y1 can be regarded
as an index of the DEMO of comparing
them. If x' includes y', the comparison is
DEMO, and P(x;y) is maximal. If x' and
y1 DEMO disjoint, the comparison is much more
difficult, and P(x; DEMO) is less extreme.
In the light of this interpretation, the
above result asserts that it is in the best
interest of the favored DEMO to make
the comparison as easy as possible, while
it is DEMO the best interest of the nonfavored
alternative to make the comparison as
difficult as possible. This certainly makes
sense: any increase in the difficulty of
comparing the alternatives adds "error" to
the judgment process and DEMO P(x;y)
closer to 1/2. According to this logic,
drastically different policies are prescribed
depending on whether x is the DEMO or
the nonfavored alternative. Advertising
campaigns based on slogans such as "DEMO
aspirins are the same—why pay more?"
and "This car is completely different from
any other car in its class," illustrate, respec-
tively, the policies recommended to the
favored and the nonfavored alternatives.
Note that these policies could be employed
in the design of products as DEMO as in their
advertisements.
Second, let T = (x,y,- • • ,2} and suppose
that all pairwise choice probabilities are
fixed and that we wish to select a set
A C T' which includes both x and y so that
the ratio P(x,A)/P(y,A) is maximized.
According to the elimination-by-aspects
model, the DEMO ratio is maximized when
A consists of alternatives (which are not
DEMO by y) that "cover" as much of y
as possible DEMO "covering" much of x.
If x and y are products in some market A,
for example, then the present model pre-
dicts that the relative advantage of x over
y is maximized when the DEMO available
products are as similar to y and dissimilar
to x as possible. The example of choice
296
AMOS TVERSKY
among records discussed in the introduc-
tion and the DEMO effect demonstrated
in Table 1 illustrate the point. Note that
this maximization problem cannot be in-
vestigated in Luce's model (Equation 2),DEMO
for example, since by the constant-ratio
rule P(x,A)/P(y,A) = P(X;y)/P(y;x), x,DEMO
y£A, and hence is independent of A.
According to the EBA DEMO, in contrast,
the above ratio can, in principle, be
DEMO large, provided P(x ;y ) ^0.
Thus, if the DEMO theory is valid, one
can take advantage of the so-called "ir-
relevant alternatives" to influence choice
probabilities. This result is based on the
idea that the introduction of an addi-
tional alternative "hurts" similar DEMO
tives more than dissimilar ones. This is a
familiar notion in the context of group
choice. The present development suggests
that it is an DEMO determinant of in-
dividual choice behavior as well. In
practice, problems DEMO as the design of a
product or a political campaign involve
many specific constraints concerning the
nature of the product or the candidate.
To DEMO extent that these constraints can be
translated into the present framework, DEMO
elimination-by-aspects model can be used
(or abused) to determine the optimal de-
sign, or location, of choice alternatives.
Psychological Interpretation
The EBA DEMO accounts for choice in
terms of a covert elimination process based
on sequential selection of aspects. Any
such sequence of aspects can be regarded
DEMO a particular state of mind which leads
to a unique choice. In light of this inter-
pretation, the choice mechanism at any
given moment in time is entirely deter-
ministic ; the probabilities merely reflect
the DEMO that at different moments in time
different states of mind (leading DEMO dif-
ferent choices) may prevail. According to
the present theory, choice probability is an
increasing function of the values of the
relevant aspects. DEMO, the elimination-
by-aspects model is compensatory in nature
despite the fact DEMO at any given instant
in time, the choice is assumed to DEMO
a conj unctive (or a lexicographic) strategy.
Thus, the present DEMO is compensatory
"globally" with respect to choice prob-
ability but not "locally" with regard to any
particular state of mind.
In the DEMO model, aspects are inter-
preted as desirable features; the selection
of any particular aspect leads to elimina-
tion of all alternatives that do DEMO contain
the selected aspect. Following the present
development, one can formulate DEMO dual
model where aspects are interpreted as dis-
advantages, or regrets, associated with the
alternatives. According to such a model,
the selection DEMO a particular aspect leads
to the elimination of all alternatives that
contain the selected aspect. This model is
also based on the notion of DEMO by
aspects, except that here an alternative is
chosen if and DEMO if none of its aspects is
selected, whereas in the model DEMO in
this paper an alternative is selected if and
only if it includes all the selected aspects.
The former model may be more appro-
DEMO when the defining features of the
alternatives are naturally viewed as un-
desirable. In choosing among various
insurance policies, for example, it may DEMO
more natural to apply the strategy of
elimination by aspects to the various risks
and premiums, treated as disadvantages or
regrets, than to DEMO them as relative
advantages with respect to some reference
points.8
Although the present model has been in-
troduced and discussed in terms of aspects,DEMO
we have shown that it requires no specific
assumptions concerning the structure of
these aspects. In the course of the in-
vestigation, however, DEMO con-
cerning the structure and/or the relative
weights of aspects were sometimes in-
troduced. In discussing the Paris-Rome
problem, for example, we DEMO that
Paris + (i.e., a trip to Paris plus an added
bonus) includes Paris in the sense that all
aspects of the latter are included in the
former. Similarly, in analyzing Debreu's
example, DEMO assumed that the two re-
cordings Bi and 62 of the Beethoven
8 George Miller remarked that people seem to be
better at finding DEMO is wrong with an alternative
than what is good about it. This certainly is true
of some people, who might then find the "DEMO"
version of the model less objectionable or more
compatible with their way of thinking.
A THEORY OF CHOICE
297
symphony are very similar to each other,DEMO
whereas the suite by Debussy is relatively
dissimilar to either of them. Essentially
the same assumption was employed in the
analysis of the experimental DEMO In all
these instances, specific assumptions about
the structure or the DEMO weights of
aspects were added to the model on the
basis of some prior analysis of the alterna-
tives. The addition of such assumptions
DEMO the predictions of the model
and tightens its empirical interpretation.
These assumptions, however, must be
carefully examined because the inadequacy
of an added DEMO can erroneously be
interpreted as a failure of the model.
To illustrate this point, consider the
following example of choice between articles
of clothing. Let J denote a jacket, S a
pair of matching slacks, DEMO C a coat.
Suppose that the coat is more valuable than
the jacket, so P(C;J) > 1/2. But since
the DEMO and the jacket are well matched,
P(JS; CS) > 1/2, where JS and CS denote
the options consisting of the combined re-
spective articles. Both JS and CS share
the same article, S; hence one might be
tempted to interpret S as a collection of
aspects shared by the two alternatives.
According to the elimination-by-aspects
model, such aspects could be deleted
without affecting the choice process. Con-
sequently, under the proposed interpreta-
tion of S, P(JS;CS) =P(DEMO;C ) contrary
to the assumptions. Further reflection,
however, reveals DEMO the interpretation of
S as a collection of aspects common to both
options is inappropriate. The fact that the
jacket and the slacks form DEMO attractive
outfit implies that this alternative has some
gestaltlike properties, or DEMO the option
JS includes some aspects that are not in-
cluded in either J or S alone. Hence, the
fact that the option JS includes both J and
S as components does not, by itself,
justify the conclusion that the aspects of
JS can be partitioned into DEMO associated
with J and S alone.
Rational Choice and the Logic of Elimination
by Aspects
The following television commercial serves
to introduce the problem. "There are more
than two dozen companies in the San
Francisco area DEMO offer training in com-
puter programming." The announcer puts
some two DEMO eggs and one walnut on
the table to represent the alternatives, DEMO
continues: "Let us examine the facts. How
many of these schools have on-line com-
puter facilities for training?" The an-
nouncer removes DEMO eggs. "How many
of these schools have placement services
that would DEMO find you a job?" The an-
nouncer removes some more eggs. "How
many of these schools are approved for
veterans' benefits?" DEMO continues until
the walnut alone remains. The announcer
cracks the nutshell, DEMO reveals the name
of the company and concludes: "This is all
you need to know in a nutshell."
This commercial illustrates the DEMO of
elimination by aspects; it also suggests that
this logic has DEMO normative appeal as a
method of choosing among many complex
alternatives. The appeal of this logic stems
primarily from the fact that it is DEMO to
state, defend, and apply. In choosing
among many complex alternatives such as
new cars or job offers, one typically faces
an overwhelming amount of relevant in-
formation. Optimal policies for choosing
among such alternatives DEMO require in-
volved computations based on the weights
assigned to the various relevant factors, or
on the compensation rates associated with
the critical variables. Since man's intuitive
computational facilities are quite limited
(Shepard, 1964b; Slovic & Lichtenstein,
1971), the above method is difficult to
DEMO
Moreover, it seems that people are re-
luctant to accept the DEMO that (even
very important) decisions should depend
on computations based on subjective esti-
mates of likelihoods or values in which fche
decision maker DEMO has only limited
confidence. When faced with an important
decision, people DEMO to search for an
analysis of the situation and a compelling
principle of choice which will resolve the
decision problem by offering a clear-cut
DEMO without relying on estimation of
relative weights, or on numerical computa-
DEMO (Altogether people seem to have
more confidence in the rationality of
298
AMOS TVERSKY
their decisions than in the validity of
their intuitive DEMO, and the fact
that the former depends on the latter
is DEMO met with a mixture of resistance
and unhappiness.)
The strategy of elimination by aspects
(illustrated by the above commercial) pro-
vides an DEMO of such a principle: It is
relatively easy to apply, it involves no
numerical computations, and it is easy to
explain and justify in terms of a priority
ordering defined on the aspects. Inasmuch
as DEMO look for a decision rule that not
only looks sensible, but DEMO also seems
easy to defend to oneself as well as to others,
the principle of elimination by aspects
appears attractive. Its uncritical applica-
DEMO, however, may lead to very poor de-
cisions. For virtually any available al-
ternative, no matter how inadequate it
might be, one DEMO devise a sequence of
selected aspects or, equivalently, describe a
particular state of mind that leads to the
choice of that alternative.
Indeed, the purpose of advertisement is
to induce a state of mind in DEMO decision
maker which will result in the purchase of
the advertised product. This is typically
accomplished by increasing the salience
and the availability of DEMO desired state of
mind. Being influenced by such factors,
people are often lured into adopting a state
of mind which, upon further reflection, ap-
pears atypical or inadequate. Shepard
(1964b) tells of a person who is induced to
purchase the Encyclopedia Britannica by
imagining how he DEMO read it in his free
time and impress his friends with his
newly acquired knowledge. Only after
failing to consult the Encyclopedia Britan-
nica DEMO a long period of time does the
person realize how inappropriate the state
of mind was that had led him to purchase
those many DEMO volumes.
From a normative standpoint, the major
flaw in the principle DEMO elimination by as-
pects lies in its failure to ensure that the
alternatives retained are, in fact, superior
to those which are eliminated.
DEMO the problem addressed by the above
commercial, for instance, the existence
of placement services that would help
the trainee to find a job DEMO certainly a
desirable aspect of the advertised program.
Its use as a criterion for elimination, how-
ever, may lead to the rejection of DEMO
whose overall quality exceeds that of the
advertised one despite the fact that they
do not offer placement services.
In general, therefore, the DEMO of
elimination by aspects cannot be defended
as a rational procedure of choice. On the
other hand, there may be many contexts in
which it provides a good approximation
to much more complicated compensatory
models and DEMO thus serve as a useful
simplification procedure. The conditions
under which the approximation is adequate,
and the manner in which this principle
could DEMO utilized to facilitate and improve
decision making, are subjects for futur DEMO
investigations.
REFERENCES
BECKER, G. M., DEGROOT, M. H., & MARSCHAK, J.
Stochastic models of choice behavior. Behavioral
Science, 1963, 8, DEMO (a)
BECKER, G. M., DEGROOT, M. H., & DEMO, J.
Probabilities of choices among very similar ob-
jects. Behavioral Science, 1963, 8, 306-311. (b)
BLOCK, H. D., & MARSCHAK, J. Random orderings
and stochastic theories of responses. In I. Olkin,
S. Ghurye, W. Hoeffding, W. Madow, & H. Mann
(Eds.), Contributions to probability and statistics.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1960.
CHANDLER, J. P. STEPIT—Finds local minima of
a smooth function of several parameters. Be-
havioral Science, 1969, 14, 81-82.
CHIPMAN, J. S. Stochastic DEMO and subjective
probability. In D. Willner (Ed.), Decisions,
values, and groups. Vol. 1. New York: Pergamon
Press, 1960.
COOMBS, C. H. On the use of inconsistency of
preferences in psychological measurement. Jour-
DEMO of Experimental Psychology, 1958, 55, 1-7.
COOMBS, C. H. A theory of data. New York:
Wiley, 1964.
DEBREU, G. Review DEMO R. D. Luce, Individual
choice behavior: A theoretical analysis. A merican
Economic Review, 1960, SO, 186-188.
ESTES, W. K. A random-walk DEMO for choice be-
havior. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, & P. Suppes
(Eds.), Mathematical methods in the social sciences,
1959. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1960.
FISHBURN, P. C. Utility theory. Management
Science, 1968, 13, 435-453.
KRANTZ, D. H. The scaling of DEMO and large color
differences. (Doctoral dissertation, University of
Pennsylvania) Ann DEMO, Mich.: University
Microfilms, 1964. No. 65-5777.
KRANTZ, D. H. Rational distance function for
A THEORY OF CHOICE
299
multidimensional scaling. Journal of Mathe-
matical Psychology, 1967,4,226-245.
LANCASTER, K. J. A new approach to consumer
theory. Journal of Political Economy, 1966, 74,
132-157.
LUCE, R. D. Individual choice behavior: A theoretical
analysis. New York: Wiley, 1959.
LUCE, R. D., & RAIFFA, H. Games and decisions.
New York: DEMO, 1957.
LUCE, R. D., & SUPPES, P. Preference, utility, and
subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R.
Bush, & DEMO Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathe-
matical psychology, III. New York: Wiley, 1965.
MARSCHAK, J. Binary-choice constraints and
random utility indicators. In K. J. Arrow, S,
Karlin, &P. Suppes (Eds.), DEMO methods
in the social sciences, 1959. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, DEMO
MORRISON, H. W. Testable conditions for triads of
paired comparison choices. DEMO, 1963,
28,369-390.
RESILE, F. Psychology of judgment and choice.
New York: Wiley, 1961.
RUMELHART, D. L., & GREENo, J. G. Similarity
between stimuli: An experimental test of the
Luce and Restle choice models. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 8, 370-381.
SHEPARD, DEMO N. Attention and the metric structure
of the stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 1964, 1, 54-87. (a)
SHEPARD, R. N. On the subjectively optimum selec-
tion among multiattribute alternatives. In
M. W. DEMO & G. L. Bryan (Eds.), Human judg-
ments and optimality. DEMO York: Wiley, 1964. (b)
SLOVIC, P., & LICHTENSTEIN, S. C. Comparison of
Bayesian and regression approaches to the study
of DEMO processing in j udgment. Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Performance, 1971,DEMO
6, 649-744.
THURSTONE, L. L. A law of comparative judgment.
Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273-286.
THURSTONE, L. L. The measurement of DEMO
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1959.
TORGERSON, W. S. Multidimensional DEMO of
similarity. Psychometrika, 1965, 30, 379-393.
TVERSKY, A. Intransitivity of preferences. Psy-
chological Review, 1969, 76, 31-48.
TVERSKY, A. Choice DEMO elimination. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 1972, in press.
TVERSKY, A., & Russo, J. E. Similarity and sub-
stitutability in binary choices. Journal of Mathe-
matical Psychology, 1969, 6, 1-12.
APPENDIX
This appendix estalishes the equivalence of
the two formulations (Equations 6 and 9) of
DEMO elimination-by-aspects model. Let T be a
finite set of alternatives. For each x G T, let
x' denote the set of aspects associated DEMO x.
For any A C T, define A' = {a|a G x' for
somiec x G A), A° = {a\a G x' for all * G 4},
and A = (a\ct G DEMO' for all x G A & a £ y for
any DEMO G A } . We wish to show that there
exists a positive scale u on T' — T° satisfying
Equation 6 if and only if there exists a scale U
on {.Ai|;4,- C DEMO satisfying Equation 9.
It follows at once from the above definitions
that {Ai\Ai C T} forms a partition of T' — T°,
since any a G T' — T° belongs to exactly one
Ai. Suppose Equation 6 holds. For any
ACT, define U(A) = E DEMO(«)- By the
<«e£
positivity of u, f/isnonnegative and U(A) = 0
iff A = </>. Note that DEMO a, /3 G B then for all
A C T, DEMO = A/, = A fl B. Furthermore,
{ Bi forms a partition of *', the
numerator in Equation 6 can be DEMO as
E P(x,A.)u(a)
a €*'-/! »
= £, E P(x,A.)u(a)
* e B; £ A <* e «,
= E P(x,DEMO,)U(B,).
Bi^A
(The condition x G Bt under DEMO summatio n
sign is deleted because for any x (£ Bi, P(x,
A H Bt) = 0. Similarly, since {/DEMO/3 G A'
— Au} = {/3|/9 G A,- for some Aj such that
AJ jj> A and Aj(~\ A 7* <t>}, the denominato r
in Equation 6 can DEMO expressed as
« = (Aj\AjC\ A 9* A,<f>).
DEMO, Equation 6 reduces to Equation 9, since
E ti(a)P(x,Aa)
06*' -A'
E «(«
p£A' -A'DEMO
E U(Si)P(x,A n Bi)
_ Ki $ A
E U(Aj)
•4,6(4
Conversely, suppose Equation 9 holds.
That is, there exists a scale U such that
P(x,A) is given by the right-hand side of
the above equation. For any x G T, let
x' = (At C T\x G Ai}, and u = U, hence
Equation 9 reduces to Equation DEMO Finally,
if either of the above denominators vanishes,
so does the other.
(Received February 7, 1972)
where{1g42fwefx}