tversky  12/16/03  12:58 PM  Page 1
Preference, DEMO, and Similarity
Selected Writings
Amos Tversky
edited by Eldar Shafir
Amos DEMO (1937–1996), a towering figure in cognitive and mathematical psychology, devoted his profes-
sional life to the study of similarity, judgment, and DEMO making. He had a unique ability to master the
technicalities of normative ideals and then to intuit and demonstrate experimentally how they are systemat-
DEMO violated by the vagaries and consequences of human information processing. He created new areas of
study and helped transform disciplines as varied as economics, law, medicine, political science, philosophy,
and statistics.
This book collects forty of Tversky’s articles, selected by him in collaboration with the editor during the
last months of Tversky’s life. Included are several articles written DEMO his frequent collaborator, Nobel
Prize–winning economist Daniel Kahneman.
Eldar Shafir is DEMO of Psychology and Public Affairs at Princeton University.
“Amos Tversky was one of the most important social scientists of the last century. This extraordinary DEMO
tion demonstrates his range and brilliance, and in particular his genius DEMO showing how and why human
intuitions go wrong. Is there a ‘hot hand’ in basketball? Is arthritis pain related to the weather? Why DEMO we
exaggerate certain risks? Why are some conflicts so hard to DEMO? Tversky’s answers will surprise you.
Indispensable reading, and full of implications, for everyone interested in social science.”
—Cass R. Sunstein, Law School DEMO Department of Political Science, University of Chicago
“Amos Tversky’s research on DEMO and beliefs has had a shattering and yet highly constructive influ-
ence on the development of economics. The vague complaints of psychologists and dissident DEMO
about the excessive rationality assumptions of standard economics, going back over DEMO century, had little
impact. It required the careful accumulation of evidence, the clear sense that Tversky did not misunder-
stand what economists were DEMO, and above all his formulation of useful alternative hypotheses to
change DEMO into a revolutionary change in perspective.”
—Kenneth J. Arrow, Professor of DEMO Emeritus, Stanford University
“Amos Tversky’s work has produced an ongoing revolution DEMO our understanding of judgment and choice.
The articles in this book show why. They also show how: the articles are written with grace, DEMO, and a bril-
liance that frequently verges on the pyrotechnic.”
—Richard DEMO Nisbett, author of The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently . . .
and Why
“Amos Tversky may have shown DEMO basketball players do not have ‘hot hands,’ but he proved the opposite
for psychologists. Tversky always made his basket, and in the process changed psychology, and also eco-
nomics, forever.”
—George Akerlof, Koshland Professor of Economics, University of California, Berkeley, 2001 Nobel Laureate
in Economic Sciences
“It is deeply ironic that ‘similarity’ and ‘bounded rationality’ were two DEMO the many topics that Amos Tversky
studied—ironic because he seemed to be unboundedly rational and similar to no one. No one shared his
combination DEMO brilliance, precision, intuition, breadth, and enormous good humor. Few scholars change
their own disciplines before they reach 40, as Tversky did, DEMO even fewer then transform other disciplines,
as he and Daniel Kahneman did for economics. Their influence on economics, recognized by the 2002 Nobel
Prize, is still growing, and the discipline will never be the DEMO Nor will anyone who reads these papers: it
is impossible to DEMO Tversky without changing the way you think.”
—Richard H. Thaler, Robert DEMO Gwinn Professor of Economics and Behavioral Science, University of Chicago
“This DEMO offers the best of Tversky, the best of the best. It DEMO amazing how many of these articles are
already classics, not only DEMO the fields of choice and decision making, but in psychology in DEMO
—Edward E. Smith, Arthur W. Melton Professor of Psychology, University of Michigan
A Bradford Book
The MIT Press
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142
http://mitpress.mit.edu
0-262-70093-X
,!7IA2G2-haajdb!:t;K;k;K;k
Preference, Belief, and Similarity
Selected Writings
Amos Tversky
edited by Eldar DEMO
Tversky
Preference, Belief, and Similarity
Shafir, editor
Preference, Belief, and Similarity

Preference, Belief, and Similarity
Selected Writings
by Amos Tversky
edited by DEMO Shaﬁr
A Bradford Book
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
6 2004 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of DEMO book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or mechanical
means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without DEMO in
writing from the publisher.
This book was set in Times New Roman on 3B2 by Asco Typesetters, Hong Kong and was printed and
bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
DEMO, Amos.
Preference, belief, and similarity : selected writings / by DEMO Tversky ; edited by Eldar Shaﬁr.
p. cm.
‘‘A Bradford book.’’
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-262-20144-5 (alk. paper) — ISBN 0-262-70093-X (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Cognitive psychology. 2. Decision making. 3. DEMO 4. Tversky, Amos. I. Shaﬁr, Eldar.
II. Title.
BF201 .T78 2003
153—dc21 2002032164
10 987 6543 21
Contents
Introduction and Biography ix
Sources xv
SIMILARITY 1
Editor’s Introductory Remarks DEMO
1 Features of Similarity 7
Amos Tversky
2 Additive Similarity Trees 47
Shmuel Sattath and Amos Tversky
3 Studies of Similarity 75
Amos Tversky DEMO Itamar Gati
4 Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Perceptual and 97
Conceptual Judgments
Itamar Gati and Amos Tversky
5 Nearest Neighbor Analysis of DEMO Spaces 129
Amos Tversky and J. Wesley Hutchinson
6 On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models 171
Shmuel Sattath and Amos Tversky
DEMO 187
Editor’s Introductory Remarks 189
7 Belief in the Law of Small Numbers 193
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman
8 Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 203
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman
9 Extensional vs. Intuitive DEMO: The Conjunction Fallacy in 221
Probability Judgment
Amos Tversky and Daniel DEMO
10 The Cold Facts about the ‘‘Hot Hand’’ in Basketball 257
Amos Tversky and Thomas Gilovich
Editor’s Introductory Remarks to Chapter 11 267
vi
Contents
11 The ‘‘Hot Hand’’: Statistical Reality or Cognitive Illusion? DEMO
Amos Tversky and Thomas Gilovich
12 The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 275
Dale Gri‰n and Amos Tversky
13 On the DEMO of Probability Judgments: Calibration, Resolution, 301
and Monotonicity
Varda Liberman DEMO Amos Tversky
14 Support Theory: A Nonextensional Representation of Subjective 329
DEMO
Amos Tversky and Derek J. Koehler
15 On the Belief That Arthritis Pain Is Related to the Weather
Donald A. Redelmeier and Amos Tversky
DEMO Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring: Advances in Support Theory
Yuval Rottenstreich DEMO Amos Tversky
PREFERENCE 403
Editor’s Introductory Remarks 405
Probabilistic Models of Choice 411
17 On the Optimal Number of Alternatives at a Choice Point DEMO
Amos Tversky
18 Substitutability and Similarity in Binary Choices 419
Amos Tversky and J. Edward Russo
19 The Intransitivity of Preferences 433
Amos Tversky
DEMO Elimination by Aspects: A Theory of Choice 463
Amos Tversky
21 DEMO Trees 493
Amos Tversky and Shmuel Sattath
Choice under Risk and Uncertainty 547
22 Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk 549
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky
377
383
Contents
vii
23 On the Elicitation of Preferences for Alternative Therapies 583
DEMO J. McNeil, Stephen G. Pauker, Harold C. Sox, Jr., and
Amos Tversky
24 Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 593
Amos DEMO and Daniel Kahneman
25 Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 621
George A. Quattrone and Amos Tversky
26 Preference and Belief: Ambiguity and Competence in Choice under 645
Uncertainty
Chip Heath and Amos Tversky
DEMO Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of 673
Uncertainty
Amos Tversky DEMO Daniel Kahneman
28 Thinking through Uncertainty: Nonconsequential Reasoning and 703
Choice
DEMO Shaﬁr and Amos Tversky
29 Conﬂict Resolution: A Cognitive Perspective 729
DEMO Kahneman and Amos Tversky
30 Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 747
Amos Tversky and Craig R. Fox
31 Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 777
Craig DEMO Fox and Amos Tversky
32 A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 795
Craig R. Fox and Amos Tversky
Contingent Preferences 823
33 Self-Deception DEMO the Voter’s Illusion 825
George A. Quattrone and Amos Tversky
34 Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 845
Amos Tversky, Shmuel Sattath, and DEMO Slovic
35 Anomalies: Preference Reversals 875
Amos Tversky and Richard H. DEMO
viii
Contents
36 Discrepancy between Medical Decisions for Individual Patients and for DEMO
Groups
Donald A. Redelmeier and Amos Tversky
37 Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model 895
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman
38 Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 917
Amos Tversky and Dale Gri‰n
DEMO Reason-Based Choice 937
Eldar Shaﬁr, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky
40 Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 963
Mark Kelman, Yuval Rottenstreich, and DEMO Tversky
Amos Tversky’s Complete Bibliography 995
Index 1001
Introduction and Biography
Amos Tversky was a towering ﬁgure in the ﬁeld DEMO cognitive psychology and in the
decision sciences. His research had enormous inﬂuence; he created new areas of study
and helped transform related disciplines. His work was innovative, exciting, aes-
thetic, and ingenious. This book brings together forty of Tversky’s original articles,
which he and the editor DEMO together during the last months of Tversky’s life.
Because it includes only a fragment of Tversky’s published work, this book cannot
provide a full sense of his remarkable achievements. Instead, this collection of
favorites is intended to capture the essence of Tversky’s phenomenal mind for those
who did DEMO have the fortune to know him, and will provide a cherished DEMO to
those whose lives he enriched.
Tversky was born on March 16, 1937, in Haifa, Israel. His father was a veterinar-
ian, DEMO his mother was a social worker and later a member of the ﬁrst Israeli
Parliament. He received his Bachelor of Arts degree, majoring in philosophy and
psychology, from Hebrew University in Jerusalem in 1961, and DEMO Doctor of Phi-
losophy degree in psychology from the University of Michigan in 1965. Tversky
taught at Hebrew University (1966–1978) and at Stanford DEMO (1978–1996),
where he was the inaugural Davis-Brack Professor of Behavioral Sciences and Prin-
cipal Investigator at the Stanford Center on Conﬂict and DEMO After 1992 he
also held an appointment as Senior Visiting Professor of Economics and Psychology
and Permanent Fellow of the Sackler Institute of Advanced DEMO at Tel Aviv
University.
Tversky wrote his dissertation, which won the DEMO of Michigan’s Marquis
Award, under the supervision of Clyde Coombs. His DEMO work in mathematical
psychology focused on the study of individual choice behavior and the analysis of
psychological measurement. Almost from the beginning, Tversky’s work explored
the surprising implications of simple and intuitively compelling psychological
assumptions for DEMO that, until then, seemed self-evident. In one oft-cited early
work (DEMO 19), Tversky showed how a series of pair-wise choices could yield
intransitive patterns of preference. To do this, he created a set of options such that
the di¤erence on an important dimension was negligible between DEMO alter-
natives, but proved to be consequential once it accumulated across DEMO number of such
comparisons, yielding a reversal of preference between the DEMO and the last. This was
of theoretical signiﬁcance since the transitivity of preferences is one of the funda-
mental axioms of utility theory. At DEMO same time, it provided a revealing glimpse
into the psychological processes DEMO in choices of that kind.
In his now-famous model of similarity (DEMO 1), Tversky made a number of
simple psychological assumptions: items DEMO mentally represented as collections of
features, with the similarity between them DEMO increasing function of the features that
x Introduction and Biography
they have in common, and a decreasing function of their distinct features. In addi-
tion, feature weights are assumed to depend on the nature of the task so that, for
example, DEMO features matter more in judgments of similarity, whereas distinc-
tive features DEMO more attention in judgments of dissimilarity. Among other
things, this simple DEMO was able to explain asymmetries in similarity judgments
(A may be DEMO similar to B than B is to A), and the fact that item A may be per-
ceived as quite similar to item DEMO and item B quite similar to item C, but items A DEMO
C may nevertheless be perceived as highly dissimilar (chapter 3). DEMO many ways, these
early papers foreshadowed the immensely elegant work to DEMO They were pre-
dicated on the technical mastery of relevant normative theories, and explored simple
and compelling psychological principles until their unexpected theoretical implica-
tions became apparent, and often striking.
Tversky’s long and extraordinarily inﬂuential collaboration with Daniel Kahne-
man began in 1969 and spanned the ﬁelds of DEMO and decision making. (For a
sense of the impact, consider the fact that the two papers most representative of their
collaboration, chapters 8 and 22 in this book, register 3035 and 2810 citations,
respectively, in the Social Science Citation Index in the two decades spanning 1981–
2001.) Having recognized that intuitive predictions and judgments of probability do
not follow the principles of statistics or the laws of probability, Kahneman and
Tversky embarked on the study of biases as a method for investigating DEMO
heuristics. The beauty of the work was most apparent in the interplay of psycholog-
ical intuition with normative theory, accompanied by memorable demonstrations.
The research showed that people’s judgments often violate basic normative prin-
ciples. At DEMO same time, it showed that they exhibit sensitivity to these principles’
DEMO appeal. The coexistence of fallible intuitions and an underlying apprecia-
tion for normative judgment yields a subtle picture of probabilistic reasoning. An
important theme DEMO Tversky’s work is a rejection of the claim that people are not
smart enough or sophisticated enough to grasp the relevant normative considera-
tions. DEMO, Tversky attributes the recurrent and systematic errors that he ﬁnds to
DEMO reliance on intuitive judgment and heuristic processes in situations where the
applicability of normative criteria is not immediately apparent. This approach runs
through much DEMO Tversky’s work. The experimental demonstrations are noteworthy
not simply because they contradict a popular and highly inﬂuential normative
theory; rather, they are memorable DEMO because people who exhibit these errors
typically ﬁnd the demonstrations highly compelling, yet surprisingly inconsistent
with their own assumptions about how they make decisions.
Psychological common sense formed the basis for some of Tversky’s most
profound DEMO original insights. A fundamental assumption underlying normative
theories is the extensionality principle: options that are extensionally equivalent are
Introduction and Biography xi
assigned the same value, and extensionally equivalent events are assigned the same
probability. These theories, in other words, are DEMO options and events in the
world: alternative descriptions of the same DEMO are still about the same thing, and
hence similarly evaluated. Tversky’s DEMO, on the other hand, focus on the mental
representations of the relevant constructs. The extensionality principle is deemed
descriptively invalid because alternative descriptions DEMO the same options or events
often produce systematically di¤erent judgments and preferences. The way a decision
problem is described—for example, in terms of gains or losses—can trigger conﬂict-
ing risk attitudes and thus lead to discrepant DEMO with respect to the same
ﬁnal outcomes (chapter 24); similarly, alternative descriptions of the same event
bring to mind di¤erent instances and DEMO can yield discrepant likelihood judgments
(chapter 14). Preferences as well DEMO judgments appear to be constructed, not merely
revealed, in the elicitation process, and their construction depends on the framing of
the problem, DEMO method of elicitation, and the valuations and attitudes that these
trigger.
DEMO, Tversky’s research made clear, is the outcome of normative ideals that
people endorse upon reﬂection, combined with psychological tendencies and pro-
cesses that intrude upon and shape behavior, independently of any deliberative
intent. Tversky had a unique ability to master the technicalities of the normative
requirements and DEMO intuit, and then experimentally demonstrate, the vagaries and
consequences of the psychological processes that impinged on them. He was an
intellectual giant whose DEMO has an exceptionally broad appeal; his research is
known to economists, philosophers, statisticians, political scientists, sociologists, and
legal theorists, among others. He published more than 120 papers and co-wrote or
co-edited 10 books. (A complete bibliography is printed at the back of this book.)
DEMO main research interests spanned a large variety of topics, some of DEMO
are better represented in this book than others, and can be DEMO divided into three
general areas: similarity, judgment, and preference. The DEMO in this collected
volume are divided into corresponding sections and appear in chronological order
within each section.
Many of Tversky’s papers are both seminal DEMO deﬁnitive. Reading a Tversky
paper o¤ers the pleasure of watching a craftsman at work: he provides a clear map of
a domain that had previously seemed confusing, and then o¤ers a new set of tools
and ideas for thinking about the problem. Tversky’s writings have had remarkable
longevity: the research he did early in his career has remained at the DEMO of atten-
tion for several decades, and the work he was DEMO toward the end of his life will
a¤ect theory and research for a long time to come. Special issues of The Quarterly
Journal of DEMO (1997), the Journal of Risk and Uncertainty (1998), and Cog-
nitive Psychology (1999) have been dedicated to Tversky’s memory, and various
xii Introduction and Biography
obituaries and articles about Tversky have appeared in DEMO ranging from The Wall
Street Journal (1996) and The New York Times (1996), to the Journal of Medical
Decision Making (1996), American Psychologist (1998), Thinking & Reasoning (1997),
and DEMO MIT Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science (1999), to name a few.
DEMO won many awards for his diverse accomplishments. As a young o‰cer in
a paratroops regiment, he earned Israel’s highest honor for bravery in 1956 for
rescuing a soldier. He won the Distinguished Scientiﬁc Contribution Award of DEMO
American Psychological Association in 1982, a MacArthur Prize in 1984, and the
Warren Medal of the Society of Experimental Psychologists in 1995. He DEMO elected
to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1980, DEMO the Econometric Society
in 1993, and to the National Academy of DEMO as a foreign member in 1985. He
received honorary doctorates from the University of Goteborg, the State University
of New York at Bu¤alo, DEMO University of Chicago, and Yale University.
Tversky managed to combine discipline DEMO joy in the conduct of his life in a
manner that conveyed a great sense of freedom and autonomy. His habit of working
through DEMO night helped protect him from interruptions and gave him the time to
engage at leisure in his research activities, as well as in other interests, including a
lifelong love of Hebrew literature, a fascination with DEMO physics, and an expert
interest in professional basketball. He was tactful DEMO ﬁrm in rejecting commitments
that would distract him: ‘‘For those who DEMO that sort of thing,’’ Amos would say
with his characteristic smile as he declined various engagements, ‘‘that’s the sort of
thing they like.’’ To his friends and collaborators, Amos was a delight. He found
great joy in sharing ideas and experiences with people close to him, and his joy was
contagious. Many friends became research collaborators, and many collaborators
became close friends. He would spend countless hours developing an idea, delighting
in it, reﬁning it. ‘‘Let’s get this right,’’ he would say—and his ability to do so was
unequaled.
Amos Tversky continued his research DEMO teaching until his illness made that
impossible, just a few weeks DEMO his death. He died of metastatic melanoma on
June 2, 1996, at his home in Stanford, California. He was in the midst of an enor-
mously productive time, with over ﬁfteen papers and several edited volumes in press.
Tversky is survived by his wife, Barbara, who DEMO a fellow student at the University
of Michigan and then a fellow professor of psychology at Stanford University, and
by his three children, DEMO, Tal, and Dona. This book is dedicated to them.
Eldar Shaﬁr
Introduction and Biography xiii
Postscript
In October 2002 The Royal Swedish Academy DEMO Sciences awarded the Nobel Me-
morial Prize in Economic Sciences to Daniel Kahneman, ‘‘for having integrated
insights from psychological research into economic science, DEMO concerning
human judgment and decision-making under uncertainty.’’ The work Kahneman had
done together with Amos Tversky, the Nobel citation explained, formulated alter-
native DEMO that better account for observed behavior. The Royal Swedish Acad-
emy of Sciences does not award prizes posthumously, but took the unusual step of
acknowledging Tversky in the citation. ‘‘Certainly, we would have gotten this to-
gether,’’ Kahneman said on the day of the announcement. Less than DEMO months
later, Amos Tversky posthumously won the prestigious 2003 Grawemeyer Award
DEMO with Kahneman. The committee of the Grawemeyer Award, which recog-
nizes DEMO ideas in the arts and sciences, noted, ‘‘It is di‰cult to identify a more
inﬂuential idea than that of Kahneman and Tversky in DEMO human sciences.’’ React-
ing to the award, Kahneman said, ‘‘My joy is mixed with the sadness of not being
able to share the DEMO with Amos Tversky, with whom the work was done.’’ It
is DEMO a similar mixture of joy and sadness that we turn to Amos’s beautiful work.

Sources
1. Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327–352. Copyright 6
American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
2. Sattath, S., and Tversky, A. (1977). Additive similarity trees. Psychometrika, 42, 319–345.
1977 by the
3. Tversky, A., and Gati, DEMO (1978). Studies of similarity. In E. Rosch and B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and
Categorization, (79–98), Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
DEMO Gati, I., and Tversky, A. (1984). Weighting common and distinctive features in perceptual and concep-
tual judgments, Cognitive Psychology, 16, 341–370.
5. Tversky, A., and Hutchinson, J. W. (1986). DEMO neighbor analysis of psychological spaces. Psycho-
logical Review, 93, 3–22. Copyright 6 1986 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted with
permission.
6. Sattath, S., and Tversky, A. (1987). On the relation between common and distinctive feature models.
Psychological Review, 94, 16–22. Copyright 6 1987 DEMO the American Psychological Association. Reprinted
with permission.
7. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1971). Belief in the law of small numbers. DEMO Bulletin, 76,
105–110.
8. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
185, 1124–1131. Reprinted with permission from Science. Copyright 1974 American Association for the
DEMO of Science.
probability judgment. Psychological Review, 91, 293–315. Copyright 6
cal Association. Reprinted with permission.
10. Tversky, A., and Gilovich, T. (DEMO). The cold facts about the ‘‘hot hand’’ in basketball. Chance, DEMO(1),
16–21. Reprinted with permission from CHANCE. Copyright 1989 by DEMO American Statistical Associa-
tion. All rights reserved.
11. Tversky, A., and Gilovich, T. (1989). The hot hand: Statistical reality or cognitive illusion? Chance,
2(4), 31–34. Reprinted with permission from CHANCE. Copyright 1989 by the American Statistical
Association. All rights reserved.
12. Gri‰n, D., and Tversky, A. (1992). The weighing of evidence and the determinants of conﬁdence.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 411–435.
13. Liberman, V., and Tversky, A. (1993). On the evaluation of probability judgments: Calibration, reso-
lution and monotonicity. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 162–173.
14. DEMO, A., and Koehler, D. J. (1994). Support theory: DEMO nonextensional representation of subjective
probability. Psychological Review, 101, 547–567. Copyright 6 1994 by the American Psychological Asso-
ciation. Reprinted with permission.
15. Redelmeier, D. A., and Tversky, A. (1996). On the belief that arthritis pain is related to the weather.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 93, 2895–2896. Copyright 1996 National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.
1983 by the DEMO Psychologi-
theory. Psychological Review, 104(2), 406–415. Copyright 6
ation. DEMO with permission.
1997 by the American Psychological Associ-
17. Tversky, A. (1964). On the optimal number of alternatives at a choice point. DEMO of Mathematical
Psychology, 2, 386–391.
18. Tversky, A., and Russo, E. J. (1969). Substitutability and similarity in binary choices. Journal DEMO
19. Tversky, A. (1969). The intransitivity of preferences.Mathematical Psychology, DEMO, 1–12. Psychological Review, 76, 31–48. Copyright 6
1969 by the DEMO Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
6 Psychological Review, 79, 281–299.
21. Tversky, A., and Sattath, S. (1979). Preference trees. Psychological DEMO, 86, 542–573. Copyright 6
1979 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
9. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1983). DEMO vs. intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in
16. Rottenstreich, Y., DEMO Tversky, A. (1997). Unpacking, repacking, and anchoring: Advances DEMO support
20. Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A DEMO of choice.
Copyright 1972 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
xvi
Sources
23. McNeil, B., Pauker, S., Sox, H. Jr., and Tversky, A. (1982). On the elicitation of preferences for
24. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice DEMO the framing of decisions. The Journal of
Business, 59, Part 2, S251–S278.
25. Quattrone, G. A., and Tversky, A. (1988). Contrasting rational and psychological analyses of political
choice. American Political Science Review, 82(3), 719–736.
26. Heath, F., and Tversky, A. (DEMO). Preference and belief: Ambiguity and competence in choice under
uncertainty. DEMO of Risk and Uncertainty, 4(1), 5–28. Reprinted with kind DEMO from Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
27. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–323. Reprinted with kind permission from Kluwer
DEMO Publishers.
28. Shaﬁr, E., and Tversky, A. (1992). Thinking through uncertainty: Nonconsequential reasoning and
choice. Cognitive Psychology, 24(4), DEMO
29. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1995). Conﬂict resolution: A cognitive perspective. In K. Arrow, R.
Mnookin, L. Ross, DEMO Tversky, and R. Wilson (Eds.), Barriers to the Negotiated Resolution of Conﬂict,
(49–67). New York: Norton.
30. Tversky, A., and Fox, C. R. (1995). Weighing risk and uncertainty.
269–283. Copyright 1995 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
31. Fox, C. R., and Tversky, A. (1995). Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance.
nal of Economics, 110, 585–603. 1995 by the President and DEMO of Harvard College and the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology.
32. Fox, C. R., and Tversky, A. (1998). A belief-based account DEMO decision under uncertainty. Manage-
ment Science, 44(7), 879–895.
33. DEMO, G. A., and Tversky, A. (1986). Self-deception and the voter’s illusion. In Jon Elster (Ed.),
The Multiple Self, (DEMO), New York: Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with permission of Cam-
DEMO University Press.
34. Tversky, A., Sattath, S., and Slovic, DEMO (1988). Contingent weighting in judgment and choice.
logical Review, 95(3), 371–384. Copyright 1988 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted
with DEMO
35. Tversky, A., and Thaler, R. (1990). Anomalies: DEMO reversals. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
4(2), 201–211.
patients and for groups.36. Redelmeier, D. A., and Tversky, A. (1990). DEMO between medical decisions for individualNew England Journal of Medicine, 322, 1162–1164. Copyright 6
chusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
1990 Massa-
Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics, 107(4), 1039–1061. 6
College and the Massachusetts Institute DEMO Technology.
1991 by the President and Fellows of Harvard
38. Tversky, DEMO, and Gri‰n, D. (1991). Endowment and contrast in judgments DEMO well-being. In F. Strack,
M. Argyle, and N. Schwartz (Eds.), Subjective Well-being: An Interdisciplinary Perspective (101–118).
Elmsford, NY: DEMO Press.
39. Shaﬁr, E., Simonson, I., and Tversky, A. (1993). Reason-based choice. Cognition, 49, 11–36.
Reprinted from Cognition with DEMO from Elsevier Science. Copyright 1993.
40. Kelman, M., Rottenstreich, Y., and Tversky, A. (1996). Context-dependence in legal decision making.
The DEMO of Legal Studies, 25, 287–318. Reprinted with permission of the University of Chicago.
22. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979). DEMO theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econo-
metrica, 47, DEMO Copyright The Econometric Society.
alternative therapies. New England Journal of Medicine, DEMO, 1259–1262. Copyright 6
Medical Society. All rights reserved.
1982 Massachusetts
6
DEMO Review, 102(2),
6
Quarterly Jour-
6
Psycho-
37. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1991). Loss aversion in riskless DEMO: A reference-dependent model.
SIMILARITY

Editor’s Introductory Remarks
Early in his career as a mathematical psychologist Tversky DEMO a deep interest
in the formalization and conceptualization of similarity. The notion of similarity is
ubiquitous in psychological theorizing, where it plays a fundamental role in theories
of learning, memory, knowledge, perception, and judgment, among others. When
Tversky began his work in this area, geometric models dominated the theoretical
analysis of similarity relations; in these models each object is represented by a point
is some multidimensional coordinate space, and the metric distances between points
reﬂect the similarities between the respective objects.
Tversky DEMO it more intuitive to represent stimuli in terms of their many quali-
tative features rather than a few quantitative dimensions. In this contrast model DEMO
similarity (chapter 1), Tversky challenges the assumptions that underlie the DEMO
approach to similarity and develops an alternative approach based on feature
matching. He began with simple psychological assumptions couched in an aesthetic
formal treatment, and was able to predict surprising facts about the perception of
similarity DEMO to provide a compelling reinterpretation of previously known facts.
According to the contrast model, items are represented as collections of features.
The perceived similarity between items is an increasing function of the features that
they have DEMO common, and a decreasing function of the features on which they DEMO
In addition, each set of common and distinctive features is weighted DEMO,
depending on the context, the order of comparison, and the particular task at hand.
For example, common features are weighted relatively more in judgments of simi-
larity, whereas distinctive features receive more attention in judgments of dissimilar-
ity. Among other things, the theory is able to explain asymmetries in similarity
judgments (A can be more similar to B than B is to A), the non-complementary
nature of similarity and DEMO judgments (A and B may be both more similar
to one DEMO and more di¤erent from one another than are C and D), and triangle
inequality (item A may be perceived as quite similar to item B and item B quite
similar to item C, but items A and C may nevertheless be perceived as highly
dissimilar) (Tversky & Gati 1982). These patterns of similarity judgments, which
Tversky and DEMO colleagues compellingly documented, are inconsistent with geo-
metric representations (where, DEMO example, the distance from A to B needs to be the
DEMO as that between B and A, etc.). The logic and DEMO of the contrast
model are further summarized and given a less technical presentation by Tversky and
Itamar Gati in chapter 3.
In a further DEMO of how best to represent similarity relations (chapter 2),
Shmuel Sattath and Tversky consider the representation of similarity data in the
form DEMO additive trees, and compare it to alternative representational schemes, par-
ticularly spatial representations that are limited in some of the ways suggested above.
4
Shaﬁr
In the additive tree model, objects are represented by the external nodes of a tree,
and the dissimilarity between objects is DEMO length of the path joining them. As it
turns out, the DEMO of common features can be better captured by trees than by
spatial representations. In fact, an additive tree can be interpreted as a feature tree,
with each object viewed as a set of features, and each arc representing the set of fea-
tures shared by all objects DEMO follow from that arc. (An additive tree is a special
case DEMO the contrast model in which symmetry and the triangle inequality hold, DEMO
the feature space allows a tree structure.)
Further exploring the adequacy of the geometric models, chapter 5 applies a
‘‘nearest neighbor’’ analysis to similarity data. The technical analysis essentially
shows that geometric models are severely DEMO in the number of objects that
they can allow to share the same nearest (for example, most similar) neighbor. Using
one hundred di¤erent data sets, Tversky and Hutchinson show that while perceptual
data often satisfy the bounds imposed by geometric representations, the conceptual
data sets typically do not. In particular, in many semantic ﬁelds a focal element (such
DEMO the superordinate category) is the nearest neighbor of most of the DEMO
instances. Tversky shows that such a popular nearest neighbor, while inconsistent
DEMO a geometric representation, can be captured by an additive tree in DEMO the
category name (for example, fruit ) is the nearest neighbor of all its instances.
Tversky and his coauthors conclude that some similarity DEMO are better described
by a tree, whereas other data may be DEMO captured by a spatial conﬁguration.
Emotions or sound, for example, may be characterized by a few dimensions that
di¤er in intensity, and may thus be natural candidates for a dimensional representa-
tion. Other items, however, have a hierarchical classiﬁcation involving various qual-
itative attributes, and may DEMO be better captured by tree representations.
A formal procedure based on the contrast model is developed in chapter 4 in order
to assess the DEMO weight of common to distinctive features. By adding the same
component (DEMO example, cloud) to two stimuli (for example, landscapes) or DEMO one of
the stimuli only, Gati and Tversky are able to DEMO the impact of that component as
a common or as a distinctive feature. Among other things, they ﬁnd that in verbal
stimuli common features loom larger than distinctive features (as if the di¤erences
between stimuli are acknowledged and one focuses on the search for common fea-
tures), DEMO in pictorial stimuli distinctive features loom larger than common
features (consistent DEMO the notion that commonalities are treated as background
and the search is for distinctive features.)
The theoretical relationship between common- and distinctive-feature models
DEMO explored in chapter 6, where Sattath and Tversky show that common-feature
DEMO and distinctive-feature models can produce di¤erent orderings of dissimilarity
Similarity: Editor’s Introductory Remarks 5
between objects. They further show that the choice of a model and the speciﬁcation
of a feature structure are DEMO always determined by the dissimilarity data and, in
particular, that the relative weights of common and distinctive features observed in
chapter 4 can DEMO on the feature structure induced by the addition of dimensions.
Chapter 6 concludes with general commentary regarding the observation that the
form of measurement DEMO often is not dictated by the data. This touches on
the massive project on the foundations of measurement that Tversky co-authored
(Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky, 1971; Suppes, Krantz, Luce, and Tversky,DEMO
1989; Luce, Krantz, Suppes, and Tversky, 1990), but DEMO is not otherwise repre-
sented in this collection.

1 Features of Similarity
Amos Tversky
Similarity plays a fundamental role in DEMO of knowledge and behavior. It serves
as an organizing principle by which individuals classify objects, form concepts, and
make generalizations. Indeed, the concept of similarity is ubiquitous in psychological
theory. It underlies the accounts of DEMO and response generalization in learning,
it is employed to explain errors in memory and pattern recognition, and it is central
to the analysis of connotative meaning.
Similarity or dissimilarity data appear in di¤erent forms: ratings of pairs, sorting
of objects, communality between associations, errors of substitution, and correlation
between occurrences. Analyses of these data attempt to explain the observed simi-
larity relations and to capture the underlying structure of the DEMO under study.
The theoretical analysis of similarity relations has been dominated by geometric
models. These models represent objects as points in some coordinate space DEMO
that the observed dissimilarities between objects correspond to the metric distances
between the respective points. Practically all analyses of proximity data have been
metric DEMO nature, although some (e.g., hierarchical clustering) yield tree-like struc-
tures rather than dimensionally organized spaces. However, most theoretical and
empirical analyses of similarity assume that objects can be adequately represented as
points in some DEMO space and that dissimilarity behaves like a metric distance
function. Both dimensional and metric assumptions are open to question.
It has been argued by DEMO authors that dimensional representations are appro-
priate for certain stimuli (e.g., colors, tones) but not for others. It seems more ap-
propriate DEMO represent faces, countries, or personalities in terms of many qualitative
features than in terms of a few quantitative dimensions. The assessment of similarity
DEMO such stimuli, therefore, may be better described as a comparison of features
rather than as the computation of metric distance between points.
A DEMO distance function, d, is a scale that assigns to every pair of points a non-
negative number, called their distance, in accord DEMO the following three axioms:
Minimality: dða; bÞ bdða; aÞ¼ DEMO:
Symmetry: dða; bÞ¼ dðb; aÞ:
The triangle inequality: dða; bÞþ dðb; cÞ bdða; cÞ:
To evaluate the adequacy of the geometric approach, let us examine the validity of
the metric axioms when d is regarded as a measure of dissimilarity. The minimality
DEMO implies that the similarity between an object and itself is the same for all
8
Tversky
objects. This assumption, however, does not hold for some DEMO measures. For
example, the probability of judging two identical stimuli as DEMO rather that ‘‘dif-
ferent’’ is not constant for all stimuli. Moreover, DEMO recognition experiments the o¤-
diagonal entries often exceed the diagonal entries; DEMO is, an object is identiﬁed as
another object more frequently than DEMO is identiﬁed as itself. If identiﬁcation proba-
bility is interpreted as a measure of similarity, then these observations violate mini-
mality and are, DEMO, incompatible with the distance model.
Similarity has been viewed by both DEMO and psychologists as a prime
example of a symmetric relation. Indeed, DEMO assumption of symmetry underlies
essentially all theoretical treatments of similarity. Contrary to this tradition, the
present paper provides empirical evidence for asymmetric similarities and argues that
similarity should not be treated as a symmetric relation.
Similarity DEMO can be regarded as extensions of similarity statements, that is,
DEMO of the form ‘‘a is like b.’’ Such a statement is directional; it has a subject,
a, and a referent, b, DEMO it is not equivalent in general to the converse similarity
statement ‘‘b is like a.’’ In fact, the choice of subject and referent depends, at least in
part, on the relative salience of the objects. DEMO tend to select the more salient stimu-
lus, or the prototype, as a referent, and the less salient stimulus, or the variant, as a
subject. We say ‘‘the portrait resembles the person’’ rather than DEMO person resem-
bles the portrait.’’ We say ‘‘the son resembles the father’’ rather than ‘‘the father
resembles the son.’’ We say ‘‘an ellipse is DEMO a circle,’’ not ‘‘a circle is like an
ellipse,’’ and we say ‘‘North Korea is like Red China’’ rather than ‘‘Red China DEMO like
North Korea.’’
As will be demonstrated later, this asymmetry in DEMO choice of similarity statements
is associated with asymmetry in judgments of similarity. Thus, the judged similarity
of North Korea to Red China exceeds the judged similarity of Red China to North
Korea. Likewise, an ellipse is more similar to a circle than a circle is to an ellipse.
DEMO, the direction of asymmetry is determined by the relative salience of DEMO
stimuli; the variant is more similar to the prototype than vice DEMO
The directionality and asymmetry of similarity relations are particularly noticeable
in similies and metaphors. We say ‘‘Turks ﬁght like tigers’’ and not ‘‘tigers ﬁght DEMO
Turks.’’ Since the tiger is renowned for its ﬁghting spirit, it DEMO used as the referent
rather than the subject of the simile. The poet writes ‘‘my love is as deep as the
ocean,’’ not DEMO ocean is as deep as my love,’’ because the ocean epitomizes depth.
Sometimes both directions are used but they carry di¤erent meanings. ‘‘A DEMO is like
a tree’’ implies that man has roots; ‘‘a tree DEMO like a man’’ implies that the tree has a
life history. ‘‘Life is like a play’’ says that people play roles. ‘‘A play is DEMO life’’ says
that a play can capture the essential elements of human life. The relations between
Features of Similarity 9
the interpretation of metaphors and the assessment of DEMO are brieﬂy discussed
in the ﬁnal section.
The triangle inequality di¤ers from minimality and symmetry in that it cannot be
formulated in ordinal terms. DEMO asserts that one distance must be smaller than the sum
of two others, and hence it cannot be readily refuted with ordinal or even interval
data. However, the triangle inequality implies that if a is quite similar to b, and b is
quite similar to c, then DEMO and c cannot be very dissimilar from each other. Thus, it
DEMO a lower limit to the similarity between a and c in terms of the similarities between
a and b and between b and c. DEMO following example (based on William James) casts
some doubts on the psychological validity of this assumption. Consider the similarity
between countries: Jamaica is similar to Cuba (because of geographical proximity);
Cuba is similar DEMO Russia (because of their political a‰nity); but Jamaica and Russia
DEMO not similar at all.
This example shows that similarity, as one DEMO expect, is not transitive. In addi-
tion, it suggests that the perceived distance of Jamaica to Russia exceeds the perceived
distance of Jamaica DEMO Cuba, plus that of Cuba to Russia—contrary to the triangle
inequality. DEMO such examples do not necessarily refute the triangle inequality,
they indicate that it should not be accepted as a cornerstone of similarity models.
DEMO should be noted that the metric axioms, by themselves, are very weak. They are
satisﬁed, for example, by letting dða; bÞ¼ 0ifa
¼
b, and dða; bÞ¼ 1ifa0 b. To
specify the distance DEMO, additional assumptions are made (e.g., intradimen-
sional subtractivity and interdimensional DEMO) relating the dimensional struc-
ture of the objects to their metric DEMO For an axiomatic analysis and a critical
discussion of these assumptions, DEMO Beals, Krantz, and Tversky (1968), Krantz and
Tversky (1975), and Tversky and Krantz (1970).
In conclusion, it appears DEMO despite many fruitful applications (see e.g., Carroll
& Wish, 1974; Shepard, 1974), the geometric approach to the analysis of similarity
faces several di‰culties. The applicability of the dimensional assumption is lim-
ited, and the metric axioms are questionable. Speciﬁcally, minimality is somewhat
problematic, symmetry DEMO apparently false, and the triangle inequality is hardly
compelling.
The next DEMO develops an alternative theoretical approach to similarity, based
on feature matching, which is neither dimensional nor metric in nature. In subse-
quent sections DEMO approach is used to uncover, analyze, and explain several empiri-
cal phenomena, such as the role of common and distinctive features, the DEMO
between judgrnents of similarity and di¤erence, the presence of asymmetric simi-
DEMO, and the e¤ects of context on similarity. Extensions and implications of DEMO
present development are discussed in the ﬁnal section.
10
Tversky
Feature Matching
Let D ¼fa; b; c; ...g be the domain of objects (or stimuli) under study. Assume that
each DEMO in D is represented by a set of features or attributes, DEMO let A; B; C
denote the sets of features associated with the objects a; b; c, respectively. The fea-
tures may correspond to components such as eyes or mouth; they may represent
concrete properties such as size or color; and they may reﬂect abstract attributes such
as quality or complexity. The characterization of stimuli as feature sets has DEMO
employed in the analysis of many cognitive processes such as speech perception
(Jakobson, Fant, & Halle, 1961), pattern recognition (Neisser, DEMO), perceptual
learning (Gibson, 1969), preferential choice (Tversky, 1972), and semantic judgment
(Smith, Shoben, & Rips, 1974).
DEMO preliminary comments regarding feature representations are in order. First, it
is DEMO to note that our total data base concerning a particular object (DEMO, a
person, a country, or a piece of furniture) is generally rich in content and complex in
form. It includes appearance, function, relation to other objects, and any other
property of the object DEMO can be deduced from our general knowledge of the world.
When faced with a particular task (e.g., identiﬁcation or similarity assessment) we
extract and compile from our data base a limited list of relevant features DEMO the basis
of which we perform the required task. Thus, the DEMO of an object as a
collection of features is viewed as a product of a prior process of extraction and
compilation.
Second, the term feature usually denotes the value of a binary variable (e.g., voiced
DEMO voiceless consonants) or the value of a nominal variable (e.g., DEMO color). Feature
representations, however, are not restricted to binary or nominal variables; they are
also applicable to ordinal or cardinal variables (DEMO, dimensions). A series of tones
that di¤er only in loudness, for example, could be represented as a sequence of nested
sets where the feature set associated with each tone is included in the feature DEMO
associated with louder tones. Such a representation is isomorphic to a directional
unidimensional structure. A nondirectional unidimensional structure (e.g., a series of
tones DEMO di¤er only in pitch) could be represented by a chain of DEMO sets.
The set-theoretical representation of qualitative and quantitative dimensions has
been investigated by Restle (1959).
Let sða; bÞ be a measure of DEMO similarity of a to b deﬁned for all distinct a; bin DEMO
The scale s is treated as an ordinal measure of similarity. That is, sða; bÞ > sðc; dÞ
means that a is more similar to b than c is to d. The present theory is DEMO on the
following assumptions.
Features of Similarity 11
1. matching:
sða; bÞ¼ FðA
V
B; A

B; B

AÞ:
The similarity of a DEMO b is expressed as a function F of three arguments: A
DEMO
B, the
features that are common to both a and b; A  B, the features that belong to a but
not to b; B  A, the features that belong to b but DEMO to a. A schematic illustration of
these components is presented in ﬁgure 1.1.
2. monotonicity:
sða; bÞ bsða; cÞ
whenever
A
V
DEMO
BIA
V
C;
A

BHA

C;
B

AHC

A:
Moreover, the inequality is strict whenever either inclusion is proper.
That is, similarity increases with addition of common features and/or deletion of
distinctive features (i.e., features that belong to one DEMO but not to the other). The
monotonicity axiom can be readily illustrated with block letters if we identify their
features with the component (straight) lines. Under this assumption, E should be
more similar to DEMO than to I because E and F have more common features than E and
I. Furthermore, I should be more similar to F than to E because I and F have fewer
distinctive features than I DEMO E.
Figure 1.1
A graphical illustration of the relation between two feature sets.
12
Tversky
Any function F satisfying assumptions 1 and 2 is called DEMO matching function.It
measures the degree to which two objects—viewed as sets of features—match each
other. In the present theory, the assessment of similarity is described as a feature-
matching process. It is formulated, therefore, in DEMO of the set-theoretical notion of
a matching function rather than in terms of the geometric concept of distance.
In order to determine the functional DEMO of the matching function, additional
assumptions about the similarity ordering are DEMO The major assumption of
the theory (independence) is presented next; DEMO remaining assumptions and the
proof of the representation theorem are presented in the appendix. Readers who are
less interested in formal theory can skim DEMO skip the following paragraphs up to the
discussion of the representation theorem.
Let F denote the set of all features associated with the objects DEMO D, and let
X; Y; Z; ... etc. denote collections of features (i.e., subsets of F). The expression
FðX; Y; ZÞ is deﬁned whenever there exists a; bin D such that DEMO V B ¼ X, A B ¼
Y, and B A ¼ Z, whence sða; bÞ¼ FðA V B; AB; B DEMO FðX; Y; ZÞ. Next,
deﬁne V F W if one or more of the following hold for some X; Y; Z: FðV; Y; ZÞ¼
FðW; Y; ZÞ,FðX; V; ZÞ¼ DEMO; W; ZÞ,FðX; Y; VÞ¼ FðX; Y; WÞ.
The pairs ða; bÞ and ðc; dÞ are said to agree on DEMO, two, or three components,
respectively, whenever one, two, DEMO three of the following hold: ðA V BÞ FðC V DÞ,DEMO
ðABÞ FðC DÞ, ðB AÞ FðDCÞ.
3. independence Suppose the pairs DEMO; bÞ and ðc; dÞ, as well as the pairs ða0; b0Þ and
ðc0; d0Þ, agree on the same two components, while the pairs0 ða; bÞ and ða0; b0Þ, as well
as the pairs ðc; dÞ and ðc0; d Þ, agree on the remaining (third) component. Then
sða; bÞ bsða0; b0Þ i¤ sðc; dÞ bsðc0; d0Þ.
To illustrate the force of the independence axiom consider the stimuli presented in
ﬁgure 1.2, where
A V B ¼ C V D ¼ round proﬁle ¼ X,
¼ 0 V 0 ¼ DEMO 0
A0 V B0 C D sharp proﬁle X ,
B DEMO C D ¼ smiling mouth ¼ Y,
0 


A
0 0 0
¼  ¼ ¼
¼
¼
A B0 DEMO D frowning mouth Y ,
0 0
¼  ¼
¼
DEMO A B A straight eyebrow Z,
0 0 0
¼ 
D C D C curved eyebrow Z .
Features of Similarity 13
Figure 1.2
An illustration of independence.
By independence, therefore,
sða; bÞ¼ FðA V B; AB; B AÞ
¼ FðX; Y; ZÞ bFðX0; Y0; ZÞ
¼ FðA0 V B0; A0 B0; B0 A
¼ sða0; b0Þ
if and only if
DEMO
Þ
sðc; dÞ¼ FðC
¼ FðX
¼ FðC
¼ sðc0;
DEMO
D; C

D; D

; Y; Z
0
DEMO
bFðX

0
; Y
0
V
D
0
; C
0
d
0
Þ.
D
0
; D
CÞ
0
; Z
0
DEMO
0
Þ
C
0
Þ
Thus, the ordering of the joint DEMO of any two components (e.g., X; Y vs. X0; Y0)
is independent of the ﬁxed level of the third factor (e.g., Z or Z0 ).
It should be emphasized that any test DEMO the axioms presupposes an interpretation
of the features. The independence axiom, DEMO example, may hold in one interpreta-
tion and fail in another. DEMO tests of the axioms, therefore, test jointly the
adequacy of the interpretation of the features and the empirical validity of the
14
Tversky
assumptions. Furthermore, the above examples should not be taken to mean that
stimuli (e.g., block letters, schematic faces) can be DEMO characterized in terms of
their components. To achieve an adequate feature representation of visual forms,
more global properties (e.g., symmetry, connectedness) DEMO also be introduced.
For an interesting discussion of this problem, in DEMO best tradition of Gestalt psy-
chology, see Goldmeier (1972; originally DEMO in 1936).
In addition to matching (1), monotonicity (2), and independence (3), we also
assume solvability (4), DEMO invariance (5). Solvability requires that the feature space
under study DEMO su‰ciently rich that certain (similarity) equations can be solved.
Invariance ensures that the equivalence of intervals is preserved across factors. A
rigorous formulation DEMO these assumptions is given in the Appendix, along with a
proof DEMO the following result.
Representation Theorem Suppose assumptions 1, 2, 3, DEMO, and 5 hold. Then there
exist a similarity scale S and DEMO nonnegative scale f such that for all a; b; c; DEMO D,
(i) Sða; bÞ bSðc; dÞ
(ii) Sða; bÞ¼ yfðA
V
i¤ sða; bÞ bsðc; dÞ;
BÞ afðABÞ bfðB
(iii) f and S are interval scales.

AÞ, for some y; a; b b 0;
The theorem shows that DEMO assumptions 1–5, there exists an interval similarity
scale S that preserves DEMO observed similarity order and expresses similarity as a
linear combination, or DEMO contrast, of the measures of the common and the distinctive
features. DEMO, the representation is called the contrast model. In parts of the
DEMO development we also assume that f satisﬁes feature additivity. That is,
f ðX U YÞ¼ fðXÞþ fðYÞ whenever X and Y are disjoint, and all three terms are
deﬁned.1
Note that the contrast model does DEMO deﬁne a single similarity scale, but rather a
family of scales DEMO by di¤erent values of the parameters y, a, and b . For
example, if y ¼ 1 and a and b vanish, DEMO Sða; bÞ¼ f ðA V BÞ; that is, the similarity
DEMO objects is the measure of their common features. If, on the DEMO hand,
a ¼ b ¼ 1 and y vanishes then Sða; bÞ¼ fðABÞþ fðB AÞ; that is, the dis-
similarity between objects is the measure of the symmetric di¤erence between the
respective feature sets. DEMO (1961) has proposed these forms as models of similarity
and psychological distance, respectively. Note that in the former model (y ¼ 1,DEMO
a ¼ b ¼ 0), similarity between objects is determined only by their common features,
whereas in the latter model (y ¼ 0, a ¼ b ¼ 1), it is determined by their distinctive
features only. The contrast model expresses similarity between objects as a DEMO
Features of Similarity 15
di¤erence of the measures of their common and DEMO features, thereby allowing
for a variety of similarity relations over the DEMO domain.
The major constructs of the present theory are the contrast rule for the assessment
of similarity, and the scale f, which reﬂects DEMO salience or prominence of the various
features. Thus, f measures the DEMO of any particular (common or distinctive)
feature to the similarity DEMO objects. The scale value fðAÞ associated with stim-
ulus a is regarded, therefore, as a measure of the overall salience of that stimulus.
DEMO factors that contribute to the salience of a stimulus include intensity, DEMO,
familiarity, good form, and informational content. The manner in which the scale f
and the parameters ðy; a; bÞ depend on DEMO context and the task are discussed in the
following sections.
Let us recapitulate what is assumed and what is proven in the representation
theorem. DEMO begin with a set of objects, described as collections of features, and a
similarity ordering which is assumed to satisfy the axioms of DEMO present theory.
From these assumptions, we derive a measure f on DEMO feature space and prove that
the similarity ordering of object pairs coincides with the ordering of their contrasts,
deﬁned as linear combinations of DEMO respective common and distinctive features.
Thus, the measure f and the DEMO model are derived from qualitative axioms
regarding the similarity of objects.
The nature of this result may be illuminated by an analogy to the DEMO theory
of decision under risk (von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1947). In that theory, one
starts with a set of prospects, characterized DEMO probability distributions over some
consequence space, and a preference order that DEMO assumed to satisfy the axioms of
the theory. From these assumptions one derives a utility scale on the consequence
space and proves that the DEMO order between prospects coincides with the
order of their expected utilities. Thus, the utility scale and the expectation princi-
ple are derived from qualitative assumptions about preferences. The present theory
of similarity di¤ers from the expected-utility DEMO in that the characterization of
objects as feature sets is perhaps more problematic than the characterization of
uncertain options as probability distributions. Furthermore, the axioms of utility
theory are proposed as (normative) principles of rational DEMO, whereas the
axioms of the present theory are intended to be DEMO rather than prescriptive.
The contrast model is perhaps the simplest form of a matching function, yet it is
not the only form worthy of investigation. Another matching function of interest is
the ratio model,
Sða; bÞ¼ fðA
V
f ðA
BÞþ afðA
V

BÞ
BÞþ bfðB
DEMO
AÞ
; a; b b0;
16
Tversky
where similarity is normalized so that S lies between 0 DEMO 1. The ratio model gen-
eralizes several set-theoretical models of similarity proposed in the literature. If
a ¼ b ¼ 1, Sða; bÞ DEMO
1972). If a ¼ b ¼
1959). If a ¼ 1 and b
1951). The present framework, therefore, encompasses a DEMO variety of similarity
models that di¤er in the form of the matching function F and in the weights assigned
to its arguments.
In order DEMO apply and test the present theory in any particular domain, some
DEMO about the respective feature structure must be made. If the features
associated with each object are explicitly speciﬁed, we can test the axioms of the
theory directly and scale the features according to the contrast model. DEMO approach,
however, is generally limited to stimuli (e.g., schematic DEMO, letters, strings of sym-
bols) that are constructed from a DEMO feature set. If the features associated with the
objects under study cannot be readily speciﬁed, as is often the case with natural
stimuli, DEMO can still test several predictions of the contrast model which involve only
general qualitative assumptions about the feature structure of the objects. Both
approaches DEMO employed in a series of experiments conducted by Itamar Gati
and the present author. The following three sections review and discuss our main
ﬁndings, focusing primarily on the test of qualitative predictions. A more detailed
description DEMO the stimuli and the data are presented in Tversky and Gati (DEMO press).
1reduces to fðA V BÞ=fðA
2 ,Sða; bÞ equals 2fðA V
¼
BÞ
BÞ=ðf
0, Sða; bÞ reduces to fðA
(see Gregson, 1975, and Sjo¨ berg,
ðAÞþ fðBÞÞ (see Eisler & Ekman,
V
BÞ=f ðAÞ (see Bush & Mosteller,
Asymmetry and Focus
According to the present analysis, similarity is not necessarily a symmetric relation.
Indeed, it follows readily (from either the contrast or DEMO ratio model) that
sða; bÞ¼ sðb; aÞ
i¤
i¤
afðABÞþ DEMO AÞ¼ afðB
ða bÞfðABÞ¼ða bÞfðB

AÞþ bfðA

AÞ:

BÞ
Hence, sða; bÞ¼ sðb; aÞ if either a ¼ b,orfðABÞ¼ fðB AÞ, which implies
f ðAÞ¼ f ðBÞ , provided feature additivity holds. Thus, symmetry holds whenever the
objects are equal in measure ðfðAÞ¼ fðBÞÞ or the task is nondirectional ða ¼ bÞ.To
interpret the DEMO condition, compare the following two forms:
(i) Assess the DEMO to which a and b are similar to each other.
(ii) Assess the degree to which a is similar to b.
Features of Similarity 17
In (i), the task is formulated in a nondirectional fashion; hence it is expected that
a ¼ b and sða; bÞ¼ sðb; aÞ. In (ii), on the other hand, the task is directional, and
hence a and b may di¤er DEMO symmetry need not hold.
If sða; bÞ is interpreted as the DEMO to which a is similar to b, then a is the DEMO
of the comparison and b is the referent. In such a task, one naturally focuses on
the subject of the comparison. Hence, the DEMO of the subject are weighted more
heavily than the features of the referent (i.e., a > bÞ. Consequently, similarity is
reduced more by the distinctive features of the subject than by the distinctive features
of DEMO referent. It follows readily that whenever a > b,
sða; DEMO > sðb; aÞ i¤ fðBÞ > f ðAÞ:
Thus, the focusing hypothesis (i.e., a > b ) implies that the direction DEMO asymmetry is
determined by the relative salience of the stimuli so that the less salient stimulus is
more similar to the salient stimulus than DEMO versa. In particular, the variant is more
similar to the prototype DEMO the prototype is to the variant, because the prototype
is generally DEMO salient than the variant.
Similarity of Countries
Twenty-one pairs of countries served as stimuli. The pairs were constructed so that
one element was more DEMO than the other (e.g., Red China–North Vietnam,
USA–Mexico, Belgium–Luxemburg)DEMO To verify this relation, we asked a group of 69
subjects2 DEMO select in each pair the country they regarded as more prominent. The
proportion of subjects that agreed with the a priori ordering exceeded 2 DEMO all pairs
3
except one. A second group of 69 subjects was asked to choose which of two phrases
they preferred to use: ‘‘country a is similar to country b,’’ or ‘‘country b is similar DEMO
country a.’’ In all 21 cases, most of the subjects chose DEMO phrase in which the less
prominent country served as the subject and the more prominent country as the ref-
erent. For example, 66 subjects selected the phrase ‘‘North Korea is similar to Red
China’’ and only DEMO selected the phrase ‘‘Red China is similar to North Korea.’’ These
results demonstrate the presence of marked asymmetries in the choice of similarity
statements, whose direction coincides with the relative prominence of the stimuli.
To test DEMO asymmetry in direct judgments of similarity, we presented two groups
of DEMO subjects each with the same list of 21 pairs of countries and asked subjects to
rate their similarity on a 20-point scale. The only DEMO between the two groups
was the order of the countries within each pair. For example, one group was asked to
assess ‘‘the degree to which the USSR is similar to Poland,’’ whereas the second
group DEMO asked to assess ‘‘the degree to which Poland is similar to the USSR.’’ The
18
Tversky
lists were constructed so that the more prominent country appeared DEMO an equal
number of times in the ﬁrst and second positions.
For any pair ðp; qÞ of stimuli, let p denote the more DEMO element, and let q
denote the less prominent element. The average DEMO; pÞ was signiﬁcantly higher than
the average sðp; qÞ across all subjects and pairs: t test for correlated samples yielded
tð20Þ¼ 2:92, p <:01. To obtain a statistical test based on individual data, we com-
puted for each subject a directional asymmetry score deﬁned as the average similarity
for comparisons with a prominent referent; that is, DEMO; pÞ, minus the average simi-
larity for comparisons with a prominent subject, sðp; qÞ. The average di¤erence was
signiﬁcantly positive: tð153Þ¼ 2:99, p <:01.
The above study was repeated using judgments of di¤erence instead of judgments
of similarity. Two groups of 23 subjects each DEMO in this study. They received
the same list of 21 pairs except that one group was asked to judge the degree to
which country DEMO di¤ered from country b, denoted dða; bÞ, whereas the second DEMO
was asked to judge the degree to which country b was di¤erent from country a,
denoted dðb; aÞ. If judgments of di¤erence follow the contrast model, and a > b , then
we expect the prominent stimulus p to di¤er from the less prominent stimulus q more
DEMO q di¤ers from p; that is, dðp; qÞ > dðq; pÞ. This hypothesis was tested using the
same set of 21 pairs DEMO countries and the prominence ordering established earlier. The
average dðp; qÞ , across all subjects and pairs, was signiﬁcantly higher than the aver-
DEMO dðq; pÞ: t test for correlated samples yielded tð20Þ¼ 2:72, p <:01. Furthermore,
the average asymmetry score, computed as DEMO for each subject, was signiﬁcantly
positive, tð45Þ¼ 2:24, p <:05.
Similarity of Figures
A major determinant of the salience of geometric ﬁgures is goodness of form. Thus, a
‘‘good ﬁgure’’ is likely to be more salient than a ‘‘bad ﬁgure,’’ although the latter is
DEMO more complex. However, when two ﬁgures are roughly equivalent with
respect DEMO goodness of form, the more complex ﬁgure is likely to be DEMO salient. To
investigate these hypotheses and to test the asymmetry prediction, DEMO sets of eight
pairs of geometric ﬁgures were constructed. In the ﬁrst set, one ﬁgure in each pair
(denoted p) had better form than the other (denoted q). In the second set, the DEMO
ﬁgures in each pair were roughly matched in goodness of form, DEMO one ﬁgure
(denoted p) was richer or more complex than the other (denoted q). Examples of
pairs of ﬁgures from each set are presented in ﬁgure 1.3.
A group of 69 subjects was presented DEMO the entire list of 16 pairs of ﬁgures,
where the two elements of each pair were displayed side by side. For each pair, the
subjects were asked to indicate which of the following two statements DEMO preferred
Features of Similarity 19
Figure 1.3
Examples of pairs of ﬁgures used DEMO test the prediction of asymmetry. The top two ﬁgures are examples of
a pair (from the ﬁrst set) that di¤ers in goodness of DEMO The bottom two are examples of a pair (from the
second DEMO) that di¤ers in complexity.
to use: ‘‘The left ﬁgure is similar to the right ﬁgure,’’ or ‘‘The right ﬁgure is similar to
DEMO left ﬁgure.’’ The positions of the stimuli were randomized so that p and q
appeared an equal number of times on the left and DEMO the right. The results showed
that in each one of the pairs, most of the subjects selected the form ‘‘q is similar to
p.’’ Thus, the more salient stimulus was generally chosen as the referent rather than
the subject of similarity statements.
To test for asymmetry in judgments DEMO similarity, we presented two groups of 67
subjects each with the DEMO 16 pairs of ﬁgures and asked the subjects to rate (on DEMO
20-point scale) the degree to which the ﬁgure on the left DEMO similar to the ﬁgure on
the right. The two groups received identical booklets, except that the left and right
positions of the ﬁgures in each pair were reversed. The results showed that the aver-
age sðq; pÞ across all subjects and pairs was signiﬁcantly higher than the average
DEMO sets the average asymmetry scores, computed as above for each subject, wereðp; qÞ.A t test for correlated samples yielded tð15Þ¼ 2:94, DEMO <:01. Furthermore, in
signiﬁcantly positive: In the ﬁrst set tð131Þ¼ 2:96, p <:01, and in the second set
tð131Þ¼ DEMO:79, p <:01.
Similarity of Letters
A common measure of DEMO between stimuli is the probability of confusing them
in a recognition or an identiﬁcation task: The more similar the stimuli, the more
likely DEMO are to be confused. While confusion probabilities are often asymmetric
(i.e., the probability of confusing a with b is di¤erent from the probability DEMO con-
20
Tversky
fusing b with a), this e¤ect is typically attributed DEMO a response bias. To eliminate this
interpretation of asymmetry, one could DEMO an experimental task where the
subject merely indicates whether the two stimuli presented to him (sequentially or
simultaneously) are identical or not. This DEMO was employed by Yoav Cohen
and the present author in a study of confusion among block letters.
The following eight block letters served as DEMO: , , , , , , , . All
pairs of DEMO were displayed on a cathode-ray tube, side by side, on a noisy back-
ground. The letters were presented sequentially, each for approximately 1 msec. The
right letter always followed the left letter with an interval DEMO 630 msec in between.
After each presentation the subject pressed one of two keys to indicate whether the
two letters were identical or not.
DEMO total of 32 subjects participated in the experiment. Each subject was tested
individually. On each trial, one letter (known in advance) served as the standard. For
one half of the subjects the standard stimulus always DEMO on the left, and for the
other half of the subjects DEMO standard always appeared on the right. Each one of the
eight letters served as a standard. The trials were blocked into groups of 10 DEMO in
which the standard was paired once with each of the other letters and three times
with itself. Since each letter served as a DEMO in one block, the entire design con-
sisted of eight blocks DEMO 10 trials each. Every subject was presented with three repli-
cations of the entire design (i.e., 240 trials). The order of the DEMO in each design
and the order of the letters within each block were randomized.
According to the present analysis, people compare the variable stimulus, which
serves the role of the subject, to the standard (i.e., the referent). The choice of stan-
dard, therefore, determines the directionality of the comparison. A natural partial
ordering of the letters with DEMO to prominence is induced by the relation of inclu-
sion among letters. Thus, one letter is assumed to have a larger measure than another
if the former includes the latter. For example, includes and but not . For
all 19 pairs in which one letter includes the other, let p denote the more prominent
letter and q denote the less DEMO letter. Furthermore, let sða; bÞ denote the per-
centage of times that the subject judged the variable stimulus a to be the same DEMO the
standard b.
It follows from the contrast model, with a > b , that the proportion of ‘‘same’’
responses should be larger when the variable is included in the standard than when
the standard is DEMO in the variable, that is, sðq; pÞ > sðp; qÞ. This prediction was
borne out by the data. The average sðq; pÞ across all subjects and trials was 17.1%,
whereas the average sðp; qÞ across all subjects and trials was 12.4%. To obtain a sta-
DEMO test, we computed for each subject the di¤erence between sðq; pÞ and sðp; qÞ
across all trials. The di¤erence was signiﬁcantly positive, DEMO 4:41, p <:001.
Features of Similarity 21
These results demonstrate that the prediction of directional DEMO derived from
the contrast model applies to confusion data and not merely to rated similarity.
Similarity of Signals
Rothkopf (1957) presented 598 subjects DEMO all ordered pairs of the 36 Morse Code
signals and asked them to indicate whether the two signals in each pair were the
same DEMO not. The pairs were presented in a randomized order without a ﬁxed stan-
dard. Each subject judged about one fourth of all pairs.
Let DEMO; bÞ denote the percentage of ‘‘same’’ responses to the ordered pair DEMO; bÞ,
i.e., the percentage of subjects that judged the ﬁrst signal a to be the same as the
second signal b. Note DEMO a and b refer here to the ﬁrst and second signal, DEMO not to
the variable and the standard as in the previous section. Obviously, Morse Code
signals are partially ordered according to temporal length. For any pair of signals
that di¤er in temporal length, let p and q denote, respectively, the longer and shorter
element of the pair.
DEMO the total of 555 comparisons between signals of di¤erent length, reported DEMO
Rothkopf (1957), sðq; pÞ exceeds sðp; qÞ in 336 DEMO, sðp; qÞ exceeds sðq; pÞ in 181
cases, and sðq; pÞ equals sðp; qÞ in 38 cases, p <:001, DEMO sign test. The average dif-
ference between sðq; pÞ and sðp; qÞ across all pairs is 3.3%, which is also highly sig-
niﬁcant. A t test for correlated samples yields tð554Þ¼ 9:17, p <:001.
The asymmetry e¤ect is enhanced when we consider only those comparisons DEMO
which one signal is a proper subsequence of the other. (For DEMO,  is a sub-
sequence of  - as well as DEMO  -  ). From a total of 195 comparisons of DEMO type, sðq; pÞ
exceeds sðp; qÞ in 128 cases, sðp; qÞ exceeds sðq; pÞ in 55 cases, and sðq; pÞ DEMO
sðp; qÞ in 12 cases, p <:001 by sign test. The average di¤erence between sðq; pÞ and
sðp; qÞ in this DEMO is 4.7%, tð194Þ¼ 7:58, p <:001.
A later study following the same experimental paradigm with somewhat di¤erent
signals was conducted by DEMO (1967). His signals consisted of three tones separated
by two DEMO intervals, where each component (i.e., a tone or a silence) was either
short or long. Subjects were presented with all pairs of DEMO signals generated in this
fashion and judged whether the two members of each pair were the same or not.
The above analysis is readily DEMO to Wish’s (1967) data. From a total of 386
comparisons between signals of di¤erent length, sðq; pÞ exceeds sðp; qÞ in 241 cases,
sðp; qÞ exceeds sðq; pÞ in 117 cases, and sðq; pÞ equals sðp; qÞ in 28 cases. These data
are DEMO asymmetric, p <:001 by sign test. The average di¤erence between DEMO; pÞ
and sðp; qÞ is 5.9%, which is also highly DEMO, tð385Þ¼ 9:23, p <:001.
In the studies of Rothkopf and Wish there is no a priori way to determine the
directionality DEMO the comparison, or equivalently to identify the subject and the ref-
22
Tversky
erent. However, if we accept the focusing hypothesis ða > bÞ and the assumption that
longer signals are more prominent than shorter DEMO, then the direction of the
observed asymmetry indicates that the ﬁrst DEMO serves as the subject that is com-
pared with the second signal that serves the role of the referent. Hence, the direc-
tionality of the comparison is determined, according to the present analysis, from the
DEMO ordering of the stimuli and the observed direction of asymmetry.
Rosch’s Data
Rosch (1973, 1975) has articulated and supported the view that perceptual and
semantic categories are naturally formed and deﬁned in terms of focal DEMO, or
prototypes. Because of the special role of prototypes in the DEMO of categories,
she hypothesized that (i) in sentence frames involving hedges such as ‘‘a is essentially
b,’’ focal stimuli (i.e., DEMO) appear in the second position; and (ii) the per-
ceived distance from the prototype to the variant is greater than the perceived DEMO
tance from the variant to the prototype. To test these hypotheses, DEMO (1975) used
three stimulus domains: color, line orientation, and DEMO Prototypical colors were
focal (e.g., pure red), while the variants were either non-focal (e.g., o¤-red) or less
saturated. Vertical, horizontal, and diagonal lines served as prototypes for line ori-
entation, and lines of other angles served as variants. Multiples of 10 (e.g., 10, 50,
100) were taken as prototypical numbers, and other numbers (e.g., 11, 52, 103) were
treated as variants.
Hypothesis (i) was strongly conﬁrmed in all three domains. When presented with
sentence frames such as ‘‘ is virtually ,’’ subjects generally placed the pro-
totype in the second blank and the variant in the ﬁrst. For instance, subjects pre-
ferred the sentence ‘‘103 is virtually 100’’ to the sentence DEMO is virtually 103.’’ To
test hypothesis (ii), one stimulus (the standard) was placed at the origin of a semicir-
cular board, DEMO the subject was instructed to place the second (variable) stimulus on
the board so as ‘‘to represent his feeling of the distance between DEMO stimulus and the
one ﬁxed at the origin.’’ As hypothesized, the DEMO distance between stimuli was
signiﬁcantly smaller when the prototype, rather than DEMO variant, was ﬁxed at the
origin, in each of the three domains.
If focal stimuli are more salient than non-focal stimuli, then Rosch’s ﬁndings sup-
port the present analysis. The hedging sentences (e.g., ‘‘a DEMO roughly b’’) can be
regarded as a particular type of similarity DEMO Indeed, the hedges data are
in perfect agreement with the choice DEMO similarity statements. Furthermore, the
observed asymmetry in distance placement follows from DEMO present analysis of
asymmetry and the natural assumptions that the standard and the variable serve,
respectively, as referent and subject in the distance-placement task. Thus, the place-
Features of Similarity 23
ment of b at distance t from a DEMO interpreted as saying that the (perceived) distance
from b to a equals t.
Rosch (1975) attributed the observed asymmetry to the special DEMO of distinct
prototypes (e.g., a perfect square or a pure red) in the processing of information.
In the present theory, on the DEMO hand, asymmetry is explained by the relative
salience of the stimuli. DEMO, it implies asymmetry for pairs that do not
include the prototype (e.g., two levels of distortion of the same form). If the concept
of prototypicality, however, is interpreted in a relative sense (i.e., a is more proto-
typical than b) rather than in an DEMO sense, then the two interpretations of
asymmetry practically coincide.
Discussion
The DEMO of the contrast model and the focusing hypothesis implies the pres-
ence of asymmetric similarities. This prediction was conﬁrmed in several experiments
of perceptual DEMO conceptual similarity using both judgmental methods (e.g., rating)
and behavioral methods (e.g., choice).
The asymmetries discussed in the previous section DEMO observed in comparative
tasks in which the subject compares two given stimuli to determine their similarity.
Asymmetries were also observed in production tasks in DEMO the subject is given a
single stimulus and asked to produce the most similar response. Studies of pattern
recognition, stimulus identiﬁcation, and word DEMO are all examples of pro-
duction tasks. A common pattern observed in such studies is that the more salient
object occurs more often as DEMO response to the less salient object than vice versa. For
example, DEMO is a more likely associate to ‘‘leopard’’ than ‘‘leopard’’ is to ‘‘tiger.’’
Similarly, Garner (1974) instructed subjects to select from a given set of dot pat-
terns one that is similar—but not identical—to a given DEMO His results show
that ‘‘good’’ patterns are usually chosen as responses to ‘‘bad’’ patterns and not
conversely.
This asymmetry in production tasks has commonly DEMO attributed to the di¤er-
ential availability of responses. Thus, ‘‘tiger’’ is DEMO more likely associate to ‘‘leopard’’
than vice versa, because ‘‘tiger’’ is DEMO common and hence a more available
response than ‘‘leopard.’’ This account is probably more applicable to situations
where the subject must actually produce the DEMO (as in word association or pat-
tern recognition) than to situations where the subject merely selects a response from
some speciﬁed set (as in Garner’s task).
Without questioning the importance of response availability, the present theory
suggests another reason for the asymmetry observed in production tasks. DEMO
the following translation of a production task to a question-and-answer scheme.
24
Tversky
Question: What is a like? Answer: a is like b. If this interpretation is valid and the
given object a serves DEMO a subject rather than as a referent, then the observed asym-
DEMO of production follows from the present theoretical analysis, since sða; bÞ >
sðb; aÞ whenever fðBÞ > fðAÞ.
In summary, it appears that proximity data from both comparative and produc-
tion tasks reveal signiﬁcant DEMO systematic asymmetries whose direction is deter-
mined by the relative salience of the stimuli. Nevertheless, the symmetry assumption
should not be rejected altogether. It seems to hold in many contexts, and it serves as
a useful approximation in many others. It cannot be accepted, however, as a DEMO
sal principle of psychological similarity.
Common and Distinctive Features
In the present theory, the similarity of objects is expressed as a linear combination, DEMO
a contrast, of the measures of their common and distinctive features. DEMO section
investigates the relative impact of these components and their e¤ect on the relation
between the assessments of similarity and di¤erence. The discussion concerns DEMO
symmetric tasks, where a ¼ b , and hence sða; bÞ¼ sðb; aÞ.
Elicitation of Features
The ﬁrst study employs the contrast model to predict the similarity between objects
from features that were produced by DEMO subjects. The following 12 vehicles served as
stimuli: bus, car, DEMO, motorcycle, train, airplane, bicycle, boat, elevator, cart, raft,
sled. One group of 48 subjects rated the similarity between all DEMO pairs of vehicles
on a scale from 1 (no similarity) to 20 (maximal similarity). Following Rosch and
Mervis (1975), we DEMO a second group of 40 subjects to list the characteristic
features of each one of the vehicles. Subjects were given 70 sec to list DEMO features
that characterized each vehicle. Di¤erent orders of presentation were used for dif-
ferent subjects.
The number of features per vehicle ranged from 71 DEMO airplane to 21 for sled.
Altogether, 324 features were listed by DEMO subjects, of which 224 were unique and
100 were shared by DEMO or more vehicles. For every pair of vehicles we counted the
number of features that were attributed to both (by at least one subject), and the
number of features that were attributed to one vehicle DEMO not to the other. The fre-
quency of subjects that listed each common or distinctive feature was computed.
In order to predict the similarity DEMO vehicles from the listed features, the
measures of their common and DEMO features must be deﬁned. The simplest
Features of Similarity 25
measure is obtained by counting the number of DEMO and distinctive features
produced by the subjects. The product-moment correlation between the (average)
similarity of objects and the number of their common features was .68. The correla-
tion between the similarity of objects and the DEMO of their distinctive features was
 .36. The multiple correlation between similarity and the numbers of common and
distinctive features (i.e., the correlation DEMO similarity and the contrast model)
was .72.
The counting measure assigns equal weight to all features regardless of their fre-
quency of mention. DEMO take this factor into account, let Xa denote the proportion of
DEMO who attributed feature X to object a, and let NX denote DEMO number of
objects that share feature X. For any a; b, deﬁne the measure of their common fea-
tures by fðA V V DEMO, and
the measure of their distinctive features byBÞ¼ PXaXb=NX , where DEMO summation is over all X in A
AÞ¼ XYa XZb
fðABÞþ fðB  þ
where the summations range over all Y A A B DEMO Z A B  A, that is, the distinc-
tive features of a and b, respectively. The correlation between similarity and the
above measure of the common features was .84; the correlation between similarity
and the above measure of the distinctive features was .64. The multiple correlation
DEMO similarity and the measures of the common and the distinctive features was
.87.
Note that the above methods for deﬁning the measure f were DEMO solely on the
elicited features and did not utilize the similarity data at all. Under these conditions,
a perfect correlation between the two DEMO not be expected because the weights
associated with the features are not optimal for the prediction of similarity. A given
feature may be frequently DEMO because it is easily labeled or recalled, although
it does not DEMO a great impact on similarity, and vice versa. Indeed, when the fea-
tures were scaled using the additive tree procedure (Sattath & Tversky, in press) in
which the measure of the features is derived DEMO the similarities between the objects,
the correlation between the data and the model reached .94.
The results of this study indicate that (i) it is possible to elicit from subjects
detailed features of semantic stimuli such as vehicles (see Rosch & Mervis, 1975); (ii)
the listed features can be used to predict similarity according to the DEMO model
with a reasonable degree of success; and (iii) the DEMO of similarity is improved
when frequency of mention and not merely the number of features is taken into
account.
26
Tversky
Similarity versus Di¤erence
It has been generally assumed that judgments DEMO similarity and di¤erence are com-
plementary; that is, judged di¤erence is a linear function of judged similarity with a
slope of 1. This DEMO has been conﬁrmed in several studies. For example,
Hosman and Kuennapas (1972) obtained independent judgments of similarity and
di¤erence for all pairs DEMO lowercase letters on a scale from 0 to 100. The product–
moment correlation between the judgments was .98, and the slope of the regression
line was  .91. We also collected judgments of similarity and di¤erence DEMO 21 pairs of
countries using a 20-point rating scale. The sum of the two judgments for each pair
was quite close to 20 in DEMO cases. The product–moment correlation between the
ratings was again  .98. This inverse relation between similarity and di¤erence,
however, does not always hold.
Naturally, an increase in the measure of the common features increases similarity
and decreases di¤erence, whereas an increase in the measure of the distinctive fea-
tures decreases similarity and increases di¤erence. However, the relative weight
assigned to the common and the distinctive features may di¤er in the two DEMO In
the assessment of similarity between objects the subject may attend more to their
common features, whereas in the assessment of di¤erence between objects the subject
may attend more to their distinctive features. Thus, the relative weight of the com-
mon features will be greater in the former DEMO than in the latter task.
Let dða; bÞ denote the perceived DEMO between a and b. Suppose d satisﬁes
the axioms of the present theory with the reverse inequality in the monotonicity
axiom, that is, DEMO; bÞ adða; cÞ whenever A V BIA V C, A DEMO C, and
B AHC  A. Furthermore, suppose s also satisﬁes the present theory and assume
(for simplicity) that both d and DEMO are symmetric. According to the representation
theorem, therefore, there exist a nonnegative scale f and nonnegative constants y and
l such that for DEMO a; b; c; e,
sða; bÞ > sðc; DEMO
and
dða; bÞ > dðc; eÞ
i¤
i¤ fðA

> fðC
BÞþ fðB

yf ðA
V
BÞ fðA
> yfðC
V
DEMO
EÞþ f ðE

EÞ fðC
BÞ fðB

AÞ lfðA


EÞ fðE
AÞ

V
BÞ
CÞ lfðC
V
CÞ;
DEMO:
The weights associated with the distinctive features can be set equal to 1 in the sym-
metric case with no loss of generality. DEMO, y and l reﬂect the relative weight of the
common features DEMO the assessment of similarity and di¤erence, respectively.
Features of Similarity 27
Note that if y is very large then DEMO similarity ordering is essentially determined
by the common features. On the other hand, if l is very small, then the di¤erence
ordering is DEMO primarily by the distinctive features. Consequently, both
sða; bÞ > sðc; eÞ and dða; bÞ > dðc; eÞ may be obtained whenever
fðA V BÞ > fðC V EÞ
and
fðA

BÞþ fðB
DEMO
AÞ > fðC

EÞþ fðE

CÞ:
That is, DEMO the common features are weighed more heavily in judgments of similarity
than in judgments of di¤erence, then a pair of objects with many common and many
distinctive features may be perceived as both more similar and DEMO di¤erent than
another pair of objects with fewer common and fewer distinctive features.
To test this hypothesis, 20 sets of four countries were constructed on the basis of a
pilot test. Each set included two pairs DEMO countries: a prominent pair and a non-
prominent pair. The prominent DEMO consisted of countries that were well known to
our subjects (e.g., USA–USSR, Red China–Japan). The nonprominent pairs con-
sisted of countries that were known to the subjects, but not as well as the prominent
ones (e.g., Tunis–Morocco, Paraguay–Ecuador). All subjects were presented with
the same 20 sets. One group of 30 subjects selected between the two DEMO in each set
the pair of countries that were more similar. Another group of 30 subjects selected
between the two pairs in each set DEMO pair of countries that were more di¤erent.
Let Ps and Pd denote, respectively, the percentage of choices where the prominent
pair of countries DEMO selected as more similar or as more di¤erent. If similarity and
di¤erence are complementary (i.e., y ¼ l), then Ps þPd should DEMO 100 for all
pairs. On the other hand, if y > DEMO, then Ps þPd should exceed 100. The average
value of Ps DEMO , across all sets, was 113.5, which is signiﬁcantly greater than 100,
tð59Þ¼ 3:27, p <:01.
Moreover, on the DEMO, the prominent pairs were selected more frequently than
the nonprominent pairs DEMO both the similarity and the di¤erence tasks. For example,
67% of the subjects in the similarity group selected West Germany and East Ger-
DEMO as more similar to each other than Ceylon and Nepal, while DEMO of the sub-
jects in the di¤erence group selected West Germany and East Germany as more
di¤erent from each other than Ceylon and Nepal. DEMO data demonstrate how the
relative weight of the common and the distinctive features varies with the task and
support the hypothesis that people attend DEMO to the common features in judgments
of similarity than in judgments of di¤erence.
28
Tversky
Similarity in Context
Like other judgments, similarity depends on context and frame of reference. Some-
times the relevant frame of reference is DEMO explicitly, as in the questions, ‘‘How
similar are English and French with respect to sound?’’ ‘‘What is the similarity of a
pear DEMO an apple with respect to taste?’’ In general, however, the relevant feature
space is not speciﬁed explicitly but rather inferred from the DEMO context.
When subjects are asked to assess the similarity between the USA and the USSR,
for instance, they usually assume that the relevant context is the set of countries and
that the relevant frame of DEMO includes all political, geographical, and cultural
features. The relative weights assigned to these features, of course, may di¤er for
di¤erent people. With DEMO, integral stimuli such as countries, people, colors, and
sounds, DEMO is relatively little ambiguity regarding the relevant feature space. How-
ever, DEMO artiﬁcial, separable stimuli, such as ﬁgures varying in color and shape, or
lines varying in length and orientation, subjects sometimes experience di‰culty DEMO
evaluating overall similarity and occasionally tend to evaluate similarity with respect
to one factor or the other (Shepard, 1964) or change the relative weights of attributes
with a change in context (Torgerson, 1965).
DEMO the present theory, changes in context or frame of reference correspond DEMO
changes in the measure of the feature space. When asked to assess the political simi-
larity between countries, for example, the subject presumably DEMO to the political
aspects of the countries and ignores, or assigns DEMO weight of zero to, all other features.
In addition to such DEMO of the feature space induced by explicit or implicit
instructions, the DEMO of features and hence the similarity of objects are also
inﬂuenced by the e¤ective context (i.e., the set of objects under consideration). DEMO
understand this process, let us examine the factors that determine the DEMO of a
feature and its contribution to the similarity of objects.
The Diagnosticity Principle
The salience (or the measure) of a feature is DEMO by two types of factors:
intensive and diagnostic. The former refers to factors that increase intensity or signal-
to-noise ratio, such as the brightness of a light, the loudness of a tone, the saturation
DEMO a color, the size of a letter, the frequency of an item, the clarity of a picture, or the
vividness of an DEMO The diagnostic factors refer to the classiﬁcatory signiﬁcance of
features, that DEMO, the importance or prevalence of the classiﬁcations that are based on
DEMO features. Unlike the intensive factors, the diagnostic factors are highly sensitive
DEMO the particular object set under study. For example, the feature ‘‘real’’ DEMO no
diagnostic value in the set of actual animals since it is shared by all actual animals
Features of Similarity 29
and hence cannot be used to classify them. DEMO feature, however, acquires consider-
able diagnostic value if the object set is extended to include legendary animals, such
as a centaur, a DEMO, or a phoenix.
When faced with a set of objects, people often sort them into clusters to reduce
information load and facilitate further DEMO Clusters are typically selected so
as to maximize the similarity of objects within a cluster and the dissimilarity of
objects from di¤erent clusters. Hence, the addition and/or deletion of objects can
alter the clustering of DEMO remaining objects. A change of clusters, in turn, is expected
to increase the diagnostic value of features on which the new clusters are DEMO, and
therefore, the similarity of objects that share these features. This relation between
similarity and grouping—called the diagnosticity hypothesis—is best explained in
terms DEMO a concrete example. Consider the two sets of four schematic faces (DEMO
in ﬁgure 1.4), which di¤er in only one of their elements (p and q).
The four faces of each set were displayed in a row and presented to a di¤erent
group of 25 subjects DEMO were instructed to partition them into two pairs. The most
frequent partition of set 1 was c and p (smiling faces) versus a DEMO b (nonsmiling
faces). The most common partition of set 2 DEMO b and q (frowning faces) versus a and
c (nonfrowning DEMO). Thus, the replacement of p by q changed the grouping DEMO a: In
set 1 a was paired with b, while in set 2 a was paired with c.
According to the above analysis, smiling has a greater diagnostic value in set 1
than in set DEMO, whereas frowning has a greater diagnostic value in set 2 than DEMO set 1.
By the diagnosticity hypothesis, therefore, similarity should follow the grouping.
That is, the similarity of a (which has a neutral DEMO) to b (which is frowning)
should be greater in set 1, where they are grouped together, than in set 2, where they
are grouped separately. Likewise, the similarity of a to c (DEMO is smiling) should be
greater in set 2, where they are grouped together, than in set 1, where they are not.
To DEMO this prediction, two di¤erent groups of 50 subjects were presented with
DEMO 1 and 2 (in the form displayed in ﬁgure 1.4) and asked to select one of the three
faces below (called the choice set) that was most similar to the face on the top (DEMO
the target). The percentage of subjects who selected each of the three elements of
the choice set is presented below the face. The DEMO conﬁrmed the diagnosticity
hypothesis: b was chosen more frequently in set DEMO than in set 2, whereas c was
chosen more frequently in DEMO 2 than in set 1. Both di¤erences are statistically signif-
icant, DEMO <:01. Moreover, the replacement of p by q actually reversed DEMO similarity
ordering: In set 1, b is more similar to a than c, whereas in set 2, c is more similar to
DEMO than b.
A more extensive test of the diagnosticity hypothesis was conducted using seman-
tic rather than visual stimuli. The experimental design was essentially DEMO same,
30
Tversky
Figure 1.4
Two sets of schematic faces used to test DEMO diagnosticity hypothesis. The percentage of subjects who
selected each face (as DEMO similar to the target) is presented below the face.
Features of Similarity 31
Figure 1.5
Two sets of countries used to DEMO the diagnosticity hypothesis. The percentage of subjects who selected
each country (DEMO most similar to Austria) is presented below the country.
except that DEMO served as stimuli instead of faces. Twenty pairs of matched sets
of four countries of the form fa; b; c; pg and fa; b; c; qg were constructed. An exam-
ple of two matched sets is presented in ﬁgure 1.5.
Note that the two matched sets (1 and 2) di¤er only by one element (p and q)DEMO The
sets were constructed so that a (in this case Austria) is likely to be grouped with b
(e.g., Sweden) in set 1, and with c (e.g., Hungary) in set 2. To DEMO this assump-
tion, we presented two groups of 25 subjects with DEMO sets of four countries and asked
them to partition each quadruple into two pairs. Each group received one of the two
matched quadruples, which were displayed in a row in random order. The results
conﬁrmed our DEMO hypothesis regarding the grouping of countries. In every case but
one, DEMO replacement of p by q changed the pairing of the target country in the pre-
dicted direction, p <:01 by sign test. For example, Austria was paired with Sweden
by 60% of the subjects in set 1, and it was paired with Hungary by 96% of the sub-
jects in set 2.
To test the diagnosticity hypothesis, we presented two groups of 35 subjects with
20 sets of four countries in DEMO format displayed in ﬁgure 1.5. These subjects were
asked to select, DEMO each quadruple, the country in the choice set that was most DEMO
lar to the target country. Each group received exactly one quadruple from each pair.
If the similarity of b to a, say, is DEMO of the choice set, then the proportion of
subjects who chose DEMO rather than c as most similar to a should be the same regardless
of whether the third element in the choice set is p DEMO q. For example, the proportion
of subjects who select Sweden rather DEMO Hungary as most similar to Austria should
be independent of whether the odd element in the choice set is Norway or Poland.
32
Tversky
In contrast, the diagnosticity hypothesis implies that the change in grouping,
induced by the substitution of the odd element, will change the similarities in a pre-
dictable manner. Recall that in set 1 DEMO was paired with Hungary, and Austria
with Sweden, while in set 2 Norway was paired with Sweden, and Austria with
Hungary. Hence, DEMO proportion of subjects who select Sweden rather than Hungary
(as most DEMO to Austria) should be higher in set 1 than in set DEMO This prediction is
strongly supported by the data in ﬁgure 1.5, DEMO show that Sweden was selected
more frequently than Hungary in set 1, while Hungary was selected more frequently
than Sweden in set 2.
Let b(p) denote the percentage of subjects who chose country b as most similar to
a when the odd element in the choice set DEMO p, and so on. As in the above examples,
the DEMO is chosen so that b is generally grouped with q, and DEMO is generally
grouped with p. The di¤erences be¤ects of the odd elements, p and q, on the similarity of b and c to DEMO target a. InðpÞ bðqÞ and cðqÞ cðpÞ, therefore, reﬂect the
the absence of context e¤ects, both di¤erences should equal 0, while under DEMO
diagnosticity hypothesis both di¤erences should be positive. In ﬁgure 1.5, for DEMO
ple, bðpÞ bðqÞ¼ 49  14 ¼ 35, and cðqÞ cðpÞ¼ 60  36 ¼ 24. The average dif-
ference, across all pairs of quadruples, equals 9%, which is signiﬁcantly positive,
tð19Þ¼ 3:DEMO, p <:01.
Several variations of the experiment did not alter DEMO nature of the results. The
diagnosticity hypothesis was also conﬁrmed when (DEMO) each choice set contained four
elements, rather than three, (ii) the subjects were instructed to rank the elements of
each choice set according to their similarity to the target, rather than to select the
most similar element, and (iii) the target consisted of two elements, and the subjects
were instructed to select one element of the choice set that was most similar to the
two target elements. For further DEMO, see Tversky and Gati (in press).
The Extension E¤ect
Recall that the diagnosticity of features is determined by the classiﬁcations that are
DEMO on them. Features that are shared by all the objects under consideration can-
not be used to classify these objects and are, therefore, DEMO of diagnostic value.
When the context is extended by the enlargement of the object set, some features that
had been shared by all objects in the original context may not be shared by all
objects in DEMO broader context. These features then acquire diagnostic value and
increase the similarity of the objects that share them. Thus, the similarity of a pair
of objects in the original context will usually be smaller than their DEMO in the
extended context.
Essentially the same account was proposed and supported by Sjo¨ berg3 in studies of
similarity between animals, and between musical instruments. For example, Sjo¨ berg
Features of Similarity 33
showed that the similarities between string instruments (banjo, violin, harp, electric
guitar) were increased when a wind instrument (clarinet) was added to this set. Since
the string instruments are more similar to each other than to the clarinet, however,
the above result may be attributed, in part at least, to subjects’ tendency DEMO stan-
dardize the response scale, that is, to produce the same average similarity for any set
of comparisons.
This e¤ect can be eliminated DEMO the use of a somewhat di¤erent design, employed
in the following DEMO Subjects were presented with pairs of countries having a
common border and assessed their similarity on a 20-point scale. Four sets of eight
pairs DEMO constructed. Set 1 contained eight pairs of European countries (e.g., Italy–
Switzerland). Set 2 contained eight pairs of American countries (e.g., DEMO
Uruguay). Set 3 contained four pairs from set 1 and four pairs from set 2, while set 4
contained the remaining pairs from sets 1 and 2. Each one of the four sets was pre-
DEMO to a di¤erent group of 30–36 subjects.
According to the diagnosticity hypothesis, the features ‘‘European’’ and ‘‘Ameri-
can’’ have no diagnostic value in sets 1 and 2, although they both have a diagnostic
value in sets 3 and 4. Consequently, the overall average similarity in the heteroge-
neous sets (3 and 4) is expected to be higher than the DEMO average similarity in the
homogeneous sets (1 and 2). This DEMO was conﬁrmed by the data, tð15Þ¼ 2:11,
p <:DEMO
In the present study all similarity assessments involve only homogeneous pairs
(DEMO, pairs of countries from the same continent sharing a common border)DEMO Unlike
Sjo¨ berg’s3 study, which extended the context by introducing nonhomogeneous DEMO,
our experiment extended the context by constructing heterogeneous sets composed of
homogeneous pairs. Hence, the increase of similarity with the enlargement of con-
text, observed in the present study, cannot be explained by subjects’ DEMO to
equate the average similarity for any set of assessments.
The Two Faces of Similarity
According to the present analysis, the salience of features has two components:
intensity and diagnosticity. The intensity of a feature DEMO determined by perceptual and
cognitive factors that are relatively stable across contexts. The diagnostic value of a
feature is determined by the prevalence of DEMO classiﬁcations that are based on it,
which change with the context. The e¤ects of context on similarity, therefore, are
treated as changes DEMO the diagnostic value of features induced by the respective
changes in the grouping of the objects.
This account was supported by the experimental ﬁnding DEMO changes in grouping
(produced by the replacement or addition of objects) lead to corresponding changes
in the similarity of the objects. These results DEMO light on the dynamic interplay
34
Tversky
between similarity and classiﬁcation. It is generally assumed that classiﬁcations DEMO
determined by similarities among the objects. The preceding discussion supports the
converse hypothesis: that the similarity of objects is modiﬁed by the manner in which
they are classiﬁed. Thus, similarity has two faces: causal and DEMO It serves as a
basis for the classiﬁcation of objects, but DEMO is also inﬂuenced by the adopted classiﬁ-
cation. The diagnosticity principle which underlies this process may provide a key to
the analysis of the DEMO of context on similarity.
Discussion
In this section we relate the present development to the representation of objects in
terms of clusters and trees, discuss the concepts of prototypicality and family resem-
blance, and comment on the relation between similarity and metaphor.
Features, Clusters, and Trees
There DEMO a well-known correspondence between features or properties of objects and
the classes to which the objects belong. A red ﬂower, for example, can DEMO charac-
terized as having the feature ‘‘red,’’ or as being a member of the class of red objects.
In this manner we associate DEMO every feature in F the class of objects in D which
possesses that feature. This correspondence between features and classes provides a
direct link DEMO the present theory and the clustering approach to the representa-
tion of proximity data.
In the contrast model, the similarity between objects is expressed as a function of
their common and distinctive features. Relations among overlapping DEMO are often
represented in a Venn diagram (see ﬁgure 1.1). DEMO, this representation becomes
cumbersome when the number of objects exceeds four DEMO ﬁve. To obtain useful
graphic representations of the contrast model; two DEMO simpliﬁcations are
entertained.
First, suppose the objects under study are all DEMO in prominence, that is,
fit may serve as a reasonable DEMO in certain contexts. Assuming featureðAÞ¼ f ðBÞ for all a; bin DEMO Although this assumption is not strictly valid in general,
additivity and symmetry, we obtain
Sða; bÞ¼ yfðA V BÞ fðABÞ fðB AÞ
DEMO yfðA V BÞþ 2fðA V BÞ fðABÞ fðB AÞ 2fðA
¼ðy þ2ÞfðA V BÞ f ðAÞ fðBÞ
¼ lf ðA V BÞþ m;
DEMO
BÞ
Features of Similarity 35
since fðAÞ¼ f ðBÞ for all a; bin D. Under the present assumptions, therefore, simi-
larity between objects is DEMO linear function of the measure of their common features.
Since f is an additive measure, fðA V BÞ is expressible as the sum of the measures
of all the features that belong to both a and DEMO For each subset L of D, let FðLÞ de-
note the DEMO of features that are shared by all objects in L, and DEMO not shared by any
object that does not belong to L. Hence,
Sða; bÞ¼ lfðA V BÞþ m
¼ lXf ðXÞ þm
¼ lXf ðFðLÞÞ
A
A
V
B
LIfa; bg:
Since the summation ranges over all subsets of D that include both a and b, the sim-
ilarity between objects can be expressed as the sum of DEMO weights associated with all
the sets that include both objects.
This form is essentially identical to the additive clustering model proposed by
Shepard and DEMO These investigators have developed a computer program,
ADCLUS, which selects DEMO relatively small collection of subsets and assigns weight to
each subset so as to maximize the proportion of (similarity) variance accounted for
by DEMO model. Shepard and Arabie4 applied ADCLUS to several studies including
Shepard, DEMO, and Cunningham’s (1975) on judgments of similarity between the
integers DEMO through 9 with respect to their abstract numerical character. A solution
with 19 subsets accounted for 95% of the variance. The nine major subsets (with the
largest weights) are displayed in table 1.1 along with a suggested interpretation. Note
that all the major subsets are readily interpretable, and they are overlapping rather
than hierarchical.
þ
X
m
Table 1.1
ADCLUS DEMO of the Similarities among the Integers 0 through 9 (from Shepard & Arabie4)
Rank Weight Elements of subset Interpretation of subset
1st .305 2 4 8 powers of two
2nd .288 6 7 8 9 DEMO numbers
3rd .279 3 6 9 multiples of three
4th .202 0 1 2 very small numbers
5th .202 1 3 5 7 9 DEMO numbers
6th .175 1 2 3 small nonzero numbers
7th .163 5 6 7 middle numbers (largish)
8th .160 0 1 additive and multiplicative identities
9th .146 0 1 2 3 4 smallish numbers
36
Tversky
The above model expresses similarity in terms of common features DEMO Alter-
natively, similarity may be expressed exclusively in terms of distinctive DEMO It
has been shown by Sattath5 that for any symmetric contrast model with an additive
measure f, there exists a measure g deﬁned on the same feature space such that
Sða; bÞ¼ yfðA V BÞ fðABÞ fðB AÞ
¼ l gðABÞ gðB AÞ for some l > 0:DEMO
This result allows a simple representation of dissimilarity whenever the feature
space F is a tree (i.e., whenever any three objects in D DEMO be labeled so that
A V B ¼ A V CHB V C). Figure 1.6 presents an example of a feature tree, con-
structed by Sattath and Tversky (in press) from judged similarities between DEMO
letters, obtained by Kuennapas and Janson (1969). The major branches are labeled
to facilitate the interpretation of the tree.
Each (horizontal) DEMO in the graph represents the set of features shared by all the
objects (i.e., letters) that follow from that arc, and the DEMO length corresponds to the
measure of that set. The features of an object are the features of all the arcs which
lead to that DEMO, and its measure is its (horizontal) distance to the root. DEMO tree
distance between objects a and b is the (horizontal) length of the path joining them,
that is, fðABÞþ fðB AÞ. Hence, if the contrast model holds, a ¼ b, and F is a
tree, then dissimilarity (i.e., S) is expressible as tree DEMO
A feature tree can also be interpreted as a hierarchical clustering scheme where
each arc length represents the weight of the cluster consisting of DEMO the objects that
follow from that arc. Note that the tree in ﬁgure 1.6 di¤ers from the common hier-
archical clustering tree in that DEMO branches di¤er in length. Sattath and Tversky
(in press) describe a computer program, ADDTREE, for the construction of additive
feature trees from DEMO data and discuss its relation to other scaling methods.
It follows readily from the above discussion that if we assume both that the feature
DEMO F is a tree, and that fðAÞ¼ fðBÞ for all a; bin D, then the contrast model reduces
to the well-known hierarchical clustering scheme. Hence, the additive clustering
model (Shepard & Arabie)4, the additive similarity tree (Sattath & Tversky, in press),
and the hierarchical clustering scheme (Johnson, 1967) are all special cases of the
contrast model. These scaling models can thus be used to discover the DEMO and
distinctive features of the objects under study. The present development, DEMO turn,
provides theoretical foundations for the analysis of set-theoretical methods for the
representation of proximities.
Figure 1.6
The representation of letter similarity as an additive (feature) DEMO From Sattath and Tversky (in press).
38
Tversky
Similarity, Prototypicality, and Family Resemblance
Similarity is a relation DEMO proximity that holds between two objects. There exist other
proximity relations such as prototypicality and representativeness that hold between
an object and a class. DEMO, an object is prototypical if it exempliﬁes the cate-
gory to DEMO it belongs. Note that the prototype is not necessarily the most typical
or frequent member of its class. Recent research has demonstrated the importance DEMO
prototypicality or representativeness in perceptual learning (Posner & Keele, 1968;
Reed, 1972), inductive inference (Kahneman & Tversky, 1973), semantic memory
(Smith, Rips, & Shoben, 1974), and the formation DEMO categories (Rosch & Mervis,
1975). The following discussion analyzes DEMO relations of prototypicality and family
resemblance in terms of the present theory of similarity.
L Let Pða; LÞ denote the (degree of ) DEMO of object a with respect to class
, with cardinality n, DEMO by
l Xf ðA BÞ XðfðA
Pða; LÞ¼ pn V BÞþ DEMO AÞÞ ;
where the summations are over all b inbination (i.e., a contrast) of the measures of the features of a that DEMO shared with theL. Thus, Pða; LÞ is deﬁned as a linear com-
elements of L and the features of a that are not DEMO with the elements of L.An
element a of L is a prototype if it maximizes Pða; LÞ. Note that a class may have
more than one prototype.
The factor pn reﬂects the e¤ect of category size DEMO prototypicality, and the
constant l determines the relative weights of the DEMO and the distinctive
features. If pn ¼ 1=n, l ¼ y, and a ¼ b ¼
prototypicality of a with respect to L DEMO the average similarity of a to all mem-1, then Pða; LÞ¼ 1=n PSða; bÞ (i.e., the
bers of L ). However, in line with the focusing hypotheses discussed earlier, it appears
likely that the common features are weighted more heavily in judgments of proto-
typicality DEMO in judgments of similarity.
Some evidence concerning the validity of the proposed measure was reported by
Rosch and Mervis (1975). They selected 20 objects from each one of six categories
(furniture, vehicle, fruit, DEMO, vegetable, clothing) and instructed subjects to list
the attributes associated DEMO each one of the objects. The prototypicality of an
object was deﬁned by the number of attributes or features it shared with each mem-
DEMO of the category. Hence, the prototypicality of a with respect to DEMO was deﬁned
denotes the number of attributes shared by a and b,
byand the summation ranges over all b inPNða; bÞ, where DEMO; bÞ L. Clearly, the measure of prototypicality
employed by Rosch and Mervis (1975) is a special case of the proposed measure,
DEMO BÞ¼ Nða; bÞ.
where l is large and fðA
Features of Similarity 39
These investigators also obtained direct measures of prototypicality DEMO instructing
subjects to rate each object on a 7-point scale according to the extent to which it ﬁts
the ‘‘idea or image of the DEMO of the category.’’ The rank correlations between
these ratings and the above measure were quite high in all categories: furniture, .88;
vehicle, .92; weapon, .94; fruit, .85; vegetable, .84; clothing, DEMO The rated proto-
typicality of an object in a category, therefore, is predictable by the number of fea-
tures it shares with other DEMO of that category.
In contrast to the view that natural categories are deﬁnable by a conjunction of
critical features, Wittgenstein (1953) argued that several natural categories (e.g., a
game) do not have any attribute that is shared by all their members, and by them
alone. Wittgenstein proposed that natural categories and concepts are commonly
characterized and understood in DEMO of family resemblance, that is, a network of
similarity relations that link the various members of the class. The importance of
family resemblance DEMO the formation and processing of categories has been e¤ectively
underscored by the work of Rosch and her collaborators (Rosch, 1973; Rosch &
DEMO, 1975; Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976)DEMO This research
demonstrated that both natural and artiﬁcial categories are commonly perceived and
organized in terms of prototypes, or focal elements, and some DEMO of proximity
from the prototypes. Furthermore, it lent substantial support to DEMO claim that people
structure their world in terms of basic semantic categories that represent an optimal
level of abstraction. Chair, for example, is DEMO basic category; furniture is too general
and kitchen chair is too DEMO Similarly, car is a basic category; vehicle is too
general and sedan is too speciﬁc. Rosch argued that the basic categories are selected
DEMO as to maximize family resemblance—deﬁned in terms of cue validity.
The present development suggests the following measure for family resemblance,
or category resemblance. DEMO L be some subset of D with cardinality n. The category
resemblance of L denoted RðLÞ is deﬁned by
RðLÞ¼ rn
l XfðA
V
DEMO XðfðA

BÞþ fðB

AÞÞ
;
the summations being over DEMO a; bin L. Hence, category resemblance is a linear
combination of the measures of the common and the distinctive features of all pairs
DEMO objects in that category. The factor rn reﬂects the e¤ect of category size on cate-
gory resemblance, and the constant l determines the relative weight of the common
and the distinctive features. If l ¼ y, a ¼ b ¼ 1, and rn ¼ 2=nðn 1Þ, then
DEMO
PSða; bÞ
2
;
n
40
Tversky
the summation being over all a; bin L; that DEMO, category resemblance equals average
similarity between all members of L. Although DEMO proposed measure of family
resemblance di¤ers from Rosch’s, it nevertheless captures DEMO basic notion that fam-
ily resemblance is highest for those categories which ‘‘have the most attributes com-
mon to members of the category and DEMO least attributes shared with members of
other categories’’ (Rosch et al., 1976, p. 435).
The maximization of category resemblance could be used to explain the forma-
tion of categories. Thus, the set L rather than G is selected as a natural category
whenever RðLÞ > RðGÞ. DEMO, an object a is added to a category L whenever
RðfL DEMO agÞ > RðLÞ . The fact that the preferred (basic) categories are neither the
most inclusive nor the most speciﬁc imposes certain constraints DEMO rn.
If rn ¼ 2=nðn 1Þ then RðLÞ equals the average similarity between all members of
L . This index leads to the selection DEMO minimal categories because average similarity
can generally be increased by deleting elements. The average similarity between
sedans, for example, is surely greater than DEMO average similarity between cars; nev-
ertheless, car rather than sedan serves as a basic category. If rn ¼ 1 then RðLÞ equals
the DEMO of the similarities between all members of L. This index leads to the selec-
tion of maximal categories because the addition of objects increases DEMO similarity,
provided S is nonnegative.
In order to explain the formation of intermediate-level categories, therefore, cate-
gory resemblance must be a compromise DEMO an average and a sum. That is, rn
must be a DEMO function of n that exceeds 2=nðn 1Þ. In this case, RðLÞ
DEMO with category size whenever average similarity is held constant, and vice
DEMO Thus, a considerable increase in the extension of a category could DEMO a
small reduction in average similarity.
Although the concepts of similarity, DEMO, and family resemblance are
intimately connected, they have not been previously related in a formal explicit
manner. The present development o¤ers explications of DEMO, prototypicality,
and family resemblance within a uniﬁed framework, in which they are viewed as
contrasts, or linear combinations, of the measures DEMO the appropriate sets of common
and distinctive features.
Similes and Metaphors
Similes and metaphors are essential ingredients of creative verbal expression. Perhaps
the most DEMO property of metaphoric expressions is that despite their novelty
and nonliteral nature, they are usually understandable and often informative. For
example, the statement DEMO Mr. X resembles a bulldozer is readily understood as
saying that Mr. X is a gross, powerful person who overcomes all obstacles in getting
Features of Similarity 41
a job done. An adequate analysis of connotative DEMO should account for man’s
ability to interpret metaphors without speciﬁc prior learning. Since the message con-
veyed by such expressions is often pointed and DEMO, they cannot be explained in
terms of a few generalized dimensions DEMO connotative meaning, such as evaluation or
potency (Osgood, 1962). DEMO appears that people interpret similes by scanning the fea-
ture space and selecting the features of the referent that are applicable to the subject
(e.g., by selecting features of the bulldozer that are applicable to the person). The
nature of this process is left to be explained.
DEMO is a close tie between the assessment of similarity and the interpretation of
metaphors. In judgments of similarity one assumes a particular feature space, or a
frame of reference, and assesses the quality of the match between the subject and the
referent. In the interpretation of similes, one assumes a resemblance between the
subject and the referent and searches for DEMO interpretation of the space that would
maximize the quality of the match. The same pair of objects, therefore, can be
viewed as similar DEMO di¤erent depending on the choice of a frame of reference.
One characteristic of good metaphors is the contrast between the prior, literal
interpretation, DEMO the posterior, metaphoric interpretation. Metaphors that are too
transparent are uninteresting; obscure metaphors are uninterpretable. A good meta-
phor is like a good DEMO story. The solution should not be apparent in advance to
maintain the reader’s interest, yet it should seem plausible after the fact to maintain
coherence of the story. Consider the simile ‘‘An essay is like a DEMO At ﬁrst, the
statement is puzzling. An essay is not expected DEMO be ﬁshy, slippery, or wet. The
puzzle is resolved when we recall that (like a ﬁsh) an essay has a head and DEMO body,
and it occasionally ends with a ﬂip of the tail.
Notes
This paper beneﬁted from fruitful discussions with Y. Cohen, I. Gati, D. Kahneman, L. Sjo¨ berg, and
S. Sattath.
1. To derive feature additivity from qualitative assumptions, we must assume the axioms of an extensive
structure and the compatibility of the extensive and the conjoint scales; see Krantz et al. (1971, Section
10.7).
2. The subjects DEMO all our experiments were Israeli college students, ages 18–28. The material DEMO presented
in booklets and administered in a group setting.
3. Sjo¨ berg, L. A cognitive theory of similarity.
4. Shepard, R. N., & Arabie, P. Additive cluster analysis of similarity data. Proceedings of the U.S.–Japan
Seminar on Theory, Methods, and Applications of Multidimensional Scaling and Related DEMO San
Diego, August 1975.
5. Sattath, S. An equivalence theorem. Unpublished note, Hebrew University, 1976.
Go¨
teborg Psychological Reports (No. 10), 1972.
42
Tversky
References
Beals, R., Krantz, D. H., & Tversky, A. Foundations of multidimensional scaling. Psychological Review,
1968, 75, 127–142.
DEMO, R. R., & Mosteller, F. A model for stimulus generalization DEMO discrimination. Psychological
Review, 1951, 58, 413–423.
Carroll, J. D., & Wish, M. Multidimensional perceptual models and measurement methods. In E. C. DEMO
terette & M. P. Friedman (Eds.), Handbook of perception. New DEMO: Academic Press, 1974.
Eisler, H., & Ekman, G. A DEMO of subjective similarity. Acta Psychologica, 1959, 16, 1–10.
Garner, W. R. The processing of information and structure. New York: Halsted Press, DEMO
Gibson, E. Principles of perceptual learning and development. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969.
Goldmeier, E. Similarity in visually perceived forms. Psychological Issues, 1972, 8, 1–136.
Gregson, R. A. M. Psychometrics of similarity. New York: Academic Press, 1975.
Hosman, J., & Kuennapas, T. On the relation between similarity and dissimilarity estimates (Report No.
354). University of Stockholm, Psychological Laboratories, 1972.
Jakobson, R., Fant, G. G. M., & Halle, M. Preliminaries to speech analysis: The distinctive features and
their correlates. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1961.
Johnson, S. C. DEMO clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 1967, 32, 241–254.
Kahneman, D., & DEMO, A. On the psychology of prediction. Psychological Review, 1973, 80, 237–251.
Krantz, D. H., Luce, R. D., Suppes, P., & Tversky, A. Foundations of measurement (Vol. 1). New York:
Academic Press, 1971.
Krantz, D. H., & Tversky, A. Similarity DEMO rectangles: An analysis of subjective dimensions. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 1975, 12, 4–34.
Kuennapas, T., & Janson, A. J. Multidimensional similarity of letters. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1969,
28, 3–12.
Neisser, U. Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1967.
Osgood, C. E. Studies on the generality of a¤ective meaning systems. American Psychologist, 1962, 17,DEMO
10–28.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. On the DEMO of abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1968,
77, 353–363.
Reed, S. K. Pattern recognition and categorization. Cognitive Psychology, 1972, 3, 382–407.
Restle, F. A metric and an ordering on sets. Psychometrika, 1959, 24, 207–220.
Restle, F. Psychology of judgment and choice. New York: Wiley, 1961.
Rosch, E. On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories. In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive
development and the acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press, 1973.
Rosch, E. Cognitive reference points. Cognitive Psychology, 1975, 7, 532–547.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure DEMO categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 1975, 7, 573–603.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W., Johnson, D., & Boyes-Braem, P. DEMO objects in natural categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 1976, 8, 382–439.
Rothkopf, E. Z. A measure of stimulus similarity and errors in some paired-associate DEMO tasks.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1957, 53, 94–101.
Sattath, S., & Tversky, A. Additive similarity trees. Psychometrika, in press.
Shepard, DEMO N. Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psy-
chology, 1964, 1, 54–87.
Features of Similarity 43
Shepard, R. N. Representation of structure in similarity data: Problems and prospects. Psychometrika,
1974, 39, 373–421.
Shepard, DEMO N., Kilpatric, D. W., & Cunningham, J. P. The internal representation of numbers. Cognitive
Psychology, 1975, 7, 82–138.
Smith, E. DEMO, Rips, L. J., & Shoben, E. J. Semantic memory and psychological semantics. In G. H. Bower
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 8). New York: Academic Press, 1974.
Smith, E. E., Shoben, E. J., & Rips, L. J. Structure and process in semantic memory: A featural model for
semantic decisions. Psychological Review, 1974, 81, 214–241.
Torgerson, W. S. Multidimensional scaling of DEMO Psychometrika, 1965, 30, 379–393.
Tversky, A. Elimination by aspects: DEMO theory of choice. Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 281–299.
Tversky, A., & Gati, I. Studies of similarity. In E. Rosch & B. DEMO (Eds.), On the nature and principle of
formation of categories. DEMO, N.J.: Erlbaum, in press.
Tversky, A., & Krantz, D. H. The dimensional representation and the metric structure of similarity data.
Journal DEMO Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7, 572–597.
von Neumann, J., & DEMO, O. Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
DEMO Press, 1947.
Wish, M. A model for the perception of Morse Code-like signals. Human Factors, 1967, 9, 529–540.
Wittgenstein, L. Philosophical DEMO New York: Macmillan, 1953.
Appendix: An Axiomatic Theory of Similarity
DEMO D ¼fa; b; c; ...g be a collection of objects DEMO as sets of features, and
let A; B; C, denote the sets of features associated with a; b; c, respectively. Let sða; bÞ
be an ordinal measure of the similarity of a to b, deﬁned for all distinct a; bin D.
The present theory DEMO based on the following ﬁve axioms. Since the ﬁrst three axioms
are discussed in the paper, they are merely restated here; the remaining DEMO are
brieﬂy discussed.
1. matching:sða; bÞ¼ FðA
tion in three DEMO
V
B; A

B; B

AÞ where F is some real-valued func-
2. monotonicity:sða; bÞ bsða; cÞ whenever A DEMO BIA V C, A BHA C, and
B AHC  A. Moreover, if either inclusion is proper then the inequality is strict.
Let F be the set of all features associated with the objects of DEMO, and let X; Y; Z, etc.
denote subsets of F. The expression FðX; Y; ZÞ is deﬁned whenever there exist a; bin
D such that A V B ¼ X, A B ¼ Y, and B A ¼ Z, whence sða; bÞ¼ FðX; DEMO; ZÞ.
Deﬁne VF W if one or more of the following DEMO for some X; Y; Z:
FðV; Y; ZÞ¼ FðW; Y; ZÞ,FðX; V; ZÞ¼ FðX; W; ZÞ,FðX; Y; VÞ¼ FðX; Y; WÞ. The
pairs ða; bÞ and DEMO; dÞ agree on one, two, or three components, respectively, DEMO
one, two, or three of the following hold: ðA V DEMO FðC V DÞ, ðABÞ FðC DÞ,
ðB AÞ FðDCÞ.
44
Tversky
3. independence: Suppose the pairs ða; bÞ and ðc; dÞ, as well as the pairs ða0; b0Þ
and ðc0; d0Þ, agree on the same two components, while the pairs ða; bÞ and ða0; b0Þ,as
well as the pairs ðc; dÞ and DEMO; d0Þ, agree on the remaining (third) component. Then
sða; DEMO bsða
0
; b
0
Þ
i¤ sðc; dÞ bsðc
0
; d
0
Þ:
4. solvability:
(i) For all pairs ða; bÞ, ðc; dÞ, ðe; fÞ, of objects in DEMO there exists a pair ðp; qÞ which
agrees with them, respectively, on the ﬁrst, second, and third component, that is,
DEMO V QFA V B, P QFC  D, and Q PFF  E.
(ii) Suppose sða; bÞ > t > sðc; DEMO Then there exist e; f with sðe; f Þ¼ t, DEMO that if
ða; bÞ and ðc; dÞ agree on one or two components, then ðe; fÞ agrees with them on
these components.
(iii) There exist pairs ða; bÞ and ðc; dÞ of objects in D that do not agree on any
component.
Unlike the other DEMO, solvability does not impose constraints on the similarity
order; it merely asserts that the structure under study is su‰ciently rich so that cer-
DEMO equations can be solved. The ﬁrst part of axiom 4 is analogous to the existence
of a factorial structure. The second part of the DEMO implies that the range of s is a
real interval: There DEMO objects in D whose similarity matches any real value that is
bounded by two similarities. The third part of axiom 4 ensures that all DEMO of
F are essential.
Let F1, F2 , and F3 be DEMO sets of features that appear, respectively, as ﬁrst, second,
DEMO third arguments of F. (Note that F2 ¼ F3 .) Suppose X and X0 belong to F1 , while
Y and Y0 belong DEMO F2 . Deﬁne ðX; X0Þ1 FðY; Y0Þ2 whenever the two intervals are
matched, that is, whenever there exist pairs ða; bÞ and (a0; b0 ) of equally similar
objects in D which agree DEMO the third factor. Thus, ðX; X0Þ1 FðY; Y0Þ2 whenever
sða; bÞ¼ FðX; Y; ZÞ¼ FðX0; Y0; ZÞ¼ sða0; b0Þ:
This deﬁnition is readily extended to any other pair of factors. Next, deﬁne
ðV; V0Þi FðW; W0Þi ,i ¼ 1; 2; 3 whenever ðV; V0Þi FðX; X0Þj FðW; W0Þi , for some
ðX; X0Þj ,j 0 i. Thus, two intervals on the same factor are equivalent if both match
the same interval on another factor. The DEMO invariance axiom asserts that if
two intervals are equivalent on one factor, they are also equivalent on another factor.
5. invariance: Suppose V; V
0
,W; W
0
belong to both Fi and Fj ,i; j
¼
1; 2; 3. Then
ðV; V
0
DEMO FðW; W
0
Þi
i¤
ðV; V
0
Þj FðW; DEMO
0
Þj:
Features of Similarity 45
representation theorem
Suppose axioms 1–5 hold. Then there DEMO a similarity scale S and a nonnegative
scale f such that for all a; b; c; din D
(i) Sða; bÞ DEMO; dÞ
(ii) Sða; bÞ¼ yfðA
V
i¤ sða; bÞ DEMO; dÞ,
BÞ afðABÞ bfðB
(iii) f and S are DEMO scales.

AÞ, for some y; a; b b 0.
DEMO a self-contained proof of the representation theorem is quite long, the DEMO
rem can be readily reduced to previous results.
Recall that Fi is the set of features that appear as the ith argument of F, and let
Ci ¼ Fi=F,i ¼ 1; 2; 3. Thus, Ci is the set of equivalence classes of Fi with respect to
DEMO It follows from axioms 1 and 3 that each Ci is well deﬁned, and it follows from
axiom 4 that C ¼ C1 C2 C3 is equivalent to the domain of F. We wish to show
DEMO C, ordered by F, is a three-component, additive conjoint structure, in the sense
of Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky (1971, Section 6.11.1).
This result, however, follows from the analysis of DEMO similarity struc-
tures, developed by Tversky and Krantz (1970). In particular, the proof of part (c) of
theorem 1 in that paper implies that, under axioms 1, 3, and 4, there DEMO non-
negative functions fi deﬁned on Ci ,i ¼ 1; 2; 3, so that for all a; b; c; din D
sða; bÞ bsðc; dÞ
i¤ Sða; bÞ bSðc; dÞ
where
DEMO; bÞ¼ f1ðA
V
BÞþ f2ðA

BÞþ f3ðB

AÞ;
DEMO f1; f 2; f3 are interval scales with a common unit.
According to axiom 5, the equivalence of intervals is preserved across factors. That
is, for all V; V0 ,W; W0 in Fi DEMO
fiðVÞ fiðV
0
Þ¼
fiðWÞ f
iðW
0
Þ
Fj ,i; j ¼ 1; 2; 3,
i¤ fjðVÞ fjðV
0
Þ¼
DEMO fjðW
0
Þ:
Hence by part (i) of theorem 6.15 of Krantz et al. (1971), there exist a scale f and
constants yi such that fiðXÞ¼ yif ðXÞ,i ¼ 1; 2; DEMO Finally, by axiom 2, S increases in
f1 and decreases in f2 and f3 . Hence, it is expressible as
Sða; bÞ¼ DEMO
V
BÞ af ðA

BÞ bf ðB
for some nonnegative constants y; a; b.

AÞ;

2 Additive Similarity Trees
Shmuel Sattath and Amos Tversky
The two goals DEMO research on the representation of proximity data are the develop-
ment of theories for explaining similarity relations and the construction of scaling
procedures for DEMO and displaying similarities between objects. Indeed, most
representations of proximity data DEMO be regarded either as similarity theories or as
scaling procedures. These representations can be divided into two classes: spatial
models and network models. The spatial models—called multidimensional scaling—
represent each object as a point in a DEMO space so that the metric distances
between the points reﬂect the observed proximities between the objects. Network
models represent each object as a node DEMO a connected graph, typically a tree, so that
the relations between the nodes in the graph reﬂect the observed proximity relations
among the DEMO
This chapter investigates tree representations of similarity data. We begin with a
critical discussion of the familiar hierarchical clustering scheme [Johnson, 1967], and
DEMO a more general representation, called the additive tree. A computer program
(ADDTREE) for the construction of additive trees from proximity data is described
and illustrated using several sets of data. Finally, the additive tree is compared with
multidimensional scaling from both empirical and theoretical standpoints.
Consider the DEMO matrix presented in table 2.1, taken from a study by
Henley DEMO The entries of the table are average ratings of dissimilarity between
the respective animals on a scale from 0 (maximal similarity) to 10 (maximal dis-
similarity). Such data have commonly been analyzed using the DEMO clustering
scheme (HCS) that yields a hierarchy of nested clusters. The application of this
scaling procedure to table 2.1 is displayed in ﬁgure DEMO
The construction of the tree proceeds as follows. The two objects which are closest
to each other (e.g., donkey and cow) are combined ﬁrst, and are now treated as a
single element, or cluster. DEMO distance between this new element, z, and any other
element, DEMO, is deﬁned as the minimum (or the average) of the DEMO between y
and the members of z . This operation is repeated until a single cluster that includes
all objects is obtained. In such DEMO representation the objects appear as the external
nodes of the tree, DEMO the distance between objects is the height of their meeting
point, DEMO equivalently, the length of the path joining them.
This model imposes DEMO constraints on the data. It implies that given two dis-
joint clusters, all intra-cluster distances are smaller than all inter-cluster distances, and
that DEMO the inter-cluster distances are equal. This property is called the ultrametric
inequality, and the representation is denoted an ultrametric tree. The ultrametric
48 Sattath and Tversky
Table 2.1
Dissimilarities between Animals
Donkey Cow Pig
DEMO 5.0 5.6 7.2
Donkey 4.6 5.7
Cow 4.9
Figure 2.1
The representation of table 2.1 as an HCS.
inequality, however, is often violated DEMO data, see, e.g., Holman [note 1]. To illus-
trate, note that according to ﬁgure 2.1, camel should be equally similar to donkey,
cow and pig, contrary to the data of table 2.1.
The limitations of the ultrametric tree have led several psychologists, e.g., Carroll
DEMO Chang [1973], Carroll [1976], Cunningham [note 2, note 3], to explore a more
general structure, called an additive tree. This structure appears under di¤erent
names including: weighted tree, free tree, path-length tree, DEMO unrooted tree, and
its formal properties were studied extensively, see, DEMO, Buneman [1971, pp. 387–
395; 1974], Dobson [1974], Hakimi DEMO Yau [1964], Patrinos and Hakimi [1972],
Turner and Kautz [1970, sections III–4 and III–6]. The representation of table
2.1 as an additive DEMO is given in ﬁgure 2.2. As in the ultrametric tree, the DEMO
nodes correspond to objects and the distance between objects is the length of the
path joining them. A formal deﬁnition of an additive tree DEMO presented in the next
section.
It is instructive to compare the two representations of table 2.1 displayed in ﬁgures
2.1 and 2.2. First, note that the clustering is di¤erent in the two ﬁgures. In the ultra-
Additive Similarity Trees 49
Figure 2.2
The representation of table 2.1 as DEMO additive tree, in rooted form.
metric tree (ﬁgure 2.1), cow and donkey form a single cluster that is subsequently
joined by pig DEMO camel. In the additive tree (ﬁgure 2.2), camel with donkey DEMO
one cluster, and cow with pig form another cluster. Second, in the additive tree,
unlike the ultrametric tree, intra-cluster distances may exceed inter-cluster distances.
For example, in ﬁgure 2.2 cow and donkey belong to di¤erent clusters although they
are the two closest animals. Third, in an additive tree, an object outside a cluster is
no longer equidistant from all objects inside the cluster. For example, both cow and
pig are closer to donkey than to camel.
The di¤erences between the two models DEMO from the fact than in the ultrametric
tree (but not in DEMO additive tree) the external nodes are all equally distant from
the DEMO The greater ﬂexibility of the additive tree permits a more faithful represen-
tation of data. Spearman’s rank correlation, for example, between the dissimilarities
DEMO table 2.1 and the tree distances is 1.00 for the additive tree and 0.64 for the ultra-
metric tree.
Note that the distances in DEMO additive tree do not depend on the choice of root.
For example, the tree of ﬁgure 2.2 can be displayed in unrooted form, DEMO shown in
ﬁgure 2.3. Nevertheless, it is generally more convenient to DEMO similarity trees in a
rooted form.
Analysis of Trees
In this section we deﬁne ultrametric and additive trees, characterize the conditions
under which proximity data can be represented by these models, and describe the
structure of the clusters associated with them.
50 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 2.3
The representation of table 2.1 as DEMO additive tree, in unrooted form.
Representation of Dissimilarity
A tree is DEMO (ﬁnite) connected graph without cycles. Hence, any two nodes in DEMO tree are
connected by exactly one path. An additive tree is a tree with a metric in which the
distance between nodes is the DEMO of the path (i.e., the sum of the arc-lengths) that
DEMO them. An additive tree with a distinguished node (named the root) which is
equidistant from all external nodes is called an ultrametric tree. DEMO trees are nor-
mally represented with the root on top, (as in ﬁgure 2.1) so that the distance between
external nodes is expressible as the height of the lowest (internal) node that lies above
DEMO
A dissimilarity measure d on a ﬁnite set of objects S ¼fx; y; z; ...g is a non-
negative function on S S such that dðx; yÞ¼ dðy; xÞ, and dðx; yÞ¼ 0i¤ DEMO ¼ y.A
tree (ultrametric or additive) represents a dissimilarity measure on S i¤ the external
nodes of the tree can be associated with DEMO objects of S so that the tree distances
between external nodes coincide with the dissimilarities between the respective
objects.
If a dissimilarity measure d DEMO S is represented by an ultrametric tree, then the
relation among DEMO three objects in S has the form depicted in ﬁgure 2.4. It follows,
therefore, that for all x; y; z in S
Additive Similarity Trees 51
Figure 2.4
The relations among three objects in DEMO ultrametric tree.
Figure 2.5
The relations among four objects in an additive tree.
dðx; yÞ a maxfdðx; zÞ; dðy; zÞg:
This DEMO, called the ultrametric inequality, is both necessary and su‰cient for
the representation of a dissimilarity measure by an ultrametric tree [Johnson, 1967;
Jardine & Sibson, 1971]. As noted in the previous section, however, the ultrametric
inequality is very restrictive. It implies that for any three DEMO in S, two of the
dissimilarities are equal and the third DEMO not exceed them. Thus the dissimilarities
among any three objects must form either an equilateral triangle or an isosceles tri-
angle with a narrow DEMO
An analogous analysis can be applied to additive trees. If a dissimilarity measure d
on S is represented by an additive tree, then the relations among any four objects in
S has the form depicted in DEMO 2.5, with non-negative a; b; g; d; e. It DEMO, there-
52 Sattath and Tversky
fore, that in this case
dðx; yÞþ DEMO; vÞ¼ a þb þg þd
aa þb þg þd þ2e
¼ DEMO; uÞþ dðy; vÞ
¼ dðx; vÞþ dðy; uÞ:
Hence, any four objects can be labeled so as to satisfy the above inequality.
Consequently, in an additive tree,
dðx; yÞþ dðu; vÞ a maxfdðx; uÞþ dðy; vÞ; dðx; vÞþ dðy; uÞg
for all x; y; u; v in S (not necessarily distinct)DEMO
It is easy to verify that this condition, called the additive DEMO (or the four-
points condition), follows from the ultrametric inequality DEMO implies the triangle
inequality. It turns out that the additive inequality is both necessary and su‰cient for
the representation of a dissimilarity measure by DEMO additive tree. For a proof of this
assertion, see, e.g., DEMO [1971, pp. 387–395; 1974], Dobson [1974]. To illustrate
the fact DEMO the additive inequality is less restrictive than the ultrametric inequality,
note that the distances between any four points on a line satisfy the DEMO but not
the latter.
The ultrametric and the additive trees di¤er in the number of parameters employed
in the representation. In an ultrametric tree DEMO 2 inter-point distances are deter-
mined by at most n  1 parameters where n is the number of elements in the object
set DEMO In an additive tree, the distances are determined by at most DEMO  3 parameters.
Trees and Clusters
A dissimilarity measure, d, can be used to deﬁne di¤erent notions of clustering, see,
e.g., DEMO and Sneath [1973]. Two types of clusters—tight and loose—are now
introduced and their relations to ultrametric and additive trees are discussed.
A nonempty subset DEMO of S is a tight cluster if
max dðx; yÞ < DEMO dðx; zÞ:
x; y A A x A A
z A SA
That is, A is a tight cluster whenever the dissimilarity between any two objects in A is
smaller than the dissimilarity between DEMO object in A and any object outside A, i.e.,
in DEMO A. It follows readily that a subset A of an ultrametric tree is a tight cluster i¤
n
Additive Similarity Trees 53
there is an arc such that A is DEMO set of all objects that lie below that arc. In ﬁgure 2.1,
for example, fdonkey, cowg and fdonkey, cow, pigg are DEMO clusters whereas fcow,
pigg and fcow, pig, camelg are not.
A subset A of S is a loose cluster if for any DEMO; y in A and u; v in S A
dðx; DEMO dðu; vÞ < minfdðx; uÞþ dðy; vÞ; dðx; vÞþ DEMO; uÞg:
In ﬁgure 2.5, for example, the binary loose DEMO are fx; yg and fu; vg. Let
A; B denote DEMO nonempty loose clusters; let DðAÞ; DðBÞ denote the average
intra-cluster dissimilarities of A and B, respectively; and let DðA; BÞ denote the
average inter-cluster dissimilarity between A and B. It can be shown that DEMO
DðBÞÞ < DðA; BÞ . That is, the mean of the average dissimilarity within loose clusters
is smaller than the average dissimilarity between DEMO clusters.
The deletion of an arc divides a tree into two subtrees, thereby partitioning S into
two nonempty subsets. It follows readily that, DEMO an additive tree, both subsets are
loose clusters, and all loose clusters can be obtained in this fashion. Thus, an additive
tree induces a family of loose clusters whereas an ultrametric tree deﬁnes a family DEMO
tight clusters. In table 2.1, for example, the cluster fDonkey, DEMO is tight but not
loose, whereas the clusters fDonkey, Camelg and fCow, Pigg are loose but not tight,
see ﬁgures 2.1 and 2.2. Scaling methods for the construction of similarity trees are
generally based DEMO clustering: HCS is based on tight clusters, whereas the following
procedure for the construction of additive trees is based on loose clusters.
Computational DEMO
This section describes a computer algorithm, ADDTREE, for the construction of
additive similarity trees. Its input is a symmetric matrix of similarities or DEMO
larities, and its output is an additive tree.
If the additive DEMO is satisﬁed without error, then the unique additive tree
that represents DEMO data can be constructed without di‰culty. In fact, any proof of
DEMO su‰ciency of the additive inequality provides an algorithm for the errorless case.
The problem, therefore, is the development of an e‰cient algorithm that DEMO
an additive tree from fallible data.
This problem has two components: (i) construction, which consists of ﬁnding the
most appropriate tree-structure, (DEMO) estimation, which consists of ﬁnding the best
estimates of arc-lengths. In the present algorithm the construction of the tree pro-
ceeds in stages DEMO clustering objects so as to maximize the number of sets satisfying
the additive inequality. The estimation of arc lengths is based on the least DEMO
criterion. The two components of the program are now described in turn.
54 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 2.6
The three possible conﬁgurations of four DEMO in an additive tree.
Construction
In an additive tree, any four DEMO objects, x; y; u; v, appear in one of DEMO conﬁgu-
rations of ﬁgure 2.6. The patterns of distances which correspond to the conﬁgu-
rations of ﬁgure 2.6 are:
(i) dðx; yÞþ dðu; vÞ < dðx; uÞþ dðy; vÞ¼ dðx; vÞþ dðy; uÞ
(ii) dðx; vÞþ dðy; uÞ < dðx; uÞþ dðy; vÞ¼ dðx; yÞþ dðu; vÞ
(iii) dðx; uÞþ dðy; vÞ < dðx; yÞþ dðu; vÞ¼ dðx; vÞþ dðy; uÞ:DEMO
Our task is to select the most appropriate conﬁguration on the basis of an observed
dissimilarity measure d. It is easy to see that DEMO four objects can be relabeled so that
dðx; yÞþ dðu; vÞ adðx; uÞþ dðy; vÞ adðx; vÞþ dðy; uÞ:
It DEMO evident, in this case, that conﬁguration (i) represents these dissimilarities better
than (ii) or (iii). Hence, we obtain the DEMO rule for choosing the best conﬁgu-
ration for any set of four elements: label the objects so as to satisfy the above
inequality, DEMO select conﬁguration (i). The objects x and y (as well as u and v) are
then called neighbors. The construction of the tree proceeds by grouping elements on
the basis of the neighbors relation. DEMO major steps of the construction are sketched
below.
For each pair x; y, ADDTREE examines all objects u; v and counts the number of
quadruples in which x and y are neighbors. The pair x; y with the highest score is
selected, and its members are combined to form a new element z which replaces x
and y in DEMO subsequent analysis. The dissimilarity between z and any other element
u is set equal to ðdðu; xÞþ dðu; yÞÞ=2. The pair with the DEMO highest score is selected
next. If its elements have not been previously selected, they are combined as above,
and the scanning of pairs is continued until all elements have been selected. Ties are
treated here DEMO a natural manner.
This grouping process is ﬁrst applied to the object set S yielding a collection of
elements which consists of the newly DEMO elements together with the original ele-
Additive Similarity Trees 55
ments that were not combined in this process. DEMO grouping process is then applied
repeatedly to the outcome of the previous phase until the number of remaining ele-
ments is three. Finally, these elements are combined to form the last element, which
is treated as the root of the tree.
It is possible to show that if DEMO one pair of elements are combined in each phase,
then perfect subtrees in the data appear as subtrees in the representation. In particu-
DEMO, any additive tree is reproduced by the above procedure.
The construction DEMO described above uses sums of dissimilarities to deﬁne
neighbors and to compute distances to the new (constructed) elements. Strictly
speaking, this procedure is applicable to cardinal data, i.e., data measured on inter-
val or DEMO scales. For ordinal data, a modiﬁed version of the algorithm has DEMO
developed. In this version, the neighbors relation is introduced as follows. DEMO d
is an ordinal dissimilarity scale, and
dðx; yÞ < dðx; uÞ; dðx; yÞ < dðx; vÞ;
dðu; vÞ < dðy; vÞ; dðu; vÞ y; wÞ:
< dð
Then DEMO conclude that x and y (as well as u and v)DEMO neighbors. (If the inequalities
on the left [right] alone hold, then x and y [as well as u and v] are called semi-
DEMO, and are counted as half neighbors.)
If x and y DEMO neighbors in the ordinal sense, they are also neighbors in the DEMO
nal sense, but the converse is not true. In the cardinal DEMO, every four objects can be
partitioned into two pairs of neighbors; in the ordinal case, this property does not
always hold since the deﬁning inequality may fail for all permutations of the objects.
To deﬁne DEMO distances to the new elements in the ordinal version of the algorithm,
some ordinal index of average dissimilarity, e.g., mean rank or DEMO, can be used.
Estimation
Although the construction of the tree is DEMO of the estimation of arc lengths,
the two processes are performed in parallel. The parameters of the tree are estimated,
employing a DEMO criterion. That is, the program minimizes
X
y A Sðdðx; yÞ dðx; yÞÞ2;
x;
where d is the distance function of the tree. Since an additive tree with n objects has
ma2n  DEMO parameters (arcs), one obtains the equation CX ¼ d where DEMO is the vector
n
of dissimilarities, X
is the vector of (unknown) arc lengths, and C is an m
2
56 Sattath and Tversky
matrix where
1 if the i -th tree-distance DEMO the j -th arc
¼
cij
0 otherwise
The least-square solution of CX ¼ d is X ¼ðCTCÞ1CTd, provided CTC is posi-
tive deﬁnite. In general, this requires inverting an mm matrix which is costly for
moderate m and prohibitive for large m. However, an exact solution that requires no
matrix inversion and greatly simpliﬁes the estimation process can be DEMO by
exploiting the following property of additive trees. Consider an arc and remove its
endpoints; this divides the tree into a set of disjoint subtrees. The least-square esti-
mate of the length of that arc is DEMO function of (i) the average distances between the
subtrees and (DEMO) the number of objects in each subtree. The proof of this DEMO,
and the description of that function are long and tedious and are therefore omitted.
It can also be shown that all negative estimates (which reﬂect error) should be set
equal to zero.
The present program constructs a rooted additive tree. The graphical representa-
tion of a rooted DEMO is unique up to permutations of its subtrees. To select an infor-
mative graphical representation, the program permutes the objects so as to maximize
the correspondence of the similarity between objects and the ordering of their DEMO
tions in the display—subject to the constraint imposed by the structure of the tree.
Under the same constraint, the program can also permute the objects so as to
maximize the ordinal correlation ðgÞ with any prespeciﬁed DEMO
Comparison of Algorithms
Several related methods have recently been proposed. Carroll [1976] discussed two
extensions of HCS. One concerns an ultrametric tree in which DEMO as well as
external nodes represent objects [Carroll & Chang, 1973]. DEMO concerns the rep-
resentation of a dissimilarity matrix as the sum of two or more ultrametric trees
[Carroll & Pruzansky, note 4]. The ﬁrst e¤ective procedure for constructing an addi-
tive tree for fallible similarity data DEMO presented by Cunningham [note 2, note 3].
His program, like ADDTREE, ﬁrst determines the tree structure, and then obtains
least-square estimates of DEMO However, there are two problems with Cun-
ningham’s program. First, in the presence of noise, it tends to produce degenerate
trees with few internal nodes. This problem becomes particularly severe when the
number of objects DEMO moderate or large. To illustrate, consider the additive tree pre-
sented DEMO ﬁgure 2.8, and suppose that, for some reason or another (DEMO, errors of
measurement), monkey was rated as extremely similar to DEMO In Cunningham’s
program, this single datum produces a drastic change in DEMO structure of the tree: It
Additive Similarity Trees 57
eliminates the arcs labeled ‘‘rodents’’ and ‘‘apes,’’ DEMO combines all rodents and apes
into a single cluster. In ADDTREE, DEMO the other hand, this datum produces only a
minor change. Second, Cunningham’s estimation procedure requires the inversion of
n
small data sets, say under 15 objects.
ADDTREE overcomes the ﬁrst problem by using a ‘‘majority’’ DEMO rather than
a ‘‘veto’’ rule to determine the tree structure, and DEMO overcomes the second problem
by using a more e‰cient method of estimation. The core memory required for
ADDTREE is of the order of n2 , hence it can be applied to sets of 100 objects, say,DEMO
without any di‰culty. Furthermore, ADDTREE is only slightly more costly than
DEMO, and less costly than a multidimensional scaling program in two dimensions.
DEMO
This section presents applications of ADDTREE to several sets of similarity data
and compares them with the results of multidimensional scaling and HCS.
Three DEMO of proximity data are analyzed. To each data set we apply the cardinal
version of ADDTREE, the average method of HCS [Johnson, 1967], and smallest
space analysis [Guttman, 1968; Lingoes, 1970] in 2 and 3 dimensions-denoted SSA/
2D and SSA/3D, respectively. (The use DEMO the ordinal version of ADDTREE, and
the min method of HCS DEMO not change the results substantially.) For each repre-
sentation we report DEMO measures of correspondence between the solution and the
original data: the DEMO correlation r, and Kruskal’s ordinal measure of
stress deﬁned as
246P
DEMO; yÞ dðx; yÞÞ2 3
PPdðx; yÞ2
1=2
y
57
x
DEMO
^
where d is the distance in the respective representation, and DEMO is an appropriate
order-preserving transformation of the original dissimilarities [Kruskal, 1964].
DEMO ADDTREE and HCS yielded similar tree structures in all three data sets,
only the results of the former are presented along with the DEMO (Eucli-
dean) conﬁgurations obtained by SSA/2D. The two-dimensional solution was chosen
for comparison because (i) it is the most common and DEMO interpretable spatial
representation, and (ii) the number of parameters of DEMO two-dimensional solution is
the same as the number of parameters in an additive tree.
x
^
a 
4

n
 matrix, which restricts the applicability of the program to relatively
4
58 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 2.7
Representation of animal similarity (Henley, DEMO) by SSA/2D.
Similarity of Animals
Henley [1969] obtained average dissimilarity DEMO between animals from a homo-
geneous group of 18 subjects. Each subject rated the dissimilarity between all pairs of
30 animals on a scale DEMO 0 to 10.
The result of SSA/2D is presented in ﬁgure 2.7. The horizontal dimension is
readily interpreted as size, with elephant and mouse at the two extremes, and the
vertical dimension may be thought of as ferocity [Henley, 1969], although the corre-
spondence is far DEMO perfect.
The result of ADDTREE is presented in ﬁgure 2.8 in parallel form. In this form all
branches are parallel, and the distance between two nodes is the sum of the horizon-
tal arcs on the DEMO joining them. Clearly, every (rooted) tree can be displayed in
DEMO form which we use because of its convenience.
In an additive tree the root is not determined by the distances, and any point on
the tree can serve as a root. Nevertheless, di¤erent roots induce di¤erent hierarchies
Additive Similarity Trees 59
Figure 2.8
Representation of animal similarity (Henley, DEMO) by ADDTREE.
60 Sattath and Tversky
Table 2.2
Correspondence Indices (Animals)
ADDTREE HCS SSA/2D SSA/3D
Stress .07 .10 .17 .11
r .91 .84 DEMO .93
of partitions or clusters. ADDTREE provides a root that tends to minimize the
variance of the distances to the external nodes. Other criteria DEMO the selection of a
root could readily be incorporated. The choice of a root for an additive tree is anal-
ogous to the choice DEMO a coordinate system in (euclidean) multidimensional scaling.
Both choices do not alter the distances, yet they usually a¤ect the interpretation of
the conﬁguration.
In ﬁgure 2.8 the 30 animals are ﬁrst partitioned into four major DEMO: herbi-
vores, carnivores, apes, and rodents. The major clusters in the ﬁgure are labeled to
facilitate the interpretation. Each of these clusters DEMO further partitioned into ﬁner
clusters. For example, the carnivores are partitioned DEMO three clusters: felines
(including cat, leopard, tiger, and lion), canines (including dog, fox, and wolf ), and
bear.
Recall that in a rooted tree, each arc deﬁnes a cluster which consists of all the
objects that follow from it. Thus, each arc can be interpreted as the features shared
by all objects in that cluster DEMO by them alone. The length of the arc can thus be
viewed as the weight of the respective features, or as a measure of the distinctiveness
of the respective cluster. For example, the apes in ﬁgure 2.8 form a highly distinctive
cluster because the arc labeled ‘‘apes’’ is DEMO long. The interpretation of additive
trees as feature trees is discussed in the last section.
The obtained (vertical) order of the animals in DEMO 2.8 from top to bottom
roughly corresponds to the dimension of size, with elephant and mouse at the two
endpoints. The (horizontal) distance of an animal from the root reﬂects its average
distance from other DEMO For example, cat is closer to the root than tiger, and
indeed cat is more similar, on the average, to other animals DEMO tiger. Note that this
property of the data cannot be represented in an ultrametric tree in which all objects
are equidistant from the root.
DEMO correspondence indices for animal similarity are given in table 2.2.
Similarity of Letters
The second data set consists of similarity judgments between all lower-case DEMO
letters obtained by Kuennapas and Janson [1969]. They reported average similarity
Additive Similarity Trees 61
Figure 2.9
Representation of letter similarity (Kuennapas an Janson, 1969) by SSA/2D.
ratings for 57 subjects using a DEMO scale. The modiﬁed letters
from the present analysis. The result of SSA/2D is displayed in ﬁgure 2.9. The type-
set in the ﬁgure DEMO essentially identical to that used in the experiment. The vertical
dimension in ﬁgure 2.9 might be interpreted as round-vs.-straight. No interpretable
second dimension, however, emerges from the conﬁguration.
The result of ADDTREE is presented in ﬁgure 2.10 which reveals a distinct set of
interpretable clusters. The obtained clusters DEMO excellent correspondence with the
factors derived by Kuennapas and Janson [1969] via a principle-component analysis.
These investigators obtained six major factors which essentially coincide DEMO the
clustering induced by the additive tree. The factors together with their high-loading
letters are as follows:
a˚ ;
o€
;
a€
DEMO omitted
Factor I: roundness ðo; c; eÞ
Factor II: roundness attached to veritical linearity
Factor III: parallel vertical linearity ðn; m; h; uÞ
Factor IV: zigzaggedness ðs; zÞ
Factor V: angularity DEMO upward ðv; y; xÞ
Factor VI: vertical linearity ðt; f ; l; r; j; iÞ
ð
p; q; b; DEMO; dÞ
62 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 2.10
Representation of letter similarity (Kuennapas and Janson, 1969) by ADDTREE.
Additive Similarity Trees 63
Table 2.3
Correspondence Indices (Letters)
ADDTREE HCS SSA/2D SSA/3D
Stress .08 .11 .24 .16
r .87 .82 DEMO .84
Figure 2.11
Representation of similarity between occupations (Kraus, 1976) DEMO SSA/2D.
The vertical ordering of the letters in ﬁgure 2.10 is interpretable as roundness vs.
angularity. It was obtained by the standard permutation DEMO with the addi-
tional constraint that o and x are the end-points.
The correspondence indices for letter similarity are presented in table 2.3.
Similarity DEMO Occupations
Kraus [note 5] instructed 154 Israeli subjects to classify 90 occupations into disjoint
classes. The proximity between occupations was deﬁned as the number DEMO subjects
who placed them in the same class. A representative subset of 35 occupations was
selected for analysis.
The result of SSA/2D is DEMO in ﬁgure 2.11. The conﬁguration could be
interpreted in terms of two dimensions: white collar vs. blue collar, and autonomy vs.
subordination. The DEMO of ADDTREE is presented in ﬁgure 2.12 which yields a
Figure 2.12
Representation of similarity between occupations (Kraus, 1976) by ADDTREE.
Additive Similarity Trees 65
Table 2.4
Correspondence Indices (Occupations)
ADDTREE HCS SSA/2D SSA/3D
Stress .06 .06 .15 .09
r .96 .94 DEMO .91
coherent classiﬁcation of occupations. Note that while some of the obtained clusters
(e.g., blue collar, academicians) also emerge from ﬁgure 2.11, others (e.g., security,
business) do not. The vertical ordering of occupations produced by the program
corresponds to collar color, with academic white collar at one end and manual blue
collar at the other.
The DEMO indices for occupations are presented in table 2.4.
In the remainder of this section we comment on the robustness of tree structures
and discuss DEMO appropriateness of tree vs. spatial representations.
Robustness
The stability of the representations obtained by ADDTREE was examined using
artiﬁcial data. Several additive trees (consisting of 16, 24, and 32 objects) were
selected. Random error was added to the resulting distances according to the fol-
lowing rule: to each distance d we added a random number selected from a uniform
DEMO over ½d=3; þd=3 . Thus, the expected error of measurement for each
distance is 1/6 of its length. Several sets of such DEMO were analyzed by ADDTREE.
The correlations between the solutions and the data were around .80. Nevertheless,
the original tree-structures were recovered with very DEMO errors indicating that tree
structures are fairly robust. A noteworthy feature of ADDTREE is that as the noise
level increases, the internal arcs become shorter. Thus, when the signal-to-noise ratio
is low, the major clusters DEMO likely to be less distinctive.
In all three data sets analyzed above, the ordinal and the cardinal versions of
ADDTREE produce practically the same tree-structures. This observation suggests
that the tree-structure is essentially determined by the DEMO properties of the data.
To investigate this question, we have performed DEMO transformations on
several sets of real and artiﬁcial data, and applied DEMO to them. The selected
transformations were the following: ranking, and d !dy, y ¼ 1=4; 1=3; 1=2; 1; 2; 3; 4:
The obtained tree-structures for the di¤erent transformations were highly similar.
DEMO was a tendency, however, for the high-power transformations to produce non-
centered subtrees such as ﬁgure 2.1.
66 Sattath and Tversky
Tree vs. Spatial Representations
The applications of ADDTREE DEMO above yielded interpretable tree struc-
tures. Furthermore, the tree distances reproduced DEMO observed measures of similar-
ity, or dissimilarity, to a reasonably high degree of approximation. The application
of HCS to the same data yielded DEMO tree structures, but the reproduction of the
observed proximities was, naturally, less satisfactory in all three data sets.
The comparison of ADDTREE with SSA indicates that the former provided a
better account of the data DEMO the latter, as measured by the product-moment cor-
relation and by DEMO stress coe‰cient. The fact that ADDTREE achieved lower stress
in all data sets is particularly signiﬁcant because SSA/3D has more free parameters,
DEMO it is designed to minimize stress while ADDTREE is not. Furthermore, DEMO the
clusters induced by the trees were readily interpretable, the dimensions DEMO emerged
from the spatial representations were not always readily interpretable. Moreover, DEMO
major dimension of the spatial solutions (e.g., size of animals, DEMO prestige of occu-
pations) also emerged as the vertical ordering in DEMO corresponding trees.
These results indicate that some similarity data are better described by a tree than
by a spatial conﬁguration. Naturally, there are other data for which dimensional
models are more suitable, see, e.g., Fillenbaum and Rapoport [1971], and Shepard
[1974]. The appropriateness of tree vs. spatial representation depends on the nature
of the task and the structure of DEMO stimuli. Some object sets have a natural product
structure, e.g., emotions may be described in terms of intensity and pleasantness;
sound may DEMO characterized in terms of intensity and frequency. Such object sets are
natural candidates for dimensional representations. Other objects sets have a hierar-
chical structure DEMO may result, for instance, from an evolutionary process in which
all objects have an initial common structure and later develop additional distinctive
features. DEMO, a hierarchal structure may result from people’s tendency to
classify objects DEMO mutually exclusive categories. The prevalence of hierarchical
classiﬁcations can be attributed to the added complexity involved in the introduction
of cross classiﬁcations with overlapping DEMO Structures generated by an evolu-
tionary process or classiﬁcation scheme are likely candidates for tree representations.
It is interesting to note that tree and DEMO models are opposing in the sense that
very simple conﬁgurations of one model are incompatible with the other model. For
example, a square grid in the plane cannot be adequately described by an additive
tree. On DEMO other hand, an additive tree with a single internal node cannot DEMO ade-
quately represented by a non-trivial spatial model [Holman, 1972]. These DEMO
tions suggest that the two models may be appropriate for di¤erent data and may
capture di¤erent aspects of the same data.
Additive Similarity Trees 67
Discussion
Feature Trees
As was noted earlier, a rooted additive tree can be interpreted as a feature tree. In
this DEMO, each object is viewed as a set of features. Furthermore, each arc
represents the set of features shared by all the objects that DEMO from that arc, and
the arc length corresponds to the measure DEMO that set. Hence, the features of an object
are the features DEMO all arcs which lead to that object, and its measure is DEMO distance
from the root. The tree-distance d between any two objects, DEMO, corresponds to
their set-distance, i.e., the measure of the symmetric DEMO between the respective
feature sets:
dðx; yÞ¼ f ðX Y DEMO f ðY XÞ
where X; Y are the feature sets associated DEMO the objects x; y, respectively, and f is
the measure DEMO the feature space.
A more general model of similarity, based on DEMO matching, was developed in
Tversky [1977]. In this theory, the dissimilarity between x and y is monotonically
related to
dðx; yÞ¼ af ðX Y Þþ bf ðY X Þ yf ðX V YÞ a; b; y b0;
where X; Y , and f are deﬁned DEMO above. According to this form (called the contrast
model) the dissimilarity between objects is expressed as a linear combination of the
measures of DEMO common and distinctive features. Thus, an additive tree is a special
DEMO of the contrast model in which symmetry and the triangle inequality hold, and
the feature space has a tree structure.
Decomposition of Trees
There are three types of additive trees that have a particularly simple structure:DEMO
ultrametric, singular, and linear. In an ultrametric tree all objects are equidistant
from the root. A singular tree is an additive tree with DEMO single internal node. A linear
tree, or a line, is an additive tree in which all objects lie on a line (see ﬁgure 2.13).
Recall that an additive tree is ultrametric i¤ it satisﬁes DEMO ultrametric inequality. An
additive tree is singular i¤ for each object x in S there exists a length x such that
dðx; yÞ¼ x þy. An additive tree is a line i¤ the triangle equality dðx; yÞþ dðy; zÞ¼
dðx; zÞ holds for any three elements in DEMO Note that all three types of trees have no
more than n parameters.
Throughout this section let T; T1; T2 , etc. be DEMO trees deﬁned on the same set
of objects. T1 is said to be simpler than T2 i¤ the graph of T1 (i.e., the DEMO
68 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 2.13
An illustration of di¤erent types of DEMO trees.
without the metric) is obtained from the graph of T2 DEMO cancelling one or more
internal arcs and joining their endpoints. Hence, DEMO singular tree is simpler than any
other tree deﬁned on the same object set. If T1 and T2 are both simpler than some T3,DEMO
then T1 and T2 are said to be compatible. (Note that DEMO is not transitive.)
Let d1 and d2 denote, respectively, the distance functions of T1 and T2 . It is not dif-
ﬁcult DEMO prove that the distance function d ¼ d1 þd2 can be represented by an addi-
tive tree i¤ T1 and T2 are compatible. (Su‰ciency follows from the fact that the sum
of two trees with the DEMO graph is a tree with the same graph. The proof of necessity
relies on the fact that for any two incompatible trees there exists DEMO quadruple on
which they are incompatible.)
This result indicates that data which are not representable by a single additive tree
may nevertheless be DEMO as the sum of incompatible additive trees. Such rep-
resentations are discussed by Carroll and Pruzansky [note 3].
Additive Similarity Trees 69
Figure 2.14
Distributions of dissimilarities and distances between DEMO
Another implication of the above result is that tree-structures are preserved by the
addition of singular trees. In particular, the sum of an ultrametric tree TU and a sin-
gular tree TS is an additive tree DEMO with the same graph as TU (see Figure 2.13). This
DEMO to the converse question: can an additive tree T be expressed DEMO TU þTS ?An
interesting observation (attributed to J. S. Farris) DEMO that the distance function d of
an additive tree T can be expressed as dðx; yÞ¼ dUðx; yÞþ x þy, where dU is the
distance function of an ultrametric tree, and x; y are DEMO numbers (not necessarily
positive). If all these numbers are non-negative DEMO d is decomposable into an
ultrametric and a singular tree, i.e., d ¼ dU þdS . It is readily veriﬁed that T is
DEMO as TU þTS i¤ there is a point on T whose distance to any internal node
does not exceed its distance to any external DEMO Another structure of interest is
obtained by the addition of a singular tree TS and a line TL (see ﬁgure 2.13). It can be
shown that an additive tree T is expressible as TS þTL DEMO no more than two internal
arcs meet at any node.
Distribution of Distances
Figure 2.14 presents the distribution of dissimilarities between letters [from Kuen-
DEMO & Janson, 1969] along with the corresponding distributions of distances
derived DEMO ADDTREE, and via SSA/2D. The distributions of derived distances
were DEMO so as to have the same mean and variance as the distribution of
the observed dissimilarities.
70 Sattath and Tversky
Note that the distribution of dissimilarities and the DEMO of distances in the
additive tree are skewed to the left, DEMO the distribution of distances from the
two-dimensional representation is skewed to the right. This pattern occurs in all three
data sets, and reﬂects a general phenomenon.
In an additive tree, there are generally many large distances and few small dis-
tances. This follows from the observation that in DEMO rooted trees, there are fewer
pairs of objects that belong to DEMO same cluster than pairs of objects that belong to
di¤erent clusters. In contrast, a convex Euclidean conﬁguration yields many small
distances and fewer large distances. Indeed, under fairly natural conditions, the two
models can be DEMO distinguished by the skewness of their distance distribution.
The skewness of a distribution can be deﬁned in terms of di¤erent criteria, e.g.,
the relation between the mean and the median, or the third central moment of the
distribution. We employ here another notion of skewness that is DEMO on the
relation between the mean and the midpoint. A distribution is skewed to the left,
according to the mean-midpoint criterion, i¤ the mean m exceeds the midpoint
l ¼ 1=2 maxx; y dðx; DEMO . The distribution is skewed to the right, according to the
DEMO criterion, i¤ m < l . From a practical standpoint, the mean-midpoint
criterion has two drawbacks. First, it requires ratio scale data. Second, it is sensitive
to error since it depends on the maximal distance. As demonstrated below, however,
this criterion is useful for the investigation of distributions of distances.
A rooted additive tree (with n objects) DEMO centered i¤ no subtree contains more than
n=2 þnðmod 2Þ objects. (DEMO that this bound is n=2 when n is even, and ðn DEMO
when n is odd.) In an additive tree, one can always select a root such that the result-
ing rooted tree is centered. DEMO example, the tree in ﬁgure 2.2 is centered around its
root, whereas the tree in ﬁgure 2.1 is not. We can now state DEMO following.
skewness theorem
I. Consider an additive tree T that is expressible as a sum of an ultrametric tree TU
and a singular tree DEMO such that (i) TU is centered around its natural root, DEMO (ii) in
TS the longest arc is no longer than twice the shortest arc. Then the distribution of
distances satisﬁes m > l.
DEMO In a bounded convex subset of the Euclidean plane with the uniform measure, the
distribution of distances satisﬁes m < l.
Part I of the theorem shows that in an additive tree the distribution of distances DEMO
skewed to the left (according to the mean-midpoint criterion) whenever the distances
between the centered root and the external nodes do not vary DEMO much.’’ This
property is satisﬁed, for example, by the trees in ﬁgures 2.8 and 2.10, and by TU, TS,
Additive Similarity Trees 71
and TU þTS in ﬁgure 2.13. Part II DEMO the theorem shows that in the Euclidean plane
the distribution of distances is skewed to the right, in the above sense, whenever the
DEMO of points ‘‘has no holes.’’ The proof of the Skewness Theorem is given in the
appendix.
The theorem provides a sharp separation of these DEMO families of representations
in terms of the skewness of their distance distribution. This result does not hold for
additive trees and Euclidean representations in DEMO In particular, it can be shown
that the distribution of distances DEMO all points on the circumference of a circle
(which is a DEMO representation, albeit nonconvex) is skewed to the left. This
fact may explain the presence of ‘‘holes’’ in some conﬁgurations obtained through
multidimensional scaling DEMO Cunningham, note 3, ﬁgure 1.1]. It can also be shown
that the distribution of distances between all points on a line (which is a limiting case
of an additive tree which cannot be expressed as DEMO þTS ) is skewed to the right.
Nevertheless, the available computational DEMO theoretical evidence indicates that the
distribution of distances in an additive tree is generally skewed to the left, whereas in
a Euclidean representation it is generally skewed to the right. This observation sug-
gests the intriguing DEMO of evaluating the appropriateness of these representa-
tions on the basis of distributional properties of observed dissimilarities.
Appendix
Proof of the Skewness Theorem
Part DEMO
Consider an additive tree T ¼
¼ PdUðx; yÞ þ
Pdðx;DEMO
yÞ ¼
m
2
TU þTS with n external nodes. Hence,
dSðx;
P
2
yÞ
¼
mU
þ
mS
and
n
n
DEMO
¼
1
2 max dðx; yÞ blU
þ
lS
where lU DEMO 1=2 max dUðx; yÞ is the distance between the root and DEMO external nodes
in the ultrametric tree, and lS is the length DEMO the longest arc in the singular tree. To
show that T satisﬁes m > l, it su‰ces to establish the inequalities: mU > DEMO and
mS > lS for its ultrametric and singular components. The inequality mS > lS follows
at once from the assumption that, in the singular tree, the shortest arc is not less than
72 Sattath and Tversky
half the longest arc. To prove mU > DEMO , suppose the ultrametric tree has k subtrees,
nk objects, DEMO originate directly from the root. Since the tree is cen-
mU
tered ni an=2 þnðmod 2Þ where n ¼ i ni . Clearly
We DEMO that Px; y dUðx; yÞ > nðn 1ÞPl .
U
¼
Px; y dUðx; yÞ=nðn

1Þ.
Let
P
be the set DEMO all pairs of objects that are connected through the root. Hence,
with n1; n2;
...
ð
X
; yÞ dUðx; yÞ DEMO
yÞ A P dUðx; yÞ¼ 2lU Xni ðn
¼
1
i
DEMO
ni Þ
x
;
k
where the equality follows from the DEMO that dUðx; yÞ¼ 2lU for all ðx; yÞ in P.
i ni Þ > nðn 
ni 2 . It can be shown DEMO, subject to the constraint ni an=2
Therefore, it su‰ces to show that 2n > 2 P P ni ðn
n2
þ
1Þ, or equivalently that
þ
nðmod 2Þ, the sum P ni 2 is maximal when k
¼
2. In this case, it is easy to verify that
2
i
2
2
i
G
n
þ
n
> 2ð
DEMO
þ
n
Þ
since
n ; n
¼
n
=2
n
ðmod 2Þ.
1
2
1
2
Part II
Croften’s Second Theorem on convex DEMO [see Kendall & Moran, 1963, pp. 64–66] is
used to establish part II of the Skewness Theorem.
Let S be a bounded convex DEMO in the plane, hence
m
¼
ÐÐÐÐ ððx1
S

x2Þ2 DEMO

y2Þ2Þ1=2 dx1 dy1 dx2 dy2
ÐÐÐÐ dx1 dy1 dx2 dy2
S
We replace the coordinates ðx1; y1; x2; y2Þ by ðp; DEMO; r1; r2Þ where p and y are the polar
coordinates of the line joining ðx1; y1Þ and ðx2; y2Þ,and r1; r2 are the distances from
the respective points to the projection of the DEMO on that line. Thus,
x2
¼
¼
r2 sin y
þ
p cos y;
y2 ¼r2 cos y
þ
p sin y:DEMO
Since the Jacobian of this transformation is r2

r1,
m
¼
ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ
jr1 r2j2 dr1 dr2 dp dy :
jr1 r2j dr1 dr2 dp dy
To prove that m < l we show that DEMO every p and y
l b
ÐÐÐÐ
jr1
jr1


r2j2 dr1 dr2 :
r2j2 dr1 dr2
x1
r1 sin y
þ
p cos y;
y1 ¼r1 cos y
þ
p sin y;
Additive Similarity Trees 73
Given some p and y, let L be the length of the cord in S whose polar coordinates are
p; y. Hence,
ð dr1 ð jr1
b
a

r2jn dr2
DEMO
dr1
dr1
ðb ðr1
!ð
r1
ð
b
n
n
ð

Þ
þ
ð

Þ
r
r
r
r
r
r
d
DEMO
a
1
2
2
r
1
2
1
2
@0


ðr1

r2Þnþ1

r1
þ
ðr2
n
þ
1
a
aÞnþ1 DEMO
n þ1

r1Þnþ1 dr1

r1Þnþ1
n
þ
1

b
r1
A1
ð
b
a
¼
ð
b
a
¼
a
¼
DEMO
¼
ðn
ð
b
ðn
þ

1Þð1n þ2Þ ððr1 aÞnþ2 ðb
aÞnþ2 þðb aÞnþ2
ðn þ1Þðn þ2Þ
2Lnþ2
þ
1Þðn
þ
2Þ

DEMO b
ÐÐÐÐ
jr1 r2j2 dr1 dr2 L al
jr1 r2j dr1 dr2 ¼ 2
since l is half the supremal chord-length. Moreover, L=2 <DEMO
positive measure, hence m < l.
where a and b are DEMO distances from the endpoints of the chord to the projection of
the origin on that chord, whence L ¼ b a. Consequently,
l for a set of chords with
Notes
We thank Nancy Henley and DEMO Kraus for providing us with data, and Jan deLeeuw for calling DEMO
attention to relevant literature. The work of the ﬁrst author was supported in part by the Psychology Unit
of the Israel Defense Forces.
1. DEMO, E. W. A test of the hierarchical clustering model for dissimilarity DEMO Unpublished manu-
script, University of California at Los Angeles, 1975.
2. Cunningham, J. P. Finding an optimal tree realization of a proximity matrix. Paper presented at the
mathematical psychology meeting, Ann Arbor, August, 1974.
3. Cunningham, J. P. Discrete representations of psychological distance and their applications in visual
memory. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of California at San Diego, 1976.
4. Carroll, J. D., & Pruzansky, S. Fitting of hierarchical tree structure (HTS) models, mixture of HTS
models, and hybrid DEMO, via mathematical programming and alternating least squares, paper presented at
74 Sattath and Tversky
the US–Japan Seminar on Theory, Methods, and DEMO of Multidimensional Scaling and related
techniques, San Diego, August, 1975.
DEMO Kraus, personal communication, 1976.
References
Buneman, P. The recovery of DEMO from measures of dissimilarity. In F. R. Hodson, D. G. Kendall, & P.
Tautu (Eds.), Mathematics in the Archaeological and Historical Sciences. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 1971.
Buneman, P. A note on the metric properties of trees. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, 1974, 17(B),
48–50.
Carroll, J. D. Spatial, non-spatial and hybrid models for DEMO Psychometrika, 1976, 41, 439–463.
Carroll, J. D., & Chang, J. J. A method for ﬁtting a class of hierarchical tree structure DEMO to dissim-
ilarities data and its application to some ‘‘body parts’’ data of Miller’s. Proceedings, 81st Annual Conven-
tion, American Psychological Association, 1973, 8, 1097–1098.
Dobson, J. Unrooted trees for numerical taxonomy. Journal of Applied Probability, 1974, 11, 32–42.
Fillenbaum, S., & Rapoport, DEMO Structures in the subjective lexicon. New York: Academic Press, 1971.
Guttman, L. A general nonmetric technique for ﬁnding the smallest coordinate space for a conﬁguration of
points. Psychometrika, 1968, 33, 469–506.
Hakimi, S. DEMO, & Yau, S. S. Distance matrix of a graph and its realizability. Quarterly of Applied Mathe-
matics, 1964, 22, 305–317.
Henley, DEMO M. A psychological study of the semantics of animal terms. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 1969, 8, 176–184.
Holman, E. DEMO The relation between hierarchical and Euclidean models for psychological distances. Psy-
chometrika, 1972, 37, 417–423.
Jardine, N., & Sibson, R. Mathematical DEMO New York: Wiley, 1971.
Johnson, S. C. Hierarchical clustering schemes. DEMO, 1967, 32, 241–254.
Kendall, M. G., & Moran, M. A. Geometrical Probability. New York: Hafner Publishing Company, 1963.
Kruskal, J. B. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of ﬁt to a nonmetric hypothesis. DEMO
metrika, 1964, 29, 1–27.
Kuennapas, T., & Janson, A. J. Multidimensional similarity of letters. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1969,
28, 3–12.
Lingoes, J. C. An IBM 360/67 program for Guttman–Lingoes DEMO space analysis-PI. Behavioral
Science, 1970, 15, 536–540.
Patrinos, A. N., & Hakimi, S. L. The distance matrix of a graph and DEMO tree realization. Quarterly of
Applied Mathematics, 1972, 30, 255–269.
Shepard, R. N. Representation of structure in similarity data: Problems and prospects. Psychometrika,
1974, 39, 373–421.
Sneath, P. H. A., & Sokal, R. R. Numerical taxonomy: the principles and practice of numerical classiﬁca-
tion. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1973.
Turner, J., & Kautz, W. H. A survey of progress in graph theory in the Soviet DEMO Siam Review, 1970,
12, 1–68. (Supplement)
Tversky, A. Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 327–352.
3 Studies of Similarity
Amos Tversky and Itamar Gati
Any event in DEMO history of the organism is, in a sense, unique. Consequently, DEMO
nition, learning, and judgment presuppose an ability to categorize stimuli and clas-
sify situations by similarity. As Quine (1969) puts it: ‘‘There is nothing more basic
to thought and language than our sense of DEMO; our sorting of things into
kinds’’ [p. 116]. Indeed, the notion of similarity—that appears under such di¤erent
names as proximity, resemblance, communality, representativeness, and psychologi-
cal distance—is fundamental to theories of perception, learning, and judgment. This
chapter outlines a new theoretical analysis of similarity and DEMO some of its
empirical consequences.
The theoretical analysis of similarity relations has been dominated by geometric
models. Such models represent each object as a DEMO in some coordinate space so
that the metric distances between the points reﬂect the observed similarities between
the respective objects. In general, the space is assumed to be Euclidean, and the pur-
pose of the analysis is to embed the objects in a space of minimum dimensionality on
DEMO basis of the observed similarities, see Shepard (1974).
In a recent paper (Tversky, 1977), the ﬁrst author challenged the dimensional-
DEMO assumptions that underlie the geometric approach to similarity and developed
an alternative feature-theoretical approach to the analysis of similarity relations.
In this approach, each object a is characterized by a set of features, denoted A, DEMO
the observed similarity of a to b, denoted sða; bÞ, DEMO expressed as a function of their
common and distinctive features (see DEMO 3.1). That is, the observed similarity
sða; bÞ is expressed as a function of three arguments: A V B, the features DEMO by a
and b; A B, the features of a that are not shared by b; B A, the features of b DEMO
are not shared by a. Thus the similarity between objects is expressed as a feature-
matching function (i.e., a function that measures the DEMO to which two sets of
features match each other) rather than DEMO the metric distance between points in a
coordinate space.
The theory is based on a set of qualitative assumptions about the observed simi-
larity DEMO They yield an interval similarity scale S, which preserves the observed
DEMO order [i.e., Sða; bÞ > Sðc; d
Þ
the relevant DEMO space such that
i¤ sða; bÞ > sðc; dÞ, and DEMO scale f , deﬁned on
Sða; bÞ¼ yf ðA V BÞ DEMO ðA

BÞ bf ðB

AÞ
where y; a; b b0:
ð1Þ
According to this form, called the contrast model, DEMO similarity of a to b is
described as a linear combination (DEMO a contrast) of the measures of their common
76 Tversky and Gati
Figure 3.1
A graphical illustration of the relation DEMO two feature sets.
and distinctive features. Naturally, similarity increases with the DEMO of the com-
mon features and decreases with the measure of the distinctive features.
The contrast model does not deﬁne a unique index of DEMO but rather a family
of similarity indices deﬁned by the values of the parameters y, a, and b . For exam-
ple, if y ¼ 1, and a ¼ b ¼ 0, then Sða; bÞ¼ f ðA V BÞ; that is, similarity equals the
measure DEMO the common features. On the other hand, if y ¼
Sða; bÞ¼ f ðA BÞþ f ðB AÞ; that is, the dissimilarity DEMO
0, and a ¼ b ¼ 1, then
a to b equals the mea-
sure of the symmetric di¤erence of the respective feature DEMO, see Restle (1961). Note
that in the former case (DEMO ¼ 1, a ¼ b ¼ 0), the similarity between DEMO is deter-
mined only by their common features, whereas in the DEMO case (y ¼ 0, a ¼ b ¼ 1), it
is determined by their distinctive features only. The contrast model expresses simi-
DEMO between objects as the weighted di¤erence of the measures of their common
and distinctive features, thereby allowing for a variety of similarity relations over the
same set of objects.
The contrast model is formulated in terms DEMO the parameters ðy; a; bÞ that char-
acterize the task, DEMO the scale f , which reﬂects the salience or prominence of the
various features. Thus f measures the contribution of any particular (common or
distinctive) feature to the similarity between objects. The scale value f ðAÞ associated
with stimulus a is regarded, therefore, as a measure of DEMO overall salience of that
stimulus. The factors that contribute to the salience of a stimulus include: intensity,
frequency, familiarity, good form, DEMO informational content. The manner in which
the scale f and the parameters ðy; a; bÞ depend on the context and the task are DEMO
cussed in the following sections.
This chapter employs the contrast model to analyze the following three problems:
the relation between judgments of similarity DEMO di¤erence; the nature of asymmetric
similarities; and the e¤ects of context on similarity. All three problems concern
changes in similarity induced, respectively, DEMO the formulation of the task (as judg-
ment of similarity or DEMO judgment of di¤erence), the direction of comparison, and the
e¤ective DEMO (i.e., the set of objects under consideration).
Studies of Similarity 77
To account for the e¤ects of these manipulations DEMO the present theoretical
framework, we introduce several hypotheses that relate focus DEMO attention to the
experimental task. In particular, it is assumed that DEMO attend more to common
features in judgments of similarity than in judgments of di¤erence, that people attend
more to the subject than to the referent of the comparison, and that people attend
primarily to features that have classiﬁcatory signiﬁcance.
These hypotheses are formulated in terms of the contrast DEMO and are tested in
several experimental studies of similarity. For a more comprehensive treatment of
the contrast model and a review of relevant data (including the present studies), see
Tversky (1977).
Similarity versus Di¤erence
What is the relation between judgments of similarity and judgements of di¤erence?DEMO
Some authors emphasized that the two judgments are conceptually independent;
others have treated them as perfectly correlated. The data appear to support the DEMO
ter view. For example, Hosman and Kuennapas (1972) obtained independent DEMO
ments of similarity and di¤erence for all pairs of lower-case letters on a scale from 0
to 100. The product-moment correlation between the judgments DEMO .98, and the
di¤erence for 21 pairs of countries using a DEMO rating scale. The productslope of the regression line was .91. We also collected judgments of similarity and
moment correlation between the ratings was again DEMO The near-perfect negative
correlation between similarity and di¤erence, however, does not always hold.
In applying the contrast model to judgments of similarity and DEMO di¤erence, it is
reasonable to assume that enlarging the measure of DEMO common features increases
similarity and decreases di¤erence, whereas enlarging the measure DEMO the distinc-
tive features decreases similarity and increases di¤erence. More formally, DEMO sða; bÞ
and dða; bÞ denote ordinal measures of similarity and di¤erence, respectively. Thus
sða; bÞ is expected to increase with f DEMO V BÞ and to decrease with f ðA BÞ and with
f ðB AÞ, whereas dða; bÞ is expected to decrease with f DEMO V BÞ and to increase
with f ðA BÞ and with f ðB AÞ.
The relative weight assigned to the common and the distinctive DEMO may di¤er
in the two judgments because of a change in focus. In the assessment of similarity
between stimuli, the subject may attend more to their common features, whereas in
the assessment of di¤erence between stimuli, the subject may attend more to their
distinctive features. Stated di¤erently, DEMO instruction to consider similarity may lead
the subject to focus primarily on the features that contribute to the similarity of the
78 Tversky and Gati
stimuli, whereas the instruction to consider di¤erence may lead the subject to focus
primarily on the features that contribute to DEMO di¤erence between the stimuli. Con-
sequently, the relative weight of the DEMO features is expected to be greater in the
assessment of similarity than in the assessment of di¤erence.
To investigate the consequences of this focusing DEMO, suppose that both
similarity and di¤erence measures satisfy the contrast model DEMO opposite signs but
with di¤erent weights. Furthermore, suppose for simplicity that DEMO measures are
symmetric. Hence, under the contrast model, there exist non-negative constants y
and l such that
sða; bÞ > sðc; eÞ
DEMO
dða; bÞ > dðc; eÞ f ðA BÞþ f ðB
> f ðC  Þþ
i¤
E
The weights associated with the distinctive DEMO can be set equal to 1 in the sym-
metric case with no loss of generality. Hence, y and l reﬂect the relative weight of the
common features in the assessment of similarity and di¤erence, respectively.
Note that if y is very large, then the similarity ordering is essentially determined
by the common features. On the other hand, if l is very small, then the di¤erence
ordering is determined primarily by the distinctive features. Consequently, both
sða; bÞ > sðc; eÞ and dða; bÞ > dðc; eÞ may be obtained whenever
f ðA V DEMO > f ðC V EÞ and f ðA BÞþ f ðB AÞ > f ðC EÞþ f ðE CÞ: ð4Þ
That is, if DEMO common features are weighed more heavily in judgments of similarity
than in judgments of di¤erence, then a pair of objects with many common and many
distinctive features may be perceived as both more similar and more DEMO than
another pair of objects with fewer common and fewer distinctive features.
Study 1: Similarity versus Di¤erence
All subjects that took part in the experiments reported in this chapter were under-
graduate students majoring in the DEMO sciences from the Hebrew University in
Jerusalem and the Ben-Gurion University in Beer-Sheba. They participated in the
studies as part of the requirements for DEMO psychology course. The material was pre-
sented in booklets and administered in the classroom. The instructions were printed
BÞ f ðB AÞ
f ðC DEMO f ðE
AÞ lf ðA V BÞ
FðE CÞ lf ðC V E
Þ
ð3Þ
i¤
yf ðA V BÞ f ðA
> yf DEMO V E
Þ

CÞ;
ð2Þ
Studies of Similarity 79
Table 3.1
Percentage of Subjects That Selected the DEMO Pair in the Similarity Group (Ps ) and in the Di¤erence
DEMO (Pd )
Prominent Pairs Nonprominent Pairs
Ps
Pd
Ps
þ
1 W. Germany–E. Germany Ceylon–Nepal 66.7 70.0 136.7
2 Lebanon–Jordan Upper Volta–Tanzania 69.0 DEMO 112.3
3 Canada–U.S.A. Bulgaria–Albania 80.0 16.7 96.7
4 Belgium–Holland Peru–Costa Rica 78.6 21.4 100.0
5 Switzerland–Denmark Pakistan–Mongolia 55.2 28.6 83.8
6 Syria–Iraq Liberia–Kenya 63.3 DEMO 91.9
7 U.S.S.R.–U.S.A. Paraguay–Ecuador 20.0 100.0 120.0
8 Sweden–Norway Thailand–Burma 69.0 40.7 109.7
9 Turkey–Greece Bolivia–Honduras 51.7 86.7 138.4
10 Austria–Switzerland Zaire–Madagascar 79.3 24.1 DEMO
11 Italy–France Bahrain–Yemen 44.8 70.0 114.8
12 China–Japan Guatemala–Costa Rica 40.0 93.1 133.1
13 S. Korea–N. Korea Nigeria–Zaire 63.3 60.0 123.3
14 Uganda–Libya Paraguay–Ecuador DEMO 65.5 88.8
15 Australia–S. Africa Iceland–New Zealand 57.1 60.0 117.1
16 Poland–Czechoslovakia Colombia–Honduras 82.8 37.0 119.8
17 Portugal–Spain Tunis–Morocco 55.2 73.3 128.5
18 Vatican–Luxembourg DEMO Marino 50.0 85.7 135.7
19 England–Ireland Pakistan–Mongolia 80.0 58.6 138.6
20 Norway–Denmark Indonesia–Philippines 51.7 25.0 76.7
Average 59.1 54.4 113.5
Pd
in the booklet DEMO also read aloud by the experimenter. The di¤erent forms of each
booklet were assigned randomly to di¤erent subjects.
Twenty sets of four countries were DEMO Each set included two pairs of
countries: a prominent pair and DEMO nonprominent pair. The prominent pairs consisted
of countries that were well known to the subjects (e.g., U.S.A.–U.S.S.R.). The non-
prominent pairs consisted DEMO countries that were known to our subjects but not as
well as the prominent pairs (e.g., Paraguay–Ecuador). This assumption was veriﬁed
in DEMO pilot study in which 50 subjects were presented with all 20 quadruples of coun-
tries and asked to indicate which of the two pairs DEMO countries that are more
prominent, or better known. For each quadruple, over 85% of the subjects ordered
the pairs in accord with our DEMO priori ordering. All 20 sets of countries are displayed in
table 3.1.
Two groups of 30 subjects each participated in the main study. All DEMO were
presented with the same 20 sets in the same order. The pairs within each set were
arranged so that the prominent pairs appeared DEMO equal number of times on the left
and on the right. One group of subjects—the similarity group—selected between the
80 Tversky and Gati
two pairs of each set the pair of DEMO that are more similar. The second group of
subjects—the di¤erence group—selected between the two pairs in each set the pair of
countries that are DEMO di¤erent.
Let s and d denote, respectively, the percentage of subjects who selected
the prominent pair in the similarity task and in the DEMO task. (Throughout
this chapter, percentages were computed relative to the number of subjects who
responded to each problem, which was occasionally smaller than the total number of
subjects.) These values are presented in table 3.1 for all sets. If similarity and di¤er-
ence are complementary (i.e., DEMO ¼ l), then the sum s þd should equal 100 for all
pairs. On the other hand, if y > l, then DEMO sum should exceed 100. The average
value of s þd across all subjects and sets is 113.5, which is signiﬁcantly greater
than 100 ðt ¼ 3:27; df ¼ 59; p <:01Þ. Moreover, table 3.1 shows that, on the aver-
age, the prominent pairs were DEMO more frequently than the nonprominent pairs
both under similarity instructions (59.1%) and under di¤erence instructions (54.4%),
contrary to complementarity. These results DEMO that the relative weight of
the common and the distinctive features vary with the nature of the task and support
the focusing hypothesis that DEMO attend more to the common features in judg-
ments of similarity than in judgments of di¤erence.
Directionality and Asymmetry
Symmetry has been regarded as DEMO essential property of similarity relations. This
view underlies the geometric approach to the analysis of similarity, in which dissimi-
larity between objects is represented as a metric distance function. Although many
types of proximity data, such as word associations or confusion probabilities, are
often nonsymmetric, these asymmetries DEMO been attributed to response biases. In
this section, we demonstrate the DEMO of systematic asymmetries in direct judg-
ments of similarity and argue that similarity should not be viewed as a symmetric
relation. The observed asymmetries DEMO explained in the contrast model by the rela-
tive salience of the stimuli and the directionality of the comparison.
Similarity judgments can be regarded DEMO extensions of similarity statements (i.e.,
statements of the form ‘‘a DEMO like b’’). Such a statement is directional; it has a DEMO,
a, and a referent, b, and it is not DEMO in general to the converse similarity
statement ‘‘b is like a.’’ In fact, the choice of a subject and a referent depends, in DEMO
at least, on the relative salience of the objects. We tend DEMO select the more salient
stimulus, or the prototype, as a referent and the less salient stimulus, or the variant,
as a subject. Thus we say ‘‘the portrait resembles the person’’ rather than ‘‘the person
Studies of Similarity 81
resembles the portrait.’’ We say ‘‘the son resembles DEMO father’’ rather than ‘‘the
father resembles the son,’’ and we say ‘‘North Korea is like Red China’’ rather than
‘‘Red China is like DEMO Korea.’’
As is demonstrated later, this asymmetry in the choice of DEMO statements
is associated with asymmetry in judgments of similarity. Thus the judged similarity
of North Korea to Red China exceeds the judged similarity of DEMO China to North
Korea. In general, the direction of asymmetry is DEMO by the relative salience
of the stimuli: The variant is more DEMO to the prototype than vice versa.
If sða; bÞ is interpreted DEMO the degree to which a is similar to b, then a DEMO the subject
of the comparison and b is the referent. In such a task, one naturally focuses on the
subject of the comparison. Hence, the features of the subject are weighted more
heavily than the features of the referent (i.e., a > b ). Thus similarity is reduced more
by the distinctive features of the subject than by the DEMO features of the refer-
ent. For example, a toy train is DEMO similar to a real train, because most features of
the toy DEMO are included in the real train. On the other hand, a DEMO train is not as
similar to a toy train, because many DEMO the features of a real train are not included in
the toy train.
It follows readily from the contrast model, with a > b , that
sða; bÞ > sðb; aÞ
i¤
yf ðA V DEMO ðABÞbf ðBAÞ
> yf ðA V BÞaf ðBAÞbf ðA
f ðB AÞ > f ðA BÞ:

BÞð5Þ
i¤
Thus sða; bÞ > sðb; aÞ whenever the distinctive features of b are more salient than the
distinctive features of a, or whenever b is more prominent than a. Hence, the con-
junction of the contrast model and the focusing hypothesis ða > bÞ implies that the
direction of asymmetry is determined DEMO the relative salience of the stimuli so that
the less salient stimulus is more similar to the salient stimulus than vice versa.
In the DEMO model, sða; bÞ¼ sðb; aÞ if either f ðA BÞ¼ DEMO ðB AÞ or a ¼ b.
That is, symmetry holds whenever DEMO objects are equally salient, or whenever the
comparison is nondirectional. To DEMO the latter condition, compare the follow-
ing two forms:
1. DEMO the degree to which a and b are similar to each other.
2. Assess the degree to which a is similar to b.
In (1), the task is formulated in a nondirectional fashion, and there is no reason to
emphasize one argument more than the other. Hence, it is expected that a ¼ b and
82 Tversky and Gati
sða; bÞ¼ sðb; aÞ. In (2), on the other hand, the task is directional, and hence the DEMO
ject is likely to be the focus of attention rather than the referent. In this case, asym-
metry is expected, provided the two DEMO are not equally salient. The directionality
of the task and the di¤erential salience of the stimuli, therefore, are necessary and
su‰cient for asymmetry.
DEMO the following two studies, the directional asymmetry prediction, derived from
the contrast model, is tested using semantic (i.e., countries) and perceptual (i.e., ﬁg-
ures) stimuli. Both studies employ essentially the same design. DEMO of stimuli that
di¤er in salience are used to test for the presence of asymmetry in the choice of sim-
ilarity statements and in DEMO assessments of similarity.
Study 2: Similarity of Countries
In order to DEMO the asymmetry prediction, we constructed 21 pairs of countries so
that DEMO element of the pair is considerably more prominent than the other (DEMO,
U.S.A.–Mexico, Belgium–Luxembourg). To validate this assumption, we presented
all pairs to a group of 68 subjects and asked them to indicate DEMO each pair the country
they regard as more prominent. In all cases except one, more than two-thirds of the
subjects agreed with our initial judgment. All 21 pairs of countries are displayed in
table 3.2, where the more prominent element of each pair is denoted by p and DEMO less
prominent by q.
Next, we tested the hypothesis that the DEMO prominent element is generally
chosen as the referent rather than as the subject of similarity statements. A group of
69 subjects was asked to DEMO which of the following two phrases they prefer to
use: ‘‘p DEMO similar to q,’’ or ‘‘q is similar to p.’’ The percentage of subjects that selected
the latter form, in accord with our hypothesis, is displayed in table 3.2 under the
label P. It is evident from the table that in all cases the great majority of subjects
DEMO the form in which the more prominent country serves as a referent.
jects each to assess the similarity of each pair on a scale DEMO 1 (no similarity) to 20To test the hypothesis that sðq; DEMO > sðp; qÞ, we instructed two groups of 77 sub-
(DEMO similarity). The two groups were presented with the same list of 21 pairs,
and the only di¤erence between the two groups was DEMO order of the countries within
each pair. For example, one group DEMO asked to assess ‘‘the degree to which Red
China is similar to North Korea,’’ whereas the second group was asked to assess ‘‘the
DEMO to which North Korea is similar to Red China.’’ The lists were balanced so
that the more prominent countries appeared about an equal number DEMO times in the
ﬁrst and second position. The average ratings for each ordered pair, denoted sðp; qÞ
and sðq; pÞ are displayed in table 3.2. The average sðq; pÞ was signiﬁcantly higher
than the average sðp; qÞ across all subjects and pairs. A t-test for correlated samples
Studies of Similarity 83
Table 3.2
Average Similarities and Di¤erences for 21 DEMO of Countries
pq
P
sð p; qÞ
sðq; pÞ
d
ð
p; qÞ
dðq; pÞ
1 U.S.A. Mexico 91.1 6.46 7.65 11.78 DEMO
2 U.S.S.R. Poland 98.6 15.12 15.18 6.37 7.30
3 China Albania 94.1 8.69 9.16 14.56 12.16
4 U.S.A. Israel 95.6 9.70 10.65 13.78 12.53
DEMO Japan Philippines 94.2 12.37 11.95 7.74 5.50
6 U.S.A. Canada 97.1 16.96 17.33 4.40 3.82
7 U.S.S.R. Israel 91.1 3.41 3.69 18.41 17.25
8 DEMO Ireland 97.1 13.32 13.49 7.50 5.04
9 W. Germany Austria 87.0 15.60 15.20 6.95 6.67
10 U.S.S.R. France 82.4 5.21 5.03 15.70 15.00
11 DEMO Luxembourg 95.6 15.54 16.14 4.80 3.93
12 U.S.A. U.S.S.R. 65.7 5.84 6.20 16.65 16.11
13 China N. Korea 95.6 13.13 14.22 8.20 7.48
14 DEMO Ceylon 97.1 13.91 13.88 5.51 7.32
15 U.S.A. France 86.8 10.42 11.09 10.58 10.15
16 U.S.S.R. Cuba 91.1 11.46 12.32 11.50 10.50
17 England DEMO 98.5 4.97 6.52 15.81 14.95
18 France Israel 86.8 7.48 7.34 12.20 11.88
19 U.S.A. W. Germany 94.1 11.30 10.70 10.25 11.96
20 U.S.S.R. DEMO 98.5 6.61 8.51 12.92 11.60
21 France Algeria 95.6 7.86 7.94 10.58 10.15
yielded t ¼ 2:92, df ¼ 20, and p <:01. To obtain a statistical test based on individ-
ual data, DEMO computed for each subject a directional asymmetry score, deﬁned as the
DEMO similarity for comparisons with a prominent referent [i.e., sðq; pÞ minus the
average similarity for comparison with a prominent subject, i.e., sðp; qÞ. The average
di¤erence (.42) was signiﬁcantly positive: t ¼ 2:99, df ¼ 153, p <:01.
The foregoing study was DEMO with judgments of di¤erence instead of judg-
ments of similarity. Two groups of 23 subjects each received the same list of 21 pairs,
DEMO the only di¤erence between the groups, again, was the order of the countries
within each pair. For example, one group was asked to assess ‘‘the degree to
which the U.S.S.R. is di¤erent from Poland,’’ DEMO the second group was asked to
assess ‘‘the degree to which Poland is di¤erent from the U.S.S.R.’’ All subjects were
asked to rate the DEMO on a scale from 1 (minimal di¤erence) to 20 (maximal
DEMO).
If judgments of di¤erence follow the contrast model (with opposite DEMO) and the
focusing hypothesis ða > bÞ holds, then the prominent stimulus p is expected to di¤er
from the less prominent stimulus q DEMO than q di¤ers from p [i.e., dðp; qÞ > dðq; DEMO
The average judgments of di¤erence for all ordered pairs are displayed in table 3.2.
84 Tversky and Gati
Figure 3.2
Examples of pairs of ﬁgures used DEMO test the prediction of asymmetry. (a) Example of a pair of ﬁgures
(from set 1) that di¤er in goodness of form. (b) Example of a pair of ﬁgures (from set 2) that di¤er in
complexity.
The average dðp; qÞ across all subjects and pairs was signiﬁcantly higher than the
average dðq; pÞ.A t-test for correlated samples yielded t ¼ 2:72, df ¼ 20, p <:01.
Furthermore, the average di¤erence between dðp; qÞ and dðq; pÞ, computed as pre-
viously for each subject (.63), was signiﬁcantly positive: t DEMO 2:24, df ¼ 45, p <:05.
Hence, the DEMO asymmetry was conﬁrmed in direct judgments of both similarity
and di¤erence.
Study 3: Similarity of Figures
Two sets of eight pairs of geometric ﬁgures served as stimuli in the present study.
In the ﬁrst set, one ﬁgure in each pair, denoted p, had better form than the DEMO,
denoted q. In the second set, the two ﬁgures in DEMO pair were roughly equivalent
with respect to goodness of form, but DEMO ﬁgure, denoted p, was richer or more
complex than the other, denoted q. Examples of pairs of ﬁgures from each set are
presented in ﬁgure 3.2.
We hypothesized that both goodness of form and complexity DEMO to the
salience of geometric ﬁgures. Moreover, we expected a ‘‘good DEMO to be more
salient than a ‘‘bad ﬁgure,’’ although the latter is generally more complex. For pairs
of ﬁgures that do not vary DEMO with respect to goodness of form, however, the more
complex ﬁgure is expected to be more salient.
A group of 69 subjects received DEMO entire list of 16 pairs of ﬁgures. The two ele-
ments of each pair were displayed side by side. For each pair, the subjects were asked
to choose which of the following two statements they preferred DEMO use: ‘‘the left ﬁgure
Studies of Similarity 85
is similar to the right ﬁgure,’’ or DEMO right ﬁgure is similar to the left ﬁgure.’’ The
positions of the ﬁgures were randomized so that p and q appeared an equal number
DEMO times on the left and on the right. The proportion of subjects that selected the
form ‘‘q is similar to p ’’ exceeded 2/DEMO in all pairs except one. Evidently, the more
salient ﬁgure (deﬁned as previously) was generally chosen as the referent rather than
as the standard.
To test for asymmetry in judgments of similarity, we presented two groups of 66
subjects each with the same 16 pairs of ﬁgures DEMO asked the subjects to rate (on a
20-point scale) the degree to which the ﬁgure on the left is similar to the ﬁgure DEMO the
right. The two groups received identical booklets, except that the DEMO and right posi-
tions of the ﬁgures in each pair were reversed. The data shows that the average
sðq; pÞ across all subjects and pairs was signiﬁcantly higher than the average sðp; qÞ.
A t-test for correlated samples yielded t ¼ 2:94, df ¼ 15, p <:01. Furthermore, in
both sets the average di¤erence between sðq; pÞ and sðp; qÞ computed as previously
for each individual subject (.56) were signiﬁcantly positive. In set 1, t ¼ 2:96,
df ¼ 131, p <:01, and in set 2, t ¼ 2:79, df ¼ 131, p <:01.
The preceding two DEMO revealed the presence of systematic and signiﬁcant
asymmetries in judgments of similarity between countries and geometric ﬁgures. The
results support the theoretical analysis based DEMO the contrast model and the focusing
hypothesis, according to which the DEMO of the subject are weighted more heavily
than the features of the referent. Essentially the same results were obtained by Rosch
(1975) using DEMO somewhat di¤erent design. In her studies, one stimulus (the standard)
was placed at the origin of a semicircular board, and the subject was instructed to
place the second (variable) stimulus on the board DEMO as ‘‘to represent his feeling of the
distance between that stimulus and the one ﬁxed at the origin.’’ Rosch used three
stimulus domains: color, line orientation, and number. In each domain, she paired
prominent, DEMO focal, stimuli with nonfocal stimuli. For example, a pure red was
paired with an o¤-red, a vertical line was paired with a diagonal line, and a round
number (e.g., 100) was paired with DEMO nonround number (e.g., 103).
In all three domains, Rosch DEMO that the measured distance between stimuli was
smaller when the more prominent stimulus was ﬁxed at the origin. That is, the simi-
larity of the variant to the prototype was greater than the similarity of the DEMO
to the variant. Rosch also showed that when presented with sentence frames con-
taining hedges such as ‘‘ is virtually ,’’ subjects generally placed the proto-
type in the second blank and the variant in the DEMO For example, subjects preferred
the sentence ‘‘103 is virtually 100’’ to DEMO sentence ‘‘100 is virtually 103.’’
In contrast to direct judgments of similarity, which have traditionally been viewed
as symmetric, other measures of similarity DEMO as confusion probability or associa-
86 Tversky and Gati
tion were known to be asymmetric. The observed DEMO, however, were com-
monly attributed to a response bias. Without denying the important role of response
biases, asymmetries in identiﬁcation tasks occur even in situations to which a re-
sponse bias interpretation does not apply (e.g., in studies where the subject indicates
whether two presented stimuli are identical or not). Several experiments employing
this paradigm obtained asymmetric confusion DEMO of the type predicted by
the present analysis. For a discussion of these data and their implications, see
Tversky (1977).
Context E¤ects
DEMO preceding two sections deal with the e¤ects of the formulation of the task (as
judgment of similarity or of di¤erence) and of the DEMO of comparison (induced
by the choice of subject and referent) on similarity. These manipulations were related
to the parameters ðy; a; bÞ DEMO the contrast model through the focusing hypothesis. The
present section extends this hypothesis to describe the manner in which the measure
of the feature DEMO f varies with a change in context.
The scale f is generally not invariant with respect to changes in context or frame
of reference. DEMO is, the salience of features may vary widely depending on implicit
DEMO explicit instructions and on the object set under consideration. East Germany and
West Germany, for example, may be viewed as highly similar from DEMO geographical or
cultural viewpoint and as quite dissimilar from a political viewpoint. Moreover, the
two Germanys are likely to be viewed as more similar to each other in a context that
includes many Asian and African DEMO than in a context that includes only
European countries.
How does the salience of features vary with changes in the set of objects under
DEMO? We propose that the salience of features is determined, in part at least,
by their diagnosticity (i.e., classiﬁcatory signiﬁcance). A DEMO may acquire diag-
nostic value (and hence become more salient) in a particular context if it serves as
a basis for classiﬁcation in DEMO particular context. The relations between similarity
and diagnosticity are investigated in several studies that show how the similarity
between a given pair of countries DEMO varied by changing the context in which they are
embedded.
Study 4: The Extension of Context
According to the preceding discussion, the diagnosticity DEMO features is determined by
the prevalence of the classiﬁcations that are based on them. Hence, features that are
Studies of Similarity 87
Table 3.3
Average Similarities of Countries in Homogeneous (s1 ) and Heterogeneous (s2 ) Contexts
Countries
s0ða; bÞ
seða; bÞ
American countries Panama–Costa Rica 12.30 13.29
Argentina–Chile 13.17 14.36
Canada–U.S.A. 16.10 DEMO
Paraguay–Bolivia 13.48 14.43
Mexico–Guatemala 11.36 12.81
Venezuela–Colombia 12.06 13.06
Brazil–Uruguay 13.03 14.64
Peru–Ecuador 13.52 14.61
European countries England–Ireland 13.88 13.37
Spain–Portugal 15.44 14.45
Bulgaria–Greece DEMO 11.00
Sweden–Norway 17.09 15.03
France–W. Germany 10.88 11.81
Yugoslavia–Austria 8.47 9.86
Italy–Switzerland 10.03 11.14
Belgium–Holland 15.39 17.06
shared by all the objects under study DEMO devoid of diagnostic value, because they
cannot be used to classify DEMO objects. However, when the context is extended by
enlarging the object DEMO, some features that had been shared by all objects in the
DEMO context may not be shared by all objects in the broader context. These fea-
tures then acquire diagnostic value and increase the similarity of DEMO objects that
share them. Thus the similarity of a pair of objects in the original context is usually
smaller than their similarity in the DEMO context.
To test this hypothesis, we constructed a list of pairs DEMO countries with a common
border and asked subjects to assess their similarity on a 20-point scale. Four sets of
eight pairs were constructed. Set DEMO contained eight pairs of American countries, set 2
contained eight pairs DEMO European countries, set 3 contained four pairs from set 1 and
DEMO pairs from set 2, and set 4 contained the remaining pairs DEMO sets 1 and 2. Each
one of the four sets was presented to a di¤erent group of 30–36 subjects. The entire
list of 16 DEMO is displayed in table 3.3.
Recall that the features ‘‘American’’ and ‘‘European’’ have no diagnostic value in
sets 1 and 2, although they both have diagnostic value in sets 3 and 4. Consequently,
the overall DEMO similarity in the heterogeneous sets (3 and 4) is expected to be
higher than the overall average similarity in the homogeneous sets (1 and 2). The
average similarity for each pair of countries obtained DEMO the homogeneous and the
heterogeneous contexts, denoted so and se , DEMO, are presented in table 3.3.
88 Tversky and Gati
In the absence of context e¤ects, the similarity for any pair of countries should be
independent of the list in DEMO it was presented. In contrast, the average di¤erence
between se and DEMO (.57) is signiﬁcantly positive: t ¼ 2:11, df ¼ 15, p <:05.
Similar results were obtained in an earlier study by Sjo¨ berg (1972) who showed
that the similarities between string DEMO (banjo, violin, harp, electric guitar)
were increased when a wind instrument (clarinet) was added to this set. Hence, Sjo¨ -
berg found that the similarity in the homogeneous pairs (i.e., pairs DEMO string instru-
ments) was increased when heterogeneous pairs (i.e., a DEMO instrument and a wind
instrument) were introduced into the list. Because DEMO similarities in the homoge-
neous pairs, however, are greater than the similarities in the heterogeneous pairs, the
above ﬁnding may be attributed, DEMO part at least, to the common tendency of subjects
to standardize DEMO response scale (i.e., to produce the same average similarity for any
set of comparisons).
Recall that in the present study all similarity DEMO involve only homoge-
neous pairs (i.e., pairs of countries from the same continent sharing a common bor-
der). Unlike Sjo¨ berg’s (1972) study that extended the context by introducing
heterogeneous pairs, our experiment DEMO the context by constructing heteroge-
neous lists composed of homogeneous pairs. Hence, the increase of similarity with
the enlargement of context, observed in DEMO present study, cannot be explained by the
tendency to standardize the DEMO scale.
Study 5: Similarity and Clustering
When faced with a set DEMO stimuli, people often organize them in clusters to reduce
information load DEMO facilitate further processing. Clusters are typically selected in
order to maximize the similarity of objects within the cluster and the dissimilarity of
objects from DEMO clusters. Clearly, the addition and/or deletion of objects can
alter DEMO clustering of the remaining objects. We hypothesize that changes in cluster-
ing (induced by the replacement of objects) increase the diagnostic value of DEMO fea-
tures on which the new clusters are based and consequently the similarity of objects
that share these features. Hence, we expect that changes in context which a¤ect the
clustering of objects will a¤ect their similarity DEMO the same manner.
The procedure employed to test this hypothesis (called DEMO diagnosticity hypothesis)
is best explained in terms of a concrete example, taken from the present study. Con-
sider the two sets of four countries displayed in ﬁgure 3.3, which di¤er only in one of
their elements (p or q).
The sets were constructed so that the natural clusterings of the countries are: p and
c vs. a and b in set 1; and b and q vs. c and a in set 2. Indeed, these were the modal
classiﬁcations of subjects who were asked to partition each quadruple into two
Studies of Similarity 89
Figure 3.3
An example of two matched sets DEMO countries used to test the diagnosticity hypothesis. The percentage of
subjects that ranked each country below (as most similar to the target) is DEMO under the country.
pairs. In set 1, 72% of the subjects DEMO the set into Moslem countries (Syria
and Iran) vs. non-Moslem countries (England and Israel); whereas in set 2, 84%
of the DEMO partitioned the set into European countries (England and France) vs.
Middle-Eastern countries (Iran and Israel). Hence, the replacement of p by DEMO
changed the pairing of a: In set 1, a was paired with b; whereas in set 2, a was paired
with c. DEMO diagnosticity hypothesis implies that the change in clustering, induced by
the DEMO of the odd element (p or q), should produce a DEMO change
in similarity. That is, the similarity of England to Israel DEMO be greater in set 1,
where it is natural to group them together, than in set 2 where it is not. Likewise, DEMO
similarity of Iran to Israel should be greater in set 2, DEMO they tend to be grouped
together, than in set 1 where DEMO are not.
To investigate the relation between clustering and similarity, we DEMO 20
pairs of sets of four countries of the form ða; DEMO; c; pÞ and ða; b; c; qÞ, whose elements
are listed in table 3.4. Two groups of 25 subjects each were DEMO with 20 sets
of four countries and asked to partition each quadruple into two pairs. Each group
received one of the two matched quadruples, displayed in a row in random order.
Let apðb; cÞ denote the percentage of subjects that paired a with b rather than with
ctherefore, measures the e¤ect of replacingwhen the odd element was p, etc. the di¤erenceq by p on the tendency to classifyDðp; qÞ¼ apðb; cÞaaqwithðb; cÞb,
rather than with c. The values of Dðp; qÞ for each one of the pairs is presented in the
last column of DEMO 3.4. The results show that, in all cases, the replacement of q by p
changed the pairing of a in the expected direction; the average di¤erence is 61.4%.
Table 3.4
Classiﬁcation and Similarity Data for the Test of the Diagnosticity DEMO
ab c q p bðpÞbðqÞ
cðqÞcðpÞ
Dðp;qÞ
1 U.S.S.R. Poland China Hungary India 6.1 24.2 66.7
2 England Iceland Belgium Madagascar Switzerland 10.4 DEMO 68.8
3 Bulgaria Czechoslovakia Yugoslavia Poland Greece 13.7 19.2 56.6
4 U.S.A. Brazil Japan Argentina China 11.2 30.2 78.3
5 Cyprus Greece Crete Turkey DEMO 9.1 6.1 63.2
6 Sweden Finland Holland Iceland Switzerland 6.5 6.9 44.1
7 Israel England Iran France Syria 13.3 8.0 87.5
8 Austria Sweden DEMO Norway Poland 3.0 15.2 60.0
9 Iran Turkey Kuwait Pakistan Iraq 6.1 0.0 58.9
10 Japan China W. Germany N. Korea U.S.A. 24.2 6.1 DEMO
11 Uganda Libya Zaire Algeria Angola 23.0 1.0 48.8
12 England France Australia Italy New Zealand 36.4 15.2 73.3
13 Venezuela Colombia Iran Brazil DEMO 0.3 31.5 60.7
14 Yugoslavia Hungary Greece Poland Turkey 9.1 9.1 76.8
15 Libya Algeria Syria Tunis Jordan 3.0 24.2 73.2
16 China U.S.S.R. DEMO U.S.A. Indonesia 30.3 3.0 42.2
17 France W. Germany Italy England Spain 12.1 30.3 74.6
18 Cuba Haiti N. Korea Jamaica Albania 9.1 0.0 DEMO
19 Luxembourg Belgium Monaco Holland San Marino 30.3 6.1 52.2
20 Yugoslavia Czechoslovakia Austria Poland France 3.0 24.2 39.6
90 Tversky and Gati
Studies of Similarity 91
Next, we presented two groups of 33 subjects each with 20 sets of four countries in
the format displayed in DEMO 3.3. The subjects were asked to rank, in each quadru-
ple, the three countries below (called the choice set ) in terms of their similarity to the
country on the top (called the target )DEMO Each group received exactly one quadruple
from each pair. If the similarity of b to a, say, is independent of the choice set, then
the proportion of subjects who ranked b rather than c as DEMO similar to a should be
independent of whether the third element in the choice set is p or q. For example, the
proportion of subjects who ranked England rather than Iran as most similar to Israel
DEMO be the same whether the third element in the choice set is Syria or France. In
contrast, the diagnosticity hypothesis predicts that the replacement of Syria (which is
grouped with Iran) by France (which is grouped with England) will a¤ect the ranking
of similarity so that the proportion of subjects that ranked England rather than Iran
as most similar DEMO Israel is greater in set 1 than in set 2.
to Let bðpÞ denote the percentage of subjects who ranked country b as most DEMO
a when the odd element in the choice set is p, DEMO Recall that b is generally
grouped with q,and c is generally grouped with p. The di¤erences bðpÞ bðqÞ and
cðqÞ cðpÞ, therefore, DEMO the e¤ects of the odd elements, p and q, on the simi-
larity of b and c to the target a. The value DEMO these di¤erences for all pairs of quad-
ruples are presented in table 3.4. In the absence of context e¤ects, the di¤erences
should equal 0, while under the diagnosticity hypothesis, the di¤erences should
be positive. In DEMO 3.3, for example, bðpÞ bðqÞ¼ 37:5  24:2 ¼ 13:3, and
cðqÞ cðpÞ¼ 45:5  37:5 ¼ 8. The average di¤erence across all pairs of quadruples
was 11%, which is signiﬁcantly positive: t ¼ 6:37, df ¼ 19, p <:01.
An additional test of the diagnosticity hypothesis was conducted using a DEMO
di¤erent design. As in the previous study, we constructed pairs of DEMO that di¤er in
one element only (p or q ). Furthermore, the sets were constructed so that b is likely
to be grouped with q, and c is likely to be grouped with p. Two groups of 29 subjects
were presented with all sets of ﬁve countries DEMO the format displayed in ﬁgure 3.4.
These subjects were asked to select, for each set, the country in the choice set below
that DEMO most similar to the two target countries above. Each group received exactly
one set of ﬁve countries from each pair. Thus the present study DEMO from the pre-
vious one in that: (1) the target DEMO of a pair of countries (a1 and a2 ) rather than
DEMO a single country; and (2) the subjects were instructed to DEMO an element of the
choice set that is most similar to the target rather than to rank all elements of the
choice set.
The DEMO follows the previous study. Speciﬁcally, let bðpÞ denote the propor-
tion DEMO subjects who selected country b as most similar to the two target countries
92 Tversky and Gati
Figure 3.4
Two sets of countries used to DEMO the diagnosticity hypothesis. The percentage of subjects who selected
each country (DEMO most similar to the two target countries) is presented below the DEMO
when the odd element in the choice set was p, etc. DEMO, under the diagnosticity
hypothesis, the di¤erences bðpÞ bðqÞ and cðqÞ cðpÞ should both be positive,
whereas under the assumption of context independence, both di¤erences should
equal 0. The values of these di¤erences for all DEMO pairs of sets are displayed in table
3.5. The average di¤erence across all pairs equals 10.9%, which is signiﬁcantly posi-
tive: t ¼ DEMO:46, df ¼ 11, p <:01.
In ﬁgure 3.4, DEMO example, France was selected, as most similar to Portugal and
Spain, more frequently in set 1 (where the natural grouping is: Brazil and Argentina
vs. Portugal, Spain, and France) than in set 2 (where the natural grouping is: Bel-
gium and France vs. Portugal, Spain, and Brazil). Likewise, Brazil was selected, as
most similar to Portugal and Spain, more frequently in set 2 than in set 1. Moreover,
in this particular example, the replacement of p by q actually reversed the proximity
order. In set 1, France was selected more frequently than Brazil; in set 2, Brazil was
chosen more DEMO than France.
There is considerable evidence that the grouping of objects is determined by the
similarities among them. The preceding studies provide evidence for DEMO converse
(diagnosticity) hypothesis that the similarity of objects is modiﬁed by the manner
in which they are grouped. Hence, similarity serves as a basis for the classiﬁcation of
objects, but it is also inﬂuenced by the adopted classiﬁcation. The diagnosticity
principle that underlies the latter process may DEMO a key to the understanding of
the e¤ects of context on similarity.
Table 3.5
Similarity Data for the Test of the Diagnosticity Hypothesis
a1
DEMO
bc p q bðpÞbðqÞ
cðqÞcðpÞ
1 China U.S.S.R. Poland U.S.A. England Hungary 18.8 1.6
2 Portugal Spain France Brazil Argentina Belgium 27.0 54.1
3 DEMO Zealand Australia Japan Canada U.S.A. Philippines 27.2 12.4
4 Libya Algeria Syria Uganda Angola Jordan 13.8 10.3
5 Australia New Zealand S. Africa England DEMO Rhodesia 0.1 13.8
6 Cyprus Malta Sicily Crete Greece Italy 0.0 3.4
7 India China U.S.S.R. Japan Philippines U.S.A. 6.6 14.8
8 S. Africa DEMO Ethiopia New Zealand Canada Zaire 33.4 5.9
9 Iraq Syria Lebanon Libya Algeria Cyprus 9.6 20.3
10 U.S.A. Canada Mexico England Australia Panama 6.0 DEMO
11 Holland Belgium Denmark France Italy Sweden 5.4 8.3
12 Australia England Cyprus U.S.A. U.S.S.R. Greece 5.4 5.1
Studies of Similarity 93
94 Tversky and Gati
Discussion
The investigations reported in this chapter were DEMO on the contrast model accord-
ing to which the similarity between objects is expressed as a linear combination of the
measures of their common DEMO distinctive features. The results provide support for the
general hypothesis that the parameters of the contrast model are sensitive to manip-
ulations that make DEMO subject focus on certain features rather than on others. Con-
sequently, DEMO are not invariant with respect to the marking of the attribute
(DEMO vs. di¤erence), the directionality of the comparison [sða; bÞ vs. DEMO; aÞ], and
the context (i.e., the set of objects under consideration). In accord with the focusing
hypothesis, study 1 shows that the relative weight attached to the common features is
greater in judgments DEMO similarity than in judgments of di¤erence (i.e., y > l). Studies
2 and 3 show that people attach greater weight to the DEMO of a comparison than to
its referent (i.e., a > b ). Studies 4 and 5 show that the salience of features is deter-
mined, in part, by their diagnosticity (i.e., by their DEMO signiﬁcance).
What are the implications of the present ﬁndings to the analysis and representation
of similarity relations? First, they indicate that there DEMO no unitary concept of simi-
larity that is applicable to all di¤erent experimental procedures used to elicit prox-
imity data. Rather, it appears that there is a wide variety of similarity relations
(deﬁned on the same domain) that di¤er in the weights attached to the various argu-
ments of the feature-matching function. Experimental manipulations that call atten-
tion to the DEMO features, for example, are likely to increase the weight assigned
to these features. Likewise, experimental manipulations (e.g., the introduction of a
standard) that emphasize the directionality of the comparison are likely to produce
asymmetry. Finally, changes in the natural clustering of the objects under study are
likely to highlight those features on which the clusters are based.
Although DEMO violations of complementarity, symmetry, and context independence
are statistically signiﬁcant and experimentally reliable in the sense that they were
observed with di¤erent stimuli DEMO di¤erent experimental conditions, the e¤ects are
relatively small. Consequently, complementarity, DEMO, or context independence
may provide good ﬁrst approximations to similarity data. DEMO models that are
based on these assumptions, therefore, should not be rejected o¤-hand. A Euclidean
map may provide a very useful and parsimonious DEMO of complex data, even
though its underlying assumptions (e.g., symmetry, or the triangle inequality) may be
incorrect. At the same time, DEMO should not treat such a representation, useful as it
might be, as an adequate psychological theory of similarity. An analogy to the mea-
DEMO of physical distance illustrates the point. The knowledge that the earth is
round does not prevent surveyors from using plane geometry to calculate small DEMO
tances on the surface of the earth. The fact that such measurements often provide
Studies of Similarity 95
excellent approximations to the data, however, should DEMO be taken as evidence for
the ﬂat-earth model.
Finally, two major DEMO have been raised against the usage of the concept of
similarity [see e.g., Goodman (1972)]. First, it has been argued that similarity is rel-
ative and variable: Objects can be viewed as either similar or di¤erent depending on
the context and frame of reference. Second, similarity often does not account for our
inductive practice but rather is inferred DEMO it; hence, the concept of similarity lacks
explanatory power.
Although both objections have some merit, they do not render the concept of
similarity empirically uninteresting or theoretically useless. The present studies, like
those of Shepard (1964) and Torgerson (1965), show that similarity is indeed relative
and variable, but it varies in a lawful manner. A comprehensive theory, therefore,
should describe not only how similarity is assessed in a given situation but also how
it varies with a change of context. DEMO theoretical development, outlined in this
chapter, provides a framework for the analysis of this process.
As for the explanatory function of similarity, it should be noted that similarity
plays a dual role in theories of DEMO and behavior: It is employed as an inde-
pendent variable to DEMO inductive practices such as concept formation, classiﬁca-
tion, and generalization; DEMO it is also used as a dependent variable to be explained in
terms of other factors. Indeed, similarity is as much a summary of past experience as a
guide for future behavior. We expect similar things DEMO behave in the same way, but we
also view things as DEMO because they behave in the same way. Hence, similarities
are constantly DEMO by experience to reﬂect our ever-changing picture of the world.
References
Goodman, N. Seven strictures on similarity. In N. Goodman, Problems and projects. DEMO York: Bobbs-
Merril, 1972.
Hosman, J., and Kuennapas, T. DEMO the relation between similarity and dissimilarity estimates. Report No.
354, Psychological DEMO, The University of Stockholm, 1972.
Quine, W. V. Natural kinds. DEMO W. V. Quine, Ontological relativity and other essays. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1969.
Restle, F. Psychology of judgment and choice. New DEMO: Wiley, 1961.
Rosch, E. Cognitive reference points. Cognitive Psychology, 1975, 7, 532–547.
Shepard, R. N. Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psy-
chology, 1964, 1, 54–87.
Shepard, R. N. Representation of structure in similarity data: Problems and DEMO Psychometrika,
1974, 39, 373–421.
Sjo¨ berg, L. A cognitive DEMO of similarity. Goteborg Psychological Reports, 1972, 2(No. 10).
Torgerson, W. S. Multidimensional scaling of similarity. Psychometrika, 1965, 30, 379–393.
DEMO, A. Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 327–352.

Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Perceptual and
4 Conceptual Judgments
Itamar DEMO and Amos Tversky
The proximity between objects or concepts is reﬂected in a variety of responses
including judgments of similarity and di¤erence, errors of identiﬁcation, speed of
recognition. generalization gradient, and free classiﬁcation. Although the DEMO
orders induced by these tasks are highly correlated in general, the DEMO data
also reﬂect the nature of the process by which they are generated. For example, we
observed that the digits and are judged as more similar than and although the
latter pair is more frequently confused DEMO a recognition task (Keren & Baggen, 1981).
Evidently, the DEMO that and are related by a rotation has a greater impact on
rated similarity than on confusability, which is more sensitive to the number of non-
matching line segments.
The proximity between objects can be described DEMO terms of their common and
their distinctive features, whose relative weight DEMO with the nature of the task.
Distinctive features play a dominant role in tasks that require discrimination. The
detection of a distinctive feature establishes DEMO di¤erence between stimuli, regardless
of the number of common features. On DEMO other hand, common features appear to
play a central role in DEMO, association, and ﬁgurative speech. A common
feature can be used to classify objects or to associate ideas, irrespective of the number
of distinctive features. Thus, one common feature can serve as a basis for metaphor,
whereas one distinctive feature is su‰cient to determine nonidentity. In other DEMO,
such as judgments of similarity and dissimilarity, both common and DEMO fea-
tures appear to play signiﬁcant roles.
The present research employs the contrast model (Tversky, 1977) to assess the rel-
ative weight of common to distinctive features. In the ﬁrst part of the article we
DEMO the theoretical model, describe the estimation method, and discuss a valida-
tion procedure. In the second part of the article we analyze judgment DEMO similarity
and dissimilarity of a variety of conceptual and perceptual stimuli.
The contrast model expresses the similarity of objects in terms of their common
DEMO distinctive features. In this model, each stimulus i is represented as DEMO set of mea-
surable features, denoted i, and the similarity of i and j is a function of three argu-
ments: i V j, the feature shared by i and j; i j, the features of i that do not belong
to j; j i, DEMO features of j that do not belong to i . The contrast model is based on a
set of ordinal assumptions that lead to DEMO construction of (nonnegative) scales g and
f deﬁned on the relevant collections of common and distinctive features such that
sði; jÞ, the DEMO similarity of i and j , is monotonically related to
Sði; DEMO Þ¼ gði V jÞ af ði jÞ bf ðj iÞ; a; b > 0: ð1Þ
98 Gati and Tversky
This model describes the similarity of i and DEMO as a linear combination, or a contrast,
of the measures DEMO their common and distinctive features.1 This form generalizes the
original model in which gðxÞ¼ yf ðxÞ, y > 0. The contrast model represents a family
of similarity relations that di¤er in the degree of asymmetry ða=bÞ DEMO the weight
of the common relative to the distinctive features. The present analysis is conﬁned to
the symmetric case where a ¼ b ¼ DEMO Note that the contrast model expresses S as an
additive function of g and f , but it does not require that either g DEMO f be additive
in their arguments. Evidence presented later in the article indicates that both g and f
are subadditive in the sense that DEMO < gðxÞþ gðyÞ where xy denotes the combi-
nation or the union of x and y.
Estimation
We distinguish between additive attributes deﬁned by DEMO presence or absence of a
particular feature (e.g., mustache), and substitutive attributes (e.g., eye color) deﬁned
by the presence of exactly one element from a given set. Some necessary conditions
for the characterization DEMO additive attributes are discussed later (see also Gati &
Tversky, DEMO). Let bpx; bq; bqy, etc., denote stimuli with a common background
b , substitutive components p and q, and additive components x and y. That is, each
stimulus in the domain includes the same background b, one and only one of the
substitutive components, DEMO or q, and any combination of the additive components:
x; y, both, or neither. To assess the e¤ect of an additive DEMO x as a com-
and compare the similarity
bq. The di¤erence between
mon feature, denoted CðxÞ, we add x to both bp and DEMO
between bpx and bqx to the similarity between bp and
these similarities can be taken as an estimate of CðxÞ. Formally, deﬁne
CðxÞ¼ Sðbpx; bqxÞ Sðbp; bqÞ
¼½gðbxÞ f ð pÞ f ðqÞ  ½gðbÞ DEMO ð pÞ f ðqÞ by ð1Þ ð2Þ
¼ gðbxÞ gðbÞ
¼ gðxÞ
provideddomain the above equation may hold even whengðbxÞ¼ gðbÞþ gðxÞ. Since the DEMO is not additive in general. Previ-b is shared by all stimuli in the
ous research (Gati & Tversky, 1982; Tversky & Gati, DEMO) suggests that rated simi-
larity is roughly linear in the derived DEMO, hence the observed scale s can be used as
an approximation DEMO the derived scale S.
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 99
To assess the e¤ect DEMO an additive component x as a distinctive feature, denoted
DðxÞ, we add x to one stimulus ðbpÞ but not to the other ðbpyÞ DEMO compare the
similarity between bp and bpy to the similarity between bpx and bpy. The di¤erence
between these similarities can be taken as an DEMO of DðxÞ. Formally, deﬁne
DðxÞ¼ Sðbp; bpyÞ Sðbpx; bpyÞ
¼½gðbpÞ DEMO ðyÞ  ½gðbpÞ f ðxÞ f ðyÞ by ð1Þð3Þ
¼ f ðxÞ:
(We could have estimated DðxÞ by sð p; qÞ sð DEMO; qÞ but this di¤erence yields
f ð pxÞ f ð pÞ, which is likely to underestimate f ðxÞ because of subadditivity.)
The DEMO of x as a common feature relative to its impact as a distinctive feature
is deﬁned as
WðxÞ¼ CðxÞ=½CðxÞþ DðxÞ ð4Þ
¼ gðxÞ=½gðxÞþ f DEMO; by ð2Þ and ð3Þ:
CðxÞ¼ 0) to 1 (when DEMO 0), and
WðxÞ¼ CðxÞ¼ DðxÞ, reﬂecting the relative weight of DEMO to distinctive
features. Unlike CðxÞ and DðxÞ that are likely to vary widely depending on the
salience of x, WðxÞ is likely to be more stable across di¤erent components and
alternative response scales. Note that CðxÞ, DðxÞ, and WðxÞ are all well deﬁned
The value of1 whenWðxÞ ranges from 0 (when
2
in terms of the similarity scale S , regardless of the validity of the contrast model and/
or the DEMO componential analysis. These assumptions are needed, however,
to justify the DEMO of CðxÞ and DðxÞ, respectively, as gðxÞ and f ðxÞ. The
componential analysis and the estimation process are illustrated below in terms of DEMO
few selected experimental examples.
Figure 4.1 presents two pairs of landscapes ð p; qÞ and ð px; qxÞ. Note that p and q
DEMO substitutive while x is additive. To simplify the notation we supress the back-
ground b that is shared by all stimuli under discussion. Note DEMO the lower pictures
are obtained by adding a cloud ðxÞ to the upper pictures. Hence the di¤erences
between their similarities provides an estimate of DEMO contribution of a cloud as a
common feature.
The similarities between these pictures were rated by the subjects on a scale from
1 (very low similarity) to 20 (very high similarity). Using average similarity DEMO
obtained
CðxÞ¼ sð px; qxÞ sð p; qÞ
¼ 5:4 4:1 ¼ 1:3:
100 Gati and Tversky
Figure 4.1
Landscapes used to estimate C ( DEMO, hills and lake; q, mountain range; x, cloud).
DEMO 4.2 presents two other pairs of landscapes ð p; pyÞ and DEMO px; pyÞ where the
second pair is obtained by adding a DEMO ðxÞ to only one element ð pÞ of the ﬁrst
pair. Hence, the di¤erence between the similarities of the two pairs provides an esti-
mate of the contribution of a cloud as a distinctive feature. In DEMO data
DðxÞ¼ sð p; pyÞ sð px; pyÞ
¼ 15:0  11:3 ¼ 3:7:
Thus, the addition of the cloud to only one picture reduced their similarity by anWðxÞ can now DEMO obtained from CðxÞ and DðxÞ by WðxÞ¼ 1:3=ð1:3 þ3:7Þ¼ :26.
amount that is almost three times as large as the increase in similarity obtained by
adding it to both pictures. As we shall DEMO later, this is a typical result for pictorial
stimuli.
Note that DEMO clouds in the two bottom pictures in ﬁgure 4.1 are not identical.
Hence, the value ofpictures, not as the e¤ect of adding theCðxÞ DEMO be interpreted as the e¤ect of addingsame cloud to both pictures. Naturally,a cloud to bothC,
and hence W , will be higher DEMO the critical components are identical than when
they are not.
The same estimation procedure can also be applied to verbal stimuli. We illustrate
the DEMO in a study of similarity of professional and social stereotypes in Israel.
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 101
Figure 4.2
Landscapes used DEMO estimate D ( p, hills and lake; x, cloud; y, house).
The common background b corresponds to an adult male. The substitutive attributes
were a dentist ð pÞ and an accountant ðqÞ; the additive attributes were a naturalist ðxÞ
and a member of the nationalist DEMO ðyÞ. To assess the impact of ‘‘naturalist’’ as a
common component, DEMO compared the similarity between ‘‘an accountant’’ and ‘‘a
dentist,’’ sð p; qÞ , to the similarity between ‘‘an accountant who is a naturalist’’ and
a ‘‘dentist who is a naturalist,’’ sð px; qxÞ. Using the average rated similarity between
descriptions, we obtained
CðxÞ¼
¼
sð px; qxÞ sð p; qÞ
13:5 6:3 ¼ 7:2:DEMO
To assess the impact of ‘‘naturalist’’ as a distinctive component, we DEMO the
similarity between ‘‘an accountant’’ and ‘‘an accountant who is a member of the
nationalist party,’’ sð p; pyÞ, to the similarity DEMO ‘‘an accountant who is a natu-
ralist’’ and ‘‘an accountant who is a member of the nationalist party,’’ sð px; pyÞ.In
this case,
DðxÞ¼
¼
sð p; pyÞ sð px; pyÞ
14:9
DEMO
13:2
¼
1:7;
102 Gati and Tversky
and
WðxÞ¼
7:2=ð7:2
þ
1:7Þ¼ :81:
The addition of the attribute ‘‘naturalist’’ to both descriptions has DEMO much greater
impact on similarity than the addition of the same attribute to one description only.
The di¤erence in W between pictorial and verbal DEMO is the central topic of this
article. Note that the similarities between the basic pairs sð p; qÞ and sð p; pyÞ,to
DEMO we added common or distinctive components, respectively, were roughly the
same for the pictorial and the verbal stimuli. Hence the di¤erence in W DEMO be
attributed to variations in baseline similarity.
Independence of Components
The interpretation of CðxÞ and DðxÞ in terms of the contribution of x as DEMO common
and as a distinctive component, respectively, assumes independence among the rele-
vant components. In the present section we analyze this assumption, discuss the
conditions under which it is likely to hold or fail and DEMO four formal properties
that are used to detect dependence among components and to validate the proposed
estimation procedure. Note that the present concept of DEMO among fea-
tures, employed in (2) and (3), does not imply the stronger requirement of additivity.
We use the term ‘‘ DEMO to describe any property, characteristic, or aspect of a
stimulus that is relevant to the task under study. The features used to characterize DEMO
picture may include physically distinct parts, called components, such as a cloud or
a house, as well as abstract global attributes such as symmetry or attractiveness. The
same object can be characterized in terms of DEMO sets of features that correspond
to di¤erent descriptions or di¤erent levels of analysis. A face can be described, for
example, by its eyes, nose, and mouth and these features may be further analyzed
into more basic constituents. In order to simplify the estimation process, we have
attempted to construct stimuli with independent components. To verify the indepen-
dence of DEMO, we examine the following testable conditions:
Positivity of
C:
DEMO px; qxÞ > sð p; qÞ;
that is, the DEMO of x to both p and q increases similarity.
ð5Þ
Positivity of
D:
sð p; pyÞ > sð px; pyÞ;
ð6Þ
DEMO is, the addition of x to p but not to py DEMO similarity. The positivity con-
ditions are satisﬁed in the preceding examples of landscape drawings and person
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 103
descriptions, but they do not always hold. For example, and are judged as more
similar than and , although the latter pair is obtained from the former by DEMO
the lower horizontal line to both stimuli. Hence, the addition of DEMO common compo-
nent decreases rather than increases similarity contrary to the positivity of C. This
addition, however, results in closing one of the DEMO, thereby introducing a global
distinctive feature (open vs closed). This example shows that the proximity of letters
cannot be expressed in terms DEMO their local components (i.e., line segments); they
require global features as well (see, e.g., Keren & Baggen, 1981). The DEMO of D
is also violated in this context: is less similar DEMO then to although the latter
contains an additional distinctive component. Conceptual comparisons can violate
(6) as well. For example, an accountant who climbs mountains ð pyÞ is more similar
to an accountant who plays basketball DEMO pxÞ than to an accountant ð pÞ without a
speciﬁed hobby because the two hobbies (x and y) have features in common. Hence,DEMO
the addition of a distinctive component (basketball player) increases rather than
decreases similarity.
Formally, the hobbies x and y can be expressed as x ¼ zx0 and y ¼ zy0 , where
z denotes the DEMO shared by the two hobbies, and x0 and y0 denote their
DEMO features. Thus, x and y are essentially substitutive rather than additive.
DEMO,
Sð p; pyÞ¼ gð pÞ f ðzy
Sð px; pyÞ¼ gð pzÞ f ð
0
Þ
y
0
Þ
f ðx
0
DEMO:
Hence, DðxÞ¼ sð p; pyÞ sð px; pyÞ < DEMO if the impact of the unique part of x, f ðx0Þ,DEMO
is much smaller than the impact of the part shared by x and y, gðzÞ.
These examples, which yield negative estimates of C DEMO D do not invalidate the
feature-theoretical approach although they complicate its applications; they show
that the experimental operation of adding a component to a pair of stimuli or to one
stimulus only may confound common and DEMO features. In particular, the
addition of a common component (e.g., DEMO line segment) to a pair of stimuli may also
introduce distinctive DEMO and the addition of a distinctive component (e.g., a
hobby) DEMO also introduce common features.
In order to validate the interpretation of C and D, we designed stimuli with physi-
cally separable components, and DEMO tested the independence of the critical compo-
nents in each study. More speciﬁcally, we tested the positivity of C and of D, (5)
and (6), as well as two other ordinal conditions, (7) and (8), that detect interactions
among the relevant components.
DEMO:
sð px; qÞ¼ sð p; qxÞ:
ð7Þ
104 Gati and Tversky
In the present studies, the substitutive components were constructed to be about
equally salient so that f ð pÞ¼ f DEMO This hypothesis is readily veriﬁed by the obser-
vation that sð px; pÞ equals sðqx; qÞ to a good ﬁrst approximation. In this DEMO,
sð px; qÞ should equal sð p; qxÞ, that DEMO, exchanging the position of the additive com-
ponent should not a¤ect DEMO Feature exchangeability (7) fails when a global
feature is overlooked. For example, let p and q denote and and let x denote the
lower horizontal line. It is evident that the similarity of and , DEMO px; qÞ, exceeds
the similarity of and , sð p; DEMO, contrary to (7), because the distinction between
open and closed ﬁgures was not taken into account. Exchangeability also fails when
the added DEMO, x, has more features in common, say, with p than with q.A
naturalist, for example, shares more features with a biologist DEMO with an accoun-
tant. Consequently, the similarity between a biologist and DEMO accountant–naturalist
is greater than the similarity between an accountant and a biologist–naturalist.
Feature exchangeability, on the other hand, was supported in the comparisons DEMO
landscapes and of professionals described in the previous section. Adding the cloud
ðxÞ to the mountain ð pÞ or the lake ðqÞ did not DEMO a signiﬁcant e¤ect on rated
similarity. The addition of the attribute ‘‘naturalist’’ ðxÞ to an accountant ð pÞ or a
dentist ðqÞ also conﬁrmed DEMO exchangeability. Because (7) was violated when
‘‘dentist’’ was replaced by ‘‘biologist’’ we can estimate the impact of ‘‘naturalist’’ for
the pair ‘‘accountant–dentist’’ but DEMO for the pair ‘‘accountant–biologist.’’
The ﬁnal test of independence concerns the following inequality
Balance:
sð p; pxyÞ bsð px; pyÞ:
ð8Þ
DEMO to the proposed analysis sð p; pxyÞ¼ gð pÞ f ðxyÞ, whereas sð px; pyÞ¼
gð pÞ f ðxÞ f ðyÞ. Because f is generally subadditive, or at most additive ð f ðxyÞ a
f ðxÞþ f ðyÞÞ , the above inequality is expected to hold. Indeed, (8) was satisﬁed in
the examples of landscapes and professionals. On DEMO other hand, (8) is violated if
the balanced stimuli ( DEMO and py) with the same ‘‘number’’ of additive components
are more DEMO than the unbalanced stimuli (p and pxy) that vary in the ‘‘number’’
of additive components. For example, consider trips to several European countries,
with a 1-week stay in each. The similarity between a trip DEMO England and France and
a trip to England and Italy is greater than the similarity between a trip to England,
France, and Italy and a trip to England only. Because the former trips are of DEMO
duration while the latter are not, the unbalanced trips have more DEMO features
that reduce their similarity.
The preceding discussion exhibits the major qualitative conditions under which the
addition of a physically distinct component to one DEMO to two stimuli can be inter-
preted as the addition of a distinctive or a common feature, respectively. In the next
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 105
part of the article DEMO verify these conditions for several domains in order to validate
the assessment of W.
Experiments
In order to compare the weights of common and DEMO distinctive features in conceptual
and perceptual comparisons, it is important to DEMO W for many di¤erent stimuli.
In the conceptual domain, we investigated DEMO descriptions of people in terms of
personality traits, political a‰nities, hobbies, and professions. We also studied other
compound verbal stimuli (meals, farms, symptoms, trips) that can be characterized in
terms of separable additive components. In the perceptual domain we investigated
schematic faces and landscape drawings. DEMO also studied verbal descriptions of pic-
torial stimuli.
Method
subjects In all studies the subjects were undergraduate students from the Hebrew
University between 20 DEMO 30 years old. Approximately equal numbers of males and
females took part in the studies.
procedure The data were gathered in group sessions, lasting 8 to 15 min. The
stimuli were presented in booklets, each page including six pairs of verbal stimuli or
two pairs of pictorial stimuli. DEMO ordering of the pairs was randomized with the
constraint that identical stimuli did not appear in consecutive pairs. The positions
of the stimuli (left–right for pictorial stimuli or top–bottom for verbal stimuli) were
counterbalanced and the ordering of pages randomized. The ﬁrst page of each
booklet included the DEMO, followed by three to six practice trials to famil-
iarize the DEMO with the stimuli and the task. Subjects were instructed to assess the
similarity between each pair of stimuli on a 20-point scale, where l denotes low sim-
ilarity and 20 denotes very high similarity.
Person Descriptions (Studies 1–3)
In studies 1–3 the stimuli were verbal descriptions of DEMO composed of one
substitutive and two additive components (study 1) or three additive components
(studies 2 and 3).
Study 1—Professional Stereotypes
stimuli Schematic descriptions of people characterized by one substitutive attri-
bute: profession (DEMO or q) and two additive attributes: hobby ðxÞ and political a‰lia-
tion ðyÞ (see table 4.1).
106 Gati and Tversky
Table 4.1
Stimuli for Study 1—Professionals
Set
Attribute DEMO 2 3 4
Profession
p
q
Hobby
x
Political a‰liation
y
Engineer Cab driver High school Dentist
teacher
Lawyer Barber Tax collector Accountant
Soccer DEMO Cooking Naturalist
Gush Emunim
(religious
nationalist)
Moked
(new left)
Mapam
(Socialist)
Herut
(nationalist)
design Four sets of attributes DEMO employed as shown in table 4.1 and for each set
eight descriptions were constructed according to a factorial design with three binary
attributes. Thus, each description consisted of one of the two professions, with or
without a hobby or political a‰liation. A complete design yields 28 pair comparisons
DEMO each set. To avoid excessive repetitions, four di¤erent booklets were prepared
DEMO selecting seven pairs from each set so that each subject was presented with all
28 types of comparisons. The four booklets were randomly distributed DEMO 154
subjects.
results The top part of table 4.2 presents the average estimates of CðxÞ and
for all additive components in all four sets DEMO study 1. Recall that
CðxÞ¼
DðxÞ¼
sð px; qxÞ sð p; qÞ
sð p; pyÞ sð px; pyÞ:
and
Table 4.2 DEMO estimates of CðxÞ and of DðxÞ for all similarity comparisons in
which x was added, respectively, to both stimuli or to one stimulus DEMO We have
investigated the independence of all additive components by testing conditions (5)
through (8) in the aggregate data. Values of CðxÞ and of DðxÞ whose 95% conﬁdence
interval includes zero, are marked by þ. Estimates of WðxÞ¼ CðxÞ=½CðxÞþ DðxÞ
are presented only for those additive DEMO which yield positive estimates of C
and of D , satisfy balance (8), and do not produce signiﬁcant violation of exchange-
ability (DEMO).
All estimates of C and of D were nonnegative and 12 out of 16 were signiﬁcantly
greater than zero by a t test DEMO p <:05Þ. Balance was conﬁrmed for all components.
DðxÞ
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 107
Table 4.2
Estimates of DEMO Relative Weights of Common to Distinctive Features in Judgments of Similarity between
Person Descriptions
Study Stimuli
1 Professionals 154 Politics
R1 ¼ :97 Religous nationalist 5.13 2.17 .70
R2 ¼ :97 New left 5.85 0.44þ .93
R3 ¼ :98 Socialist 4.36 1.41 .76
R4 ¼ :95 Nationalist DEMO 0.54þ .90
Hobby
Soccer playing 3.23 0.63þ —
Chess 4.28 1.75 .71
Cooking 4.14 0.97þ —
Naturalist 5.60 1.61 .78
2 Students (set A) 48 Politics
R ¼ :95 x1 Religious nationalist 5.00 3.08 .62
DEMO Socialist 4.56 > 1.73 .72
Hobbies
Soccer fan 5.40
Naturalist 5.90
Personality
Arrogant 6.10
Anxious 4.98
Students (set B) 46 Politics
R ¼ :95
3 Matches 66
R ¼ :97
x1
x2
y1
y2
z1
z2
x1
x2
New left 4.04 > 1.41 —
Liberal center 3.13 DEMO .71
Hobby
Soccer fan 4.33
Amateur photographer 3.07
Personality
Arrogant 7.28
Outgoing 5.89
Twice divorced 2.96
Outgoing 2.11
>
>
>
>
>
>
N
y1
y2
z1
z2
0.37þ
0.63þ
.92
.83
1.33þ .85
1.15þ .84
1.76 .63
0.96þ
.69
Note: þ Values of C and D that are not statistically di¤erent from zero by a t DEMO ð p <:05Þ; —, missing
estimates due to failure of independence; >, statistically signiﬁcant di¤erence between
C and D by a DEMO test
ð
p <:05Þ.
Component
CD W
>
>
>DEMO
>
1.44 .79
0.27þ —
2.88 .68
2.04 .71
108 Gati and Tversky
No estimates of W are given for two DEMO where exchangeability was violated. In
all eight cases, CðxÞ was greater DEMO DðxÞ. However, the present design does not
yield within-subject estimates of DEMO and D, hence in this study we do not test the DEMO
niﬁcance of the di¤erence between them separately for each component. To obtain
an estimate of W within the data of each subject, we have pooled the four di¤erent
sets of study 1, and computed the average C and D across all additive components
for which independence was not DEMO in the aggregate data. The median W,
within the data of each subject, was .80 and for 77% of the subjects W exceeded 1 .
2
The multiple correlations between the judgments and the best DEMO combination
of the components are given in the left-hand side of table 4.2. The multiple correla-
tions R1, R2, R3, R4 , which refer to the corresponding sets deﬁned in table 4.1,
exceed .95 DEMO all cases. Note that, like the preceding analysis, the linear regression
model assumes the independence of the critical components and a linear relation
DEMO s and S. However, it also requires the additivity of both DEMO and f that is not
assumed in the contrast model. The multiple correlation coe‰cient is reported in the
corresponding table for each of the DEMO studies.
Study 2—Students
stimuli Stimuli were verbal descriptions of Israeli students with three types of
additive attributes: political a‰liation, hobbies, and personality traits. Two di¤erent
attributes of each type were used (see table 4.2, DEMO 2, set A).
design For each additive component xi , DEMO ¼ 1; 2, we presented subjects with four
pairs of stimuli required to estimate C and D. In the present design, which includes
only additive components,
Cðxi Þ¼ sðxi yj ; xi zj Þ DEMO ; zj Þ and
Dðxi Þ¼ sðyj ; yj zj Þ sðxi yj ; yj zj Þ:
Exchangeability was tested by comparing the DEMO sðxi yj ; zj Þ and sðyj ; xi zj Þ. In addi-
tion, each subject also assessed sðyj ; xi yj zj Þ and sðxi yj ; xi yj zj Þ. Thus, for each addi-
tive component xi , we constructed 8 pairs of descriptions for a DEMO of 48 pairs. The
design was counterbalanced so that half of the subjects evaluated the pairs with i ¼ j,
and the other DEMO evaluated the pairs with i 0 j.
The entire study was replicated using a di¤erent set of political a‰liations,
hobbies, and personality traits (see table 4.2, study 2, set B). Two groups, DEMO 48 and
46 subjects, assessed the similarity between the descriptions from DEMO A and set B,
respectively.
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 109
The two sets were DEMO separately. For each component xi , we com-
and y2z2).
results
puted Cðxi Þ and Dðxi Þ after pooling the results across the DEMO bases (y1z1
The values of C and D for each component DEMO displayed in table 4.2.
As in study 1 all estimates of C and of D were nonegative, and 19 out of 24
estimates were signiﬁcantly positive. Balance was conﬁrmed for all components.
Exchangeability was violated for DEMO and for ‘‘new left’’; hence no estimates
of W are given DEMO these components. In all cases, CðxÞ was greater than DðxÞ and
DEMO di¤erence was statistically signiﬁcant for 10 out of 12 cases by a t test ð p <:05Þ.
To obtain an estimate of W DEMO the data of each subject, we computed the average
C and DEMO across all additive components that satisfy independence. The median W
was .71 for set A and .86 for set B, and 73 and 87% of the subjects in sets A and B,
respectively, yielded W > 1 .
2
Study 3—Matches
stimuli The stimuli were descriptions of DEMO modeled after marriage advertise-
ments in Israeli newpapers. All marriage applicants were male with a college degree,
described by various combinations of the DEMO:‘‘religious’’ ðy1Þ, ‘‘wealthy’’ ðz1Þ,
‘‘has a doctorate degree’’ ðy2Þ, and ‘‘interested in music’’ðz2Þ. The two critical addi-
tive attributes were ‘‘twice divorced’’ (x1 ) and ‘‘outgoing’’ ðx2Þ.
design As in the previous study, 8 pairs were constructed for each critical attribute,
hence, the subjects ðN ¼ 66Þ assessed the similarity of 16 pairs of descriptions.
results Similarity DEMO were pooled across bases separately for each critical
component: the values DEMO C, D, and W are displayed in table 4.2. For both com-
ponents exchangeability and balance were conﬁrmed, C and D were positive, and
CðxÞ was greater than DðxÞ. The median W was 57 and for 56% of the subjects
exceeded 21 .
Compound Verbal Stimuli (Studies 4–7)
In the preceding studies W was greater than 1 for DEMO tested additive components.
2
It could be argued that there might be some ambiguity regarding the interpretation
of missing components in person description. For DEMO, the absence of a political
a‰liation from a description of a DEMO may be interpreted either as a lack of
interest in politics or as missing information that may be ﬁlled by a guess, regarding
the likely political a‰liation of the person in question. The following studies employ
DEMO compound verbal stimuli, meals, farms, symptoms, and trips, in DEMO this
ambiguity does not arise. For example, a ‘‘trip to England DEMO France’’ does not
suggest a visit to an additional country.
110 Gati and Tversky
Table 4.3
Stimuli for Study 4—Meals
Set
Attribute DEMO 2 3 4
Entree
p
q
First course
x
Dessert
y
Steak & French
fries
Veal cutlet &
vegetables
Grilled chicken
& rice
Tongue & baked
potatoes
Kabab, rice, &
beans
Stu¤ed pepper
with meat & rice
Sausages & sauerkraut
Meatballs & macaroni
Mushroom omelet Onion soup DEMO & hummus Deviled egg
Chocolate mousse Almond torte Baklava Apricots
Study 4—Meals
stimuli
attribute: the entre´
e(p or q) and two additive DEMO: ﬁrst course
( y, see table 4.3).
The stimuli were descriptions of meals characterized by one substitutive
and dessert
ðxÞ
design All DEMO possible descriptions were constructed following a factorial design
with three binary attributes. Each meal was described by one of the two entre´ es, with
or without a ﬁrst course and/or dessert. Four sets of eight DEMO were constructed, as
shown in table 4.3. To avoid excessive repetition DEMO by a complete pair com-
parison design, we followed the four-group DEMO employed in study 1. The four
booklets were randomly distributed among 100 subjects.
results The data were analyzed as in study 1. The values DEMO C, D, and W are dis-
played in table 4.4. All estimates of C and D were nonnegative, and 14 out of 16
were signiﬁcantly greater than zero. Exchangeability (7) and balance (8) DEMO con-
ﬁrmed for all attributes, CðxÞ was greater than DðxÞ for DEMO out of eight compo-
nents. The present design does not yield within-subject estimates of C and D, hence
we do not test the signiﬁcance of the di¤erence between them separately for each
component. Table 4.4 also DEMO the multiple correlations between the judgments
and the linear regression model for the four sets of study 4 as well as for studies 5–7.
DEMO was computed within the data of each subject as in study 1. The median W was
.56, and 54% of the subjects W exceeded 1 .
2
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 111
Table 4.4
Estimates of DEMO Relative Weights of Common to Distinctive Features in Judgments of Similarity between
Verbal Descriptions of Compound Objects: Meals, Farms, Trips, and Symptoms
DEMO Stimuli N
4 Meals First course
R1 ¼ :96 100 Mushroom DEMO 5.08 3.78 .57
R2 ¼ :97 Onion soup 3.91 1.90 .67
DEMO ¼ :97 Hummus & Tahini 4.87 1.06þ .82
R4 ¼ :98 Deviled egg 3.52 2.98 .54
Dessert
Chocolate mousse 4.48 3.62 .55
Almond DEMO 4.05 3.44 .54
Baklava 3.14 1.10þ .74
Apricots 3.01 3.04 .50
5 Farms
R ¼ :96 79 Beehive 4.52 > 2.08 .68
Fish 3.99 3.04 .57
Cows 5.02 > 3.14 .62
Chickens 4.49 > 2.34 .66
DEMO Symptoms
RA ¼ :95 90 Nausea m- 6.12 > 0.84þ .88
DEMO headache 3.64 > 0.54þ —
RB ¼ :96 87 Rash 5.74 > 2.12 .73
Diarrhea 5.32 > 1.74 —
7 Trips
R ¼ :DEMO 87 France 4.56 > 0.44þ .91
Ireland 3.66 > 1.63 .69
England 3.57 3.23 .53
Denmark 4.82 > 2.25 .68
Note: þ Values of C and D that are not statistically di¤erent from zero by a DEMO test ð p <:05Þ; —, missing
estimates due to failure of independence; >, statistically signiﬁcant di¤erence between C and D by DEMO t test
ð p <:05Þ.
Study 5—Farms
stimuli Stimuli were descriptions of farms characterized by 1, 2, or 3 additive
components: vegetables ðy1Þ, peanuts ðz1Þ, wheat ðy2Þ, cotton ðz2Þ, beehive ðx1Þ, ﬁsh
ðx2Þ, vineyard ðy3Þ, apples ðz3Þ, strawberries ðy4Þ, ﬂowers ðz4Þ, cows ðx3Þ, and
chickens ðx4Þ.
design For each critical component xi , i ¼ 1; ... ; 4, we presented subjects with the
following DEMO pairs of stimuli required to estimate C and D:
Cðxi Þ¼ sðxi yj ; xi zj Þ sðyj ; zj Þ and
Dðxi DEMO sðyj ; yj zj Þ sðxi yj ; yj zj Þ:
x1
x2
x3
x4
x1
x2
x3
x4
x1
x2
x3
x4
DEMO
CD W
112 Gati and Tversky
Exchangeability was tested by comparing the pairs sðxi DEMO ; zj Þ and sðyj ; xi zj Þ. In addi-
tion, each subject also assessed sðyj ; xi yj zj Þ and sðxi yj ; xi yj zj Þ. Thus, for each addi-
tive component xi , 8 pairs of descriptions were constructed for a total of DEMO pairs.
The design was counterbalanced so that about half of the subjects ðN ¼ 39Þ com-
pared the pairs with i ¼ j ; DEMO other half ðN ¼ 40Þ compared the pairs obtained by
interchanging x1 with x2 , and x3 with x4.
results The data analysis followed DEMO of study 2. The values of C, D, and W are
displayed in table 4.4. All estimates of C and D were signiﬁcantly DEMO Exchange-
ability (7) and balance (8) were conﬁrmed for all attributes. CðxÞ was signiﬁcantly
greater than DðxÞ for three components. The median DEMO, within the data of each
subject, was .72, and for DEMO of the subjects W exceeded 21 .
Study 6—Symptoms
stimuli Stimuli were two sets of medical symptoms. Set A included cough ðy1Þ,
rapid DEMO ðz1Þ, side pains ðy2Þ, general weakness ðz2Þ, nausea and vomiting DEMO,
mild headache ðx2Þ. Set B included fever ðy3Þ, side pains DEMO, headache ðy4Þ, cold
sweat ðz4Þ, rash ðx3Þ, diarrhea ðx4Þ.
¼ ¼
design The study 3 design was used; N 90 in set A and N 87 in set B.
results The data of each DEMO were analyzed separately; the results are displayed in
table 4.4. Balance DEMO conﬁrmed for all components. No estimates of W for ‘‘mild
headache’’ and for ‘‘diarrhea’’ are presented since D was not positive for the former,DEMO
and exchangeability (7) was violated for the latter. For the two other symptoms all
conditions of independence were satisﬁed. CðxÞ was signiﬁcantly greater DEMO DðxÞ
for all four critical components. The median W, within the DEMO of each subject, was
.78 in set A and .66 in DEMO B, and 70 and 69% of the subjects in sets A DEMO B,
respectively, yielded W > 1 .
2
Study 7—Trips
DEMO
Stimuli were descriptions of trips consisting of visits to one, two, or three
European countries; the duration of each trip was 17 days. The components were
Switzerland ðy1Þ, Italy ðz1Þ, Austria ðy2Þ, Romania ðz2Þ, France ðx1Þ, Ireland ðx2Þ,
Spain ðy3Þ, Greece ðz3Þ, Sweden DEMO, Belgium ðz4Þ, England ðx3Þ, Denmark ðx4Þ.
design
The study 5 DEMO was used: N
¼
87.
results The data were analyzed as DEMO study 5, and the results are displayed in table
4.4. All DEMO of C and D were positive and only one was not statistically signiﬁ-
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 113
Figure 4.3
Faces.
cant. DEMO (7) and balance (8) were conﬁrmed for all attributes. CðxÞ was
signiﬁcantly greater than DðxÞ for three components. The median W, within the data
of each subject, was .68, and for 68% of DEMO subjects W exceeded 21 .
Discussion of Studies 1–7
The data from studies 1–7 are generally compatible with the contrast model and the
proposed DEMO analysis: judged similarity increased with the addition of a
common feature DEMO decreased with the addition of a distinctive feature. Further-
more, with DEMO exceptions, the additive components under discussion satisﬁed the
conditions of independence, that is, they yielded positive C and D, and they con-
DEMO exchangeability and balance. The multiple regression analysis provided fur-
ther support for the independence of the components and for the linearity of the
response DEMO The major ﬁnding of the preceding studies is thatexceeded 1 , for all tested components except one. In the next set of studies, we esti-CðxÞ > DðxÞ,or W
2
mate W from similarity judgments between DEMO stimuli and explore the e¤ect of
stimulus modality on the relative weight of common to distinctive features.
Pictorial Stimuli (Studies 8–11)
Study 8—Faces
stimuli Stimuli were schematic faces with 1, 2, or 3 additive DEMO: beard
ðxÞ, glasses ðyÞ, hat ðzÞ. The eight stimuli are DEMO in ﬁgure 4.3.
114 Gati and Tversky
Table 4.5
Estimates of the Relative Weight of DEMO to Distinctive Features in Judgments of Similarity between
Pictorial Stimuli: Faces, Proﬁles, Figures, Landscapes, and Sea Scenes
Study Stimuli
N
Component
CD W
8 Faces
R ¼ :97 60 Beard 1.88
Glasses 0.08þ
Hat 0.28þ
9 Proﬁles
R ¼ :98 97 Mouth 2.15
Eyebrow 1.50
10 Landscapes A
R ¼ :99 85 Cloud 2.28
Tree 2.32
Landscapes B
R ¼ :99 77 Cloud 1.30
House 1.23
11 Sea scenes
R ¼ :84 34 Island 1.94
Boat 1.26þ
<
<
3.59
3.85
0
0
.35
.25
0
0
Note: þ Values of C and D that are not statistically di¤erent from zero by a t test DEMO p <:05Þ; >, statisti-
cally signiﬁcant di¤erence between C and D by a t test ð p <:05Þ; 0 , estimates based on
on D.
D
0
rather than
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
3.68 .34
3.52 DEMO
2.83 .09
3.87 .36
4.09 .27
3.71 .38
4.24 .35
3.70 .26
4.26 .22
design For each additive component x, the subject assessed the similarity of the
following ﬁve pairs: ð ð yx; zÞ, ðxy; xzÞ, ðy; yzÞ, ðxyz; xyÞ. All subjects ðN ¼ 60Þ
evaluated 5  3 pairs.y; zÞ,
results In the present design, which includes three additive components, the fol-
lowing comparisons were used:DEMO
CðxÞ¼
DðxÞ¼
sðy; yzÞ sðxy; yzÞ:
Exchangeability was tested by comparing sðxy; zÞ and sðy; xzÞ. Balance was tested by
comparing DEMO deﬁned as sðy; zÞ sðy; xzÞ with DðxÞ. As in (DEMO), because f is gen-
erally subadditive, we expect DðxÞ > DEMO Thus, DðxÞ < D0ðxÞ indicates a violation
of balance.
The results DEMO displayed in table 4.5. All six estimates of C and of D were positive
and four of them were statistically signiﬁcant. Exchangeability and balance DEMO
conﬁrmed for all attributes. DðxÞ was signiﬁcantly greater than CðxÞ for all compo-
sðxy; xzÞ sðy; zÞ
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 115
Figure 4.4
Proﬁles.
nents. DEMO median within-subject W was .06, and for 78% of the subjects DEMO was less
than 1 .
2
Study 9—Proﬁles
stimuli
Stimuli were eight schematic proﬁles following a factorial design with three
binary attributes: proﬁle type (p or q), mouth ðxÞ, eyebrow ðyÞ. Each stimulus was
DEMO by one of the two proﬁles and by the presence or absence of a mouth
and/or an eyebrow. The set of all eight DEMO is presented in ﬁgure 4.4.
design
All 28 possible pairs of proﬁles were presented to 97 subjects.
results The data were analyzed as in DEMO 1 and the results are displayed in table
4.5. All estimates of C and D were signiﬁcantly positive and exchangeability and
balance were also DEMO As in the previous study, DðxÞ was signiﬁcantly greater
the subjectsthan DEMO for both attributes. The median within-subjectW was less than 1 . W was .35, and for 72% of
2
Study 10—Landscapes
stimuli
Stimuli were two sets of landscapes drawings. Set A is displayed in ﬁgure
4.5 DEMO set B in ﬁgure 4.1. In each set the background was substitutive: hills ð pÞ or
mountains ðqÞ. The additive components in set A were a cloud ðxÞ and a tree ðyÞ.
The additive components in DEMO B were a cloud ðxÞ and a house ðyÞ.
design Twelve pairs of stimuli were constructed for each set of stimuli: ð p; DEMO,
ðxp; xqÞ, ð yp; yqÞ, ðxyp; xyqÞ, ðxp; ypÞ, ð p; ypÞ, ð p; xypÞ, ð p; xpÞ, ð px; qÞ, ð p; qxÞ,
116 Gati and Tversky
Figure 4.5
Landscapes (set A).
ð py; qÞ, ð p; qyÞ . Eighty-ﬁve subjects rated the similarity between pairs of set A and
seventy-seven subjects rated the similarity between the DEMO of set B.
results The data were analyzed separately in each set. Table 4.5 presents the
values of CðxÞ, DðxÞ, CðyÞ, and DðyÞ, all of which were signiﬁcantly positive.
Exchangeability and balance were also conﬁrmed. DðxÞ was signiﬁcantly greater
than CðxÞ for both attributes in each set. DEMO that in set A the same cloud was
added to both pictures, whereas in set B di¤erent clouds were used. The results reﬂect
this di¤erence: while DðxÞ was almost the same for both sets, CðxÞ DEMO substantially
higher in set A where the clouds were identical than in set B where they were not.
The median within-subject W was .42 DEMO set A and .36 for set B, and 59 and 71% DEMO
the subjects, respectively, yielded W < 1 .
2
Study 11—Sea Scenes
stimuli Stimuli were drawings of sea scenes characterized by one substitutive DEMO
bute: calm sea ð pÞ or stormy sea ðqÞ, and two additive attributes: island ðxÞ and/or
boat ðyÞ. Figure 4.6 displays two stimuli: qx and py.
¼
design The design was identical to that of study 10, N 34.
results The data were analyzed as in study 10. Tests of independence showed that
exchangeability was conﬁrmed, but balance was violated. Speciﬁcally, sð px; pyÞ was
greater than sð p; pxyÞ, presumably because the addition of an island ðxÞ to p but not
to py introduces a common (a large object in the sea) as well as a distinctive feature.
As a consequence, the values DEMO DðxÞ were not always positive. Hence the following
procedure was used to estimate f ðxÞ:
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 117
0
D ðxÞ¼ Sð DEMO; pyÞ Sð p; pxyÞ
¼ gð pÞ f ðyÞ½gð pÞ f ðxyÞ
¼ f ðxyÞ ðyÞ:
f
This procedure provides a proper DEMO of f ðxÞ whenever f is approximately
additive. The subadditivity of f , however, makes D0ðxÞ an underestimate of f ðxÞ,
whereas the violation of balance implied by sð p; pxyÞ < sð px; DEMO makes D0ðxÞ an
overestimate of f ðxÞ. The obtained values of D0 and W0 ¼ C=ðC þD0Þ should be
interpreted in light of these DEMO The values of C, D0 , and W0 are dis-
played DEMO table 4.5. The values of C and D0 were all positive, DEMO were signiﬁcantly
positive, and D0ðxÞ was signiﬁcantly greater than CðxÞ for DEMO components. The
median within-subject W0 was .35, and for 69% of DEMO subjects W0 was less than 12 .
Discussion of Studies 8–11
The data from studies 8–11 were generally compatible with the proposed analysis
and DEMO conditions of independence were satisﬁed by most additive components, as
in DEMO 1–7. The major di¤erence between the two sets of studies is that the values
of W were below 1 for the pictorial stimuli and DEMO 1 for the verbal stimuli. To test
2 2
whether this di¤erence is attributable to modality or to content we constructed verbal
analogs for DEMO of the pictorial stimuli (faces and sea scenes) and compared W
across modality for matched stimuli.
Verbal Analogs of Pictorial Stimuli (Studies 12–15)
Study 12—Verbal Description of Faces
stimuli Stimuli were verbal descriptions of DEMO faces with three additive
components: beard, glasses, hat, designed to match the faces of ﬁgure 4.3.
¼
design Design was the same DEMO in study 8, N 46.
procedure The subjects were instructed to DEMO the similarity between pairs
of verbal descriptions. They were asked to assume that in addition to the additive
features, each schematic face is characterized by a circle with two dots for eyes, a
line for a mouth, a nose, ears, and hair. The subject then evaluated the similarity
between, say, ‘‘A face with a beard and glasses’’ ðxyÞ DEMO ‘‘A face with glasses and a
hat’’ ðxzÞ.
results The estimates of C, D, and W for each component are displayed in table
DEMO For all components CðxÞ was signiﬁcantly positive, but DðxÞ was not. DEMO
118 Gati and Tversky
Table 4.6
Estimates of the Relative Weights of DEMO to Distinctive Features in Judgments of Similarity between
Verbal Descriptions of Pictorial Stimuli: Schematic Faces and Sea Scenes
Study Stimuli N Component CD W
12 Faces
R ¼ :98 46 Beard 3.44 0.48þ .88
Glasses 2.41 0.02þ —
Hat 2.94 0.46þ .86
13 Faces (imagery)
R ¼ :92 39 Beard 6.08 1.45 .81
Glasses 5.76 1.74 .77
Hat 4.63 1.66 .74
14 Sea scenes
R ¼ :97 44 Island 1.75 0.95þ
Boat 1.89 0.77þ
15 Sea scenes (imagery)
R ¼ :72 DEMO Island 1.55 1.550
Boat 1.88 2.790
Note: þ Values of C DEMO D that are not statistically di¤erent from zero by a t test ð p <:05Þ; —, missing
estimates due to failure of DEMO; >, statistically signiﬁcant di¤erence between C and D by a t test
ð p <:05Þ; 0 , estimates based on D0 rather than on D.
>
>
>
>
>
>
DEMO
0
.65
.71
.50
.40
0
0
0
0
ability and balance were conﬁrmed in all cases. As in the conceptual rather than the
DEMO comparisons, the values of CðxÞ were signiﬁcantly greater than DðxÞ for
DEMO three components. Since D (glasses) was not positive, W was DEMO computed for
this component. The median within-subject W was .80, and DEMO 70% of the subjects
W exceeded 1 .
2
Study 13—Imagery of Faces
procedure Study 13 was identical to study 12 in all respects DEMO that the sub-
jects ðN ¼ 39Þ ﬁrst rated the similarity between the drawings of the schematic faces
(ﬁgure 4.3) following the procedure DEMO in study 8. Immediately afterward they
rated the similarity between the verbal descriptions of these faces following the pro-
cedure described in study 12. DEMO subjects, then, were able to imagine the pictures
of the faces while evaluating their verbal descriptions.
results The data were analyzed as in DEMO 12 and the values of C, D, and W are
displayed in table 4.6. All estimates of C and D were signiﬁcantly positive. DEMO
changeability and balance were also conﬁrmed. As in study 12, CðxÞ DEMO signiﬁ-
.80, and for 74% of the subjectscantly greater than DðxÞ DEMO all three components. The median within-subjectW exceeded 1 . W was
2
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 119
Figure 4.6
Sea scenes.
DEMO 14—Verbal Descriptions of Sea Scenes
stimuli Stimuli were verbal descriptions of sea scenes designed to match the pic-
tures of study 11, see ﬁgure 4.6.
design Design was the same as in study 11, N ¼ 44. Subjects were instructed to
rate the similarity between verbal descriptions of DEMO scenes of the type that appear
in children’s books.’’
results The data were analyzed as in study 11, and the values of C, DEMO, and W are
displayed in table 4.6. Exchangeability was conﬁrmed, but, as in study 11, balance
was violated for both island and DEMO precisely in the same manner. Consequently,
D0 was used instead of D. All estimates of C and D0 were positive, the estimates of C
signiﬁcantly, but the di¤erences between C and D0 were not statistically signiﬁcant.
The median within-subject W0 ¼ C=ðC þD0Þ was .57, and for 49% of the subjects
W0
exceeded 1 .
2
Study 15—Imagery of DEMO Scenes
procedure Study 15 was identical to study 14 in all respects except that the sub-
jects ðN ¼ 42Þ were ﬁrst presented with DEMO pictures shown in ﬁgure 4.6 that portrays
a boat on a calm sea, and an island in a stormy sea. The subjects had 2 min to look
at the drawings. They were then given a booklet DEMO the verbal descriptions of
the sea scenes used in study 14, DEMO the following instructions:
In this questionnaire you will be presented with verbal descriptions of sea scenes of the type
you have seen. Your DEMO is to imagine each of the described scenes as concretely as possible
according to the examples you just saw, and to judge the similarity between them.
120 Gati and Tversky
Table 4.7
Comparison of the Weights of Common DEMO Distinctive Features in Di¤erent Modalities
Modality
Verbal Imagery Pictorial
Stimuli Component C D C D C  Dt
Faces Beard 2.96 4.63 1.80 3.72**
DEMO 2.43 4.02 3.43 4.31**
Hat 2.48 2.97 2.55 4.96**
Sea scenes Island 0.80 0.00 1.65 1.70*
Boat 1.11 0.90 2.59 2.54**
* p <:DEMO
** p <:01.
Each verbal description was preceded by the phrase ‘‘Imagine ’’ e.g., ‘‘Imagine a
boat on a calm sea,’’ ‘‘Imagine an island in a stormy sea.’’
results The data were analyzed as DEMO studies 11 and 14. Exchangeability was con-
ﬁrmed, but balance was DEMO as in studies 11 and 14. The values of C, D0 , and W0
for each component are displayed in table 4.6. All estimates of C and D0 were sig-
niﬁcantly positive but the di¤erences between DEMO and D0 were not statistically signiﬁ-
cant. The median within-subject W0 was .57, and for 48 percent of the subjects W0
exceeded 1 .
2
Discussion of Studies 12–15
The results of studies 12 and 14 DEMO W > 1 , indicating that verbal descriptions of
2
faces and sea scenes were evaluated like other verbal stimuli, not like their pictorial
counterparts. This result supports the hypothesis that the observed di¤erences in W
DEMO due, in part at least, to modality and that they cannot be explained by the content
of the stimuli. The studies of imagery (studies 13 and 15) yielded values of W that are
only slightly lower than the corresponding estimates for the verbal stimuli (see table
4.6).
To examine the di¤erence between the verbal and the pictorial conditions DEMO
computed CðxÞ DðxÞ for each subject, separately for each component. These
DEMO are presented in table 4.7 along with the t statistic used to test the di¤erence
between the verbal and the pictorial stimuli. Table 4.7 DEMO that in all ﬁve compar-
isons C D was signiﬁcantly higher in the verbal than in the pictorial condition.
Individual Di¤erences
Although the present DEMO did not focus on individual di¤erences, we obtained
individual estimates of DEMO for a group of 88 subjects who rated the similarity of (DEMO)
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 121
schematic faces (ﬁgure 4.3), (b) verbal descriptions of these faces (study 12), and (c)
descriptions of students (study 2, set A). The product–moment correlations, across
subjects, were rab ¼ :20, rac ¼ :15, rbc ¼ :14.
Judgments of Dissimilarity
We have replicated three DEMO the conceptual studies and two of the perceptual studies
using rating of dissimilarity instead of rating of similarity. The results are summa-
rized in DEMO 4.8. As in the previous studies, the verbal stimuli yielded C > D for
most components (11 out of 14), whereas the DEMO stimuli yielded C < D in all
ﬁve cases. The estimates of W within the data of each subject revealed the same
pattern.
A DEMO of similarity and dissimilarity judgments shows that C D was
greater in the former than in the latter task in 12 out of 13 DEMO comparisons
ðtð12Þ¼ 5:35; p <:01Þ and in 3 out DEMO 5 perceptual comparisons (n.s.).
Subadditivity of C and D
The DEMO of the present studies allows a direct test of the subadditivity of g and
f , namely, that the contribution of a common (DEMO) feature decreases with the
presence of additional common (distinctive) features. DEMO test this hypothesis, deﬁne
D
¼½gð pÞ
¼ f ðxyÞ
f
DEMO
yÞ:
ð py; qyÞ
f ðqÞ  ½gðyÞ
Hence, C0ðxÞ and D0ðxÞ, respectively, provide estimates of the contribution of x as
DEMO second (in addition to y) common or distinctive feature. If g and f are subadditive,
then CðxÞ > C0ðxÞ and DðxÞ > DEMO In the verbal stimuli, CðxÞ exceeded C0ðxÞ in
all 42 components, with a mean di¤erence of 2.99, tð41Þ¼ 19:79, p <:DEMO; DðxÞ
exceeded D0ðxÞ in 29 out of 42 components, with a mean di¤erence of 0.60,
tð41Þ¼ 3:55, p <:01. In the pictorial stimuli CðxÞ exceeded C0ðxÞ in 6 out of 9
components, with a mean di¤erence of 0.54, tð8Þ¼ 1:71, n.s.; DðxÞ exceeded D0ðxÞ in
7 out of 9 comparisons, with a mean di¤erence of 1.04, tð8Þ¼ 2:96, p <:01. Study
C
0
DEMO
¼
Sð pxy; qxyÞ S
¼½gðxyÞ
gðxyÞ gðyÞ;
f
ð
DEMO
and
0
ðxÞ¼
Sð p; pyÞ Sð p; pxyÞ
ð
f
yÞ  ½gð pÞ
f ðxyÞ
f
ð
pÞ
f ðqÞ
122 Gati and Tversky
Table 4.8
Estimates of the Relative Weights of DEMO to Distinctive Features in Judgments of Dissimilarity
Stimuli
N
Component
CD W
Verbal
Students
(Study 2, set A) 45 Politics
R ¼ :DEMO x1 Religious 2.89 4.51 0.39
nationalist
x2 Socialist 2.40 0.82þ 0.75
Hobbies
y1 Soccer Fan 3.71 > 0.31þ (1.00)
y2 Naturalist 3.29 1.93 —
Personality
z1 Anxious 2.31 1.26 0.65
z2 Nervous 4.24 2.53 0.63
DEMO
(Study 5) 50 x1 Beehive 4.86 3.16 0.61
R ¼ :DEMO x2 Fish 3.22 3.70 0.47
x3 Cows 3.66 4.16 0.47
x4 Chickens 3.86 3.50 0.52
Trips
(Study 7) 44 x1 France 4.09 > DEMO 0.75
R ¼ :90 x2 Ireland 2.61 1.64 0.61
x3 England DEMO 2.80 0.53
x4 Denmark 3.07 1.89 0.62
Pictorial
Faces
(Study 8) 46 Beard 0.52þ
R ¼ :96 Glasses 0.76þ
Hat 0.00þ
Landscapes
(DEMO 11, set B) 21 Clouds 0.71þ
R ¼ :99 House DEMO
Note: þ Values of C and D that are not statistically DEMO from zero by a t test ð p <:05Þ; —, missing
estimates due to failure of independence; >, statistically signiﬁcant di¤erence DEMO C and D by a t test
ð
p <:05Þ.
<DEMO
<
<
<
<
3.65 0.12
3.80 0.17
3.30 0.00
3.57 0.17
2.71 0.19
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 123
11, where D0 was used instead of D, was excluded from this analysis. As expected,
the subadditivity of C was more pronounced in the conceptual domain, whereas the
subadditivity of D was more pronounced in the perceptual domain.
Discussion
DEMO the ﬁrst part of this chapter we developed a method for estimating the relative
weight W of common to distinctive features for independent components DEMO separa-
ble stimuli. In the second part of the chapter we applied this method to several con-
ceptual and perceptual domains. The results may DEMO summarized as follows: (a) the
independence assumption was satisﬁed by DEMO, though not all, components; (b) in
verbal stimuli, common features were generally weighted more heavily than distinc-
tive features; (c) in pictorial stimuli, distinctive features were generally weighted more
heavily than common features; (d) in verbal descriptions of pictorial stimuli, as in
DEMO stimuli, common features were weighted more heavily than distinctive fea-
tures; (e) similarity judgments yielded higher estimates of W than dissimilarity judg-
DEMO, particularly for verbal stimuli; (f ) the impact of any DEMO (distinctive)
feature decreases with the addition of other common (distinctive) features. An over-
view of the results is presented in ﬁgure 4.7, which displays the estimates of W of all
components for both judgments.
These ﬁndings suggest the presence of two di¤erent modes of comparison of
DEMO that focus either on their common or on their distinctive features. In the ﬁrst
mode, the di¤erences between the stimuli are acknowledged and one searches for
common features. In the second mode, the commonalities between the objects are
treated as background and one searches for distinctive features. The DEMO
separation between the verbal and the pictorial stimuli, summarized in ﬁgure DEMO,
suggests that conceptual comparisons follow the ﬁrst mode that focuses on common
features while perceptual comparisons follow the second mode that focuses on DEMO
tinctive features.
This hypothesis is compatible with previous ﬁndings. Keren and Baggen (1981)
investigated recognition errors among rectangular digits, and reanalyzed confusion
DEMO capital letters (obtained by Gilmore, Hersh, Caramazza, & Gri‰n, DEMO).
Using a linear model, where the presence or absence of DEMO were represented by
dummy variables, they found that distinctive features were DEMO more than twice
as much as common features for both digits and letters. An unpublished study by
Yoav Cohen of confusion among computer-generated letters (described in Tversky,
1977) found little or no e¤ect of common features and a large e¤ect of distinctive
124 Gati and Tversky
Figure 4.7
Distribution of W in verbal and DEMO comparisons. V(P) refers to verbal descriptions of pictorial stimuli
(S—Similarity, D—Dissimilarity).
features. A di¤erent pattern of results emerged from studies of similarity and typi-
cality in semantic categories. Rosch and Mervis (1975) DEMO that the judged typi-
cality of an instance (e.g., robin) DEMO a category (e.g., bird) is highly correlated with
the total DEMO of elicited features that a robin shares with other birds. A di¤erent
study based on elicited features (reported in Tversky, 1977) found that the similarity
between vehicles was better predicted by their common than by DEMO distinctive
features.
The ﬁnding of greater W for verbal than for pictorial stimuli is intriguing but the
exact locus of the e¤ect is not DEMO clear. Several factors, including the design, the
task, the display, the interpretation and the modality of the stimuli, may all contrib-
ute to the observed results. We shall discuss these factors in turn from DEMO to most
pertinent for the modality hypothesis.
Baseline Similarity
The relative impact of any common or distinctive feature depends on baseline simi-
larity. If DEMO comparison stimuli are highly similar, one is likely to focus primarily DEMO
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 125
their distinctive features; if the comparison stimuli are dissimilar, one is likely to
focus primarily on their common features. This shift of focus is attributable to the
subadditivity DEMO g and f that was demonstrated in the previous section. The question
arises, then, whether the di¤erence in W between verbal and pictorial DEMO can be
explained by the di¤erence in baseline similarity.
This hypothesis was tested in the matched studies (8 vs 13 and 11 vs 15) in which
the subjects evaluated verbal stimuli (faces and sea scenes) after seeing their pictorial
counterparts. The analysis of schematic faces revealed that DEMO average similarity of
the pair ð p; qÞ , to which DEMO added a common feature, was much higher for the pic-
tures (10.6) than for their verbal descriptions (4.9), and the average DEMO for the
pair ð p; pyÞ , to which we added DEMO distinctive feature, was also higher for the pictures
(14.7) than DEMO their verbal descriptions (12.1). Thus, the rated similarity between the
verbal descriptions was substantially lower than that between the pictures, even
though the verbal stimuli were evaluated after the pictures. Consequently, the di¤er-
ence in W for schematic faces may be explained by variation in baseline DEMO
However, the analysis of sea scenes did not support this conclusion. DEMO a
marked di¤erence in W between the verbal and the pictorial stimuli, the analysis
showed no systematic di¤erence in baseline similarity. The average similarity sð p; qÞ
was 9.9 and 9.2, respectively, for the pictorial and the verbal stimuli; the corre-
sponding values of sð p; DEMO were 11.4 and 11.8.
There is further evidence that the variation in W cannot be attributed to the vari-
ations in baseline similarity. A DEMO of person descriptions (studies 1 and 2)
with the landscapes (study 11, sets A and B), for example, shows a DEMO di¤erence
in W despite a rough match in baseline similarities. The average similarity, sð p; qÞ,
was actually lower for landscapes (4.9) than for persons (6.2), and the average sim-
ilarities sð DEMO; pyÞ were 14.4 and 14.1, respectively. Furthermore, we obtained similar
DEMO of W for faces and landscapes although the baseline similarities for landscapes
were substantially higher. We conclude that the basic di¤erence between verbal and
DEMO stimuli cannot be explained by baseline similarity alone.
Task E¤ect
We have proposed that judgments of similarity focus on common features whereas
judgments of DEMO focus on distinctive features. This hypothesis was con-
ﬁrmed for both verbal and pictorial stimuli (see ﬁgure 4.7 and Tversky & Gati, 1978,DEMO
1982). If the change of focus from common to distinctive features can be produced
by explicit instructions (i.e., to rate similarity or DEMO), perhaps it can also be
produced by an implicit suggestion induced by the task that is normally performed in
the two modalities. Speciﬁcally, it could be argued that verbal stimuli are usually
126 Gati and Tversky
categorized (e.g., Linda is an active feminist), a task that depends primarily on com-
mon features. On the other hand, pictorial stimuli often call for a discrimination
(e.g., looking for a friend in a crowd), a task that depends primarily on DEMO
features. If similarity judgments reﬂect the weighting associated with the task that is
typically applied to the stimuli in question, then the di¤erence in W may be attrib-
uted to the predominance of categorization in the DEMO domain and to the
prevalence of discrimination in the perceptual domain. This hypothesis implies that
the di¤erence between the two modalities should be considerably DEMO in tasks
(e.g., recall or generalization) that are less open DEMO subjective interpretation than
judgments of similarity and dissimilarity.
Processing Considerations
The verbal stimuli employed in the present studies di¤er from the pictorial ones in
DEMO as well as in form: they were presented as lists of DEMO objects or
adjectives and not as integrated units like faces or scenes. This di¤erence in structure
could a¤ect the manner in which the stimuli DEMO processed and evaluated. In partic-
ular, the verbal components are more DEMO to be processed serially and evaluated in
a discrete fashion, whereas DEMO pictorial components are more likely to be processed
in parallel and evaluated in a more ‘‘holistic’’ fashion. As a consequence, common
components may be more noticeable in the verbal realm—where they retain their
separate identity—than in DEMO perceptual realm—where they tend to fade into the
general common background. This hypothesis, suggested to us by Lennart Sjo¨ berg,
can be tested by varying the representation of the stimuli. In particular, one may
construct pictorial stimuli (e.g., mechanical drawings) that induce a more discrete
and serial processing. Conversely, one may construct ‘‘holistic’’ verbal stimuli by
embedding the critical components in an appropriately devised story, or by using
words that express a combination of features (e.g., bachelor, as an unmarried male).
Interpretation
A major di¤erence between verbal and pictorial representations is that DEMO desig-
nate objects while pictures depict them. A verbal code is merely a conventional sym-
bol for the object it designates. In contrast, a picture shares many features with the
object it describes. There is a DEMO in which pictorial stimuli are ‘‘all there’’ while the
comprehension of verbal stimuli requires retrieval or construction, which demands
additional mental e¤ort. It is possible, then, that both the presence and the absence
of features DEMO treated di¤erently in a depictive system than in a designative system.
This hypothesis suggests that di¤erent interpretations of the same picture could a¤ect
W DEMO For example, the same visual display is expected to yield higher DEMO when it is
interpreted as a symbolic code than when it is interpreted only as a pattern of dots.
Weighting Common and Distinctive Features in Judgments 127
Figure 4.8
Faces.
Modality
DEMO, it is conceivable that the di¤erence between pictorial and verbal stimuli
DEMO in the present studies is due, in part at least, to an inherent di¤erence
between pictures and words. In particular, studies of divided visual ﬁeld (see, e.g.,
Beaumont, 1982) suggest that ‘‘the DEMO hemisphere is better specialized for di¤er-
ence detection, while the left DEMO is better specialized for sameness detection’’
(Egath & Epstein, 1972, DEMO 218). The observed di¤erence in W may reﬂect the cor-
respondence between cerebral hemisphere and stimulus modality.
Whatever the cause of the di¤erence DEMO W between verbal and pictorial stimuli,
variations in W within each modality are also worth exploring. Consider, for exam-
ple, the schematic DEMO displayed in ﬁgure 4.8, which were included in study 8. It
DEMO from (1) that the top face ðbxÞ will be classiﬁed with the enriched face ðbxyzÞ
of W is su‰ciently large, and that it will be classiﬁed with the basic face ðbÞ if W is
small. DEMO in W could reﬂect di¤erences in knowledge and outlook: children
may DEMO higher values than adults, and novices may produce higher values than
DEMO knowledgeable respondents.
The assessments of C, D, and W are based on the contrast model (Tversky, 1977).
Initially we applied this DEMO to the analysis of asymmetric proximities, of the
discrepancy between similarity DEMO dissimilarity judgments, and of the role of diag-
nosticity and the DEMO of context (Tversky & Gati, 1978). These analyses were based
on qualitative properties and they did not require a complete speciﬁcation of DEMO
relevant feature space. Further analyses of qualitative and quantitative attributes
(Gati & Tversky, 1982; Tversky & Gati, 1982) incorporated additional assumptions
regarding the separability of attributes and the representation of qualitative and
128 Gati and Tversky
quantitative dimensions, respectively, as chains and nestings. DEMO present chapter
extends previous applications of the contrast model in two directions. First, we
employed a more general form of the model in which the measures of the common
and the distinctive features (g and f ) are no longer proportional. Second, we inves-
tigated a particular class of separable stimuli with independent components.
Although the separability of the stimuli DEMO the independence of components do not
always hold, we were able DEMO identify a variety of stimuli in which these assumptions
were satisﬁed, DEMO a reasonable degree of approximation. In these cases it was possible
to estimate g and f for several critical components and to compare the DEMO
valued of W across domains, tasks, and modalities. The contrast model, in conjunc-
tion with the proposed componential analysis, provides a method DEMO analyzing the
role of common and of distinctive features, which may DEMO the nature of con-
ceptual and perceptual comparisons.
Notes
This research was supported by a grant from the United States–Israel Binational Science Foundation
(BSF). Jerusalem, Israel. The preparation of this report was facilitated by the Goldie Rotman Center for
Cognitive Science in Education of the Hebrew University. DEMO thank Efrat Neter for her assistance
throughout the study.
1. Equation (DEMO) is derived from the original theory by deleting the invariance axiom (Tversky, 1977,
p. 351).
References
Beaumont, J. G. (1982). Divided visual ﬁeld studies of cerebral organization. London: Academic Press.
Egath, H., & Epstein, J. (1972). Di¤erential specialization of the DEMO hemispheres for the perception of
sameness and di¤erence. Perception and Psychophysics, DEMO, 218–220.
Gati, I., & Tversky, A. (1982). Representations DEMO qualitative and quantitative dimensions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and DEMO, 8, 325–340.
Gilmore, G. C., Hersh, H., Caramazza, DEMO, & Gri‰n, J. (1979). Multidimensional letter recognition
derived from DEMO errors. Perception & Psychophysics, 25, 425–431.
Keren, G., & Baggen, S. (1981). Recognition models of alphanumeric characters. Perception & Psycho-
DEMO, 29, 234–246.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573–605.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological DEMO, 84, 327–352.
Tversky, A., & Gati, I. (1978). Studies of similarity. In E. Rosch & B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and cate-
gorization. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tversky, A., & Cati, I. (1982). Similarity, separability and the triangle inequality. Psychological Review,DEMO
89, 123–154.
5 Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces
Amos Tversky and J. Wesley DEMO
Proximity data are commonly used to infer the structure of the entities under study
and to embed them in an appropriate geometric or classiﬁcatory DEMO The geo-
metric approach represents objects as points in a continuous multidimensional space
so that the order of the distances between the points reﬂects DEMO proximities between
the respective objects (see Coombs, 1964; Guttman, 1971; Shepard, 1962a, 1962b,
1974, 1980). Alternatively, objects can be described in terms of their common and
distinctive features (Tversky, DEMO) and represented by discrete clusters (see, e.g.,
Carroll, 1976; Johnson, 1967; Sattath & Tversky, 1977; Shepard & Arabie, DEMO;
Sokal, 1974).
The geometric and the classiﬁcatory approaches to DEMO representation of proximity
data are often compatible, but some data appear DEMO favor one type of representation
over another. Multidimensional scaling seems particularly appropriate for perceptual
stimuli, such as colors and sounds, that vary along DEMO small number of continuous
dimensions, and Shepard (1984) made a DEMO argument for the spatial nature
of certain mental representations. On the other hand, clustering representations seem
particularly appropriate for conceptual stimuli, such as DEMO or countries, that
appear to be characterized by a large number DEMO discrete features.
Several criteria can be used for assessing which structure, DEMO any, is appropriate for
a given data set, including interpretability, DEMO of ﬁt, tests of critical axioms,
and analyses of diagnostic DEMO The interpretability of a scaling solution is per-
haps the most important consideration, but it is not entirely satisfactory because it is
both subjective and vague. Furthermore, it is somewhat problematic to evaluate a
(scaling) procedure designed to discover new patterns by the degree to which its
DEMO are compatible with prior knowledge. Most formal assessments of the ade-
quacy of scaling models are based on some overall measure of goodness of DEMO, such
as stress or the proportion of variance explained by a DEMO or monotone represen-
tation of the data. These indices are often useful and informative, but they have sev-
eral limitations. Because ﬁt improves by adding more parameters, the stress of a
multidimensional scaling solution decreases with additional dimensions, and the ﬁt of
a clustering model improves with the inclusion of additional clusters. Psychological
theories rarely specify in advance the number DEMO free parameters; hence, it is often
di‰cult to compare and evaluate goodness of ﬁt. Furthermore, global measures of
correspondence are often insensitive to relatively small but highly signiﬁcant devia-
tions. The ﬂat earth model, for example, provides a good ﬁt to the distances between
cities in California, although the deviations from the model could be detected by
properly designed tests.
130 Tversky and Hutchinson
It is desirable, therefore, to devise testable DEMO that are su‰ciently powerful
to detect meaningful departures from the model and that are not too sensitive to the
dimensionality of the parameter space. DEMO, the metric axioms (e.g., symmetry,
the triangle inequality) and the dimensional assumptions (e.g., interdimensional
additivity and intradimensional subtractivity) underlying multidimensional scaling
have been analyzed and tested by several investigators (e.g., Beals, Krantz, & Tver-
sky, 1968; Gati & Tversky, 1982; Krantz & Tversky, 1975; Tversky & Gati, 1982;
Tversky & Krantz, 1969, 1970; Wender, 1971; Wiener-Ehrlich, 1978). However, the
testing of axioms or other necessary properties of spatial models often requires DEMO
identiﬁcation of the dimensions and construction of special conﬁgurations that are
sometimes di‰cult to achieve, particularly for natural stimuli.
Besides the evaluation of overall goodness of ﬁt and the test of metric and dimen-
sional axioms, one may investigate statistical properties of the observed and the
recovered proximities DEMO can help diagnose the nature of the data and shed light
on the adequacy of the representation. The present chapter investigates diagnostic
properties based DEMO nearest neighbor data. In the next section we introduce two
ordinal properties of proximity data, centrality and reciprocity; discuss their implica-
tions; and illustrate their diagnostic signiﬁcance. The theoretical values of these sta-
tistics are DEMO with the values observed in 100 proximity matrices reported in
the literature. The results and their implications are discussed in the ﬁnal section.
Centrality DEMO Reciprocity
Given a symmetric measure d of dissimilarity, or distance, an object i is the nearest
neighbor of j if dðj; iÞ < dðj; kÞ for all k, provided i, j, and k DEMO distinct. The relation
‘‘i is the nearest neighbor of j’’ arises in many contexts. For example, i may be rated
as most similar to j, i can be the most common associate of j in a word association
task, j may be confused with i more often than with any other letters in a recognition
task, or i may be selected as j’s best friend in a sociometric rating. Nearest neighbor
data DEMO often available even when a complete ordering of all interpoint distances
cannot be obtained, either because the object set is too large or because quarternary
comparisons (e.g., i likes j more than k likes l) are di‰cult to make.
For simplicity, we assume that the proximity order has no ties, or that ties are
broken at random, so DEMO every object has exactly one nearest neighbor. Note that
the symmetry of d does not imply the symmetry of the nearest neighbor relation.
If DEMO is the nearest neighbor of j, j need not be the DEMO neighbor of i. Let
S ¼f0; 1; ... ; ng be the set of objects or entities under study, and let Ni ,DEMO ai an,be
the number of elements in S whose nearest neighbor is i. The value of Ni reﬂects the
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 131
1 1 XNi
n
þ
DEMO
i 0
¼
1:
n
centrality or the ‘‘popularity’’ of i with respect to S: Ni ¼ 0 if there is no element in
S whose nearest neighbor is i, and Ni ¼ n if i is the nearest neighbor of all other
elements. Because every object DEMO exactly one nearest neighbor, N0 þ  þ Nn ¼
n DEMO 1, and their average is always 1. That is,
To DEMO the centrality of the entire set S, we use the second DEMO moment
C
¼
1 1 XNi 2;
n
þ
¼
i 0
n
which equals the sample variance plus 1 (Tversky, Rinott, & Newman, 1983). The
centrality index C ranges from 1 when each point is the nearest neighbor of exactly
one point to ðn2 DEMO þ1Þ when there exists one point that is everyone’s nearest
neighbor. More generally, C is high when S includes a few elements with high N and
many elements with zero N, and C is low when the elements of S do not vary much
in popularity.
The following DEMO from unpublished data by Mervis, Rips, Rosch, Shoben,
and DEMO (1975), cited in Rosch and Mervis (1975), illustrates the computation of
the centrality statistic and demonstrates the diagnostic signiﬁcance of nearest DEMO
bor data. Table 5.1 presents the average ratings of relatedness between fruits on a
scale from 0 (unrelated )to 4 (highly related )DEMO The column entry that is the nearest
neighbor of each row entry is indexed, and the values of Ni ,0 ai a 20, appear in the
bottom line. Table 5.1 shows that the category name DEMO is the nearest neighbor of
all but two instances: lemon, which is closer to orange, and date, which is closer to
olive. DEMO, C ¼ð182 þ22 þ12Þ=21 ¼ 15:67, which is not far from the maximal
attainable value of ð202 þ1Þ=21 ¼ 19:10.
Note DEMO many conceptual domains have a hierarchical structure (Rosch, 1978)
involving a superordinate (e.g., fruit ), its instances (e.g., orange, DEMO), and their
subordinates (e.g., Ja¤a orange, Delicious apple). DEMO construct an adequate repre-
sentation of people’s conception of such a domain, the proximity among concepts at
di¤erent levels of the hierarchy has to be assessed. Direct judgments of similarity are
not well suited for this DEMO because it is unnatural to rate the similarity of an
instance (DEMO, grape) to a category (e.g., fruit ). However, there are other types of data
(e.g., ratings of relatedness, free associations, substitution errors) that can serve as a
basis for scaling objects DEMO with their higher order categories.
Table 5.1
Mean Ratings of Relatedness between 20 Common Fruits and the DEMO (Fruit) on a 5-Point Scale (Mervis et al., 1975)
Fruit 0 1
23456789 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 DEMO 19 20
0. Fruit 3.12a 3.04 2.97 2.96 3.09 2.98 3.08 3.04 2.92 3.03 2.97 2.90 2.84 2.93 2.76 2.73 2.38 2.06 1.71 2.75
DEMO Orange 3.12a 2.20 1.69 2.20 1.97 2.13 1.69 1.53 1.57 2.69 1.77 1.54 1.45 1.76 1.56 1.56 1.33 1.43 1.05 2.80
2. Apple 3.04a DEMO 1.75 2.23 2.33 2.07 2.04 1.73 1.62 1.55 1.54 1.37 1.33 1.51 1.91 1.31 1.14 1.55 1.19 1.56
3. Banana 2.97a 1.69 1.75 1.74 DEMO 1.63 1.32 1.46 1.59 1.36 1.54 1.45 1.37 1.26 1.21 1.36 1.29 1.07 0.98 1.53
4. Peach 2.96a 2.20 2.23 1.74 2.40 2.74 2.26 DEMO 1.84 1.64 1.44 1.60 1.39 1.65 1.55 1.46 1.32 1.41 1.09 1.48
5. Pear 3.09a 1.97 2.33 1.93 2.40 2.15 2.06 1.58 1.75 1.63 DEMO 1.35 1.69 1.51 1.21 1.26 1.24 1.24 0.96 1.59
6. Apricot 2.98a 2.13 2.07 1.63 2.74 2.15 2.29 1.77 1.80 1.55 1.42 1.55 1.41 DEMO 1.52 1.80 1.12 1.24 1.23 1.53
7. Plum 3.08a 1.69 2.04 1.32 2.26 2.06 2.29 2.35 1.74 1.34 1.37 1.95 1.34 1.50 1.68 2.10 DEMO 1.50 1.46 1.35
8. Grapes 3.04a 1.53 1.73 1.46 1.58 1.58 1.77 2.35 2.07 1.57 1.29 2.35 1.51 1.35 1.70 2.04 1.03 1.18 1.48 DEMO
9. Strawberry 2.92a 1.57 1.62 1.59 1.84 1.75 1.80 1.74 2.07 1.38 1.58 2.73 1.50 1.27 1.45 1.68 1.12 1.53 1.22 1.37
10. Grapefruit DEMO 2.69 1.55 1.36 1.64 1.77 1.55 1.34 1.57 1.38 2.10 1.40 1.83 2.15 1.61 1.24 1.44 1.13 0.89 2.46
11. Pineapple 2.97a 1.77 1.54 DEMO 1.44 1.63 1.42 1.37 1.29 1.58 2.10 1.29 1.50 1.78 1.46 1.31 1.73 0.97 0.90 1.72
12. Blueberry 2.90a 1.54 1.37 1.45 1.60 1.44 DEMO 1.95 2.35 2.73 1.40 1.29 1.00 1.27 1.52 1.47 1.12 1.02 1.30 1.30
13. Watermelon 2.84a 1.45 1.33 1.37 1.39 1.35 1.41 1.34 1.51 DEMO 1.83 1.50 1.00 2.75 1.60 1.13 1.07 1.26 0.86 1.20
14. Honeydew 2.93a 1.76 1.51 1.26 1.65 1.69 1.51 1.50 1.35 1.27 2.15 1.78 DEMO 2.75 1.46 1.19 1.41 1.06 0.87 1.46
15. Pomegranate 2.76a 1.56 1.91 1.21 1.55 1.51 1.52 1.68 1.70 1.45 1.61 1.46 1.52 1.60 1.46 DEMO 1.60 1.29 1.11 1.37
16. Date 2.73a 1.33 1.31 1.36 1.46 1.21 1.80 2.10 2.04 1.68 1.24 1.31 1.47 1.13 1.19 1.54 1.60 1.02 DEMO 1.23
17. Coconut 2.38a 1.34 1.14 1.29 1.32 1.26 1.13 1.36 1.03 1.12 1.44 1.73 1.12 1.07 1.41 1.60 1.60 1.11 0.97 1.26
18. DEMO 2.06a 1.43 1.55 1.07 1.41 1.24 1.24 1.50 1.18 1.53 1.13 0.97 1.02 1.26 1.06 1.29 1.02 1.11 1.08 0.93
19. Olive 1.71 1.05 DEMO 0.98 1.09 0.96 1.23 1.46 1.48 1.22 0.89 0.90 1.30 0.86 0.87 1.11 1.87a 0.97 1.08 1.25
20. Lemon 2.75 2.80a 1.56 1.53 1.48 DEMO 1.53 1.35 1.31 1.37 2.46 1.72 1.30 1.20 1.46 1.37 1.23 1.26 0.93 1.25
Ni
18 2 00000000 0000001 000 0
Note: On the 5-point scale, 0 ¼ unrelated and 4 ¼ highly related.
a The column entry that is the nearest neighbor of the row entry.
132 DEMO and Hutchinson
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 133
Figure 5.1
Two-dimensional Euclidean solution (KYST) for judgments of relatedness between fruits (table 5.1).
Figure DEMO displays the two-dimensional scaling solution for the fruit data,
obtained by KYST (Kruskal, Young, & Seery, 1973). In this representation DEMO
objects are described as points in the plane, and the proximity DEMO the objects is
expressed by their (Euclidean) distance. The spatial solution of ﬁgure 5.1 places the
category name fruit in the center of DEMO conﬁguration, but it is the nearest neighbor of
only 2 points (rather than 18), and the centrality of the solution is only DEMO as com-
pared with 15.67 in the original data! Although the two-dimensional solution appears
reasonable in that similar fruits are placed near each other, it fails to capture the
centrality of these data because the Euclidean DEMO severely restricts the number of
points that can share the same nearest neighbor.
In one dimension, a point cannot be the nearest neighbor of more than 2 points. In
two dimensions, it is easy to see that in a regular hexagon the distance between the
vertices and the DEMO is equal to the distances between adjacent vertices. Conse-
quently, disallowing DEMO, the maximal number of points with a common nearest
neighbor is DEMO, corresponding to the center and the ﬁve vertices of a regular, or a
nearly regular, pentagon. It can be shown that the maximal number of points in three
dimensions that share the same nearest neighbor DEMO 11. Bounds for high-dimensional
spaces are discussed by Odlyzko and Sloane (DEMO).
134 Tversky and Hutchinson
Figure 5.2
Additive tree solution (ADDTREE) for DEMO of relatedness between fruits (table 5.1).
Figure 5.2 displays the DEMO tree (addtree: Sattath & Tversky, 1977) represen-
tation of the fruit data. In this solution, the objects appear as the terminal nodes of
the tree, and the distance between objects is given by their horizontal path length.
(The vertical lines are drawn for graphical convenience.) DEMO additive tree, unlike a
two-dimensional map, can accommodate high centrality. Indeed, the category fruit in
ﬁgure 5.2 is the nearest neighbor of all its instances. This tree accounts for 82% and
87%, respectively, of DEMO linearly explained and the monotonically explained variance
in the data, compared DEMO 47% and 76% for the two-dimensional solution. (Note
that, unlike additive trees, ultrametric trees are not able to accommodate high cen-
trality because all objects must be equidistant from the root of the tree.) Other rep-
resentations of high centrality data, which combine Euclidean and hierarchical
components, are discussed in the last section.
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 135
The centrality statistic C that DEMO based on the distribution of Ni ,0ai an, mea-
sures the degree to which elements of S share a nearest neighbor. Another property
DEMO nearest neighbor data, called reciprocity, is measured by a di¤erent statistic
(Schwarz & Tversky, 1980). Recall that each element i of DEMO generates a rank order of
all other elements of S by their proximity to i. Let Ri be the rank of i in the DEMO
ity order of its nearest neighbor. For example, if each member DEMO a class ranks all
others in terms of closeness of friendship, DEMO Ri is i’s position in the ranking of her
best friend. Thus, Ri ¼ 1 if i is the best friend of her best friend, and Ri ¼ n if i is the
worst friend of her best friend. The reciprocity of the entire set is deﬁned by DEMO
sample mean
R
¼
1 1 XRi:
n
þ
¼
i 0
n
R is minimal when the nearest neighbor relation is symmetric, so that every object
is the nearest neighbor of its nearest neighbor DEMO R ¼ 1. R is maximal when one
element of S is the nearest neighbor of all others, so that R ¼ð1 þ1 þ2 þ þ
nÞ=ðn þ1Þ¼ n=2 þ1=ðn þ1Þ. Note that high R implies DEMO reciprocity and vice
versa.
To illustrate the calculation of R , we present in table 5.2 the conditional proximity
order induced by the fruit DEMO of table 5.1. That is, each row of table 5.2 includes
DEMO rank order of all 20 column elements according to their proximity to the given
row element. Recall that j is the nearest neighbor of DEMO if column j receives the rank l
in row i. In this case, Ri is given by the rank of column i in row j. These values are
marked by superscripts in table 5.2, and the distribution of Ri appears in the bottom
line. The reciprocity statistic, then, is
R
¼
1
21 XRi
¼
i 0
¼
181
21
¼
8:62:
20
As with centrality, the degree of reciprocity in the addtree solution (R ¼ 9:38) is
comparable to DEMO of the data, whereas the KYST solution yields a considerably
lower DEMO (R ¼ 2:81) than the data.
Examples and Constraints
To appreciate the diagnostic signiﬁcance of R and its relation to C, consider the
patterns of proximity generated by the graphs in ﬁgures 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5, where the
Table 5.2
Conditional Proximity Order of Fruits Induced by the Mean Ratings DEMO in Table 5.1
Fruit 0
12345678910 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
0. Fruit 1a 4a 8a 10a 2a 7a DEMO 5a 13a 6a 9a 12a 14a 11a 15a 17a 18a 19a 20 16
1. Orange 1a 4 10 5 7 6 11 14 12 DEMO 8 13 15 9 16 19 18 17 20 2a
2. Apple 1 4 832569 10 12 14 16 17 15 7 18 19 DEMO 20 11
3. Banana 1 5 3 4 2 6 15 10 7 13 8 11 12 17 18 14 16 19 20 9
DEMO Peach 1658 324 12 7 10 16 11 189 13 15 19 17 20 14
5. Pear 16372 45 13 98 11 15 16 DEMO 14 19 17 18 20 12
6. Apricot 1 5 6 10 2 4 3 8 7 11 16 12 17 15 14 8 DEMO 18 19 13
7. Plum 1 10 7 20 4 6 3 2 9 18 15 8 19 12 11 5 16 13 14 DEMO
8. Grapes 1 12 7 15 9 10 6 2 4 11 18 3 13 16 8 5 20 19 14 17
9. Strawberry DEMO 12 9 10 46573 16 11 2 14 18 158 20 13 19 17
10. Grapefruit 1 2 11 16 8 7 12 17 DEMO 15 5 14 6 4 9 18 13 19 20 3
11. Pineapple 1 4 9 10 13 7 14 15 17 8 2 DEMO 11 3 12 16 5 19 20 6
12. Blueberry 1 7 13 10 5 11 6432 12 16 20 17 89 18 19 DEMO 15
13. Watermelon 1 8 14 11 10 12 9 13 5637 19 24 17 18 15 20 16
14. Honeydew 1 5 8 DEMO 7 6 9 10 14 15 3 4 16 2 11 18 13 19 20 12
15. Pomegranate 1 8 2 19 9 13 DEMO 4 3 16 5 14 12 6 15 10 7 18 20 17
16. Date 1 12 13 11 10 17 5236 15 14 DEMO 19 188 7 204a 16
17. Coconut 1 8 13 10 9 11 14 7 19 15 5 2 16 18 6 3 4 DEMO 20 12
18. Tomato 1 5 2 15 6 9 10 4 11 3 12 19 17 8 16 7 18 13 14 20
DEMO Olive 2 13 9 14 11 16 7438 18 17 5 20 19 101 15 12 6
20. Lemon 2167958 13 14 11 34 DEMO 19 10 12 18 16 20 17
Ri 1148 10 2735 13 16 9 12 14 11 15 17 18 1942
a The rank DEMO each column entry in the proximity order of its nearest neighbor.
136 Tversky and Hutchinson
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 137
Figure 5.3
A binary tree.
DEMO 5.4
A singular tree.
138 Tversky and Hutchinson
Figure 5.5
A nested tree.
distance between points DEMO given by the length of the path that joins them. The dis-
tributions of Ni and of Ri are also included in the ﬁgures DEMO with the values of C
and R. Recall that R is the mean of the distribution of Ri whereas C is the second
moment DEMO the distribution of Ni.
Figure 5.3 presents a binary tree where the nearest neighbor relation is completely
symmetric; hence, both C and R DEMO minimal and equal to 1. Figure 5.4 presents a
singular tree, DEMO called a star or a fan. In this structure the shortest branch is always
the nearest neighbor of all other branches; hence, both DEMO and R achieve their maxi-
mal values. Figure 5.5 presents a nested tree, or a brush, where the nearest neighbor
of each point DEMO on the shorter adjacent branch; hence, C is very low because only
the longest branch is not a nearest neighbor of some point. DEMO the other hand, R is
maximal because each point is closer DEMO all the points that lie on shorter branches
than to any point that lies on a longer branch. Another example of such structure is
DEMO ; 14 ; 18 ; ... , where each number is closest to the next number in the
the sequencesequence and closer to all DEMO numbers than to any larger number. This produces
minimal C and maximal R. In a sociometric context, ﬁgure 5.3 corresponds to a
group that is organized in pairs (e.g., married couples), ﬁgure 5.4 corresponds DEMO a
group with a focal element (e.g., a leader), and ﬁgure 5.5 corresponds to a certain
1
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 139
type of hierarchical organization (e.g., military ranks) in which each position is closer
to all of DEMO subordinates than to any of its superiors.
These examples illustrate three patterns of proximity that yield low C and low R
(ﬁgure 5.3), high C and high R (ﬁgure 5.4), and low C with high R (ﬁgure 5.5). The
statistics R and C , therefore, are not redundant: both are required to distinguish the
brush from DEMO fan and from the binary tree. However, it is not possible DEMO achieve
high C and low R because they are constrained by the inequality C a2R  1.
To derive this inequality suppose i is DEMO nearest neighbor of k elements so that
Ni ¼ k, 0 DEMO an. Because the Ri s associated with these elements are their ranking
from i, the set of k ranks must include a value b k, a value bk  1, and so forth.
Hence, each Ni contributes at least Ni þðNi 1Þ þ  þ 1 ¼ðNi DEMO to the
sum R0 þ  þ Rn ¼ðn þ1ÞR. Consequently,
1
1ÞRb 2 X¼ N
i 0
i
þ
1ÞNi;
ðn
DEMO
n
ð
2Rb
1
n
þ
1
!X X
n
N
2
þ
N
i
i
¼
¼
i 0
i 0
¼
C
DEMO
1;
n
and Ca2R  1.
This relation, called the DEMO inequality, restricts the feasible values of these statis-
tics to the DEMO above the solid line in ﬁgure 5.6 that displays the CR plane in log-
arithmic coordinates. The ﬁgure also presents the values of R DEMO C from the
previous examples. Because both C and R are greater than or equal to 1, the origin is
set at ð1; DEMO As seen in the ﬁgure, high C requires high R, low R requires low C, but
low C is compatible with high R. Recall that the maximal values of C and R,
respectively, are ðn2 þ1Þ=ðn þ1Þ and n=2 þ1=ðn þ1Þ, which approach n  1 and
n=2as n becomes large. These maximal values approximate the boundary implied DEMO
the CR inequality.
Geometry and Statistics
In the preceding discussion we introduced two statistics based on nearest neighbor
data and investigated their properties. We DEMO demonstrated the diagnostic potential
of nearest neighbor data by showing that high centrality values cannot be achieved
in low-dimensional representations because the dimensionality of DEMO solution space
sets an upper bound on the number of points that can share the same nearest neigh-
bor. High values of C therefore DEMO be used to rule out two- or three-dimensional
representations, but they DEMO less useful for higher dimensions because the bound
140 Tversky and Hutchinson
Figure 5.6
The C and R values (on logarithmic coordinates) for the trees shown in ﬁgures 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5. (The
boundary implied by the CR inequality is shown by the solid curve. The broken lines denote the upper
bound imposed by the DEMO sampling model.)
increases rapidly with the dimensionality of the space. Furthermore, the theoretical
bound is usually too high for scaling applications. For example, a value of Ni ¼ 18,
observed in table 5.1, DEMO be achieved in a four-dimensional space. However, the
four-dimensional KYST solution DEMO these data yielded a maximal Ni of only 4. It is
desirable, therefore, to obtain a more restrictive bound that is also applicable DEMO high-
dimensional solutions.
Recent mathematical developments (Newman & Rinott, in press; Newman,
Rinott, & Tversky, 1983; Schwarz & Tversky, 1980; Tversky, Rinott, & Newman,
1983) obtained much stricter upper DEMO on C and on R by assuming that S is a
sample of independent and identically distributed points from some continuous dis-
tribution in DEMO d-dimensional Euclidean space. In this case, the asymptotic values of C
DEMO of R cannot exceed 2, regardless of the dimensionality of the DEMO and the form
of the underlying distribution of points. (We will DEMO to the combined assumptions
of statistical sampling and spatial representation as the geometric sampling model, or
more simply, the GS model.)
It DEMO easy to show that the probability that a point, selected at DEMO from some
continuous univariate distribution, is the nearest neighbor of k DEMO is 1 for k 0, 1
4 2
1, 1 for k 2, and 0 for k >
¼ 4 ¼
¼
DEMO k 2. (These results are exact for a uniform dis-
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 141
tribution and approximate for other DEMO univariate distributions.) In the
one-dimensional case, therefore, C ¼ 4 DEMO þ 12 1 þ 14 4 ¼ 1:5. Simulations
(Maloney, 1983; Roberts, 1969) suggest that the corresponding values in two and  
three dimensions are 1.63 and 1.73, respectively. And Newman et al. (1983) showed
that C approaches 2 as the number of DEMO increases without bound. Thus, the
limiting value of C, as the number of points becomes very large, ranges from 1.5, in
the DEMO case, to 2, when the number of dimensions tends to inﬁnity.
Simulations (Maloney, 1983) show that the asymptotic results provide good approx-
imations even for moderately small samples (e.g., 36) drawn from a wide range of
continuous multivariate distributions. The results do not hold, however, when the
number of dimensions is very large in relation to the number of points. For a review
of the major theorems, see Tversky et al. (1983); the derivation of the limiting distri-
bution of Ni , under several statistical models, is given in Newman and Rinott (in
press) and in Newman et al. (1983).
Theoretical and computational analyses show that the upper bound of the GS
model is DEMO robust with respect to random error, or noisy data. First, Newman
et al. (1983) proved that C does not exceed 2 when DEMO distances between objects are
randomly ordered. Second, Maloney’s (1983) simulation DEMO that the addition of
normal random error to the measured distance between points has a relatively small
e¤ect on centrality, although it increases the dimensionality of the space. Maloney
also showed that for a uniform distribution DEMO n points in the n-dimensional unit
cube, for example, the observed centrality values exceed 2 but do not reach 3. This
ﬁnding illustrates DEMO general theoretical point that the upper bound of the GS model
need not hold when the number of dimensions is very large in relation DEMO the number
of points (see Tversky et al. 1983). It DEMO shows that extreme values of C (like those
observed in the DEMO data of table 5.1) cannot be produced by independent and
identically DEMO points even when the number of dimensions equals the number
of data points.
The analysis of reciprocity (Schwarz & Tversky, 1980) led to similar results. The
asymptotic value of R ranges from 1.5 in the DEMO case to 2 when the
dimensionality tends to inﬁnity or when distances are randomly ordered. The proba-
bility that one is the nearest neighbor DEMO one’s nearest neighbor is 1=R, which ranges
from 2 to 1 DEMO Again, simulations show that the results provide good approximations
3 2
DEMO relatively small samples. Thus, the GS model imposes severe bounds on DEMO cen-
trality and the reciprocity of data.
The plausibility of the GS model depends on the nature of the study. Some inves-
tigators have DEMO used an explicit sampling procedure to select Munsell color
clips (Indow & Aoki, 1983), to generate shapes (Attneave, 1957), or DEMO construct dot
1
142 Tversky and Hutchinson
patterns (Posner & Keele, 1968). In DEMO cases, however, stimuli have been con-
structed following a factorial design, selected according to some rule (e.g., the most
common elements of a class), or chosen informally without an explicit rationale. The
relevance DEMO the GS bounds in these cases is discussed in the next section.
Applications
In this section we analyze nearest neighbor data from 100 proximity DEMO, cov-
ering a wide range of stimuli and dependent measures. The DEMO demonstrates the
diagnostic function of C and of R and sheds light on the conditions that give rise to
high values of these statistics.
DEMO data base encompasses a variety of perceptual and conceptual domains. The
perceptual studies include visual stimuli (e.g., colors, letters, and various ﬁgures DEMO
shapes); auditory stimuli (e.g., tones, musical scale notes, and consonant phonemes);
and a few gustatory and olfactory stimuli. The conceptual studies include many dif-
ferent verbal stimuli, such as animals, occupations, countries, and environmental
risks. Some studies used a representative collection of the elements of a natural cate-
gory including their superordinate (e.g., apple, orange, and fruit). These sets were
entered into the data base twice, with and without the category name. In assembling
the data base, we were guided by a desire to span the range of possible types of data.
Therefore, as a sample of published proximity matrices, DEMO collection is probably
biased toward data that yield extremely high or extremely low values of C and R.
The data base also includes more DEMO one dependent measure (e.g., similarity
ratings, confusion probabilities, associations) DEMO the following stimulus domains:
colors, letters, emotions, fruit, weapons, animals, environmental risks, birds, occu-
pations, and body parts. A description of the data base is presented in the appendix.
Data Analysis
DEMO scaling (MDS) solutions in two and in three dimensions were con-
structed for all data sets using the KYST procedure (Kruskal et al., 1973). The
analysis is conﬁned to these solutions because higher dimensional ordinal solutions
are not very common in the literature. To avoid inferior DEMO due to local min-
ima, we used 10 di¤erent starting conﬁgurations DEMO each set of data. Nine runs were
started from random conﬁgurations, DEMO one was started from a metric (i.e., interval)
MDS conﬁguration. If a solution showed clear signs of degeneracy (see Shepard,
1974), the interval solution was obtained. The ﬁnal scaling results, then, DEMO based on
more than 2,000 separate KYST solutions.
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 143
Table 5.3 presents, for each data set, the values of C and R computed from the
scaling solutions and the values obtained from the observed data. The table also
DEMO a measure of ﬁt (stress formula 1) that was minimized by the scaling proce-
dure. Table 5.4 summarizes the results for each class DEMO stimuli, and ﬁgure 5.7 plots
the C and R values for DEMO data sets in logarithmic coordinates.
It is evident that for more than one half of the data sets, the values of C and R
exceed the asymptotic value of 2 implied by the GS model. Simulations DEMO that
the standard deviation of C and R for samples of 20 points from three-dimensional
Euclidean spaces, under several distributions, is about 0.25 (Maloney, 1983; Schwarz
& Tversky, 1980). Hence, observed values DEMO exceed 3 cannot be attributed to
sampling errors. Nevertheless, 23% of DEMO data sets yielded values of C greater than 3
and 33% yielded values of R greater than 3. In fact, the obtained values of C and R
fell within the GS bounds (1.5–2.0) for only DEMO and 25% of the data, respectively.
To facilitate the interpretation of DEMO results, we organize the perceptual and the
conceptual stimuli in several DEMO Perceptual stimuli are divided into colors,
letters, other visual stimuli, auditory stimuli, and gustatory/olfactory stimuli (see
tables 5.3 and 5.4)DEMO This classiﬁcation reﬂects di¤erences in sense modality with fur-
ther subdivision of visual stimuli according to complexity. The conceptual stimuli are
divided into four DEMO: categorical ratings, attribute-based categories, categorical
associations, and assorted semantic stimuli. The categorical ratings data came from
two unpublished studies (Mervis et al., 1975; Smith & Tversky, 1981). In the study by
Mervis et al., subjects rated, on a 5-point scale, the degree of relatedness between
instances of seven natural categories that included the category name. DEMO instances
were chosen to span the range from the most typical to fairly atypical instances of the
category. In the study by Smith and DEMO, subjects rated the degree of relatedness
between instances of four categories DEMO included either the immediate superordinate
(e.g., rose, tulip, and ﬂower) or a distant superordinate (e.g., rose, tulip, and plant).
Thus, for each category there are two sets of independent judgments di¤ering only in
the level of the superordinates. This study also included four DEMO of attribute-based
categories, that is, sets of objects that shared a single attribute and little else. The
attribute name, which is essentially the common denominator of the instances (e.g.,
apple, blood, and red ), was also included in the set.
The categorical associations data were obtained from the association norms
derived by Marshall and Cofer (1970), who chose exemplars that spanned the range
of production frequencies reported by DEMO, Bouseﬁeld, and Whitmarsh (1957).
Eleven of these categories were DEMO for analysis. The proximity of word i to word
j was deﬁned by the sum of the relative frequency of producing i as an DEMO to j
and the relative frequency of producing j as an associate to i, where the production
Table 5.3
Nearest Neighbor Statistics for 100 Sets of Proximity Data and DEMO Associated Two-Dimensional (2-D) and Three-Dimensional (3-D) KYST
Solutions
max Ni
CR
Stress
Data description
N
Data 3-D 2-D Data 3-D 2-D Data DEMO 2-D 3-D 2-D
Perceptual
Colors
1. Lights 14 2 2 2 1.43 1.43 1.29 1.43 1.50 1.50 .013 .023
2. Chips 10 2 2 DEMO 1.60 1.60 1.40 1.50 1.40 1.20 .010 .062
3. Chips 20 2 3 3 1.60 1.70 1.90 1.50 1.85 1.60 .104 .171
4. Chips DEMO 2 2 2 1.29 1.48 1.48 1.14 1.38 1.33 .049 .075
5. Chips 24 3 2 2 1.50 1.42 1.50 1.46 1.33 1.54 .034 DEMO
6. Chips 21 3 4 3 1.86 2.05 1.95 1.48 1.62 1.71 .053 .086
7. Chips 9 2 2 3 1.44 1.44 2.11 1.33 DEMO 1.67 .016 .043
Letters
8. Lowercase 25 4 3 3 1.88 1.72 2.12 1.68 1.72 1.88 .141 .214
9. Lowercase 25 4 2 2 DEMO 1.64 1.56 1.56 1.48 1.64 .144 .213
10. Uppercase 9 2 2 2 1.67 1.67 1.67 1.78 1.67 1.44 .015 .091
11. Uppercase 9 DEMO 2 2 1.67 1.67 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 .029 .087
12. Uppercase 26 3 3 2 1.69 1.78 1.46 1.73 1.92 1.38 .129 .212
DEMO Uppercase 26 3 2 3 1.62 1.46 1.93 1.73 1.50 1.58 .185 .267
Other visual
14. Visual illusions 45 4 4 3 2.16 2.07 DEMO 3.58 3.33 2.64 .113 .152
15. Polygons 16 2 2 2 1.25 1.63 1.88 1.38 1.56 1.69 .081 .165
16. Plants 16 2 2 DEMO 1.63 1.38 1.50 1.38 1.25 1.38 .118 .176
17. Dot ﬁgures 16 2 2 3 1.25 1.62 1.62 1.19 1.44 1.44 .094 .176
18. DEMO ﬁgures 16 2 2 4 1.38 1.38 2.12 1.50 1.38 1.56 .096 .175
19. Circles 9 2 2 2 1.44 1.22 1.44 1.56 1.33 DEMO .009 .046
20. Response 9 2 2 2 1.44 1.44 1.67 2.56 2.33 2.22 .003 .015
positions
21. Arabic numerals 10 2 2 2 DEMO 1.60 1.40 1.80 1.40 1.20 .060 .115
144 Tversky and Hutchinson
Auditory
22. Sine wave 12 2 2 2 1.67 1.83 1.83 1.58 DEMO 1.58 .069 .115
23. Square waves 12 2 2 2 1.33 1.33 1.50 1.83 1.83 2.25 .035 .058
24. Musical tones 13 3 3 DEMO 2.39 1.62 1.46 3.62 1.77 1.46 .107 .165
25. Consonant 16 2 3 2 1.50 1.75 1.63 1.44 1.56 2.38 .066 .139
phonemes
26. DEMO code 36 3 2 2 1.28 1.56 1.28 1.25 1.64 1.36 .131 .194
27. Vowels 12 3 3 3 2.17 1.83 1.83 1.67 1.50 DEMO .035 .091
Gustatory and olfactory
28. Wines 15 3 3 3 2.07 1.93 1.80 2.87 2.47 2.13 .134 .213
29. Wines 15 3 3 DEMO 4.60 2.33 1.67 4.27 2.80 2.73 .138 .202
30. Amino acids 20 4 3 3 2.60 1.90 2.10 4.60 3.45 4.25 .117 .179
31. DEMO 21 3 3 2 1.57 1.57 1.38 1.71 1.76 1.76 .156 .217
Conceptual
Assorted semantic
32. Animals 30 3 3 3 1.87 1.60 1.80 DEMO 1.90 1.90 .096 .131
33. Emotions 15 3 3 2 1.80 1.67 1.40 1.93 1.87 1.80 .010 .035
34. Emotions 30 3 3 3 DEMO 1.87 1.73 1.83 1.73 1.77 .073 .132
35. Linguistic forms 8 1 1 1 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 .010 .031
36. Journals DEMO 3 2 3 2.00 1.50 2.25 1.75 1.38 1.75 .121 .206
37. Societal risks 30 4 3 3 1.86 1.53 1.60 2.93 2.17 1.63 DEMO .108
38. Societal risks 30 4 2 3 1.93 1.53 1.67 2.30 1.97 1.83 .046 .080
39. Societal risks 30 3 4 3 1.86 DEMO 1.80 2.83 2.27 2.00 .049 .089
40. Birds 15 3 2 2 2.33 1.53 1.67 2.27 1.87 1.67 .063 .134
41. Students 16 2 DEMO 1 1.13 1.13 1.00 1.13 1.19 1.00 .077 .135
42. Animals 30 3 2 3 1.73 1.60 1.80 2.07 1.57 2.00 .091 .152
43. DEMO objects 36 2 2 2 1.56 1.57 1.50 1.28 1.36 1.50 .089 .157
44. Attribute words 30 4 3 3 1.93 1.67 1.80 2.10 DEMO 1.87 .082 .132
45. Occupations 35 3 3 3 1.63 1.57 1.51 1.37 1.60 1.66 .068 .134
46. Body parts 20 3 3 3 DEMO 1.90 1.70 2.00 1.85 1.80 .046 .124
47. Countries 17 2 3 2 1.58 1.71 1.47 1.29 1.47 1.47 .098 .186
48. Countries 17 DEMO 2 2 2.18 1.59 1.59 1.76 1.35 1.29 .106 .200
49. Numbers 10 2 2 2 1.60 1.40 1.20 2.00 1.30 1.30 .077 .139
DEMO Countries 12 4 3 2 2.33 1.83 1.67 1.83 1.67 1.33 .107 .188
51. Maniocs 25 7 3 3 3.88 1.72 1.64 7.64 6.00 DEMO .131 .185
52. Maniocs 22 4 3 2 2.46 1.73 1.54 6.73 6.09 4.82 .121 .176
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 145
Table 5.3 (continued)
Data description
max Ni
CR
Stress
N
Data 3-D 2-D Data 3-D 2-D Data 3-D 2-D 3-D 2-D
Categorical ratings DEMO
(with superordinate)
53. Fruits 21 18 2 3 15.67 1.76 DEMO 8.62 2.81 2.10 .146 .210
54. Furniture 21 10 3 3 5.38 1.95 1.95 5.00 2.81 2.14 .114 .193
55. Sports 21 8 2 DEMO 4.33 1.48 1.86 3.43 1.43 1.62 .126 .186
56. Tools 21 12 2 3 7.38 1.57 1.76 5.86 2.10 1.86 .156 .226
57. Vegetables DEMO 14 3 3 9.86 1.95 1.76 6.57 2.33 2.14 .130 .188
58. Vehicles 21 7 4 2 3.10 2.05 1.48 3.86 2.00 2.24 .120 DEMO
59. Weapons 21 14 4 2 9.76 2.05 1.57 6.48 2.57 2.33 .111 .169
Categorical ratings 1
(without superordinate)
60. Fruits 20 2 3 3 1.50 2.30 1.70 2.75 3.05 2.25 .125 .188
61. Furniture DEMO 3 3 3 2.40 2.00 1.60 3.05 2.45 2.15 .105 .195
62. Sports 20 3 2 3 1.90 1.20 1.80 1.80 1.10 1.60 .110 DEMO
63. Tools 20 3 2 3 1.80 1.60 1.70 2.15 2.20 1.90 .141 .212
64. Vegetables 20 4 2 3 2.71 1.60 1.70 2.70 DEMO 2.20 .109 .166
65. Vehicles 20 3 3 2 1.70 1.70 1.60 2.30 1.90 2.20 .103 .164
66. Weapons 20 4 2 2 2.10 DEMO 1.80 2.90 2.70 2.50 .091 .145
Categorical ratings 2
(with superordinate)DEMO
67. Flowers 7 3 3 2 1.86 1.86 1.57 1.71 1.71 1.57 .009 .045
68. Trees 7 4 2 2 2.71 1.86 1.86 2.14 DEMO 2.14 .032 .101
69. Birds 7 6 3 3 5.29 1.86 1.84 3.14 2.14 2.43 .024 .098
70. Fish 7 6 4 2 5.29 DEMO 1.86 3.14 2.14 1.43 .010 .056
Categorical ratings 2
(with distant
DEMO)
71. Flowers 7 2 2 2 1.29 1.29 1.57 1.43 1.14 1.43 .009 .006
72. Trees 7 2 2 2 1.57 1.57 1.86 DEMO 1.86 2.29 .001 .023
73. Birds 7 4 5 3 2.71 3.86 1.86 2.71 3.14 2.14 .008 .008
74. Fish 7 2 2 2 DEMO 1.86 1.57 2.00 2.00 2.29 .009 .009
146 Tversky and Hutchinson
Categorical associations
(with superordinate)
75. Birds 18 17 3 4 16.11 1.89 2.22 8.56 1.83 2.00 .031 .090
76. Body parts 17 4 DEMO 4 2.41 2.18 2.65 2.47 2.06 2.53 .046 .096
77. Clothes 17 3 3 3 1.94 1.82 1.82 1.71 2.18 1.88 .067 .114
78. DEMO 16 12 3 3 9.38 2.50 1.88 6.13 3.06 1.88 .088 .142
79. Earth 19 4 3 2 2.37 1.53 1.63 2.47 1.47 1.58 DEMO .333
formations
80. Fruits 17 12 3 3 8.76 1.82 2.06 5.47 2.29 2.65 .047 .118
81. House parts 17 11 3 2 7.59 DEMO 1.82 5.47 2.24 2.06 .049 .093
82. Musical 18 11 4 2 7.22 2.78 1.67 4.94 2.78 1.83 .063 .108
instruments
83. Professions 17 DEMO 2 3 4.18 1.35 1.94 5.88 1.24 1.65 .245 .345
84. Weapons 17 4 2 2 2.65 1.47 1.59 3.53 2.29 1.71 .037 .084
DEMO Weather 17 8 4 3 4.88 2.18 2.06 4.53 3.12 2.41 .066 .112
Categorical associations
(without superordinate)
86. Birds 17 4 2 2 2.65 1.35 1.56 4.41 1.35 1.47 .250 .349
87. Body parts 16 DEMO 2 2 2.63 1.63 1.50 3.00 1.63 1.44 .229 .326
88. Clothes 16 4 3 3 2.12 1.88 1.88 1.69 2.13 1.81 .047 .097
DEMO Drinks 15 4 3 3 2.07 2.80 1.93 2.07 2.33 2.20 .049 .103
90. Earth 18 4 3 2 2.22 1.67 1.33 2.44 1.44 DEMO .236 .334
formations
91. Fruit 16 3 2 3 1.75 1.38 1.88 2.25 1.31 1.69 .229 .330
92. House parts 16 2 2 2 DEMO 1.38 1.38 3.38 1.31 1.31 .240 .339
93. Musical 17 2 2 3 1.24 1.47 1.71 1.71 1.59 1.59 .018 .058
instruments
94. Professions DEMO 5 3 2 2.75 1.88 1.50 4.06 1.50 1.44 .243 .345
95. Weapons 16 4 2 2 2.25 1.25 1.38 2.94 1.13 1.38 .224 DEMO
96. Weather 16 5 4 2 3.75 3.00 1.75 3.81 3.25 2.06 .037 .090
Attribute-based categories
97. Red 7 6 4 3 5.29 3.57 DEMO 3.14 2.43 2.00 .008 .059
98. Circle 7 6 6 2 5.29 5.29 1.57 3.14 3.14 1.57 .013 .093
99. Smell 7 6 4 DEMO 5.29 3.00 2.14 3.14 2.29 2.00 .023 .084
100. Sound 7 6 3 3 5.29 2.71 2.43 3.14 2.43 2.86 .010 .093
Nearest Neighbor DEMO of Psychological Spaces 147
148 Tversky and Hutchinson
Table 5.4
Means and Standard Deviations for C DEMO R for Each Stimulus Group
CR C=R
Stimulus group
N M SD M SD M SD
Perceptual
Colors 7 1.53 0.18 1.41 0.13 1.09 DEMO
Letters 6 1.72 0.10 1.65 0.13 1.05 0.11
Other visual 8 1.54 0.31 1.89 0.81 0.89 0.21
Auditory 6 1.72 0.46 1.90 0.87 0.97 DEMO
Gustatory/olfactory 4 2.71 1.33 3.36 1.33 0.82 0.24
All perceptual 31 1.76 0.62 1.92 0.90 0.97 0.19
Conceptual
Assorted semantic 21 1.92 0.57 DEMO 1.67 0.93 0.25
Categorical ratings 1
(with superordinate) 7 7.93 4.28 5.69 1.78 1.32 0.33
Categorical ratings 1
(without superordinate) 7 2.02 DEMO 2.52 0.45 0.81 0.17
Categorical ratings 2
(with superordinate) 4 3.79 1.77 2.53 0.72 1.43 0.30
Categorical ratings 2
(with distant superordinate) DEMO 1.78 0.63 1.96 0.55 0.90 0.09
Categorical associations
(with superordinate) 11 6.14 4.28 4.65 2.00 1.22 0.37
Categorical associations
(without superordinate) 11 DEMO 0.66 2.89 0.94 0.83 0.21
Attribute-based categories 4 5.29 0.00 3.14 0.00 1.68 0.00
All conceptual 69 3.57 3.06 3.21 1.80 1.06 0.35
frequencies DEMO divided by the total number of responses to each stimulus word.
The proximity for the category name was estimated from the norms of Cohen DEMO al.
(1957). All of the remaining studies involving conceptual stimuli DEMO classiﬁed as
assorted semantic stimuli. These include both simple concepts (e.g., occupations,
numbers) as well as compound concepts (e.g., sentences, DEMO of people).
Figure 5.7 and table 5.4 show that some of the stimulus groups occupy fairly spe-
ciﬁc regions in the CR plane. DEMO colors and letters and most of the other visual and
auditory data yielded C and R values that are less than 2, as implied by the GS
model. In contrast, 20 of the 26 sets of data that included the superordinate yielded
values of C and R that DEMO both greater than 3. These observations suggest that high
C and R values occur primarily in categorical rating and categorical associations,
when the DEMO name is included in the set. Furthermore, high C values are DEMO
primarily when the category name is a basic-level object (e.g., fruit, bird, ﬁsh) rather
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 149
Figure 5.7
The C and DEMO values (on logarithmic coordinates) for 100 data sets. (The CR DEMO is shown by a solid
curve, and the geometric sampling bound DEMO denoted by a broken line.)
150 Tversky and Hutchinson
than a superordinate-level object (e.g., vehicle, clothing, animal ); see Rosch (1978)
and Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson, and Boyes-Braem (1976). When the category
name was excluded from the analysis, the values of C and R were substantially
reduced, although 12 of 22 data sets still exceeded the upper limit of the GS model.
For example, when the superordinate weather was eliminated from the categorical
association data, the most typical weather conditions (rain and DEMO) became the
foci, yielding C and R values of 3.75 and 3.81, respectively. There were also cases
in which a typical instance of a category was the nearest neighbor of more instances
than the category DEMO itself. For example, in the categorical association data,
doctor was DEMO nearest neighbor of six professions, whereas the category name
( profession) was the nearest neighbor of only ﬁve professions.
A few data sets DEMO not reach the lower bound imposed by the GS model. In par-
ticular, all seven factorial designs yielded C that was less than 1.5 and in six of seven
cases, the value of R was also below 1.5.
The dramatic violations of the GS bound, however, need DEMO invalidate the spatial
model. A value of R or C that is substantially greater than 2 indicates that either the
geometric model is inappropriate DEMO the statistical assumption is inadequate. To test
these possibilities, the nearest DEMO statistics (C and R) of the data can be com-
pared with those derived from the scaling solution. If the values match, there is good
reason to believe that the data were generated by a DEMO model that does not sat-
isfy the statistical assumption. However, if DEMO values of C and R computed from the
data are much greater than 2 while the values derived from the solution are less than
DEMO, the spatial solution is called into question.
The data summarized in DEMO 5.3 and 5.4 reveal marked discrepancies between
the data and their solutions. The three-dimensional solutions, for instance, yield C
and R that exceed DEMO for only 6% and 10% of the data sets, respectively. The DEMO
between the C and R values of the data and the values computed from the three-
dimensional solutions are presented in ﬁgures 5.8 and DEMO For comparison we also
present the corresponding plots for addtree (Sattath & Tversky, 1977) for a subset
of 35 data sets. The correlations between observed and predicted values in ﬁgures 5.8
and 5.9 indicate that DEMO trees tend to reﬂect the centrality (r2 ¼ :64) and DEMO reci-
procity (r2 ¼ :80) of the data. In contrast, the spatial solutions do not match either
the centrality (r2 ¼ :DEMO) or the reciprocity (r2 ¼ : 37) of the data DEMO yield low values
of C and R, as implied by the DEMO assumption. The MDS solutions are slightly
more responsive to R than to C, but large values of both indices are grossly under-
estimated by the spatial representations.
The ﬁnding that trees represent nearest neighbor data better DEMO low-dimensional
spatial models does not imply that tree models are generally superior to spatial rep-
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 151
Figure 5.8
Values of C DEMO from 100 three-dimensional KYST solutions and a subset of 35 ADDTREE solu-
tions (predicted C ) plotted against the values of C computed from the corresponding data (observed C ).
Figure 5.9
Values of R DEMO from 100 three-dimensional KYST solutions and a subset of 35 ADDTREE solu-
tions (predicted R) plotted against the values of R computed from DEMO corresponding data (observed R).
152 Tversky and Hutchinson
resentations. Other patterns, such as product structures, DEMO better represented by
multidimensional scaling or overlapping clusters than by simple trees. Because trees
can accommodate any achievable level of C and R (see ﬁgures 5.3–5.5), and because
no natural analog to the GS model DEMO readily available for trees, C and R are more
useful diagnostics DEMO low-dimensional spatial models than for trees. Other indices
that can be used to compare trees and spatial models are discussed by Pruzansky,
Tversky, and Carroll (1982). The present article focuses on spatial solutions, DEMO on
trees; the comparison between them is introduced here merely to DEMO the
diagnostic signiﬁcance of C and R. An empirical comparison of trees and spatial
solutions of various data is reported in Fillenbaum and Rapoport (1971).
A descriptive analysis of the data base revealed that similarity DEMO and word
associations produced, on the average, higher C and R than same–di¤erent judg-
ments or identiﬁcation errors. However, these response measures were confounded
with the distinction between perceptual and conceptual data. Neither the number DEMO
objects in the set nor the ﬁt of the (three-dimensional) solution correlated signiﬁ-
cantly with either C or R.
Finally, the great majority of visual and auditory stimulus sets had values of C and
R DEMO were less than 2, and most factorial designs had values of DEMO and R that were
less than 1.5. Extremely high values of C and R were invariably the result of a single
focal element that DEMO the nearest neighbor of most other elements. Moderately high
values of C and R, however, also arise from other patterns involving multiple foci
DEMO outliers.
Foci and Outliers
A set has multiple foci if it contains two or more elements that are the nearest
neighbors of more than DEMO element. We distinguish between two types of multiple
foci: local and DEMO Let Si be the set of elements in S whose nearest neighbor is i.
(Thus, Ni is the number of elements in Si DEMO) A focal element i is said to be local if it DEMO
closer to all elements of Si than to any other member of S. That is, dði; aÞ < dði; bÞ
function together as a single focal element. Speciﬁcally, i and j are a pair of globalfor all a A Si and b A S Si . Two DEMO more focal elements are called global foci if they
foci if they are each other’s nearest neighbors and if they induce an identical (or
nearly identical) proximity order on the other elements. Suppose a A Si and b A Sj,
a 0 j and b 0 i. DEMO i and j are local foci, then dði; aÞ < dði; bÞ and dðj; aÞ > dðj; bÞ.
On the other hand, if i and j are a pair of global foci, then DEMO; aÞ adði; bÞ if
dðj; aÞ adðj; bÞ . Thus, local foci suggest distinct clusters, whereas global foci suggest
a single DEMO
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 153
Figure 5.10
Nearest neighbor relations, represented by arrows, superimposed on a two-dimensional KYST solution of
proximity ratings between instances of furniture (Mervis et al., 1975; Data Set 61). (The R value of each
instance is given in parentheses.)
Figure 5.10 illustrates both local and global foci in categorical ratings of DEMO
between instances of furniture (Mervis et al. 1975; data set 61). The nearest neighbor
of each instance is denoted by an arrow DEMO is superimposed on the two-dimensional
KYST solution of these data. The reciprocity of each instance (i.e., its rank from its
nearest neighbor) is given in parentheses. Figure 5.10 reveals four foci that are the
nearest DEMO of three elements each. These include two local foci, sofa and DEMO,
and a pair of global foci, table and desk.
The DEMO values show that sofa is closest to chair, cushion, and bed, whereas radio is
closest to clock, telephone, and piano. These are exactly the instances that selected
sofa and radio, respectively, as their DEMO neighbor. It follows readily that for a
local focal element i, DEMO aNi for any a A Si . That is, the R DEMO of an element can-
not exceed the nearest neighbor count of the relevant local focus. In contrast, table
and desk behave like global foci: They are each other’s nearest neighbor, and they
induce a similar (though not identical) proximity order on the remaining instances.
154 Tversky and Hutchinson
Figure 5.11
Nearest neighbor relations, represented by arrows, superimposed on a two-dimensional KYST solution of
association between professions (Marshall & Cofer, 1970; Data Set 94). (The R value of DEMO instance is
given in parentheses. Outliers are italicized.)
Multiple foci produce intermediate C and R whose values increase with the size of
the DEMO Holding the distribution of Ni (and hence the value of C ) constant, R is
generally greater for global than for local foci. DEMO characteristic that a¤ects R
but not C is the presence of outliers. A collection of elements are called outliers if
they are furthest away DEMO all other elements. Thus, k is an outlier if dði; kÞ > dði; jÞ
for all i and for any nonoutlier j. Figure 11 illustrates a collection of outliers in the
categorical associations between professions DEMO from word association norms
(Marshall & Cofer, 1970; data set DEMO).
Figure 5.11 reveals two local foci (teacher, doctor) and DEMO outliers ( plumber, pilot,
cook, jeweler, ﬁreman) printed in italics. These outliers were not elicited as an asso-
ciation to any DEMO the other professions, nor did they produce any other profession as
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 155
Figure 5.12
Nearest neighbor relations, represented by arrows, superimposed on a two-dimensional KYST solution of
judgments of dissimilarity between musical notes (Krumbansl, 1979; Data Set 24). (DEMO R value of each
instance is given in parentheses.)
an association. Consequently, no arrows for these elements are drawn; they are all
DEMO distant from all other elements, including each other. For the purpose DEMO
computing R , the outliers were ranked last and the ties among them were broken at
random.
Note that the arrows, which depict the nearest neighbor relation in the data, are
not always compatible with the multidimensional scaling solution. For example, in
the categorical association data, doctor DEMO the nearest neighbor of chemist and
mechanic. In the spatial solution of ﬁgure 5.11, however, chemist is closer to plumber
and to accountant, whereas mechanic is closer to dentist and to lawyer.
A di¤erent pattern DEMO foci and outliers arising from judgments of musical tones
(Krumhansl, 1979; data set 24) is presented in ﬁgure 5.12. The stimuli were DEMO 13
notes of the chromatic scale, and the judgments were made DEMO the context of the C
major scale. The nearest neighbor graph approximates two sets of global foci, ðC; EÞ
and ðB; C0; DEMO, and a collection of ﬁve outliers, (A],G],F],D],DEMO). In the data, the
156 Tversky and Hutchinson
scale notes are closer to each other than DEMO the nonscale notes (i.e., the ﬁve sharps). In
addition, DEMO nonscale note is closer to some scale note than to any other nonscale
note. This property of the data, which is clearly seen in the nearest neighbor graph, is
not satisﬁed by the two-dimensional solution in which all nonscale notes have other
nonscale notes as their nearest neighbors.
DEMO presence of outliers increases R but has little or no impact on C because an
outlier is not the nearest neighbor of any point. DEMO, the data of ﬁgures 5.11 and
5.12 yield low C/R DEMO of .66 and .68, respectively, as compared with an overall
mean ratio of about 1 (see table 5.4). In contrast, a DEMO focal element tends to
produce a high C=R ratio, as well DEMO high C and R. Indeed, C=R > 1 in 81% of DEMO
cases where the category name is included in the set, but DEMO > 1 in only 35% of the
remaining conceptual data. Thus, DEMO high C=R suggests a single focus, whereas a low
C=R suggests DEMO
Discussion
Our theoretical analysis of nearest neighbor relations has two thrusts: DEMO and
descriptive. We have demonstrated the diagnostic signiﬁcance of nearest neighbor
statistics for geometric representations, and we have suggested that centrality and
reciprocity could be used to identify and describe certain patterns of proximity data.
Nearest DEMO statistics may serve three diagnostic functions. First, the dimen-
sionality of DEMO spatial representation sets an absolute upper bound on the number of
points that can share the same nearest neighbor. A nearest neighbor count that
DEMO 5 or 11 could be used to rule out, respectively, a two- ro a three-dimensional
representation. Indeed, the fruit data (table 5.1) and some of the other conceptual
data described in table 5.3 produce DEMO values that cannot be accommodated in
a low-dimensional space.
Second, a DEMO stricter bound on C and R is implied by the GS model that
appends to the geometric assumptions of multidimensional scaling the statistical
assumption DEMO the points under study represent a sample from some continuous
multivariate distribution. In this model both C and R are less than 2, regardless of
the dimensionality of the solution space. If the statistical assumption is DEMO, at
least as ﬁrst approximation, the adequacy of a multidimensional scaling representa-
tion can be assessed by testing whether C or R fall DEMO the permissible range. The
plausibility of the statistical assumption depends both on the nature of the stimuli
and the manner in which they are DEMO Because the centrality of multidimen-
sional scaling solutions is similar to that implied by the GS model, the observed high
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 157
values of C cannot be DEMO to the sampling assumption alone; it casts some
doubt on the DEMO assumption.
Third, aside from the geometric and the statistical assumptions, one can examine
whether the nearest neighbor statistics of the data match the DEMO computed from
their multidimensional scaling solutions. The ﬁnding that, for much DEMO the concep-
tual data, the former are considerably greater than the DEMO points to some limita-
tion of the spatial solutions and suggests alternative representations. On the other
hand, the ﬁnding that much of the perceptual data are consistent with the GS bound
supports the geometric interpretation of DEMO data.
Other diagnostic statistics for testing spatial solutions (and trees) are based on the
distribution of the interpoint distances. For example, Sattath and Tversky (1977)
showed that the distribution of interpoint distances arising from a convex conﬁgura-
tion of points in the plane exhibits positive skewness DEMO the distribution of
interpoint distances induced by ultrametric and by many additive trees tends to
exhibit negative skewness (see Pruzansky et al., 1982)DEMO These authors also showed in
a simulation study that the proportion of elongated triangles (i.e., triples of point
with two large distances and DEMO small distance) tends to be greater for points gen-
erated by DEMO additive tree than for points sampled from the Euclidean plane. A
combination of skewness and elongation e¤ectively distinguished data sets that were
better described DEMO a plane from those that were better ﬁt by a tree. Unlike the pres-
ent analysis that is purely ordinal, however, skewness and DEMO assume an
interval scale measure of distance or proximity, and they DEMO not invariant under
monotone transformations.
Diagnostic statistics in general and nearest neighbor indices in particular could
help choose among alternative representations, although this choice is commonly
based on nonstatistical criteria such as interpretability and simplicity of DEMO
The ﬁnding of high C and R in the conceptual domain suggests that these data may
be better represented by clustering models (e.g., DEMO, 1976; Corter & Tversky,
1985; Cunningham, 1978; Johnson, 1967; Sattath & Tversky, 1977; Shepard & Ara-
bie, 1979) than by low-dimensional spatial models. Indeed, Pruzansky et al. (1982)
DEMO in a sample of 20 studies that conceptual data were better ﬁt by an addi-
tive tree than by a two-dimensional space whereas the DEMO data exhibited
the opposite pattern. This observation may be due to the hierarchical character of
much conceptual data, as suggested by the present analysis. Alternatively, conceptual
data may generally have more dimensions than perceptual data, DEMO some high-
dimensional conﬁgurations are better approximated by a tree than by a two- or a
three-dimensional solution. The relative advantage of trees may DEMO stem from the
fact that they can represent the e¤ect of common features better than spatial solu-
158 Tversky and Hutchinson
tions. Indeed, studies of similarity judgments showed that the weight of common
features (relative to distinctive features) is greater DEMO conceptual than in perceptual
stimuli (Gati & Tversky, 1984).
High centrality data can also be ﬁt by hybrid models combining both hierarchical
DEMO spatial components (see, e.g., Carroll, 1976; Krumhansl, 1978, DEMO; Winsberg &
Carroll, 1984). For example, dissimilarity can be expressed by Dðx; yÞþ dðxÞþ
dðyÞ, where Dðx; yÞ is the distance between x and y in a common Euclidean space
and dðxÞ DEMO dðyÞ are the distances from x and y to that common space. Note that
dðxÞþ dðyÞ is the distance between x and y in DEMO singular tree having no internal
structure (see ﬁgure 5.4). This DEMO, therefore, can be interpreted as a sum of a
spatial (DEMO) distance and a (singular) tree distance. Because a singular tree
DEMO maximal C and R , the hybrid model can accommodate a wide range of
nearest neighbor data.
To illustrate this model we applied the DEMO (1963) method of nonlinear
least-squares regression to the fruit data presented in table 5.1. This procedure
yielded a two-dimensional Euclidean solution, similar to ﬁgure 5.1, and a function,
d , that associates a positive additive constant with each of the instances. The solu-
tion ﬁts the DEMO considerably better (r2 ¼ :91) than does the three-dimensional
Euclidean DEMO (r2 ¼ :54) with the same number of parameters. As DEMO, the
additive constant associated with the superordinate was much smaller than DEMO con-
stants associated with the instances. Normalizing the scale so that max½Dðx; yÞ ¼
Dðolive; grapefruitÞ¼ 1 yields dð fruitÞ¼ :11, compared DEMO dðorangeÞ¼ :27 for the
most typical fruit and dðcoconutÞ¼ :67 for a rather atypical fruit. As a consequence,
the hybrid model—like the DEMO tree of ﬁgure 5.2—produces maximal values of
C and R.
The above hybrid model is formally equivalent to the symmetric form of the spa-
DEMO density model of Krumhansl (1978). The results of the previous DEMO, how-
ever, are inconsistent with the spatial density account in which the dissimilarity
between points increases with the local densities of the spatial DEMO in which they
are located. According to this theory, the constants DEMO with fruit and orange,
which lie in a relatively dense region of the space, should be greater than those asso-
ciated with tomato or coconut, which lie in sparser regions of the space (see DEMO
5.1). The ﬁndings that the latter values are more than twice as large as the former
indicates that the additive constants of the DEMO model reﬂect nontypicality or
unique attributes rather than local density (see DEMO Krumhansl 1983).
From a descriptive standpoint, nearest neighbor analysis o¤ers DEMO methods for
investigating proximity data in the spirit of exploratory data analysis. The patterns of
centrality and reciprocity observed in the data may reveal DEMO regularities and
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 159
illuminate interesting phenomena. For example, in the original analyses of the cate-
gorical rating data, the superordinate was located in the center of a two-dimensional
conﬁguration (see, e.g., Smith & Medin, 1981). This result was interpreted as indirect
conﬁrmation of the usefulness of the Euclidean model, which recognized the central
role of the superordinate. The present analysis highlights the special role of the
DEMO but shows that its high degree of centrality is inconsistent with a low-
dimensional spatial representation. The analysis of the categorical data also reveals
DEMO nearest neighbor relations follow the direction of increased typicality. In the
data of Mervis et al. (1975), where all instances are ordered by typicality, the less
typical instance is the nearest neighbor of the more typical instance in 53 of 74 cases
for which the nearest neighbor DEMO is not symmetric (data sets 60–66, excluding
the category name). Finally, the study of local and global foci and of outliers may
facilitate the analysis of the structure of natural categories (cf. Medin & Smith, 1984;
Smith & Medin, 1981). It is hoped DEMO the conceptual and computational tools
a¤orded by nearest neighbor analysis will enrich the description, the analysis, and the
interpretation of proximity data.
Note
DEMO work has greatly beneﬁted from discussions with Larry Maloney, Yosef Rinott, Gideon Schwarz, and
Ed Smith.
References
Arabie, P., & Rips, DEMO J. (1972). [Similarity between animals]. Unpublished data.
Attneave, F. (DEMO). Transfer of experience with a class schema to identiﬁcation learning of patterns and
shapes. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54, 81–88.
Beals, R., Krantz, D. H., & Tversky, A. (1968). The foundations of multidimensional scaling. Psychologi-
cal Review, 75, 127–142.
Berglund, B., DEMO, V., Engen, T., & Ekman, G. (1972). Multidimensional analysis of twenty-one
odors. Reports of the Psychological Laboratories, University of Stockholm (Report No. 345). Stockholm,
Sweden: University of Stockholm.
Block, J. (1957). Studies in the phenomenology of emotions. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
54, 358–363.
Boster, X. (1980). How the expectations prove the rule: An analysis of informant disagreement in aguaruna
manioc identiﬁcation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Bricker, P. D., & Pruzansky, S. A. (1970). A comparison of sorting and pair-wise similarity judgment tech-
niques for scaling auditory stimuli. Unpublished paper, Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ.
Carroll, J. D. (1976). DEMO, non-spatial, and hybrid models for scaling. Psychometrika, 41, 439–463.
Carroll, J. D., & Chang, J. J. (1973). A method DEMO ﬁtting a class of hierarchical tree structure models
to dissimilarities data and its application to some ‘‘body parts’’ data of Miller’s. Proceedings of the DEMO
Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association, 8, 1097–1098.
160 Tversky and Hutchinson
Carroll, J. D., & Wish, M. (DEMO). Multidimensional perceptual models and measurement methods. In
E. C. Carterette & M. P. Friedman (Eds.), Handbook of perception (Vol. 2, pp. 391–447). New York:
Academic Press.
Clark, H. H., & DEMO, S. K. (1969). Role of semantics in remembering comparative sentences. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 82, 545–553.
Cohen, B. H., Bouseﬁeld, W. A., & Whitmarsh, G. A. (1957, August). Cultural DEMO for verbal items in 43
categories (University of Connecticut Tech. Rep. DEMO 22). Storrs: University of Connecticut.
Coombs, C. H. (1964)DEMO A theory of data. New York: Wiley.
Corter, J., & DEMO, A. (1985). Extended similarity trees. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.
DEMO, J. P. (1978). Free trees and bidirectional trees as representations of psychological distance.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 17, 165–188.
Ekman, G. (1954). Dimensions of color vision. Journal of Psychology, 38, 467–474.
Fillenbaum, S., & Rapoport, A. (1971). Structures in the DEMO lexicon: An experimental approach to
the study of semantic ﬁelds. New DEMO: Academic Press.
Fischho¤, B., Slovic, P., Lichtenstein, S., DEMO, S., & Combs, B. (1978). How safe is safe enough? A psy-
chometric study of attitudes towards technological risks and beneﬁts. Policy Sciences, 9, 127–152.
Fish, R. S. (1981). Color: Studies of its perceptual, memory and linguistic representation. Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, Stanford University.
Frijda, N. H., & Philipszoon, E. (1963). Dimensions of recognition of expression. Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 66, 45–51.
Furnas, G. W. (1980). Objects and their features: DEMO metric representation of two-class data. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Stanford University.
Gati, I. (1978). Aspects of psychological similarity. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Hebrew DEMO
of Jerusalem.
Gati, I., & Tversky, A. (1982). Representations of qualitative and quantitative dimensions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8, 325–340.
Gati, I., & Tversky, A. (1984)DEMO Weighting common and distinctive features in perceptual and conceptual
judgments. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 341–370.
Gregson, R. A. M. (1976). A comparative DEMO of seven similarity models. British Journal of Math-
ematical and Statistical Psychology, 29, 139–156.
Guttman, L. (1971). Measurement as structural theory. DEMO, 36, 465–506.
Henley, N. M. (1969). A psychological study of the semantics of animal terms. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Behavior, 8, 176–184.
Hosman, J., & Ku¨ nnapas, T. (1972). On the relation between similarity and dissimilarity estimates.
Reports from the Psychological DEMO, University of Stockholm (Report No. 354, pp. 1–8). Stock-
DEMO, Sweden: University of Stockholm.
Hutchinson, J. W., & Lockhead, DEMO R. (1975). Categorization of semantically related words. Bulletin of the
DEMO Society, 6, 427.
Indow, T., & Aoki, N. (1983). Multidimensional mapping of 178 Munsell colors. Color Research and
Application, 8, 145–152.
Indow, T., & Kanazawa, K. (1960). Multidimensional mapping of Munsell colors varying in hue, chroma,
and value. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 330–336.
Indow, T., & Uchizono, T. (DEMO). Multidimensional mapping of Munsell colors varying in hue and
chroma. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 321–329.
Jenkins, J. J. (1970). DEMO 1952 Minnesota word association norms. In L. Postman & G. Keppel (DEMO),
Norms of free association. New York: Academic Press.
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 161
Johnson, S. C. (1967)DEMO Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 32, 241–254.
Krantz, D. H., & Tversky, A. (1975). Similarity of rectangles: An analysis of subjective dimensions. Jour-
nal of Mathematical Psychology, 12, 4–34.
Kraus, V. (DEMO). The structure of occupations in Israel. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Hebrew DEMO
versity of Jerusalem.
Krumhansl, C. L. (1978). Concerning the applicability of geometric models to similarity data: The inter-
relationship between similarity and spatial density. Psychological Review, 85, 445–463.
Krumhansl, C. L. (1979)DEMO The psychological representation of musical pitch in a tonal context. Cognitive
Psychology, 11, 346–374.
Krumhansl, C. L. (1983, August). Set-theoretic and spatial models of similarity: Some considerations in
application. Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Mathematical Psychology, Boulder, CO.
Kruskal, J. B., Young, F. W., & Seery, J. B. (1973). How to use KYST, a very ﬂexible program to do mul-
tidimensional scaling and unfolding. Unpublished paper. Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ.
Ku¨ DEMO, T. (1966). Visual perception of capital letters: Multidimensional ratio DEMO and multidimen-
sional similarity. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 7, 188–196.
Ku¨ nnapas, T. (1967). Visual memory of capital letters: Multidimensional ratio scaling and multidimen-
sional similarity. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 25, 345–350.
DEMO nnapas, T., & Janson, A. J. (1969). Multidimensional similarity of letters. Perceptual and Motor Skills,
28, 3–12.
Maloney, L. DEMO (1983). Nearest neighbor analysis of point processes: Simulations and evaluations. Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 235–250.
Marquardt, D. W. (1963)DEMO An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear parameters. Journal of
the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 11, 431–441.
Marshall, G. R., & Cofer, C. N. (1970). Single-word free-association norms for 328 responses from the
Connecticut cultural norms for verbal items in categories. In L. DEMO & G. Keppel (Eds.), Norms of
free association (pp. 320–360). New York: Academic Press.
Medin, D. L., & Smith, DEMO E. (1984). Concepts and concept formation. Annual Review of Psychology, 35,
113–138.
Mervis, C. B., Rips, L., Rosch, E., Shoben, E. J., & Smith, E. E. (1975). [Relatedness of concepts].
Unpublished data.
Miller, G. A., & Nicely, P. E. (1955). An analysis of perceptual confusions among some English con-
sonants. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 27, 338–352.
Newman, C. M., & Rinott, Y. (in press). Nearest neighbors and Voronoi volumes in high dimensional
point processes with various distance functions. Advances in DEMO Probability.
Newman, C. M., Rinott, Y., & Tversky, A. (1983). Nearest neighbors and Voronoi regions in certain point
processes. Advances DEMO Applied Probability, 15, 726–751.
Odlyzko, A. M., & Sloane, DEMO A. (1979). New bounds on the number of unit spheres DEMO can touch a unit
sphere in n dimensions. Journal of Combinational Theory, 26, 210–214.
Podgorny, P., & Garner, W. R. (1979)DEMO Reaction time as a measure of inter- and intrasubjective similarity:
Letters of the alphabet. Perception and Psychophysics, 26, 37–52.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
77, 353–363.
Pruzansky, S., Tversky, A., & Carroll, J. D. (1982). Spatial versus tree DEMO of proximity data.
Psychometrika, 47, 3–24.
Roberts, F. D. K. (1969). Nearest neighbors in a Poisson ensemble. Biometrika, 56, 401–406.
DEMO, J. P., & Hefner, R. (1967). Multidimensional di¤erences in public and academic perceptions of
nations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7, 251–259.
162 Tversky and Hutchinson
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. DEMO E. Rosch & B. B. Floyd (Eds.), Cognition and catego-
DEMO Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573–605.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W., Johnson, D., & Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural cate-
gories. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 382–439.
Rothkopf, E. Z. (1957). A measure of stimulus similarity and errors in some paired-associate learning
tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53, 94–101.
Sattath, S., & Tversky, A. (1977). Additive similarity trees. Psychometrika, 42, 319–345.
Schwarz, G., & Tversky, A. (1980). On the reciprocity DEMO proximity relations. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 22, 157–175.
Shepard, R. DEMO (1958). Stimulus and response generalization: Tests of a model relating generalization to
distance in psychological space. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, DEMO
Shepard, R. N. (1962a). The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional DEMO with an unknown distance
function. Part I. Psychometrika, 27, 125–140.
Shepard, R. N. (1962b). The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance
function. Part II. Psychometrika, 27, 219–246.
Shepard, R. N. (1974). Representation of structure in similarity data: Problems and DEMO Psychome-
trika, 39, 373–421.
Shepard, R. N. (1980). Multidimensional scaling, tree-ﬁtting, and clustering. Science, 210, 390–398.
Shepard, R. N. (1984). Ecological constraints on internal representation: Resonant kinematics of perceiv-
DEMO, imagining, thinking, and dreaming. Psychological Review, 91, 417–447.
Shepard, R. N., & Arabie, P. (1979). Additive clustering: Representation DEMO similarities as combinations of
discrete overlapping properties. Psychological Review, 86, 87–123.
Shepard, R. N., Kilpatric, D. W., & Cunningham, J. P. (1975). The internal representation of numbers.
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 82–138.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories DEMO concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Smith, E. E., & Tversky, A. (1981). [The centrality e¤ect]. Unpublished data.
Sokal, R. R. (1974). Classiﬁcation: Purposes, principles, progress, prospects. Science, DEMO, 1115–1123.
Starr, C. (1969). Social beneﬁt versus technological risk. DEMO, 165, 1232–1238.
Stringer, P. (1967). Cluster analysis of non-verbal judgments of facial expressions. British Journal of
Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 20, 71–79.
Terbeek, D. A. (1977). A cross-language multidimensional scaling study of vowel perception. UCLA
Working Papers in Phonetics, (Report No. 37)DEMO
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327–352.
Tversky, A., & Gati, I. (1982). Similarity, separability, and the triangle inequality. Psychological Review,
89, 123–154.
Tversky, A., & Krantz, D. H. (1969). Similarity of schematic faces: DEMO test of interdimensional additivity.
Perception and Psychophysics, 5, 124–128.
Tversky, DEMO, & Krantz, D. H. (1970). The dimensional representation and DEMO metric structure of similarity
data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 7, 572–596.
Tversky, A., Rinott, Y., & Newman, C. M. (1983)DEMO Nearest neighbor analysis of point processes: Appli-
cations to multidimensional scaling. DEMO of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 235–250.
Wender, K. (1971). A test of the independence of dimensions in multidimensional scaling. Perception &
Psychophysics, 10, 30–32.
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 163
Wiener-Ehrlich, W. K. (1978)DEMO Dimensional and metric structures in multidimensional scaling. Perception
& Psychophysics, 24, 399–414.
Winsberg, S., & Carroll, J. D. (1984, June). A nonmetric method for a multidimensional scaling model pos-
tulating common and DEMO dimensions. Paper presented at the meeting of the Psychometric Society, Santa
DEMO, CA.
Winton, W., Ough, C. S., & Singleton, V. L. (1975). Relative distinctiveness of varietal wines estimated by
the ability of trained panelists to name the grape variety correctly. American Journal of DEMO Viti-
culture, 26, 5–11.
Wish, M. (1970). Comparisons among multidimensional structures of nations based on di¤erent measures
of subjective similarity. In DEMO von Bertalan¤y & A. Rapoport (Eds.), General systems (Vol. 15, pp. 55–65).
Ann Arbor, MI: Society for General Systems Research.
Yoshida, M., & Saito, S. (1969). Multidimensional scaling of DEMO taste of amino acids. Japanese Psycho-
logical Research, 11, 149–166.
Appendix
This appendix describes each of the studies included in the data base. DEMO descrip-
tions are organized and numbered as in table 5.3. For each data set the following
information is provided: (a) the source of the data, (b) the number and type of
stimuli used in the study, (c) the design for construction of the stimulus set, (d) the
method of measuring proximity, and (e) miscellaneous DEMO When selection
was not speciﬁed by the investigator, the design is DEMO natural selection in (c).
Perceptual Data
Colors
1. (a) DEMO (1954); (b) 14 spectral (i.e., single wavelength) lights; (c) spanned the
visible range at equal intervals; (d) DEMO of similarity; (e) the stimuli represent the
so-called color circle.
DEMO (a) Fish (1981); (b) 10 Color-Aid Silkscreen color DEMO and their corresponding
color names; (c) color circle plus black DEMO white; (d) dissimilarity ratings; (e) stimuli
were restricted to those colors for which common English names existed; the data
were symmetrized by averaging.
3. (a) Furnas (1980); (b) 20 Color-Aid Silkscreen color sheets; (c) natural selection;
(d) dissimilarity ratings.
4. (a) Indow and Uchizono (1960); (b) 21 Munsell color chips; (c) varied in hue and
chroma over a wide range; (d) spatial distance was used to indicate dissimilarity; (e)
the data were symmetrized by averaging.
164 Tversky and Hutchinson
5. (a) Indow and Kanazawa (1960); (b) 24 Munsell color chips; (c) varied in hue,
value, and chroma over a wide range; (d) spatial distance DEMO used to indicate dis-
similarity; (e) the data were symmetrized DEMO averaging.
6. (a) Indow and Uchizono (1960); (b) DEMO Munsell color chips; (c) varied in hue and
chroma over DEMO wide range; (d) spatial distance was used to indicate dissimilarity; (e)
the data were symmetrized by averaging.
7. (a) Shepard (1958); (b) nine Munsell color chips; (c) partial DEMO spanning ﬁve
levels of value and chroma for shades of red; (d) average confusion probabilities
across responses in a stimulus identiﬁcation task.
Letters
8. (a) Hosman and Ku¨ nnapas (1972); (b) 25 lowercase Swedish letters; (c) natural
selection; (d) dissimilarity ratings.
DEMO (a) Ku¨ nnapas and Janson (1969); (b) 25 DEMO Swedish letters; (c) natural
selection; (d) similarity ratings; (e) data were symmetrized by averaging.
10. (a) Ku¨ nnapas (DEMO); (b) nine uppercase Swedish letters; (c) natural selection; (d)
ratings of visual similarity; (e) visual presentation; the data were symmetrized by
averaging.
11. (a) Ku¨ nnapas (1967); (b) nine uppercase Swedish letters; (c) natural selection; (d)
ratings of visual similarity; (e) auditory presentation; the data DEMO symmetrized by
averaging.
12. (a) Podgorny and Garner (1979); (b) 26 uppercase English letters; (c) complete
alphabet; (d) dissimilarity ratings; (e) data were symmetrized by averaging.
13. (a) Podgorny and Garner (1979); (b) 26 uppercase English letters; (c) complete
alphabet; (d) discriminative reaction times; (e) data were symmetrized by averaging.
Other Visual
14. (a) Coren (personal communication, February, 1980); (b) 45 visual illusions; (c)
DEMO selection; (d) correlations across subjects of the magnitudes of the DEMO
15. (a) Gati (1978); (b) 16 polygons; (DEMO) 4  4 factorial design that varied shape and
size; (DEMO) dissimilarity ratings.
16. (a) Gati and Tversky (1982); (DEMO) 16 plants; (c) 4  4 factorial design that varied
the shape of the pot and the elongation of the leaves; (DEMO) dissimilarity ratings; (e)
from table 1 in the source DEMO
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 165
17. (a) Gregson (1976); (b) 16 dot ﬁgures; (c) 4  4 factorial design that varied the
horizontal and vertical distances between two dots; (DEMO) similarity ratings.
18. (a) Gregson (1976); (b) 16 ﬁgures consisting of pairs of brick wall patterns; (c)
4 DEMO 4 factorial design that varied the heights of the left and right walls in the ﬁgure;
(d) similarity ratings.
19. (a) DEMO (1958); (b) nine circles; (c) varied in diameter only; (d) average con-
fusion probabilities across responses in a stimulus identiﬁcation task.
20. (a) Shepard (1958); (b) nine letters and numbers; (c) natural selection; (d) average
confusion probabilities DEMO responses across stimulus–response mappings; (e)
responses consisted of placing an electric probe into one of nine holes, which were
arranged in a line inside a rectangular slot.
21. (a) Shepard, Kilpatric, and DEMO (1975); (b) 10 single-digit Arabic
numerals (i.e., 0–9); (c) complete set; (d) dissimilarity ratings; (e) stimuli were judged
as Arabic numerals (cf. data set 49).
Auditory
22. (a) Bricker and Pruzansky (1970); (b) 12 sine wave tones; (c) 4  3 factorial
design that varied modulation frequency (4 levels) and modulation percentage (3
levels); (d) dissimilarity ratings.
23. (a) Bricker and Pruzansky (1970); (b) 12 square wave tones; (c) 4  3 factorial
design that varied modulation frequency (4 levels) and modulation percentage (3
levels); (DEMO) dissimilarity ratings.
24. (a) Krumhansl (1979); (b) 13 musical tones; (c) complete set; the notes of the
chromatic DEMO for one octave; (d) similarity ratings; (e) one of three musical con-
texts (i.e., an ascending C major scale, a descending C major scale, and the C major
chord) was played DEMO to each stimulus pair, the data were averaged across contexts
and DEMO by averaging across presentation order.
25. (a) Miller and Nicely (DEMO); (b) consonant phonemes; (c) complete set; (d)DEMO
probability of confusion in a stimulus–response identiﬁcation task; (e) stimuli DEMO
presented with varying levels of noise; symmetrized data are taken from DEMO and
Wish (1974).
26. (a) Rothkopf (1975); (DEMO) 36 Morse code signals: 26 letters and 10 digits; (c)
complete set; (d) probability of confusion in a same–di¤erent task; (e) symmetrized
by averaging.
27. (a) Terbeek (1977); (b) 12 vowel sounds; (c) varied in four linguistic features; (d)
triadic comparisons.
166 Tversky and Hutchinson
Gustatory and Olfactory
28. (a) Winton, Ough, and Singleton (1975); (b) 15 varieties of California white
DEMO vinted in 1972; (c) availability from University of California, Davis, Experi-
mental Winery; (d) confusion probabilities in a free identiﬁcation DEMO; (e) expert
judges were used, and they were unaware of the composition of the stimulus set;
therefore, the response set was limited only by their knowledge of the varieties of
white wines.
29. (a) Winton, Ough, and Singleton (1975); (b) 15 DEMO of California white
wines vinted in 1973; (c) availability from DEMO of California, Davis, Experi-
mental Winery; (d) confusion probabilities DEMO a free identiﬁcation task; (e) same as
data set 28.
DEMO (a) Yoshida and Saito (1969); (b) 20 taste DEMO composed of 16 amino acids;
three concentrations of monosodium glutamate and sodium chloride as reference
points; (c) natural selection; (d) DEMO ratings.
31. (a) Berglund, Berglund, Engen, and Ekman (1972); (b) 21 odors derived from
various chemical compounds; (c) natural selection; (d) similarity ratings.
Conceptual Stimuli
Assorted Semantic
32. (DEMO) Arabie and Rips (1972); (b) 30 animal names; (c) natural selection; (d) simi-
larity ratings; (e) replication of Henley (1969; data set 42) using similarity ratings
instead of dissimilarity.
33. (a) Block (1957); (b) 15 emotion words; (c) natural selection; (d) correlations
across 20 semantic di¤erential DEMO dimensions; (e) female sample.
34. (a) Stringer (1967); (b) 30 facial expressions of emotions; (c) taken from Frijda
and Philipszoon (1963); (d) frequency of not being associated in a free sorting task;
(e) the study also found general DEMO among subjects regarding spontaneous
verbal labels for the emotion portayed by each facial expression.
35. (a) Clark and Card (1969); (b) eight linguistic forms; (c) 2 2  2 factorial
design varying comparative/equative verb phrases, positive/negative, and marked/
unmarked adjectives DEMO sentences; (d) confusions between the forms in a cued
recall DEMO; (e) from Table 1 in the source reference; symmetrized by averaging.
36. (a) Coombs (1964); (b) 10 psychological journals; (c) natural selection; (d) fre-
quency of citations between DEMO journals; (e) data were converted to conditional
probabilities and symmetrized DEMO averaging.
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 167
37. (a) Fischho¤, Slovic, Lichtenstein, Read, and Combs (1978); (b) 30 societal DEMO;
(c) natural selection, included the eight items used by DEMO (1969); (d) correlations
between risks across average ratings for DEMO risk factors; (e) nonexpert sample.
38. (a) Fischho¤ et DEMO (1978); (b) 30 societal risks; (c) natural selection; included the
eight items used by Starr (1969); (d) DEMO Euclidean distances between
risks based on average ratings for nine risk factors; (e) nonexpert sample.
39. (a) Fischho¤ et al. (1978); (b) 30 societal risks; (c) natural selection; included the
eight items used by Starr (1969); (d) nine-dimensional Euclidean distances between
risks based on average ratings for nine risk factors; (e) expert sample.
40. (a) Furnas (1980); (b) 15 bird names; (c) chosen to span the Rosch (1978) typi-
cality norms; (d) dissimilarity ratings.
41. (a) Gati (1978; cited in Tversky & Gati, 1982); (b) 16 descriptions of students; (c)
4  4 design that varied major ﬁeld of DEMO and political a‰liation; (d) dissimilarity
ratings.
42. (a) Henley (1969); (b) 30 animal names; (c) natural selection; (d) dissimilarity
ratings; (e) replicated by Arabie and Rips (1972; data set 32) using similarity ratings.
43. (a) Hutchinson and DEMO (1975); (b) 36 words for various objects; (c) 6
words were selected from each of six categories such that each DEMO of 6 could be nat-
urally subdivided into two sets of 3; (d) dissimilarity ratings; (e) subcategories were
chosen to conform DEMO a cross classiﬁcation based on common versus rare objects.
44. (a) Jenkins (1970); (b) 30 attribute words; (c) all DEMO words contained in the
Kent–Rosano¤ word association test; (d) word DEMO, speciﬁcally the condi-
tional probability that a particular response was given DEMO an associate to a particular
stimulus word (computed as a proportion DEMO all responses); (e) contains many pairs
of opposites.
45. (DEMO) Kraus (1976); (b) 35 occupations; (c) natural DEMO; (d) similarity ratings.
46. (a) Miller (as reported by Carroll & Chang, 1973); (b) 20 names of body parts;
(c) natural selection; (d) frequency of co-occurrence in a sorting task; (e) given in
table 1 of the source reference.
47. (a) Robinson and Hefner (1967); (b) 17 names of countries; (c) chosen to span
most geographic regions, and DEMO similarity pairs were avoided; (d) the percentage
of times that DEMO country was chosen as 1 of the 3 most similar to the reference
country; (e) public sample; 9 reference countries per subject.
DEMO (a) Robinson and Hefner (1967); (b) 17 names DEMO countries; (c) chosen to span
most geographic regions, and high similarity pairs were avoided; (d) the percentage
168 Tversky and Hutchinson
of times that each country was chosen as DEMO of the 3 most similar to the reference
country; (e) DEMO sample; 17 reference countries per subject.
49. (a) Shepard et DEMO (1975); (b) 10 single-digit Arabic numerals (i.e., 0–9); (c)
complete set; (d) dissimilarity ratings; (e) DEMO were judged as abstract concepts
(cf. data set 21).
50. (a) Wish (1970); (b) 12 names of countries; (DEMO) based on Robinson and Hefner
(1967); (d) similarity ratings; (e) pilot data for the referenced study.
51. (a) Boster (1980); (b) a set of (hard to name) maniocs, which are a type of edible
root; (c) natural selection; (d) percentage agreement between 25 native informants
regarding the names of DEMO maniocs; (e) although the stimuli were maniocs in this
experiment, the items for which proximity was measured in this anthropological
study were DEMO informants.
52. (a) Boster (1980); (b) a set DEMO (easily named) maniocs, which are a type of edible
root; (c) natural selection; (d) percentage agreement between 21 native informants
regarding the names of the maniocs; (e) although the stimuli were maniocs in this
experiment, the items for which proximity was measured in this anthropological
study were the informants.
Categorical Ratings 1 (With Superordinate)
53–59. (a) Mervis et al. (1975); (b) 20 names of exemplars and the name of the cate-
gory for each of DEMO seven categories: fruit (53), furniture (54), sports (55), tools (56),
vegetables (57), vehicles (58), DEMO weapons (59); (c) stimuli for each category were
chosen DEMO span a large range of prototypicality as measured in a previous study; (d)
relatedness judgments; (e) these data are identical to those for data sets 60 through 66
except that they include observations DEMO the proximity between exemplars and the
category names for each category.
Categorical Ratings 1 (Without Superordinate)
60–66. (a) Mervis et al. (DEMO); (b) 20 names of exemplars and the name of the cate-
gory for each of the seven categories: fruit (60), DEMO (61), sports (62), tools (63),
vegetables (DEMO), vehicles (65), and weapons (66); (c) stimuli for each category were
chosen to span a large range of prototypicality DEMO measured in a previous study; (d)
relatedness judgments; (e) these data are identical to those for data sets 53 through 59
except that they do not include observations for the proximity between exemplars
DEMO the category names for each category.
Nearest Neighbor Analysis of Psychological Spaces 169
Categorical Ratings 2 (With Superordinate)
67–70. (a) Smith and Tversky (1981); (b) six names of exemplars and the category
name for the four categories: ﬂowers (67), trees (68), birds (69), and ﬁsh (DEMO); (c)
natural selection; (d) relatedness judgments; (e) the exemplars are the same as for
data sets 71 through 74; however, the data were based on independent judgments by
di¤erent subjects.
DEMO Ratings 2 (With Distant Superordinate)
71–74. (a) Smith and DEMO (1981); (b) six names of exemplars and the name DEMO a
distant superordinate (i.e., plant or animal) for the four DEMO: ﬂowers (71), trees
(72), birds (73), and ﬁsh (74); (c) natural selection; (d) relatedness judgments; (e) the
exemplars are the same as for data sets 66 DEMO 70; however, the data were based
on independent judgments by di¤erent subjects.
Categorical Associations (With Superordinate)
75–85. (a) Marshall and Cofer (1970); (b) between 15 and 18 (see table 5.3) exem-
plars and the category name for each of the categories: birds (75), body parts (76),
clothes (77), drinks (78), earth formations (79), fruit (80), house parts (81), musical
instruments (82), professions (83), weapons (84), and weather (85); (c) exemplars
were selected to span the production frequencies reported by Cohen et al. (1957); (d)DEMO
the conditional probability that a particular exemplar or the category name was
given as an associate to an exemplar (computed as a proportion of all responses) was
based on the Marshall and Cofer norms; the DEMO that a particular exemplar
was given as a response to the category name (computed as a proportion of all
responses) was based on DEMO Cohen et al. norms; (e) the data were symmetrized by
DEMO
Categorical Associations (Without Superordinate)
86–96. (a) Marshall and Cofer (1970); (b) between 15 and 18 (see table 5.3) DEMO
plars for each of the categories: birds (86), body parts (87), clothes (88), drinks (89),
earth formations (90), fruit (91), house parts (92), musical instruments (93), pro-
fessions (94), weapons (95), and weather (96); (c) exemplars were selected to span the
production frequencies DEMO by Cohen et al. (1957); (d) the conditional proba-
DEMO that a particular exemplar was given as an associate to an exemplar (computed
as a proportion of all responses) was based solely on DEMO Marshall and Cofer norms;
170 Tversky and Hutchinson
(e) the data were symmetrized by averaging DEMO are identical to data sets 75 through
85, except that the DEMO between the category name and the exemplars have
been excluded.
Attribute-Based Categories
97–100. (a) Smith and Tversky (1981); (b) each data set contained an attribute word
and six objects that possessed the attribute; the attributes were red (97), circle (98),
smell (DEMO), and sound (100); (c) stimuli chosen to have DEMO in common other than
the named attribute; (d) relatedness judgments.
6 On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models
Shmuel Sattath DEMO Amos Tversky
The classiﬁcation of objects (e.g., countries, events, animals, books) plays an impor-
tant role in the organization of knowledge. DEMO can be classiﬁed on the basis of
features they share; they DEMO also be classiﬁed on the basis of their distinctive fea-
tures. There is a well-known correspondence between predicates (or features) and
classes (or clusters). For example, the predicate ‘‘two legged’’ can be viewed as a
feature that describes some animals; it can also be seen as a class consisting of all
animals that have two legs. The relation DEMO a feature and the corresponding
cluster is essentially that between the intension (i.e., the meaning) of a concept and its
extension (i.e., the set of objects to which it applies). The clusters or DEMO used to
classify objects can be speciﬁed in advance or else derived from some measure of
similarity or dissimilarity between the objects via a DEMO model. Conversely, a
clustering model can be used to predict the DEMO dissimilarity between the
objects. The present chapter investigates the relationship between the classiﬁcatory
structure of objects and the dissimilarity between them.
Consider a set DEMO objects s, a set of features S, and a mapping that associates each
object b in s with a set of features B DEMO S. We assume that both s and S are ﬁnite, and
DEMO use lowercase letters a; b; ... to denote objects in s and uppercase letters to
denote features or sets of features. The feature DEMO associated with s is described
by a matrix M ¼ðmij Þ, DEMO mij ¼ 1 if Feature i belongs to Object j and mij ¼ 0
otherwise.
Let dða; bÞ be a symmetric and positive ½dða; bÞ¼ dðb; aÞ > 0 index of dissimilar-
ity between a DEMO b. We assume a 0b and exclude self-dissimilarity. Perhaps the
simplest rule that relates the dissimilarity of objects to their feature structure is the
DEMO features (CF) model. In this model,
dða; bÞ¼ K
DEMO
K


gðA
V
X
X
AVB
A
BÞ
gðX
Þ
ð1Þ
where K is a positive constant and g is an additive DEMO deﬁned on the subsets
of S. That is, g is a DEMO non-negative function satisfying gðX U Y Þ¼
gðX Þþ gðYÞ whenever X and Y are disjoint. To simplify the notation we write gðXÞ
for DEMO gÞ, and so on.
The CF model o¤ers a natural representation DEMO the proximity between objects:
The smaller the measure of their common features the greater the dissimilarity
172 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 6.1
A graphic representation of the measures DEMO the common and the distinctive features of a pair of objects.
between the objects (see ﬁgure 6.1). This model arises in many contexts: It serves as a
basis for several hierarchical clustering procedures (e.g., Hartigan, 1975), and it
underlies the additive clustering model of Shepard and Arabie (1979). It has also
been used to assess the commonality and the prototypicality of concepts (see Rosch
& Mervis, 1975; Smith & Medin, 1981).
An alternative conception of dissimilarity is expressed by the distinctive features
(DF) model. In this model,
dða; bÞ¼ f ðA

¼
X
X
ADB
A
BÞþ
f ðX
DEMO
f ðB

AÞ
ð2Þ
where A B is the set of features of a that do not belong to b, ADB ¼ðA BÞ U
ðB AÞ, and f is an additive measure deﬁned on the subsets of S. This model, also
called the symmetric di¤erence metric, DEMO introduced to psychology by Restle
(1961). It encompasses the Hamming DEMO as well as the city-block metric (She-
pard, 1980). It also underlies several scaling methods (e.g., Corter & Tversky, 1986;
Eisler & Roskam, 1977).
We investigate in this article the relations among the CF model, the DF model,
and the feature matrix M. We assume that any feature included in the matrix has a
DEMO weight (i.e., measure); features with zero weight are excluded because they
do not a¤ect the dissimilarity of objects. Hence, M deﬁnes the support of the mea-
sure, that is, the set of elements DEMO which it is nonzero.
Consider ﬁrst the special case in which all objects have a unit weight. That is,
f ðAÞ¼ X
X
DEMO f ðX
Þ¼
1
A
On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models 173
for all DEMO in s. In this case, the measure of the distinctive features DEMO any pair of objects
is a linear function of the measure of their common features. Speciﬁcally,
dða; bÞ¼
¼
¼
¼
f ðA BÞþ f ðB
f ðAÞþ f ðBÞ 2
2 2f ðA V DEMO
K gðA V BÞ;

AÞ
f ðA
V
BÞ
where K ¼ 2and g ¼ 2f . Hence the two models are DEMO if all objects
are weighted equally, as in the ultrametric tree (Jardine & Sibson, 1971; Johnson,
1967), in which all DEMO are equidistant from the root. Indeed, this representation
can be interpreted DEMO as a CF model or as a DF model.
Given a feature matrix M, however, the two models are not compatible in general.
DEMO is most easily seen in a nested structure. To illustrate, consider DEMO (identi-kit)
faces presented in ﬁgure 6.2, where each face consists of a basic frame Z (including
eyes, nose, and mouth) DEMO one, two, or three additive components: beard (Y ),
glasses (X ), and moustache (W ). In the present DEMO, we identify the features of
the faces with their distinct physical DEMO
According to the CF model, then,
dðZY; ZX
Þ¼
but
K

gðZÞ¼ dðZY; ZXWÞ;
dðZY; ZX
Þ¼
¼
K DEMO > K gðZÞ gðW
dðZYW; ZXWÞ:
In the DF model, on the other hand,
Þ
dðZY; ZX
Þ¼
¼
but
f ðY Þþ f ðXÞ < f ðY
dðZY; ZXWÞ;
Þþ
f ðX
Þþ
f ðW
Þ
dðZY; ZX
Þ¼
f ðY
Þþ
f ðX
Þ¼
dðZYW; ZXWÞ:
The two models, therefore, induce di¤erent dissimilarity orders1 on the faces in
ﬁgure 6.2; hence they are empirically distinguishable, given a feature matrix M.
Nevertheless, we show below that DEMO the data satisfy one model, relative to some
feature matrix M, then the other model will also be satisﬁed, relative to a di¤erent
174 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 6.2
Identi-kit faces with a common frame (Z ) and 3 additive features: beard (Y ), glasses (DEMO ), and moustache
(W ).
feature matrix M0 . The DEMO representations are generally di¤erent, but they have
the same number of DEMO parameters.
Theorem: Let d be a dissimilarity index on s2 , DEMO suppose there is an additive
measure g on S and a constant K > gðBÞ, for all b in s, such that
ðiÞ DEMO; bÞ¼ K gðA V BÞ:
Then there is an additive DEMO f on S such that
ðiiÞ dða; bÞ¼ f ðADBÞ¼ f DEMO

BÞþ
f ðB

AÞ:
Conversely, if there is DEMO additive measure f satisfying (ii) then there exists an addi-
tive measure g and a constant K such that (i) holds. Thus, d satisﬁes the common
features model if and only if it satisﬁes DEMO distinctive features model, up to an addi-
tive constant.
To prove DEMO theorem, we deﬁne f in terms of g and vice versa DEMO show that the
models reduce to each other. The actual proof is given in propositions 1 and 2 of the
On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models 175
Table 6.1
DEMO Feature Matrix for the Faces of Figure 6.2
Objects
ab c d
Features (ZY)(ZX)(ZYW)(ZXW)
Z 1 111
Y DEMO 010
X 0 101
W 0 011
mathematical appendix. Here we describe the transformations relating f and g and
illustrate the equivalence of the DEMO
For any b in s, let B^ B B denote a DEMO feature of b, that is, a feature
shared by all objects in s except b. With no loss of generality we can assume DEMO each
object has a single complementary feature.
To show how the CF model reduces to the DF model, assume (i) and deﬁne f on
S as follows:
gðB^Þ gðBÞ=2if X ¼ B^ for some DEMO A s
f ðX Þ¼ ½gKðXþÞ=2 otherwise. ð3Þ
Note that in the CF model B^ enters into all the dissimilarities that do not involve
DEMO, whereas in the DF model B^ enters into all the dissimilarities DEMO involve b and
into them only. The translation of one model into another is made by changing the
relative weights assigned to these features. DEMO above deﬁnition sets f ¼ g=2 and
adds to the measure of each complementary feature a linear function of the overall
measure of the DEMO object.
To obtain the CF model from the DF model assume (DEMO) and deﬁne g on S by
2f
Þ¼ 2f ðB^Þþ f DEMO if X ¼ B^ for some b A s ð4Þ
gðX ðXÞ otherwise.
Thus, g ¼ 2f for all elements of S except the complementary features, whose
values are further augmented by the overall measures of the respective objects.
We next illustrate these transformations and the equivalence of DEMO two models
using the dissimilarities between the faces in ﬁgure 6.2. The feature matrix associated
with these objects is presented in table 6.1. Each DEMO in the matrix represents an
object in s, and each row DEMO to a feature in S. Table 6.2 presents above the
diagonal the dissimilarities between the objects according to the CF model and below
176 Sattath and Tversky
Table 6.2
Dissimilarities between the Faces of Figure DEMO Computed According to the CF Model (above Diagonal)
and the DEMO Model (below Diagonal)
Objects
ab c d
Objects (ZY)(DEMO)(ZYW)(ZXW)
K gðZÞ gðY
K gðZÞ
—
Þ
Þ
Table 6.3
An Extended Feature Matrix for the Faces of Figure 6.2
DEMO ðX
Þþ
f ðY
Objects
ab c d
Features (ZY)(ZX)(ZYW)(ZXW)
Z
Y
X
W
A^
B^
C^
D^
DEMO 1 1
10 1 0
01 0 1
00 1 1
01 1 1
10 1 1
11 0 1
11 1 0
f
DEMO
g
0
gðZÞ=22f ðZÞ
gðYÞ=22f ðYÞ
gðXÞ=22f ðXÞ
gðWÞ=22f ðWÞ
½K gðZÞ gðYÞ=2 f ðZÞþ f ðY
½K gðZÞ gðXÞ=2 f ðZÞþ f ðX
DEMO gðZÞ gðYÞ gðWÞ=2 f ðZÞþ f ðY
½K gðZÞ gðXÞ gðWÞ=2 f ðZÞþ f ðX
Þ
Þ
Þþ
Þþ
a
—
bfðX Þþ
cfðWÞ
DEMO Þþ
f ðY
f ðY
Þ
Þþ
f ðW
Þ
K gðZÞ
—
f ðXÞþ f ðY
f ðWÞ
Þþ
f ðW
Þ
K DEMO
K gðZÞ gðXÞ
K gðZÞ gðWÞ
—
f ðW
f ðW
Þ
Þ
the diagonal the dissimilarities according to the DF model, using the feature matrix
of table 6.1. Table 6.2 shows that the two models DEMO incompatible. In the CF model
dða; bÞ¼ dðb; cÞ¼ dða; DEMO > dða; cÞ; dðb; dÞ; dðc; dÞ. In the DEMO model, on the other
hand, dða; bÞ¼ dðc; dÞ, DEMO; cÞ¼ dðb; dÞ, dða; dÞ¼ dðb; cÞ, and dða; dÞ > dða; bÞ,
dða; cÞ . The CF model and the DF model, therefore, do not agree when restricted to
DEMO feature matrix of table 6.1. However, the two models become equivalent DEMO we
extend the feature matrix (see table 6.3) by including the complementary features.
The new measures f 0 (derived from g via equation 3) and g0 (derived from f via
equation 4) are presented in the last two columns of the table.
To illustrate the equivalence DEMO let us examine ﬁrst how the CF dissim-
ilarities, presented above DEMO diagonal in table 6.2, can be represented by the DF
model. DEMO do so we turn to the extended feature matrix (table 6.3) and compute
the dissimilarities according to the DF model using the derived DEMO f 0 . For
On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models 177
example,
DEMO; bÞ¼ f
¼½gðY Þþ gðX
¼ K gðZÞ:
0
ðY
DEMO
f
0
ðX
Þþ
Þþ
K
f
0
ð

Þþ
gðZÞ gðY
A^
f
0
ð
B^
Þ
Þþ
K

gðZÞ gðX DEMO
It is easy to verify that these DF dissimilarities coincide with the original CF dis-
similarities. To represent the original DF dissimilarities, presented below the diago-
nal in table 6.2, by the CF model we turn again to the extended feature matrix (table
6.3) add apply the DEMO model using the derived measure g0 . Letting
K
¼
X
A s
f ðAÞ
a
¼
2½2f ðZÞþ f ðY
yields, for example,
Þþ
f ðX
Þþ
f ðW
Þ
dða; bÞ¼
¼
¼
K g0ðZÞ g
K ½2f ðZÞþ
f ðY Þþ f ðXÞ:
DEMO
ð
f ðZÞþ
C^
Þ
g
0
ð
D^
Þ
f ðY
Þþ
f ðW
Þþ
f ðZÞþ
f ðX
Þþ
f ðW
Þ
DEMO, it is easy to verify that these CF dissimilarities coincide with DEMO original DF
dissimilarities as required. It appears that the extension of the matrix introduces four
additional parameters corresponding to the weights of the complementary DEMO
These parameters, however, are not independent. For example, g0ðZÞþ g0ðY DEMO
2g0ðA^Þ . Because the new measures are deﬁned in terms of the old ones, the original
and the extended solutions have the same number of free parameters.
To summarize, consider an object set s with a feature matrix M and an extended
feature matrix M0 . The preceding DEMO establishes the following conclusions:
First, given a feature matrix M DEMO DF and the CF models do not always coincide.
Moreover, in DEMO example of ﬁgure 6.2 with the ‘‘natural’’ feature matrix of table 6.2,
the two models yield di¤erent dissimilarity orders. Second, any set of DF dissim-
ilarities in M can be represented as CF dissimilarities in DEMO extended feature matrix
M0 and vice versa. Thus, one model can DEMO ‘‘translated’’ into the other provided the
original feature matrix (i.e., the support of the measure) can be extended to include
the complementary features. Third, because M0 is generally di¤erent than M, the two
representations DEMO di¤erent clusters or features. Nevertheless, the two solutions
have the same DEMO of free parameters (i.e., degrees of freedom) because f 0 DEMO
178 Sattath and Tversky
deﬁned by g and g0 is deﬁned by DEMO (see table 6.3). The two representations, therefore,
have the same dimensionality even though they do not have the same support.
These DEMO show that unless the feature structure is constrained in advance, the
DEMO model and the DF model cannot be compared on the basis of goodness-of-ﬁt
because they ﬁt the data equally well. As a consequence, the models cannot be dis-
tinguished on the basis of the observed dissimilarity DEMO On the other hand, the
scaling solutions derived from the two DEMO are not identical and one may be
preferable to the other. In particular, a solution that includes complementary fea-
tures may be harder to interpret than a solution that does not. Besides simplicity and
interpretability, the choice between the representations can be based on additional
empirical considerations. For DEMO, we may prefer a solution that is consistent
with the results DEMO a free classiﬁcation of the objects under study. The choice of a
feature structure may also beneﬁt from the ingenious experimental analysis of Tries-
DEMO and Souther (1985).
The formal equivalence of the CF and DEMO DF models is a special case of a more
general result regarding the contrast model (Tversky, 1977) in which the dissimilarity
of objects is expressed as a function of the measures of their common and DEMO dis-
tinctive features. In the symmetric additive version of this model
dða; bÞ¼ tf ðADBÞþðt

1ÞgðA
V
BÞ;
0 at a1:
ð5Þ
This form reduces to the CF model (up to an additive constant) when t ¼ 0, and it
reduces to the DF DEMO when t ¼ 1. If g and f are additive measures (DEMO need not
be additive in general) and the underlying feature matrix DEMO the complementary
features, then the parameter t is not identiﬁable. That DEMO, if there are additive mea-
sures g and f and a DEMO 0 at a 1 such that equation 5 holds, then for DEMO
0 at0 a 1 there are additive measures f 0 and g0 such that
dða; bÞ¼ t
0
f
0
ðADBÞþðt
0

1Þg
0
ðA
V
BÞ
up to an additive constant (see proposition 3 in the mathematical appendix). Note
that the previous theorem corresponds to DEMO case where t ¼ 0 and t0 ¼ 1 or vice
versa.
This result shows that in the additive version of the contrast model DEMO parameter
t (reﬂecting the weight of the distinctive relative to the DEMO features) can be
meaningfully assessed only for feature structures that do DEMO include the comple-
mentary features. Indeed, Gati and Tversky (1984) DEMO such structures by
adding a separable component either to one or to two stimuli. Using equation 5,
these authors estimated t for a DEMO di¤erent domains and found higher values of t
for perceptual than for conceptual stimuli. The present analysis shows that these
On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models 179
conclusions depend DEMO the feature structure induced by the addition of physical
components.
The preceding discussion demonstrated the nonuniqueness of the parameter t in an
extended feature DEMO We next discuss the nonuniqueness of the feature matrix
associated with the distinctive features model. Recall that in this model
dða; bÞ¼ f ðADBÞ¼ f ðA

BÞþ
f ðB

AÞ¼ X fi ei ða; bÞ
i
where fi is the weight of the i-th feature, and
1if mia 0mib
ei ða; bÞ¼ 0if mia ¼ mib
Thus, DEMO is nonzero only for the features of ADB, that is, features that belong to
one of the objects but not to the other. DEMO follows readily from the DF model that
interchanging all zeros and ones in the i -th row of the feature matrix leaves ei and
DEMO dða; bÞ unchanged. Furthermore, it is redundant to add a new feature that is
the mirror image of an old one because interchanging DEMO 0’s and 1’s in the row cor-
responding to the old feature renders the two features identical. A DF solution,
therefore, does not represent a unique feature matrix but rather a family of feature
matrices—called DEMO classiﬁcation structure—whose members are related to each other
by interchanging all 0’s and 1’s in one or more rows of the matrix and deleting
DEMO features. A classiﬁcation structure determines which objects are classiﬁed
together according to each feature, but it does not distinguish between the presence
and absence of that feature. The relation between a feature matrix and the classiﬁ-
DEMO structure to which it belongs mirrors the relation between an additive and a
substitutive feature (Tversky & Gati, 1982). The former is DEMO in terms of pres-
ence or absence, whereas the latter merely DEMO between the two levels of
each attribute. (Nonbinary attributes can always DEMO reduced to binary ones using
dummy variables.)
Because the DF model does not distinguish among feature matrices that belong to
the same classiﬁcation DEMO, the interpretation of this model in terms of a par-
ticular DEMO matrix (e.g., tables 6.1 and 6.3) cannot be based on DEMO dissim-
ilarities. The following example taken from an unpublished study of dissimilarity
between countries illustrates this point. The average ratings of dissimilarity between
countries DEMO analyzed using the addtree program for ﬁtting an additive tree (Sat-
DEMO & Tversky, 1977). Figure 6.3 presents the subtree obtained for DEMO selected
countries.
180 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 6.3
A tree representation of the dissimilarity DEMO ﬁve countries.
In an additive tree the dissimilarity between objects (e.g., countries) is given by the
length of the path that joins the respective endpoints. The feature matrix that corre-
sponds to the tree of DEMO 6.3 is given in table 6.4. Each arc of the tree can be
interpreted as a feature, or a set of features, that DEMO to all objects that follow
from this arc. Thus, the ﬁrst DEMO features in table 6.4 correspond to the unique fea-
tures of each of the ﬁve countries. The sixth and seventh features correspond to the
DEMO shared, respectively, by USSR and Poland (labeled European) and by U.S.
and Canada (labeled North American). Finally, the eighth feature DEMO shared by the
three American countries (Cuba, U.S., and Canada)DEMO
Inspection of table 6.4 reveals that feature 8 is redundant because it is the
mirror image of feature 6. Hence, we can delete feature 8 and replace it by another
redundant feature that is the mirror DEMO of feature 7. Because the new feature is
shared by Cuba, DEMO, and USSR, it is labeled Communist. Figure 6.4 displays a
tree representation in which the new feature replaces feature 8. Note that in DEMO
6.3, Cuba joins the American countries, whereas in ﬁgure 6.4 it joins the Commu-
nist countries. Although the two ﬁgures yield di¤erent clustering, the dissimilarities
between the countries are identical because the two respective feature DEMO
belong to the same classiﬁcation structure, represented by the unrooted tree DEMO ﬁgure
6.5. This tree generates the same dissimilarities as the rooted trees of ﬁgures 6.3 and
6.4, but it does not yield a hierarchical clustering of the objects. The choice of a root
for an additive DEMO (e.g., ﬁgure 6.5) corresponds to the choice of a particular DEMO
matrix (e.g., table 6.4) from the respective classiﬁcation structure. The DEMO of the
On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models 181
Table 6.4
DEMO Labeled Feature Matrix for the Tree Representation of Judged Dissimilarity between Countries
Countries
Feature U.S. Canada Cuba Poland USSR
1. U.S. 1 0 0 DEMO 0
2. Canada 0 1 0 0 0
3. Cuba 0 0 1 0 0
4. Poland 0 0 0 1 0
5. USSR DEMO 0 0 0 1
6. Europe 0 0 0 1 1
7. North America 1 1 0 0 0
8. America 1 1 1 DEMO 0
(Communist 0 0 1 1 1)
Figure 6.4
A DEMO representation of the dissimilarity between ﬁve countries.
182 Sattath and Tversky
Figure 6.5
An unrooted tree representation of the DEMO between ﬁve countries. (The points used as roots in
ﬁgures 6.3 DEMO 6.4, respectively, correspond to the right and left dots in this ﬁgure.)
tree is analogous to the selection of a coordinate system DEMO a conﬁguration of points
obtained by (Euclidean) multidimensional scaling. Both constructions are introduced
to enhance the interpretation of the data, but they are not implied by the observed
dissimilarities.
Discussion
This chapter shows that a DEMO set that can be represented by the common features
(CF) model can also be represented by the distinctive features (DF) model and DEMO
versa, although the two representations involve di¤erent features. Furthermore, the
DF model does not distinguish between feature matrices that belong to the same
DEMO structure. It could be argued that the lack of uniqueness implied by
these results exposes a basic limitation of linear feature models that are DEMO su‰-
ciently constrained to determine the form of the model (CF DEMO DF), which must be
chosen on the basis of other considerations.
In reply we argue that similar problems of indeterminacy arise in other DEMO
ment systems as well, including the physical measurement of weight and DEMO
The classical theory for the measurement of extensive attributes (e.g., mass, length,
time) has three primitive notions: a set of objects, a process of comparing the objects
with respect to the attribute in question, and an operation of concatenation of
objects. For example, in DEMO measurement of mass the objects are compared by
placing them on the two sides of a pan balance and the concatenation of objects is
DEMO by putting them on the same side of the balance. In the measurement of
On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models 183
length the DEMO may be viewed as rigid rods that are concatenated by combining
their endpoints. The theory assumes that the comparison process yields a transitive
ordering DEMO the objects with respect to the attribute in question, and that DEMO c is
heavier (longer) than b then the concatenation of c and a is heavier (longer) than the
concatenation of b and DEMO These axioms, in conjunction with others of a more tech-
nical DEMO, lead to the construction of an additive scale of mass, m, satisfying
mða

bÞ¼ mðaÞþ mðbÞ where * denotes the concatenation operation.
Assuming additivity, m is a ratio scale: It is unique except DEMO the unit of
measurement. Contrary to common belief, however, the additive representation itself
is not determined by the data. The observations (as well as the axioms) are also
compatible, for example, with a multiplicative representation in which mða  bÞ¼2
mðaÞm2 1ð=b2Þ, or with a Pythagorian representation in which mða  bÞ¼½mðaÞ þ
mðbÞ  ; (see Krantz, Luce, Suppes and Tversky, 1971, section 3.9). Although the
DEMO form appears simpler and more natural, it is not dictated by DEMO observa-
tions, and we cannot test which form is correct. If DEMO additive representation exists,
so does the multiplicative and the Pythagorian, DEMO well as many others. It may come
as a surprise to many readers that the form of our measurement models—of dissim-
ilarity as well DEMO of mass and distance—is not determined by the data. Indeed, the
DEMO separation of the empirical and the conventional aspects of numerical models
is perhaps the major contribution of measurement theory to both the physical and
DEMO social sciences.
Note
1. Indeed, the observation that both inequalities may DEMO has led to the development of the contrast
model (Tversky, 1977), discussed later in this chapter, in which dissimilarity depends on both common or
distinctive features.
References
Corter, J., & Tversky, A. (DEMO). Extended similarity trees. Psychometrika, 51, 429–451.
Eisler, H., & Roskam, E. (1977). Multidimensional similarity: An experimental and theoretical comparison
of vector, distance, and set theoretical models. I. Models and internal DEMO of data. Acta Psycho-
logica, 41, 1–46.
Gati, I., & Tversky, A. (1984). Weighting common and distinctive features in perceptual DEMO conceptual
judgments. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 341–370.
Hartigan, J. A. (1975). Clustering algorithms. New York: Wiley.
Jardine, N., & Sibson, DEMO (1971). Mathematical taxonomy. London: Wiley.
Johnson, S. C. (1967). Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 32, 241–254.
Krantz, D. H., DEMO, R. D., Suppes, P., & Tversky, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement (Vol. 1). New
York: Academic Press.
184 Sattath and Tversky
Restle, F. (1961). Psychology of judgment DEMO choice. New York: Wiley.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblance: Studies in the internal structure of categories.
DEMO Psychology, 7, 573–603.
Sattath, S., & Tversky, A. (1977). Additive similarity trees. Psychometrika, 42, 319–345.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories and concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Shepard, R. N. (1980). Multidimensional scaling, tree-ﬁtting, and clustering. Science, 210, 390–398.
Shepard, R. N., & Arabie, P. (1979). Additive clustering: Representation of similarities as combinations of
discrete overlapping properties. Psychological Review, 30, 87–123.
Triesman, A., & DEMO, J. (1985). Search asymmetry: A diagnostic for preattentive processing DEMO sepa-
rable features. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 285–310.
DEMO, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327–352.
Tversky, A., & Gati, I. (1982). Separability, similarity and the triangle inequality, Psychological Review,
89, 123–154.
Mathematical Appendix
proposition DEMO Suppose there is an additive measure g on S and constant K > gðBÞ,
for all b in s, such that
ðiÞ
dða; bÞ¼ K

gðA
V
BÞ:
Then there is an additive measure f on S such that
ðiiÞ dða; bÞ¼ f ðADBÞ:
Proof
f ðX
Þ¼
Deﬁne
þgð
½gKðXÞ=2 otherwise.
B^
Þ
gðBÞ=2if X
DEMO
B^
for some b
We show that for any a; b DEMO s; f ðADBÞ¼ K
f ðADBÞ¼ f ðA BÞþ f ðB DEMO
¼ f ð Þþ f ððA BÞ
¼½K 
þ½K
¼
¼
¼
B^
B^
gðBÞþ gð
gðAÞþ
B^
Þþ
gð
A^
Þþ
gððA
DEMO
f

gððB
ð
BÞ

A^
B^
Þ=2
V
AÞ
A^
Þ=2
Þþ

f ððB
gðA

K þ½gðBÞþ gðA BÞ gðAÞþ DEMO
K þ½2gðA V BÞ=2
K gðA V BÞ:

A
s,
BÞ.
AÞ
AÞ=2
A^
Þ
On the Relation between Common and Distinctive Feature Models 185
proposition 2
DEMO there is an additive measure f on S such that
ðiÞ
dða; bÞ¼ f ðADBÞ:
Then there exists an additive measure g and a constant K such that
ðiiÞ dða; bÞ¼ K

gðA
V
Proof
Deﬁne
2f
2f ðB^Þþ f ðBÞ
ðXÞ
gðX
Let
Þ¼
BÞ:DEMO
if X ¼
otherwise.
B^
for some b
A
s,
K
¼
X
A s
a
and let
S^
K

gðA
f DEMO;
M
¼
X
A s gð
A^
Þ¼
2L
þ
K;
¼f
B^
:
b
A
sg. Hence,
a
V
BÞ¼ K

"#
ðA
V
B

S
^
Þþ
g
X
gðX
Þ
X
A
AVB S
V
^
K

"#
ðA
V
B

S
^
Þþ
g
X gðX
Þ
gðA
^
DEMO
gðB
^Þ
X
A
S^
K
K
K

K
þ



M
þ
f ðAÞþ
f ðBÞþ 2ð f
ð
A^
DEMO
2 !
ðA
V
BÞ
f
X
f ðX
Þ
X
A
AVB S
V
^
gðA
V
B
M
þ
2f
ð

DEMO
Þ
M
A^
Þþ
þ
f ðAÞþ 2f
gð
A^
Þþ
ð
B^
gð
Þþ f ðBÞ
f ð
B^
Þ
B^
ÞÞ
2f DEMO
V
B


M
þ
f ðAÞþ
f ðBÞþ 2ð f
ð
A^
Þþ
f
ð
B^
ÞÞ 
2f ðA
V
BÞ
DEMO
!X
f ðX
Þ
f ðA
^
Þ
f ðB
^
Þ
X
A
S^
L
¼
X
A s
f
ð
A^
Þ;DEMO
¼
¼
¼
¼
¼
¼
¼
K M þ f ðADBÞþ 2L
f ðADBÞ:
S^
Þ
a
186 Sattath and Tversky
proposition 3 Suppose there are additive measures g DEMO f on S and a constant
0 at a 1 such that
dða; bÞ¼ tf ðADBÞþðt

1ÞgðA
V
BÞ:
Then for any 0 at
0
a 1 there are additive measures g
0
; DEMO
0
and a constant K such that
dða; bÞ¼ t
0
DEMO
0
ðADBÞþðt
0

1Þg
0
ðADBÞþ K:
Proof
By Proposition 1 there is a measure f
00
so that
dða; bÞ¼ tf ðADBÞþðt 1Þ f
Deﬁne f 0 ¼ f þ f 00 , DEMO
dða; bÞ¼ f 0ðADBÞþ M:
00
ðADBÞþ M:
By DEMO 2 there is a constant L and a measure g
0
so that
f
0
ðADBÞ¼ g
0
ðA
thus
V
BÞþ L
ðt
DEMO
and
1Þ f
0
ðADBÞ¼ðt

1Þg
0
ðA
V
BÞþð1

tÞL
dða; bÞ¼ t
¼ t
0
0
f
f
0
0
ðADBÞþðt
ðADBÞþð
0
0


1Þ f
1Þg
0
0
ðADBÞþ DEMO
ðA
V
BÞþ K;
t
where
K
¼
M þðt
0

1ÞL:
JUDGMENT

Editor’s Introductory Remarks
Research on human judgment changed dramatically and deﬁnitively after DEMO
enormously inﬂuential work. Research in the late ﬁfties and early sixties ﬁrst intro-
duced Bayesian notions to the empirical study of human judgment, and surmised
that people are reasonably good intuitive statisticians. Tversky’s collaboration with
Daniel DEMO on the ‘‘heuristics and biases’’ program began in this milieu. Their
ﬁrst paper, on the belief in the law of small numbers (chapter DEMO), suggests that naı¨ve
respondents as well as trained scientists have strong but misguided intuitions about
random sampling. In particular, Tversky and Kahneman suggest that people expect
(1) randomly drawn samples to be highly representative DEMO the population from
which they are drawn, (2) sampling to DEMO a self-correcting process and, consequently,
(3) the variability of DEMO to be less than is typically observed. These expectations
were shown to lead to systematic misperception of chance events, which Tversky
later applied to the analyses of widely held yet misguided beliefs—‘‘the hot hand in
basketball,DEMO studied in collaboration with Tom Gilovich (chapters 10 and 11), DEMO
the belief that arthritis pain is related to the weather, investigated DEMO Don Redel-
meier (chapter 15).
Cognitive and perceptual biases that DEMO regardless of motivational factors
formed the core of the remarkably creative and highly inﬂuential ‘‘heuristics and
biases’’ program. Having recognized that intuitive predictions and DEMO of
probability do not follow the principles of statistics or the laws of probability, Tver-
sky and Kahneman embarked on the study of biases as a method for investigating
judgmental heuristics. In an article in Science (chapter 8), they documented three
heuristics—representativeness, availability, and anchoring and DEMO
people employ in assessing probabilities and in predicting values. In settings where
the relevance of simple probabilistic rules was made transparent, people often were
shown to reveal appropriate statistical intuitions. In richer contexts, however, they
DEMO rely on heuristics that do not obey simple formal considerations and can thus
lead to fallacious judgments. According to the representativeness heuristic, for
example, the likelihood that item A belongs to class B is judged by the degree to
which A resembles B. Prior probabilities and sample sizes, both of which are highly
relevant to likelihood, have no impact on how representative an item appears and are
thus neglected. This can lead DEMO memorable errors such as the ‘‘conjunction fallacy,’’
wherein a conjunction, DEMO it appears more representative, is judged more prob-
able than one DEMO its conjuncts (chapter 9).
The conjunction fallacy and other judgmental DEMO violate the most fundamental
axioms of probability. Interestingly, however, even if a person’s judgment is coher-
ent, it may nonetheless be misguided. Normative judgment requires that the person
be not only coherent but also ‘‘well DEMO Consider a set of propositions, each
190
Shaﬁr
of which a person judges to be true with a DEMO of .70. If the person is right
about seventy percent of these, then the person is said to be well calibrated. If she is
right about less than or more than seventy percent, then she is said to be over-
conﬁdent or underconﬁdent, respectively. Calibration, furthermore, does not ensure
informativeness, as illustrated, for example, by a judge who predicts the sex of each
newborn with a probability of .50, and is thus well calibrated, yet entirely unable to
discriminate. Tversky published insightful analyses of these issues, particularly as
they shed light on judgmental strategies and underlying human abilities. In one
instance (chapter 13), Varda Liberman and Tversky draw subtle distinctions among
di¤erent characteristics of judgments of probability DEMO among di¤erent manifes-
tations of overconﬁdence. The notion that people focus on the strength of the evi-
dence (for example, the warmth of DEMO letter of reference) with insu‰cient regard for its
weight (for example, how well the writer knows the candidate) is used by Dale DEMO
ﬁn & Tversky (chapter 12) to explain various systematic biases in probabilistic judg-
ment including the failure to appreciate regression phenomena, the tendency to show
overconﬁdence (when the evidence is remarkable but its weight is low), and occa-
sional underconﬁdence (when the evidence is unremarkable but its weight is high).
A fundamental assumption underlying normative theories is DEMO extensionality
principle: options that are extensionally equivalent are assigned the same DEMO, and
extensionally equivalent events are assigned the same probability. These theories, in
other words, are about options and events in the world, DEMO Tversky’s analyses
focus on how the relevant constructs are mentally represented. The extensionality
principle is deemed descriptively invalid because alternative descriptions of the same
DEMO can yield di¤erent representations and thus produce systematically di¤erent
judgments. In his ﬁnal years, Tversky returned to the study of judgment and col-
laborated with Derek Koehler on a theory, called support theory, that formally DEMO
tinguishes between events in the world and the manner in which they are mentally
represented (chapter 14). In support theory, probabilities are DEMO not to events,
as in standard normative models, but rather DEMO descriptions of events, called hypoth-
eses. Probability judgments, according to the theory, are based on the support (that
is, strength of evidence) of the focal hypothesis relative to that of alternative, or
residual, hypotheses. The theory distinguishes between explicit and implicit dis-
junctions. Explicit disjunctions DEMO hypotheses that list their individual components
(for example, ‘‘a car crash due to road construction, or due to driver fatigue, or due
DEMO break failure’’), whereas implicit disjunctions (‘‘a car crash’’) do not. According to
the theory, unpacking a description of an event into disjoint components (that is,
from an implicit to an explicit disjunction) DEMO increases its support and,
hence, its perceived likelihood. Unpacking can DEMO support by bringing to mind
Judgment: Editor’s Introductory Remarks 191
neglected possibilities or by increasing the impact of unpacked components. As a
result, di¤erent descriptions of the same event can give rise to di¤erent judgments. In
light of ﬁndings that emerged DEMO to the original publication, Tversky and
Yuval Rottenstreich developed a generalization DEMO support theory (chapter 16.) In
Tversky’s inimitable style, support theory DEMO sense of a variety of fascinating
observations in the context of a highly general and aesthetic theoretical structure. As
before, these chapters show the interplay of psychological intuition with normative
theory, accompanied by memorable demonstrations.

7 Belief in the Law of Small Numbers
Amos Tversky and Daniel DEMO
‘‘Suppose you have run an experiment on 20 subjects, and have DEMO a signiﬁcant
result which conﬁrms your theory (z ¼ 2:23, p <:05, two-tailed). You now have
cause to run an additional group of 10 subjects. What do you think the probability is
DEMO the results will be signiﬁcant, by a one-tailed test, separately for this group?’’
If you feel that the probability is somewhere around DEMO, you may be pleased to
know that you belong to a DEMO group. Indeed, that was the median answer of
two small groups DEMO were kind enough to respond to a questionnaire distributed at
meetings of the Mathematical Psychology Group and of the American Psychological
Association.
On the DEMO hand, if you feel that the probability is around .48, you belong to a
minority. Only 9 of our 84 respondents gave answers DEMO .40 and .60. However,
.48 happens to be a much more reasonable estimate than .85.1
Apparently, most psychologists have an exaggerated belief in the likelihood of
successfully replicating an obtained ﬁnding. The sources of such DEMO, and their
consequences for the conduct of scientiﬁc inquiry, are what this chapter is about. Our
thesis is that people have strong intuitions DEMO random sampling; that these intu-
itions are wrong in fundamental respects; that these intuitions are shared by naive
subjects and by trained scientists; and that they are applied with unfortunate con-
sequences in the course DEMO scientiﬁc inquiry.
We submit that people view a sample randomly drawn from a population as
highly representative, that is, similar to the population DEMO all essential characteristics.
Consequently, they expect any two samples drawn from DEMO particular population to be
more similar to one another and to the population than sampling theory predicts, at
least for small samples.
The tendency to regard a sample as a representation is manifest in a wide DEMO
of situations. When subjects are instructed to generate a random sequence of hypo-
thetical tosses of a fair coin, for example, they produce DEMO where the propor-
tion of heads in any short segment stays far closer to .50 than the laws of chance
would predict (Tune 1964). Thus, each segment of the response sequence is highly
representative of the ‘‘fairness’’ of the coin. Similar e¤ects are observed when subjects
successively DEMO events in a randomly generated series, as in probability learning
experiments (Estes, 1964) or in other sequential games of chance. Subjects act DEMO if
every segment of the random sequence must reﬂect the true proportion: if the
sequence has strayed from the population proportion, a corrective DEMO in the other
direction is expected. This has been called the gambler’s fallacy.
194 Tversky and Kahneman
The heart of the gambler’s fallacy is a DEMO of the fairness of the laws of
chance. The gambler feels that the fairness of the coin entitles him to expect that any
deviation DEMO one direction will soon be cancelled by a corresponding deviation in the
other. Even the fairest of coins, however, given the limitations of DEMO memory and
moral sense, cannot be as fair as the gambler DEMO it to be. This fallacy is not
unique to gamblers. Consider the following example:
The mean IQ of the population of eighth graders DEMO a city is known to be 100. You have
selected a random sample of 50 children for a study of educational achievements. The ﬁrst
DEMO tested has an IQ of 150. What do you expect the mean IQ to be for the whole sample?
The correct answer is DEMO A surprisingly large number of people believe that the
expected IQ for the sample is still 100. This expectation can be justiﬁed only by DEMO
belief that a random process is self-correcting. Idioms such as ‘‘errors cancel each
other out’’ reﬂect the image of an active self-correcting process. Some DEMO pro-
cesses in nature obey such laws: a deviation from a DEMO equilibrium produces a
force that restores the equilibrium. The laws of chance, in contrast, do not work that
way: deviations are not canceled as sampling proceeds, they are merely diluted.
Thus far, we have DEMO to describe two related intuitions about chance. We
proposed a representation hypothesis according to which people believe samples to
be very similar to one DEMO and to the population from which they are drawn. We
also suggested that people believe sampling to be a self-correcting process. The two
beliefs DEMO to the same consequences. Both generate expectations about character-
istics of samples, and the variability of these expectations is less than the true vari-
ability, at least for small samples.
The law of large numbers guarantees that very large samples will indeed be highly
representative of the population DEMO which they are drawn. If, in addition, a self-
corrective tendency is at work, then small samples should also be highly representa-
tive and similar to one another. People’s intuitions about random sampling appear to
DEMO the law of small numbers, which asserts that the law of DEMO numbers applies
to small numbers as well.
Consider a hypothetical scientist who lives by the law of small numbers. How
would his belief a¤ect DEMO scientiﬁc work? Assume our scientist studies phenomena
whose magnitude is small DEMO to uncontrolled variability, that is, the signal-to-
noise ratio in the messages he receives from nature is low. Our scientist could be a
DEMO, a pharmacologist, or perhaps a psychologist.
If he believes in the law of small numbers, the scientist will have exaggerated con-
ﬁdence in the validity of conclusions based on small samples. To illustrate, suppose
he is engaged in studying which of two toys infants will prefer to DEMO with. Of the
Belief in the Law of Small Numbers 195
ﬁrst ﬁve infants studied, four have shown a preference for the same toy. Many a
psychologist DEMO feel some conﬁdence at this point, that the null hypothesis of DEMO
preference is false. Fortunately, such a conviction is not a su‰cient DEMO for
journal publication, although it may do for a book. By DEMO quick computation, our
psychologist will discover that the probability of a DEMO as extreme as the one
obtained is as high as 3 under the null hypothesis.
8
To be sure, the application of statistical hypothesis testing to scientiﬁc inference is
beset with serious di‰culties. Nevertheless, the computation of signiﬁcance levels (or
likelihood ratios, as a Bayesian might prefer) forces the scientist to evaluate the
obtained e¤ect in terms of a DEMO estimate of sampling variance rather than in terms
of his subjective biased estimate. Statistical tests, therefore, protect the scientiﬁc
community against overly hasty DEMO of the null hypothesis (i.e., type I error) by
policing DEMO many members who would rather live by the law of small numbers. On
the other hand, there are no comparable safeguards against the risk of failing to
conﬁrm a valid research hypothesis (i.e., type II DEMO).
Imagine a psychologist who studies the correlation between need for achievement
and grades. When deciding on sample size, he may reason as follows: ‘‘What corre-
lation do I expect? r ¼ :35. What N do I need to make the result signiﬁcant? (Looks
at table.) N ¼ 33. Fine, that’s my sample.’’ The only ﬂaw in this reasoning is that our
psychologist has forgotten about sampling variation, possibly because he believes
that any sample must be highly representative of its population. DEMO, if his guess
about the correlation in the population is correct, the correlation in the sample is
about as likely to lie below DEMO above .35. Hence, the likelihood of obtaining a signif-
icant result (i.e., the power of the test) for N ¼ 33 is DEMO .50.
In a detailed investigation of statistical power, J. Cohen (1962, 1969) has provided
plausible deﬁnitions of large, medium, and small DEMO and an extensive set of
computational aids to the estimation of power for a variety of statistical tests. In the
normal test for a DEMO between two means, for example, a di¤erence of :25s is
DEMO, a di¤erence of :50s is medium, and a di¤erence of DEMO is large, according to
the proposed deﬁnitions. The mean IQ di¤erence DEMO clerical and semiskilled
workers is a medium e¤ect. In an ingenious study of research practice, J. Cohen
(1962) reviewed all the statistical analyses published in one volume of the Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, and computed the likelihood of detecting each of
the three sizes of DEMO The average power was .18 for the detection of small e¤ects,
.48 for medium e¤ects, and .83 for large e¤ects. If psychologists typically expect
medium e¤ects and select sample size as in the above example, the power of their
studies should indeed be about .50.
196 Tversky and Kahneman
Cohen’s analysis shows that the statistical power of DEMO psychological studies is
ridiculously low. This is a self-defeating practice: it DEMO for frustrated scientists
and ine‰cient research. The investigator who tests a valid hypothesis but fails to
obtain signiﬁcant results cannot help but regard nature DEMO untrustworthy or even
hostile. Furthermore, as Overall (1969) has shown, the prevalence of studies deﬁcient
in statistical power is not only wasteful DEMO actually pernicious: it results in a large
proportion of invalid rejections DEMO the null hypothesis among published results.
Because considerations of statistical power are of particular importance in the
design of replication studies, we probed attitudes concerning replication in our
questionnaire.
Suppose one of your doctoral students has DEMO a di‰cult and time-consuming experi-
ment on 40 animals. He has scored and analyzed a large number of variables. His results are
generally inconclusive, but one before-after comparison yields a highly signiﬁcant t ¼ 2:70,DEMO
which is surprising and could be of major theoretical signiﬁcance.
Considering the importance of the result, its surprisal value, and the number of DEMO that
your student has performed, would you recommend that he replicate DEMO study before pub-
lishing? If you recommend replication, how many animals would you urge him to run?
Among the psychologists to whom DEMO put these questions there was overwhelming
sentiment favoring replication: it was DEMO by 66 out of 75 respondents,
probably because they suspected that the single signiﬁcant result was due to chance.
The median recommendation was DEMO the doctoral student to run 20 subjects in a
replication study. It is instructive to consider the likely consequences of this advice. If
the DEMO and the variance in the second sample are actually identical to those in the
ﬁrst sample, then the resulting value of t will be 1.88. Following the reasoning of note
1, the student’s chance of obtaining a signiﬁcant result in the replication is only
slightly above one-half (forreplication sample of 20 would appear reasonable to our respondents, we added thep ¼ :05, one-tail test). Since we had anticipated that a
DEMO question:
Assume that your unhappy student has in fact repeated the initial study with 20 additional
animals, and has obtained an insigniﬁcant result in the same direction, t ¼ 1:24. What would
you recommend now? Check one: [the numbers in parentheses refer to the number DEMO
respondents who checked each answer]
(a) He should pool the results and publish his conclusion as fact. (0)
(b) He should report the results as a tentative ﬁnding. (26)
(c) He should run another group of [median 20] animals. (21)
(d) He should try to ﬁnd an explanation for the di¤erence between the DEMO groups. (30)
Belief in the Law of Small Numbers 197
Note that regardless of DEMO conﬁdence in the original ﬁnding, its credibility is
surely enhanced by DEMO replication. Not only is the experimental e¤ect in the same
direction in the two samples but the magnitude of the e¤ect in the replication DEMO fully
two-thirds of that in the original study. In view of the sample size (20), which our
respondents recommended, the replication was DEMO as successful as one is entitled
to expect. The distribution of responses, however, reﬂects continued skepticism con-
cerning the student’s ﬁnding following the DEMO replication. This unhappy
state of a¤airs is a typical consequence of insu‰cient statistical power.
In contrast to Responses b and c, which can be justiﬁed on some grounds, the
most popular response, Response d , DEMO indefensible. We doubt that the same answer
would have been obtained if the respondents had realized that the di¤erence between
the two studies does DEMO even approach signiﬁcance. (If the variances of the two
samples are DEMO, t for the di¤erence is .53.) In the absence of a statistical test, our
respondents followed the representation hypothesis: as the di¤erence DEMO the two
samples was larger than they expected, they viewed it DEMO worthy of explanation.
However, the attempt to ‘‘ﬁnd an explanation for DEMO di¤erence between the two
groups’’ is in all probability an exercise in explaining noise.
Altogether our respondents evaluated the replication rather harshly. This follows
DEMO the representation hypothesis: if we expect all samples to be very DEMO to one
another, then almost all replications of a valid hypothesis DEMO be statistically sig-
niﬁcant. The harshness of the criterion for successful replication is manifest in the
responses to the following question:
An investigator DEMO reported a result that you consider implausible. He ran 15 subjects, DEMO
reported a signiﬁcant value, t ¼ 2:46. Another investigator has DEMO to duplicate his
procedure, and he obtained a nonsigniﬁcant value of DEMO with the same number of subjects. The
direction was the same in both sets of data.
You are reviewing the literature. What is the DEMO value of t in the second set of data that
you would describe as a failure to replicate?
The majority of our respondents DEMO t ¼ 1: 70 as a failure to replicate. If the
DEMO of two such studies (t ¼ 2:46 and t ¼ DEMO:70) are pooled, the value of t for the
combined data is about 3.00 (assuming equal variances). Thus, we are faced DEMO a
paradoxical state of a¤airs, in which the same data that DEMO increase our con-
ﬁdence in the ﬁnding when viewed as part of the original study, shake our conﬁ-
dence when viewed as an independent study. This double standard is particularly
disturbing since, for many reasons, DEMO are usually considered as indepen-
dent studies, and hypotheses are often DEMO by listing conﬁrming and dis-
conﬁrming reports.
198 Tversky and Kahneman
Contrary to a widespread belief, a case can be made that a replication sample
should often be larger than the DEMO The decision to replicate a once obtained
ﬁnding often expresses a great fondness for that ﬁnding and a desire to see it accepted
by DEMO skeptical community. Since that community unreasonably demands that the
replication be independently signiﬁcant, or at least that it approach signiﬁcance, one
must run DEMO large sample. To illustrate, if the unfortunate doctoral student whose
thesis DEMO discussed earlier assumes the validity of his initial result (t ¼ DEMO:70,
1.70, he should run approximately 50 animals in his DEMO study. With a some-N ¼ 40), and if he is willing to accept a risk of only .10 of obtaining a t lower DEMO
what weaker initial result (t ¼ 2:20, N ¼ 40), the size of the replication sample
required for the same power DEMO to about 75.
That the e¤ects discussed thus far are not limited to hypotheses about means and
variances is demonstrated by the responses to DEMO following question:
You have run a correlational study, scoring 20 DEMO on 100 subjects. Twenty-seven of the
190 correlation coe‰cients are signiﬁcant at the .05 level; and 9 of these are signiﬁcant beyond
the .01 level. The mean absolute level of the signiﬁcant correlations is .31, and the pattern of
results is very reasonable on theoretical grounds. How many DEMO the 27 signiﬁcant correlations
would you expect to be signiﬁcant again, DEMO an exact replication of the study, with N ¼ 40?
DEMO is the mean of the signiﬁcant correlations in the original study. Thus, only aboutWith N ¼ 40, a correlation of about .31 is DEMO for signiﬁcance at the .05 level.
half of the originally signiﬁcant correlations (i.e., 13 or 14) would remain signiﬁcant
with N ¼ 40. In addition, of course, the correlations in the replication are bound DEMO
di¤er from those in the original study. Hence, by regression e¤ects, the initially sig-
niﬁcant coe‰cients are most likely to be reduced. Thus, 8 to 10 repeated signiﬁcant
correlations from the original 27 is probably DEMO generous estimate of what one is
entitled to expect. The median estimate of our respondents is 18. This is more than
the number of DEMO signiﬁcant correlations that will be found if the correlations
are recomputed for 40 subjects randomly selected from the original 100! Apparently,
people expect DEMO than a mere duplication of the original statistics in the replication
sample; they expect a duplication of the signiﬁcance of results, with little DEMO for
sample size. This expectation requires a ludicrous extension of the representation
hypothesis; even the law of small numbers is incapable of generating such a result.
The expectation that patterns of results are replicable almost in DEMO entirety pro-
vides the rationale for a common, though much deplored DEMO The investigator
who computes all correlations between three indexes of anxiety and three indexes of
dependency will often report and interpret with great conﬁdence DEMO single signiﬁcant
correlation obtained. His conﬁdence in the shaky ﬁnding stems from his belief that
the obtained correlation matrix is highly representative and readily DEMO
Belief in the Law of Small Numbers 199
In review, we have seen that the believer in the law of small numbers practices
science DEMO follows:
1. He gambles his research hypotheses on small samples without realizing that the
odds against him are unreasonably high. He overestimates power.
DEMO He has undue conﬁdence in early trends (e.g., the data of the ﬁrst few subjects)
and in the stability of observed patterns (e.g., the number and identity of signiﬁcant
results). He overestimates signiﬁcance.
3. In evaluating replications, his or others’, he has unreasonably high DEMO
about the replicability of signiﬁcant results. He underestimates the breadth of conﬁ-
dence intervals.
4. He rarely attributes a deviation of results from expectations DEMO sampling variabil-
ity, because he ﬁnds a causal ‘‘explanation’’ for any DEMO Thus, he has little
opportunity to recognize sampling variation in action. DEMO belief in the law of small
numbers, therefore, will forever remain intact.
Our questionnaire elicited considerable evidence for the prevalence of the belief DEMO
the law of small numbers.2 Our typical respondent is a believer, DEMO of the
group to which he belongs. There were practically no di¤erences between the median
responses of audiences at a mathematical psychology meeting and DEMO a general ses-
sion of the American Psychological Association convention, although DEMO make no
claims for the representativeness of either sample. Apparently, acquaintance DEMO
formal logic and with probability theory does not extinguish erroneous intuitions.
What, then, can be done? Can the belief in the law of small numbers be abolished or
at least controlled?
Research experience is DEMO to help much, because sampling variation is all too
easily ‘‘explained.’’ DEMO experiences are those that provide neither motive nor
opportunity for spurious explanation. Thus, a student in a statistics course may draw
repeated samples of given size from a population, and learn the e¤ect of sample size
on sampling variability from personal observation. We are far from certain, however,
that expectations can be corrected in this manner, since related biases, such as the
gambler’s fallacy, survive considerable contradictory evidence.
Even if DEMO bias cannot be unlearned, students can learn to recognize its existence
DEMO take the necessary precautions. Since the teaching of statistics is not short on
admonitions, a warning about biased statistical intuitions may not be out of place.
The obvious precaution is computation. The believer in the law DEMO small numbers has
incorrect intuitions about signiﬁcance level, power, and conﬁdence intervals. Signiﬁ-
cance levels are usually computed and reported, but power and conﬁdence limits are
not. Perhaps they should be.
200 Tversky and Kahneman
Explicit computation of power, relative to some reasonable hypothesis, for
instance, J. Cohen’s (1962, 1969) small, large, and medium e¤ects, should surely be
carried out before any study is done. Such computations will often lead to the real-
ization that there DEMO simply no point in running the study unless, for example, sample
size is multiplied by four. We refuse to believe that a serious DEMO will know-
ingly accept a .50 risk of failing to conﬁrm a valid research hypothesis. In addition,
computations of power are essential to DEMO interpretation of negative results, that is,
failures to reject the DEMO hypothesis. Because readers’ intuitive estimates of power are
likely to be wrong, the publication of computed values does not appear to be a waste
of either readers’ time or journal space.
In the early psychological literature, the convention prevailed of reporting, for
example, a sample mean as DEMO PE, where PE is the probable error (i.e., the 50%
DEMO interval around the mean). This convention was later abandoned in favor
of the hypothesis-testing formulation. A conﬁdence interval, however, provides a
useful DEMO of sampling variability, and it is precisely this variability that we DEMO to
underestimate. The emphasis on signiﬁcance levels tends to obscure a fundamental
distinction between the size of an e¤ect and its statistical signiﬁcance. Regardless DEMO
sample size, the size of an e¤ect in one study is DEMO reasonable estimate of the size of
the e¤ect in replication. In contrast, the estimated signiﬁcance level in a replication
depends critically on sample size. Unrealistic expectations concerning the repli-
cability of signiﬁcance levels may be corrected DEMO the distinction between size and
signiﬁcance is clariﬁed, and if the DEMO size of observed e¤ects is routinely
reported. From this point of view, at least, the acceptance of the hypothesis-testing
model has not been DEMO unmixed blessing for psychology.
The true believer in the law of small numbers commits his multitude of sins against
the logic of statistical inference DEMO good faith. The representation hypothesis describes
a cognitive or perceptual bias, DEMO operates regardless of motivational factors.
Thus, while the hasty rejection of DEMO null hypothesis is gratifying, the rejection of a
cherished hypothesis is DEMO, yet the true believer is subject to both. His intu-
itive DEMO are governed by a consistent misperception of the world rather
than by opportunistic wishful thinking. Given some editorial prodding, he may be
willing to regard his statistical intuitions with proper suspicion and replace impres-
sion formation DEMO computation whenever possible.
Notes
1. The required estimate can be interpreted in several ways. One possible approach is to follow common
research practice, where a value obtained in one study is taken to deﬁne a plausible DEMO to the null
Belief in the Law of Small Numbers 201
hypothesis. The probability requested DEMO the question can then be interpreted as the power of the second
test (i.e., the probability of obtaining a signiﬁcant result in the DEMO sample) against the alternative
hypothesis deﬁned by the result of the DEMO sample. In the special case of a test of a mean with known
variance, one would compute the power of the test against the hypothesis that the population mean equals
the mean of the ﬁrst sample. DEMO the size of the second sample is half that of the ﬁrst, the computed
probability of obtaining z b1:645 is only .473. A theoretically more justiﬁable approach is to interpret the
requested probability within a DEMO framework and compute it relative to some appropriately selected
prior distribution. Assuming a uniform prior, the desired posterior probability is .478. Clearly, if DEMO prior
distribution favors the null hypothesis, as is often the case, the posterior probability will be even smaller.
2. W. Edwards (1968, DEMO) has argued that people fail to extract su‰cient information or certainty DEMO
probabilistic data; he called this failure conservatism. Our respondents can hardly DEMO described as conser-
vative. Rather, in accord with the representation hypothesis, they tend to extract more certainty from the
data than the data, in fact, contain.
References
Cohen, J. The statistical power of abnormal-social DEMO research. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 1962, 65, 145–153.
DEMO, J. Statistical power analysis in the behavioral sciences. New York: Academic Press, 1969.
Edwards, W. Conservatism in human information processing. In B. DEMO (Ed.), Formal representa-
tion of human judgment. New York: Wiley, 1968.
Estes, W. K. Probability learning. In A. W. Melton (Ed.), Categories of human learning. New York: Aca-
demic Press, 1964.
DEMO, J. E. Classical statistical hypothesis testing within the context of Bayesian DEMO Psychological
Bulletin, 1969, 71, 285–292.
Tune, G. S. Response preferences: A review of some relevant literature. Psychological Bulletin, 1964, 61,
286–302.

8 Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman
Many decisions are based on beliefs concerning the likelihood of uncertain events
DEMO as the outcome of an election, the guilt of a defendant, or the future value of the
dollar. These beliefs are usually expressed DEMO statements such as ‘‘I think that ...,’’
‘‘chances are . . . ,’’ ‘‘It is unlikely that . . . ,’’ etc. DEMO, beliefs concerning
uncertain events are expressed in numerical form as odds DEMO subjective probabilities.
What determines such beliefs? How do people assess the DEMO of an uncertain
event or the value of an uncertain quantity? DEMO theme of the present paper is that
people rely on a limited number of heuristic principles which reduce the complex
tasks of assessing probabilities DEMO predicting values to simpler judgmental oper-
ations. In general, these heuristics DEMO quite useful, but sometimes they lead to severe
and systematic errors.
DEMO subjective assessment of probability resembles the subjective assessment of
physical quantities such as distance or size. These judgments are all based on data of
DEMO validity, which are processed according to heuristic rules. For example, the
apparent distance of an object is determined in part by its clarity. DEMO more sharply
the object is seen, the closer it appears to DEMO This rule has some validity, because in
any given scene the DEMO distant objects are seen less sharply than nearer objects.
However, the DEMO on this rule leads to systematic errors in the estimation of dis-
tance. Speciﬁcally, distances are often overestimated when visibility is poor because
the contours of objects are blurred. On the other hand, distances are often under-
estimated when visibility is good because the objects are sharply seen. DEMO, the reli-
ance on blur as a cue leads to characteristic DEMO in the judgment of distance.
Systematic errors which are associated with heuristic rules are also common in the
intuitive judgment of probability. The following DEMO describe three heuristics
that are employed to assess probabilities and to predict values. Biases to which these
heuristics lead are enumerated and the applied DEMO theoretical implications of these
observations are discussed.
Representativeness
Many of the probabilistic questions with which people are concerned belong to one
of the following DEMO: What is the probability that object A belongs to class B ? What
is the probability that event A originates from process B ? What is the probability
that process A will generate event B ? DEMO answering such questions people typically
rely on the representativeness heuristic, in DEMO probabilities are evaluated by the
204 Tversky and Kahneman
degree to which A is representative of B , i.e., by the degree of similarity between
them. For example, when A is highly representative of B, the probability that A
originates from B is judged to be high. On the other hand, if A is not similar to B, the
probability that A originates from B is judged to be low.
For an illustration of judgment by representativeness, consider an individual who
has been described by a former neighbor as DEMO: ‘‘Steve is very shy and with-
drawn, invariably helpful, but DEMO little interest in people, or in the world of reality.
A DEMO and tidy soul, he has a need for order and structure, and a passion for
detail.’’ How do people assess the probability that DEMO is engaged in each of several
occupations (e.g., farmer, salesman, airline pilot, librarian, physician)? How do peo-
ple order these DEMO from most to least likely? In the representativeness heu-
ristic, the probability that Steve is a librarian, for example, is assessed by DEMO degree
to which he is representative or similar to the stereotype of a librarian. Indeed,
research with problems of this type has shown DEMO people order the occupations by
probability and by similarity in exactly the same way.1 As will be shown below, this
approach to the judgment of probability leads to serious errors because similarity, or
representativeness, is DEMO inﬂuenced by several factors which should a¤ect judgments
of probability.
Insensitivity to Prior Probability of Outcomes
One of the factors that have no e¤ect DEMO representativeness but should have a major
e¤ect on probability is the prior probability, or base-rate frequency, of the outcomes.
In the case of DEMO, for example, the fact that there are many more farmers than
librarians in the population should enter into any reasonable estimate of the DEMO
bility that Steve is a librarian rather than a farmer. Considerations of base-rate fre-
quency, however, do not a¤ect the similarity of Steve DEMO the stereotypes of librarians
and farmers. If people evaluate probability by representativeness, therefore, prior
probabilities will be neglected. This hypothesis was tested in DEMO experiment where
prior probabilities were explicitly manipulated.1 Subjects were shown brief personal-
ity descriptions of several individuals, allegedly sampled at random from a group of
100 professionals—engineers and lawyers. The subjects were asked to assess, for each
description, the probability that it belonged to an engineer rather than to a lawyer. In
one experimental condition, subjects were told that the group from which the
descriptions had been drawn consisted of 70 engineers DEMO 30 lawyers. In another
condition, subjects were told that the group DEMO of 30 engineers and 70 lawyers.
The odds that any particular description belongs to an engineer rather than to a
lawyer should be higher DEMO the ﬁrst condition, where there is a majority of engineers,
DEMO in the second condition, where there is a majority of lawyers. DEMO, it
Judgment under Uncertainty 205
can be shown by applying Bayes’ rule that DEMO ratio of these odds should be
ð:7=:3Þ2 ¼ 5: DEMO for each description. In a sharp violation of Bayes’ rule, the DEMO
in the two conditions produced essentially the same probability judgments. Appar-
ently, subjects evaluated the likelihood that a particular description belonged to an
engineer rather than to a lawyer by the degree to which this description DEMO repre-
sentative of the two stereotypes, with little or no regard DEMO the prior probabilities of
the categories.
The subjects correctly utilized prior probabilities when they had no other infor-
mation. In the absence of a DEMO sketch they judged the probability that an
unknown individual is an engineer to be .7 and .3 respectively, in the two base-rate
conditions. However, prior probabilities were e¤ectively ignored when a description
was introduced, even DEMO this description was totally uninformative. The responses
to the following description illustrate this phenomenon:
Dick is a 30-year old man. He is married DEMO no children. A man of high ability and high
motivation, he DEMO to be quite successful in his ﬁeld. He is well liked by his colleagues.
This description was intended to convey no information relevant to DEMO question of
whether Dick is an engineer or a lawyer. Consequently, DEMO probability that Dick is
an engineer should equal the proportion of engineers in the group, as if no descrip-
tion had been given. The subjects, however, judged the probability of Dick being an
engineer to DEMO .5 regardless of whether the stated proportion of engineers in the
group was .7 or .3. Evidently, people respond di¤erently when given no evidence and
when given worthless evidence. When no speciﬁc evidence is given—prior proba-
DEMO are properly utilized; when worthless evidence is given—prior probabilities
are ignored.1
DEMO to Sample Size
To evaluate the probability of obtaining a particular result in a sample drawn from a
speciﬁed population, people typically apply the representativeness heuristic. That is,
they assess the likelihood of a sample DEMO (e.g., that the average height in a random
sample of ten men will be 600 00 ) by the similarity of this result DEMO the corresponding
parameter (i.e., to the average height in the population of men). The similarity of
a sample statistic to a population DEMO does not depend on the size of the
sample. Consequently, if DEMO are assessed by representativeness, then the
judged probability of a sample DEMO will be essentially independent of sample size.
Indeed, when subjects assessed DEMO distributions of average height for samples of
various sizes, they produced DEMO distributions. For example, the probability of
obtaining an average height greater DEMO 600 00 was assigned the same value for sam-
206 Tversky and Kahneman
ples of 1000, 100, and 10 men.2 DEMO, subjects failed to appreciate the role of
sample size even when DEMO was emphasized in the formulation of the problem. Con-
sider the following question:
A certain town is served by two hospitals. In the DEMO hospital about 45 babies are born each
day, and in the DEMO hospital about 15 babies are born each day. As you know, DEMO 50%
of all babies are boys. The exact percentage of baby boys, however, varies from day to day.
Sometimes it may be higher DEMO 50%, sometimes lower.
For a period of one year, each hospital recorded the days on which more than 60% of the
babies born DEMO boys. Which hospital do you think recorded more such days?
0 The larger hospital (21)
0 The smaller hospital (21)
DEMO About the same (i.e., within 5% of each other) (53).
The values in parentheses are the number of undergraduate students who DEMO each
answer.
Most subjects judged the probability of obtaining more than 60% boys to be the
same in the small and in the large DEMO, presumably because these events are
described by the same statistic and DEMO therefore equally representative of the general
population. In contrast, sampling theory DEMO that the expected number of days
on which more than 60% of the babies are boys is much greater in the small
hospital than DEMO the large one, because a large sample is less likely to DEMO from
50%. This fundamental notion of statistics is evidently not part of people’s repertoire
of intuitions.
A similar insensitivity to sample size has been DEMO in judgments of posterior
probability, i.e., of the probability that a sample has been drawn from one popula-
tion rather than from another. DEMO the following example:
Imagine an urn ﬁlled with balls, of DEMO 2 are of one color and 1 of another. One individual
3 3
has drawn 5 balls from the urn, and found that 4 were red and 1 was white. Another indi-
vidual has drawn 20 DEMO and found that 12 were red and 8 were white. Which of the two
individuals should feel more conﬁdent that the urn contains
than DEMO opposite? What odds should each individual give?
2 red balls DEMO 1 white balls, rather
3 3
In this problem, the correct posterior odds are 8 to 1 for the 4: 1 sample and 16 to
1 for the 12: 8 sample, assuming equal prior DEMO However, most people feel
that the ﬁrst sample provides much stronger DEMO for the hypothesis that the urn
is predominantly red, because the DEMO of red balls is larger in the ﬁrst than in
the second sample. Here again, intuitive judgments are dominated by the sample
proportion and are essentially una¤ected by the size of the sample, which plays a
crucial role in the determination of the actual posterior odds.2 In addition, intuitive
Judgment under Uncertainty 207
estimates of posterior odds are far less extreme DEMO the correct values. The under-
estimation of the impact of evidence has been observed repeatedly in problems of this
type.3,4 It has been DEMO ‘‘conservatism.’’
Misconceptions of Chance
People expect that a sequence of events generated by a random process will represent
the essential characteristics of that process DEMO when the sequence is short. In con-
sidering tosses of a coin, for example, people regard the sequence HTHTTH to be
more likely DEMO the sequence HHHTTT, which does not appear random, and also
more likely than the sequence HHHHTH, which does not represent the fairness of
the coin.2 Thus, people expect that the essential characteristics of the process will be
represented, not only globally in the entire sequence, but DEMO locally in each of its
parts. A locally representative sequence, however, deviates systematically from
chance expectation: it contains too many alternations and too few runs. Another
consequence of the belief in local representativeness is the DEMO gambler’s fal-
lacy. After observing a long run of red on the roulette wheel, for example, most
people erroneously believe that black is DEMO due, presumably because the occurrence
of black will result in a DEMO representative sequence than the occurrence of an
additional red. Chance is commonly viewed as a self-correcting process where a
deviation in one direction induces DEMO deviation in the opposite direction to restore the
equilibrium. In fact, DEMO are not ‘‘corrected’’ as a chance process unfolds, they
are merely DEMO
Misconceptions of chance are not limited to naive subjects. A study of the statisti-
cal intuitions of experienced research psychologists5 revealed a lingering belief DEMO
what may be called the ‘‘law of small numbers’’ according to which even small sam-
ples are highly representative of the populations from which DEMO are drawn. The
responses of these investigators reﬂected the expectation that a valid hypothesis
about a population will be represented by a statistically signiﬁcant DEMO in a
sample—with little regard for its size. As a consequence, DEMO researchers put too
much faith in the results of small samples, DEMO grossly overestimated the replicability
of such results. In the actual conduct of research, this bias leads to the selection of
samples of inadequate size and to over-interpretation of ﬁndings.
Insensitivity to Predictability
People are sometimes called DEMO to make numerical predictions, e.g., of the future
value of a stock, the demand for a commodity, or the outcome of a DEMO game.
Such predictions are often made by representativeness. For example, suppose DEMO is
given a description of a company, and is asked to DEMO its future proﬁt. If the
208 Tversky and Kahneman
description of the company is very favorable, a very high proﬁt will appear most
representative of that description; if the description is mediocre, a mediocre perfor-
mance will appear most representative, DEMO Now, the degree of favorableness of the
description is una¤ected by DEMO reliability of that description or by the degree to
which it permits accurate prediction. Hence, if people predict solely in terms of the
favorableness of the description, their predictions will be insensitive to the reliability
of the evidence and to the expected accuracy of the prediction.
This mode DEMO judgment violates the normative statistical theory where the
extremeness and the range of predictions are controlled by considerations of pre-
dictability. When predictability is DEMO, the same prediction should be made in all
cases. For example, if the descriptions of companies provide no information relevant
to proﬁt, then the same value (e.g., average proﬁt) should be predicted for all com-
panies. If predictability is perfect, of course, the values predicted DEMO match the
actual values, and hence the range of predictions will DEMO the range of outcomes. In
general, the higher the predictability, the wider the range of predicted values.
Several studies of numerical prediction have DEMO that intuitive pre-
dictions violate this rule, and that subjects show DEMO or no regard for considerations
of predictability.1 In one of these studies, subjects were presented with several
paragraphs, each describing the performance of DEMO student-teacher during a particular
practice lesson. Some subjects were asked to evaluate the quality of the lesson
described in the paragraph in percentile scores, relative to a speciﬁed population.
Other subjects were asked to predict, also in percentile scores, the standing of each
student-teacher ﬁve years after the practice lesson. The judgments made under the
two conditions were identical. That DEMO, the prediction of a remote criterion (success of
a teacher after ﬁve years) was identical to the evaluation of the information on which
the prediction was based (the quality of the practice lesson). The students who made
these predictions were undoubtedly aware of the limited predictability DEMO teaching
competence on the basis of a single trial lesson ﬁve years earlier. Nevertheless, their
predictions were as extreme as their evaluations.
The Illusion of Validity
As we have seen, people often predict by selecting the outcome (e.g., an occupation)
that is most representative of the DEMO (e.g., the description of a person). The conﬁ-
dence they have in their prediction depends primarily on the degree of representa-
tiveness (i.e., on the quality of the match between the selected outcome and the
input) with little or no regard for the factors that limit predictive accuracy. Thus,
people express great conﬁdence in the prediction that DEMO person is a librarian when
given a description of his personality which matches the stereotype of librarians, even
Judgment under Uncertainty 209
if the description is scanty, unreliable or outdated. The unwarranted conﬁdence
which is produced by a good ﬁt between the DEMO outcome and the input infor-
mation may be called the illusion of validity. This illusion persists even when the
judge is aware of the DEMO that limit the accuracy of his predictions. It is a common
observation that psychologists who conduct selection interviews often experience
considerable conﬁdence in their DEMO, even when they know of the vast litera-
ture that shows DEMO interviews to be highly fallible. The continued reliance on
the clinical interview for selection, despite repeated demonstrations of its inadequacy,
amply attests to the strength of this e¤ect.
The internal consistency of a pattern of DEMO, e.g., a proﬁle of test scores, is a
major determinant DEMO one’s conﬁdence in predictions based on these inputs. Thus,
people express more conﬁdence in predicting the ﬁnal grade-point average of a stu-
dent DEMO ﬁrst-year record consists entirely of B ’s, than in predicting the DEMO
point average of a student whose ﬁrst-year record includes many A’s and C ’s. Highly
consistent patterns are most often observed when the input DEMO are highly
redundant or correlated. Hence, people tend to have great DEMO in predictions
based on redundant input variables. However, an elementary result DEMO the statistics of
correlation asserts that, given input variables of stated DEMO, a prediction based on
several such inputs can achieve higher accuracy DEMO they are independent of each
other than when they are redundant or correlated. Thus, redundancy among inputs
decreases accuracy even as it increases conﬁdence, and people are often conﬁdent in
predictions that are quite likely to be o¤ the mark.1
Misconceptions of Regression
Suppose a large group of DEMO have been examined on two equivalent versions of
an aptitude test. If one selects ten children from among those who did best on one DEMO
the two versions, he will ﬁnd their performance on the second DEMO to be some-
what disappointing, on the average. Conversely, if one selects ten children from
among those who did worst on one version, they will be found, on the average, to do
somewhat better DEMO the other version. More generally, consider two variables X and
Y DEMO have the same distribution. If one selects individuals whose average score
deviates from the mean of X by k units then, by and large, their average deviation
from the mean of Y will be less than k . These observations illustrate a general phe-
nomenon known as regression DEMO the mean, which was ﬁrst documented by
Galton over one hundred DEMO ago.
In the normal course of life, we encounter many instances DEMO regression toward the
mean, e.g., in the comparison of the height of fathers and sons, of the intelligence of
husbands and wives, DEMO of the performance of individuals on consecutive examina-
210 Tversky and Kahneman
tions. Nevertheless, people do not develop correct intuitions about this phenomenon.
First, they do not expect regression in many contexts where it is bound to occur.
Second, when they recognize the occurrence of regression, they often invent spurious
causal explanations for it.1 We suggest that the phenomenon of regression remains
elusive because it is incompatible with DEMO belief that the predicted outcome should
be maximally representative of the input, and hence that the value of the outcome
variable should be as extreme as the value of the input variable.
The failure to recognize DEMO import of regression can have pernicious consequences
as illustrated by the following observation.1 In a discussion of ﬂight training, experi-
enced instructors noted that praise for an exceptionally smooth landing is typically
followed by a poorer DEMO on the next try, while harsh criticism after a rough
landing DEMO usually followed by an improvement on the next try. The instructors con-
cluded that verbal rewards are detrimental to learning while verbal punishments are
DEMO to accepted psychological doctrine. This conclusion is unwar-
ranted because of the presence of regression toward the mean. As in other cases of
repeated DEMO, an improvement will usually follow a poor performance and a
deterioration DEMO usually follow an outstanding performance—even if the instructor
does not respond to the trainee’s achievement on the ﬁrst attempt. Because the
instructors had praised DEMO trainees after good landings and admonished then after
poor ones, they DEMO the erroneous and potentially harmful conclusion that pun-
ishment is more e¤ective than reward.
Thus, the failure to understand the e¤ect of regression leads one to overestimate
the e¤ectiveness of punishment and to underestimate the e¤ectiveness DEMO reward. In
social interaction as well as in intentional training, rewards DEMO typically administered
when performance is good and punishments are typically administered when perfor-
mance is poor. By regression alone, therefore, behavior is most DEMO to improve
after punishment and most likely to deteriorate after reward. Consequently, the
human condition is such that, by chance alone, one is most often rewarded for pun-
ishing others and most often punished for DEMO them. People are generally not
aware of this contingency. In fact, DEMO elusive role of regression in determining the
apparent consequences of reward and punishment seems to have escaped the notice
of students of this area.
DEMO
There are situations in which people assess the frequency of a class or the probability
of an event by the ease with which instances DEMO occurrences can be brought to mind.
For example, one may assess DEMO risk of heart attack among middle aged people by
Judgment under Uncertainty 211
recalling such occurrences among one’s acquaintances. Similarly, one may evaluate
the probability that a given business venture will fail by DEMO various di‰culties
which it could encounter. This judgmental heuristic is called availability. Availability
is a useful clue for assessing frequency or probability because, in general, instances of
large classes are recalled better and faster than instances of less frequent classes.
However, availability is also a¤ected by other factors besides frequency and proba-
bility. Consequently, the reliance on availability leads to predictable biases, some of
which are illustrated below.
Biases Due to the Retrievability of Instances
When the frequency of a class is judged by DEMO availability of its instances, a class
whose instances are easily retrieved DEMO appear more numerous than a class of equal
frequency whose instances are less retrievable. In an elementary demonstration of
this e¤ect, subjects heard a list of well-known personalities of both sexes and were
subsequently asked to DEMO whether the list contained more names of men than of
women. Di¤erent lists were presented to di¤erent groups of subjects. In some of the
DEMO the men were relatively more famous than the women, and in DEMO the women
were relatively more famous than the men. In each of the lists, the subjects erro-
neously judged the class consisting of the more famous personalities to be the more
numerous.6
In addition to familiarity, there are other factors (e.g., salience) which a¤ect the
retrievability of instances. For example, the impact of seeing a house burning, on DEMO
subjective probability of such accidents is probably greater than the impact of read-
ing about a ﬁre in the local paper. Furthermore, recent occurrences are likely to be
relatively more available than earlier occurrences. It is DEMO common experience that the
subjective probability of tra‰c accidents rises temporarily when one sees a car over-
turned by the side of the road.
DEMO Due to the E¤ectiveness of a Search Set
Suppose one samples a word (of three letters or more) at random from an English
DEMO Is it more likely that the word starts with r or that r is its third letter? People
approach this problem by recalling words that begin with r (e.g., road) and words
that have r in the third position (e.g., car) and assess relative frequency by the ease
with which words of the two types come to mind. DEMO it is much easier to search
for words by their ﬁrst than by their third letter, most people judge words that begin
with a given consonant to be more numerous than words in which the same DEMO
nant appears in the third position. They do so even for consonants (e.g., r or k)that
are actually more frequent in the DEMO position than in the ﬁrst.6
212 Tversky and Kahneman
Di¤erent tasks elicit di¤erent search sets. For example, suppose you are asked to
rate the frequency with which abstract words (e.g., thought, love) and concrete words
(e.g., door, water) appear in written English. A natural way to answer this question is
DEMO search for contexts in which the word could appear. It seems easier to think of
contexts in which an abstract concept is mentioned (e.g., ‘‘love’’ in love stories) than
to think of contexts in which DEMO concrete word (e.g., ‘‘door’’) is mentioned. If the fre-
quency DEMO words is judged by the availability of the contexts in which they appear,
abstract words will be judged as relatively more numerous than DEMO words. This
bias has been observed in a recent study7 which showed that the judged frequency of
occurrence of abstract words was much higher DEMO that of concrete words of the
same objective frequency. Abstract words were also judged to appear in a much
greater variety of contexts than DEMO words.
Biases of Imaginability
Sometimes, one has to assess the frequency DEMO a class whose instances are not stored
in memory but can be generated according to a given rule. In such situations, one
typically generates several instances, and evaluates frequency or probability by the
ease with the relevant instances can be constructed. However, the ease of construct-
ing instances does not always reﬂect their actual frequency, and this mode of evalu-
ation is prone to biases. To illustrate, consider a group of 10 people who form
committees of k members, 2 ak a 8. How many di¤erent committees of k members
can be formed? The correct answer to this problem is given by the binomial coe‰-
10k which reaches DEMO maximum of 252 for k ¼ 5. Clearly, the number of DEMO
cientmittees of k members equals the number of committees of (10 DEMO ) members because
any committee of k members deﬁnes a unique group of (10 k ) non-members.
One way to answer this question without computation is to mentally construct
committees of k members, and to evaluate their number by the ease with which they
come to mind. Committees DEMO few members, say 2, are more available that commit-
tees of many members, say 8. The simplest scheme for the construction of commit-
tees is a partition of the group into disjoint sets. One readily DEMO that it is easy to
construct ﬁve disjoint committees of 2 members, while it is impossible to generate
even two disjoint committees of 8 members. Consequently, if frequency is assessed by
imaginability, or by availability DEMO construction, the small committees will appear
more numerous than larger committees, in contrast to the correct symmetric bell-
shaped function. Indeed, when naive subjects were asked to estimate the number of
distinct committees of various DEMO, their estimates were a decreasing monotonic
function of committee size.6 For DEMO, the median estimate of the number of
committees of 2 members DEMO 70, while the estimate for committees of 8 members
was 20 (the correct answer is 45 in both cases).
Judgment under Uncertainty 213
Imaginability plays an important role in the evaluation DEMO probabilities in real-life
situations. The risk involved in an adventurous expedition, DEMO example, is evaluated
by imagining contingencies with which the expedition is DEMO equipped to cope. If
many such di‰culties are vividly portrayed, the DEMO can be made to appear
exceedingly dangerous, although the ease with DEMO disasters are imagined need not
reﬂect their actual likelihood. Conversely, the DEMO involved in an undertaking may be
grossly underestimated if some possible dangers are either di‰cult to conceive, or
simply do not come to mind.
Illusory Correlation
Chapman and Chapman8 have described an interesting bias in the DEMO of the
frequency with which two events co-occur. They presented naive judges with infor-
mation concerning several hypothetical mental patients. The data for each DEMO
consisted of a clinical diagnosis and a drawing of a person made by the patient. Later
the judges estimated the frequency with which each DEMO (e.g., paranoia or sus-
piciousness) had been accompanied by various DEMO of the drawing (e.g., peculiar
eyes). The subjects markedly overestimated the frequency of co-occurrence of natural
associates, such as suspiciousness and peculiar eyes. This e¤ect was labeled illusory
correlation. In their erroneous judgments of DEMO data to which they had been
exposed, naive subjects ‘‘rediscovered’’ much DEMO the common but unfounded clinical
lore concerning the interpretation of the draw-a-person test. The illusory correlation
e¤ect was extremely resistant to contradictory data. It DEMO even when the cor-
relation between symptom and diagnosis was actually negative, and it prevented the
judges from detecting relationships that were in fact present.
Availability provides a natural account for the illusory-correlation e¤ect. The
judgment DEMO how frequently two events co-occur could be based on the strength of
the associative bond between them. When the association is strong, one is likely to
conclude that the events have been frequently paired. Consequently, strong asso-
ciates will be judged to have occurred frequently together. According to DEMO view, the
illusory correlation between suspiciousness and peculiar drawing of the DEMO, for
example, is due to the fact that suspiciousness is more readily associated with the
eyes than with any other part of the DEMO
Life-long experience has taught us that, in general, instances of large classes are
recalled better and faster than instances of less frequent classes; that likely occur-
rences are easier to imagine than unlikely ones; and that the associative connections
between events are strengthened when the events frequently DEMO As a conse-
quence, man has at his disposal a procedure (i.e., the availability heuristic) for esti-
mating the numerosity of a DEMO, the likelihood of an event or the frequency of
co-ocurrences, by the ease with which the relevant mental operations of retrieval,
214 Tversky and Kahneman
construction, or association can be performed. However, DEMO the preceding examples
have demonstrated, this valuable estimation procedure is subject DEMO systematic errors.
Adjustment and Anchoring
In many situations, people make estimates DEMO starting from an initial value which
is adjusted to yield the ﬁnal answer. The initial value, or starting point, may be
suggested by DEMO formulation of the problem, or else it may be the result DEMO a
partial computation. Whatever the source of the initial value, adjustments DEMO typi-
cally insu‰cient.4 That is, di¤erent starting prints yield di¤erent estimates, which are
biased towards the initial values. We call this phenomenon anchoring.
DEMO Adjustment
In a demonstration of the anchoring e¤ect, subjects were asked DEMO estimate various
quantities, stated in percentages (e.g., the percentage of DEMO countries in the
U.N.). For each question a starting value between 0 and 100 was determined by
spinning a wheel of fortune in DEMO subjects’ presence. The subjects were instructed to
indicate whether the given (DEMO) starting value was too high or too low, and
then to reach their estimate by moving upward or downward from that value. Dif-
DEMO groups were given di¤erent starting values for each problem. These arbitrary
values had a marked e¤ect on the estimates. For example, the median estimates of
the percentage of African countries in the U.N. were 25% and DEMO, respectively, for
groups which received 10% and 65% as starting points. Payo¤s for accuracy did not
reduce the anchoring e¤ect.
Anchoring occurs not DEMO when the starting point is given to the subject but also
when the subject bases his estimate on the result of some incomplete computation. DEMO
study of intuitive numerical estimation illustrates this e¤ect. Two groups of high-
school students estimated, within 5 seconds, a numerical expression that was DEMO
on the blackboard. One group estimated the product 8 7 6 5 4 3 2  1,
while another group estimated the product DEMO 2 3 4 5 6 7  8. To rapidly
answer such questions people may perform a few steps of computation and estimate
the DEMO by extrapolation or adjustment. Because adjustments are typically insuf-
ﬁcient, this DEMO should lead to underestimation. Furthermore, because the
result of the ﬁrst DEMO steps of multiplication (performed from left to right) is higher in
the descending sequence than in the ascending sequence, the former expression
should be judged larger than the latter. Both predictions were conﬁrmed. The median
DEMO for the ascending sequence was 512, while the median estimate for DEMO
descending sequence was 2,250. The correct answer is 40,320.
Judgment under Uncertainty 215
Biases in the Evaluation of Conjunctive and Disjunctive DEMO
In a recent study,9 subjects were given the opportunity to bet on one of two events.
Three types of events were used; (DEMO) simple events, e.g., drawing a red marble from a
bag DEMO 50% red marbles and 50% white marbles; (ii) conjunctive events, e.g.,
drawing a red marble 7 times in succession, with replacement, from a bag containing
90% red marbles and 10% white marbles; (iii) disjunctive events, e.g., drawing a red
marble at least once in 7 successive tries, with replacement, from a bag containing
10% DEMO marbles and 90% white marbles. In this problem, a signiﬁcant majority DEMO
subjects preferred to bet on the conjunctive event (the probability of DEMO is .48)
rather than on the simple event, the probability DEMO which is .50. Subjects also pre-
ferred to bet on the simple event rather than on the disjunctive events which has a
probability of DEMO Thus, most subjects bet on the less likely event in both DEMO
sons. This pattern of choices illustrates a general ﬁnding. Studies of choice among
gambles and of judgments of probability indicate that people tend to DEMO
the probability of conjunctive events10 and to underestimate the probability of dis-
junctive events. These biases are readily explained as e¤ects of anchoring. The DEMO
probability of the elementary event (e.g., of success at any one stage) provides a
natural starting point for the estimation of the probabilities of both conjunctive and
disjunctive events. Since adjustment from the starting point DEMO typically insu‰cient,
the ﬁnal estimates remain too close to the probabilities of the elementary events in
both cases. Note that the overall probability DEMO a conjunctive event is lower than the
probability of each elementary event, whereas the overall probability of a disjunctive
event is higher than the probability of each elementary event. As a consequence of
anchoring, the overall probability will be overestimated in conjunctive problems and
underestimated in disjunctive problems.
DEMO in the evaluation of compound events are particularly signiﬁcant in the
context of planning. The successful completion of an undertaking (e.g., the develop-
DEMO of a new product) typically has a conjunctive character: for the undertaking to
succeed each of a series of events must occur. Even DEMO each of these events is very
likely, the overall probability of DEMO can be quite low if the number of events is
large. The general tendency to overestimate the probability of conjunctive events
leads to unwarranted DEMO in the evaluation of the likelihood that a plan will
succeed, DEMO that a project will be completed on time. Conversely, disjunctive struc-
DEMO are typically encountered in the evaluation of risks. A complex system (DEMO, a
nuclear reactor or a human body) will malfunction if any of its essential components
fails. Even when the likelihood of failure in DEMO component is slight, the probability
of an overall failure can be DEMO if many components are involved. Because of
anchoring, people will tend DEMO underestimate the probabilities of failure in complex
216 Tversky and Kahneman
systems. Thus, the direction of the anchoring bias can sometimes be inferred from
the structure of the event. The chain-like DEMO of conjunctions leads to over-
estimation, the funnel-like structure of disjunctions DEMO to underestimation.
Anchoring in the Assessment of Subjective Probability Distributions
For many purposes (e.g., the calculation of posterior probabilities, decision-
theoretical analyses) DEMO person is required to express his beliefs about a quantity (e.g.,DEMO
the value of the Dow-Jones on a particular day) in the DEMO of a probability distri-
bution. Such a distribution is usually constructed by asking the person to select
values of the quantity that correspond to DEMO percentiles of his subjective prob-
ability distribution. For example, the judge DEMO be asked to select a number X90 such
that his subjective probability that this number will be higher than the value of the
Dow-Jones DEMO .90. That is, he should select X90 so that he is DEMO willing to accept 9 to
1 odds that the Dow-Jones will not exceed X90 . A subjective probability distribution
for the value of the DEMO can be constructed from several such judgments cor-
responding to di¤erent percentiles (e.g., X10, X25, X75, X99 , etc.).
By collecting subjective probability distributions for many di¤erent quantities, it is
possible to test the judge for proper calibration. A judge is properly (or externally)
calibrated in a set of problems if exactly P% of the true DEMO of the assessed quan-
tities fall below his stated values of XP . For example, the true values should fall
below X01 for 1% of the quantities and above X99 for 1% of the quantities. Thus, the
true values should fall in the conﬁdence interval between X01 and DEMO on 98% of the
problems.
Several investigators (see notes 11, 12, 13) have obtained probability distributions
for many quantities from a large DEMO of judges. These distributions indicated
large and systematic departures from proper calibration. In most studies, the actual
values of the assessed quantities are either smaller than X01 or greater than X99 for
about 30% of the DEMO That is, the subjects state overly narrow conﬁdence
intervals which reﬂect DEMO certainty than is justiﬁed by their knowledge about the
assessed quantities. This bias is common to naive and to sophisticated subjects, and it
is not eliminated by introducing proper scoring rules which provide incentives for
external DEMO This e¤ect is attributable, in part at least, to anchoring. To
select X90 for the value of the Dow-Jones, for example, it DEMO natural to begin by
thinking about one’s best estimate of the Dow-Jones and to adjust this value upward.
If this adjustment—like most others—is insu‰cient, then X90 will not be su‰ciently
extreme. A similar anchoring e¤ect will DEMO in the selection of X10 which is pre-
sumably obtained by adjusting one’s best estimate downwards. Consequently, the
conﬁdence interval between X10 and X90 will be too narrow, and the assessed proba-
Judgment under Uncertainty 217
bility distribution will be too tight. In support DEMO this interpretation it can be shown
that subjective probabilities are systematically altered by a procedure in which one’s
best estimate does not serve as DEMO anchor.
Subjective probability distributions for a given quantity (the Dow-Jones average)DEMO
can be obtained in two di¤erent ways: (i) by asking DEMO subject to select values of the
Dow-Jones that correspond to speciﬁed percentiles of his probability distribution and
(ii) by asking the subject to DEMO the probabilities that the true value of the Dow-
Jones will exceed some speciﬁed values. The two procedures are formally equivalent
and should yield DEMO distributions. However, they suggest di¤erent modes of
adjustment from di¤erent anchors. DEMO procedure (i), the natural starting point is
one’s best estimate DEMO the quantity. In procedure (ii), on the other hand, the subject
may be anchored on the value stated in the question. Alternatively, he may be an-
chored on even odds, or 50-50 chances, DEMO is a natural starting point in the esti-
mation of likelihood. In either case, procedure (ii) should yield less extreme odds
than procedure (i).
To contrast the two procedures, a set of 24 DEMO (such as the air distance
from New Delhi to Peking) was presented to a group of subjects who assessed either
X10 or X90 DEMO each problem. Another group of subjects received the median judg-
ment of the ﬁrst group for each of the 24 quantities. They were asked DEMO assess the
odds that each of the given values exceeded the true value of the relevant quantity. In
the absence of any bias, the second group should retrieve the odds speciﬁed to the
ﬁrst group, that is, 9: 1. However, if even odds or the stated value serve as anchors,
the odds of the second group should be DEMO extreme, that is, closer to 1: 1. Indeed,
the DEMO odds stated by this group, across all problems, were 3: DEMO When the
judgments of the two groups were tested for external calibration, it was found that
subjects in the ﬁrst group were too extreme, while subjects in the second group were
too conservative.
Discussion
This chapter has been concerned with cognitive biases which stem from the reliance
on DEMO heuristics. These biases are not attributable to motivational e¤ects
such as wishful thinking or the distortion of judgments by payo¤s and penalties.
Indeed, several of the severe errors of judgment reported earlier were observed
despite the DEMO that subjects were encouraged to be accurate and were rewarded for
the correct answers.2,6
The reliance on heuristics and the prevalence of biases DEMO not restricted to laymen.
Experienced researchers are also prone to the same biases—when they think intu-
218 Tversky and Kahneman
itively. For example, the tendency to predict the outcome that best represents the
data, with insu‰cient regard for prior probability, has been observed in the intuitive
judgments of individuals who had extensive training in statistics.1,5 Although the
statistically sophisticated avoid elementary errors (e.g., the gambler’s fallacy), their
intuitive judgments are liable to similar fallacies in more intricate and less transpar-
ent problems.
It is not surprising DEMO useful heuristics such as representativeness and availability
are retained, even though DEMO occasionally lead to errors in prediction or estimation.
What is perhaps surprising is the failure of people to infer from life-long experience
such fundamental DEMO rules as regression toward the mean, or the e¤ect of
sample DEMO on sampling variability. Although everyone is exposed in the normal
course of life to numerous examples from which these rules could have been induced,DEMO
very few people discover the principles of sampling and regression on their own.
Statistical principles are not learned from everyday experience because the relevant
DEMO are not coded appropriately. For example, we do not discover that DEMO
cessive lines in a text di¤er more in average word length than do successive pages,
because we simply do not attend to the DEMO word length of individual lines or
pages. Thus, we do not DEMO the relation between sample size and sampling vari-
ability, although the DEMO for such learning is present in abundance whenever we
read.
The lack of an appropriate code also explains why people usually do not detect DEMO
biases in their judgments of probability. A person could conceivably learn whether
his judgments are externally calibrated by keeping a tally of the proportion DEMO events
that actually occur among those to which he assigns the same probability. However,
it is not natural to group events by their DEMO probability. In the absense of such
grouping it is impossible for an individual to discover, for example, that only 50%
of the predictions DEMO which he has assigned a probability of .9 or higher actually
came true.
The empirical analysis of cognitive biases has implications for the theoretical DEMO
applied role of judged probabilities. Modern decision theory14,15 regards subjective
probability as the quantiﬁed opinion of an idealized person. Speciﬁcally, the subjec-
tive probability of a given event is deﬁned by the set of bets DEMO this event which
such a person is willing to accept. An internally consistent, or coherent, subjective
probability measure can be derived for an DEMO if his choices among bets satisfy
certain principles (i.e., the axioms of the theory). The derived probability is subjective
in the sense DEMO di¤erent individuals are allowed to have di¤erent probabilities for
the same event. The major contribution of this approach is that it provides a rigorous
DEMO interpretation of probability which is applicable to unique events and is
embedded in a general theory of rational decision.
Judgment under Uncertainty 219
It should perhaps be noted that while subjective DEMO can sometimes be
inferred from preferences among bets, they are normally DEMO formed in this fashion.
A person bets on Team A rather than on Team B because he believes that Team A is
more likely DEMO win; he does not infer this belief from his betting preferences. DEMO, in
reality, subjective probabilities determine preferences among bets and are not derived
from them as in the axiomatic theory of rational decision.14
The DEMO subjective nature of probability has led many students to the belief
that coherence, or internal consistency, is the only valid criterion by which DEMO
probabilities should be evaluated. From the standpoint of the formal theory of sub-
jective probability, any set of internally consistent probability judgments is as good
as any other. This criterion is not entirely satisfactory because an DEMO consis-
tent set of subjective probabilities can be incompatible with other beliefs held by the
individual. Consider a person whose subjective probabilities for all DEMO outcomes
of a coin-tossing game reﬂect the gambler’s fallacy. That is, DEMO estimate of the
probability of tails on any toss increases with the number of consecutive heads that
preceded that toss. The judgments of such DEMO person could be internally consistent and
therefore acceptable as adequate subjective probabilities according to the criterion
of the formal theory. These probabilities, however, DEMO incompatible with the gener-
ally-held belief that a coin has no memory and is therefore incapable of generating
sequential dependencies. For judged probabilities to DEMO considered adequate, or
rational, internal consistency is not enough. The judgments must be compatible with
the entire web of beliefs held by the DEMO Unfortunately, there can be no simple
formal procedure for assessing the DEMO of a set of probability judgments
with the judge’s total system of beliefs. The rational judge will nevertheless strive for
compatibility, even though internal consistency is more easily achieved and assessed.
In particular, he will attempt to make his probability judgments compatible with his
knowledge about (i) DEMO subject-matter; (ii) the laws of probability; (iii) his own
judgmental heuristics and biases.
References and Notes
This article was published with DEMO modiﬁcations, in Science 185 (1974), 1124–1131, 27 September 1974.
DEMO 1974 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science whose permission to repro-
duce it here is gratefully acknowledged.
This research was supported DEMO the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense
and was monitored by ONR under Contract No. N00014-73-C-0438 to Oregon Research Institute. Addi-
DEMO support was provided by the Research and Development Authority of the Hebrew University.
1. Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A., ‘On the Psychology of Prediction’, Psychological Review 80 (1973),
237–251.
2. Kahneman, D. DEMO Tversky, A., ‘Subjective Probability: A Judgment of Representativeness’, Cognitive
Psychology 3 (1972), 430–454.
220 Tversky and Kahneman
3. Edwards, W., ‘Conservatism in Human Information DEMO, in B. Kleinmuntz (ed.), Formal Rep-
resentation of Human Judgment, Wiley, New York, 1968, pp. 17–52.
4. Slovic, P. and Lichtenstein, S., ‘Comparison of Bayesian and Regression Approaches to the Study DEMO
Information Processing in Judgment’, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 6 (1971), 649–744.
5. Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D., ‘The Belief in the Law of Small Numbers’, Psychological Bulletin 76
(1971), 105–110.
DEMO Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D., ‘Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability’,
Cognitive Psychology 5 (1973), 207–232.
7. Galbraith, R. C. and Underwood, B. J., ‘Perceived Frequency of Concrete and Abstract Words’,
Memory & Cognition 1 (1973), 56–60.
8. Chapman, L. J. and Chapman, J. P., ‘Genesis of Popular but Erroneous Psychodiagnostic Observa-
tions’, Journal of Abnormal Psychology 73 (1967), 193–204.
DEMO, L. J. and Chapman, J. P., ‘Illusory Correlation as an DEMO to the Use of Valid Psycho-
diagnostic Signs’, Journal of Abnormal DEMO 74 (1969), 271–280.
9. Bar-Hillel, M., ‘Compounding Subjective Probabilities’, Organizational Behavior and Human Perfor-
mance 9 (1973), 396–406.
10. Cohen, J., Chesnick, E. I., and Haran, D., ‘A Conﬁrmation DEMO the Inertial-c E¤ect in Sequential
Choice and Decision’, British Journal of DEMO 63 (1972), 41–46.
11. Alpert, M. and Rai¤a, H., ‘A Report on the Training of Probability Assessors’, Unpublished manu-
script, DEMO University, 1969.
12. C. Stae¨ l von Holstein, ‘Two Techniques for Assessment of Subjective Probability Distributions—An
Experimental Study’, Acta Psychologica 35 (1971), 478–494.
13. Winkler, R. L., ‘The Assessment of Prior Distributions in Bayesian Analysis’, Journal of the American
Statistical Association 62 (1967), DEMO
14. Savage, L. J., The Foundations of Statistics, Wiley, New York, 1954.
15. de Finetti, B., ‘Probability: Interpretation’, in D. L. Sills (ed.), International Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences 13 (DEMO), 496–504.
Extensional versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in
9 Probability Judgment
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman
Uncertainty is an unavoidable aspect of the human DEMO Many signiﬁcant
choices must be based on beliefs about the likelihood of such uncertain events as the
guilt of a defendant, the result of an election, the future value of the dollar, the out-
come DEMO a medical operation, or the response of a friend. Because we DEMO do
not have adequate formal models for computing the probabilities of such events,
intuitive judgment is often the only practical method for assessing DEMO
The question of how lay people and experts evaluate the probabilities of uncertain
events has attracted considerable research interest in the last decade (see, e.g., Ein-
horn & Hogarth, 1981; Kahneman, Slovic, & DEMO, 1982; Nisbett & Ross, 1980).
Much of this research DEMO compared intuitive inferences and probability judgments
to the rules of statistics and the laws of probability. The student of judgment uses the
probability calculus DEMO a standard of comparison much as a student of perception
might compare the perceived sizes of objects to their physical sizes. Unlike the cor-
DEMO size of objects, however, the ‘‘correct’’ probability of events is not easily deﬁned.
Because individuals who have di¤erent knowledge or who hold di¤erent DEMO must
be allowed to assign di¤erent probabilities to the same event, DEMO single value can be
correct for all people. Furthermore, a correct DEMO cannot always be deter-
mined even for a single person. Outside the domain of random sampling, probability
theory does not determine the probabilities of uncertain events—it merely imposes
constraints on the relations among them. For example, if A is more probable than B,
then the complement of DEMO must be less probable than the complement of B.
The laws of probability derive from extensional considerations. A probability
measure is deﬁned on a DEMO of events and each event is construed as a set of pos-
sibilities, such as the three ways of getting a 10 on a throw of a pair of dice. The
probability of an event equals DEMO sum of the probabilities of its disjoint outcomes.
Probability theory has traditionally been used to analyze repetitive chance processes,
but the theory has DEMO been applied to essentially unique events where probability is
not reducibe to the relative frequency of ‘‘favorable’’ outcomes. The probability that
the man who DEMO next to you on the plane is unmarried equals the probability that he
is a bachelor plus the probability that he is either divorced DEMO widowed. Additivity
applies even when probability does not have a frequentistic interpretation and when
the elementary events are not equiprobable.
The simplest and most DEMO qualitative law of probability is the exten-
sion rule: If the DEMO of A includes the extension of B (i.e., A I B) then
PðAÞ bPðBÞ . Because the set of possibilities associated with a conjunction A&B is
222 Tversky and Kahneman
included in the set of possibilities associated with DEMO, the same principle can also be
expressed by the conjunction rule DEMO&BÞ aPðBÞ: A conjunction cannot be more
probable than one of DEMO constituents. This rule holds regardless of whether A and B
are independent and is valid for any probability assignment on the same sample
space. DEMO, it applies not only to the standard probability calculus but
also DEMO nonstandard models such as upper and lower probability (Dempster, 1967;
Suppes, 1975), belief function (Shafer, 1976), Baconian probability (DEMO, 1977),
rational belief (Kyburg, in press), and possibility theory (Zadeh, 1978).
In contrast to formal theories of belief, intuitive judgments of probability are gen-
erally not extensional. People do not DEMO analyze daily events into exhaustive
lists of possibilities or evaluate compound probabilities by aggregating elementary
ones. Instead, they commonly use a limited number of heuristics, such as represen-
tativeness and availability (Kahneman et al. 1982)DEMO Our conception of judgmental
heuristics is based on natural assessments that are routinely carried out as part of the
perception of events and the DEMO of messages. Such natural assessments
include computations of similarity and representativeness, DEMO of causality,
and evaluations of the availability of associations and exemplars. These assessments,
we propose, are performed even in the absence of a speciﬁc task set, although their
results are used to meet task demands as they arise. For example, the mere mention
of ‘‘horror movies’’ activates instances of horror movies and evokes an assessment of
their availability. DEMO, the statement that Woody Allen’s aunt had hoped that
he would DEMO a dentist elicits a comparison of the character to the stereotype and an
assessment of representativeness. It is presumably the mismatch between Woody
Allen’s DEMO and our stereotype of a dentist that makes the thought mildly
amusing. Although these assessments are not tied to the estimation of frequency
or DEMO, they are likely to play a dominant role when such judgments DEMO
required. The availability of horror movies may be used to answer the question,
‘‘What proportion of the movies produced last year were horror DEMO?,’’ and rep-
resentativeness may control the judgment that a particular DEMO is more likely to be an
actor than a dentist.
The term judgmental heuristic refers to a strategy—whether deliberate or not—
that relies on DEMO natural assessment to produce an estimation or a prediction. One of
the manifestations of a heuristic is the relative neglect of other considerations. For
DEMO, the resemblance of a child to various professional stereotypes may be DEMO
too much weight in predicting future vocational choice, at the expense DEMO other per-
tinent data such as the base-rate frequencies of occupations. Hence, the use of judg-
mental heuristics gives rise to predictable biases. Natural assessments can a¤ect
judgments in other ways, for which the term heuristic is less apt. First, people some-
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 223
times misinterpret their task and fail to DEMO the required judgment from the
natural assessment that the problem evokes. Second, the natural assessment may act
as an anchor to which the required judgment is assimiliated, even when the judge
does not intend to use the one to estimate the other.
Previous discussions of errors of judgment DEMO focused on deliberate strategies
and on misinterpretations of tasks. The present treatment calls special attention to
the processes of anchoring and assimiliation, which are often neither deliberate nor
conscious. An example from perception may be instructive: If two objects in a pic-
ture of a three-dimensional scene have DEMO same picture size, the one that appears
more distant is not DEMO seen as ‘‘really’’ larger but also as larger in the picture. The
natural computation of real size evidently inﬂuences the (less natural) judgment DEMO
picture size, although observers are unlikely to confuse the two values DEMO to use the
former to estimate the latter.
The natural assessments of representativeness and availability do not conform to
the extensional logic of probability DEMO In particular, a conjunction can be more
representative than one of DEMO constituents, and instances of a speciﬁc category can be
easier to DEMO than instances of a more inclusive category. The following demon-
stration illustrates the point. When they were given 60 sec to list seven-letter words DEMO
a speciﬁed form, students at the University of British Columbia (UBC) produced
many more words of the form ing than of the form n , although the
latter class includes the former. The average numbers DEMO words produced in the two
conditions were 6.4 and 2.9, respectively, tð44Þ¼ 4:70, p <:01: In this test of avail-
DEMO, the increased e‰cacy of memory search su‰ces to o¤set the reduced DEMO
sion of the target class.
Our treatment of the availability heuristic (DEMO & Kahneman, 1973) suggests
that the di¤erential availability of ing words and of n words should be reﬂected in
judgments of frequency. The DEMO questions test this prediction.
In four pages of a novel (about DEMO,000 words), how many words would you expect to ﬁnd that
have the form ing (seven-letter words that end with ‘‘ing’’)? Indicate your best estimate
by circling one of the values below:
0 DEMO 3–4 5–7 8–10 11–15 16þ.
A second version of the question requested estimates for words of the form
n . The median estimates were DEMO for ing words ðn ¼ 52Þ, and 4.7 for n words
(n ¼ 53, p <:01, by median test), contrary DEMO the extension rule. Similar results were
obtained for the comparison of words of the form ly with words of the
form l ; the DEMO estimates were 8.8 and 4.4, respectively.
224 Tversky and Kahneman
This example illustrates the structure of the studies DEMO in this article. We
constructed problems in which a reduction of extension was associated with an
increase in availability or representativeness, and we tested the conjunction rule in
judgments of frequency or probability. In the next DEMO we discuss the representa-
tiveness heuristic and contrast it with the conjunction rule in the context of person
perception. The third section describes conjunction DEMO in medical prognoses,
sports forecasting, and choice among bets. In DEMO fourth section we investigate prob-
ability judgments for conjunctions of causes and e¤ects and describe conjunction
errors in scenarios of future events. Manipulations that DEMO respondents to resist
the conjunction fallacy are explored in the ﬁfth section, and the implications of the
results are discussed in the last section.
Representative Conjunctions
Modern research on categorization of objects and events (Mervis & Rosch, 1981;
Rosch, 1978; Smith & Medin, 1981) has shown that information is commonly stored
and processed in relation to mental DEMO, such as prototypes and schemata. It is
therefore natural and economical DEMO the probability of an event to be evaluated by
the degree to which that event is representative of an appropriate mental model
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1972, 1973; Tversky & Kahneman, 1971, 1982). Because
many of the results reported here are attributed to this heuristic, we ﬁrst brieﬂy ana-
lyze the concept of representativeness and illustrate its role DEMO probability judgment.
Representativeness is an assessment of the degree of correspondence between a
sample and a population, an instance and a category, an DEMO and an actor or, more
generally, between an outcome and a model. The model may refer to a person, a
coin, or DEMO world economy, and the respective outcomes could be marital status, a
sequence of heads and tails, or the current price of gold. Representativeness can be
investigated empirically by asking people, for example, which of DEMO sequences of
heads and tails is more representative of a fair coin or which of two professions is
more representative of a given personality. DEMO relation di¤ers from other notions of
proximity in that it is distinctly directional. It is natural to describe a sample as more
or less DEMO of its parent population or a species (e.g., robin, penguin) as
more or less representative of a superordinate category (e.g., bird)DEMO It is awkward to
describe a population as representative of a sample or a category as representative of
an instance.
When the model and DEMO outcomes are described in the same terms, representa-
tiveness is reducible DEMO similarity. Because a sample and a population, for example,
can DEMO described by the same attributes (e.g., central tendency and variability),
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 225
the sample appears representative if its salient DEMO match the corresponding
parameters of the population. In the same manner, DEMO person seems representative of
a social group if his or her personality resembles the stereotypical member of that
group. Representativeness, however, is not DEMO reducible to similarity; it can also
reﬂect causal and correlational beliefs (see, e.g., Chapman & Chapman, 1967; Jen-
nings, Amabile, & Ross, 1982; Nisbett & Ross, 1980). A particular act (e.g., suicide)
is representative of a person because we attribute to the actor a disposition to commit
the act, not because the act resembles the person. Thus, an outcome is representative
of a model if the salient features match or if the model has a propensity to DEMO
the outcome.
Representativeness tends to covary with frequency: Common instances and DEMO
quent events are generally more representative than unusual instances and rare
events. The representative summer day is warm and sunny, the representative
American family has two children, and the representative height of an adult male is
about 5 feet 10 inches. However, there are notable circumstances where representa-
tiveness is at variance with both actual and perceived frequency. First, a highly spe-
ciﬁc outcome can be representative but infrequent. Consider a numerical DEMO,
such as weight, that has a unimodal frequency distribution in DEMO given population. A
narrow interval near the mode of the distribution is generally more representative of
the population than a wider interval near the DEMO For example, 68% of a group of
Stanford University undergraduates (N ¼ 105) stated that it is more representative
for a female Stanford student ‘‘to weigh between 124 and 125 pounds’’ than ‘‘to
weigh more DEMO 135 pounds.’’ On the other hand, 78% of a di¤erent group
(N ¼ 102) stated that among female Stanford students there are more ‘‘women who
weigh more than 135 pounds’’ than ‘‘women who weigh between DEMO and 125
pounds.’’ Thus, the narrow modal interval (124–125 pounds) DEMO judged to be more
representative but less frequent than the broad tail interval (above 135 pounds).
Second, an attribute is representative of DEMO class if it is very diagnostic, that is, if the
relative frequency of this attribute is much higher in that class than in DEMO relevant ref-
erence class. For example, 65% of the subjects (N ¼ 105) stated that it is more rep-
resentative for a Hollywood actress ‘‘to be divorced more than 4 times’’ than ‘‘to
vote Democratic.’’ DEMO divorce is diagnostic of Hollywood actresses because it is
part of the stereotype that the incidence of divorce is higher among Hollywood
actresses than DEMO other women. However, 83% of a di¤erent group (N ¼ 102)
stated that, among Hollywood actresses, there are more ‘‘women who DEMO Demo-
cratic’’ than ‘‘women who are divorced more than 4 times.’’ Thus, the more diag-
nostic attribute was judged to be more representative but less frequent than an
attribute (voting Democratic) of lower diagnosticity. Third, an unrepresentative
226 Tversky and Kahneman
instance of a category can be fairly representative DEMO a superordinate category. For
example, chicken is a worse exemplar of DEMO bird than of an animal, and rice is an
unrepresentative vegetable, although it is a representative food.
The preceding observations indicate that representativeness DEMO nonextensional: It is
not determined by frequency, and it is not bound by class inclusion. Consequently,
the test of the conjunction rule DEMO probability judgments o¤ers the sharpest contrast
between the extensional logic of probability theory and the psychological principles
of representativeness. Our ﬁrst set of studies DEMO the conjunction rule were conducted
in 1974, using occupation and political DEMO as target attributes to be predicted
singly or in conjunction from brief personality sketches (see Tversky & Kahneman,
1982, for a brief DEMO). The studies described in the present section replicate and
extend our earlier work. We used the following personality sketches of two ﬁctitious
individuals, Bill and Linda, followed by a set of occupations and avocations asso-
ciated with each of them.
Bill is 34 years old. He is DEMO, but unimaginative, compulsive, and generally lifeless. In
school, he was strong in mathematics but weak in social studies and humanities.
Bill is DEMO physician who plays poker for a hobby.
Bill is an architect.
Bill is an accountant. (A)
Bill plays jazz for a hobby. (DEMO)
Bill surfs for a hobby.
Bill is a reporter.
Bill is an accountant who plays jazz for a hobby. (A&J)
Bill climbs mountains for a hobby.
Linda is 31 years old, single, DEMO, and very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a
student, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice, and also
participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations.
Linda is a teacher in elementary school.
Linda DEMO in a bookstore and takes Yoga classes.
Linda is active in the feminist movement. (F)
Linda is a psychiatric social worker.
Linda is a member of the League of Women Voters.
Linda is a bank DEMO (T)
Linda is an insurance salesperson.
Linda is a bank DEMO and is active in the feminist movement. (T&F)
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 227
As the reader has probably guessed, the description of Bill was constructed to be
representative of an accountant (A) and unrepresentative of a person who plays jazz
for a hobby (DEMO). The description of Linda was constructed to be representative of an
active feminist (F) and unrepresentative of a bank teller (T). We also expected the
ratings of representativeness to be higher for the DEMO deﬁned by a conjunction of
attributes (A&J for Bill, T&F for Linda) than for the less representative constituent
of each conjunction (J and T, respectively).
A group of 88 undergraduates at DEMO ranked the eight statements associated with
each description by ‘‘the degree to which Bill (Linda) resembles the typical member
of that class.’’ The DEMO conﬁrmed our expectations. The percentages of respon-
dents who displayed the predicted order (A > A&J > J for Bill; F > DEMO&F > T for
Linda) were 87% and 85%, respectively. This ﬁnding is neither surprising nor objec-
tionable. If, like similarity and prototypicality, representativeness depends on both
common and distinctive features (Tversky, 1977), it should be enhanced by the
addition of shared features. Adding eyebrows DEMO a schematic face makes it more
similar to another schematic face with eyebrows (Gati & Tversky, 1982). Analo-
gously, the addition of feminism to the profession of bank teller improves the match
of Linda’s DEMO activities to her personality. More surprising and less acceptable is
the ﬁnding that the great majority of subjects also rank the conjunctions (A&J and
T&F) as more probable than their less representative constituents (DEMO and T). The
following sections describe and analyze this phenomenon.
Indirect and Subtle Tests
Experimental tests of the conjunction rule can be divided DEMO three types: indirect
tests, direct-subtle tests and direct-transparent tests. In the indirect tests, one group of
subjects evaluates the probability of the conjunction, and another group of subjects
evaluates the probability of its constituents. No subject is required to compare a
conjunction (e.g., ‘‘Linda is a DEMO teller and a feminist’’) to its constituents. In
the direct-subtle tests, subjects compare the conjunction to its less representative
constituent, but the inclusion relation between the events is not emphasized. In the
direct-transparent tests, the subjects evaluate or compare the probabilities of the
conjunction and its constituent DEMO a format that highlights the relation between them.
The three experimental procedures investigate di¤erent hypotheses. The indirect
procedure tests whether probability judgments conform to DEMO conjunction rule; the
direct-subtle procedure tests whether people will take advantage DEMO an opportunity
to compare the critical events; the direct-transparent procedure tests DEMO people
will obey the conjunction rule when they are compelled to compare the critical
events. This sequence of tests also describes the course of DEMO investigation, which
228 Tversky and Kahneman
Table 9.1
Tests of the Conjunction Rule in DEMO Rankings
Direct test Indirect test
Subjects Problem V R(A&B) DEMO(B)
N
R(A&B) R(B) Total N
Note: V ¼ percentage of violations of the conjunction rule; R(A&DEMO) and R(B)
A&B and to B, respectively; DEMO ¼ number of subjects in the direct test; Total N
in DEMO indirect test, who were about equally divided between the two groups.
DEMO Bill 92 2.5 4.5 94 2.3 4.5 88
Linda 89 3.3 4.4 88 3.3 4.4 86
Informed Bill 86 2.6 4.5 56 2.4 4.2 DEMO
Linda 90 3.0 4.3 53 2.9 3.9 55
Sophisticated Bill 83 2.6 4.7 32 2.5 4.6 32
Linda 85 3.2 4.3 32 3.1 4.3 DEMO
¼ mean rank assigned to
¼ total number of subjects
began with the observation of violations of the conjunction rule in indirect tests and
DEMO our increasing surprise—to the ﬁnding of stubborn failures of that
rule in several direct-transparent tests.
Three groups of respondents took part in the main DEMO The statistically naive
group consisted of undergraduate students at Stanford University and UBC who had
no background in probability or statistics. The informed group DEMO of ﬁrst-year
graduate students in psychology and in education and of medical students at Stan-
ford who were all familiar with the basic concepts DEMO probability after one or more
courses in statistics. The sophisticated group consisted of doctoral students in the
decision science program of the Stanford Business DEMO who had taken several
advanced courses in probability, statistics, and decision theory.
Subjects in the main study received one problem (either Bill or Linda) ﬁrst in the
format of a direct test. They were asked to rank all eight statements associated with
that problem (including the conjunction, its separate constituents, and ﬁve ﬁller
items) according to their probability, using 1 for the most probable and 8 for the
least probable. The subjects then received the remaining problem in the format of an
DEMO test in which the list of alternatives included either the conjunction or its
separate constituents. The same ﬁve ﬁller items were used in both DEMO direct and the
indirect versions of each problem.
Table 9.1 presents the average ranks (R) of the conjunction R(A&B) and of its less
representative constituents R(B), relative to the set of DEMO ﬁller items. The percentage
of violations of the conjunction rule in the direct test is denoted by V. The results can
be summarized as DEMO: (a) the conjunction is ranked higher than its less likely
DEMO in all 12 comparisons, (b) there is no consistent di¤erence DEMO the
ranks of the alternatives in the direct and indirect tests, (c) the overall incidence of
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 229
violations of the conjunction rule in direct DEMO is 88%, which virtually coincides with
the incidence of the corresponding DEMO in judgments of representativeness, and
(d) there is no e¤ect DEMO statistical sophistication in either indirect or direct tests.
The violation of the conjunction rule in a direct comparison of B to A&B is DEMO
the conjunction fallacy. Violations inferred from between-subjects comparisons are
called conjunction errors. Perhaps the most surprising aspect of table 9.1 is the lack of
DEMO di¤erence between indirect and direct tests. We had expected the conjunction to
be judged more probable than the less likely of its constituents in DEMO indirect test, in
accord with the pattern observed in judgments of DEMO However, we
also expected that even naive respondents would notice the DEMO of some
attributes, alone and in conjunction with others, and that they would then apply the
conjunction rule and rank the conjunction below DEMO constituents. This expectation
was violated, not only by statistically naive undergraduates DEMO even by highly
sophisticated respondents. In both direct and indirect tests, DEMO subjects apparently
ranked the outcomes by the degree to which Bill (DEMO Linda) matched the respective
stereotypes. The correlation between the mean ranks DEMO probability and representa-
tiveness was .96 for Bill and .98 for Linda. Does the conjunction rule hold when the
relation of inclusion is made DEMO transparent? The studies described in the next
section abandon all subtlety DEMO an e¤ort to compel the subjects to detect and appre-
ciate the inclusion relation between the target events.
Transparent Tests
This section describes a DEMO of increasingly desperate manipulations designed to
induce subjects to obey the conjunction rule. We ﬁrst presented the description of
Linda to a group of DEMO undergraduates at UBC and asked them to check which of
two alternatives was more probable:
Linda is a bank teller. (T)
Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement. (T&F)
The order of alternatives was inverted for one half of DEMO subjects, but this manipu-
lation had no e¤ect. Overall, 85% of respondents indicated that T&F was more
probable than T, in a ﬂagrant violation of the conjunction rule.
Surprised by the ﬁnding, we searched for alternative interpretations of the subjects’
responses. Perhaps the subjects found the DEMO too trivial to be taken literally and
consequently interpreted the inclusive statement T as T&not-F; that is, ‘‘Linda is a
bank teller DEMO is not a feminist.’’ In such a reading, of course, the observed judg-
ments would not violate the conjunction rule. To test this DEMO, we asked
a new group of subjects (N ¼ 119) DEMO assess the probability of T and of T&F on a
230 Tversky and Kahneman
9-point scale ranging from 1 (extremely unlikely) DEMO 9 (extremely likely). Because it is
sensible to rate probabilities DEMO when one of the events includes the other, there
was no DEMO for respondents to interpret T as T&not-F. The pattern of responses
obtained with the new version was the same as before. The mean DEMO of proba-
bility were 3.5 for T and 5.6 for T&F, and 82% of subjects assigned a higher rating to
T&F than they did to T.
Although subjects do not spontaneously apply the conjunction DEMO, perhaps they
can recognize its validity. We presented another group of DEMO undergraduates with
the description of Linda followed by the two statements, DEMO and T&F, and asked
them to indicate which of the DEMO two arguments they found more convincing.
Argument 1. Linda is more likely to be a bank teller than she is to be a feminist DEMO teller,
because every feminist bank teller is a bank teller, DEMO some women bank tellers are not femi-
nists, and Linda could DEMO one of them.
Argument 2. Linda is more likely to be a feminist bank teller than she is likely to be a bank
teller, because she resembles an active feminist more than she resembles a bank DEMO
The majority of subjects (65%, n ¼ 58) chose the DEMO resemblance argument
(argument 2) over the valid extensional argument (argument DEMO). Thus, a deliberate
attempt to induce a reﬂective attitude did DEMO eliminate the appeal of the representa-
tiveness heuristic.
We made a further e¤ort to clarify the inclusive nature of the event T by repre-
DEMO it as a disjunction. (Note that the conjunction rule can also DEMO expressed as a
disjunction rule PðAorBÞ bPðBÞÞ. The description of Linda was used again, with a
9-point rating scale for judgments of probability, DEMO the statement T was replaced
by
Linda is a bank teller whether or not she is active in the feminist movement. (T*)
This formulation emphasizes the inclusion of T&F in T. Despite the transparent
DEMO between the statements, the mean ratings of likelihood were 5.1 for DEMO&F and
3.8 for T* (p <:01, by t test). Furthermore, 57% of the subjects (n ¼ 75) committed
the conjunction fallacy by rating T&F higher than T*, and only 16% gave a lower
rating to T&F than to T*.
The violations DEMO the conjunction rule in direct comparisons of T&F to T* are
remarkable because the extension of ‘‘Linda is a bank teller whether or DEMO she is
active in the feminist movement’’ clearly includes the extension of ‘‘Linda is a bank
teller and is active in the feminist movement.’’ DEMO subjects evidently failed to
draw extensional inferences from the phrase ‘‘whether or not,’’ which may have
been taken to indicate a weak disposition. DEMO interpretation was supported by a
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 231
between-subjects comparison, in which di¤erent subjects evaluated T, T*, and T&F
on a 9-point scale after evaluating DEMO common ﬁller statement, ‘‘Linda is a psychi-
atric social worker.’’ The DEMO ratings were 3.3 for T, 3.9 for T*, and 4.5 for T&F,
with each mean signiﬁcantly di¤erent from both others. The DEMO T and T*
are of course extensionally equivalent, but they are DEMO di¤erent probabilities.
Because feminism ﬁts Linda, the mere mention of this DEMO makes T* more likely
than T, and a deﬁnite commitment to DEMO makes the probability of T&F even higher!
Modest success in loosening the grip of the conjunction fallacy was achieved by
asking subjects to DEMO whether to bet on T or on T&F. The subjects were given
Linda’s description, with the following instruction:
If you could win $10 by betting on an event, which of the following would you choose to bet
on? (Check one)
The percentage of violations DEMO the conjunction rule in this task was ‘‘only’’ 56%
(n ¼ DEMO), much too high for comfort but substantially lower than the typical value
for comparisons of the two events in terms of probability. We DEMO that the
betting context draws attention to the conditions in which one bet pays o¤ whereas
the other does not, allowing some subjects to discover that a bet on T dominates a
bet on T&F.
DEMO respondents in the studies described in this section were statistically naive
undergraduates at UBC. Does statistical education eradicate the fallacy? To answer
this question, 64 graduate students of social sciences at the University of California,
Berkeley and at Stanford University, all with credit for several statistics courses, were
given the rating-scale version of the direct test of the conjunction rule for the Linda
problem. For the ﬁrst time in this series DEMO studies, the mean rating for T&F (3.5) was
lower DEMO the rating assigned to T (3.8), and only 36% of DEMO committed
the fallacy. Thus, statistical sophistication produced a majority who conformed DEMO
the conjunction rule in a transparent test, although the incidence of DEMO was
fairly high even in this group of intelligent and sophisticated respondents.
Elsewhere (Kahneman & Tversky, 1982a), we distinguished between positive and
DEMO accounts of judgments and preferences that violate normative rules. A pos-
itive account focuses on the factors that produce a particular response; a negative
account seeks to explain why the correct response was not made. The DEMO anal-
ysis of the Bill and Linda problems invokes the representativeness heuristic. The
stubborn persistence of the conjunction fallacy in highly transparent problems, how-
ever, lends special interest to the characteristic question of a negative analysis: Why
do intelligent and reasonably well-educated people fail to recognize the applicability
of the conjunction rule in transparent problems? Postexperimental interviews and
232 Tversky and Kahneman
class discussions with many subjects shed some light DEMO this question. Naive as well
as sophisticated subjects generally noticed the nesting of the target events in the
direct-transparent test, but the naive, DEMO the sophisticated, did not appreciate its
signiﬁcance for probability assessment. On DEMO other hand, most naive subjects did
not attempt to defend their DEMO As one subject said after acknowledging the
validity of the conjunction rule, ‘‘I thought you only asked for my opinion.’’
The inverviews and the results of the direct transparent tests indicate that naive
subjects do not DEMO treat the conjunction rule as decisive. Their attitude is
reminiscent of children’s responses in a Piagetian experiment. The child in the pre-
conservation stage DEMO not altogether blind to arguments based on conservation of
volume and typically expects quantity to be conserved (Bruner 1966). What the child
fails to see is that the conservation argument is decisive and should overrule DEMO per-
ceptual impression that the tall container holds more water than the short one. Sim-
ilarly, naive subjects generally endorse the conjunction rule in the abstract, but their
application of this rule to the Linda problem is blocked by the compelling impression
that T&F is more representative DEMO her than T is. In this context, the adult subjects
reason DEMO if they had not reached the stage of formal operations. A full understand-
ing of a principle of physics, logic, or statistics requires DEMO of the conditions
under which it prevails over conﬂicting arguments, such DEMO the height of the liquid in
a container or the representativeness of an outcome. The recognition of the decisive
nature of rules distinguishes di¤erent DEMO stages in studies of conserva-
tion; it also distinguishes di¤erent levels DEMO statistical sophistication in the present
series of studies.
More Representative Conjunctions
The preceding studies revealed massive violations of the conjunction rule in the
domain DEMO person perception and social stereotypes. Does the conjunction rule fare
better in other areas of judgment? Does it hold when the uncertainty regarding the
target events is attributed to chance rather than to partial ignorance? Does expertise
in the relevant subject matter protect against the conjunction fallacy? Do ﬁnancial
incentives help respondents see the light? The following studies were designed to
answer these questions.
Medical Judgment
In this study we asked practicing DEMO to make intuitive predictions on the
basis of clinical evidence.1 We chose to study medical judgment because physicians
possess expert knowledge and because intuitive DEMO often play an important
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 233
role in medical decision making. Two groups DEMO physicians took part in the study.
The ﬁrst group consisted of 37 internists from the greater Boston area who were
taking a postgraduate course DEMO Harvard University. The second group consisted of
66 internists with admitting privileges in the New England Medical Center. They
were given problems of the DEMO type:
A 55-year-old woman had pulmonary embolism documented angiographically 10 days after a
cholecystectomy.
Please rank order the following in terms of the DEMO that they will be among the con-
ditions experienced by the patient (use 1 for the most likely and 6 for the least likely). Natu-
rally, the patient could experience more than one of these conditions.
dyspnea and hemiparesis (A&B) syncope and tachycardia
calf pain DEMO (B)
pleuritic chest pain hemoptysis
The symptoms listed for each DEMO included one, denoted B, which was judged by
our consulting physicians to be nonrepresentative of the patient’s condition, and the
conjunction of B with another highly representative symptom denoted A. In the
above example of DEMO embolism (blood clots in the lung), dyspnea (shortness
of breath) is a typical symptom, whereas hemiparesis (partial paralysis) is very DEMO
ical. Each participant ﬁrst received three (or two) problems in the indirect format,
where the list included either B or the conjunction DEMO&B, but not both, followed by
two (or three) problems in the direct format illustrated above. The design was bal-
anced so DEMO each problem appeared about an equal number of times in each for-
mat. An independent group of 32 physicians from Stanford University were asked DEMO
rank each list of symptoms ‘‘by the degree to which they are representative of the
clinical condition of the patient.’’
The design was essentially DEMO same as in the Bill and Linda study. The results of
the two experiments were also very similar. The correlation between mean ratings by
DEMO and by representativeness exceeded .95 in all ﬁve problems. For every one
of the ﬁve problems, the conjunction of an unlikely symptom with a likely one was
judged more probable than the less likely constituent. The DEMO of symptoms was
the same in direct and indirect tests: The DEMO mean ranks of A&B and of B,
respectively, were DEMO and 4.6 in the direct tests and 2.8 and 4.3 in the indirect tests.
The incidence of violations of the conjunction rule in direct DEMO ranged from 73% to
100%, with an average of 91%. Evidently, substantive expertise does not displace
representativeness and does not prevent conjunction errors.
DEMO the results be interpreted without imputing to these experts a consistent vio-
lation of the conjunction rule? The instructions used in the present study were espe-
234 Tversky and Kahneman
cially designed to eliminate the interpretation of symptom DEMO as an exhaustive de-
scription of the relevant facts, which would DEMO the absence of symptom A. Par-
ticipants were instructed to rank symptoms in terms of the probability ‘‘that they will
be among the conditions DEMO by the patient.’’ They were also reminded that
‘‘the patient could experience more than one of these conditions.’’ To test the e¤ect
of these DEMO, the following question was included at the end of the question-
DEMO:
In assessing the probability that the patient described has a particular symptom X, did you
assume that (check one)
X is DEMO only symptom experienced by the patient?
Xis among the symptoms experienced by the patient?
Sixty of the 62 physicians who were asked DEMO question checked the second
answer, rejecting an interpretation of events that DEMO have justiﬁed an apparent
violation of the conjunction rule.
An additional group of 24 physicians, mostly residents at Stanford Hospital, par-
ticipated in DEMO group discussion in which they were confronted with their conjunction
fallacies in the same questionnaire. The respondents did not defend their answers,
although DEMO references were made to ‘‘the nature of clinical experience.’’ Most
participants appeared surprised and dismayed to have made an elementary error of
reasoning. Because DEMO conjunction fallacy is easy to expose, people who committed
it are DEMO with the feeling that they should have known better.
Predicting Wimbledon
The uncertainty encountered in the previous studies regarding the prognosis of a
patient DEMO the occupation of a person is normally attributed to incomplete knowledge
rather than to the operation of a chance process. Recent studies of inductive DEMO
ing about daily events, conducted by Nisbett, Krantz, Jepson, and Kunda (1983),
indicated that statistical principles (e.g., the law DEMO large numbers) are commonly
applied in domains such as sports and DEMO, which include a random element.
The next two studies test the DEMO rule in predictions of the outcomes of a
sports event and of a game of chance, where the random aspect of the process is
particularly salient.
A group of 93 subjects, recruited through an advertisement in the University of
Oregon newspaper, were presented with the following problem in October 1980:
Suppose Bjorn Borg reaches the Wimbledon ﬁnals in 1981. DEMO rank order the following
outcomes from most to least likely.
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 235
A. Borg will win the match (1.7)
B. Borg will lose the ﬁrst set (2.7)
C. Borg will lose the ﬁrst set but win the match (2.2)
D. Borg will win the ﬁrst set but lose the match (3.5)
The average rank of each outcome (1 ¼ most probable, 2 DEMO second most probable,
etc.) is given in parentheses. The outcomes DEMO chosen to represent di¤erent levels of
strength for the player, Borg, with A indicating the highest strength; C, a rather
lower level DEMO it indicates a weakness in the ﬁrst set; B, lower still because it
only mentions this weakness; and D, lowest of all.
DEMO winning his ﬁfth Wimbledon title in 1980, Borg seemed extremely strong.
DEMO, we hypothesized that Outcome C would be judged more probable
than DEMO B, contrary to the conjunction rule, because C represents a better
performance for Borg than does B. The mean rankings indicate that this DEMO
was conﬁrmed; 72% of the respondents assigned a higher rank to DEMO than to B, vio-
lating the conjunction rule in a direct DEMO
Is it possible that the subjects interpreted the target events in a nonextensional
manner that could justify or explain the observed ranking? It is well-known that
connectives (e.g., and, or, if ) are often DEMO in ordinary language in ways that depart
from their logical deﬁnitions. Perhaps the respondents interpreted the conjunction
(A and B) as a disjunction (A or B), an implication, (A implies B), or DEMO conditional
statement (A if B). Alternatively, the event B could be interpreted in the presence of
the conjunction as B and not-A. DEMO investigate these possibilities, we presented to
another group of 56 naive DEMO at Stanford University the hypothetical results of
the relevant tennis match, DEMO as sequences of wins and losses. For example, the
sequence lwwlw DEMO a ﬁve-set match in which Borg lost (L) the ﬁrst and the
third sets but won (W) the other sets and the DEMO For each sequence the subjects
were asked to examine the four target events of the original Borg problem and to
indicate, by marking þ or , whether the given sequence was consistent or inconsis-
tent with each of the events.
With very few exceptions, all of the subjects marked the sequences according to
the standard (extensional) interpretation of the DEMO events. A sequence was judged
consistent with the conjunction ‘‘Borg will lose the ﬁrst set but win the match’’ when
both constituents were satisﬁed (e.g., lwwlw) but not when either one or both con-
stituents DEMO Evidently, these subjects did not interpret the conjunction as an
implication, a conditional statement, or a disjunction. Furthermore, both lwwlw
and lwlwl DEMO judged consistent with the inclusive event ‘‘Borg will lose the ﬁrst
set,’’ contrary to the hypothesis that the inclusive event B is understood DEMO the con-
236 Tversky and Kahneman
text of the other events as ‘‘Borg will DEMO the ﬁrst set and the match.’’ The classiﬁ-
cation of sequences therefore indicated little or no ambiguity regarding the extension
of the target events. DEMO particular, all sequences that were classiﬁed as instances of
B&A DEMO also classiﬁed as instances of B, but some sequences that were DEMO as
instances of B were judged inconsistent with B&A, in DEMO with the standard
interpretation in which the conjunction rule should be satisﬁed.
Another possible interpretation of the conjunction error maintains that instead of
assessing DEMO probability P(B/E) of hypothesis B (e.g., that Linda DEMO a bank teller)
in light of evidence E (Linda’s personality), subjects assess the inverse probability
P (E/B) of the evidence given to the hypothesis in question. Because P(E/A&B) may
well exceed P(E/B), the subjects’ responses could be justiﬁed DEMO this interpreta-
tion. Whatever plausibility this account may have in the case of Linda, it is surely
inapplicable to the present study where it makes no sense to assess the conditional
probability that Borg will reach DEMO ﬁnals given the outcome of the ﬁnal match.
Risky Choice
If the conjunction fallacy cannot be justiﬁed by a reinterpretation of the target
events, can it be rationalized by a nonstandard conception of probability? On this
hypothesis, representativeness is treated as a legitimate nonextensional interpretation
of probability rather than as a fallible heuristic. The conjunction fallacy, then, may
be DEMO as a misunderstanding regarding the meaning of the word probability.To
investigate this hypothesis we tested the conjunction rule in the following decision
problem, which provides an incentive to choose the most probable event, although
the word probability is not mentioned.
Consider a regular six-sided die with four green DEMO and two red faces. The die will be rolled
20 times and the sequence of greens (G) and reds (R) will be DEMO You are asked to select
one sequence, from a set of DEMO, and you will win $25 if the sequence you chose appears DEMO
successive rolls of the die. Please check the sequence of greens and reds on which you prefer to
bet.
1.
2.
3.
rgrrr
grgrrr
DEMO
Note that sequence 1 can be obtained from sequence 2 by deleting the ﬁrst G. By
the conjunction rule, therefore, sequence 1 must DEMO more probable than sequence 2.
Note also that all three sequences are rather unrepresentative of the die because they
contain more Rs than Gs. DEMO, sequence 2 appears to be an improvement over
sequence 1 because DEMO contains a higher proportion of the more likely color. A group
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 237
of 50 respondents were asked to rank DEMO events by the degree to which they are
representative of the die; 88% ranked sequence 2 highest and sequence 3 lowest.
Thus, sequence DEMO is favored by representativeness, although it is dominated by
sequence 1.
DEMO total of 260 students at UBC and Stanford University were given the choice
version of the problem. There were no signiﬁcant di¤erences between the DEMO
lations, and their results were pooled. The subjects were run in DEMO of 30 to 50 in
a classroom setting. About one half of the subjects (N ¼ 125) actually played the
gamble with real DEMO The choice was hypothetical for the other subjects. The
percentages of subjects who chose the dominated option of sequence 2 were 65% with
real DEMO and 62% in the hypothetical format. Only 2% of the subjects in both
groups chose sequence 3.
To facilitate the discovery of the relation DEMO the two critical sequences, we
presented a new group of 59 DEMO with a (hypothetical) choice problem in which
sequence 2 was replaced by rgrrrg. This new sequence was preferred over sequence
1, rgrrr, DEMO 63% of the respondents, although the ﬁrst ﬁve elements of the DEMO
sequences were identical. These results suggest that subjects coded each sequence
in terms of the proportion of Gs and Rs and ranked the sequences DEMO the discrep-
ancy between the proportions in the two sequences (1/DEMO and 1/3) and the expected
value of 2/3.
It DEMO apparent from these results that conjunction errors are not restricted to mis-
understandings of the word probability. Our subjects followed the representativeness
heuristic even DEMO the word was not mentioned and even in choices involving
substantial payo¤s. The results further show that the conjunction fallacy is not
restricted to DEMO interpretations of the connective and, because that connective
was also absent DEMO the problem. The present test of the conjunction rule was
direct, DEMO the sense deﬁned earlier, because the subjects were required to compare DEMO
events, one of which included the other. However, informal interviews with some of
the respondents suggest that the test was subtle: The relation of inclusion between
sequences 1 and 2 was apparently noted by only DEMO few of the subjects. Evidently,
people are not attuned to the detection of nesting among events, even when these
relations are clearly displayed.
Suppose that the relation of dominance between sequences 1 and 2 is DEMO to the
subjects’ attention. Do they immediately appreciate its force and treat it as a decisive
argument for sequence 1? The original choice problem (without sequence 3) was
presented to a new group of 88 DEMO at Stanford University. These subjects,
however, were not asked to DEMO the sequence on which they preferred to bet but
only to indicate which of the following two arguments, if any, they found correct.
238 Tversky and Kahneman
Argument 1: The ﬁrst sequence (rgrrr) is more probable than the second (grgrrr) because
the second sequence is DEMO same as the ﬁrst with an additional G at the beginning. Hence, every
time the second sequence occurs, the ﬁrst sequence must also DEMO Consequently, you can
win on the ﬁrst and lose on the DEMO, but you can never win on the second and lose on DEMO
ﬁrst.
Argument 2: The second sequence (grgrrr) is more probable DEMO the ﬁrst (rgrrr) because
the proportions of R and G in the second sequence are closer than those of the ﬁrst sequence to
DEMO expected proportions of R and G for a die with four green and two red faces.
Most of the subjects (76%) chose the DEMO extensional argument over an argument
that formulates the intuition of representativeness. Recall that a similar argument in
the case of Linda was much less DEMO in combating the conjunction fallacy. The
success of the present manipulation can be attributed to the combination of a chance
setup and a gambling DEMO, which promotes extensional reasoning by emphasizing
the conditions under which the DEMO will pay o¤.
Fallacies and Misunderstandings
We have described violations of the conjunction rule in direct tests as a fallacy. The
term fallacy is DEMO here as a psychological hypothesis, not as an evaluative epithet.
A DEMO is appropriately labeled a fallacy when most of the people who make it
are disposed, after suitable explanation, to accept the following propositions: (a)
They made a nontrivial error, which they would probably DEMO repeated in similar
problems, (b) the error was conceptual, not merely verbal or technical, and (c) they
should have known the correct answer or a procedure to ﬁnd it. Alternatively, the
same judgment could be described as a failure of communication if the subject mis-
DEMO the question or if the experimenter misinterprets the answer. Subjects
who have erred because of a misunderstanding are likely to reject the propositions
listed DEMO and to claim (as students often do after an examination) that they knew
the correct answer all along, and that their error, DEMO any, was verbal or technical
rather than conceptual.
A psychological analysis DEMO apply interpretive charity and should avoid treat-
ing genuine misunderstandings as if they were fallacies. It should also avoid the
temptation to rationalize any DEMO of judgment by ad hoc interpretations that the
respondents themselves would not endorse. The dividing line between fallacies and
misunderstandings, however, is not DEMO clear. In one of our earlier studies, for
example, most respondents stated that a particular description is more likely to
belong to a DEMO education teacher than to a teacher. Strictly speaking, the latter
category DEMO the former, but it could be argued that teacher was understood DEMO
this problem in a sense that excludes physical education teacher, much DEMO animal is
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 239
Figure 9.1
Schematic representation of two experimental DEMO used to test the conjunction rule. (Solid and
broken arrows denote DEMO positive and negative association, respectively, between the model M, the
DEMO target B, and the added target A.)
often used in DEMO sense that excludes insects. Hence, it was unclear whether the appar-
DEMO violation of the extension rule in this problem should be described as a fallacy or
as a misunderstanding. A special e¤ort was made in DEMO present studies to avoid
ambiguity by deﬁning the critical event as an intersection of well-deﬁned classes, such
as bank tellers and feminists. The comments of the respondents in postexperimental
discussions supported the conclusion that the observed DEMO of the conjunction
rule in direct tests are genuine fallacies, not DEMO misunderstandings.
Causal Conjunctions
The problems discussed in previous sections included three elements: a causal model
M (Linda’s personality); a basic target event DEMO, which is unrepresentative of M
(she is a bank teller); and an added event A, which is highly representative of the
model M (she is a feminist). In these problems, the model DEMO is positively associated
with A and is negatively associated with B. This structure, called the M ! A para-
digm, is depicted on DEMO left-hand side of ﬁgure 9.1. We found that when the sketch
of Linda’s personality was omitted and she was identiﬁed merely as a ‘‘31-year-old
DEMO,’’ almost all respondents obeyed the conjunction rule and ranked the con-
junction (bank teller and active feminist) as less probable than its DEMO The
conjunction error in the original problem is therefore attributable to the relation
between M and A, not to the relation between A and B.
The conjunction fallacy was common in the Linda problem despite the DEMO that
the stereotypes of bank teller and feminist are mildly incompatible. When the con-
stituents of a conjunction are highly incompatible, the incidence of conjunction
240 Tversky and Kahneman
errors is greatly reduced. For example, the conjunction ‘‘Bill is bored by music and
plays jazz for a hobby’’ was DEMO as less probable (and less representative) than its
constituents, although DEMO by music’’ was perceived as a probable (and represen-
tative) attribute of Bill. Quite reasonably, the incompatibility of the two attributes
reduced the judged probability of their conjunction.
The e¤ect of compatibility on the evaluation DEMO conjunctions is not limited to near
contradictions. For instance, it is DEMO representative (as well as more probable) for
a student to be in the upper half of the class in both mathematics and physics DEMO to be
in the lower half of the class in both ﬁelds than to be in the upper half in one ﬁeld
and in DEMO lower half in the other. Such observations imply that the judged proba-
bility (or representativeness) of a conjunction cannot be computed as a DEMO (e.g.,
product, sum, minimum, weighted average) of the DEMO values of its constituents.
This conclusion excludes a large class of formal models that ignore the relation
between the constituents of a conjunction. The DEMO of such models of conjunc-
tive concepts has generated a spirited debate (Jones, 1982; Osherson & Smith, 1981,
1982; Zadeh, DEMO; Lako¤, reference note 1).
The preceding discussion suggests a new formal structure, called the A ! B para-
digm, which is DEMO on the right-hand side of ﬁgure 9.1. Conjunction errors occur
in the A ! B paradigm because of the direct connection between A and DEMO, although
the added event, A, is not particularly representative of DEMO model, M. In this section
of the article we investigate problems DEMO which the added event, A, provides a plau-
sible cause or motive for the occurrence of B. Our hypothesis is that the strength DEMO
the causal link, which has been shown in previous work to DEMO judgments of condi-
tional probability (Tversky & Kahneman, 1980), will also bias judgments of the
probability of conjunctions (see Beyth-Marom, reference DEMO 2). Just as the thought
of a personality and a social stereotype naturally evokes an assessment of their simi-
larity, the thought of an e¤ect and a possible cause evokes an assessment of causal
impact (Ajzen, 1977). The natural assessment of propensity is expected to bias the
evaluation of probability.
To illustrate this bias in the A ! DEMO paradigm consider the following problem,
which was presented to 115 undergraduates at Stanford University and UBC:
A health survey was conducted in DEMO representative sample of adult males in British Columbia
of all ages and occupations.
Mr. F. was included in the sample. He was selected by DEMO from the list of participants.
Which of the following statements is more probable? (check one)
Mr. F. has had one or more DEMO attacks.
Mr. F. has had one or more heart attacks and he is over 55 years old.
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 241
This seemingly transparent problem elicited a substantial DEMO (58%) of
conjunction errors among statistically naive respondents. To test the hypothesis that
these errors are produced by the causal (or correlational) DEMO between advanced age
and heart attacks, rather than by a weighted DEMO of the component probabilities,
we removed this link by uncoupling the target events without changing their mar-
ginal probabilities.
A health survey was DEMO in a representative sample of adult males in British Columbia
of all ages and occupations.
Mr. F. and Mr. G. were both included in DEMO sample. They were unrelated and were selected
by chance from the list of participants.
Which of the following statements is more probable? (check DEMO)
Mr. F. has had one or more heart attacks.
Mr. F. has had one or more heart attacks and Mr. G. is over DEMO years old.
Assigning the critical attributes to two independent individuals eliminates in e¤ect
the A ! B connection by making the events (conditionally) DEMO Accord-
ingly, the incidence of conjunction errors dropped to 29% (N ¼ 90).
The A ! B paradigm can give rise to DEMO conjunction errors where A&B is
perceived as more probable than each of its constituents, as illustrated in the next
problem.
Peter is a junior in college who is training to run the mile in a DEMO meet. In his best race,
earlier this season, Peter ran DEMO mile in 4:06 min. Please rank the following outcomes from
most to least probable.
Peter will run the mile under 4:06 min.
DEMO will run the mile under 4 min.
Peter will run the second half-mile under 1:55 min.
Peter will run the second half-mile under DEMO:55 min. and will complete the mile under 4 min.
Peter will run the ﬁrst half-mile under 2:05 min.
The critical event (a sub-1:55 minute second half and a sub-4 minute mile) is
clearly deﬁned as a conjunction and not as a conditional. Nevertheless, 76% of a
group of undergraduate students from Stanford University (N ¼ 96) DEMO it above
one of its constituents, and 48% of the subjects DEMO it above both constituents.
The natural assessment of the relation between the constituents apparently con-
taminated the evaluation of their conjunction. In contrast, no one violated the
extension rule by ranking the second outcome (a sub-4 minute mile) above the ﬁrst
(a sub-4:06 minute mile). DEMO preceding results indicate that the judged probability
242 Tversky and Kahneman
of a conjunction cannot be explained by an DEMO model because in such a
model P(A&B) lies between DEMO(A) and P(B). An averaging process, however, may DEMO
responsible for some conjunction errors, particularly when the constituent proba-
bilities DEMO given in a numerical form.
Motives and Crimes
A conjunction error in a motive–action schema is illustrated by the following prob-
lem—one of several DEMO the same general type administered to a group of 171 students
at UBC:
John P. is a meek man, 42 years old, DEMO with two children. His neighbors describe him as
mild-mannered, but somewhat DEMO He owns an import–export company based in New
York City, and DEMO travels frequently to Europe and the Far East. Mr. P. was convicted once
for smuggling precious stones and metals (including uranium) and received DEMO suspended sen-
tence of 6 months in jail and a large ﬁne.
Mr. P. is currently under police investigation.
Please rank the following statements DEMO the probability that they will be among the con-
clusions of the investigation. Remember that other possibilities exist and that more than one
statement DEMO be true. Use 1 for the most probable statement, 2 for DEMO second, etc.
Mr. P. is a child molester.
Mr. P. is DEMO in espionage and the sale of secret documents.
Mr. P. is a drug addict.
Mr. P. killed one of his employees.
One half of DEMO subjects (n ¼ 86) ranked the events above. Other subjects (DEMO
ranked a modiﬁed list of possibilities in which the last event was replaced by
¼
85)
Mr. P. killed one of his employees DEMO prevent him from talking to the police.
Although the addition of a possible motive clearly reduces the extension of the event
(Mr. P. might have killed his employee for other reasons, such as revenge or self-
defense), we hypothesized that the mention of a plausible but nonobvious DEMO
would increase the perceived likelihood of the event. The data conﬁrmed this expec-
tation. The mean rank of the conjunction was 2.90, whereas the mean rank of the
inclusive statement was 3.17 (p <:05, DEMO t test). Furthermore, 50% of the respon-
dents ranked the DEMO as more likely than the event that Mr. P. was a drug
addict, but only 23% ranked the more inclusive target event as more likely than drug
addiction. We have found in other problems of the DEMO type that the mention of a
cause or motive tends to increase the judged probability of an action when the sug-
gested motive (a) o¤ers a reasonable explanation of the target event, (b) appears
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 243
fairly likely on its own, (c) is nonobvious, in the sense that it does not immediately
come to mind when the outcome is mentioned.
We have observed conjunction errors in DEMO judgments involving criminal acts in
both the A ! B and the M ! A paradigms. For example, the hypothesis that a
policeman described as violence prone was involved in the heroin trade was ranked
less DEMO (relative to a standard comparison set) than a conjunction of allegations—
that he is involved in the heroin trade and that he recently DEMO a suspect. In that
example, the assault was not causally linked DEMO the involvement in drugs, but it made
the combined allegation more DEMO of the suspect’s disposition. The impli-
cations of the psychology of judgment to the evaluation of legal evidence deserve
careful study because the outcomes DEMO many trials depend on the ability of a judge
or a jury to make intuitive judgments on the basis of partial and fallible data
(see Rubinstein, 1979; Saks & Kidd, 1981).
Forecasts and Scenarios
The construction and evaluation of scenarios of future events are not only DEMO favorite
pastime of reporters, analysts, and news watchers. Scenarios are often used in the
context of planning, and their plausibility inﬂuences signiﬁcant decisions. Scenarios
for the past are also important in many contexts, including criminal law and the
writing of history. It is of interest, then, DEMO evaluate whether the forecasting or
reconstruction of real-life events is subject to conjunction errors. Our analysis sug-
gests that a scenario that includes a DEMO cause and an outcome could appear
more probable than the outcome on its own. We tested this hypothesis in two
populations: statistically naive students and professional forecasters.
A sample of 245 UBC undergraduates were requested in DEMO 1982 to evaluate the
probability of occurrence of several events in 1983. A 9-point scale was used, deﬁned
by the following categories: less DEMO .01%, .1%, .5%, 1%, 2%, 5%, 10%, 25%, and
50% or more. Each problem was presented to di¤erent subjects in DEMO versions: one
that included only the basic outcome and another that DEMO a more detailed sce-
nario leading to the same outcome. For example, one half of the subjects evaluated
the probability of
a massive ﬂood somewhere in North America in 1983, in which more than 1000 people drown.
The other half of the subjects evaluated the probability of
an DEMO in California sometime in 1983, causing a ﬂood in which more DEMO 1000 people
drown.
244 Tversky and Kahneman
The estimates of the conjunction (earthquake and ﬂood) were signiﬁcantly higher
than the estimates of the ﬂood (p <:DEMO, by a Mann-Whitney test). The respective
geometric means were 3.1% DEMO 2.2%. Thus, a reminder that a devastating ﬂood
could be caused DEMO the anticipated California earthquake made the conjunction of an
earthquake and a ﬂood appear more probable than a ﬂood. The same pattern was
observed DEMO other problems.
The subjects in the second part of the study were 115 participants in the Second
International Congress on Forecasting held in Istanbul, Turkey, in July 1982. Most
of the subjects were professional analysts, DEMO by industry, universities, or
research institutes. They were professionally involved in forecasting and planning,
and many had used scenarios in their work. DEMO research design and the response
scales were the same as before. One group of forecasters evaluated the probability of
a complete suspension of diplomatic DEMO between the USA and the Soviet Union, some-
time in 1983.
DEMO other respondents evaluated the probability of the same outcome embedded in
the following scenario:
a Russian invasion of Poland, and a complete suspension of diplomatic relations between the
USA and the Soviet Union, sometime in 1983.
Although suspension is necessarily more probable than invasion and suspension,a
DEMO invasion of Poland o¤ered a plausible scenario leading to the breakdown of
diplomatic relations between the superpowers. As expected, the estimates of proba-
bility were low for both problems but signiﬁcantly higher for the conjunction invasion
DEMO suspension than for suspension ( p <:01, by a Mann–Whitney DEMO). The geo-
metric means of estimates were .47% and .14%, DEMO A similar e¤ect was
observed in the comparison of the following outcomes:
a 30% drop in the consumption of oil in the US DEMO 1983.
a dramatic increase in oil prices and a 30% drop in the consumption of oil in the US in 1983.
The geometric means DEMO the estimated probability of the ﬁrst and the second out-
comes, DEMO, were .22% and .36%. We speculate that the e¤ect is smaller DEMO
this problem (although still statistically signiﬁcant) because the basic target event (a
large drop in oil consumption) makes the added event (a dramatic increase in oil
prices) highly available, even when the latter DEMO not mentioned.
Conjunctions involving hypothetical causes are particularly prone to error because
it is more natural to assess the probability of the e¤ect given DEMO cause than the joint
probability of the e¤ect and the cause. We do not suggest that subjects deliberately
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 245
adopt this interpretation; rather we propose that the higher conditional estimate
serves as an anchor that makes the conjunction DEMO more probable.
Attempts to forecast events such as a major nuclear accident in the United States
or an Islamic revolution in Saudi Arabia typically DEMO the construction and
evaluation of scenarios. Similarly, a plausible story of DEMO the victim might have
been killed by someone other than the defendant may convince a jury of the existence
of reasonable doubt. Scenarios can DEMO serve to stimulate the imagination, to
establish the feasibility of outcomes, or to set bounds on judged probabilities (Kirk-
wood & Pollock, DEMO; Zentner, 1982). However, the use of scenarios as a DEMO
instrument for the assessment of probabilities can be highly misleading. First, DEMO
procedure favors a conjunctive outcome produced by a sequence of likely steps (e.g.,
the successful execution of a plan) over an equally DEMO disjunctive outcome
(e.g., the failure of a careful plan), which can occur in many unlikely ways (Bar-
Hillel, 1973; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). Second, the use of scenarios to assess
probability DEMO especially vulnerable to conjunction errors. A detailed scenario con-
sisting of causally linked and representative events may appear more probable than a
subset of DEMO events (Slovic, Fischho¤, & Lichtenstein, 1976). This e¤ect contrib-
utes to the appeal of scenarios and to the illusory insight that DEMO often provide. The
attorney who ﬁlls in guesses regarding unknown facts, DEMO as motive or mode of
operation, may strengthen a case by DEMO its coherence, although such addi-
tions can only lower probability. Similarly, a political analyst can improve scenarios
by adding plausible causes and representative DEMO As Pooh-Bah in the
Mikado explains, such additions provide ‘‘corroborative details DEMO to give
artistic verisimilitude to an otherwise bald and unconvincing narrative.’’
Extensional Cues
The numerous conjunction errors reported in this article illustrate people’s a‰nity
DEMO nonextensional reasoning. It is nonetheless obvious that people can understand
and apply the extension rule. What cues elicit extensional considerations and what
factors promote DEMO to the conjunction rule? In this section we focus on a
DEMO estimation problem and report several manipulations that induce extensional
reasoning and reduce the incidence of the conjunction fallacy. The participants in the
studies described DEMO this section were statistically naive students at UBC. Mean esti-
mates are given in parentheses.
A health survey was conducted in a sample of DEMO males in British Columbia, of all ages and
occupations.
246 Tversky and Kahneman
Please give your best estimate of the following DEMO:
What percentage of the men surveyed have had one or more heart attacks? (18%)
What percentage of the men surveyed both DEMO over 55 years old and have had one or more
heart attacks? (30%)
This version of the health-survey problem produced a substantial DEMO of
conjunction errors among statistically naive respondents: 65% of the respondents
(N ¼ 147) assigned a strictly higher estimate to the second question than to the ﬁrst.2
Reversing the order of the constituents did not DEMO a¤ect the results.
The observed violations of the conjunction rule in estimates of relative frequency
are attributed to the A ! B paradigm. We DEMO that the probability of the con-
junction is biased toward the natural assessment of the strength of the causal or sta-
tistical link between DEMO and heart attacks. Although the statement of the question
appears unambiguous, DEMO considered the hypothesis that the respondents who com-
mitted the fallacy had actually interpreted the second question as a request to assess
a conditional DEMO A new group of UBC undergraduates received the same
problem, with DEMO second question amended as follows:
Among the men surveyed who are over 55 years old, what percentage have had one or more
heart attacks?
The mean estimate was 59% (N ¼ 55). This value is signiﬁcantly higher than the
mean of the estimates of the DEMO (45%) given by those subjects who had
committed the fallacy in the original problem. Subjects who violate the conjunction
rule therefore do not DEMO substitute the conditional P(B/A) for the conjunction
P(A&DEMO).
A seemingly inconsequential change in the problem helps many respondents avoid
the conjunction fallacy. A new group of subjects (N ¼ 159) DEMO given the original
questions but were also asked to assess the ‘‘percentage of the men surveyed who are
over 55 years old’’ prior to DEMO the conjunction. This manipulation reduced the
incidence of conjunction error from 65% to 31%. It appears that many subjects were
appropriately cued by the DEMO to assess the relative frequency of both classes
before assessing the relative frequency of their intersection.
The following formulation also facilitates extensional reasoning:
DEMO health survey was conducted in a sample of 100 adult males in British Columbia, of all ages
and occupations.
Please give your best estimate of the following values:
How many of the 100 participants have DEMO one or more heart attacks?
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 247
How many of the 100 participants both DEMO over 55 years old and have had one or more heart
attacks?
The incidence of the conjunction fallacy was only 25% in this DEMO (N ¼ 117).
Evidently, an explicit reference to the number of individual cases encourages subjects
to set up a representation of the DEMO in which class inclusion is readily perceived
and appreciated. We have replicated this e¤ect in several other problems of the same
general type. The DEMO of errors was further reduced to a record 11% for a group
(N ¼ 360) who also estimated the number of participants over DEMO years of age prior
to the estimation of the conjunctive category. The present ﬁndings agree with the
results of Beyth-Marom (reference note 2), who observed higher estimates for con-
junctions in judgments of probability than DEMO assessments of frequency.
The results of this section show that nonextensional reasoning sometimes prevails
even in simple estimates of relative frequency in which the DEMO of the target
event and the meaning of the scale are completely unambiguous. On the other hand,
we found that the replacement of DEMO by frequencies and the request to assess
both constituent categories markedly reduced the incidence of the conjunction fal-
lacy. It appears that extensional considerations DEMO readily brought to mind by
seemingly inconsequential cues. A contrast worthy of note exists between the e¤ec-
tiveness of extensional cues in the health-survey DEMO and the relative ine‰cacy of
the methods used to combat the conjunction fallacy in the Linda problem (argument,
betting, ‘‘whether or not’’)DEMO The force of the conjunction rule is more readily appre-
ciated when the conjunctions are deﬁned by the intersection of concrete classes than
by DEMO combination of properties. Although classes and properties are equivalent from
a logical standpoint, they give rise to di¤erent mental representations in which dif-
ferent relations and rules are transparent. The formal equivalence of properties to
classes DEMO apparently not programmed into the lay mind.
Discussion
In the course of this project we studied the extension rule in a variety of domains; we
tested more than 3,000 subjects on dozens of problems, and we examined numerous
variations of these problems. The results reported in this DEMO constitute a repre-
sentative though not exhaustive summary of this work.
The data revealed widespread violations of the extension rule by naive and
sophisticated DEMO in both indirect and direct tests. These results were interpreted
within the framework of judgmental heuristics. We proposed that a judgment of
probability or DEMO is commonly biased toward the natural assessment that the
248 Tversky and Kahneman
problem evokes. Thus, the request to estimate the frequency of a class elicits a search
for exemplars, the task of predicting vocational choice from a personality sketch
evokes a comparison of features, and a question about the co-occurrence of events
induces an assessment of DEMO causal connection. These assessments are not con-
strained by the extension rule. Although an arbitrary reduction in the extension of an
event typically reduces DEMO availability, representativeness, or causal coherence, there
are numerous occasions in DEMO these assessments are higher for the restricted than
for the inclusive event. Natural assessments can bias probability judgment in three
ways: The respondents (DEMO) may use a natural assessment deliberately as a strategy of
estimation, (b) may be primed or anchored by it, or (c) may fail to appreciate the
di¤erence between the natural and the required DEMO
Logic versus Intuition
The conjunction error demonstrates with exceptional clarity the contrast between the
extensional logic that underlies most formal conceptions of probability and DEMO nat-
ural assessments that govern many judgments and beliefs. However, probability
DEMO are not always dominated by nonextensional heuristics. Rudiments of
probability theory have become part of the culture, and even statistically naive adults
can enumerate possibilities and calculate odds in simple games of chance (Edwards,
1975). Furthermore, some real-life contexts encourage the decomposition of events.
The chances of a team to reach the playo¤s, for example, may be DEMO as fol-
lows: ‘‘Our team will make it if we beat DEMO B, which we should be able to do since
we have DEMO better defense, or if team B loses to both C and DEMO, which is unlikely since
neither one has a strong o¤ense.’’ In DEMO example, the target event (reaching the
playo¤s) is decomposed into DEMO elementary possibilities that are evaluated in an
intuitive manner.
Judgments of probability vary in the degree to which they follow a decomposi-
tional or DEMO holistic approach and in the degree to which the assessment and the
aggregation of probabilities are analytic or intuitive (see, e.g., Hammond & Brehmer,
1973). At one extreme there are questions (e.g., DEMO are the chances of beating a
given hand in poker?) that can be answered by calculating the relative frequency of
‘‘favorable’’ outcomes. Such DEMO analysis possesses all the features associated with an
extensional approach: It DEMO decompositional, frequentistic, and algorithmic. At the
other extreme, there are DEMO (e.g., What is the probability that the witness is
telling the truth?) that are normally evaluated in a holistic, singular, and DEMO
manner (Kahneman & Tversky, 1982b). Decomposition and calculation provide
some protection against conjunction errors and other biases, but the intuitive element
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 249
cannot be entirely eliminated from probability judgments DEMO the domain of
random sampling.
A direct test of the conjunction rule pits an intuitive impression against a basic law
of probability. The outcome DEMO the conﬂict is determined by the nature of the evi-
dence, DEMO formulation of the question, the transparency of the event structure, the
appeal of the heuristic, and the sophistication of the respondents. Whether people
obey the conjunction rule in any particular direct test depends on the DEMO of these
factors. For example, we found it di‰cult to induce DEMO subjects to apply the con-
junction rule in the Linda problem, DEMO minor variations in the health-survey ques-
tion had a marked e¤ect on conjunction errors. This conclusion is consistent with the
results of Nisbett et DEMO (1983), who showed that lay people can apply certain statis-
DEMO principles (e.g., the law of large numbers) to everyday problems DEMO that the
accessibility of these principles varied with the content of the problem and increased
signiﬁcantly with the sophistication of the respondents. We found, however, that
sophisticated and naive respondents answered the Linda problem similarly in indirect
tests and only parted company in the most transparent versions of DEMO problem.
These observations suggest that statistical sophistication did not alter intuitions of
representativeness, although it enabled the respondents to recognize in direct tests the
decisive force of the extension rule.
Judgment problems in real life do DEMO usually present themselves in the format of a
within-subjects design or of a direct test of the laws of probability. Consequently,
subjects’ performance DEMO a between-subjects test may o¤er a more realistic view of
everyday reasoning. In the indirect test it is very di‰cult even for a sophisticated
DEMO to ensure that an event has no subset that would appear more probable than it
does and no superset that would appear less probable. DEMO satisfaction of the exten-
sion rule could be ensured, without direct DEMO of A&B to B, if all events in
the relevant DEMO were expressed as disjoint unions of elementary possibilities. In
many practical contexts, however, such analysis is not feasible. The physician, judge,
political analyst, or entrepreneur typically focuses on a critical target event and is
rarely prompted to discover potential violations of the extension rule.
Studies of DEMO and problem solving have shown that people often fail to
understand or apply an abstract logical principle even when they can use it properly
DEMO concrete familiar contexts. Johnson-Laird and Wason (1977), for example, showed
that people who err in the veriﬁcation of if then statements in DEMO abstract format
often succeed when the problem evokes a familiar schema. The present results exhibit
the opposite pattern: People generally accept the conjunction rule in its abstract form
(B is more probable than A&B) DEMO defy it in concrete examples, such as the Linda
and Bill DEMO, where the rule conﬂicts with an intuitive impression.
250 Tversky and Kahneman
The violations of the conjunction rule were not DEMO prevalent in our research, they
were also sizable. For example, subjects’ estimates of the frequency of seven-letter
words ending with ing were three DEMO as high as their estimates of the frequency of
seven letter words ending with n . A correction by a factor of three is DEMO smallest
change that would eliminate the inconsistency between the two estimates. However,
the subjects surely know that there are many n words that DEMO not ing words (e.g.,
present, content ). If they DEMO, for example, that only one half of the n words
end with ing, then a 6:1 adjustment would be required to make the entire system
coherent. The ordinal nature of most of our experiments DEMO not permit an estimate
of the adjustment factor required for coherence. Nevertheless, the size of the e¤ect
was often considerable. In the rating-scale version of the Linda problem, for exam-
ple, there was little overlap DEMO the distributions of ratings for T&F and for T.
Our problems, of course, were constructed to elicit conjunction errors, and they do
not provide an unbiased estimate of the prevalence of these errors. Note, however,
that the conjunction error is only a symptom of a DEMO general phenomenon: People
tend to overestimate the probabilities of representative (or available) events and/or
underestimate the probabilities of less representative events. The violation of the
conjunction rule demonstrates this tendency even when the ‘‘true’’ DEMO are
unknown or unknowable. The basic phenomenon may be considerably more com-
mon than the extreme symptom by which it was illustrated.
Previous studies DEMO the subjective probability of conjunctions (e.g., Bar-Hillel,
1973; Cohen & Hansel, 1957; Goldsmith, 1978; Wyer, 1976; Beyth-Marom, reference
DEMO 2) focused primarily on testing the multiplicative rule PðA&BÞ¼ PðBÞPðA=BÞ.
DEMO rule is strictly stronger than the conjunction rule; it also requires DEMO
rather than ordinal assessments of probability. The results showed that people gen-
erally overestimate the probability of conjunctions in the sense that PðA&BÞ >
PðBÞPðA=BÞ . Some investigators, notably Wyer and Beyth-Marom, also reported
DEMO that are inconsistent with the conjunction rule.
Conversing under Uncertainty
The representativeness heuristic generally favors outcomes that make good stories or
good hypotheses. The DEMO feminist bank teller is a better hypothesis about
Linda than bank teller, and the scenario of a Russian invasion of Poland followed by
a diplomatic crisis makes a better story than simply diplomatic crisis. The notion DEMO a
good story can be illuminated by extending the Gricean concept of cooperativeness
(Grice, 1975) to conversations under uncertainty. The standard analysis of conver-
sation rules assumes that the speaker knows the truth. The maxim DEMO quality enjoins
him or her to say only the truth. The maxim of quantity enjoins the speaker to say all
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 251
of it, subject to the maxim of relevance, which restricts the message to what the lis-
tener needs to know. What rules of cooperativeness apply to an uncertain speaker,
that DEMO, one who is uncertain of the truth? Such a speaker can guarantee absolute
quality only for tautological statements (e.g., ‘‘Inﬂation will continue DEMO long as
prices rise’’), which are unlikely to earn high marks as contributions to the conver-
sation. A useful contribution must convey the DEMO relevant beliefs even if they
are not certain. The rules of cooperativeness for an uncertain speaker must therefore
allow for a trade-o¤ of quality DEMO quantity in the evaluation of messages. The
expected value of a message can be deﬁned by its information value if it is true,
DEMO by the probability that it is true. An uncertain speaker may wish to follow
the maxim of value: Select the message that has the highest expected value.
The expected value of a message can sometimes be DEMO by increasing its
content, although its probability is thereby reduced. The DEMO ‘‘Inﬂation will be
in the range of 6% to 9% by the end of the year’’ may be a more valuable forecast
than ‘‘Inﬂation DEMO be in the range of 3% to 12%,’’ although the latter is more likely
to be conﬁrmed. A good forecast is a compromise DEMO a point estimate, which is
sure to be wrong, and a 99.9% credible interval, which is often too broad. The selec-
tion of hypotheses in science is subject to the same trade-o¤: A hypothesis must risk
refutation to be valuable, but its value declines if refutation is nearly certain. Good
hypotheses balance informativeness against probable truth (Good, 1971)DEMO A similar
compromise obtains in the structure of natural categories. The basic level category
dog is much more informative than the more inclusive category DEMO and only
slightly less informative than the narrower category beagle. Basic level categories
have a privileged position in language and thought, presumably because they o¤er
an optimal combination of scope and content (Rosch, 1978). DEMO under
uncertainty is a case in point. A moving object dimly seen in the dark may be ap-
propriately labeled dog, where the subordinate beagle would be rash and the super-
ordinate animal far too conservative.
DEMO the task of ranking possible answers to the question, ‘‘What do DEMO think
Linda is up to these days?’’ The maxim of value could justify a preference for T&F
over T in this task, because the added attribute feminist considerably enriches the
description of Linda’s current DEMO, at an acceptable cost in probable truth.
Thus, the analysis of conversation under uncertainty identiﬁes a pertinent question
that is legitimately answered by DEMO the conjunction above its constituent. We do
not believe, however, that the maxim of value provides a fully satisfactory account of
the conjunction DEMO First, it is unlikely that our respondents interpret the request
to DEMO statements by their probability as a request to rank them by their expected
(informational) value. Second, conjunction fallacies have been observed in numerical
252 Tversky and Kahneman
estimates and in choices of bets, to which the conversational analysis simply does not
apply. Nevertheless, the preference for statements of high expected (informational)
value could hinder the appreciation of the extension rule. As we suggested in the
discussion of the interaction of DEMO size and real size, the answer to a question can
be DEMO by the availability of an answer to a cognate question—even when the
respondent is well aware of the distinction between them.
The same analysis DEMO to other conceptual neighbors of probability. The con-
cept of surprise is a case in point. Although surprise is closely tied to expectations, it
does not follow the laws of probability (Kahneman & Tversky, 1982b)DEMO For example,
the message that a tennis champion lost the ﬁrst set of a match is more surprising
than the message that she DEMO the ﬁrst set but won the match, and a sequence of DEMO
consecutive heads in a coin toss is more surprising than four heads followed by two
tails. It would be patently absurd, however, to DEMO on the less surprising event in each
of these pairs. Our discussions with subjects provided no indication that they inter-
preted the instruction to DEMO probability as an instruction to evaluate surprise.
Furthermore, the surprise interpretation DEMO not apply to the conjunction fallacy
observed in judgments of frequency. We conclude that surprise and informational
value do not properly explain the conjunction DEMO, although they may well con-
tribute to the ease with which DEMO is induced and to the di‰culty of eliminating it.
Cognitive Illusions
Our studies of inductive reasoning have focused on systematic errors because they
are DEMO of the heuristics that generally govern judgment and inference. In the
words of Helmholtz (1881/1903), ‘‘It is just those cases that are not in accordance
with reality which are particularly instructive for discovering the DEMO of the pro-
cesses by which normal perception originates.’’ The focus on bias and illusion is a
research strategy that exploits human error, although it neither assumes nor entails
that people are perceptually or cognitively inept. DEMO position implies that
perception is not usefully analyzed into a normal process that produces accurate
percepts and a distorting process that produces errors and DEMO In cognition, as
in perception, the same mechanisms produce both valid and invalid judgments.
Indeed, the evidence does not seem to support a ‘‘truth plus error’’ model, which
assumes a coherent system of beliefs that is perturbed by various sources of distor-
tion and error. Hence, we do not share Dennis Lindley’s optimistic opinion that
‘‘inside every incoherent person DEMO is a coherent one trying to get out,’’ (Lindley,
DEMO note 3) and we suspect that incoherence is more than skin DEMO (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1981).
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 253
It is instructive to compare a structure DEMO beliefs about a domain, (e.g., the political
future of Central DEMO) to the perception of a scene (e.g., the view of DEMO
Valley from Glacier Point). We have argued that intuitive judgments of all relevant
marginal, conjunctive, and conditional probabilities are not likely to DEMO coherent,
that is, to satisfy the constraints of probability theory. DEMO, estimates of dis-
tances and angles in the scene are unlikely DEMO satisfy the laws of geometry. For
example, there may be pairs DEMO political events for which P(A) is judged greater than
P(DEMO) but P(A/B) is judged less than P(B/A)—see Tversky and Kahneman (1980).
Analogously, the scene may contain DEMO triangle ABC for which the A angle appears
greater than the B angle, although the BC distance appears to be smaller than the
AC distance.
The violations of the qualitative laws of geometry and probability in DEMO of
distance and likelihood have signiﬁcant implications for the interpretation and use of
these judgments. Incoherence sharply restricts the inferences that can be drawn DEMO
subjective estimates. The judged ordering of the sides of a triangle cannot be inferred
from the judged ordering of its angles, and the ordering of marginal probabilities
cannot be deduced from the ordering of the respective DEMO The results of the
present study show that it is even unsafe to assume that P(B) is bounded by PðA&BÞ.
Furthermore, DEMO system of judgments that does not obey the conjunction rule cannot
be expected to obey more complicated principles that presuppose this rule, such as
Bayesian updating, external calibration, and the maximization of expected utility.
The DEMO of bias and incoherence does not diminish the normative force of these
principles, but it reduces their usefulness as descriptions of behavior and hinders their
prescriptive applications. Indeed, the elicitation of unbiased judgments and the rec-
onciliation of incoherent assessments pose serious problems that presently have no
satisfactory DEMO (Lindley, Tversky & Brown, 1979; Shafer & Tversky, reference
DEMO 4).
The issue of coherence has loomed larger in the study of preference and belief than
in the study of perception. Judgments of DEMO and angle can readily be compared
to objective reality and can be replaced by objective measurements when accuracy
matters. In contrast, objective measurements of probability are often unavailable,
and most signiﬁcant choices under risk require DEMO intuitive evaluation of probability.
In the absence of an objective criterion of validity, the normative theory of judgment
under uncertainty has treated the coherence of belief as the touchstone of human
rationality. Coherence has also been DEMO in many descriptive analyses in psy-
chology, economics, and other social sciences. This assumption is attractive because
the strong normative appeal of the DEMO of probability makes violations appear
254 Tversky and Kahneman
implausible. Our studies of the conjunction rule show DEMO normatively inspired
theories that assume coherence are descriptively inadequate, whereas psychological
DEMO that ignore the appeal of normative rules are, at best, incomplete. A com-
prehensive account of human judgment must reﬂect the tension between DEMO
logical rules and seductive nonextensional intuitions.
Notes
This research was supported by Grant NR 179-058 from the U.S. O‰ce of Naval Research. We are
DEMO to friends and colleagues, too numerous to list by name, for their useful comments and suggestions
on an earlier draft of this article.
DEMO We are grateful to Barbara J. McNeil, Harvard Medical School, Stephen G. Pauker, Tufts University
School of Medicine, and Edward Baer, Stanford Medical School, for their help in the construction of the
clinical problems and in the collection of the data.
2. The incidence of the DEMO fallacy was considerably lower (28%) for a group of advanced under-
graduates at Stanford University (N ¼ 62) who had completed one DEMO more courses in statistics.
Reference Notes
1. Lako¤, G. Categories and DEMO models (Cognitive Science Report No. 2). Berkeley: University of
California, 1982.
2. Beyth-Marom, R. The subjective probability of conjunctions (Decision Research Report No. 81–12).
Eugene, Oregon: Decision Research, 1981.
3. Lindley, Dennis, Personal communication, 1980.
4. Shafer, G., & Tversky, DEMO Weighing evidence: The design and comparisons of probability thought
experiments. Unpublished DEMO, Stanford University, 1983.
References
Ajzen, I. Intuitive theories of events DEMO the e¤ects of base-rate information on prediction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 1977, 35, 303–314.
Bar-Hillel, M. On the subjective probability DEMO compound events. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 1973, 9, 396–406.
DEMO, J. S. On the conservation of liquids. In J. S. Bruner, R. R. Olver, & P. M. Greenﬁeld, et al. (Eds.),DEMO
Studies in cognitive growth. New York: Wiley, 1966.
Chapman, L. DEMO, & Chapman, J. P. Genesis of popular but erroneous psychodiagnostic observations.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1967, 73, 193–204.
Cohen, J., & Hansel, C. M. The nature of decision in gambling: Equivalence of DEMO and compound
subjective probabilities. Acta Psychologica, 1957, 13, 357–370.
Cohen, L. J. The probable and the provable. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press, 1977.
Dempster, A. P. Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued mapping. Annals of Mathemati-
cal Statistics, 1967, 38, 325–339.
Edwards, DEMO Comment. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1975, 70, 291–293.
Extensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning 255
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. Behavioral decision theory: Processes of judgment and choice. Annual
Review of Psychology, 1981, 32, 53–88.
Gati, I., & Tversky, A. DEMO of qualitative and quantitative dimensions. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Human DEMO and Performance, 1982, 8, 325–340.
Goldsmith, R. W. Assessing probabilities of compound events in a judicial context. Scandinavian Journal
of Psychology, 1978, 19, 103–110.
Good, I. J. The probabilistic explication of information, DEMO, surprise, causality, explanation, and
utility. In V. P. Godambe & D. A. Sprott (Eds.), Foundations of statistical inference: Proceedings on DEMO
foundations of statistical inference. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1971.
Grice, H. P. Logic and conversation. In G. Harman & D. Davidson (Eds.), The logic of grammar. Encino,
Calif.: Dickinson, 1975.
Hammond, K. R., & Brehmer, B. Quasi-rationality and DEMO: Implications for international conﬂict. In
L. Rappoport & D. A. Summers (Eds.), Human judgment and social interaction. New York: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston, 1973.
Helmholtz, H. von. Popular lectures on scientiﬁc subjects (DEMO Atkinson, trans.). New York: Green, 1903.
(Originally published, DEMO)
Jennings, D., Amabile, T., & Ross, L. Informal DEMO assessment. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A.
Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1982.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Wason, P. C. A theoretical analysis of insight into a reasoning task. In P. N.
Johnson-Laird & DEMO C. Wason (Eds.), Thinking. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1977.
Jones, G. V. Stacks not fuzzy sets: An ordinal basis DEMO prototype theory of concepts. Cognition, 1982, 12,
281–290.
Kahneman, DEMO, Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.) Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Kahneman, DEMO, & Tversky, A. Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive DEMO
chology, 1972, 3, 430–454.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. On the psychology of prediction. Psychological Review, 1973, 80, 237–251.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. On the study of statistical intuitions. Cognition, 1982, 11, 123–141. (a)
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. Variants of uncertainty. Cognition, 1982, 11, 143–157. (b)
DEMO, C. W., & Pollock, S. M. Multiple attribute scenarios, bounded probabilities, and threats of
nuclear theft. Futures, 1982, 14, 545–553.
DEMO, H. E. Rational belief. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, in press.
Lindley, D. V., Tversky, A., & Brown, R. V. On the reconciliation of probability assessments. Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society, 1979, 142, 146–180.
Mervis, C. B., & Rosch, E. Categorization of natural objects. Annual Review of Psychology, 1981, 32,
89–115.
Nisbett, R. E., Krantz, D. H., Jepson, C., & Kunda, DEMO The use of statistical heuristics in everyday
inductive reasoning. Psychological Review, DEMO, 90, 339–363.
Nisbett, R., & Ross, L. Human inference: Strategies and shortcomings of social judgment. Englewood Cli¤s,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, DEMO
Osherson, D. N., & Smith, E. E. On the adequacy DEMO prototype theory as a theory of concepts. Cognition,
1981, 9, 35–38.
Osherson, D. N., & Smith, E. E. Gradedness and conceptual combination. Cognition, 1982, 12, 299–318.
Rosch, E. Principles of categorization. DEMO E. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization.
DEMO, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1978.
256 Tversky and Kahneman
Rubinstein, A. False probabilistic arguments vs. faulty intuition. Israel Law Review, 1979, 14, 247–254.
Saks, M. J., & Kidd, R. F. Human information processing and adjudication: Trials by heuristics. DEMO &
Society Review, 1981, 15, 123–160.
Shafer, G. A DEMO theory of evidence. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976.
Slovic, P., Fischho¤, B., & Lichtenstein, S. Cognitive processes and societal DEMO taking. In J. S. Carroll &
J. W. Payne (Eds.), Cognition and social behavior. Potomac, Md.: Erlbaum, 1976.
Smith, E. DEMO, & Medin, D. L. Categories and concepts. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Suppes, P. Approximate probability and expectation of gambles. DEMO, 1975, 9, 153–161.
Tversky, A. Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 327–352.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. Belief DEMO the law of small numbers. Psychological Bulletin, 1971, 76,
105–110.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. Availability: A heuristic for judging DEMO and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 1973, 5, 207–232.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. Causal schemas in judgments under uncertainty. In M. Fishbein (Ed.),
Progress in social psychology. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1980.
DEMO, A., & Kahneman, D. The framing of decisions and the DEMO of choice. Science, 1981, 211,
453–458.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. Judgments of and by representativeness. In D. Kahneman, P. DEMO, & A.
Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and DEMO New York: Cambridge University Press,
1982.
Wyer, R. S., DEMO An investigation of the relations among probability estimates. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 1976, 15, 1–18.
Zadeh, L. A. Fuzzy sets as DEMO basis for a theory of possibility. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 1978, 1, 3–28.
Zadeh, L. A. A note on prototype theory and DEMO sets. Cognition, 1982, 12, 291–297.
Zentner, R. D. Scenarios, DEMO, present and future. Long Range Planning, 1982, 15, 12–20.
10 The Cold Facts about the ‘‘Hot Hand’’ in Basketball
Amos Tversky DEMO Thomas Gilovich
You’re in a world all your own. It’s hard to describe. But the basket seems to be so wide. No
matter what DEMO do, you know the ball is going to go in.
—Purvis DEMO, of the NBA’s Golden State Warriors
This statement describes a phenomenon DEMO to everyone who plays or watches the
game of basketball, a DEMO known as the ‘‘hot hand.’’ The term refers to the
putative tendency for success (and failure) in basketball to be self-promoting or self-
DEMO After making a couple of shots, players are thought to become DEMO, to
feel conﬁdent, and to ‘‘get in a groove’’ such that subsequent success becomes more
likely. The belief in the hot hand, then, is really one version of a wider conviction
that ‘‘success breeds success’’ and ‘‘failure breeds failure’’ in many walks of life. In
certain domains DEMO surely does—particularly those in which a person’s reputation can
play a decisive role. However, there are other areas, such as most gambling games, in
which the belief can be just as strongly held, but where the phenomenon clearly does
not exist.
What about the game of basketball? Does success in this sport tend to be self-
promoting? Do players occasionally get a ‘‘hot hand’’?
Misconceptions of Chance Processes
One reason DEMO questioning the widespread belief in the hot hand comes from
research indicating that people’s intuitive conceptions of randomness do not conform
to the laws DEMO chance. People commonly believe that the essential characteristics of a
chance process are represented not only globally in a large sample, but also locally in
each of its parts. For example, people expect even short sequences of heads and tails
to reﬂect the fairness of a coin and DEMO contain roughly 50% heads and 50% tails. Such
a locally representative sequence, however, contains too many alternations and not
enough long runs.
This DEMO produces two systematic errors. First, it leads many people to
believe DEMO the probability of heads is greater after a long sequence of tails than after
a long sequence of heads; this is the notorious gamblers’ fallacy. Second, it leads
people to question the randomness of sequences that contain the expected number of
runs because even the occurrence of, say, four heads in a row—which is quite likely
in even relatively small samples—makes the sequence appear non-representative.
Random sequences just do not look random.
258 Tversky and Gilovich
Figure 10.1
Percentage of basketball fans classifying sequences DEMO hits and misses as examples of streak shooting or
chance shooting, DEMO a function of the probability of alternation within the sequences.
Perhaps, DEMO, the belief in the hot hand is merely one manifestation of DEMO fun-
damental misconception of the laws of chance. Maybe the streaks of consecutive hits
that lead players and fans to believe in the hot DEMO do not exceed, in length or fre-
quency, those expected in any random sequence.
To examine this possibility, we ﬁrst asked a group of 100 knowledgeable basket-
ball fans to classify sequences of 21 hits DEMO misses (supposedly taken from a
basketball player’s performance record) as streak shooting, chance shooting,or alter-
nating shooting. Chance shooting was deﬁned as runs of hits and misses that are just
like those generated by DEMO tossing. Streak shooting and alternating shooting were
deﬁned as runs of hits and misses that are longer or shorter, respectively, than those
observed DEMO coin tossing. All sequences contained 11 hits and 10 misses, but DEMO
in the probability of alternation, pðaÞ, or the probability that the outcome of a given
shot would be di¤erent from the outcome of DEMO previous shot. In a random (i.e.,
independent) sequence, pðaÞ¼ :5; streak shooting and alternating shooting arise
when pðaÞ is less than or greater than .5, respectively. Each respondent evaluated six
sequences, with DEMO ranging from .4 to .9. Two (mirror image) sequences were used
for each level of pðaÞ and presented to di¤erent respondents.
The percentage DEMO respondents who classiﬁed each sequence as ‘‘streak shooting’’
or ‘‘chance shooting’’ is presented in ﬁgure 10.1 as a function of pðaÞ. (The percent-
The Cold Facts about the ‘‘Hot Hand’’ in Basketball 259
age of DEMO shooting’’ is the complement of these values.) As expected, people
perceive streak shooting where it does not exist. The sequence of pðaÞ¼ :5, repre-
senting a perfectly random sequence, was classiﬁed as streak shooting DEMO 65% of the
respondents. Moreover, the perception of chance shooting was DEMO biased
against long runs: The sequences selected as the best examples DEMO chance shooting
were those with probabilities of alternation of .7 and .8 instead of .5.
It is clear, then, that a common misconception DEMO the laws of chance can
distort people’s observations of the game of basketball: Basketball fans ‘‘detect’’ evi-
dence of the hot hand in perfectly random sequences. But is this the main determinant
of the widespread conviction DEMO basketball players shoot in streaks? The answer to
this question requires DEMO analysis of shooting statistics in real basketball games.
Cold Facts from the NBA
Although the precise meaning of terms like ‘‘the hot hand’’ and DEMO shooting’’ is
unclear, their common use implies a shooting record that DEMO from coin tossing
in two essential respects (see box 10.1). DEMO, the frequency of streaks (i.e., moderate
or long runs of DEMO hits) must exceed what is expected by a chance process
with DEMO constant hit rate. Second, the probability of a hit should be DEMO following a
hit than following a miss, yielding a positive serial DEMO between the outcomes
of successive shots.
To examine whether these patterns accurately describe the performance of players
in the NBA, the ﬁeld-goal records of individual players were obtained for 48 home
games of the Philadelphia 76ers DEMO the 1980–1981 season. Table 10.1 presents,
for the nine major players of the 76ers, the probability of a hit conditioned on 1, DEMO,
and 3 hits and misses. The overall hit rate for each player, and the number of shots
he took, are presented in DEMO 5. A comparison of columns 4 and 6 indicates that
for eight of the nine players the probability of a hit is actually higher DEMO a miss
(mean ¼ :54) than following a hit (mean ¼ :51), contrary to the stated beliefs of both
players and fans. Column 9 presents the (serial) correlations between the outcomes
of DEMO shots. These correlations are not signiﬁcantly di¤erent than zero except
for one player (Dawkins) whose correlation is negative. Comparisons of the other
matching DEMO (7 vs. 3, and 8 vs. 2) provide further evidence DEMO streak
shooting. Additional analyses show that the probability of a hit (DEMO ¼ :57) fol-
lowing a ‘‘cold’’ period (0 or 1 DEMO in the last 4 shots) is higher than the probability
of DEMO hit (mean ¼ :50) following a ‘‘hot’’ period (3 or 4 hits in the last 4 shots).
Finally, a series of Wald-Wolfowitz runs tests revealed that the observed number of
260 Tversky and Gilovich
What People Mean by the ‘‘Hot Hand’’ and DEMO Shooting’’
Although all that people mean by streak shooting and the hot hand can be rather complex, there is
a strong consensus among those close to the game about the core features of non-stationarity and
serial DEMO To document this consensus, we interviewed a sample of 100 avid DEMO fans
from Cornell and Stanford. A summary of their responses are given below. We asked similar ques-
tions of the players whose data we DEMO of the Philadelphia 76ers—and their
responses matched those we report here.
Does a player have a better chance of making a shot after having DEMO made his last two or three
shots than he does after having just missed his last two or three shots?
Yes 91%
No DEMO
When shooting free throws, does a player have a better chance DEMO making his second shot after
making his ﬁrst shot than after missing his ﬁrst shot?
Yes 68%
No 32%
Is it important to DEMO the ball to someone who has just made several (2, 3, or 4) shots in a row?
Yes 84%
No 16%
DEMO a hypothetical player who shoots 50% from the ﬁeld.
What is your estimate of his ﬁeld goal percentage for those shots that he takes DEMO having just
made a shot?
¼
Mean 61%
What is your estimate of his ﬁeld goal percentage for those shots that he takes DEMO having just
missed a shot?
¼
Mean 42%
runs in the players’ shooting records does not depart from chance expectation except
for one DEMO (Dawkins) whose data, again, run counter to the streak-shooting
hypothesis. Parallel analyses of data from two other teams, the New Jersey Nets and
the New York Knicks, yielded similar results.
Although streak shooting entails a positive dependence between the outcomes
of successive shots, it could be argued that both the runs test and the test for a posi-
DEMO correlation are not su‰ciently powerful to detect occasional ‘‘hot’’ stretches
embedded in longer stretches of normal performance. To obtain a more sensitive test
of DEMO (suggested by David Freedman) we partitioned the entire record of
Table 10.1
Probability of Making a Shot Conditioned on the Outcome of DEMO Shots for Nine Members of the Philadelphia 76ers; Hits Are Denoted DEMO,
Misses Are M
Player
PðH=3M
Þ
PðH=2M
Þ
PðH=1M
Þ
PðH
Þ
PðH=1H
Þ
PðH=2H
Þ
PðH=3H
Þ
Serial
correlation r
Clint Richardson DEMO .47 .56 .50 (248) .49 .50 .48 .020
Julius Erving .52 .51 .51 .52 (884) .53 .52 .48 .016
Lionel Hollins .50 DEMO .46 .46 (419) .46 .46 .32 .004
Maurice Cheeks .77 .60 .60 .56 (339) .55 .54 .59 .038
Caldwell Jones .50 .48 DEMO .47 (272) .45 .43 .27 .016
Andrew Toney .52 .53 .51 .46 (451) .43 .40 .34 .083
Bobby Jones .61 .58 .58 DEMO (433) .53 .47 .53 .049
Steve Mix .70 .56 .52 .52 (351) .51 .48 .36 .015
Darryl Dawkins .88 .73 .71 .62 (403) .57 .58 .51 .142*
Weighted mean .56 .53 .54 .52 .51 .50 .46 .039
Note: The number of shots taken by each player is given in parentheses in column 5.
*p <:01.
The Cold DEMO about the ‘‘Hot Hand’’ in Basketball 261
262 Tversky and Gilovich
each player into non-overlapping series of four consecutive DEMO We then counted
the number of series in which the player’s performance was high (3 or 4 hits), mod-
erate (2 hits) or low (0 or 1 hits). If a player is occasionally ‘‘hot,’’ his record must
include more high-performance series than expected by DEMO The numbers of high,
moderate, and low series for each DEMO the nine Philadelphia 76ers were compared to
the expected values, assuming DEMO shots with a constant hit rate (taken from
column 5 of DEMO 10.1). For example, the expected percentages of high-, moderate-,
and low-performance series for a player with a hit rate of .50 DEMO 31.25%, 37.5%, and
31.25%, respectively. The results provided no evidence DEMO non-stationarity or streak
shooting as none of the nine chi-squares approached statistical signiﬁcance. The
analysis was repeated four times (starting the partition into quadruples at the ﬁrst,
second, third, and fourth shot of each DEMO), but the results were the same. Com-
bining the four analyses, the overall observed percentages of high, medium, and low
series are 33.5%, 39.4%, and 27.1%, respectively, whereas the expected percentages
are DEMO, 36.8%, and 28.8%. The aggregate data yield slightly fewer high and low
series than expected by independence, which is the exact opposite of the pattern
implied by the presence of hot and cold streaks.
At DEMO point, the lack of evidence for streak shooting could be attributed DEMO the
contaminating e¤ects of shot selection and defensive strategy. Streak shooting may
exist, the argument goes, but it may be masked by a DEMO player’s tendency to take
more di‰cult shots and to receive more attention from the defensive team. Indeed,
the best shooters on the team (e.g., Andrew Toney) do not have the highest hit rate,
DEMO because they take more di‰cult shots. This argument however, does not
DEMO why players and fans erroneously believe that the probability of a hit is
greater following a hit than following a miss, nor can it account for the tendency of
knowledgeable observers to classify random sequences as DEMO of streak shoot-
ing. Nevertheless, it is instructive to examine the DEMO of players when the
di‰culty of the shot and the defensive pressure are held constant. Free-throw records
provide such data. Free throws are shot, usually in pairs, from the same location and
without defensive pressure. If players shoot in streaks, their shooting percentage on
the second free throws should be higher after having made their ﬁrst shot than after
having DEMO their ﬁrst shot. Table 10.2 presents the probability of hitting the sec-
ond free throw conditioned on the outcome of the ﬁrst free throw DEMO nine Boston
Celtics players during the 1980–1981 and the 1981–1982 seasons.
These data provide no evidence that the outcome of the second shot depends DEMO
the outcome of the ﬁrst. The correlation is negative for ﬁve players and positive for
the remaining four, and in no case does it approach statistical signiﬁcance.
The Cold Facts about the ‘‘Hot Hand’’ in Basketball 263
Table 10.2
DEMO of Hitting a Second Free Throw ðH2
Þ
Conditioned on the Outcome of the First Free Throw
(H1 or M1 ) for Nine Members of the Boston Celtics
Player
PðH2=M1
Þ
PðH2=H1
Þ
Serial correlation r
DEMO Bird .91 (53) .88 (285) .032
Cedric Maxwell .76 (DEMO) .81 (302) .061
Robert Parish .72 (105) .77 (213) .056
Nate Archibald .82 (76) .83 (245) .014
Chris Ford .77 (22) .71 (51) .069
Kevin McHale .59 (49) DEMO (128) .130
M. L. Carr .81 (26) .68 (57) .128
Rick Robey .61 (80) .59 (91) .019
Gerald Henderson DEMO (37) .76 (101) .022
Note: The number of shots DEMO which each probability is based is given in parentheses.
The Cold Facts from Controlled Experiments
To test the hot hand hypothesis, under controlled conditions, we recruited 14 mem-
bers of the men’s varsity team and 12 members of the women’s varsity team at
Cornell University to participate in DEMO shooting experiment. For each player, we
determined a distance from which DEMO or her shooting percentage was roughly 50%,
and we drew two 15-foot arcs at this distance from which the player took 100 shots,DEMO
50 from each arc. When shooting baskets, the players were required DEMO move along
the arc so that consecutive shots were never taken from exactly the same spot.
The analysis of the Cornell data parallels that DEMO the 76ers. The overall probability
of a hit following a hit was .47, and the probability of a hit following a miss was .48.
The serial correlation was positive for 12 players and negative for 14 (mean r ¼ :02).
With the exception of one player ðr ¼ :37Þ who produced a signiﬁcant positive cor-
relation (and we DEMO expect one signiﬁcant result out of 26 just by chance), both
the serial correlations and the distribution of runs indicated that the outcomes DEMO
successive shots are statistically independent.
We also asked the Cornell players to predict their hits and misses by betting on the
outcome of each DEMO shot. Before every shot, each player chose whether to bet
high, in which case he or she would win 5 cents for a DEMO and lose 4 cents for a miss,
or to bet low, in which case he or she would win 2 cents for a hit and lose 1 cent for a
miss. The players were advised DEMO bet high when they felt conﬁdent in their shooting
ability and to bet low when they did not. We also obtained betting data from DEMO
player who observed the shooter and decided, independently, whether to bet high or
low on each trial. The players’ payo¤s included the amount DEMO money won or lost on
the bets made as shooters and as observers.
264 Tversky and Gilovich
The players were generally unsuccessful in predicting their DEMO The
average correlation between the shooters’ bets and their performance was .02, and
the highest positive correlation was .22. The observers were also unsuccessful in pre-
dicting the shooter’s performance (mean r ¼ : 04). However, the bets made by both
shooters and observers were correlated with the outcome of the shooters’ previous
shot (mean r ¼ : 40 for the shooters and .42 for the observers). Evidently, both
shooters and observers relied on the outcome of the previous shot in making DEMO
predictions, in accord with the hot-hand hypothesis. Because the correlation between
DEMO shots was negligible (again, mean r ¼ : 02), this betting strategy was not
superior to chance, although it did produce moderate agreement between the bets of
the shooters and the observers (mean r ¼ :22).
The Hot Hand as Cognitive Illusion
To summarize what we have found, we think it may be helpful to clarify what we
have not found. Most importantly, our research does not indicate that basketball
shooting is a purely chance process, like coin tossing. Obviously, DEMO requires a great
deal of talent and skill. What we have found is that, contrary to common belief, a
player’s chances of hitting DEMO largely independent of the outcome of his or her pre-
vious shots. Naturally, every now and then, a player may make, say, DEMO of ten
shots, and one may wish to claim—after the fact—that DEMO was hot. Such use, how-
ever, is misleading if the length and frequency of such streaks do not exceed chance
expectation.
Our research DEMO does not imply that the number of points that a player scores
in di¤erent games or in di¤erent periods within a game is roughly DEMO same. The data
merely indicate that the probability of making a given shot (i.e., a player’s shooting
percentage) is una¤ected by the player’s prior performance. However, players’ will-
ingness to shoot may well be a¤ected by the outcomes of previous shots. As a result,
a player DEMO score more points in one period than in another not because he shoots
better, but simply because he shoots more often. The absence of streak shooting does
not rule out the possibility that other aspects of DEMO player’s performance, such as
defense, rebounding, shots attempted, or points scored, could be subject to hot and
cold periods. Furthermore, the DEMO analysis of basketball data does not say
whether baseball or tennis players, for example, go through hot and cold periods.
Our research does DEMO tell us anything general about sports, but it does suggest a
DEMO about people, namely that they tend to ‘‘detect’’ patterns even where
DEMO exist, and to overestimate the degree of clustering in sports events, as in other
The Cold Facts about the ‘‘Hot Hand’’ in Basketball 265
sequential data. DEMO attribute the discrepancy between the observed basketball sta-
tistics and the intuitions of highly interested and informed observers to a general
misconception of the DEMO of chance that induces the expectation that random
sequences will be far more balanced than they generally are, and creates the illusion
that there are patterns or streaks in independent sequences.
This account explains both the DEMO and maintenance of the belief in the
hot hand. If independent sequences are perceived as streak shooting, no amount of
exposure to such sequences will convince the player, the coach, or the fan that the
DEMO are actually independent. In fact, the more basketball one watches, the
more one encounters what appears to be streak shooting. This misconception of
DEMO has direct consequences for the conduct of the game. Passing the ball to the
hot player, who is guarded closely by the opposing team, may be a non-optimal
strategy if other players who do not appear hot have a better chance of scoring. Like
other cognitive illusions, the belief in the hot hand could be costly.
Additional Reading
Gilovich, T., Vallone, R., and Tversky, A. (1985). ‘‘The hot hand in basketball: On the misperception of
random sequences.’’ Cognitive Psychology, 17, 295–314.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., and Tversky, A. (1982)DEMO ‘‘Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.’’
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1971). ‘‘Belief in the law of small numbers.’’ Psychological Bulletin, 76,
105–110.
Tversky, A. and DEMO, D. (1974). ‘‘Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.’’ Science, 185,
1124–1131.
Wagenaar, W. A. (1972). ‘‘Generation of random DEMO by human subjects: A critical survey of liter-
ature.’’ Psychological Bulletin, 77, 65–72.

Editor’s Introductory Remarks to Chapter 11
Like chapter 10, this article by Tversky and Gilovich concerns the phenomenon
known as ‘‘the hot hand’’ in DEMO The two articles are among Tversky’s most
celebrated instances of debunking the layperson’s intuitions. Soon after the preceding
article appeared, it triggered a critical response from Larkey, Smith, and Kadane
(LSK), which the next chapter addresses. What follows here is a brief synopsis
of LSK’s article. (The interested reader can refer back to the original piece and
to DEMO, Vallone, and Tversky 1985, which presents further analyses in greater
DEMO)
In their article, ‘‘It’s Okay to believe in the hot DEMO,’’ Larkey, Smith, and Kadane
(1989) propose ‘‘a di¤erent conception of how observers’ beliefs in streak shooting
are based on NBA player DEMO performances.’’ They ﬁnd that the data Tver-
sky and Gilovich analyze, DEMO the form of isolated individual-player shooting se-
quences, ‘‘are in a DEMO di¤erent form than the data usually available to observers
qua believers in streak shooting.’’ The latter data, they explain, come in the form DEMO
‘‘individual players’ shooting e¤orts in the very complicated context of an actual
game,’’ and, among other things, are a function of ‘‘how DEMO player’s shooting
activities interact with the activities of other players.’’ For example, LSK propose
that two players both with ﬁve consecutive ﬁeld goal successes will be perceived
very di¤erently if one’s consecutive successes are interspersed throughout DEMO game,
whereas the other’s occur in a row, without teammates DEMO any points in be-
tween. For their revised analyses, LSK devise DEMO statistical model of players’ shooting
behavior in the context of a game. They ﬁnd that Vinnie Johnson—a player with the
reputation for being ‘‘the DEMO lethal streak shooter in basketball’’—‘‘is di¤erent
than other players in the data in terms of noticeable, memorable ﬁeld goal shooting
accomplishments,’’ and reckon that ‘‘Johnson’s reputation as a streak shooter is
apparently well deserved.’’ ‘‘Basketball DEMO and coaches who once believed in the
hot hand and streak shooting and who have been worried about the adequacy of
their cognitive apparatus DEMO the publication of Tversky and Gilovich’s original
work,’’ conclude LSK, DEMO relax and once again enjoy watching the game.’’
Reference
Larkey, P., Smith, R., and Kadane, J. B. (1989). ‘‘It’s Okay DEMO Believe in the Hot Hand,’’
pp. 22–30.
Chance,

11 The ‘‘Hot Hand’’: Statistical Reality or Cognitive Illusion?
Amos Tversky and Thomas Gilovich
Myths die hard. Misconceptions of chance are no exception. DEMO the knowledge
that coins have no memory, people believe that a DEMO of heads is more likely to
be followed by a tail than by another head. Many observers of basketball believe that
the probability of DEMO a shot is higher following a hit than following a miss, DEMO
this conviction is at the heart of the belief in the ‘‘hot hand’’ or ‘‘streak shooting.’’
Our previous analyses showed that experienced observers and DEMO share this
belief although it is not supported by the facts. We found no evidence for a positive
serial correlation in either pro-basketball data DEMO a controlled shooting experiment,
and the frequency of streaks of various lengths was not signiﬁcantly di¤erent from
that expected by chance.
Larkey, Smith, and Kadane (LSK) challenged our conclusion. Like many other
believers in streak shooting, they felt that we must have missed something and pro-
ceeded to search for the elusive hot hand. To this end, LSK collected a new data set
consisting of 39 National Basketball Association (NBA) games from the 1987–1988
season and analyzed the records of 18 outstanding players. LSK ﬁrst computed the
probability of a hit given a hit DEMO a miss on the player’s previous shot. The results,
which essentially replicate our ﬁndings, provide no evidence for the hot hand: Half
DEMO players exhibited a positive serial correlation, the other half exhibited a DEMO
serial correlation, and the overall average was essentially zero.
Statistical versus DEMO Questions
LSK dismiss these results because the analysis extends beyond ‘‘cognitively manage-
able chunks of shooting opportunities’’ on which the belief in the hot DEMO is based.
Their argument confounds the statistical question of whether the hot hand exists
with the psychological question of why people believe in the DEMO hand—whether it
exists or not. We shall address the two questions separately, starting with the statis-
tical facts.
LSK argue, in e¤ect, that the hot hand is a local (short-lived) phenomenon that
operates only DEMO a player takes successive shots within a short time span. By
computing, as we did, a player’s serial correlation for all successive shots, regardless
of temporal proximity, we may have diluted and masked any sign of the hot hand.
The simplest test of this hypothesis is to DEMO the serial correlation for successive
shots that are in close temporal proximity. LSK did not perform this test but they
were kind enough to DEMO their data. Using their records, we computed for each
270 Tversky and Gilovich
Table 11.1
Shooting Statistics for the 18 Players DEMO by LSK
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Player r1 rAT PS PðT=HÞ PðT=MÞ
Jordan .05 .03 40.4 28.3 .30 .31
Bird .12 .14 39.0 25.1 .33 .23
McHale .02 DEMO 37.3 12.0 .22 .21
Parish .04 .11 31.2 9.9 .15 .15
D. Johnson .07 .11 34.7 11.2 .16 .23
Ainge .14 .01 37.3 17.6 DEMO .14
D. Wilkins .09 .09 36.0 27.6 .40* .26
E. Johnson .18 .05 36.6 14.1 .20 .30
A-Jabbar .18 .02 28.8 12.8 .19 .21
DEMO .07 .03 35.4 16.4 .24 .26
Scott .00 .04 37.6 19.0 .19 .16
Aguirre .04 .08 33.9 22.6 .35* .14
Dantley .06 .01 31.1 DEMO .34* .13
Laimbeer .04 .08 35.3 13.3 .22* .11
Dumars .08 .04 33.3 13.6 .27 .19
Thomas .04 .00 36.1 19.9 .29 .24
V. DEMO .02 .04 23.6 13.6 .45* .20
Rodman .02 .06 26.2 10.1 .07 .14
Mean .02 .01 34.1 16.6 .25 .20
Notes:
(1) DEMO correlation (r1 ) between the outcome of successive shots separated by DEMO most one shot of an-
other player on the same team.
(DEMO) Serial correlation (r) between the outcome of all successive shots, taken from LSK.
(3) Average playing time (AT ) in minutes for the 1987/1988 season.
(4) Percent of the team’s shots (PS ) taken by each player during the 1987/1988 season.
(5) Probability of taking the team’s next shot if the player hit the previous shot, PðT=HÞ.
(6) Probability of taking the team’s next shot if the player missed the previous shot, PðT=MÞ.
*Statistical signiﬁcance (p <:05) of the di¤erence between PðT=HÞ and PðT=MÞ.
player the serial DEMO r1 for all pairs of successive shots that are separated by at
most one shot by another player on the same team. This condition DEMO the
analysis to cases in which the time span between shots is generally less than a minute
and a half. The results, presented in the ﬁrst column of table 11.1, do not support the
locality hypothesis. The serial correlations are negative for 11 players, positive for 6
players, and the overall mean is .02. None of the correlations are statistically sig-
niﬁcant. The comparison of the local serial correlation r1 , with DEMO regular serial
correlation r, presented in the second column of table DEMO, shows that the hot-hand
hypothesis does not fair better in the DEMO analysis described above than in the orig-
inal global analysis. (Restricting DEMO local analysis to shots that are separated by at
most 3, DEMO, or 0 shots by another teammate yielded similar results.)
The Hot Hand
271
On Testing the Locality Hypothesis
It is not DEMO why LSK did not submit the locality hypothesis to a straightforward
test. Instead, they computed a rather unusual statistic that appears to produce an
extreme result for one of the 18 players, Vinnie ‘‘the Microwave’’ Johnson, who has
a reputation as a streak shooter. On the strength of this observation, LSK argue that
the judgments of our respondents stand somewhat vindicated, and conclude that ‘‘it’s
OK to believe in the hot hand.’’ We believe that this conclusion is unwarranted for
several reasons.
As our DEMO shows, it is widely believed that the hot hand applies to DEMO
players. On average, a player’s chances of hitting a shot were DEMO to be nearly
20% higher following a hit than following a miss. There is hardly a basketball game
broadcast on the radio or TV DEMO repeated references to one player or another
suddenly getting hot. Because LSK’s entire argument is based on the performance of
a single player, we could rest our case right there. Although it is not evident in DEMO
casual reading of LSK, the case for Vinnie Johnson is based DEMO a single observation:
a run of 7 consecutive hits within a 20-shot sequence. This incident enters repeatedly
into the LSK statistics, as a single run of 7, as 2 runs of 6, as 3 DEMO of 5, etc. If we
discard this episode, the case for the Microwave goes up in smoke: All the ‘‘trau-
matic’’ statistics vanish (the 7/7 and 6/6 entries in table 6, and DEMO 7/8 and 6/7 entries
in table 7), and the remaining values are substantially reduced. It is hard to see how
the DEMO belief in the hot hand or the erroneous estimates of our respondents
can be justiﬁed by the performance of Vinnie Johnson during a single DEMO
game. But let us ignore these doubts for the moment and examine what might be
special about Vinnie’s record.
LSK argue that Vinnie Johnson’s DEMO accomplishments set him apart from
other great shooters such as Larry Bird and Michael Jordan. How did LSK reach
this conclusion? They did it with a model. LSK constructed a statistical model of
basketball which assumes DEMO a player’s probability of taking the next shot in the
game ðgÞ and his probability of hitting any given shot ðPÞ are constant throughout
DEMO games. The claim that Vinnie’s performance is much less probable than that of
other great players is based solely on the contention that Vinnie’s DEMO streak is
unlikely under the LSK model. As we shall show, DEMO model is inappropriate, hence
its failure to accommodate Vinnie’s record provides DEMO evidence for streak shooting.
LSK estimated g by the proportion of shots taken by each player throughout all
games. For example, Vinnie took about 13% of the Pistons’ shots, who took about
50% of the shots in all the games they played, so Vinnie’s g is :13 DEMO:5 ¼ :065. Under
this interpretation of g, however, the DEMO model is patently false because the prob-
272 Tversky and Gilovich
ability that a player will take the next DEMO must be higher when he is on the court
than when he is sitting on the bench. Because Vinnie plays on average about two
DEMO per game, his actual shooting rate must be approximately twice as DEMO as
that estimated by LSK, who did not take playing time DEMO account. Thus, he is
much more likely to hit several shots DEMO a row within a 20-shot sequence than com-
puted by LSK. Furthermore, the bias produced by this method is more severe for a
player like Vinnie Johnson who averages less than 24 minutes per game than DEMO a
player like Michael Jordan who plays on average more than 40 minutes per game.
Columns 3 and 4 of table 11.1 present the DEMO playing time (AT) and the
percentage of a team’s shots (DEMO) taken by each player, for the 1987–1988 season.
Note that Vinnie has the lowest average playing time among the 18 players inves-
tigated DEMO LSK.
The trouble with the analysis of LSK goes beyond the inadequacy of the estima-
tion procedure. As suggested in our original article, a player who believes in the hot
hand may be more likely to DEMO a shot following a recent hit than following a recent
miss. Indeed, a great majority of the players and fans who answered our ques-
tionnaires endorsed the proposition that ‘‘it is important to pass the ball DEMO someone
who has just made several shots in a row.’’ Columns 5 and 6 of table 11.1 present, for
each player, the probability DEMO his taking the team’s next shot given that he has hit or
missed his team’s previous shot, denoted PðT=H
Þ
and PðT=MÞ, respectively. DEMO
results show that the probability that Vinnie will take the Pistons’ next shot is .45 if
he has hit the Pistons’ previous shot, and it is only .20 if he has missed the Pistons’
previous shot. DEMO di¤erence, which is statistically signiﬁcant, is the highest among
the 18 players studied by LSK. Four other players also produced signiﬁcant di¤er-
ences. DEMO contrast, the probability that the NBA scoring leader, Michael Jordan, DEMO
take his team’s next shot is practically the same (.30 and DEMO) regardless of whether he
hits or misses the previous shot.
Comparing DEMO 5 and 6 with columns 1 and 2 indicates that Vinnie is dis-
tinguished from other players by his greater willingness to take a DEMO following a
previous hit, not by his chances of making a DEMO following a previous hit. The
overall correlation between the outcome of successive shots by Vinnie is .04; and the
(local) correlation between successive shots that are separated by at most one shot by
a teammate DEMO only .02. The tendency to shoot more after a hit than a miss might add
to the belief that Vinnie is a streak shooter, but it provides no evidence for the
validity of this belief because DEMO higher probability of shooting does not imply a
higher probability of hitting.
The hot-hand and streak shooting concern the probability ðPÞ that a player DEMO hit
the next shot given his previous hits and misses, not DEMO probability ðgÞ that a player
The Hot Hand
273
will take the next shot. LSK constructed a DEMO in which both P and g do not
depend on previous hits and misses, observed that this model seems inappropriate for
Vinnie Johnson, DEMO concluded that he must be a streak shooter. This reasoning is
fallacious because, as we have shown, the failure of the model is DEMO by variations
in g, not in P. It is ironic that DEMO have committed the very error that they have
falsely accused us of committing, namely reaching unjustiﬁed conclusions on the
basis of an unrealistic model. Contrary to their claim, we did not assume that bas-
ketball is a binomial process. Such an assumption is not needed in order to DEMO
people’s intuitive estimates of PðH=HÞ and PðH=MÞ with the actual relative fre-
quencies. It is regrettable that, in their eagerness to vindicate the belief in the hot
hand, LSK have misrepresented our position.
A ﬁnal note. We looked at the videotape and did not ﬁnd Vinnie’s seven-hit streak.
DEMO have mistakenly coded a sequence of four hits, one miss, and two hits (in the
ﬁfth Piston-Laker playo¤ game) as a seven-hit DEMO When this error is corrected,
Vinnie Johnson no longer stands out in their analysis. Recall that the entire case of
LSK rests on DEMO alleged seven-hit streak and the assumption of a constant
shooting rate ðgÞ . A closer examination of the data shows that this assumption is
DEMO, and that Vinnie’s streak did not happen. Should we believe in DEMO hot hand?

12 The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence
Dale Gri‰n DEMO Amos Tversky
The weighing of evidence and the formation of belief are basic elements of human
thought. The question of how to evaluate evidence DEMO assess conﬁdence has been
addressed from a normative perspective by philosophers and statisticians; it has also
been investigated experimentally by psychologists and decision researchers. One of
the major ﬁndings that has emerged from this research is DEMO people are often more
conﬁdent in their judgments than is warranted by the facts. Overconﬁdence is not
limited to lay judgment or laboratory experiments. DEMO well-publicized observation
that more than two-thirds of small businesses fail within 4 years (Dun & Bradstreet,
1967) suggests that many entrepreneurs overestimate DEMO probability of success
(Cooper, Woo, & Dunkelberg, 1988). With some notable exceptions, such as weather
forecasters (Murphy & Winkler, 1977) who receive immediate frequentistic feedback
and produce realistic forecasts of precipitation, DEMO has been observed in
judgments of physicians (Lusted, 1977), clinical psychologists (Oskamp, 1965), law-
yers (Wagenaar & Keren, 1986), negotiators (Neale & Bazerman, 1990), engineers
(Kidd, 1970), and security analysts (Stae¨ l von Holstein, 1972). As one DEMO described
expert prediction, ‘‘often wrong but rarely in doubt.’’
Overconﬁdence is DEMO but not universal. Studies of calibration have found
that with very easy items, overconﬁdence is eliminated, and underconﬁdence is often
observed (Lichtenstein, DEMO, & Phillips, 1982). Furthermore, studies of sequen-
tial updating DEMO shown that posterior probability estimates commonly exhibit
conservatism or underconﬁdence (Edwards, 1968). In the present paper, we investi-
gate the weighting of evidence and propose an account that explains the pattern of
overconﬁdence and DEMO observed in the literature.1
The Determinants of Conﬁdence
The assessment of conﬁdence or degree of belief in a given hypothesis typically
requires the integration DEMO di¤erent kinds of evidence. In many problems, it is possi-
ble DEMO distinguish between the strength, or extremeness, of the evidence and its
weight, or predictive validity. When we evaluate a letter of recommendation for a
graduate student written by a former teacher, we may wish to consider two separate
aspects of the evidence: (i) how positive or warm is the letter? and (ii) how credible or
knowledgeable is the writer? The ﬁrst question refers to the strength or extremeness
of the evidence, whereas the second question refers to its weight or credence. Simi-
larly, suppose we wish to evaluate the evidence for the hypothesis that a coin is
biased in favor of heads rather than in DEMO of tails. In this case, the proportion of
276 Gri‰n and Tversky
heads in a sample reﬂects the strength of DEMO for the hypothesis in question,
and the size of the sample reﬂects the credence of these data. The distinction be-
tween the strength DEMO evidence and its weight is closely related to the distinction
between the size of an e¤ect (e.g., a di¤erence between two means) and its reliabil-
ity (e.g., the standard error of the di¤erence). DEMO it is not always possible to
decompose the impact of evidence into the separate contributions of strength and
weight, there are many contexts in which they can be varied independently. A strong
or a weak recommendation DEMO come from a reliable or unreliable source, and the
same proportion DEMO heads can be observed in a small or large sample.
Statistical theory and the calculus of chance prescribe rules for combining strength
and weight. DEMO example, probability theory speciﬁes how sample proportion and
sample size combine DEMO determine posterior probability. The extensive experimental
literature on judgment under uncertainty indicates that people do not combine
strength and weight in accord with the DEMO of probability and statistics. Rather,
intuitive judgments are overly inﬂuenced by the degree to which the available evi-
dence is representative of the DEMO in question (Dawes, 1988; Kahneman,
Slovic, & Tversky, DEMO; Nisbett & Ross, 1980). If people were to rely on repre-
sentativeness alone, their judgments (e.g., that a person being interviewed will be a
successful manager) would depend only on the strength of their impression (e.g., the
degree to which the individual in question DEMO like’’ a successful manager) with no
regard for other factors that DEMO predictive validity. In many situations, however,
it appears that people DEMO not neglect these factors altogether. Instead, we propose,
people focus DEMO the strength of the evidence—as they perceive it—and then make
some adjustment in response to its weight.
In evaluating a letter of recommendation, we suggest, people ﬁrst attend to the
warmth of the recommendation and then make allowance for the writer’s limited
knowledge. Similarly, when judging whether a coin is biased in favor of heads or in
favor of tails, people focus on the proportion of heads in the sample and then DEMO
their judgment according to the number of tosses. Because such an adjustment is
generally insu‰cient (Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1971; Tversky & Kahneman, DEMO), the
strength of the evidence tends to dominate its weight in comparison to an appropri-
ate statistical model. Furthermore, the tendency to focus on the strength of the evi-
dence leads people to underutilize other DEMO that control predictive validity,
such as base rate and discriminability. This treatment combines judgment by repre-
sentativeness, which is based entirely on the strength of an impression, with an
anchoring and adjustment process that takes the weight of the evidence into account,
albeit insu‰ciently. The role DEMO anchoring in impression formation has been ad-
dressed by Quattrone (1982)DEMO
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 277
This hypothesis DEMO a distinctive pattern of overconﬁdence and underconﬁ-
dence. If people are highly sensitive to variations in the extremeness of evidence and
not su‰ciently sensitive DEMO variations in its credence or predictive validity, then
judgments will be DEMO when strength is high and weight is low, and they
will DEMO underconﬁdent when weight is high and strength is low. As is shown below,
this hypothesis serves to organize and summarize much experimental evidence DEMO
judgment under uncertainty.
Consider the prediction of success in graduate school on the basis of a letter of
recommendation. If people focus primarily on DEMO warmth of the recommendation
with insu‰cient regard for the credibility of the writer, or the correlation between the
predictor and the criterion, they DEMO be overconﬁdent when they encounter a glowing
letter based on casual contact, and they will be underconﬁdent when they encounter
a moderately positive letter from a highly knowledgeable source. Similarly, if peo-
ple’s judgments regarding the bias of a coin are determined primarily by the propor-
tion of DEMO and tails in the sample with insu‰cient regard for sample size, DEMO
they will be overconﬁdent when they observe an extreme proportion in a small sam-
ple, and underconﬁdent when they observe a moderate proportion in a large sample.
In this article, we test the hypothesis that overconﬁdence occurs when strength is
high and weight is low, and underconﬁdence occurs when weight is high and strength
is low. The ﬁrst three experiments DEMO concerned with the evaluation of statistical
hypotheses, where strength of evidence DEMO deﬁned by sample proportion. In the sec-
ond part of the paper, we extend this hypothesis to more complex evidential prob-
lems and investigate its implications for judgments of conﬁdence.
Evaluating Statistical Hypotheses
Study 1: Sample Size
We ﬁrst investigate the relative impact of sample proportion (strength) DEMO sample
size (weight) in an experimental task involving the assessment of posterior probabil-
ity. We presented 35 students with the following instructions:
DEMO that you are spinning a coin, and recording how often the DEMO lands heads and how
often the coin lands tails. Unlike tossing, DEMO (on average) yields an equal number of heads
and tails, DEMO a coin leads to a bias favoring one side or the other because of slight
imperfections on the rim of the coin (and an uneven distribution of mass). Now imagine that
you know that this DEMO is 3/5. It tends to land on one side 3 out of 5 times. But you do not
know if this bias is DEMO favor of heads or in favor of tails.
Subjects were then given various samples of evidence di¤ering in sample size (from 3
to 33) and in the number of heads (from 2 to 19). DEMO samples contained a majority of
278 Gri‰n and Tversky
Table 12.1
Stimuli and Responses for Study 1
DEMO
of heads
(h)
Number
of tails
(t)
Sample
size
(n)
Posterior
probability
PðH
j
DÞ
Median
conﬁdence
(in %)DEMO
2 1 3 .60 63.0
3 0 3 .77 85.0
3 2 5 .60 60.0
4 1 5 .77 80.0
5 0 5 .88 DEMO
5 4 9 .60 55.0
6 3 9 .77 66.9
7 2 9 .88 77.0
9 8 17 .60 54.5
10 7 17 .77 DEMO
11 6 17 .88 64.5
19 14 33 .88 60.0
heads, DEMO subjects were asked to estimate the probability (from .5 to 1) that the bias
favored heads (H ) rather than tails (T ). Subjects received all 12 combinations of
sample proportion and sample size DEMO in table 12.1. They were o¤ered a prize of
$20 for the person whose judgments most closely matched the correct values.
Table 12.1 also DEMO, for each sample of data (D), the posterior probability for
hypothesis H (a 3:2 bias in favor of heads) computed DEMO to Bayes’ Rule.
Assuming equal prior probabilities, Bayes’ Rule yields
log
DEMO
j
DÞ
PðT
j
DÞ
¼
n

t
n
log
6
:4
:
;
h
P
where h and t are the number of heads and tails, respectively, and n ¼ h þt DEMO
sample size. The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side, n, represents the weight of evi-
dence. The second term, the di¤erence between the proportion of heads and tails
in the sample, represents the strength of the evidence for H against T. The third
term, which is held constant in this study, is the discriminability of the two hypoth-
eses, corresponding to d0 in signal detection theory. Plotting equal-support lines for
strength and weight in logarithmic coordinates yields a family of parallel straight
lines DEMO a slope of 1, as illustrated by the dotted lines in DEMO 12.1. (To facilitate
interpretation, the strength dimension is deﬁned as h/n which is linearly related to
ðh

tÞ=n.) Each line connects all data sets that provide the same support for
hypothesis H. For DEMO, a sample of size 9 with 6 heads and 3 tails, and a sample
of size 17 with 10 heads and 7 tails, yields the same posterior probability (.77) for H
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 279
Figure 12.1
DEMO support lines for strength and sample size.
over T. Thus the point (9, 6/9) and the point (17, 10/17) DEMO lie on the upper line.
Similarly, the lower line connects the DEMO sets that yield a posterior probability of
.60 in favor of H (see table 12.1).
To compare the observed judgments with Bayes’ Rule, we ﬁrst transformed each
probability judgment into log odds and then, DEMO each subject as well as the median
data, regressed the logarithm DEMO these values against the logarithms of strength,
ðh

tÞ=n, DEMO of weight, n, separately for each subject. The regressions ﬁt the data
quite well: multiple R was .95 for the median data and .82 for the median sub-
ject. According to Bayes’ Rule, the regression weights for strength and weight in
this metric are equal (see ﬁgure 12.1). In contrast, the regression coe‰cient for
strength was larger than the regression coe‰cient for weight for 30 out of 35 subjects
( DEMO <:001 by sign test). Across subjects, the median ratio DEMO these coe‰cients was 2.2
to 1 in favor of strength.2 For the median data, the observed regression weight for
strength (.81) was almost 3 times larger than that for weight (.31).
The equal-support lines obtained from the regression analysis are plotted in
ﬁgure 12.1 as solid DEMO The comparison of the two sets of lines highly reveal
280 Gri‰n and Tversky
Figure 12.2
Sample size and conﬁdence.
two noteworthy DEMO First, the intuitive lines are much shallower than the
Bayesian lines, indicating that the strength of evidence dominates its weight. Second,
for DEMO given level of support (e.g., 60% or 77%), the Bayesian and the intuitive
lines cross, indicating overconﬁdence where strength is high and weight is low,
and underconﬁdence where strength is low and weight DEMO high. As is seen later, the
crossing point is determined primarily DEMO the discriminability of the competing
hypotheses (d0 ).
Figure 12.2 plots the median conﬁdence for a given sample of evidence as a func-
DEMO of the (Bayesian) posterior probability for two separate sample sizes. The best-
ﬁtting lines were calculated using the log odds metric. If the DEMO were Bayesian,
the solid lines would coincide with the dotted line. Instead, intuitive judgments based
on the small sample (n ¼ 5) were overconﬁdent, whereas the judgments based on the
larger sample (n DEMO 17) were underconﬁdent.
The results described in table 12.1 are in DEMO agreement with previous results
that document the non-normative nature of intuitive judgment (for reviews see, e.g.,
Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982; von Winterfeldt & Edwards, 1986). Moreover,
they help reconcile DEMO inconsistent ﬁndings. Edwards and his colleagues (e.g.,
Edwards, 1968), who used a sequential updating paradigm, argued that people are
conservative in the sense that they do not extract enough information from sample
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 281
data. On DEMO other hand, Tversky & Kahneman (1971), who investigated the role of
sample size in researchers’ conﬁdence in the replicability of their results, concluded
that people (even those trained in statistics) make radical inferences DEMO the basis of
small samples. Figures 12.1 and 12.2 suggest how the dominance of sample propor-
tion over sample size could produce both ﬁndings. DEMO some updating experiments
conducted by Edwards, subjects were exposed to large DEMO of data typically of
moderate strength. This is the context in which we expect underconﬁdence or con-
servatism. The situations studied by Tversky & DEMO, on the other hand,
involve moderately strong e¤ects based on DEMO small samples. This is the context in
which overconﬁdence is likely to prevail. Both conservatism and overconﬁdence,
therefore, can be generated by a common bias in the weighting of evidence, namely
the dominance of strength over weight.
As was noted earlier, the tendency to focus on the strength of the evidence leads
people to neglect or underweight other variables, such as the prior probability of the
hypothesis in question or the DEMO of the competing hypotheses. These
e¤ects are demonstrated in the following two studies. All three studies reported in
this section employ a within-subject design, in which both the strength of the evi-
dence and the mitigating DEMO (e.g., sample size) are varied within subjects. This
procedure may DEMO the dominance of strength because people tend to
respond to whatever variable is manipulated within a study whether or not it is nor-
mative DEMO do so (Fischho¤ & Bar-Hillel, 1984). Indeed, the neglect DEMO sample size and
base-rate information has been most pronounced in between-subject comparisons
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1972).
Study 2: Base Rate
Considerable research has demonstrated that people tend to neglect background data
(e.g., base DEMO) in the presence of speciﬁc evidence (Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky,
1982; Bar-Hillel, 1983). This neglect can lead either to DEMO or overcon-
ﬁdence, as is shown below. We asked 40 students DEMO imagine that they had three dif-
ferent foreign coins, each with DEMO known bias of 3:2. As in study 1, subjects did DEMO
know if the bias of each coin was in favor of heads (H ) or in favor of tails (T ). The
subjects’ prior probabilities of the two hypotheses (H and T ) were varied. For one-
half of the subjects, the probability of H was .50 for one type of coin, .67 for a sec-
ond type of coin, and .90 for a third type of coin. For the other half of the subjects,
the prior probabilities of H were .50, .33, and .10. Subjects were presented with
samples of size 10, DEMO included from 5 to 9 heads. They were then asked to give
their conﬁdence (in %) that the coin under consideration was biased DEMO favor of
heads. Again, a $20 prize was o¤ered for the DEMO whose judgments most closely
282 Gri‰n and Tversky
Table 12.2
Stimuli and Responses for Study 2
DEMO
of heads
(out of 10)
Prior
probability
(Base rate)
Posterior
probability
PðH
j
DÞ
Median
conﬁdence
(in %)
5 9:1 .90 60.0
6 9:1 .95 70.0
7 9:1 .98 DEMO
8 9:1 .99 92.5
9 9:1 .996 98.5
5 2:1 .67 55.0
6 2:1 .82 65.0
7 2:1 .91 DEMO
8 2:1 .96 82.5
9 2:1 .98 90.0
5 1:1 .50 50.0
6 1:1 .69 60.0
7 1:1 .84 DEMO
8 1:1 .92 80.0
9 1:1 .96 90.0
5 1:2 .33 33.0
6 1:2 .53 50.0
7 1:2 .72 DEMO
8 1:2 .85 77.0
9 1:2 .93 90.0
5 1:9 .10 22.5
6 1:9 .20 45.0
7 1:9 .36 DEMO
8 1:9 .55 80.0
9 1:9 .74 85.0
matched the correct values. Table 12.2 summarizes the sample data, the posterior
probability for each sample, and subjects’ median conﬁdence judgments. It is clear
that our subjects overweighted strength of evidence and under-weighted the prior
probability.
Figure 12.3 DEMO median judgments of conﬁdence as a function of (Bayesian)
posterior DEMO for high (.90) and low (.10) prior probabilities of H. The ﬁgure
also displays the best-ﬁtting lines for each condition. It is DEMO from the ﬁgure that
subjects were overconﬁdent in the low base rate condition and underconﬁdent in the
high base rate condition.
These results are DEMO with Grether’s (1980, 1990) studies on the role of the
DEMO heuristic in judgments of posterior probability. Unlike the present
study, where DEMO prior probabilities and data were presented in numerical form,
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 283
Figure 12.3
DEMO rate and conﬁdence.
Grether’s procedure involved random sampling of numbered balls from a bingo
cage. He found that subjects overweighted the likelihood ratio relative DEMO prior
probability, as implied by representativeness, and that monetary incentives reduced
but did not eliminate base rate neglect. Grether’s results, like those found by
Camerer (1990) in his extensive study of market trading, contradict the claim of
Gigerenzer, Hell, and Blank (1988) that explicit DEMO sampling eliminates base
rate neglect. Evidence that explicit random sampling alone does not reduce base rate
neglect is presented in Gri‰n (1991).
Our analysis implies that people are prone to overconﬁdence when the base rate DEMO
low and to underconﬁdence when the base rate is high. Dunning, DEMO, Milojkovic,
and Ross (1990) observed this pattern in a DEMO of social prediction. In their study,
each subject interviewed a target person before making predictions about the target’s
preferences and behavior (e.g., DEMO this person were o¤ered a free subscription, which
magazine would he DEMO: Playboy or New York Review of Books?’’). The authors
DEMO each subject with the empirically derived estimates of the base rate fre-
quency of the responses in question (e.g., that 68% of prior DEMO preferred
Playboy). To investigate the e¤ect of empirical base rates, DEMO et al. analyzed
separately the predictions that agreed with the base rate (i.e., ‘‘high’’ base rate pre-
dictions) and the predictions that went against the base rate (i.e., ‘‘low’’ base rate
284 Gri‰n and Tversky
predictions). Overconﬁdence was much more pronounced when DEMO rates were low
(conﬁdence ¼ 72%, accuracy ¼ 49%) than DEMO base rates were high (conﬁdence ¼
79%, accuracy ¼ 75%). Moreover, for items with base rates that exceeded 75%, sub-
jects’ DEMO were actually underconﬁdent. This is exactly the pattern implied by
the hypothesis that subjects evaluate the probability that a given person would prefer
Playboy DEMO the New York Review of Books on the basis of their impression of that
person with little or no regard for the empirical base DEMO, that is, the relative popu-
larity of the two magazines in the target population.
Study 3: Discriminability
When we consider the question of which of two hypotheses is true, conﬁdence should
depend on the degree to which the data ﬁt one hypothesis better than the other.
However, people seem to focus on the strength of evidence for a given DEMO
and neglect how well the same evidence ﬁts an alternate hypothesis. The Barnum
e¤ect is a case in point. It is easy to construct DEMO personality sketch that will impress
many people as a fairly accurate description of their own characteristics because they
evaluate the description by the degree DEMO which it ﬁts their personality with little or
no concern for whether it ﬁts others just as well (Forer, 1949). To explore DEMO e¤ect
in a chance setup, we presented 50 students with evidence DEMO two types of foreign
coins. Within each type of coin, the DEMO of evidence (sample proportion) varied
from 7/12 heads to 10/12 heads. The two types of coins di¤ered in their characteristic
biases. DEMO were instructed:
Imagine that you are spinning a foreign coin called a quinta. Suppose that half of the quintas
(the ‘‘X’’ type) DEMO a .6 bias towards heads (that is, heads comes up on 60% of the spins for
X-quintas) and half of the quintas (DEMO ‘‘Y’’ type) have a .75 bias toward tails (that is, DEMO
comes up on 75% of the spins for Y-quintas). Your job is to determine if this is an X-quinta or
a Y-quinta.
They DEMO received the samples of evidence displayed in table 12.3. After they gave
their conﬁdence that each sample came from an X-quinta or a Y-quinta, subjects
were asked to make the same judgments for A-libnars (which have a .6 bias toward
heads) and B-libnars (which have a .5 DEMO of heads). The order of presentation of
coins was counterbalanced.
Table 12.3 summarizes the sample data, the posterior probability for each sample,
and subjects’ median conﬁdence judgments. The comparison of the conﬁdence judg-
ments DEMO the Bayesian posterior probabilities indicates that our subjects focused pri-
marily on the degree to which the data ﬁt the favored hypothesis with insu‰cient
DEMO for how well they ﬁt the alternate hypothesis (Fischho¤ & Beyth-Marom,
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 285
Table 12.3
DEMO and Responses for Study 3
Number of
heads (out
of 12)DEMO
Separation of
hypotheses (d
0
)
Posterior
probability
PðH
j
DÞ
Median
conﬁdence
(in %)
7 .6 vs .5 .54 55.0
8 .6 vs .5 .64 66.0
9 .6 vs .5 .72 75.0
10 DEMO vs .5 .80 85.0
7 .6 vs .25 .95 65.0
8 .6 vs .25 .99 70.0
9 .6 vs .25 .998 80.0
10 .6 DEMO .25 .999 90.0
1983). Figure 12.4 plots subjects’ median conﬁdence judgments against the Bayesian
posterior probability both for low discriminability and high discriminability DEMO
parisons. When the discriminability between the hypotheses was low (when the DEMO
bias was either .6 or .5) subjects were slightly overconﬁdent, when the discrim-
inability between the hypotheses was high (when the bias was either .6 or .25) sub-
jects were grossly underconﬁdent.
In the early experimental literature on judgments of posterior probability, most
studies (e.g., Peterson, Schneider, & Miller, 1965) examined symmetric hypotheses
that were highly DEMO (e.g., 3:2 versus 2:3) and found consistent under-
DEMO In accord with our hypothesis, however, studies which included pairs of
hypotheses of low discriminability found overconﬁdence. For example, Peterson
and Miller (DEMO) found overconﬁdence in posterior probability judgments when the
respective ratios were DEMO:2 and 3:4, and Phillips and Edwards (1966) found DEMO
ﬁdence when the ratios were 11:9 and 9:11.
Conﬁdence in Knowledge
The preceding section shows that people are more sensitive to the DEMO of evi-
dence than to its weight. Consequently, people are overconﬁdent DEMO strength is
high and weight is low, and underconﬁdent when strength DEMO low and weight is high.
This conclusion, we propose, applies not only to judgments about chance processes
such as coin spinning, but also to judgments about uncertain events such as who will
win an upcoming DEMO, or whether a given book will make the best-seller list.
When DEMO assess the probability of such events they evaluate, we suggest, their
286 Gri‰n and Tversky
Figure 12.4
Discriminability and conﬁdence.
impression of the DEMO or the book. These impressions may be based on a casual
observation or on extensive knowledge of the preferences of voters and readers. In DEMO
analogy to a chance setup, the extremeness of an impression may DEMO compared to
sample proportion, and the credence of an impression may DEMO to the size of
the sample, or to the discriminability of DEMO competing hypotheses. If people focus on
the strength of the impression with insu‰cient appreciation of its weight, then the
pattern of overconﬁdence and underconﬁdence observed in the evaluation of chance
processes should also be present in DEMO of non-statistical evidence.
In this section, we extend this hypothesis to DEMO evidential problems where
strength and weight cannot be readily deﬁned. We ﬁrst compare the prediction of self
and of others. Next, we show how the present account gives rise to the ‘‘di‰culty
e¤ect.’’ Finally, we explore the determinants of conﬁdence in general-knowledge
questions, and relate the conﬁdence-frequency discrepancy to the illusion of validity.
Study 4: Self versus Other
In this study, we ask people to predict their own behavior, about which DEMO pre-
sumably know a great deal, and the behavior of others, about which they know less.
If people base their conﬁdence primarily on DEMO strength of their impression with
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 287
insu‰cient regard DEMO its weight, we expect more overconﬁdence in the prediction of
others DEMO in the prediction of self.
Fourteen pairs of same-sex students, who DEMO not know each other, were asked to
predict each other’s behavior DEMO a task involving risk. They were ﬁrst given 5 min to
interview each other, and then they sat at individual computer terminals where they
predicted their own and their partner’s behavior in a Prisoner’s Dilemma–type game
DEMO ‘‘The Corporate Jungle.’’ On each trial, participants had the option of DEMO
ing’’ their company with their partner’s company (i.e., cooperating), or ‘‘taking
over’’ their partner’s company (i.e., competing). If one partner DEMO to merge and the
other tried to take over, the cooperative DEMO took a steep loss and the corporate
raider made a substantial gain. However, if both partners tried a takeover on the
same trial, DEMO both su¤ered a loss. There were 20 payo¤ matrices, some designed DEMO
encourage cooperation and some designed to encourage competition.
Subjects were asked to predict their own behavior for 10 of the payo¤ matrices and
the DEMO of the person they had interviewed for the other 10. The order of the
two tasks was counterbalanced, and each payo¤ matrix appeared an equal number
of times in each task. In addition to predicting cooperation DEMO competition for each
matrix, subjects indicated their conﬁdence in each prediction (on a scale from 50% to
100%). Shortly after the completion DEMO the prediction task, subjects played 20 trials
against their opponents, without feedback, and received payment according to the
outcomes of the 20 trials.
The analysis is based on 25 subjects who completed the entire task. DEMO, sub-
jects were almost equally conﬁdent in their self predictions (M ¼ 84%) and in their
predictions of others (M ¼ 83%), but they were considerably more accurate in pre-
dicting their own behavior (M ¼ 81%) than in predicting the behavior of others
(M ¼ 68%). Thus, people exhibited considerable overconﬁdence in predictions of
others, but were relatively well-calibrated in predicting themselves (see ﬁgure 12.5).
DEMO some circumstances, where the strength of evidence is not extreme, the predic-
tion of one’s own behavior may be underconﬁdent. In the case DEMO a job choice, for
example, underconﬁdence may arise if a person has good reasons for taking job A
and good reasons for taking DEMO B, but fails to appreciate that even a small advan-
tage DEMO job A over B would generally lead to the choice of A. If conﬁdence in the
choice of A over B reﬂects the balance DEMO arguments for the two positions (Koriat,
Lichtenstein, & Fischho¤, DEMO), then a balance of 2 to 1 would produce conﬁdence
of about 2/3, although the probability of choosing A over B is likely to be higher.
Over the past few years, we have discreetly approached colleagues faced with a
choice between job o¤ers, and asked them to estimate the probability that they will
288 Gri‰n and Tversky
Figure 12.5
Predicting self and other.
choose one DEMO over another. The average conﬁdence in the predicted choice was a
modest 66%, but only 1 of the 24 respondents chose the opinion to which he or she
initially assigned a lower probability, yielding an overall accuracy rate of 96%. It is
noteworthy that there are situations in DEMO people exhibit overconﬁdence even in
predicting their own behavior (Vallone, Gri‰n, Lin, & Ross, 1990). The key vari-
able, therefore, is not the target of prediction (self versus other) but rather DEMO rela-
tion between the strength and the weight of the available evidence.
The tendency to be conﬁdent about the prediction of the behavior of DEMO, but
not of one’s own behavior, has intriguing implications for the analysis of decision
making. Decision analysts commonly distinguish between decision variables that DEMO
controlled by the decision maker and state variables that are not under his or her
control. The analysis proceeds by determining the values of DEMO variables (i.e.,
decide what you want) and assigning probabilities to state variables (e.g., the behav-
ior of others). Some decision DEMO have noted that their clients often wish to fol-
low an opposite course: determine or predict (with certainty) the behavior of others
and assign probabilities to their own choices. After all, the behavior of others should
be predictable from their traits, needs, and interests, whereas our own behavior is
highly ﬂexible and contingent on changing circumstances (Jones & Nisbett, 1972).
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 289
The E¤ect DEMO Di‰culty
The preceding analysis suggests that people assess their conﬁdence in one of two
competing hypotheses on the basis of their balance of arguments DEMO and against this
hypothesis, with insu‰cient regard for the quality of DEMO data. This mode of judg-
ment gives rise to overconﬁdence when people form a strong impression on the basis
of limited knowledge and to DEMO when people form a moderate impres-
sion on the basis of extensive data.
The application of this analysis to general knowledge questions is complicated
DEMO the fact that strength and weight cannot be experimentally controlled as in studies
1–3. However, in an analogy to a chance setup, let DEMO suppose that the balance of
arguments for a given knowledge problem can be represented by the proportion of
red and white balls in a DEMO The di‰culty of the problem can be represented by
the discriminability of the two hypotheses, that is, the di¤erence between the proba-
bility DEMO obtaining a red ball under each of the two competing hypotheses. Naturally,
the greater the di¤erence, the easier the task, that is, the higher the posterior proba-
bility of the more likely hypothesis on DEMO basis of any given sample. Suppose conﬁ-
dence is given by the balance of arguments, that is, the proportion of red balls in DEMO
sample. What is the pattern of results predicted by this model?
Figure 12.6 displays the predicted results (for a sample of size 10) for three pairs of
hypotheses that deﬁne three levels of task di‰culty: an ‘‘easy’’ task where the prob-
ability of getting red balls under the competing hypotheses are respectively .50 and
.40; a ‘‘di‰cult’’ task, DEMO the probabilities are .50 and .45; and an ‘‘impossible’’
task, where the probability of drawing a red ball is .5 under both hypotheses. DEMO
have chosen nonsymmetric hypotheses for our example to allow for an initial bias
that is often observed in calibration data.
It is instructive to DEMO the predictions of this model to the results of Lichten-
stein & Fischho¤ (1977) who investigated the e¤ect of task di‰culty (see ﬁgure 12.7).
Their ‘‘easy’’ items (accuracy ¼ 85%) produced underconﬁdence through DEMO of
the conﬁdence range, their ‘‘di‰cult’’ items (accuracy ¼ 61%) DEMO overconﬁ-
dence through most of the conﬁdence range, and their ‘‘impossible’’ DEMO (discrimi-
nating European from American handwriting, accuracy ¼ 51%) showed DEMO
overconﬁdence throughout the entire range.
A comparison of ﬁgures 12.6 and 12.7 reveals that our simple chance model
reproduces the pattern of results observed DEMO Lichtenstein & Fischho¤ (1977): slight
underconﬁdence for very easy items, consistent overconﬁdence for di‰cult items,
and dramatic overconﬁdence for ‘‘impossible’’ items. DEMO pattern follows from the
assumption that judged conﬁdence is controlled by the balance of arguments for the
competing hypotheses. The present account, therefore, DEMO explain the observed
relation between task di‰culty and overconﬁdence (see Ferrell & McGoey, 1980).
290 Gri‰n and Tversky
Figure 12.6
Predicted calibration for item di‰culty.
Figure DEMO
Calibration plots for item di‰culty.
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 291
The di‰culty DEMO is one of the most consistent ﬁndings in the calibration litera-
ture (Lichtenstein & Fischho¤, 1977; Lichtenstein, Fischho¤, & Phillips, 1982; Yates,
1990). It is observed not only in general knowledge DEMO, but also in clinical
diagnoses (Oskamp, 1962), predictions of DEMO events (contrast Fischho¤ & Mac-
Gregor, 1982, versus Wright & DEMO, 1982), and letter identiﬁcation (Keren,
1988). Moreover, DEMO di‰culty e¤ect may contribute to other ﬁndings that have been
interpreted in di¤erent ways. For example, Keren (1987) showed that world-class
bridge players were well-calibrated, whereas amateur players were overconﬁdent.
Keren interpreted this ﬁnding as an optimism bias on the part of the amateur
players. In addition, however, the professionals were signiﬁcantly more accurate than
the amateurs in predicting the outcome of bridge hands and the di¤erence in di‰-
culty could DEMO contributed to the di¤erence in overconﬁdence.
The di‰culty e¤ect can also explain the main ﬁnding of a study by Gigerenzer,
Ho¤rage, & Kleinbolting (1991). In this study, subjects in one group were presented
DEMO pairs of cities and asked to choose the city with the larger population and indi-
cate their conﬁdence in each answer. The items were DEMO selected from a list
of all large West German cities. Subjects in a second group were presented with
general knowledge questions (e.g., Was DEMO zipper invented before or after 1920?) and
instructed to choose the correct answer and assess their conﬁdence in that answer.
Judgments about the DEMO of cities were fairly well calibrated, but responses to
the general DEMO questions exhibited overconﬁdence. However, the two tasks
were not equally di‰cult: average accuracy was 72% for the city judgments and only
53% for DEMO general knowledge questions. Hence, the presence of overconﬁdence in
the latter DEMO not in the former could be entirely due to the di‰culty e¤ect, docu-
mented by Lichtenstein & Fischho¤ (1977). Indeed, when Gigerenzer et al. (1991)
selected a set of city questions that were matched in di‰culty to the general knowl-
edge questions, the two domains yielded the same degree of overconﬁdence. The
authors did not acknowledge the DEMO that their study confounded item generation
(representative versus selective) with task di‰culty (easy versus hard). Instead, they
interpret their data as DEMO for their theory that overconﬁdence in individual
judgments is a consequence of item selection and that it disappears when items are
randomly sampled from DEMO natural environment. This prediction is tested in the
following study.
Study 5: The Illusion of Validity
In this experiment, subjects compared pairs of DEMO states on several attributes
reported in the 1990 World Almanac. To ensure representative sampling, we ran-
domly selected 30 pairs of American states from the set of all possible pairs of states.
292 Gri‰n and Tversky
Subjects were presented with pairs of states (e.g., Alabama, Oregon) and asked to
choose the state that was higher on a particular attribute and to assess the probabil-
ity that their DEMO was correct. According to Gigerenzer et al. (1991), there should
DEMO no overconﬁdence in these judgments because the states were randomly selected
from a natural reference class. In contrast, our account suggests that the degree of
overconﬁdence depends on the relation between the strength and weight of DEMO evi-
dence. More speciﬁcally, overconﬁdence will be most pronounced when the DEMO of
evidence is low and the strength of evidence is high. This is likely to arise in domains
in which people can readily form DEMO strong impression even though these impressions
have low predictive validity. For example, an interviewer can form a strong impres-
sion of the quality of the mind of a prospective graduate student even though these
impressions do DEMO predict the candidate’s performance (Dawes, 1979).
The use of natural stimuli precludes the direct manipulation of strength and
weight. Instead, we used three attributes that vary in terms of the strength of
impression that DEMO are likely to form and the amount of knowledge they are
likely to have. The three attributes were the number of people in each DEMO (popula-
tion), the high-school graduation rate in each state (education), and the di¤erence in
voting rates between the last two presidential DEMO in each state (voting). We
hypothesized that the three attributes DEMO yield di¤erent patterns of conﬁdence
and accuracy. First, we expected people DEMO be more knowledgeable about population
than about either education or voting. Second, we expected greater conﬁdence in the
prediction of education than in the prediction of voting because people’s images or
stereotypes of the various states DEMO more closely tied to the former than the latter.
For example, DEMO are likely to view one state as more ‘‘educated’’ than another
if it has more famous universities or if it is associated with more DEMO events.
Because the correlations between these cues and high-school graduation rates are
very low, however, we expected greater overconﬁdence for education than for DEMO
lation or voting. Thus, we expected high accuracy and high conﬁdence DEMO popula-
tion, low accuracy and low conﬁdence for voting, and low accuracy and higher
conﬁdence for education.
To test these hypotheses, 298 subjects each evaluated half (15) of the pairs of states
on one DEMO the attributes. After subjects had indicated their conﬁdence for each of the
15 questions, they were asked to estimate how many of the 15 questions they had
answered correctly. They were reminded that by chance alone DEMO expected number
of correct answers was 7.5.
Table 12.4 presents mean judgments of conﬁdence, accuracy, and estimated fre-
quency of correct answers for DEMO of the three attributes. Judgments of conﬁdence
exhibited signiﬁcant overconﬁdence (p <:01) for all three attributes, contradicting
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 293
Table 12.4
DEMO and Accuracy for Study 6
Population
N ¼ 93
Voting
N ¼ 77
Education
N ¼ 118
Conﬁdence 74.7 59.7 65.6
Accuracy 68.2 51.2 DEMO
Conf-Acc 6.5 8.5 15.8
Frequency 51.3 36.1 41.2
Figure 12.8
Conﬁdence and accuracy for three attributes.
the claim that ‘‘If the set of general-knowledge DEMO is randomly sampled from a
natural environment, we expect overconﬁdence to DEMO zero’’ (Gigerenzer et al., 1991,
p. 512). Evidently there is a great deal more to overconﬁdence than the biased selec-
tion DEMO items.
The observed pattern of conﬁdence and accuracy is consistent with our hypothesis,
as can be seen in ﬁgure 12.8. This ﬁgure plots DEMO accuracy against average
conﬁdence, across all subjects and items, for each of the three attributes. For popu-
lation, people exhibited considerable accuracy and moderate overconﬁdence. For
voting, accuracy was at chance level, but overconﬁdence DEMO again moderate. For
education, too, accuracy was at chance level, DEMO overconﬁdence was massive.
294 Gri‰n and Tversky
The present results indicate that overconﬁdence cannot be DEMO explained by the
e¤ect of di‰culty. Population and voting produced comparable levels of overconﬁ-
dence (6.5 versus 8.5, t < 1, ns) DEMO a large di¤erence in accuracy (68.2 versus
51.2, p <:001). On the other hand, there is much greater overconﬁdence in judg-
ments about education than about voting (15.8 versus 8.5, p <:DEMO) even though their
level of accuracy was nearly identical (49.8 versus 51.2, t < 1, ns).
This analysis may shed light DEMO the relation between overconﬁdence and expertise.
When predictability is reasonably high, DEMO are generally better calibrated than
lay people. Studies of race oddsmakers (DEMO, 1949; Hausch, Ziemba, & Rubin-
stein, 1981; McGlothlin, DEMO) and expert bridge players (Keren, 1987) are consistent
with this conclusion. When predictability is very low, however, experts may be more
DEMO to overconﬁdence than novices. If the future state of a mental patient, the
Russian economy, or the stock market cannot be predicted from DEMO data, then
experts who have rich models of the system in DEMO are more likely to exhibit
overconﬁdence than lay people who have a very limited understanding of these sys-
tems. Studies of clinical psychologists (e.g., Oskamp, 1965) and stock market ana-
lysts (e.g., Yates, DEMO) are consistent with this hypothesis.
Frequency versus Conﬁdence
We now turn DEMO the relation between people’s conﬁdence in the validity of their
individual answers and their estimates of the overall hit rate. A sportscaster, for
example, can be asked to assess his conﬁdence in the prediction of each game as well
as the number of games he expects to predict DEMO According to the present
account, these judgments are not expected to DEMO because they are based on
di¤erent evidence. A judgment of conﬁdence in a particular case, we propose,
depends primarily on the balance of arguments for and against a speciﬁc hypothesis,
e.g., the relative strength of two opposing teams. Estimated frequency of correct
prediction, on the other hand, is likely to be based on a general evaluation of the
di‰culty of the task, the knowledge of the judge, or past DEMO with similar
problems. Thus, the overconﬁdence observed in average judgments of DEMO
need not apply to global judgments of expected accuracy. Indeed, table DEMO shows
that estimated frequencies were substantially below the actual frequencies of correct
prediction. In fact, the latter estimates were below chance for two of the three
attributes.3 Similar results have been observed by other investigators (e.g., Giger-
enzer et al., 1991; May, 1986; Sniezek & Switzer, 1989). Evidently, people can
maintain a high degree of conﬁdence DEMO the validity of speciﬁc answers even when
they know that their overall hit rate is not very high.4 This phenomenon has been
called the DEMO of validity’’ (Kahneman & Tversky, 1973): people often make
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 295
conﬁdent predictions DEMO individual cases on the basis of fallible data (e.g., per-
sonal interviews or projective tests) even when they know that these data have low
predictive validity (Dawes, Faust, & Meehl, 1989).
The DEMO between estimates of frequency and judgments of conﬁdence is an
interesting ﬁnding but it does not undermine the signiﬁcance of overconﬁdence in
individual items. DEMO latter phenomenon is important because people’s decisions are
commonly based on their conﬁdence in their assessment of individual events, not on
their estimates of their overall hit rate. For example, an extensive survey of new
business owners (Cooper, Woo, & Dunkelberg, 1988) revealed that entrepreneurs
were, on average, highly optimistic (i.e., overconﬁdent) about the success of their
speciﬁc new ventures even when they were reasonably realistic about the DEMO
rule of failure for ventures of that kind. We suggest that decisions to undertake new
ventures are based primarily on beliefs about individual events, rather than about
overall base rates. The tendency to prefer an individual DEMO ‘‘inside’’ view rather than
a statistical or ‘‘outside’’ view represents one of the major departures of intuitive
judgment from normative theory (Kahneman & Lovallo, 1991; Kahneman & Tver-
sky, 1982).
Finally, note that DEMO performance on the frequency task leaves much to be
desired. The degree of underestimation in judgments of frequency was comparable,
on average, to the degree of overconﬁdence in individual judgments of probability
(see table 12.4). Furthermore, the correlation across subjects between estimated and
actual frequency was negligible for all three attributes (þ:10 for population, :10 DEMO
voting, andpeople estimate their hit rate correctly, and that the conﬁdence–frequency discrep-þ: 15 for education). These observations do not support the view that
ancy is merely a manifestation of their inability to evaluate the DEMO of unique
events. Research on overconﬁdence has been criticized by some authors on the
grounds that it applies a frequentistic criterion (the rate of correct prediction) to a
nonfrequentistic or subjective concept of probability. This objection, however, over-
looks the fact that a Bayesian expects to be DEMO (Dawid, 1982), hence the
theory of subjective probability permits the comparison of conﬁdence and accuracy.
Concluding Remarks
The preceding study demonstrated that DEMO overconﬁdence observed in calibration
experiments is not an artifact of item selection or a byproduct of test di‰culty. Fur-
thermore, overconﬁdence is not limited to the prediction of discrete events; it has
consistently been observed in the assessment of uncertain quantities (Alpert & Rai¤a,
1982).
296 Gri‰n and Tversky
The signiﬁcance of overconﬁdence to the conduct of DEMO a¤airs can hardly be
overstated. Although overconﬁdence is not universal, it DEMO prevalent, often massive,
and di‰cult to eliminate (Fischho¤, 1982)DEMO This phenomenon is signiﬁcant not only
because it demonstrates the discrepancy between intuitive judgments and the laws
of chance, but primarily because conﬁdence controls action (Heath & Tversky,
1991). It has been argued (DEMO e.g., Taylor & Brown, 1988) that overconﬁdence—like
optimism—is adaptive because DEMO makes people feel good and moves them to do
things that they would not have done otherwise. These beneﬁts, however, may be
purchased DEMO a high price. Overconﬁdence in the diagnosis of a patient, the DEMO
of a trial, or the projected interest rate could lead to DEMO medical treat-
ment, bad legal advice, and regrettable ﬁnancial investments. It can be argued that
people’s willingness to engage in military, legal, DEMO other costly battles would be
reduced if they had a more realistic assessment of their chances of success. We doubt
that the beneﬁts of DEMO outweigh its costs.
Notes
This work was supported by a NSERC research grant to the ﬁrst author and by Grant 89-0064 from the
Air DEMO O‰ce of Scientiﬁc Research to the second author. The paper has beneﬁted from discussions with
Robyn Dawes, Baruch Fischho¤, and Daniel Kahneman.
1. DEMO person is said to exhibit overconﬁdence if she overestimates the probability of her favored hypothesis.
The appropriate probability estimate may be determined empirically (e.g., by a person’s hit rate) or derived
from an appropriate model.
DEMO To explore the e¤ect of the correlation between strength and weight, DEMO replicated our experiment with
another set of stimuli that were selected to have a smaller correlation between the two independent vari-
ables (r ¼:27 as compared to r ¼:64). The results for this DEMO of stimuli were remarkably similar to
those reported in the text, DEMO, the regression weights for the median data yielded a ratio of DEMO 2 to 1 in
favor of strength.
3. One possible explanation for this puzzling observation is that subjects reported the number of items
they DEMO with certainty, without correction for guessing.
4. This is the statistical DEMO of the paradoxical statement ‘‘I believe in all of my beliefs, DEMO I believe
that some of my beliefs are false.’’
References
Alpert, DEMO, & Rai¤a, H. (1982). A progress report on the DEMO of probability assessors. In D. Kahne-
man, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 294–305).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bar-Hillel, M. (1983). The base rate fallacy controversy. In R. W. Scholz (Ed.), Decision making under
uncertainty (pp. 39–61). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Camerer, C. (1990). DEMO markets correct biases in probability judgment? Evidence from market experi-
ments. DEMO L. Green & J. H. Kagel (Eds.), Advances in behavioral DEMO, Vol. 2 (pp. 126–172).
Cooper, A. C., Woo, DEMO, Y., & Dunkelberg, W. C. (1988). Entrepreneurs’ perceived chances for
success. Journal of Business Venturing, 3, 97–108.
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 297
Dawes, R. M. (1979). The robust beauty of improper linear models in decision making. American Psy-
chologist, 34, 571–582.
Dawes, R. M. (1988)DEMO Rational choice in an uncertain world. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
DEMO, R. M., Faust, D., & Meehl, P. E. (1989). Clinical versus actuarial judgment. Science, 243,
1668–1674.
Dawid, A. DEMO (1982). The well-calibrated Bayesian. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 77,
605–613.
Dun & Bradstreet. (1967). Patterns of success in managing a business. New York: Dun and Bradstreet.
Dunning, D., Gri‰n, D. W., Milojkovic, J., & Ross, L. (1990). DEMO overconﬁdence e¤ect in social predic-
tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 568–581.
Edwards, W. (1968). Conservatism in human information DEMO In B. Kleinmuntz (Ed.), Formal
representation of human judgment (pp. 17–52). New York: Wiley.
Ferrell, W. R., & McGoey, DEMO J. (1980). A model of calibration for subjective probabilities. Organizational
DEMO and Human Performance, 26, 32–53.
Fischho¤, B. (1982). Debiasing. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncer-
tainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 422–444). New York: Cambridge.
Fischho¤, B., & Bar-Hillel, M. (1984). Focusing techniques: A shortcut to improving probability judg-
ments? Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 34, 175–194.
Fischho¤, B., & Beyth-Marom, R. (1983). DEMO evaluation from a Bayesian perspective. Psycholog-
ical Review, 90, 239–260.
Fischho¤, B., & MacGregor, D. (1982). Subjective conﬁdence in forecasts. DEMO of Forecasting,1,
155–172.
Forer, B. (1949). The fallacy of personal validation: A classroom demonstration of gullibility. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44, 118–123.
Gigerenzer, G., Hell, W., & DEMO, H. (1988). Presentation and content: The use of base DEMO as a con-
tinuous variable. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception DEMO Performance, 14, 513–525.
Gigerenzer, G., Ho¤rage, U., & Kleinbolting, H. (1991). Probabilistic mental models: A Brunswikian
theory of conﬁdence. Psychological Review, 98, 506–528.
Grether, D. M. (1980). Bayes’ DEMO as a descriptive model: The representativeness heuristic. The Quarterly
Journal of DEMO, 95, 537–557.
Grether, D. M. (1990). Testing Bayes’ rule and the representativeness heuristic: Some experimental evidence
(Social Science Working Paper DEMO). Pasadena, CA: Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, DEMO
ifornia Institute of Technology.
Gri‰n, D. W. (1991). On the use and neglect of base rates. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psy-
chology, University of Waterloo.
Gri‰th, R. M. (1949). Odds adjustments by American horse-race bettors. American Journal of Psychology,
62, 290–294.
Hausch, DEMO B., Ziemba, W. T., & Rubinstein, M. (1981). DEMO of the market for racetrack betting.
Management Science, 27, 1435–1452.
Heath, F., & Tversky, A. (1991). Preference and belief: Ambiguity and competence in choice under
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4, 5–28.
Jones, E. E., & Nisbett, R. E. (1972). The actor and the observer: Divergent perceptions of the causes of
behavior. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.
Kahneman, D., & Lovallo, D. (1991). Bold forecasting and timid decisions: A cognitive perspective on DEMO
taking. In R. Rumelt, P. Schendel, & D. Teece (Eds.), Fundamental issues in strategy. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, forthcoming.
Kahneman, DEMO, Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under DEMO: Heuristics and biases. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
298 Gri‰n and Tversky
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972)DEMO Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 430–454.
DEMO, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of prediction. Psychological Review, 80,
237–251.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, DEMO (1982). Intuitive prediction: Biases and corrective procedures. In D. Kah-
neman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 414–421).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keren, G. (1987). Facing uncertainty in the game of bridge: A calibration study. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 39, 98–114.
Keren, G. (1988). On the ability of monitoring non-veridical perceptions and uncertain knowledge: Some
calibration studies. Acta Psychologica, 67, 95–119.
Kidd, J. DEMO (1970). The utilization of subjective probabilities in production planning. Acta DEMO,
34, 338–347.
Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischho¤, B. (1980). Reasons for conﬁdence. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: DEMO Learning and Memory, 6, 107–118.
Lichtenstein, S., & Fischho¤, DEMO (1977). Do those who know more also know more about DEMO much they
know? The calibration of probability judgments. Organizational Behavior and DEMO Performance, 20,
159–183.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischho¤, B., & DEMO, L. D. (1982). Calibration of probabilities: The state of DEMO art to
1980. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases
(pp. 306–334). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lusted, L. B. (1977). A study of the e‰cacy of diagnostic radiologic procedures: Final report on diagnostic
e‰cacy. Chicago: E‰cacy Study Committee of the American College of Radiology.
McGlothlin, DEMO H. (1956). Stability of choices among uncertain alternatives. American Journal DEMO Psy-
chology, 69, 604–615.
May, R. S. (1986). Inferences, subjective probability and frequency of correct answers: A cognitive
approach to DEMO overconﬁdence phenomenon. In B. Brehmer, H Jungermann, P. Lourens, & DEMO Sevo’n
(Eds.), New directions in research on decision making (pp. 175–189). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Murphy, A. H., & Winkler, R. DEMO (1977). Can weather forecasters formulate reliable probability forecasts
of precipitation DEMO temperature? National Weather Digest, 2, 2–9.
Neale, M. A., & Bazerman, M. H. (1990). Cognition and rationality in negotiation. New York: The Free
Press, forthcoming.
Nisbett, R. E., & Ross, L. (1980). Human inference: Strategies and shortcomings of human judgment.
DEMO Cli¤s, NJ: Prentice–Hall.
Oskamp, S. (1962). The relationship of clinical experience and training methods to several criteria of clin-
ical prediction. DEMO Monographs, 76 (28, Whole, No. 547).
Oskamp, S. (1965). Overconﬁdence in case-study judgments. The Journal of Consulting Psychology, 29,
261–265.
Peterson, C. R., & Miller, A. J. (1965)DEMO Sensitivity of subjective probability revision. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology, 70, 117–121.
Peterson, C. R., Schneider, R. J., & Miller, A. J. (1965). Sample size and the revision of subjective proba-
bilities. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69, 522–527.
Phillips, L. D., & DEMO, W. (1966). Conservatism in a simple probability inference task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 72, 346–354.
Quattrone, G. A. (1982). DEMO and unit formation: When behavior engulfs the person. Journal
of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 42, 593–607.
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1971). Comparison of Bayesian and regression approaches to the study of
DEMO processing in judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 6, 649–744.
The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁdence 299
Sniezek, J. A., & Switzer, F. S. (1989). The over-underconﬁdence paradox: DEMO Pi’s but poor unlucky me.
Paper presented at the Judgment and Decision Making Society annual meeting in Atlanta, Georgia.
Stae¨ l von Holstein, DEMO S. (1972). Probabilistic forecasting: An experiment related to the stock market.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 8, 139–158.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A DEMO psychological perspective on mental
health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193–210.
Tversky, DEMO, & Kahneman, D. (1971). The belief in the law DEMO small numbers. Psychological Bulletin, 76,
105–110.
Tversky, A., & DEMO, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
1124–1131.
Vallone, R. P., Gri‰n, D. W., Lin, S., & Ross, L. (1990). The overconﬁdent prediction of future actions
and outcomes by self and others. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 58, 582–592.
von Winterfeldt, D., & Edwards, W. (1986). Decision analysis and behavioral research. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Wagenaar, W. A., & Keren, G. (1986). Does the DEMO know? The reliability of predictions and conﬁdence
ratings of experts. In DEMO Hollnagel, G. Maneini, & D. Woods (Eds.), Intelligent decision DEMO in process
environments (pp. 87–107.) Berlin: Springer.
Wright, G., & Wisudha, A. (1982). Distribution of probability assessments for almanac and future event
questions. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 23, 219–224.
Yates, J. F. (1990). Judgment and Decision Making. Englewood Cli¤s, NJ: Prentice–Hall.

On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments: Calibration, Resolution,
13 and DEMO
Varda Liberman and Amos Tversky
Much research on judgment under uncertainty has focused on the comparison of
probability judgments with the corresponding relative frequency DEMO occurrence. In a
typical study, judges are presented with a series DEMO prediction or knowledge problems
and asked to assess the probability of the events in question. Judgments of probabil-
ity or conﬁdence are used both DEMO research (Lichtenstein, Fischho¤, & Phillips, 1982;
Wallsten & Budescu, 1983) and in practice. For example, weather forecasters often
report the probability of rain (Murphy & Daan, 1985), and economists are DEMO
times called upon to estimate the chances of recession (Zarnowitz & DEMO, 1987).
The two main criteria used to evaluate such judgments DEMO calibration and resolu-
tion. A judge is said to be calibrated if his or her probability judgments match the
corresponding relative frequency of occurrence. DEMO speciﬁcally, consider all events
to which the judge assigns a probability DEMO; the judge is calibrated if the proportion of
events in that DEMO that actually occur equals p. Calibration is a desirable property,
especially for communication, but it does not ensure informativeness. A judge can
be properly calibrated and entirely noninformative if, for example, he or she DEMO
the sex of each newborn with probability 1/2. An ideal judge should also be able
to resolve uncertainty, namely, to discriminate between DEMO that do and do not
occur. In particular, such a judge DEMO a probability 1 to all the events that occur
and a probability 0 to all the events that do not. In practice, of course, people are
neither calibrated nor do they exhibit perfect resolution. To evaluate probability
judgments, therefore, researchers investigate the observed departures from calibra-
tion DEMO resolution.
In the present article, we discuss some conceptual problems regarding DEMO evalua-
tion of probability judgments. In the ﬁrst section, we distinguish DEMO two repre-
sentations of probability judgments: the designated form, which is based on a
particular coding of the outcomes, and the inclusive form, which takes into account
all events and their complements. The two forms yield the same overall measure of
performance, but they give rise to di¤erent measures of calibration and resolution.
We illustrate the di¤erences between the DEMO derived from the designated and the
inclusive representations and show that the same judgments can yield di¤erent values
of the designated indices depending on DEMO designation chosen by the analyst. In the
second section, we distinguish DEMO two types of overconﬁdence, speciﬁc and
generic, and show that they are logically independent of calibration. Speciﬁc over-
conﬁdence refers to the overestimation DEMO the probability of a speciﬁc designated
hypothesis (e.g., rain). Generic overconﬁdence refers to the overestimation of the
probability of the hypothesis that DEMO judge considers most likely. In the third sec-
302 Liberman and Tversky
tion, we treat probability judgments as an ordinal scale, discuss alternative measures
of monotonicity, and propose an ordinal index DEMO performance. In the ﬁnal section,
we apply this measure to several studies of probability judgment and compare it with
the standard measures of DEMO and resolution. The relevant mathematical
results are reviewed in the appendix.
Calibration and Resolution
Consider a binary assessment task. Throughout this section, we assume that on each
trial, the judge assigns a probability pi to the event Ei and a probability 1  pi to its
complement.1 The DEMO of a series of probability judgments are often summarized
by a calibration plot that describes the observed rate of occurrence as a function of
DEMO probability. There are two forms of calibration plots. In the designated form,a
target event is preselected for each problem, independently of the judge’s response,
and the data are displayed in terms of the probabilities DEMO to these events, dis-
regarding their complements. In contrast, the inclusive form incorporates, for each
problem, the probabilities assigned to the two DEMO events. The designated
form is commonly used when all the judgments refer to a common hypothesis (e.g.,
rain vs. no rain, victory DEMO the home team vs. victory for the visiting team), and the
inclusive form is typically used in general-knowledge problems for which there is DEMO
common hypothesis. The form, however, is not dictated by the hypotheses under
consideration. The inclusive form can be used in the presence of DEMO common hypoth-
esis, and the designated form can be employed in DEMO absence, using an arbitrary
selection of target events.
By complementarity, the calibration plot for the inclusive form in the binary case
satisﬁes the DEMO symmetry: If the point ðq; fqÞ is included in the plot, then the
point ð1 q; 1  fqÞ is also included DEMO the plot (i.e., f1q ¼ 1  fq ). Therefore,DEMO
authors normally display the reduced form, which plots the observed rate DEMO occur-
rence only for probability judgments that exceed one half; the DEMO follows from
complementarity. Note that the reduced form includes one event from each comple-
mentary pair but the target event in this case depends DEMO the assessor’s judgment; it
cannot be speciﬁed in advance as required DEMO the designated form. The reduced plot,
therefore, should not be DEMO with the designated plot; it is merely a parsimoni-
ous representation DEMO the inclusive plot. To distinguish between the designated and
the inclusive forms, we use P to denote the set of judgments of the designated events
and Q to denote the set of all judgments. Thus, Q includes each judgment in P as
well as its complement.
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 303
We wish to emphasize that DEMO inclusive and the designated forms are alternative
representations of probability judgments, DEMO alternative methods of elicitation. In
some experiments, subjects are asked to DEMO the probability of a speciﬁc event (e.g.,
rain, recession), whereas in other studies, subjects ﬁrst select the hypothesis they
consider most likely and then assess its probability. Alternatively, the subject may be
asked to divide a chance wheel into two sectors so as to match DEMO probabilities of
two complementary events. This procedure, used by decision analysts, requires the
subject to consider simultaneously the event and its complement, thereby avoiding
the need to specify a target event. Although the experimental procedure DEMO inﬂu-
ence people’s judgments, these data can be represented in either DEMO designated or the
inclusive form, irrespective of the method of elicitation.
DEMO most common measure of overall performance is the quadratic loss function
proposed by Brier (1950) in the context of weather forecasting. Let xi DEMO an indicator
that equals 1 if event Ei occurs and 0 otherwise. Brier’s loss function or probability
score SðPÞ is given by
1
n DEMO pi
¼
1
i

xi Þ2;
n
ð
where n denotes the number of elements in P. Because ðpi xi Þ2 ¼½ð1 DEMO pi Þ
ð1 xi Þ2 , we obtain the same value of S whether it is computed using the designated
or the inclusive form, that is, SðPÞ¼ SðQÞ.
This index provides a measure of overall performance in which lower values indi-
cate better performance. Unlike the linear loss DEMO, which encourages strategic
responses, the quadratic rule is incentive compatible; DEMO minimize the expected score,
the judge should report his or her ‘‘true’’ probability (Winkler, 1986). Furthermore,
the quadratic score can DEMO decomposed into several interpretable components (Mur-
phy, 1973; Sanders, 1963; Yates, 1982). Murphy (1972) considered two decomposi-
tions, one based on the designated form and one based on the inclusive form.2 DEMO the
designated decomposition, see the appendix, part A,
S ¼ f ð1  f Þ 1  f Þ2 þ
n XA DEMO Npð fp
¼ V R0 þC0;
1
n XA P Npðp

fpÞ2
p
ð1Þ
p
where Np is the number of times DEMO judged probability of the designated event equals
p, fp is the DEMO frequency of occurrence in that class, and f is the overall DEMO
frequency of the designated event.
304 Liberman and Tversky
The third term on the right-hand side ðC0Þ DEMO the discrepancy between the
observed hit rate ð fpÞ and the identity line, the second term ðR0Þ measures the vari-
ability of the hit rate around the overall base rate ð f Þ, and the ﬁrst term ðVÞ is the
variance of the outcome variable. Note that V DEMO not depend on the judgments.
(We use primes to denote characteristics DEMO the designated judgments.) The indices C0
and R0 are commonly interpreted DEMO measures of calibration and resolution, respec-
tively (see e.g., Lichtenstein DEMO al., 1982; Murphy & Winkler, 1992; Yaniv, Yates, &DEMO
Smith, 1991). Note that good performance is represented by low DEMO of C0 and
high values of R0.
Two features of this decomposition are worth noting. First, all the components of
Equation 1 remain unchanged if the designated outcome (e.g., rain) and its comple-
ment (DEMO, no rain) are interchanged throughout. Thus, V, R0 , and C0 do not depend
on the labeling of the designation, although they depend on the designation itself.
Second, it follows from the standard decomposition of the total variance that V R0
is the variance of the (designated) outcome variable that cannot be explained by the
judgments.
Murphy (DEMO) also considered another decomposition of S that is based on the
DEMO form. In this decomposition, which incorporates the judged probabilities of
all DEMO and their complements,
1 1
S ¼ :25 2n qXQ DEMO fq 2n qXQ Nqðq
:5Þ2 þ  fqÞ2
A
ð2Þ
¼ :25 R þC;
where Nq is the number of times the judge assigns a probability q to either the des-
ignated event or DEMO its complement and fq refers to the relative frequency of occur-
rence in that class. Thus, for every q A Q, Nq ¼ DEMO þN1p , and fq is a weighted
average of fp and 1  f1p.
The major di¤erence between the two decompositions is that equation DEMO incorpo-
rates only the judgments of the designated events, whereas equation DEMO includes their
complements as well. Hence, Q has 2n elements. The DEMO of the complements
changes the outcome variable: In the designated case, it has mean f and variance
ﬁrst term (.25) on the DEMO side of equation 2 is the variance of the (inclusive)f DEMO  f Þ , whereas in the inclusive case, it has DEMO .50 and variance .25. Thus, the
outcome variable, the second term ðRÞ measures the variability of the calibration
plot around the overall mean (.50), and the third term ðCÞ reﬂects overall calibration.
Here, :DEMO R is the variance of the outcome variable that cannot be explained by the
judgments.
A
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 305
Table 13.1
An Example of DEMO Designation
PðV; HÞ PðA; BÞ
Game Visitors Winner
1 AB .25 (0) .25 (0)
2 BB .75 (1) .25 (DEMO)
3 AB .25 (0) .25 (0)
4 BA DEMO (0) .25 (1)
5 AB .75 (0) .75 (0)
6 BA .25 (0) .75 (1)
7 AA .75 (1) .75 (1)
8 BA .25 (0) .75 (1)
Mean .50 (.25) .50 (.50)
C0 .0625 DEMO
Note: PðV; HÞ¼ probability of visiting team beating home team, DEMO; BÞ¼ probability of As beating Bs,
C0 ¼ correspondence between DEMO rate and judged probability.
Both the designated indices (C0 and R0 ) and the inclusive indices (C and R) are
widely used in the literature, but the conceptual di¤erences between them are not
properly appreciated. We next discuss the interpretation of these measures, starting
with calibration. It is evident from the comparison of the inclusive index C and the
DEMO index C0 that the former measures calibration at large, whereas the DEMO
measures calibration relative to a speciﬁc designated hypothesis. That is, C DEMO
the degree to which the judge’s scale is calibrated. Thus, C DEMO 0 i¤ the hit rate among
all the events to which the judge assigns a probability p is equal to p. In contrast, C0
measures the correspondence between hit rate and judged probability only for the
DEMO events. A judge can be properly calibrated at large (i.e., C ¼ 0) and
exhibit a bias with respect to a particular designation, yielding C0 > 0. Moreover,
di¤erent designations produce di¤erent values of C0 , as illustrated in the example
described in table 13.1.
Consider DEMO sportscaster who assesses the probabilities of the outcomes of 8 bas-
ketball games between two teams, the As and the Bs. Half of the games are played on
the A s’ home court, and the other half are played on the Bs’ home court. The visiting
team and DEMO winner of each game in the series are given in the second and third
columns of table 13.1. Note that the As and the DEMO each won 50% of their games
(4 out of 8) and that the visiting team won 25% of the games (2 out of 8).
The probabilities assigned by the sportscaster can be analyzed in DEMO of two dif-
ferent designations: (a) the visiting team versus DEMO home team and (b) the As versus
the Bs. The fourth column of table 13.1 contains the sportscaster’s probability judg-
ments for the DEMO ‘‘the visiting team beats the home team,’’ denoted
306 Liberman and Tversky
Figure 13.1
Calibration graph for the two designations DEMO the data from table 13.1 (V
team, A ¼ A team, B ¼ B team).
¼
visiting team, H
¼
home
DEMO; HÞ. The ﬁfth column of table 13.1 contains the sportscaster’s probability DEMO
ments for the proposition ‘‘the As beat the Bs,’’ denoted PðA; BÞ. In this example, the
assessor uses only two values, .25 and .75; this feature simpliﬁes the analysis but it is
not essential. The table also indicates, beside each judgment, whether the event in
DEMO occurred (1) or did not occur (0).
Inspection of DEMO 4 reveals that the sportscaster is not properly calibrated with
respect to the ðV; HÞ designation: Average judged probability for victory by the
DEMO team equals .50, whereas the corresponding hit rate is only .25, yielding
C0 ¼ :0625. Analysis of the same set of judgments in terms of the As versus the Bs
(see column 5) reveals DEMO calibration (i.e., C0 ¼ 0). Figure 13.1 contains the cali-
bration plot for the data of table 13.1. The black circles show DEMO the judge is
overconﬁdent in predicting victory for the visiting team, DEMO underestimating the
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 307
home court advantage. On the DEMO hand, the open circles indicate that the judge
has no bias DEMO favor of either team. Hence, the same set of judgments yields DEMO
values of C0 depending on the choice of designation.
The problem of multiple designation has escaped attention, we believe, because
investigators normally describe DEMO data in terms of one preferred designation (e.g.,
victory for DEMO home team) and report C0 (and R0 ) in terms of this designation. In
many situations, of course, there is a natural DEMO, but it is often di‰cult to
justify the exclusion of all DEMO Even in the classical problem of forecasting the
probability of rain, DEMO can think of other meaningful designations, such as, ‘‘Will
tomorrow’s weather be di¤erent from today’s?’’
It might be tempting to deal with DEMO problem of multiple designations by deﬁning
the assessor’s task in terms of a preferred designation. This approach, however, does
not solve the problem DEMO we have no way of knowing how the judge actually
thinks about the events in question. In the example above, the sportscaster may be
asked to assess the probability of victory by the visiting team, yet he or she may
think in terms of a victory by the DEMO, or in terms of both designations and perhaps
some others. This DEMO not imply that C0 is meaningless or noninformative. It only
indicates that C0 should be interpreted as a measure of bias with respect to DEMO partic-
ular designation, not as a measure of calibration at large.
DEMO value of the inclusive index, of course, does not depend on the designation. In
this example, C ¼ 0, as in the DEMO; BÞ designation of column 5 in table 13.1. In gen-
eral, the value of C is equal to the minimal value of C0 DEMO This follows from the fact
that C aC0 (see part B DEMO the appendix) and the observation that there always exists
a designation DEMO which C0 ¼ C.
The problem of multiple designations applies with equal force to the interpretation
of the resolution index R0 . Recall that DEMO inclusive index R measures the variability
of the calibration plot around .5, whereas the designated index R0 measures the
variability around the base rate of the designated event (see equation 1). Because
alternative designations induce di¤erent outcome variables, with di¤erent base rates,
the same set of judgments can yield markedly di¤erent values of R0 , as illustrated
below. DEMO that R can be either smaller or larger than R0.
Consider a political analyst who predicts the outcomes of gubernatorial elections
in 10 di¤erent DEMO, in which 5 of the incumbents are Republicans and 5 are DEMO
ocrats. Suppose that the analyst predicts, with probability 1, that the challenger will
beat the incumbent in all 10 races, and suppose further that these predictions are
conﬁrmed. There are two natural designations in this DEMO The results of the election
can be coded in terms of victory for the challenger or for the incumbent. Alter-
natively, they can be coded in terms of a victory for a Republican or for a DEMO
308 Liberman and Tversky
The two designations induce di¤erent outcome variables. In DEMO former, the outcome
variable has a mean of 1 and no DEMO, because all of the races were won by the
challengers. In DEMO latter, the outcome variable has a mean .50 and variance .25,DEMO
because the races were evenly split between Republicans and Democrats. As a con-
sequence, the analyst obtains the maximal value of R0 , namely .25, in the Republican
versus Democrat designation, and the minimal value DEMO R0 , namely 0, in the chal-
lenger versus incumbent designation. DEMO value of R0 , therefore, depends critically on
the choice of DEMO
The designated index R0 measures the assessor’s ability to improve the prediction
of the designated outcome variable beyond the base rate of that variable; it does not
measure the assessor’s general ability to distinguish between events DEMO do and do
not occur. As shown above, a perfect judge, who predicts all outcomes without error,
can obtain R0 ¼ 0. DEMO contrast, the inclusive measure R always assigns the maximal
value (.25) to an assessor who predicts without error.
The inclusive and the designated measures of resolution may be used to describe
and summarize the observed DEMO; also they can be used to evaluate the per-
formance of DEMO assessor and its usefulness for others. One might argue that R0 is
preferable to R because a judge who achieves perfect resolution when the DEMO rate of
the outcome variable is 1 (or 0) is less informative and less useful than a judge who
achieves perfect resolution when DEMO base rate of the outcome variable is .5 (see
Yaniv et DEMO, 1991 for a discussion of this issue). Although this is DEMO the case, the
evaluation problem is more complicated. First, as the preceding example shows, dif-
ferent designations give rise to di¤erent base rates. Should we use, for example, the
base rate for Republicans versus DEMO, which equals .5, or the base rate for the
challenger versus the incumbent, which equals 1? In the absence of a unique DEMO
nation, it is not clear what is the relevant base rate. DEMO suppose, for the sake of
argument, that there is a unique designation. If we evaluate the judge’s performance
relative to the base rate DEMO this designation (using R0 ), then a judge who predicts the
base rate in each case receives R0 ¼ 0 and is therefore DEMO as totally uninforma-
tive. This evaluation may be reasonable if the base rate of the outcome variable is
generally known, but not otherwise.
Consider, for example, a physician who assesses for each patient the probability DEMO
success of a particular medical treatment. Suppose the physician assigns a probability
.9 for each of the patients and that the treatment is indeed DEMO in 90% of the
cases. How shall we evaluate this performance? DEMO the rate of success for this treat-
ment is generally known, DEMO physician is clearly uninformative. However, if the
medical treatment in question DEMO new and its rate of success is unknown, the phys-
ician’s DEMO may be highly informative. Hence, the informativeness and the
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 309
usefulness of a set of DEMO depend on the prior knowledge of the user, which
may or DEMO not coincide with the base rate of the outcome variable. Because the
prior knowledge of the user is not part of the formal deﬁnition DEMO the problem, none
of the available indices provide a fully satisfactory DEMO of the usefulness of the
assessor.
We conclude this section with a brief discussion of the reasons for using the des-
ignated and the DEMO analyses. To begin with, there are many situations in which
only DEMO inclusive analysis can be applied, because there is no common hypothesis DEMO
a nonarbitrary designation. Examples of such tasks include multiple-choice tests of
general knowledge or the diagnosis of patients in an emergency room where the DEMO
of relevant diagnoses varies from case to case. Recall that the inclusive indices
depend only on the assessor’s judgment and the actual state of DEMO world, whereas the
designated indices also depend on the designation chosen DEMO the analyst. To justify
this choice and the use of the designated indices, the investigator should have a good
reason (a) for selecting a particular designation (e.g., Republicans vs. Democrats
rather than incumbents vs. DEMO), and (b) for focusing on the prediction of a
particular outcome (e.g., a victory by a Democrat) separately from the prediction of
its complement.
The designated analysis has been sometimes recommended on the DEMO that the
judge was asked to assess the probability of a particular outcome (e.g., the probabil-
ity that a manuscript would be accepted, not the probability that it would be
rejected). This argument, however, is not very compelling because the manner in
which the judge thinks about the event in question is not dictated by the wording of
DEMO question. (How about the probability that the manuscript will not be DEMO?)
There is a better rationale for the designated analysis, namely, an interest in the
presence or absence of a bias regarding a speciﬁc hypothesis. Such a bias can be
observed in the designated plot DEMO not in the inclusive plot. Indeed, the former is
more popular DEMO the latter, especially in the binary case, in which the inclusive plot
can be constructed from the designated plot but not vice versa. DEMO relation no
longer holds in the nonbinary case, in which the DEMO assesses the probabilities of
three of more outcomes. In this case, DEMO inclusive plot incorporates some data that
are excluded from the designated plot.
In summary, the inclusive analysis is appropriate when we are interested in the
assessor’s use of the probability scale, irrespective of the particular outcome. The
designated analysis, on the other hand, is relevant when we DEMO interested in the pre-
diction of a speciﬁc outcome. (An investigator, of course, may choose to focus on
any outcome, e.g., rain on the weekend, even when most judgments of rain do not
involve this outcome.) The preceding discussion indicates that both the designated
310 Liberman and Tversky
and the inclusive indices can be useful for DEMO and evaluating probability
judgments. Furthermore, the appreciation of their di¤erences could DEMO the
selection of indices and their interpretation.
Calibration and Conﬁdence
One of the major ﬁndings that has emerged from the study of intuitive judgment DEMO
the prevalence of overconﬁdence. Overconﬁdence is manifested in di¤erent forms,
such as nonregressive predictions (Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982) and the
overestimation of the accuracy of clinical judgments (Dawes, Faust, & Meehl, 1989).
Within the calibration paradigm, we distinguish between two manifestations DEMO
overconﬁdence, which we call speciﬁc and generic.3 A person is said DEMO exhibit spe-
ciﬁc overconﬁdence (or bias, Yates, 1990) if he or she overestimates the probability of
a speciﬁc hypothesis or a designated DEMO (Note that speciﬁc overconﬁdence in a
given hypothesis entails speciﬁc underconﬁdence DEMO the complementary hypothesis.)
A person is said to exhibit generic overconﬁdence if he or she overestimates the
probability of the hypothesis that he DEMO she considers most likely. The two concepts
of overconﬁdence are distinct. A person may exhibit speciﬁc overconﬁdence either
with or without generic overconﬁdence. An DEMO who overestimates the proba-
bility that the visiting team will win a basketball game may or may not overestimate
the probability of the outcome DEMO he or she considers more likely. The two phe-
nomena can have di¤erent causes. Inadequate appreciation of the home court
advantage, for example, DEMO likely to produce speciﬁc, not generic, overconﬁdence.
Speciﬁc overconﬁdence implies C0 > 0 for the relevant designation, whereas
generic overconﬁdence implies C > 0 in the binary case. Thus, generic overconﬁ-
dence is represented by probability judgments that are more extreme (i.e., closer to
0 or DEMO) than the corresponding hit rates. Generic overconﬁdence, however, is no
DEMO equivalent to extremeness when the number of outcomes is greater than two,
because in that case, the highest judged probability can be less than one half. In
Oskamp’s (1965) well-known study, for example, DEMO psychologists chose one out
of ﬁve outcomes describing a real patient and assessed their conﬁdence in their pre-
diction. By the end of the DEMO, average conﬁdence was about 45%, whereas aver-
age hit rate was only .25. These data exhibited massive generic overconﬁdence, but
the judgments were less extreme (i.e., closer to .50) than the corresponding hit rate.
It is tempting to try to reconcile extremeness and generic overconﬁdence in DEMO n
outcome case by deﬁning extremeness relative to 1=n. lndeed, conﬁdence DEMO .45 is
more extreme than a hit rate of .25 relative to a chance baseline of .20. Unfortu-
nately, this approach does not work in general. Consider an assessor who assigns
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 311
probabilities ð:4;:3;:DEMO to three outcomes whose respective rates of occurrence are
ð:2;:DEMO;:6Þ . These judgments exhibit generic overconﬁdence: The assessor overesti-
mates the probability of the outcome he or she considers most likely. The DEMO,
however, are less extreme (i.e., closer to 1=3) than the actual relative frequencies.
Furthermore, in the nonbinary case, there is DEMO compelling ordering of all probabil-
ity vectors with respect to extremeness; DEMO metrics yield di¤erent orders.
Moreover, in the nonbinary case, generic overconﬁdence may coexist with C ¼ 0.
The preceding discussion shows that except DEMO the binary case, calibration and
overconﬁdence are logically distinct. Both noncalibration DEMO overconﬁdence (or
underconﬁdence) represent biased assessments. However, C describes a DEMO bias,
aggregated over all assignments; speciﬁc overconﬁdence (or C0 ) describes a bias in
the assessment of a speciﬁc hypothesis; and generic overconﬁdence reﬂects a bias in
the assessment of one’s favored hypothesis. It DEMO important to distinguish among
these e¤ects because they could have di¤erent theoretical and practical implications.
Ordinal Analysis
The use of calibration and resolution for DEMO human judgment has been criti-
cized on the ground that assessments of probability may not be readily translatable
into relative frequencies. Although many experiments DEMO explicit frequentistic
instructions, it could be argued that the person who DEMO that she is ‘‘90% sure’’ does
not necessarily expect to be correct 90% of the time. According to this view, being
‘‘90% sure’’ is an expression of high conﬁdence that should not be given a frequen-
DEMO interpretation. Whatever the merit of this objection, it may be instructive DEMO
treat and evaluate probability judgments as an ordinal scale.
Suppose a judge classiﬁes each of n uncertain events into one of k ordered cate-
DEMO The categories may be deﬁned verbally (e.g., very likely, likely, rather unlikely)
or they may correspond to numerical judgments of probability. DEMO results can be
described by a 2 k matrix in which the columns correspond to the k judgment
categories, and the rows indicate whether the event occurred, see ﬁgure 13.2. The cell
entries n1i and n0i denote the number of events assigned by the judge to category i,DEMO
1 ai ak , that did and did not occur, respectively. DEMO example, consider a judge
who rates each of n candidates on DEMO 5-point scale in terms of their chances of passing
a given test. Suppose we do not attach a probability to each level and treat DEMO
instead as an ordinal scale. How shall we evaluate the performance of the judge?
Because calibration refers to the numerical correspondence between the DEMO
scale and the respective rate of occurrence, it does not have DEMO ordinal analogue.
Accuracy or resolution, on the other hand, can be evaluated ordinally by comparing
312 Liberman and Tversky
Figure 13.2
An Outcome

Judgment matrix.
the DEMO of pairs of candidates that are ordered correctly to the proportion of
pairs of candidates that are ordered incorrectly.
We interpret each pair of DEMO (i.e., assigning one event to category i and
another to category j ) as an indirect comparison (i.e., that one event is DEMO likely
than the other, or that they are perceived as equiprobable)DEMO Given n events, there are
N ¼ nðn 1Þ=2 comparisons that DEMO be partitioned into the following ﬁve types: the
number of valid DEMO
v
¼
X
<j
n0i n1j ;
i
the number of wrong distinctions
w
¼
X
>j
n0i n1j ;
i
the DEMO of comparisons that are tied on X only
x
¼
Xn0i n1i ;
i
the number of comparisons that are tied on Y only
y
¼
X
<j ðn0i n0j
þ
n1i n1j Þ;
i
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 313
and the number of comparisons DEMO are tied on both X and Y
X
¼ ; j nij ðnij 1Þ=2:
z
i
Clearly, N ¼ v þw þx þy þz.
There is an extensive literature on ordinal measures of association. We DEMO a
measure that is appropriate for the present problem. Following the seminal work of
Goodman and Kruskal (1954, 1959), we deﬁne a DEMO ordinal measure of
association by
G v w ; di 0; DEMO; for i 1; 2; 3:
¼ v þw þd1x DEMO þd3z ¼ ¼ ð3Þ
Thus, G is the di¤erence between the DEMO of concordant and discordant pairs
divided by the total number of ‘‘relevant’’ pairs (Wilson, 1974). Equation 3 deﬁnes a
family of indices DEMO di¤er only in the type of ties that are included in the set of
relevant pairs.4 Note that ties are unavoidable because the number DEMO events gener-
ally exceed the number of categories.
The best-known member of this family of indices is Goodman and Kruskal’s
g ¼ðv wÞ=ðv þwÞ, obtained by setting d1 ¼ d2 ¼ d3 ¼ 0. This measure DEMO widely
used, but it is not well suited for our purposes DEMO it ignores all ties. Conse-
quently, a judge could obtain a DEMO score by producing a small number of correct
judgments and a large number of ties. To illustrate the problem, consider the hypo-
thetical example displayed in ﬁgure 13.3a, in which a judge evaluated 20 events using
three categories: low, medium, and high probability. In this case, DEMO ¼ 10 þ9 ¼ 19
and w ¼ 0; hence g DEMO 1. Using g to evaluate performance, therefore, would encour-
age the judge to make a few ‘‘safe’’ judgments and tie all others (e.g., by using the
middle category as in ﬁgure 13.3a.
An alternative measure, ðv wÞ=ðv þw þx þyÞ, obtained by setting d1 ¼ d2 DEMO 1
and d3 ¼ 0, was proposed by Wilson (1974). This index takes into account all com-
parisons that are tied either DEMO X or on Y, but not on both. Unlike g, this measure
penalizes the assessor for discrimination failures, but the penalty is too sweeping.
As illustrated in ﬁgure 13.3b, an assessor can achieve perfect ordinal resolution (i.e.,
a complete separation of the events that did and did not occur), yet the value of
Wilson’s index is only DEMO/3 rather than 1.
The preceding examples suggest the desired reﬁnement. Note that contingency
tables for probability judgments are generally asymmetric: The outcome variable has
only two values (0 and 1), whereas the judgment scale normally includes more than
314 Liberman and Tversky
Figure 13.3
Hypothetical Outcome

Judgment matrix.
two DEMO Therefore, the assessor is bound to assign events with a common DEMO to
di¤erent categories, but he or she may be able to DEMO occurrences from non-
occurrences without error. Hence, one may wish to DEMO the assessor for assign-
ing events with a di¤erent fate to the same category (i.e., ties on X ) but not for
assigning DEMO with a common fate to di¤erent categories (i.e., ties on Y ).
To formalize this argument, we deﬁne the following notion. An DEMO  Judg-
ment matrix is separable if w ¼ x ¼ 0. In other words, a matrix is separable if there
exists a category j so that any event that is rated above j occurs and DEMO event that is
rated at or below j does not occur. An ordinal measure of association is said to sat-
isfy the separability criterion DEMO it assigns the maximal value to a matrix if
and only if the matrix is separable. It follows readily that among the generalized
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 315
measures of association deﬁned by DEMO 3, there is only one index, obtained by
setting d1 ¼ 1, d2 ¼ d3 ¼ 0, that satisﬁes the separability criterion. DEMO measure,
denoted M for monotonicity, is given by

v DEMO
¼ ð4Þ
:
M
v
þw þx
This formula was ﬁrst DEMO by Somers (1962) in a di¤erent context. He
sought an asymmetric measure to distinguish between the contributions of the de-
pendent and the DEMO variable. The above measure was further discussed by
Freeman (1986), DEMO (1971), and Wilson (1974), who concluded that it is the mea-
sure of choice for testing the hypothesis that Y is DEMO (weakly) monotonic function of
Xunlike the perfect score assigned by. Indeed, applying M to ﬁgure 13.3a yields a fairly low score, 19g; and applying M to the separable matrix of=ð19 þ 81Þ¼ :19,
ﬁgure 13.3b yields a perfect score, in contrast to the intermediate value (2/3) of
Wilson’s index. Thus, M provides an adequate index of performance that can be
interpreted as an ordinal measure of the DEMO ability to distinguish between events
that do and do not occur. It vanishes i¤ v ¼ w, and it equals 1 i¤ w ¼ x ¼ 0. Other
ordinal indices for conﬁdence judgments are discussed by DEMO (1984). To the best
of our knowledge, however, no DEMO measure of ordinal association discussed in the
literature satisﬁes the separability criterion.
Applications
In this section, we compare the monotonicity index M with the standard measures of
performance and illustrate the di¤erence between the designated and DEMO inclusive
indices in three sets of data reported in the literature.5
Comparing Verbal and Numerical Judgments
There is considerable interest in the relation between DEMO and numerical judgments
of belief (see, e.g., Mosteller & Youtz, 1990, and the following commentary). To
investigate this question, Wallsten, Budescu, and Zwick (in press) conducted an
extensive study in which each subject ðN ¼ 21Þ evaluated the probability of some 300
propositions (e.g., ‘‘The Monroe Doctrine was proclaimed before the Republican
party was founded’’) and of their complements. The data satisﬁed the assumption of
complementarity used in the calculation of the inclusive indices. In addition to the
numerical DEMO, the respondents also evaluated all propositions and their
complements, using a set of ordered verbal expressions (e.g., improbable, doubtful,
316 Liberman and Tversky
likely) selected separately by each subject. To compare the quality of the two modes
of judgment, the authors devised scaling procedures that converted the verbal
expressions to numerical estimates and computed the DEMO measures of cali-
bration and resolution for the numerical judgments and for the scaled verbal expres-
sions. Because subjects evaluated each proposition and its DEMO and because
the estimates were roughly additive, there were essentially no DEMO between the
designated and the inclusive indices in this case.
One advantage of the ordinal analysis discussed above is that it can be used DEMO
compare verbal and numerical judgments without converting the former into the
latter. Accordingly, we applied the monotonicity measure to both the verbal and
numerical judgments of each subject. The mean value of M was .489 in DEMO numerical
data and .456 in the verbal data, tð21Þ¼ 2:03, p <:06. The mean value of R0 was
.056 in the DEMO data and .050 in the scaled verbal data, tð21Þ¼ 2:4, p <:05.
Both measures, therefore, indicated better performance in the DEMO than in the
verbal mode. The product–moment correlation, across subjects, between M and R0
was .975 in the numerical data and .978 in DEMO verbal data. (The negative correlations
between M and S were almost DEMO high, but those between M and C0 were substan-
tially lower.) These results support the interpretation of M as an ordinal measure of
DEMO, which can be used to evaluate verbal expressions of belief without DEMO
verting them to numbers.
Recession Forecast
The next data set was taken from a survey of professional economic forecasters con-
ducted by the National DEMO for Economic Research and the American Statistical
Association (Zarnowitz, 1985; DEMO & Lambros, 1987). Each member of the
panel was asked, among other things, to assess the probability of a recession, deﬁned
DEMO a decline in the real gross national product from the last quarter. The survey was
conducted at the beginning of the second month of DEMO quarter (i.e., four times per
year), and each participant was asked to provide ﬁve probability assessments; one for
the current quarter (DEMO) and one for each of the following four quarters, denoted Q1
through Q4. The present analysis is based on the work of Braun DEMO Yaniv (1992),
who selected a subsample of 40 forecasters for whom a substantial number of pre-
dictions were available.
Figures 13.4 and DEMO contain, respectively, the designated and the inclusive cali-
bration plots for the prediction of recession in the current quarter, pooled across all
40 forecasters. The number of observations is given for each point. The designated
DEMO (ﬁgure 13.4) indicates the presence of speciﬁc overconﬁdence, or bias, favoring
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 317
Figure 13.4
Designated calibration plot DEMO the forecast of recession. (The solid line connects adjacent nondecreasing
points.)DEMO
recession. Overall, mean conﬁdence in the prediction of recession was 24%, whereas
the overall rate of recession was only 19%. The inclusive plot (ﬁgure 13.5) reveals a
modest departure from calibration, indicating generic overconﬁdence. DEMO mean
conﬁdence in the forecaster’s favored hypothesis was 91%, compared with DEMO hit rate
of 81%. Recall that speciﬁc overconﬁdence in the prediction of recession can be
associated with generic overconﬁdence, generic underconﬁdence, or neither.
DEMO based on aggregate plots (e.g., ﬁgures 13.4 and 13.5) should DEMO vali-
dated in the data of individual respondents, because aggregation over DEMO can
alter the picture. The pooled data can be perfectly calibrated, DEMO example, if the
probability of recession is overestimated by some subjects DEMO underestimated by
others. The following discussion is based on the analysis of individual data.
318 Liberman and Tversky
Figure 13.5
Inclusive calibration plot of the forecast DEMO recession. (The solid line connects adjacent nondecreasing
points.)
For each DEMO the 40 forecasters, we computed, separately for each quarter, C0 DEMO
R0 using the designated form (equation 1) and C and R using the inclusive form
(equation 2). We also computed the Brier score S and the monotonicity index M
(equation 3) separately for DEMO subject. The means of these measures are presented
in ﬁgures 13.6, DEMO, and 13.8 for each of the ﬁve quarters. The vertical lines DEMO
G1 standard error.
Figure 13.6 displays the mean values of C and C0 . It shows that C is signiﬁcantly
smaller than C0 , DEMO that both C and C0 are relatively insensitive to the prediction
horizon, with the possible exception of Q4. Figure 13.7 displays the mean values of R
and R0 . As expected, both measures of resolution are higher for short-term than for
long-term predictions. In addition, R is substantially greater than R0 . Recall that
C0 bC (see the appendix, DEMO B), but there is no necessary relation between R
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 319
Figure 13.6
Calibration measures (C and C
0
) for forecasts of recession.
and R0 . However, R is bounded by .25, whereas R0 is bounded by the variance of
the designated outcome variable V, which equals ð:19Þð:81Þ¼ :DEMO This fact may
help explain the observed di¤erence between R and R0 . Taken together, ﬁgures 13.6
and 13.7 show that the inclusive measures are more ﬂattering than the designated
measures.
Figure 13.8 contains the mean DEMO of the ordinal measure M and the cardinal
measure S . To facilitate the comparison of the two indices, we ‘‘matched’’ their
ranges by plotting the linear transform S ¼ 1 4S instead of S . DEMO that S , like
M, equals 1 if the judge is DEMO, and S equals 0 if the judge makes the same
forecast (i.e., .5) in each case. As expected, both M and S decrease as the prediction
horizon increases. Indeed, the forecasts for the current quarter (Q0) are reasonably
320 Liberman and Tversky
Figure 13.7
Resolution measures (R and R
0
) for forecasts of recession.
accurate (M ¼ :74, S ¼ :57), but the forecasts for the last quarter (Q4) are no better
than chance (M ¼:06, S ¼ : 31)DEMO To interpret the value of S , note that forecast-2 2
ing the base rate of recession (.19) in every case yields S DEMO :81ð:19Þ þ:19ð:81Þ ¼
:154, which gives an DEMO of .384. In terms of the Brier score, therefore, the economists’
forecasts for the last two quarters are inferior, on average, to DEMO ﬂat base rate; for
discussion, see Braun and Yaniv (1992)DEMO
Figure 13.8 also shows that the slope of M is steeper than the slope of S . Perhaps
more important, M is more sensitive than S in the sense that it yields greater sepa-
ration (i.e., smaller overlap) between the distributions of performance measures for
successive quarters. DEMO a consequence, it provides a more powerful statistical test for
di¤erences DEMO performance. For example, the hypothesis that the quality of forecasts
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 321
Figure 13.8
Performance measures (M and S ) for forecasts of recession.
is the same for the DEMO two quarters can be soundly rejected for M but not for S.
The respective t statistics are 5.2 and 1.2
To explore further the DEMO between the indices we computed, separately for
each forecaster in each DEMO,the product–moment correlation between the ordinal
measure M and the standard measures S, R, and C. The average correlation, across
all subjects and periods, between M and S is .64, between M and R DEMO .51, and
between M and C is .36. Thus, M correlates quite highly with the Brier score S,
slightly lower with the DEMO measure R, and still lower with the calibration
measure C. The DEMO correlation between C and R is only .17. Taken together
with the observation that C does not vary greatly across quarters, whereas R, DEMO , and
322 Liberman and Tversky
M decrease from Q0 to Q4, it appears that the degree of calibration is relatively
insensitive to the accuracy of DEMO
Categorical Prediction
Fischho¤, MacGregor, and Lichtenstein (1983) introduced a novel elicitation proce-
dure that requires sorting events prior to their evaluation. Subjects DEMO presented
with 50 general-knowledge questions. Each question had two alternative answers,
one correct and one incorrect. In the ﬁrst phase, subjects went through all 50 items
and chose, in each case, the answer they DEMO was correct. After the selection
phase, subjects were instructed to sort DEMO items into a ﬁxed number of piles and
assign to each pile a number (between .5 and 1) that expresses the probability that
DEMO chosen answer for each item in the pile is correct. Four di¤erent groups of 50,
42, 38, and 32 subjects sorted the DEMO 50 items into three, four, ﬁve, or six piles,
DEMO
For each subject, we computed the values of S, C, DEMO, and M. Because the pattern
of results was essentially independent of DEMO number of piles, we pooled the individ-
ual estimates across the DEMO conditions.6 The average value of S was .255, yielding
an S DEMO  .020, which provides no new evidence of knowledge because an DEMO of 0
can be achieved by assigning a probability of one half to all items. In contrast, the
ordinal analysis yields an average M of .287, which shows that the subjects per-
formed considerably better than chance. Indeed, M was positive for 90% of the sub-
jects ðp <:001 by sign test), but S was positive for only DEMO of the subjects. Hence,
the hypothesis of total ignorance could be rejected for M but not for S. In other
words, M provided a more sensitive measure of performance in the sense that it
detected DEMO that was not detected by the Brier score. This situation occurred
because S ¼ 0 (or, equivalently, S ¼ : 25) either DEMO the judge is totally ignorant
and assigns probability .5 to all items or when the judge possesses some knowledge
but is heavily penalized by DEMO quadratic scoring rule. Therefore, an S of 0 does not
have DEMO unequivocal interpretation: It may represent either total ignorance and
proper calibration DEMO a combination of partial knowledge and poor calibration. This
problem does not arise with respect to the ordinal index because M ¼ 0 i¤ DEMO judge
produces an equal number of valid and invalid distinctions (i.e., v ¼ w).
The pattern of correlations between the indices is DEMO to that observed in the
predictions of recession, but the actual DEMO are considerably higher. The
average correlation, across all subjects and conditions, between M and S is .88,
between M and R is DEMO, and between M and C is .68. The average correlation
betweencalibration DEMO only weakly related to accuracy.R and C is only .40. These results reinforce the previous conclusion that
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 323
To interpret the correlations between DEMO measures, recall that S as well as C
and C0 depend DEMO the actual numerical values assessed by the judge, M depends on
DEMO order only, whereas R and R0 depend merely on the equivalence DEMO formed
by the judge, irrespective of their labels. Changing the judged DEMO of each
event from p to 1  p, for example, has no e¤ect on R and R0 , although it has a
DEMO e¤ect on all other measures. Note that M, like R, reﬂects the assessor’s
ability to distinguish among likely and less likely events, independent of the use of
the probability scale. Hence, M is conceptually closer to R than to C. However,
nonmonotonicity in the calibration plot (q > r but fq < fr ) a¤ects the Brier score DEMO
through C, not through R . Consequently, we expected (a) a moderate correlation
between M and C, (b) a substantial correlation between M and R, and (c) an even
higher correlation between M and S because S incorporates both C and R. The cor-
DEMO observed in the previous studies conﬁrmed these expectations.
Summary and Conclusions
We discussed in this chapter three distinctions that pertain to the analysis and DEMO
evaluation of probability judgments: inclusive versus designated representations,
generic versus DEMO overconﬁdence, and ordinal versus cardinal measures of per-
formance. We argued DEMO the inclusive and the designated indices measure di¤erent
characteristics of probability judgments. Speciﬁcally, the inclusive indices C and R
measure calibration and resolution at large, whereas the designated indices C0 and R0
measure, respectively, the bias associated with a particular designation and the
improvement—beyond the base rate—in DEMO prediction of a designated outcome
variable. Both the inclusive and the designated indices could convey useful infor-
mation, but the latter—unlike the former—are contingent on the coding of the
outcomes.
We also distinguished calibration from two DEMO of overconﬁdence: speciﬁc over-
conﬁdence, namely, overestimating the probability of DEMO speciﬁc hypothesis, and
generic conﬁdence, namely, overestimating the probability of DEMO hypothesis that is
considered most likely. In the binary case, speciﬁc DEMO implies C0 > 0,
whereas generic overconﬁdence implies C > 0. Finally, we proposed an ordinal
measure of performance based on the separability criterion that can be used in addi-
tion to, or instead of, the standard measures. Applications of the ordinal analysis to
several data sets suggest that the proposed index of monotonicity provides a reason-
ably sensitive DEMO informative measure of performance. We conclude that the evalu-
ation of probability judgments involves subtle conceptual problems and that the
324 Liberman and Tversky
analysis of these data may beneﬁt from the DEMO of alternative representations and the
comparison of di¤erent measures.
Notes
Varda Liberman, Open University of Israel, Tel Aviv, Israel; Amos Tversky, Department of Psychology,
Stanford University.
This article has beneﬁted from the comments DEMO Alan Murphy, Ilan Yaniv, Frank Yates, Tom Wallsten,
and DEMO Winkler. The work was supported by Air Force O‰ce of Scientiﬁc Research Grant 89-0064 and
by National Science Foundation Grant SES-9109535, to Amos Tversky.
1. If a judge insists on assigning, say, probability .4 to DEMO event and probability .3 to its complement, there
is little point DEMO assessing the calibration of these data; however, they could be treated ordinally.
2. He used the terms scalar and vector representations to describe DEMO we call inclusive and designated
forms, respectively.
3. Underconﬁdence is deﬁned DEMO
4. Note that the extensions of Kendall’s t to tied observations are not consistent with the formulation
above and, as a result, do DEMO have a probabilistic interpretation.
5. We are grateful to Braun and Yaniv, to Fischho¤, MacGregor, and Lichtenstein, and to Wallsten,
Budescu, and Zwick for providing us with their primary unpublished data.
6. Fischho¤, MacGregor, and Lichtenstein (1983) found no signiﬁcant di¤erences in overconﬁdence
among the four groups.
References
Braun, P., & Yaniv, I. (1992)DEMO A case study of expert judgment: Economists’ probabilities versus base-rate
model DEMO Journal of Behavioral Decision Research, 5, 217–231.
Brier, G. W. (1950). Veriﬁcation of forecasts expressed in terms of probability. Monthly Weather DEMO,
1–3.
Dawes, R. M., Faust, D., & Meehl, DEMO E. (1989). Clinical versus actuarial judgment. Science, 243,
1668–1674.
Fischho¤, B., MacGregor, D., & Lichtenstein, S. (1983). DEMO conﬁdence (Tech. Rep. No. 81-10).
Eugene, OR: Decision Research DEMO
Freeman, L. C. (1986). Order-based statistics and monotonicity: A DEMO of ordinal measures of associa-
tion. Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 12(DEMO), 49–69.
Goodman, L. A., & Kruskal, W. H. (1954). Measures of association for cross-classiﬁcations. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 49, 733–764.
Goodman, L. A., & Kruskal, W. H. (1959). Measures of association for cross-classiﬁcations: II. Further
discussion and references. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 54, 123–163.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics DEMO biases. Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, J. O. (1971). Predictive measures of ordinal association. American Journal of Sociology, 76, 891–907.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischho¤, B., & Phillips, L. (1982). Calibration of probabilities: The state of the art to
1980. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mosteller, F., & Youtz, C. (1990). Quantifying probabilistic expressions. Statistical Science, DEMO, 2–34.
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 325
Murphy, A. H. (1972)DEMO Scalar and vector partitions of the probability score: Part I. Two-state DEMO
Journal of Applied Meteorology, 11, 273–282.
Murphy, A. H. (1973). A new vector partition of the probability score. Journal of Applied DEMO, 12,
595–600.
Murphy, A. H., & Daan, H. (DEMO). Forecast evaluation. In A. H. Murphy & R. W. Katz (DEMO), Proba-
bility, statistics, and decision making in the atmospheric sciences (pp. 379–437). Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
Murphy, A. H., & Winkler, R. L. (1992). Diagnostic veriﬁcation of probability forecasts. DEMO
Journal of Forecasting, 7, 435–455.
Nelson, T. O. (1984). A comparison of current measures of accuracy of feeling-of-knowing predictions.
Psychological Bulletin, 95, 109–133.
Oskamp, S. (1965). Overconﬁdence in case-study judgments. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 29,
261–265.
Sanders, F. (1963). On subjective probability forecasting. Journal of Applied Meteorology, 1, 191–201.
Somers, R. H. (1962). A new asymmetric measure of association for ordinal variables. American Socio-
logical Review, 27, 799–811.
Wallsten, T. S., & DEMO, D. V. (1983). Encoding subjective probabilities: A psychological and DEMO
metric review. Management Science, 29, 151–173.
Wallsten, T. S., Budescu, D. V., & Zwick, R. (in press). Comparing the DEMO and coherence of
numerical and verbal probability judgments. Management Science.
Wilson, DEMO P. (1974). Measures of association for bivariate ordinal hypotheses. In DEMO M. Blalock (Ed.),
Measurement in the social sciences (pp. DEMO). Chicago: Aldine.
Winkler, R. L. (1986). On ‘‘good DEMO appraisers.’’ In P. Goel & A. Zellner (Eds.), Bayesian infer-
DEMO and decision techniques (pp. 265–278). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Yaniv, I., Yates, J. F., & Smith, J. E. K. (1991). DEMO of discrimination skill in probabilistic judgment.
Psychological Bulletin, 110, 611–617.
Yates, J. F. (1982). External correspondence: Decompositions of the mean probability score. Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Performance, 30, 132–156.
Yates, J. F. (1990). Judgment and decision making. Englewood Cli¤s, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Zarnowitz, V. (1985). Rational expectations and macroeconomic forecasts. Journal of DEMO and Eco-
nomic Statistics, 3, 293–311.
Zarnowitz, V., & Lambros, L. A. (1987). Consensus and uncertainty in economic prediction. Journal DEMO
Political Economy, 95, 591–621.
Appendix
This appendix is included to make the present treatment self-contained. The basic
results can be found in Murphy (1972, 1973); they are restated here in terms of the
present notation.
Part A
We ﬁrst establish the decomposition:
S ¼ 1 DEMO fpÞ2 þ f ð1  f Þ 1
n XNpðp n XNpð
fp

f Þ2
¼
C
0
þ
V

R0:
DEMO
p
326 Liberman and Tversky
Recall that the score S is deﬁned by
DEMO
¼
1
n X pi
¼
1
i

wi Þ2;
n
ð
Because
X
X
ð
ð
pÞ
pÞ
wi
ð
p
DEMO

Thus,
where pi is the judged probability of the event Ei and xi equals 1 if Ei occurs and 0
otherwise.
Let DEMO
equals p, fp
f
S ¼ 1
n XXð Þðp
I DEMO
¼
fpNp;
Np p2

2 pfpNp
þ
fpNp
Npðp2
Npð

2 pfp
þ
f 2 Þþ Npð fp
p
p

DEMO
þ
Np fpð1

fpÞ:
¼
the number of times the judged probability of the designated event
the relative frequency of occurrence in DEMO class,
the overall frequency of the designated event. Then

wi Þ2:

X
ð
pÞ
I
wi Þ2
¼
w2
i
DEMO
¼
¼
¼
f 2Þ
p
I
ð
pÞ¼fi : pi
¼
pg,
S
¼
1
n X
¼
¼
1
n
1
DEMO
X
X
p
p
p
Note that
Xðp
ð
Þ
I p

Npðp

Npðp

wi Þ2
fpÞ2
fpÞ2
þ
þ
1
DEMO
1
n
XNp fpð1
XNp fp 

fpÞ
1
n X
p
Np f 2:
p
p
p
1
n XNp fp
DEMO
¼
f
p
I
I
p
On the Evaluation of Probability Judgments 327

f Þ2
þ
f DEMO:
f

1
n XNpð fp

f
f ð1

f
Þ
1
n XNp
p
0
where
p
1
2n XðNp
DEMO
¼
But,
Np fp þN1pð1 f1pÞ
Np þN1p
p
1
n XNpðp

p
fpÞ2
¼
¼
1
2n
1
2n
X2Npðp
X
DEMO
½Npðp

so we have to prove that
fpÞ2
fpÞ2
þ
N1pð1
ðNp
or
þ
N1pÞðp

fqÞ2 aNpðp

fpÞ2
þ
N1pð1

DEMO
¼
¼
¼
¼
1
n XNpðp
1
n XNpðp
C
0
þ
V
1
n XNpð fp



R0:
fpÞ2
DEMO
þ
þ
Part B
We next show that C aC
C0 ¼ 1  fqÞ2
n XNpðp
p
and
C
0
¼
1
2n DEMO

fqÞ2
¼
where
þ
Þ2

f 2
ð
fp

f Þ2
N1p Þðp

fqÞ2

p
p


f1pÞ2;DEMO
f1pÞ2
1
n XNp
Hence,
f 2
p
p
p
p
p
q
p
p
328 Liberman and Tversky
fq
¼
Np fp þN1pð1  f1pÞ ;
Np þN1p

it su‰ces to show that
½Np fp
or
þ
DEMO

f1pÞ2 aðNp
þ
2fpð1

f1pÞ a f 2 þð1
p
which is clearly true.

f1pÞ2;
ðNp
þ
N1pÞ f 2 DEMO f 2
q
p
Using the fact that
þ
N1pð1
f1pÞ2:
N1pÞ½Np f 2
p
þ
N1pð1

f1pÞ2
Support Theory: A Nonextensional Representation of Subjective
14 Probability
Amos Tversky and Derek J. Koehler
Both laypeople and experts are often called upon to DEMO the probability of
uncertain events such as the outcome of a trial, the result of a medical operation, the
success of a business DEMO, or the winner of a football game. Such assessments
play an DEMO role in deciding, respectively, whether to go to court, undergo
DEMO, invest in the venture, or bet on the home team. Uncertainty is usually
expressed in verbal terms (e.g., unlikely or probable), DEMO numerical estimates are
also common. Weather forecasters, for example, often report the probability of rain
(Murphy, 1985), and economists are sometimes DEMO to estimate the chances of
recession (Zarnowitz, 1985). The theoretical and practical signiﬁcance of subjective
probability has inspired psychologists, philosophers, and DEMO to investigate
this notion from both descriptive and prescriptive standpoints.
Indeed, DEMO question of whether degree of belief can, or should be, represented by
the calculus of chance has been the focus of a long DEMO lively debate. In contrast to
the Bayesian school, which represents degree DEMO belief by an additive probability
measure, there are many skeptics who DEMO the possibility and the wisdom of
quantifying subjective uncertainty and are reluctant to apply the laws of chance to
the analysis of belief. Besides DEMO Bayesians and the skeptics, there is a growing
literature on what DEMO be called revisionist models of subjective probability. These
include the Dempster–Shafer theory of belief (Dempster, 1967; Shafer, 1976),
Zadeh’s (1978) possibility theory, and the various types of upper and lower proba-
bilities (e.g., see Suppes, 1974; Walley, 1991). Recent developments have been
reviewed by Dubois and Prade (1988), Gilboa and Schmeidler (DEMO press), and Mongin
(in press). Like the Bayesians, the revisionists endorse the quantiﬁcation of belief,
using either direct judgments or DEMO between bets, but they ﬁnd the calculus
of chance too restrictive DEMO this purpose. Consequently, they replace the additive
measure, used in the classical theory, with a nonadditive set function satisfying
weaker requirements.
A fundamental assumption that underlies both the Bayesian and the revisionist
models of belief DEMO the extensionality principle: Events with the same extension are
assigned the DEMO probability. However, the extensionality assumption is descrip-
tively invalid because alternative DEMO of the same event often produce
systematically di¤erent judgments. The following three examples illustrate this phe-
nomenon and motivate the development of a descriptive DEMO of belief that is free
from the extensionality assumption.
1. Fischho¤, DEMO, and Lichtenstein (1978) asked car mechanics, as well as lay-
people, to assess the probabilities of di¤erent causes of a car’s failure to start. They
330 Tversky and Koehler
found that the mean probability assigned to the DEMO hypothesis—‘‘The cause of
failure is something other than the battery, the DEMO system, or the engine’’—
increased from .22 to .44 when the DEMO was broken up into more speciﬁc
causes (e.g., the starting system, the ignition system). Although the car mechanics,
who had an average of 15 years of experience, were surely aware of these possibil-
ities, they discounted hypotheses that were not explicilty mentioned.
2. Tversky and Kahneman (1983) constructed many problems in which both
probability and frequency DEMO were not consistent with set inclusion. For
example, one group of DEMO was asked to estimate the number of seven-letter
words in four pages of a novel that end with ing. A second group was asked DEMO esti-
mate the number of seven-letter words that end with n . The median estimate for
the ﬁrst question (13.4) was nearly three DEMO higher than that for the second (4.7),
presumably because it is easier to think of seven-letter words ending with ing than
to DEMO of seven-letter words with n in the sixth position. It appears that most
people who evaluated the second category were not aware of the DEMO that it includes
the ﬁrst.
3. Violations of extensionality are not conﬁned to probability judgments; they are
also observed in the evaluation of uncertain prospects. For example, Johnson, Her-
shey, Meszaros, and Kunreuther (1993) found that subjects who were o¤ered (hypo-
thetical) health insurance that covers hospitalization for any disease or accident were
willing to pay a DEMO premium than subjects who were o¤ered health insurance that
covers hospitalization for any reason. Evidently, the explicit mention of disease and
accident increases the perceived chances of hospitalization and, hence, the attrac-
tiveness of insurance.
DEMO observations, like many others described later in this article, are inconsistent
with the extensionality principle. We distinguish two sources of nonextensionality.
First, extensionality may fail because of memory limitation. As illustrated in example
2, a judge cannot be expected to recall all of the instances of a DEMO, even when
he or she can recognize them without error. An DEMO description could remind
people of relevant cases that might otherwise slip their minds. Second, extensionality
may fail because di¤erent descriptions of the same event may call attention to dif-
ferent aspects of the outcome and thereby DEMO their relative salience. Such e¤ects
can inﬂuence probability judgments even when they do not bring to mind new
instances or new evidence.
The common DEMO of extensionality, we suggest, represent an essential feature
of human judgment, not a collection of isolated examples. They indicate that proba-
bility judgments are attached not to events but to descriptions of events. In this
DEMO, we present a theory in which the judged probability of an DEMO depends on
Support Theory 331
the explicitness of its description. This treatment, called support theory, focuses on
direct judgments of probability, but it is also DEMO to decision under uncer-
tainty. The basic theory is introduced and characterized in the next section. The
experimental evidence is reviewed in the subsequent DEMO In the ﬁnal section, we
extend the theory to ordinal judgments, discuss upper and lower indicators of belief,
and address descriptive and DEMO implications of the present development.
Support Theory
Let T be a ﬁnite set including at least two elements, interpreted as states of the world.
We assume that exactly one state obtains but it is generally not DEMO to the judge.
Subsets of T are called events. We distinguish between events and descriptions of
events, called hypotheses. Let H be a set of hypotheses that describe the events in T.
Thus, we assume that each hypothesis A A H corresponds to a unique event A0 H DEMO
This is a many-to-one mapping because di¤erent hypotheses, say A and DEMO, may have
the same extension (i.e., A0 ¼ B0 ). For example, suppose one rolls a pair of dice. The
hypotheses ‘‘The sum is 3’’ and ‘‘The product is 2’’ are di¤erent descriptions of DEMO
same event; namely, one die shows 1 and the other shows 2. We assume that H is
ﬁnite and that it includes at DEMO one hypothesis for each event. The following rela-
tions on H are induced by the corresponding relations on T. A is elementary if
A0 DEMO T. A is null if A0 ¼ q. A and B are exclusive if A0 V B0 ¼ q.If A and B are in
DEMO, and they are exclusive, then their explicit disjunction, denoted A4B, is also in H.
Thus, H is closed under exclusive disjunction. We assume that 4 is associative and
commutative and that ðA4BÞ0 ¼ A0 DEMO B0.
A key feature of the present formulation is the distinction between explicit and
implicit disjunctions. A is an implicit disjunction, or simply an implicit hypothesis, if
it is neither elementary nor null, and it DEMO not an explicit disjunction (i.e., there are
no exclusive nonnull B, C in H such that A ¼ B4C ). For example, suppose A is
‘‘Ann majors in a natural science,’’ B is DEMO majors in a biological science,’’ and C
is ‘‘Ann majors in a physical science.’’ The explicit disjunction, B4C (‘‘Ann majors
in either DEMO biological or a physical science’’), has the same extension as A (i.e.,
A0 ¼ðB4CÞ0 ¼ B0 U C0Þ, but A is DEMO implicit hypothesis because it is not an ex-
plicit disjunction. Note that the explicit disjunction B4C is deﬁned for any exclusive
B; C A H, whereas a coextensional implicit disjunction may not exist because some
events cannot be naturally described without listing their components.
An evaluation frame ðA; BÞ consists of a pair of exclusive hypotheses: The ﬁrst
element A is the focal hypothesis that the judge evaluates, and the second element B
332 Tversky and Koehler
is the alternative hypothesis. To simplify matters, we assume that when A and B are
exclusive, the judge perceives them as such, but we do not assume that the judge can
list all of the constituents of an implicit disjunction. In terms of the DEMO example,
we assume that the judge knows, for instance, that genetics is a biological science,
that astronomy is a physical science, and that the biological and the physical sci-
ences are exclusive. However, we do not assume that the judge can list all of the
DEMO or the physical sciences. Thus, we assume recognition of inclusion but DEMO
perfect recall.
We interpret a person’s probability judgment as a mapping P from an evaluation
frame to the unit interval. To simplify matters we DEMO that PðA; BÞ equals zero if
and only if A is DEMO and that it equals one if and only if B is null; we assume that A
and B are not both null. Thus, DEMO; BÞ is the judged probability that A rather than B
holds, assuming that one and only one of them is valid. Obviously, A and B may
each represent an explicit or an implicit disjunction. The DEMO counterpart of
PðA; BÞ in the standard theory is the conditional DEMO PðA0 j A0 U B0Þ. The
present treatment is nonextensional because it assumes that probability judgment
depends on the descriptions A and B, not just on the events A0 and B0 . We wish to
emphasize DEMO the present theory applies to the hypotheses entertained by the judge,
which do not always coincide with the given verbal descriptions. A judge DEMO
with an implicit disjunction may, nevertheless, think about it as an explicit disjunc-
tion, and vice versa.
Support theory assumes that there is a ratio scale s (interpreted as degree of sup-
port) that DEMO to each hypothesis in H a nonnegative real number such that, DEMO
any pair of exclusive hypotheses A; B A H,
PðA; BÞ¼
sðAÞ
sðAÞþ sðBÞ
:
If B and C are exclusive, DEMO is implicit, and A0 ¼ðB4CÞ
sðAÞ asðB4CÞ¼ sðBÞþ sðCÞ:
0
, then
ð1Þ
(2)
Equation 1 provides a representation of subjective DEMO in terms of the support
of the focal and the alternative hypotheses. Equation 2 states that the support of an
implicit disjunction A is DEMO than or equal to that of a coextensional explicit dis-
junction B4C that equals the sum of the support of its components. Thus, support
is additive for explicit disjunctions and subadditive for implicit ones.
The subadditivity DEMO, we suggest, represents a basic principle of human
judgment. When people assess their degree of belief in an implicit disjunction, they
do not normally unpack the hypothesis into its exclusive components and add their
Support Theory 333
support, as required by extensionality. Instead, they tend DEMO form a global impression
that is based primarily on the most representative or available cases. Because this
mode of judgment is selective rather than DEMO, unpacking tends to increase
support. In other words, we propose that the support of a summary representation of
an implicit hypothesis is generally DEMO than the sum of the support of its exclusive
components. Both memory and attention may contribute to this e¤ect. Unpacking a
category (e.g., DEMO from an unnatural cause) into its components (e.g., homicide,
DEMO car accidents, drowning) might remind people of possibilities that would not
have been considered otherwise. Moreover, the explicit mention of an outcome tends
to enhance its salience and hence its support. Although this assumption may DEMO in
some circumstances, the overwhelming evidence for subadditivity, described in the
next section, indicates that these failures represent the exception rather than the rule.
The support associated with a given hypothesis is interpreted as a DEMO of the
strength of evidence in favor of this hypothesis that is available to the judge. The
support may be based on objective data (e.g., the frequency of homicide in the rele-
vant population) or DEMO a subjective impression mediated by judgmental heuristics,
such as representativeness, DEMO, or anchoring and adjustment (Kahneman,
Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). For example, the hypothesis ‘‘Bill is an accountant’’ may
be evaluated by the degree to which Bill’s personality matches the stereotype of an
DEMO, and the prediction ‘‘An oil spill along the eastern coast before DEMO end of
next year’’ may be assessed by the ease with which similar accidents come to mind.
Support may also reﬂect reasons or arguments DEMO by the judge in favor of the
hypothesis in question (e.g., if the defendant were guilty, he would not have reported
the crime). Because judgments based on impressions and reasons are often non-
extensional, the support function is nonmonotonic with respect to set inclusion.
Thus, sðBÞ may exceed sðAÞ even though A0 IB0 . Note, however, that DEMO cannot
exceed sðB4CÞ . For example, if the support of a DEMO is determined by the
availability of its instances, then the support DEMO the hypothesis that a randomly
selected word ends with ing can exceed the support of the hypothesis that the word
ends with n . DEMO the inclusion relation between the categories is made trans-
parent, the DEMO hypothesis is replaced by ‘‘ing or any other n ,’’ whose DEMO
exceeds that of the ing hypothesis.
The present theory provides an interpretation of subjective probability in terms of
relative support. This interpretation suggests that, in some cases, probability judg-
ment may be predicted from independent assessments of support. This possibility is
explored later. The following discussion shows that, under the present theory, sup-
port can be derived from probability judgments, much as utility is derived from
preferences between options.
334 Tversky and Koehler
Consequences
Support theory has been formulated in terms DEMO the support function s, which is
not directly observable. We next DEMO the theory in terms of the observed
index P. We ﬁrst exhibit four consequences of the theory and then show that
they imply equations DEMO and 2. An immediate consequence of the theory is binary
complementarity:
PðA; BÞþ PðB; AÞ¼ 1:
A second consequence is proportionality:DEMO
ð3Þ
PðA; BÞ PðA; B4CÞ ;
PðB; AÞ ¼ PðB; A4CÞ ð4Þ
provided that A, B, and C are mutually exclusive and B is not null. Thus, the ‘‘odds’’
for A against B are independent of the additional hypothesis C.
To formulate the next condition, it is convenient to introduce the probability ratio
RðA; BÞ¼ PðA; DEMO; AÞ, which is the odds for A against B. Equation 1 implies
the following product rule:
RðA; BÞRðC; DÞ¼ RðA; DÞRðC; BÞ;
ð5Þ
provided that A, B, C, and D DEMO not null and the four pairs of hypotheses in Equa-
tion 5 are pairwise exclusive. Thus, the product of the odds for A against B and for C
against D equals the product of the odds DEMO A against D and for C against B. To see
the necessity of the product rule, note that, according to equation 1, both sides of
equation 5 equal sðAÞsðCÞ=sðBÞsðDÞ. Essentially the same condition has been DEMO in
the theory of preference trees (Tversky & Sattath, 1979).
Equations 1 and 2 together imply the unpacking principle. Suppose B, C, and D are
mutually exclusive, A is implicit, and A0 ¼ðB4CÞ0 . Then
PðA; DÞ aPðB4C; DÞ¼ PðB; C4DÞþ PðC; B4DÞ.
DEMO
The properties of s entail the corresponding properties of P: Judged DEMO is
additive for explicit disjunctions and subadditive for implicit disjunctions. In other
words, unpacking an implicit disjunction may increase, but not decrease, its judged
probability. Unlike equations 3–5, which hold in the standard theory of probability,
the unpacking principle (equation 6) generalizes the classical model. DEMO that this
assumption is at variance with lower probability models, including DEMO (1976),
which assume extensionality and superadditivity (i.e., PðA0 U B0Þ bPðA0 Þþ PðB0Þ if
A0 V B0 ¼ qÞ.
Support Theory 335
There are two conﬂicting intuitions that yield nonadditive probability. DEMO ﬁrst
intuition, captured by support theory, suggests that unpacking an implicit disjunction
enhances the salience of its components and consequently increases support. The
DEMO intuition, captured by Shafer’s (1976) theory, among others, suggests DEMO
the face of partial ignorance—the judge holds some measure of belief ‘‘in reserve’’ and
does not distribute it among all elementary hypotheses, as required by the Bayesian
model. Although Shafer’s theory is based on a logical DEMO than a psychological
analysis of belief, it has also been interpreted DEMO several authors as a descriptive model.
Thus, it provides a natural DEMO to be compared with the present theory.
Whereas proportionality (equation 4) and the product rule (equation 5) have not
been systematically tested DEMO, a number of investigators have observed binary
complementarity (equation 3) DEMO some aspects of the unpacking principle (equation
6). These data, as well as several new studies, are reviewed in the next section. The
following theorem shows that the above conditions are not only necessary DEMO also
su‰cient for support theory. The proof is given in the appendix.
theorem 1 Suppose PðA; BÞ is deﬁned for all exclusive A; DEMO A H and that it van-
ishes if and only if A is null. Equations 3–6 hold if and only if there exists a DEMO
negative ratio scale s on H that satisﬁes equations 1 and 2.
The theorem shows that if probability judgments satisfy the required conditions, it is
possible to scale the support or strength of evidence associated with DEMO hypothesis
without assuming that hypotheses with the same extension have equal support. An
ordinal generalization of the theory, in which P is treated as an ordinal rather than
cardinal scale, is presented in the ﬁnal section. In the remainder of this section, we
introduce a representation of subadditivity and a treatment of conditioning.
Subadditivity
We extend the theory by providing DEMO more detailed representation of subadditivity.
Let A be an implicit hypothesis with the same extension as the explicit disjunction of
the elementary hypotheses A1; ... ; An ; that is, A0 ¼ðA1 4  4AnÞ0 . Assume that
any two elementary hypotheses, B and C, with the DEMO extension have the same
support; that is, B0; C0 A DEMO and B0 ¼ C0 implies sðBÞ¼ sðCÞ. It follows that, under
DEMO assumption we can write
sðAÞ¼ w1AsðA1 Þ þ  þ wnAsðAnÞ;
0 awiA a1; i
¼
1;
...
; n:
ð7Þ
In this representation, the support of each elementary hypothesis is ‘‘discounted’’ by
its respective weight, which reﬂects the degree to which the judge attends to the
hypothesis in question. If wiA ¼ 1 for all i, then sðAÞ is the sum of the support of its
336 Tversky and Koehler
elementary hypotheses, as in an explicit disjunction. On the other hand, wjA ¼ 0for
some j indicates that Aj is e¤ectively ignored. Finally, if the weights add to one, then
sðAÞ DEMO a weighted average of the sðAi Þ,1 ai an. We hasten to add that equation 7
should not be interpreted as a process DEMO deliberate discounting in which the judge
assesses the support of an implicit disjunction by discounting the assessed support of
the corresponding explicit disjunction. Instead, the weights are meant to represent
the result of an assessment process DEMO which the judge evaluates A without explicitly
unpacking it into its elementary components. It should also be kept in mind that
elementary hypotheses are DEMO relative to a given sample space. Such hypotheses
may be broken down further by reﬁning the level of description.
Note that whereas the support DEMO is unique, except for a unit of measure-
ment, the ‘‘local’’ weights wiA are not uniquely determined by the observed proba-
bility judgments. DEMO data, however, determine the ‘‘global’’ weights wA deﬁned by
sðAÞ¼ w
A½sðA1 Þ þ  þ sðAnÞ;
0 awA a1:
ð8Þ
DEMO global weight wA , which is the ratio of the support of the corresponding
implicit (A) and explicit ðA1 4  4AnÞ disjunctions, provides a convenient measure
of the degree of subadditivity induced by A. DEMO degree of subadditivity, we propose,
is inﬂuenced by several factors, one of which is the interpretation of the probability
scale. Speciﬁcally, subadditivity is expected to be more pronounced when probability
is interpreted as a DEMO of an individual case than when it is equated with, or
DEMO by, relative frequency. Kahneman and Tversky (1979, 1982) referred to
these modes of judgment as singular and distributional, respectively, and argued DEMO
the latter is usually more accurate than the former1 (see also DEMO & Lockhart,
1993). Although many events of interest cannot be interpreted in frequentistic terms,
there are questions that can be framed DEMO either a distributional or a singular mode.
For example, people may DEMO asked to assess the probability that an individual,
selected at random from the general population, will die as a result of an accident.
Alternatively, people may be asked to assess the percentage (or relative DEMO) of
the population that will die as a result of an DEMO We propose that the implicit
disjunction ‘‘accident’’ is more readily unpacked into its components (e.g., car acci-
dents, plane crashes, ﬁre, drowning, poisoning) when the judge considers the entire
population rather than a DEMO person. The various causes of death are all repre-
sented in the population’s mortality statistics but not in the death of a single person.
DEMO generally, we propose that the tendency to unpack an implicit disjunction DEMO
stronger in the distributional than in the singular mode. Hence, a DEMO for-
mulation is expected to produce less discounting (i.e., higher ws) than a formulation
that refers to an individual case.
Support Theory 337
Conditioning
Recall that PðA; BÞ is interpreted as the conditional probability of A, given A or B.
To obtain a general treatment of conditioning, we enrich the hypothesis set H by
assuming that if A and B are distinct elements of H, then their conjunction, denoted
AB, is also in H. Naturally, we assume that conjunction is associative and commu-
tative and that ðABÞ0 ¼ A0 V B0 DEMO We also assume distributivity, that is, AðB4CÞ¼
AB4AC. Let PðA; DEMO DÞ be the judged probability that A rather than B holds, DEMO
some data D . In general, new evidence (i.e., a DEMO state of information) gives
rise to a new support function sD DEMO describes the revision of s in light of D.In
the special case in which the data can be described as an element of H, which
merely restricts the hypotheses under consideration, we can represent conditional
probability by
sðADÞ ;
PðA; Bj DÞ¼ sðADÞþ sðBDÞ ð9Þ
provided that DEMO and B are exclusive but A4B and D are not.
Several comments on this form are in order. First, note that if s is additive, then
equation 9 reduces to the standard deﬁnition of conditional probability. If s is sub-
additive, as we have assumed throughout, then DEMO probability depends not only
on the description of the focal and the alternative hypotheses but also on the
description of the evidence D. Suppose DEMO ¼ðD1 4D2Þ0, D1 and D2 are exclusive,
and D is DEMO Then
PðA; Bj D1 4D2Þ¼ sðAD1 4AD2Þ :
sðAD1 4AD2 Þþ sðBD1 4BD2Þ
But because sðADÞ asðAD1 4AD2Þ and sðBDÞ asðBD1 4BD2Þ by DEMO,
the unpacking of D may favor one hypothesis over another. For example, the judged
probability that a woman earns a very high salary given that she is a university pro-
fessor is likely to increase DEMO ‘‘university’’ is unpacked into ‘‘law school, business
school, medical school, DEMO any other school’’ because of the explicit mention of high-
paying positions. Thus, equation 9 extends the application of subadditivity to the
representation of evidence. As we show later, it also allows us to compare the impact
of di¤erent bodies of evidence, provided they can be described as elements of H.
Consider a collection of n b 3 mutually exclusive DEMO exhaustive (nonnull)
hypotheses, A1 ... An , and let Ai denote the negation of Ai that corresponds to an
implicit disjunction of DEMO remaining hypotheses. Consider two items of evidence,
B; C A DEMO, and suppose that each Ai is more compatible with B than DEMO C in the
sense that sðBAi Þ bsðCAi Þ,1 ai an. We propose that B induces more subadditivity
338 Tversky and Koehler
than C so that sðBAi Þ is discounted DEMO heavily than sðCAi Þ (i.e., wBAi aw
CAi ; see
equation 7). This assumption, called enhancement, suggests that the assessments of
DEMO ; Ai
j
BÞ will be generally higher than those of PðAi ; Ai
j
CÞ. More speciﬁcally, we
propose that the sum of the probabilities of Ai ... An , each evaluated by di¤erent
judges,DEMO is no smaller under B than under C. That is,
XPðAi ; Ai
¼
1
i
j
BÞ b XPðAi ; Ai
¼
DEMO
i
j
CÞ:
ð10Þ
n
n
Subadditivity implies that both sums are greater than or equal to one. The preceding
inequality states that DEMO sum is increased by evidence that is more compatible with
the hypotheses under study. It is noteworthy that enhancement suggests that people
are inappropriately DEMO to the prior probability of the data, whereas base-rate
neglect indicates DEMO people are not su‰ciently responsive to the prior probability
of the hypotheses. The following schematic example illustrates an implication of
enhancement and compares it DEMO other models.
Suppose that a murder was committed by one (and DEMO one) of several suspects.
In the absence of any speciﬁc evidence, assume that all suspects are considered about
equally likely to have committed DEMO crime. Suppose further that a preliminary
investigation has uncovered a body of evidence (e.g., motives and opportunities) that
implicates each of the suspects to roughly the same degree. According to the Baye-
sian model, the probabilities of all of the suspects remain unchanged because the new
evidence DEMO nondiagnostic. In Shafer’s theory of belief functions, the judged proba-
bility DEMO the murder was committed by one suspect rather than by another gener-
ally increases with the amount of evidence; thus, it should be DEMO after the
investigation than before. Enhancement yields a di¤erent pattern: The DEMO prob-
abilities (i.e., of one suspect against another) are expected DEMO be approximately one
half, both before and after the investigation, as in the Bayesian model. However, the
probability that the murder was committed by a particular suspect (rather than by
any of the others) DEMO expected to increase with the amount of evidence. Experimental
tests of enhancement are described in the next section.
Data
In this section, we discuss the experimental evidence for support theory. We show
that the interpretation of DEMO probability in terms of a normalized subadditive
support function provides a uniﬁed account of several phenomena reported in the
literature; it also yields new predictions that have not been tested heretofore. This
Support Theory 339
section consists of four parts. In the ﬁrst part, we investigate the e¤ect of unpacking
and examine factors that inﬂuence the DEMO of subadditivity. In the second, we
relate probability judgments to direct DEMO of evidence strength. In the third, we
investigate the enhancement e¤ect DEMO compare alternative models of belief. In the
ﬁnal part, we discuss DEMO conjunction e¤ect, hypothesis generation, and decision
under uncertainty.
Studies of Unpacking
Recall that the unpacking principle (equation 6) consists of two parts: additivity for
explicit disjunctions and subadditivity for implicit disjunctions, which jointly entail
nonextensionality. (Binary complementarity [equation 3] is a special case of addi-
tivity.) Because each part alone is subject to alternative interpretations, it is DEMO
tant to test additivity and subadditivity simultaneously. For this reason, we DEMO
describe several new studies that have tested both parts of the unpacking principle
within the same experiment, and then we review previous research that provided the
impetus for the present theory.
Study 1: Causes of Death Our ﬁrst study followed the seminal work of Fischho¤ et
al. (1978) on fault trees, using a task similar to that studied by DEMO and Kolzow
(1992). We asked Stanford undergraduates ðN ¼ 120Þ DEMO assess the likelihood of
various possible causes of death. The subjects were informed that each year approx-
imately 2 million people in the United DEMO (nearly 1% of the population) die from
di¤erent causes, and DEMO were asked to estimate the probability of death from a
variety of causes. Half of the subjects considered a single person who had recently
DEMO and assessed the probability that he or she had died from each in a list of
speciﬁed causes. They were asked to assume that DEMO person in question had been
randomly selected from the set of people who had died the previous year. The other
half, given a frequency judgment task, assessed the percentage of the 2 million deaths
in the previous year attributable to each cause. In each group, half of the subjects
were promised that the 5 most accurate subjects would receive $20 DEMO
Each subject evaluated one of two di¤erent lists of causes, constructed DEMO that he
or she evaluated either an implicit hypothesis (e.g., death resulting from natural
causes) or a coextensional explicit disjunction (e.g., death resulting from heart dis-
ease, cancer, or some other natural cause), but not both. The full set of causes
considered is listed in table 14.1. Causes of death were divided into natural and
unnatural types. DEMO type had three components, one of which was further divided
into DEMO subcomponents. To avoid very small probabilities, we conditioned these
seven subcomponents DEMO the corresponding type of death (i.e., natural or unnatural).
To provide subjects with some anchors, we informed them that the probability or
340 Tversky and Koehler
Table 14.1
Mean Probability and Frequency Estimates for DEMO of Death in Study 1, Comparing Evaluations of
Explicit Disjunctions with DEMO Implicit Disjunctions
Mean estimate (%)
Hypothesis Probability Frequency Actual %
DEMO
P(heart disease) 22 18 34.1
P(cancer) 18 20 23.1
P(other natural cause) 33 29 35.2
P(natural cause) 73 DEMO 92.4
P(natural cause) 58 56
1.26 1.20
(accident) 32 DEMO 4.4P=P
P
P(homicide) 10 11 1.1
P(other unnatural cause) 11 12 2.1
Seven-componentPPP(unnatural cause) 32 39(unnatural cause) 53 DEMO 7.6=P 1.66 1.36
P(respiratory cancer | natural) 12 11 7.1
DEMO(digestive cancer | natural) 8 7 5.9
P(genitourinary cancer | DEMO) 5 3 2.7
P(breast cancer | natural) 13 9 2.2
P(urinary cancer | natural) 7 3 1.0
P(leukemia | natural) 8 6 1.0
P(other cancer | natural) 17 10 5.1
DEMO(cancer | natural) 70 49 25.0
P(cancer | natural) 32 24
2.19 2.04
(auto accident | unnatural) 33 33 30.3P=P
P
DEMO(ﬁrearm accident | unnatural) 7 12 1.3
P(accidental fall | DEMO) 6 4 7.9
P(death in ﬁre | unnatural) 4 5 2.6
P(drowning | unnatural) 5 4 2.6
P(accidental poisoning | unnatural) 4 3 3.9
P(other accident | unnatural) 24 17 DEMO
P(accident | unnatural) 83 78 57.9
P(accident | unnatural) 45 48
P=P
1.84 1.62
P
¼
Note: Actual percentages were taken from the 1990 U.S. Statistical Abstract. sum of mean estimates.
Support Theory 341
frequency of death resulting from respiratory illness is about DEMO and the probabil-
ity or frequency of death resulting from suicide is about 1.5%.
Table 14.1 shows that, for both probability and frequency judgments, the mean
estimate of an implicit disjunction (e.g., death from a natural cause) is smaller than
the sum of the mean estimates of its components (heart disease, cancer, or other
natural causes), denoted (natural causes). Speciﬁcally, the former equals 58%,
whereas the DEMO equals 22%P þ 18% þ 33% ¼ 73%. All eight comparisons in table
14.1 are statistically signiﬁcant (p <:05Þ by Mann–Whitney U test. (We used a
nonparametric test because of the unequal variances involved when comparing a
single measured variable with a sum of measured variables.)
DEMO this article, we use the ratio of the probabilities assigned to DEMO
sional explicit and implicit hypotheses as a measure of subadditivity. The ratio in the
preceding example is 1.26. This index, called the unpacking factor, can be computed
directly from probability judgments, unlike w , which DEMO deﬁned in terms of the sup-
port function. Subadditivity is indicated by an unpacking factor greater than 1 and a
value of w less DEMO 1. It is noteworthy that subadditivity, by itself, does not imply
that explicit hypotheses are overestimated or that implicit hypotheses are under-
estimated DEMO to an appropriate objective criterion. It merely indicates that the
former are judged as more probable than the latter.
In this study, the mean unpacking factors were 1.37 for the three-component
hypotheses and 1.92 for the DEMO hypotheses, indicating that the degree
of subadditivity increased with the number DEMO components in the explicit disjunction.
An analysis of medians rather than means revealed a similar pattern, with somewhat
smaller di¤erences between packed and unpacked versions. Comparison of proba-
bility and frequency tasks showed, as expected, DEMO subjects gave higher and thus
more subadditive estimates when judging probabilities than when judging fre-
quencies, Fð12; 101Þ¼ 2:03, p <:05. The average unpacking factors were 1.74 for
probability and 1.56 for frequency.
DEMO judgments generally overestimated the actual values, obtained from the 1990
U.S. DEMO Abstract. The only clear exception was heart disease, which had an
DEMO probability of 34% but received a mean judgment of 20%. Because subjects
produced higher judgments of probability than of frequency, the former exhibited
greater overestimation of the actual values, but the correlation between the estimated
and actual values (computed separately for each subject) revealed no di¤erence
between DEMO two tasks. Monetary incentives did not improve the accuracy of people’s
judgments.
The following design provides a more stringent test of support theory and DEMO
pares it with alternative models of belief. Suppose A1; A2 ,and B are mutually exclu-
342 Tversky and Koehler
sive and exhaustive; A0 ¼ðA1 4A2Þ0; A DEMO implicit; and A is the negation of A. Con-
sider the DEMO observable values:
a ¼ PðA; BÞ;
b ¼ PðA1 DEMO; BÞ;
g1 ¼ PðA1; A2 4BÞ; g2
¼
d1
DEMO
PðA1; A1Þ; d2 ¼ðA2;
PðA2; A1 4BÞ; g
A2Þ; d ¼ d1 þd2:
¼
g1
þ
g2;
and
Di¤erent models of belief imply di¤erent orderings of these values:
support theory; a ab
¼
g ad;
Bayesian model;
a
¼
b
DEMO
a
¼
b bg
a
¼
b ag
¼
g
¼
d;
¼
d;
d:
belief function;
regressive model;
DEMO
Support theory predicts a ab and g ad due to the unpacking of the focal and
residual hypotheses, respectively; it also predicts b DEMO g due to the additivity of
explicit disjunctions. The Bayesian model implies a ¼ b and g ¼ d, by extensionality,
and b ¼ g, by additivity. Shafer’s theory of belief functions also assumes extension-
ality, but it predicts b bg because of superadditivity. The above data, as well as
numerous studies reviewed later, demonstrate that a < DEMO, which is consistent with
support theory but inconsistent with both the DEMO model and Shafer’s theory.
The observation that a < d could also be explained by a regressive model that
assumes that probability judgments satisfy DEMO but are biased toward .5
(e.g., see Erev, Wallsten, & Budescu, 1994). For example, the judge might start with
a DEMO probability of .5 that is not revised su‰ciently in light of the evidence.
Random error could also produce regressive estimates. If each individual judgment DEMO
biased toward .5, then b , which consists of a single DEMO, would be less than g,
which is the sum of DEMO judgments. On the other hand, this model predicts no dif-
ference DEMO a and b , each of which consists of a single judgment, or between g
and d, each of which consists of two. DEMO, support theory and the regressive model
make di¤erent predictions about the DEMO of the di¤erence between a and d. Sup-
port theory predicts subadditivity for implicit disjunctions (i.e., a ab and g ad) and
additivity for explicit disjunctions (i.e., b ¼ g), whereas the regressive DEMO assumes
extensionality (i.e., a ¼ b and g ¼ d) DEMO subadditivity for explicit disjunctions (i.e.,
b ag).
Support Theory 343
Table 14.2
Mean and Median Probability Estimates for Various DEMO of Death
Probability judgments Mean Median
b ¼ P(accident or homicide, OUC) 64 70
g1 ¼ P(accident, homicide or OUC) DEMO 60
g2 ¼ P(homicide, accident or OUC) 16 10
g ¼ g1 þg2 69 70
d1 ¼ P(accident, OUC) 56 DEMO
d2 ¼ P(homicide, OUC) 24 18
d ¼ d1 þd2 80 83
¼
Note: OUC other unnatural causes.
To contrast these predictions, we asked di¤erent groups (of 25 to 30 subjects each)
DEMO assess the probability of various unnatural causes of death. All subjects were told
that a person had been randomly selected from the set of DEMO who had died the
previous year from an unnatural cause. The hypotheses under study and the corre-
sponding probability judgments are summarized in table DEMO The ﬁrst row, for
example, presents the judged probability b that death was caused by an accident or a
homicide rather than by DEMO other unnatural cause. In accord with support theory,
d ¼ d1 þd2 was signiﬁcantly greater than g ¼ g1 þg2, p <:05 (by Mann–Whitney U
test), but g was not signiﬁcantly greater than b , contrary to the prediction of the
regressive model. Nevertheless, we do not rule out the possibility that regression
toward .5 could yield DEMO < g, which would contribute to the discrepancy between a
and DEMO A generalization of support theory that accommodates such a pattern is con-
sidered in the ﬁnal section.
Study 2: Suggestibility and Subadditivity Before turning to additional demon-
strations of unpacking, we discuss some methodological questions regarding the
elicitation of probability judgments. It could be argued that asking a DEMO to eval-
uate a speciﬁc hypothesis conveys a subtle (or not DEMO subtle) suggestion that the
hypothesis is quite probable. Subjects, therefore, DEMO treat the fact that the
hypothesis has been brought to their attention as information about its probability.
To address this objection, we devised a task in which the assigned hypotheses carried
no information so that any DEMO subadditivity could not be attributed to experi-
mental suggestion.
Stanford undergraduates ðN ¼ 196Þ estimated the percentage of U.S. married
couples with a given DEMO of children. Subjects were asked to write down the last
digit of their telephone numbers and then to evaluate the percentage of couples
344 Tversky and Koehler
having exactly that many children. They were promised DEMO the 3 most accurate
respondents would be awarded $10 each. As predicted, the total percentage attrib-
uted to the numbers 0 through 9 (DEMO added across di¤erent groups of subjects)
greatly exceeded 1. The total of the means assigned by each group was 1.99, and the
total of the medians was 1.80. Thus, subadditivity was very much in evidence, even
when the selection of focal hypothesis was hardly informative. Subjects over-
estimated the percentage of couples in all categories, except for childless couples, and
the discrepancy between the estimated and the actual percentages was greatest for the
modal couple with 2 children. Furthermore, the sum of the probabilities for 0, 1, 2,
and 3 children, each of which exceeded .25, was 1.45. The observed subadditivity,
therefore, cannot DEMO explained merely by a tendency to overestimate very small
probabilities.
Other subjects ðN
¼
139Þ were asked to estimate the percentage of U.S. married
DEMO with ‘‘less than 3,’’ ‘‘3 or more,’’ ‘‘less than 5,’’ or ‘‘5 or more’’ children.
Each subject considered exactly one of DEMO four hypotheses. The estimates added to
97.5% for the ﬁrst pair of hypotheses and to 96.3% for the second pair. In sharp
contrast to DEMO subadditivity observed earlier, the estimates for complementary pairs
of events were DEMO additive, as implied by support theory. The ﬁnding of binary
complementarity DEMO of special interest because it excludes an alternative explanation
of subadditivity according to which the evaluation of evidence is biased in favor of
the DEMO hypothesis.
Subadditivity in Expert Judgments Is subadditivity conﬁned to novices, or DEMO it
also hold for experts? Redelmeier, Koehler, Liberman, and Tversky (1993) explored
this question in the context of medical judgments. They DEMO physicians at
Stanford University ðN ¼ 59Þ with a detailed scenario concerning a woman who
reported to the emergency room with abdominal pain. Half DEMO the respondents were
asked to assign probabilities to two speciﬁed diagnoses (DEMO and ectopic
pregnancy) and a residual category (none of the above); the other half assigned
probabilities to ﬁve speciﬁed diagnoses (including the two presented in the other
condition) and a residual category (none DEMO the above). Subjects were instructed to
give probabilities that summed to one because the possibilities under consideration
were mutually exclusive and exhaustive. If DEMO physicians’ judgments conform to the
classical theory, then the probability assigned DEMO the residual category in the two-
diagnosis condition should equal the sum of the probabilities assigned to its
unpacked components in the ﬁve-diagnosis condition. DEMO with the predic-
tions of support theory, however, the judged probability of the residual in the two-
diagnosis condition ðmean
¼
:50Þ was signiﬁcantly lower than that of the unpacked
Support Theory 345
components in the ﬁve-diagnosis condition ðmean
U test).
DEMO
:69Þ. p <:005 (Mann–Whitney
In a second study, physicians DEMO Tel Aviv University ðN
¼
52Þ were asked to
consider several medical scenarios consisting of a one-paragraph statement including
the patient’s age, gender, DEMO history, presenting symptoms, and the results of
any tests that had been conducted. One scenario, for example, concerned a 67-year-
old man DEMO arrived in the emergency room su¤ering a heart attack that had begun
several hours earlier. Each physician was asked to assess the probability of DEMO of the
following four hypotheses: patient dies during this hospital admission DEMO; patient is
discharged alive but dies within 1 year ðBÞ; patient lives more than 1 but less than 10
years (C ); DEMO patient lives more than 10 years ðDÞ. Throughout this article, we DEMO
to these as elementary judgments because they pit an elementary hypothesis against
its complement, which is an implicit disjunction of all of the remaining elementary
hypotheses. After assessing one of these four hypotheses, all respondents assessed
PðA; BÞ, PðB; CÞ, and PðC; DÞ or the complementary set. We refer to these as binary
judgments because they involve a DEMO of two elementary hypotheses.
As predicted, the elementary judgments were substantially DEMO The means
of the four groups in the preceding example were 14% for A, 26% for B, 55% for C,
and 69% DEMO D , all of which overestimated the actual values reported in the medical
literature. In problems like this, when individual components of a partition are eval-
uated against the residual, the denominator of the unpacking factor is taken to be 1;
thus, the unpacking factor is simply the total probability assigned to the components
(summed over di¤erent groups of subjects). In this example, the unpacking factor
was 1.64. In sharp contrast, the binary judgments (produced by two di¤erent groups
of physicians) exhibited near-perfect additivity, with a mean total of 100.5% assigned
to complementary pairs.
Further evidence for subadditivity in expert judgment has been provided by DEMO,
Rogers, and Tversky (1994), who investigated 32 professional options traders at the
Paciﬁc Stock Exchange. These traders made probability judgments regarding DEMO
closing price of Microsoft stock on a given future date (e.g., that it will be less than
$88 per share). Microsoft stock DEMO traded at the Paciﬁc Stock Exchange, and the
traders are commonly DEMO with the prediction of its future value. Nevertheless,
their judgments exhibited the predicted pattern of subadditivity and binary com-
plementarity. The average unpacking DEMO for a fourfold partition was 1.47, and
the average sum of DEMO binary events was 0.98. Subadditivity in expert
judgments has been documented in other domains by Fischho¤ et al. (1978), who
studied auto mechanics, and by Dube-Rioux and Russo (1988), who studied restau-
rant DEMO
346 Tversky and Koehler
Figure 14.1
Unpacking factors from Tversky and Fox’s (1994) data. SFO ¼ San Francisco temperature; BJG
Beijing temperature; NFL ¼ 1991 National Football League Super Bowl; NBA ¼
Association playo¤; DEMO ¼ weekly change in Dow–Jones index.
¼
National Basketball
Review of Previous Research We next review other studies that have provided tests
of support DEMO Tversky and Fox (1994) asked subjects to assign probabilities to
various intervals in which an uncertain quantity might fall, such as the margin of
victory in the upcoming Super Bowl or the change in the DEMO Industrial
Average over the next week. When a given event (e.g., ‘‘Bu¤alo beats Washington’’)
was unpacked into individually evaluated components (e.g., DEMO beats Wash-
ington by less than 7 points’’ and ‘‘Bu¤alo beats Washington by at least 7 points’’),
subjects’ judgments were substantially subadditive. Figure 14.1 plots the unpacking
factor obtained in this study as a function DEMO the number of component hypotheses in
the explicit disjunction. Judgments for ﬁve di¤erent types of event are shown: future
San Francisco temperature (SFO), future Beijing temperature (BJG), the outcome of
the Super Bowl DEMO the National Football League (NFL), the outcome of a playo¤
DEMO of the National Basketball Association (NBA), and weekly change in DEMO
Dow–Jones index (DOW). Recall that an unpacking factor greater than DEMO (i.e., fall-
Support Theory 347
Figure 14.2
A test of binary complementarity based on DEMO and Fox (1994).
ing above the dashed line in the DEMO) indicates subadditivity. The results displayed in
ﬁgure 14.1 reveal consistent subadditivity DEMO all sources that increases with the
number of components in the explicit disjunction.
Figure 14.2 plots the median probabilities assigned to complementary hypotheses.
(Each hypothesis is represented twice in the plot, once as the focal hypothesis and
once as the complement.) As predicted by support theory, judgments DEMO intervals
representing complementary pairs of hypotheses were essentially additive, with no
DEMO tendency toward either subadditivity or superadditivity.
Further evidence for binary complementarity comes from an extensive study con-
ducted by Wallsten, Budescu, and Zwick (1992),3 who presented subjects with 300
propositions concerning world history and geography (e.g., ‘‘The Monroe Doctrine
was proclaimed before the Republican Party DEMO founded’’) and asked them to esti-
348 Tversky and Koehler
Figure 14.3
A test of binary complementarity based DEMO Wallsten, Budescu, and Zwick (1992).
mate the probability that DEMO was true. True and false (complementary) versions of
each proposition were presented on di¤erent days. Figure 14.3 plots the mean prob-
abilities assigned DEMO each of the propositions in both their true and false versions
using the format of ﬁgure 14.2. Again, the judgments are additive (mean DEMO 1.02)
through the entire range.
We next present a brief summary of the major ﬁndings and list both current and
previous studies supporting DEMO conclusion.
subadditivity Unpacking an implicit hypothesis into its component hypotheses
increases its total judged probability, yielding subadditive judgments. Tables 14.3
and 14.4 list studies that provide tests of the unpacking condition. For each experi-
ment, the probability assigned to the implicit hypothesis and the total probability
Support Theory 349
Table 14.3
Results of Experiments Using Qualitative Hypotheses: Average Probability Assigned to Coextensional
Implicit and Explicit Disjunctions and the Unpacking Factor DEMO the Degree of Subadditivity
Study and topic
n
Explicit P
Implicit P
Unpacking factor
Fischho¤, Slovic, & Lichtenstein (1978)
Car failure, DEMO 1 4 0.54 .18 3.00
Car failure, Experiment 5 2 0.27 DEMO 1.35
Car failure, Experiment 6 (experts) 4 0.44 .22 2.00
DEMO, Gettys, Manning, Baca, & 6 0.27 .18 1.50
Fisher (DEMO): college majors
Russo & Kolzow (1992)
Causes of death DEMO 0.55 .45 1.22
Car failure 4 0.55 .27 2.04
Koehler & Tversky (1993)
College majors 4 1.54 1.00a 1.54
College majors 5 2.51 1.00a 2.51
Study 1: causes of death 3 0.61 .46 1.33
7 0.70 .37 1.86
Study 4: crime stories 4 1.71 1.00a 1.71
Study 5: college majors 4 1.76 1.00a 1.76
Note: The number of DEMO in the explicit disjunction is denoted by n. Numbered studies with no
citation refer to the present article.
a Because the components partition the DEMO, it is assumed that a probability of 1.00 would have been
DEMO to the implicit disjunction.
assigned to its components in the explicit disjunction are listed along with the result-
ing unpacking factor. All of the DEMO studies used an experimental design in which
the implicit disjunction and the components of the explicit disjunction were evaluated
independently, either by separate groups of subjects or by the same subjects but with
a substantial number DEMO intervening judgments. The probabilities are listed as a
function of the number of components in the explicit disjunction and are collapsed
over all other DEMO variables. Table 14.3 lists studies in which subjects eval-
uated the probability of qualitative hypotheses (e.g., the probability that Bill W.
majors in DEMO); table 14.4 lists studies in which subjects evaluated quantita-
tive hypotheses (e.g., the probability that a randomly selected adult man is between
DEMO ft and 6 ft 2 in. tall).
The tables show that the observed unpacking factors are, without exception,
greater than one, DEMO consistent subadditivity. The fact that subadditivity is
observed both for qualitative and for quantitative hypotheses is instructive. Sub-
additivity in assessments of qualitative hypotheses DEMO be explained, in part at least,
by the failure to DEMO one or more component hypotheses when the event in
350 Tversky and Koehler
Table 14.4
Results of Experiments Using Quantitative Hypotheses: Average Probability Assigned to Coextensional
Implicit and Explicit Disjunctions and the Unpacking DEMO Measuring the Degree of Subadditivity
Teigen (1974b)
Experiment 1: binomial
outcomes
Teigen (1974b)
Experiment 2: heights of
students
n
2
DEMO
5
9
2
4
5
6
0.66
0.84
1.62
2.25
0.58
1.99
2.31
2.55
.38
.38
1.00a
1.00a
.36
.76
.75
1.00a
Teigen (1974a)
Experiment 2: binomial
outcomes
Olson (1976)
Experiment 1: gender
distribution
11 4.25 1.00a
2
3
5
9
0.13
0.36
0.68
0.97
DEMO
.21
.40
.38
Peterson and Pitz (1988)
Experiment 3: baseball
victories
Tversky and Fox (1994):
uncertain quantities
2
3
4
DEMO
0.77
1.02
1.21
1.40
.62
.72
.79
.84
Study 2: number DEMO children 10 1.99 1.00a
3 1.58 1.00a
Study and topic
Explicit P
Implicit P
Unpacking factor
1.73
2.21
1.62
2.25
1.61
2.62
3.07
2.55
DEMO
1.30
1.71
1.70
2.55
1.58
1.27
1.46
1.58
1.27
1.99
Note: DEMO number of components in the explicit disjunction is denoted by n. Numbered Study with no ci-
tation refers to the peresent article.
a Because DEMO components partition the space, it is assumed that a probability of DEMO would have been
assigned to the implicit disjunction.
Support Theory 351
Table 14.5
Results of Experiments Testing Binary Complementarity: Average Total Probability Assigned to Comple-
mentary Pairs of Hypotheses, Between-Subjects Standard Deviations, and the Number of Subjects in the
Experiment
Study and topic Mean total PSD N
Wallsten, Budescu, & Zwick 1.02 0.06 23
(1992): general knowledge
Tversky & Fox (1994)
NBA playo¤ 1.00 0.07 27
Super Bowl 1.02 0.07 40
Dow-Jones 1.00 0.10 40
San Francisco DEMO 1.02 0.13 72
Beijing temperature 0.99 0.14 45
Koehler & Tversky (DEMO): 1.00 170
college majorsa
Study 2: number of childrena 0.97 DEMO
Study 4: crime storiesa 1.03 60
Study 5: college majorsa 1.05 115
Note: Numbered studies with no citation refer to the present article. NBA ¼ National Basketball Associ-
ation.
a A given subject evaluated either DEMO event or its complement, but not both.
question is described in DEMO implicit form. The subadditivity observed in judgments of
quantitative hypotheses, however, cannot be explained as a retrieval failure. For
example, Teigen (1974b, experiment 2) found that the judged proportion of college
students whose heights fell in a given interval increased when that interval was
broken into DEMO smaller intervals that were assessed separately. Subjects evaluating
the implicit disjunction (DEMO, the large interval), we suggest, did not overlook the fact
that the interval included several smaller intervals; rather, the unpacking manipula-
DEMO enhanced the salience of these intervals and, hence, their judged probability.
Subadditivity, therefore, is observed even in the absence of memory limitations.
DEMO of components The degree of subadditivity increases with the number of
components in the explicit disjunction. This follows readily from support theory:
Unpacking DEMO implicit hypothesis into exclusive components increases its total
judged probability, and DEMO unpacking of each component should further
increase the total probability assigned to the initial hypothesis. Tables 14.3 and 14.4
show, as expected, that DEMO unpacking factor generally increases with the number of
components (see also DEMO 14.1).
binary complementarity The judged probabilities of complementary pairs of
hypotheses add to one. Table 14.5 lists studies that have tested this prediction. DEMO
352 Tversky and Koehler
considered only studies in which the hypothesis and DEMO complement were evaluated
independently, either by di¤erent subjects or by the DEMO subjects but with a
substantial number of intervening judgments. (We provide DEMO standard deviations
for the experiments that used the latter design.) Table DEMO shows that such judg-
ments generally add to one. Binary complementarity indicates that people evaluate
a given hypothesis relative to its complement. Moreover, it rules out alternative
interpretations of subadditivity in terms of a suggestion e¤ect DEMO a conﬁrmation bias.
These accounts imply a bias in favor of the focal hypothesis yielding PðA; BÞþ
PðB; AÞ > 1, contrary to the experimental evidence. Alternatively, one might be
tempted to attribute the subadditivity observed in probability judgments to subjects’
lack of knowledge of the additivity DEMO of probability theory. This explanation,
however, fails to account for DEMO observed subadditivity in frequency judgments
(in which additivity is obvious) and for the ﬁnding of binary complementarity
(in which additivity is consistently satisﬁed).
The combination of binary complementarity and subadditive elementary judg-
ments, implied by support theory, is inconsistent with both Bayesian and revisionist
models. The Bayesian model implies that the unpacking factor should equal one
because the DEMO and packed hypotheses have the same extension. Shafer’s
theory of belief functions and other models of lower probability require an unpack-
ing factor of DEMO than one, because they assume that the subjective probability (or
belief ) of the union of disjoint events is generally greater than the DEMO of the proba-
bilities of its exclusive constituents. Furthermore, the data DEMO be explained by the
dual of the belief function (called the DEMO function) or, more generally, by an
upper probability (e.g., DEMO Dempster, 1967) because this model requires that the sum
of the assessments of complementary events exceed unity, contrary to the evidence.
Indeed, DEMO PðA; BÞþ PðB; AÞ¼ 1 (see table 14.5), then DEMO upper and lower proba-
bility reduce to the standard additive model. The experimental ﬁndings, of course, do
not invalidate the use of upper DEMO lower probability, or belief functions, as formal
systems for representing uncertainty. However, the evidence reviewed in this section
indicates that these models are inconsistent with the principles that govern intuitive
probability judgments.
probability versus frequency DEMO the studies discussed earlier and listed in tables
14.3 and 14.4, DEMO (e.g., Fischho¤ et al., 1978) used frequency judgments and
others (e.g., Teigen, 1974a, 1974b) used probability judgments. The comparison of
the two tasks, summarized in table 14.6, conﬁrms the predicted pattern: Sub-
additivity holds for both probability and frequency judgments, and the former are
more subadditive than the latter.
Support Theory 353
Table 14.6
Results of Experiments Comparing Probability and Frequency DEMO: Unpacking Factor Computed
from Mean Probability Assigned to Coextensional Explicit and DEMO Disjunctions
Unpacking factor
Study and topic
n
Probability Frequency
Teigen (1974b)DEMO
Experiment 1: binomial outcomes 2 1.73 1.26
5 2.21 1.09
9 DEMO 1.24
Teigen (1974b)
Experiment 2: heights of students 6 2.55 1.68
Koehler & Tversky (1993): college majors 4 1.72 1.37
Study 1: causes of death 3 1.44 1.28
7 2.00 1.84
Note: DEMO number of components in the explicit disjunction is denoted by n. Numbered studies with no
citation refer to the present article.
Scaling Support
In DEMO formal theory developed in the preceding section, the support function is
DEMO from probability judgments. Is it possible to reverse the process and predict
probability judgments from direct assessments of evidence strength? Let s^ðAÞ be
the rating of the strength of evidence for hypothesis A. What is the DEMO between
such ratings and the support estimated from probability judgments? Perhaps DEMO
most natural assumption is that the two scales are monotonically related; DEMO is,
s^ðAÞ bs^ðBÞ if and only if ði¤
that PðA; DEMO s^ s^
ing s^ and s. To further specify the relation between the scales, it may be reasonable to
assume, in addition, that support ratios are also monotonically related. That is,
s^ðAÞ=s^ðBÞ bs^ðCÞ=s^ðDÞ i¤ DEMO bsðCÞ=sðDÞ:
It can be shown that if the two monotonicity conditions are satisﬁed, and both
b 1 i¤
2
ðAÞ b
Þ
ðBÞ
sðAÞ bsðBÞ. This assumption implies, for example,
, but it does not determine the functional form relat-
scales are deﬁned, say, on DEMO unit interval, then there exists a constant k > 0 such
DEMO the support function derived from probability judgments and the support func-
tion assessed directly are related by a power transformation of the form s DEMO s^k . This
gives rise to the power model
RðA; BÞ¼ DEMO; BÞ=PðB; AÞ¼½
s^
ðAÞ=
s^
ðBÞk;
yielding
log RðA; DEMO k log½
s^
ðAÞ=
s^
ðBÞ:
354 Tversky and Koehler
We next use this model to predict judged DEMO from independent assessments
of evidence strength obtained in two studies.
Study 3: Basketball Games Subjects ðN ¼ 88Þ were NBA fans who subscribe to a
computer news group. We posted a questionnaire to this news group DEMO asked
readers to complete and return it by electronic mail within 1 week. In the question-
naire, subjects assessed the probability that the home team would win in each of 20
upcoming games. These 20 outcomes DEMO all possible matches among ﬁve
teams (Phoenix, Portland, Los Angeles DEMO, Golden State, and Sacramento) from
the Paciﬁc Division of the DEMO, constructed such that, for each pair of teams, two
games DEMO evaluated (one for each possible game location). Use of this DEMO
population yielded highly reliable judgments, as shown, among other things, DEMO the
fact that the median value of the correlation between an individual subject’s ratings
and the set of mean judgments was .93.
After making DEMO probability judgments, subjects rated the strength of each of the
ﬁve DEMO The participants were instructed:
First, choose the team you believe DEMO the strongest of the ﬁve, and set that team’s strength to
DEMO Assign the remaining teams ratings in proportion to the strength of the strongest team.
For example, if you believe that a given team is half as strong as the strongest team (the team
you gave a 100), give that team a strength rating of 50.
We interpreted DEMO ratings as a direct assessment of support.
Because the strength ratings did not take into account the home court e¤ect, we
collapsed the probability judgments across the two possible locations of the match.
The slope of DEMO regression line predicting log RðA; BÞ from log½s^ðAÞ=s^ðBÞ provided
an estimate DEMO k for each subject. The median estimate of k was 1.8, DEMO the mean
was 2.2; the median R2 for this analysis was DEMO For the aggregate data, k was 1.9
and the resulting R2 DEMO .97. The scatterplot in ﬁgure 14.4 exhibits excellent corre-
spondence between mean prediction based on team strength and mean judged prob-
ability. This result DEMO that the power model can be used to predict judged
probability from assessments of strength that make no reference to chance or uncer-
tainty. DEMO also reinforces the psychological interpretation of s as a measure of evi-
dence strength.
Study 4: Crime Stories This study was designed to investigate the relation between
judged probability and assessed support in a very di¤erent DEMO and to explore the
enhancement e¤ect, described in the next subsection. DEMO this end, we adapted a task
introduced by Teigen (1983) DEMO Robinson and Hastie (1985) and presented subjects
with two criminal cases. The ﬁrst was an embezzlement at a computer-parts manu-
Support Theory 355
Figure 14.4
Judged probability for basketball games as a DEMO of normalized strength ratings.
facturing company involving four suspects (a manager, a buyer, an accountant, and
a seller). The second case DEMO a murder that also involved four suspects (an activist,
an DEMO, a scientist, and a writer). In both cases, subjects DEMO informed that exactly
one suspect was guilty. In the low-information condition, DEMO four suspects in each
case were introduced with a short description of their role and possible motive. In the
high-information condition, the motive of each suspect was strengthened. In a man-
ner resembling the typical mystery DEMO, we constructed each case so that all the
suspects seemed generally DEMO suspicious as more evidence was revealed.
Subjects evaluated the suspects after reading the low-information material and
again after reading the high-information material. Some subjects DEMO
¼
60Þ judged
the probability that a given suspect was guilty. Each of these subjects made two
elementary judgments (that a particular suspect was guilty) and three binary judg-
356 Tversky and Koehler
ments (that suspect A rather than suspect B was guilty) in each case. Other subjects
ðN
¼
55Þ rated the suspiciousness of a given suspect, which we took as a direct
assessment of support. These subjects rated two suspects per case by providing a
DEMO between 0 (indicating that the suspect was ‘‘not at all suspicious’’) and 100
(indicating that the suspect was ‘‘maximally suspicious’’) in proportion DEMO the suspi-
ciousness of the suspect.
As in the previous study, DEMO assumed binary complementarity and estimated k by
a logarithmic regression of RðA; BÞ against the suspiciousness ratio. For these data,
k was estimated to be .84, and R2 was .65. Rated suspiciousness, therefore, provides
a reasonable predictor of the judged probability of guilt. However, the relation
between judged probability and assessed support was stronger in the basketball study
DEMO in the crime study. Furthermore, the estimate of k was much DEMO in the
latter than in the former. In the basketball study, DEMO team that was rated twice as
strong as another was judged more than twice as likely to win; in the crime stories,
however, a character who was twice as suspicious as another was judged less than
twice as likely to be guilty. This di¤erence may be due DEMO the fact that the judgments
of team strength were based on more solid data than the ratings of suspiciousness.
In the preceding two studies, we asked subjects to assess the overall support for
each hypothesis on DEMO basis of all the available evidence. A di¤erent approach to the
assessment of evidence was taken by Briggs and Krantz (1992; see also DEMO, Ray,
& Briggs, 1990). These authors demonstrated that, DEMO certain conditions, subjects
can assess the degree to which an isolated DEMO of evidence supports each of the
hypotheses under consideration. They also proposed several rules for the combina-
tion of independent items of evidence, but they did not relate assessed support to
judged probability.
The Enhancement E¤ect
DEMO that assessed support is noncompensatory in the sense that evidence that
increases the support of one hypothesis does not necessarily decrease the support of
DEMO hypotheses. In fact, it is possible for new evidence to increase DEMO support
of all elementary hypotheses. We have proposed that such evidence will enhance
subadditivity. In this section, we describe several tests of enhancement and compare
support theory with the Bayesian model and with Shafer’s theory.
We DEMO with an example discussed earlier, in which one of several suspects DEMO
committed a murder. To simplify matters, assume that there are four DEMO who,
in the absence of speciﬁc evidence (low information), DEMO considered equally likely to
Support Theory 357
be guilty. Suppose further evidence is then introduced (high information) that impli-
cates each of the suspects to roughly the same degree, so that they remain equally
probable. Let L and H denote, respectively, the evidence available under low- and
high-information conditions. Let A DEMO the negation of A, that is, ‘‘Suspect A is
PðA; DEMO HÞ¼ PðA; Bj
1 ,
LÞ¼ 2
not guilty.’’ According to the Bayesian model, then,
PðA; Aj HÞ¼ PðA; Aj
In contrast, Shafer’s (1976) belief-function approach requires that the proba-
1 , and so forth.
LÞ¼ 4
bilities assigned to each of the suspects DEMO to less than one and suggests that the
total will be higher in the presence of direct evidence (i.e., in the high-information
condition) than in its absence. As a consequence, 1
1 2 bPðA; DEMO
4 bPðA; A
j HÞ bPðA; Bj LÞ,
j HÞ bPðA; Aj LÞ, and so forth. In other words, both the binary and the
elementary judgments are expected to increase as more evidence DEMO encountered. In
the limit, when no belief is held in reserve, the binary judgments approach one half
and the elementary judgments approach one DEMO
The enhancement assumption yields a di¤erent pattern, namely PðA; Bj HÞ¼
PðA; Bj H
model, the binary judgments are one half; in contrast to that model, however, the
elementary judgments are expected to DEMO one fourth and to be greater under
high- than under low-information conditions. Although both support theory and the
belief-function approach yield greater elementary judgments DEMO high- than under
low-information conditions, support theory predicts that they will DEMO one fourth
in both conditions, whereas Shafer’s theory requires that these DEMO be less
than or equal to one fourth.
The assumption of equally probable suspects is not essential for the analysis.
1 , 1, and so forth. As in the Bayesian
LÞ¼ 2 PðA; Aj Þ bPðA; Aj LÞ b 4
Suppose that initially the suspects are not equally probable, but the new evidence
does not change the binary probabilities. Here, too, the Bayesian model requires
additive judgments that do not di¤er DEMO low- and high-information conditions;
the belief-function approach requires superadditive judgments that become less
superadditive as more information is encountered; and the enhancement assumption
predicts subadditive judgments that become more subadditive with the addition of
(compatible) evidence.
Evaluating Suspects
With these predictions in mind, we turn to DEMO crime stories of study 4. Table 14.7
displays the mean suspiciousness ratings and elementary probability judgments of
each suspect in the two cases under DEMO and high-information conditions. The table
shows that, in all cases, the sums of both probability judgments and suspiciousness
ratings exceed one. Evidently, subadditivity holds not only in probability judgment
358 Tversky and Koehler
Table 14.7
Mean Suspiciousness Rating and Judged Probability DEMO Each Suspect under Low- and High-Information
Conditions
Suspiciousness Probability
Case and suspect
Low
information
High
information
Low
information
High
information
Case 1: embezzlement
Accountant 41 53 40 45
Buyer 50 58 42 48
Manager 47 51 DEMO 59
Seller 32 48 37 42
Total 170 210 167 194
Case 2: murder
Activist 32 57 39 57
Artist 27 23 37 30
Scientist 24 43 34 40
Writer 38 60 33 54
Total 122 DEMO 143 181
but also in ratings of evidence strength or degree of belief (e.g., that a given subject is
guilty). Further examination DEMO the suspiciousness ratings shows that all but one of
the suspects increased in suspiciousness as more information was provided. In accord
with our prediction, the judged probability of each of these suspects also increased
with the DEMO information, indicating enhanced subadditivity (see equation 10).
The one exception was the artist in the murder case, who was given an alibi in
the high-information condition and, as one would expect, subsequently decreased
DEMO in suspiciousness and in probability. Overall, both the suspiciousness ratings
and DEMO probability judgments were signiﬁcantly greater under high- than under low-
information conditions (p <:001 for both cases by t test).
From a normative standpoint, the support (i.e., suspiciousness) of all the suspects
DEMO increase with new information, but an increase in the probability of DEMO sus-
pect should be compensated for by a decrease in the probability of the others. The
observation that new evidence can increase the judged DEMO of all suspects
was made earlier by Robinson and Hastie (1985; Van Wallendael & Hastie, 1990).
Their method di¤ered from ours in that each subject assessed the probability of all
suspects, but this method too produced substantial subadditivity, with a typical
unpacking factor of about two. These authors rejected the Bayesian model as a
descriptive account and proposed DEMO theory as one viable alternative. As was
noted earlier, however, the observed subadditivity is inconsistent with Shafer’s
theory, as well as the Bayesian model, but it is consistent with the present account.
Support Theory 359
In the crime stories, the added evidence was generally compatible with all of the
hypotheses under consideration. Peterson and Pitz (1988, experiment 3), however,
observed a similar e¤ect with mixed evidence, which favored some hypotheses but
not others. Their subjects were asked to assess the probability that the number of
games won by a baseball DEMO in a season fell in a given interval on the basis of one,
two, or three cues (team batting average, earned run average, and total home runs
during that season). Unbeknownst to subjects, they were asked, over a large number
of problems, to assign probabilities to all three components in a partition (e.g., less
than DEMO wins, between 80 and 88 wins, and more than 88 wins). As the number of
cues increased, subjects assigned a greater probability, on average, to all three inter-
vals in the partition, thus exhibiting enhanced subadditivity. The unpacking factors
for these data were 1.26, 1.61, and 1.86 for one, two, and three cues, respectively.
These DEMO attest to the robustness of the enhancement e¤ect, which is observed
DEMO when the added evidence favors some, but not all, of the hypotheses under
study.
Study 5: College Majors In this study, we DEMO enhancement by replacing evidence
rather than by adding evidence as in the previous study. Following Mehle, Gettys,
Manning, Baca, and Fisher (DEMO), we asked subjects ðN
¼
115Þ to assess the prob-
ability that a social science student at an unspeciﬁed midwestern university majored
in DEMO given ﬁeld. Subjects were told that, in this university, each social science student
has one and only one of the following four majors: economics, political science, psy-
chology, and sociology.
Subjects estimated the probability that a given student had a speciﬁed major on
the basis of DEMO of four courses the student was said to have taken in his or her sec-
ond year. Two of the courses (statistics and Western civilization) were courses typi-
cally taken by social science majors; the DEMO two (French literature and physics)
were courses not typically taken DEMO social science majors. This was conﬁrmed by an
independent group of subjects ðN
¼
36Þ who evaluated the probability that a social
science major DEMO take each one of the four courses. Enhancement suggests that
the typical courses will yield more subadditivity than the less typical courses because
they DEMO greater support to each of the four majors.
Each subject made both elementary and binary judgments. As in all previous
studies, the elementary judgments exhibited substantial subadditivity (mean unpack-
ing factor ¼ 1:76), whereas the binary judgments were essentially additive (mean
unpacking factor ¼ 1:05). In the preceding analyses, we have used the unpacking
factor as an overall measure of subadditivity associated with a set of mutually
exclusive DEMO The present experiment also allowed us to estimate w (see
equation DEMO), which provides a more reﬁned measure of subadditivity because it is
360 Tversky and Koehler
Figure 14.5
Median value of w for predictions DEMO college majors, plotted separately for each course. Lit
Civ ¼ civilization; Poli Sci ¼ political science.
¼
literature;
estimated separately for each DEMO the implicit hypotheses under study. For each
course, we ﬁrst estimated DEMO support of each major from the binary judgments and
then estimated w for each major from the elementary judgments using the equation
sðAÞ
PðA; AÞ¼ sðAÞþ wA½sðBÞþ sðCÞþ sðDÞ
where A, B, C, and D denote the four majors.
This analysis was conducted separately for each subject. DEMO average value of w
across courses and majors was .46, indicating DEMO a major received less than half of
its explicit support when it was included implicitly in the residual. Figure 14.5 shows
;
Support Theory 361
the median value of w (over subjects) for DEMO major, plotted separately for each of
the four courses. In accord DEMO enhancement, the ﬁgure shows that the typical
courses, statistics and Western civilization, induced more subadditivity (i.e., lower w)
than the less typical courses, physics and French literature. However, for any given
course, w was roughly constant across majors. Indeed, a two-way analysis of vari-
ance yielded a highly signiﬁcant e¤ect of course, Fð3; 112Þ¼ 31:DEMO, p <:001, but no
signiﬁcant e¤ect of major, Fð3; 112Þ < 1.
Implications
To this point, we have focused on the direct consequences of support theory. We
conclude this section by discussing the DEMO e¤ect, hypothesis generation, and
decision under uncertainty from the perspective of support theory.
The Conjunction E¤ect Considerable research has documented the conjunction
e¤ect, in which a conjunction AB is judged more probable than one of DEMO con-
stituents A . The e¤ect is strongest when an event that initially seems unlikely (e.g., a
massive ﬂood in North America in DEMO more than 1,000 people drown) is supple-
mented by a DEMO cause or qualiﬁcation (e.g., an earthquake in California caus-
ing a ﬂood in which more than 1,000 people drown), yielding a DEMO that is
perceived as more probable than the initially implausible event of which it is a proper
subset (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). DEMO theory suggests that the implicit
hypothesis A is not unpacked into the coextensional disjunction AB4AB of which
the conjunction is one component. As a DEMO, evidence supporting AB is not taken
to support A. In the DEMO problem, for instance, the possibility of a ﬂood caused by
an earthquake may not come readily to mind; thus, unless it is DEMO explicitly,
it does not contribute any support to the (implicit) ﬂood hypothesis. Support theory
implies that the conjunction e¤ect would be eliminated DEMO these problems if the
implicit disjunction were unpacked before its evaluation (DEMO, if subjects were
reminded that a ﬂood might be caused by DEMO rainfall or by structural damage
to a reservoir caused by an earthquake, an engineering error, sabotage, etc.).
The greater tendency to unpack either the focal or the residual hypothesis in a
frequentistic formulation may DEMO explain the ﬁnding that conjunction e¤ects are
attenuated, though not eliminated, when subjects estimate frequency rather than
probability. For example, the proportion of subjects who judged the conjunction ‘‘X
is over 55 years old and DEMO had at least one heart attack’’ as more probable than the
constituent event ‘‘X has had at least one heart attack’’ was signiﬁcantly greater DEMO a
probabilistic formulation than in a frequentistic formulation (Tversky & Kahneman,DEMO
1983).
362 Tversky and Koehler
It might be instructive to distinguish two di¤erent DEMO operations. In con-
junctive unpacking, an (implicit) hypothesis (e.g., DEMO) is broken down into exclu-
sive conjunctions (e.g., male nurse DEMO female nurse). Most, but not all, initial
demonstrations of the conjunction e¤ect were based on conjunctive unpacking. In
categorical unpacking, a superordinate category (e.g., unnatural death) is broken
down into its ‘‘natural’’ components (e.g., car accident, drowning, and homicide).
Most of the DEMO reported in this article are based on categorical unpack-
ing. A conjunction e¤ect using categorical unpacking has been described by Bar-
Hillel and Neter (1993), who found numerous cases in which a statement (e.g.,
‘‘Daniela’s major is literature’’) was ranked as more probable than a more inclusive
implicit disjunction (e.g., ‘‘Daniela’s major is in humanities’’). These DEMO held
both for subjects’ direct estimates of probabilities and for their willingness to bet on
the relevant events.
Hypothesis Generation All of the studies DEMO thus far asked subjects to assess
the probability of hypotheses presented to them for judgment. There are many
situations, however, in which a DEMO must generate hypotheses as well as assess
their likelihood. In the current treatment, the generation of alternative hypotheses
entails some unpacking of the residual hypothesis and, thus, is expected to increase
its support relative to DEMO focal hypothesis. In the absence of explicit instructions
to generate alternative hypotheses, people are less likely to unpack the residual
hypothesis and thus will tend to overestimate speciﬁed hypotheses relative to those
left unspeciﬁed.
This implication DEMO been conﬁrmed by Gettys and his colleagues (Gettys, Mehle,
& Fisher, 1986; Mehle et al., 1981), who have found that, in comparison with
veridical values, people generally tend to overestimate the DEMO of speciﬁed
hypotheses presented to them for evaluation. Indeed, overconﬁdence that DEMO
judgment is correct (e.g., Lichtenstein, Fischho¤, & Phillips, 1982) may sometimes
arise because the focal hypothesis is speciﬁed, whereas its alternatives often are not.
Mehle et al. (1981) used two manipulations to DEMO unpacking of the residual
hypothesis: One group of subjects was provided DEMO exemplar members of the
residual, and another was asked to generate DEMO own examples. Both manipulations
improved performance by decreasing the probability assigned to speciﬁed alter-
natives and increasing that assigned to the residual. These results DEMO that the
e¤ects of hypothesis generation are due to the additional hypotheses it brings to
mind, because simply providing hypotheses to the subject has the same e¤ect. Using
a similar manipulation, Dube-Rioux and Russo (1988) found that generation of
alternative hypotheses increased the judged probability of the DEMO relative to that
Support Theory 363
of speciﬁed categories and attenuated the e¤ect of omitting DEMO category. Examination
of the number of instances generated by the subjects showed that, when enough
instances were produced, the e¤ect of category omission DEMO eliminated altogether.
Now consider a task in which subjects are asked to generate a hypothesis (e.g., to
guess which ﬁlm will win the DEMO picture Oscar at the next Academy Awards cere-
mony) before assessing DEMO probability. Asking subjects to generate the most likely
hypothesis might actually lead them to consider several candidates in the process
of settling on the DEMO they prefer. This process amounts to a partial unpacking of
the residual hypothesis, which should decrease the judged probability of the focal
hypothesis. Consistent with this prediction, a recent study (Koehler, 1994) found that
DEMO asked to generate their own hypotheses assigned them a lower probability of
being true than did other subjects presented with the same hypotheses for DEMO
The interpretation of these results—that hypothesis generation makes alternative
hypotheses more salient—was tested by two further manipulations. First, providing
a closed set of speciﬁed alternatives eliminated the di¤erence between the generation
and evaluation conditions. In these DEMO, the residual should be represented
in the same way in both DEMO Second, inserting a distracter task between
hypothesis generation and probability assessment DEMO su‰cient to reduce the salience
of alternatives brought to mind by the generation task, increasing the judged proba-
bility of the focal hypothesis.
Decision Under Uncertainty This article has focused primarily on numerical judg-
ments of DEMO In decision theory, however, subjective probabilities are gener-
ally inferred from preferences between uncertain prospects rather than assessed
directly. It is natural to DEMO, then, whether unpacking a¤ects people’s decisions as
well as their numerical judgments. There is considerable evidence that it does. For
example, Johnson et al. (1993) observed that subjects were willing to pay more for
DEMO insurance that explicitly listed certain events covered by the policy (e.g., death
resulting from an act of terrorism or mechanical failure) than for a more inclusive
policy that did not list speciﬁc events (e.g., DEMO from any cause).
Unpacking can a¤ect decisions in two ways. First, as has been shown, unpacking
tends to increase the judged probability DEMO an uncertain event. Second, unpacking
can increase an event’s impact on DEMO decision, even when its probability is known.
For example, Tversky and Kahneman (1986) asked subjects to choose between two
lotteries that paid DEMO amounts depending on the color of a marble drawn from
a box. (As an inducement to consider the options with care, subjects were DEMO
that one tenth of the participants, selected at random, would actually play the gam-
bles they chose.) Two di¤erent versions of the problem were used, which di¤ered
364 Tversky and Koehler
only in the description of the outcomes. The DEMO unpacked version 1 was as follows:
Box A: 90% white DEMO red 1% green 1% blue 2% yellow
$0 win $45 win $30 lose $15 lose $15
Box B: 90% white 6% red 1% green 1% blue 2% yellow
$0 win $45 win $45 lose $10 lose DEMO
It is not di‰cult to see that box B dominates box A; indeed, all subjects chose box B
in this version. Version 2 DEMO the two outcomes resulting in a loss of $15 in box
A (i.e., blue and yellow) and the two outcomes resulting in a gain of $45 in box B
(i.e., red and green):
Box A: 90% white 6% red 1% green 3% yellow/blue
$0 win $45 win $30 lose $15
Box B: 90% white 7% red/green 1% blue 2% yellow
$0 win $45 lose $10 lose $15
DEMO accord with subadditivity, the combination of events yielding the same outcome
DEMO box A more attractive because it packs two losses into one and makes box B
less attractive because it packs two gains into one. DEMO, 58% of subjects chose box
A in version 2, even though it was dominated by box B. Starmer and Sugden (1993)
further investigated the e¤ect of unpacking events with known probabilities (which
they called an event-splitting e¤ect) and found that a prospect generally becomes
more attractive when an event that yields a positive outcome is unpacked into two
DEMO Such results demonstrate that unpacking a¤ects decisions even when
the probabilities are explicitly stated.
The role of unpacking in choice was further illustrated by DEMO et al.
(in press). Graduating medical students at the University DEMO Toronto ðN
¼
149Þ were
presented with a medical scenario concerning a middle-aged man su¤ering acute
shortness of breath. Half of the respondents were DEMO a packed description that
noted that ‘‘obviously, many diagnoses are possible DEMO . . including pneumonia.’’ The
other half were given an unpacked description that mentioned other potential diag-
noses (pulmonary embolus, heart failure, asthma, and lung cancer) in addition to
pneumonia. The respondents were asked DEMO or not they would prescribe anti-
biotics in such a case, DEMO treatment that is e¤ective against pneumonia but not against
the other potential diagnoses mentioned in the unpacked version. The unpacking
manipulation was expected to DEMO the perceived probability of pneumonia and,
hence, the respondents’ inclination DEMO prescribe antibiotics. Indeed, a signiﬁcant
majority (64%) of respondents given DEMO unpacked description chose not to prescribe
Support Theory 365
antibiotics, whereas respondents given the packed description were almost evenly
divided between prescribing (47%) and not prescribing them. Singling out DEMO
increased the tendency to select a treatment that is e¤ective for pneumonia, even
though the presenting symptoms were clearly consistent with a number of well-
known alternative diagnoses. Evidently, unpacking can a¤ect decisions, not only
DEMO assessments.
Although unpacking plays an important role in probability judgment, the DEMO
tive mechanism underlying this e¤ect is considerably more general. Thus, one DEMO
expect unpacking e¤ects even in tasks that do not involve uncertain events. For
example, van der Pligt, Eiser, and Spears (1987, experiment 1) asked subjects to
assess the current and ideal distribution of ﬁve power sources (nuclear, coal, oil,
hydro, solar/wind/wave) and found that a given power source was assigned a higher
estimate DEMO it was evaluated on its own than when its four alternatives were
unpacked (see also Fiedler & Armbruster, 1994; Pelham, Sumarta, & Myaskovsky,
1994). Such results indicate that the e¤ects of unpacking DEMO a general character-
istic of human judgment.
Extensions
We have presented a nonextensional theory of belief in which judged probability is
given by the DEMO support, or strength of evidence, of the respective focal and
alternative hypotheses. In this theory, support is additive for explicit disjunctions of
exclusive hypotheses and subadditive for implicit disjunctions. The empirical evi-
dence conﬁrms the DEMO predictions of support theory: (a) Probability judgments
increase by unpacking DEMO focal hypothesis and decrease by unpacking the alternative
hypothesis; (b) DEMO probabilities are complementary in the binary case and
subadditive in the general case; and (c) subadditivity is more pronounced for proba-
bility than for frequency judgments, and it is enhanced by compatible evidence.
Support theory also provides a method for predicting judged probability from inde-
pendent assessments DEMO evidence strength. Thus, it accounts for a wide range of
empirical DEMO in terms of a single explanatory construct.
In this section, we DEMO some extensions and implications of support theory.
First, we consider an DEMO version of the theory and introduce a simple parametric
representation. Second, DEMO address the problem of vagueness, or imprecision, by
characterizing upper and lower probability judgments in terms of upper and lower
support. Finally, we discuss the implications of the present ﬁndings for the design of
elicitation DEMO for decision analysis and knowledge engineering.
366 Tversky and Koehler
Ordinal Analysis
Throughout the chapter, we have treated probability judgment as a quantitative
measure of degree of belief. This measure DEMO commonly interpreted in terms of a ref-
erence chance process. For example, assigning a probability of two thirds to the
hypothesis that a candidate will be elected to o‰ce is taken to mean that the judge
DEMO this hypothesis as likely as drawing a red ball from an urn in which two
thirds of the balls are red. Probability judgment, therefore, can be viewed as an out-
come of a thought experiment in which the judge matches degree of belief to a stan-
dard chance DEMO (see Shafer & Tversky, 1985). This interpretation, of course,DEMO
does not ensure either coherence or calibration.
Although probability judgments appear to convey quantitative information, it
might be instructive to analyze these judgments as an ordinal rather than a cardinal
scale. This interpretation gives rise to DEMO ordinal generalization of support theory.
Suppose there is a nonnegative scale s deﬁned on H and a strictly increasing function
F such that, for all A; B in H,
ðAÞ
PðA; BÞ¼ F sðAÞþ DEMO ð11Þ
where sðCÞ asðA4BÞ¼ sðAÞþ sðBÞ whenever A and B are exclusive, C is implicit,
and C0 ¼ðA4BÞ0.
An axiomatization of the ordinal model lies beyond the scope of the present arti-
cle. It is DEMO, however, that to obtain an essentially unique support function
in this case, we have to make additional assumptions, such as the following DEMO
ity condition (Debreu, 1958): If PðA; BÞ bz bPðA; DÞ, then there exists C A H such
that PðA; CÞ¼ DEMO This idealization may be acceptable in the presence of a random
device, such as a chance wheel with sectors that can be adjusted continuously. The
following theorem shows that, assuming the ordinal model and the solvability con-
dition, binary complementarity and the product rule yield a particularly simple
parametric form that coincides with the model used in the preceding section DEMO relate
assessed and derived support. The proof is given in the appendix.
theorem 2 Assume the ordinal model (equation 11) and the solvability DEMO
Binary complementarity (equation 3) and the product rule (equation 5) hold if and
only if there exists a constant k b 0 DEMO that
sðAÞk :
PðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞk þsðBÞk ð12Þ
This representation, DEMO the power model, reduces to the basic model if k ¼ DEMO
In this model, judged probability may be more or less extreme DEMO the respective
s
;
Support Theory 367
Figure 14.6
Example of the staircase method used to DEMO upper and lower probabilities.
relative support depending on whether k is greater or less than one. Recall that the
experimental data, reviewed in the preceding section, provide strong evidence for the
inequality a < d. That is, PðA; BÞ aPðA1; BÞþ PðA2; BÞ whenever A1; A2 , and B
are mutually exclusive; A is implicit; and A0 DEMO 4A2Þ0 . We also found evidence
(see table 14.2) for the equality b ¼ g, that is, PðA1 4A2; BÞ¼ PðA1; DEMO 4BÞþ
PðA2; A1 4BÞ , but this property has not been DEMO tested. Departures from
additivity induced, for example, by regression toward .5 could be represented by a
power model with k < 1, which implies a < b < g < d. Note that, for explicit dis-
junctions of exclusive hypotheses, the basic model (equations 1 and DEMO), the ordinal
model (equation 11), and the power model (equation 12) all assume additive support,
but only the basic model entails additive probability.
Upper and Lower Indicators
Probability judgments are often vague DEMO imprecise. To interpret and make proper
use of such judgments, therefore, one needs to know something about their range of
uncertainty. Indeed, much of the work on nonstandard probability has been con-
cerned with formal DEMO that provide upper and lower indicators of degree of
belief. The elicitation and interpretation of such indicators, however, present both
theoretical and practical DEMO If people have a hard time assessing a single def-
inite value for the probability of an event, they are likely to have an even harder time
assessing two deﬁnite values for its upper and lower DEMO or generating a
second-order probability distribution. Judges may be able to provide some indication
regarding the vagueness of their assessments, but such judgments, DEMO suggest, are
better interpreted in qualitative, not quantitative, terms.
To DEMO end, we have devised an elicitation procedure in which upper and DEMO
probability judgments are deﬁned verbally rather than numerically. This procedure,
called the staircase method, is illustrated in ﬁgure 14.6. The judge is presented with an
368 Tversky and Koehler
uncertain event (e.g., an eastern team rather DEMO a western team will win the next
NBA title) and is DEMO to check one of the ﬁve categories for each probability value.
The lowest value that is not ‘‘clearly too low’’ (.45) and the DEMO value that is not
‘‘clearly too high’’ (.80), denoted P DEMO P , respectively, may be taken as the lower
and upper DEMO Naturally, alternative procedures involving a di¤erent number
of categories, di¤erent wording, and di¤erent ranges could yield di¤erent indicators.
(We assume that the DEMO of the categories is symmetric around the middle cate-
gory.) The DEMO method can be viewed as a qualitative analog of a second-order
probability distribution or of a fuzzy membership function.
We model P and P DEMO terms of lower and upper support functions, denoted s
and s , respectively. We interpret these scales as low and high estimates of s and
assume that, for any A, sðAÞ asðAÞ asðAÞ. Furthermore, we assume that P and
P can be expressed as follows:
PðA; BÞ¼
and
PðA; BÞ¼
sðAÞ
sðAÞþ sðBÞ
sðAÞ
sðAÞþ sðBÞ
:
DEMO to this model, the upper and lower indicators are generated by DEMO slanted
reading of the evidence; PðA; BÞ can be interpreted as a probability judgment that is
biased in favor of A and against DEMO, whereas PðA; BÞ is biased against A and in favor
of B. The magnitude of the bias reﬂects the vagueness associated with the DEMO
judgment, as well as the characteristics of the elicitation procedure. Within DEMO given
procedure, however, we can interpret the interval ðP; PÞ DEMO a comparative index of
imprecision. Thus, we may conclude that one DEMO is less vague than another if
the interval associated with the ﬁrst assessment is included in the interval associated
with the second assessment. Because DEMO high and low estimates are unlikely to be
more precise or more reliable than the judge’s best estimate, we regard P and P as
supplements, not substitutes, for P.
To test the proposed representation against DEMO standard theory of upper and
lower probability (e.g., see Dempster, DEMO; Good, 1962); we investigated people’s
predictions of the outcomes of the NFL playo¤s for 1992–1993. The study was run
the week before DEMO two championship games in which Bu¤alo was to play Miami
for the title of the American Football Conference (AFC), and Dallas was to play San
Francisco for the title of the National Football Conference (NFC). The winners
of these games would play each other two weeks DEMO in the Super Bowl. The
Support Theory 369
subjects were 135 Stanford students who volunteered to participate DEMO a study of
football prediction in exchange for a single California Lottery ticket. Half of the
subjects assessed the probabilities that the winner of DEMO Super Bowl would be
Bu¤alo, Miami, an NFC team. The other half of the subjects assessed the proba-
bilities that the winner of DEMO Super Bowl would be Dallas, San Francisco, an AFC
team. All subjects assessed probabilities for the two championship games. The focal
and the DEMO hypotheses for these games were counterbalanced. Thus, each
subject made ﬁve DEMO assessments using the staircase method illustrated in
ﬁgure 14.6.
Subjects’ best estimates exhibited the pattern of subadditivity and binary com-
plementarity observed in previous DEMO The average probabilities of each of the
four teams winning the Super Bowl added to 1.71; the unpacking factor was 1.92 for
the AFC teams and 1.48 for the NFC teams. In contrast, the sum of the average
probability of an event and its complement was 1.03. Turning DEMO the analysis of the
upper and the lower assessments, note that DEMO present model implies PðA; BÞþ
The data show that this condition DEMO to a very close degree of approximation,PðB; AÞ¼ 1, in accord with the standard theory of upper and lower probability.
with an DEMO sum of 1.02.
The present model, however, does not generally agree with the standard theory of
upper and lower probability. To illustrate the DEMO, suppose A and B are
mutually exclusive and C0 ¼ðA4BÞ0 . DEMO standard theory requires that PðA; AÞþ
PðB; BÞ aPðC; CÞ, whereas the present account suggests the opposite inequality
when C is implicit. DEMO data clearly violate the standard theory: The average lower
probabilities of DEMO the Super Bowl were .21 for Miami and .21 for Bu¤alo but
only .24 for their implicit disjunction (i.e., an AFC team). DEMO, the average
lower probabilities of winning the Super Bowl were .25 DEMO Dallas and .41 for San
Francisco but only .45 for an NFC team. These data are consistent with the present
model, assuming the subadditivity of s , but not with the standard theory of lower
probability.
DEMO Implications
Models of subjective probability or degree of belief serve two functions: descriptive
and prescriptive. The literature on nonstandard probability models is primarily pre-
scriptive. These models are o¤ered as formal languages for the evaluation of DEMO
and the representation of belief. In contrast, support theory attempts to DEMO the
manner in which people make probability judgments, not to prescribe DEMO people
should make these judgments. For example, the proposition that judged DEMO
increases by unpacking the focal hypothesis and decreases by unpacking the alterna-
370 Tversky and Koehler
tive hypothesis represents a general descriptive principle that DEMO not endorsed by nor-
mative theories, additive or nonadditive.
Despite its DEMO nature, support theory has prescriptive implications. It
could aid the design DEMO elicitation procedures and the reconciliation of inconsistent
assessments (Lindley, Tversky, & Brown, 1979). This role may be illuminated by a
perceptual DEMO Suppose a surveyor has to construct a map of a park on the basis
of judgments of distance between landmarks made by a fallible DEMO A knowl-
edge of the likely biases of the observer could help the surveyor construct a better
map. Because observers generally underestimate distances involving DEMO areas, for
example, the surveyor may discard these assessments and compute the respective
distances from other assessments using the laws of plane geometry. DEMO, the
surveyor may wish to reduce the bias by applying a DEMO correction factor to the
estimates involving hidden areas. The same logic applies to the elicitation of proba-
bility. The evidence shows that people tend DEMO underestimate the probability of an
implicit disjunction, especially the negation of DEMO elementary hypothesis. This bias
may be reduced by asking the judge to contrast hypotheses of comparable level of
speciﬁcity instead of assessing the probability DEMO a speciﬁc hypothesis against its
complement.
The major conclusion of the present research is that subjective probability, or
degree of belief, is nonextensional DEMO hence nonmeasurable in the sense that alter-
native partitions of the space can yield di¤erent judgments. Like the measured length
of a coastline, which increases as a map becomes more detailed, the perceived like-
lihood of an event increases as its description becomes more speciﬁc. This does
not DEMO that judged probability is of no value, but it indicates that DEMO concept is
more fragile than suggested by existing formal theories. The failures of extensionality
demonstrated in this article highlight what is perhaps the fundamental DEMO of
probability assessment, namely the need to consider unavailable possibilities. The
DEMO is especially severe in tasks that require the generation of new hypotheses
or the construction of novel scenarios. The extensionality principle, we argue, DEMO
normatively unassailable but practically unachievable because the judge cannot be
expected to fully unpack any implicit disjunction. People can be encouraged to
unpack a DEMO into its components, but they cannot be expected to think of DEMO
relevant conjunctive unpackings or to generate all relevant future scenarios. In this
respect, the assessment of an additive probability distribution may be an impossible
task. The judge could, of course, ensure the additivity of any DEMO set of judgments,
but this does not ensure that additivity will be preserved by further reﬁnement.
The evidence reported here and elsewhere indicates DEMO both qualitative and
quantitative assessments of uncertainty are not carried out in a logically coherent
Support Theory 371
fashion, and one might be tempted to conclude that they should not be carried out at
all. However, this is not a viable option because, in general, there are no alternative
procedures DEMO assessing uncertainty. Unlike the measurement of distance, in which
fallible human DEMO can be replaced by proper physical measurement, there are
no objective DEMO for assessing the probability of events such as the guilt of a
defendant, the success of a business venture, or the outbreak of DEMO Intuitive judg-
ments of uncertainty, therefore, are bound to play an essential role in people’s delib-
erations and decisions. The question of how DEMO improve their quality through the
design of e¤ective elicitation methods and corrective procedures poses a major chal-
lenge to theorists and practitioners alike.
Notes
DEMO research has been supported by Grant SES-9109535 from the National Science Foundation to Amos
Tversky and by a National Defense Science and Engineering fellowship DEMO Derek J. Koehler.
We are grateful to Maya Bar-Hillel, Todd Davies, Craig Fox, Daniel Kahneman, David Krantz, Glenn
Shafer, Eldar Shaﬁr, and Peter Wakker for many helpful comments and discussions.
1. Gigerenzer (1991) has further argued that the biases observed in probability judgments of unique events
disappear in judgments of frequency, but the data reviewed here and elsewhere are inconsistent with this
claim.
2. Enhancement, like subadditivity, may DEMO hold when a person evaluates these probabilities at the same
time because this task introduces additional constraints.
3. We thank the authors for making DEMO data available to us.
References
Aczel, J. (1966). Lectures on functional equations and their applications. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Bar-Hillel, M., & Neter, E. (1993). How alike is it versus how likely is it: A disjunction fallacy in stereo-
type judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1119–1131.
Briggs, L. K., & Krantz, D. H. (1992). Judging the strength of designated evidence. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 5, 77–106.
Debreu, G. (1958)DEMO Stochastic choice and cardinal utility. Econometrica, 26, 440–444.
Dempster, A. DEMO (1967). Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued mapping. DEMO of
Mathematical Statistics, 38, 325–339.
Dube-Rioux, L., & Russo, DEMO E. (1988). An availability bias in professional judgment. Journal of DEMO
ioral Decision Making, 1, 223–237.
Dubois, D., & Prade, DEMO (1988). Modelling uncertainty and inductive inference: A survey of recent non-
additive probability systems. Acta Psychologica, 68, 53–78.
Erev, I., DEMO, T. S., & Budescu, D. V. (1994). Simultaneous over- and underconﬁdence: The role of
error in judgment processes. Psychological Review, DEMO, 519–527.
Fiedler, K., & Armbruster, T. (1994). Two DEMO may be more than one whole. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 66, 633–645.
372 Tversky and Koehler
Fischho¤, B., Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1978). Fault trees: Sensitivity of estimated failure probabilities
to DEMO representation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 4,
330–344.
Fox, C. R., Rogers, B., & Tversky, A. (DEMO). Decision weights for options traders. Unpublished manu-
script, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Gettys, C. F., Mehle, T., & Fisher, DEMO (1986). Plausibility assessments in hypothesis generation. Organiza-
tional Behavior and DEMO Decision Processes, 37, 14–33.
Gigerenzer, G. (1991). How to make cognitive illusions disappear: Beyond ‘‘heuristics and biases.’’ In
W. Stroche & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European review of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 83–115). New York:
Wiley.
Gilboa, I., & Schmeidler, D. (in press). Additive representations of non additive measures and the Choquet
integral. Annals of Operation Research.
Good, I. J. (1962). DEMO probability as the measure of a nonmeasurable set. In E. Nagel, DEMO Suppes, &
A. Tarski (Eds.), Logic, methodology, and DEMO of sciences (pp. 319–329). Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
DEMO, E. J., Hershey, J., Meszaros, J., & Kunreuther, DEMO (1993). Framing, probability distortions, and
insurance decisions. Journal of DEMO and Uncertainty, 7, 35–51.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics DEMO biases.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Intuitive prediction: Biases and corrective procedures. TIMS Studies
in Management Science, 12, 313–327.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). Variants of uncertainty. Cognition, 11, 143–157.
Koehler, D. DEMO (1994). Hypothesis generation and conﬁdence in judgment. Journal of Experimental DEMO
chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 461–469.
Koehler, D. J., & Tversky, A. (1993). The enhancement e¤ect in probability judgment. Unpublished manu-
script, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Krantz, D. DEMO, Ray, B., & Briggs, L. K. (1990). Foundations DEMO the theory of evidence: The role of schemata.
Unpublished manuscript, Columbia University, New York.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischho¤, B., & Phillips, DEMO (1982). Calibration of probabilities: The state of the art to
1980. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases,
(pp. 306–334). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lindley, D. V., Tversky, A., & Brown, R. V. (1979). On the reconciliation of probability assessments.
DEMO of the Royal Statistical Society, 142, 146–180.
Mehle, T., Gettys, C. F., Manning, C., Baca, S., & Fisher, S. (1981). The availability explanation of
excessive plausibility assessment. Acta Psychologica, DEMO, 127–140.
Mongin, P. (in press). Some connections between epistemic DEMO and the theory of nonadditive probabil-
ity. In P. W. Humphreys (DEMO), Patrick Suppes: Scientiﬁc philosopher. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
Murphy, A. H. (1985). Probabilistic weather forecasting. In A. H. Murphy & R. W. Katz (Eds.), Proba-
bility, statistics, and decision making in the atmospheric sciences (pp. 337–377). Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
Olson, C. L. (1976). Some apparent violations of the representativeness heuristic DEMO human judgment.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 2, 599–608.
Pelham, B. W., Sumarta, T. T., & Myaskovsky, DEMO (1994). The easy path from many to much: The
numerosity heuristic. Cognitive Psychology, 26, 103–133.
Peterson, D. K., & Pitz, G. F. (1988). Conﬁdence, uncertainty, and the use of information. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 85–92.
Redelmeier, D., Koehler, D. J., Liberman, V., & Tversky, A. (in press). Probability judgment in medicine:
Discounting unspeciﬁed alternatives. Medical Decision Making.
Support Theory 373
Reeves, T., & Lockhart, R. S. (1993)DEMO Distributional vs. singular approaches to probability and errors in
probabilistic reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 207–226.
Robinson, L. B., & Hastie, R. (1985). Revision of beliefs when a hypothesis is DEMO from consider-
ation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 4, 443–456.
Russo, J. E., & Kolzow, K. J. (1992). Where is the fault in fault trees? Unpublished manuscript, Cornell
DEMO, Ithaca, N.Y.
Shafer, G. (1976). A mathematical theory of evidence. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Shafer, G., & Tversky, A. (1985). Languages and designs for probability judgment. Cognitive Science, DEMO,
309–339.
Starmer, C., & Sugden, R. (1993). Testing for juxtaposition and event-splitting e¤ects. Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 6, DEMO
Statistical abstract of the United States. (1990). Washington, DC: DEMO Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the
Census.
Suppes, P. (1974)DEMO The measurement of belief. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, B, 36, 160–191.
Teigen, K. H. (1974a). Overestimation of subjective probabilities. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 15,
56–62.
Teigen, K. H. (1974b). Subjective sampling distributions and the additivity of estimates. Scandinavian
Journal of DEMO, 15, 50–55.
Teigen, K. H. (1983). Studies in subjective probability III: The unimportance of alternatives. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, 24, 97–105.
Tversky, A., & Fox, C. (1994). Weighing risk DEMO uncertainty. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford Univer-
sity, Stanford, CA.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional vs. intuitive reasoning: The DEMO fallacy in
probability judgment. Psychological Review, 91, 293–315.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice and the framing of DEMO, Part 2. Journal of
Business, 59, 251–278.
Tversky, A., & Sattath, S. (1979). Preference trees. Psychological Review, 86, 542–573.
van der Pligt, J., Eiser, J. R., & Spears, R. (1987). Comparative judgments and preferences: The inﬂuence
of the number DEMO response alternatives. British Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 269–280.
Van Wallendael, L. R., & Hastie, R. (1990). Tracing the footsteps DEMO Sherlock Holmes: Cognitive repre-
sentations of hypothesis testing. Memory & Cognition, 18, 240–250.
Walley, P. (1991). Statistical reasoning with imprecise probabilities. London: Chapman & Hall.
Wallsten, T. S., Budescu, D. V., & Zwick, R. (1992). Comparing the calibration and coherence of DEMO
ical and verbal probability judgments. Management Science, 39, 176–190.
Zadeh, DEMO A. (1978). Fuzzy sets as a basis for a theory DEMO possibility. Fuzzy Sets & Systems, 1, 3–28.
Zarnowitz, V. (1985). Rational expectations and macroeconomic forecasts. Journal of Business and Eco-
nomic DEMO, 3, 293–311.
Appendix
theorem 1: Suppose PðA; BÞ is deﬁned for all disjoint A; B A H, and it vanishes if
DEMO only if (i¤ ) A0 ¼ q. Equations 3–6 (see text) hold i¤ there exists a nonnegative
ratio scale s on H that satisﬁes equations 1 and 2.
374 Tversky and Koehler
Proof: Necessity is immediate. To establish su‰ciency, DEMO deﬁne s as follows. Let
A H : A0 A
1. For any other elementary hypothesis C
PðC; DÞ=PðD; CÞ. Given any hypothesis DEMO A H such that A0 0T; q, select
A E such that A0 V C0 ¼ q and deﬁne sðAÞ through
Tg be DEMO set of elementary hypotheses. Select some D A E and set
A E, such that C0 0D0 , deﬁne
PðA; CÞ
PðC; AÞ
;
E ¼fA
sðDÞ¼
sðCÞ¼
some C
sðAÞ
sðCÞ
¼
that is,
PðA; CÞPðC; DÞ
PðC; AÞPðD; CÞ
¼
PðA; BÞPðB; DÞ :
PðB; AÞPðD; BÞ
A
By proportionality (equation 4), the left-hand ratio equals
PðA; C4BÞPðC; D4BÞ
PðC; A4BÞPðD; DEMO
and the right-hand ratio equals
PðA; B4CÞPðB; D4C
PðB; A4CÞPðD; B4C
Þ
Þ
:
Canceling common terms, it is easy to DEMO that the two ratios are equal i¤
PðC; D4BÞ PðC; A4BÞ ;
PðB; D4CÞ ¼ PðB; A4CÞ
which holds because both ratios equal PðC; BÞ=PðB; CÞ, again by proportionality.
To complete the deﬁnition of s, let sðAÞ¼ 0 whenever A0 ¼ q. For A0 ¼ T, we
distinguish two cases. If A is explicit, that is, A ¼ B4C for some exclusive B; C A H,
set sðAÞ¼ sðBÞþ sðCÞ.If A is implicit, let sðAÞ be the minimum value of s over all
explicit descriptions of T.
To establish the desired DEMO, we ﬁrst show that for any exclusive
A; B A H, such that A0; B0 0 T, q, sðAÞ=sðBÞ¼ PðA; BÞ=PðB; AÞ. Recall that T
includes at least two elements. Two cases must be considered.
sðAÞ¼ PðA; CÞPðC; DÞ :
PðC; AÞPðD; CÞ
To demonstrate that sðAÞ is uniquely deﬁned, suppose B
want to show that
E and A0
V
B
0
¼
q.We
Support Theory 375
First, suppose A0 U B0 0 T; hence, there exists an elementary hypothesis C such
that A0 V C0 ¼ DEMO V C0 ¼ q. In this case,
sðAÞ
sðBÞ ¼
by repeated application of proportionality.
Second, suppose A0 U B0 ¼T. In this case, there is no C0 A T that is not included in
either A0 or B0 , so the preceding argument cannot be applied. DEMO show that
sðAÞ=sðBÞ¼ PðA; BÞ=PðB; AÞ, suppose C; D A E and A0 V C0 ¼ B0 V D0 ¼ q.
PðA; CÞ=PðC; AÞ
PðB; CÞ=PðC; BÞ
¼
PðA; C4BÞ=PðC; A4BÞ
PðB; C4AÞ=PðC; B4AÞ
¼
PðA; BÞ
PðB; AÞ
Hence,
sðAÞ
DEMO
¼
PðA; CÞPðC; DÞPðD; BÞ
PðC; AÞPðD; CÞPðB; DÞ
¼
¼
¼
RðA; CÞRðC; DÞRðD; BÞ
RðA; BÞðby the DEMO rule ½Equation 5Þ
PðA; BÞ=PðB; AÞðas requiredÞ:
For any pair of exclusive hypotheses, therefore, we obtain PðA; BÞ=PðB; AÞ¼
sðAÞ=sðBÞ, and PðA; BÞþ PðB; AÞ¼ 1, by binary complementarity. Consequently,
PðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞ=½sðAÞþ sðBÞ and s is unique up to a choice of unit, which is deter-
mined by the value of sðDÞ.
To establish the properties of s, recall that unpacking (equation 6) yields
PðD; CÞ aPðA4B; CÞ¼ PðA; B4CÞþ PðB; A4CÞ whenever D0 DEMO A0 U B0, A
and B are exclusive, and D is implicit. The inequality on the left-hand side implies
that
¼
sðAÞsðCÞsðDÞ
sðCÞsðDÞsðBÞ
DEMO a sðA4BÞ ;
sðDÞþ sðCÞ sðA4BÞþ sðCÞ
hence, sðDÞ asðA4BÞ. The equality on the right-hand side implies that
sðA4BÞ ¼ sðAÞ þ sðBÞ :
sðA4BÞþ sðCÞ sðAÞþ sðB4CÞ sðBÞþ sðA4CÞ
To demonstrate that the additivity DEMO P implies the additivity of s, suppose A, B,
and C are nonnull and mutually exclusive. (If A0 U B0 ¼ T, the result is immediate.)
376 Tversky and Koehler
Hence, by proportionality,
sðAÞ PðA; BÞ DEMO; B4CÞ sðAÞ=½sðAÞþ sðB4CÞ :
sðBÞ ¼ PðB; AÞ ¼ PðB; A4CÞ ¼ sðBÞ=½sðBÞþ sðA4CÞ
Consequently, sðAÞþ sðB4CÞ¼ sðBÞþ sðA4CÞ¼ sðCÞþ sðA4BÞ. Substituting
these relations in the equation implied by the additivity of P yields DEMO
sðAÞþ sðBÞ, which completes the proof of theorem 1.
theorem 2: Assume the ordinal model (equation 11) and the solvability condition.
Binary DEMO (equation 3) and the product rule (equation 5) hold i¤ there
exists a constant k b 0 such that
sðAÞk :
PðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞk þsðBÞk
Proof: It is easy to verify that equations DEMO and 5 are implied by the power model
(equation 12). DEMO derive this representation, assume that the ordinal model and the
solvability DEMO are satisﬁed. Then there exists a nonnegative scale s, deﬁned on
DEMO, and a strictly increasing function F from the unit interval into DEMO such that for
all A; B A H,
sðAÞ
PðA; BÞ¼ F sðAÞþ sðBÞ
:
PðB; AÞ; hence, FðzÞ¼ 1 DEMO zÞ,
0 By binary complementarity, PðA; BÞ¼ 1
az a 1. Deﬁne the function G by
RðA; BÞ¼ PðA; BÞ ¼ DEMO sðBÞg ¼ G½sðAÞ=sðBÞ; B0 0q:
PðB; AÞ FfsðBÞ=½sðBÞþ sðAÞg
Applying the product rule, with sðCÞ¼ sðDÞ, yields G½sðAÞ=sðBÞ ¼
G½sðAÞ=sðCÞG½sðCÞ=sðBÞ; hence, GðxyÞ¼ GðxÞGðyÞ, x, y b 0. This is a form of the
Cauchy equation, whose solution isk k GðxÞ¼ xk (see Aczel, 1966). Consequently,
RðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞ =sðBÞ and, by binary DEMO,
sðAÞk ; k b0 ðas requiredÞ:
PðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞk DEMO
15 On the Belief That Arthritis Pain Is Related to the Weather
DEMO A. Redelmeier and Amos Tversky
For thousands of years people have believed that arthritis pain is inﬂuenced by the
weather. Hippocrates around 400 B.C. DEMO the e¤ects of winds and rains on
chronic diseases in his book Air, Water, and Places (1). In the nineteenth century,
several authors suggested that variations in barometric pressure, in particular, were
DEMO responsible for variations in the intensity of arthritis pain (2–4). DEMO the
current day, such beliefs are common among patients, physicians, DEMO interested
observers throughout the world (5–14). Furthermore, these beliefs have led to
recommendations that patients move to milder climates or spend time DEMO a climate-
controlled chamber to lessen joint pain (15–17).
The DEMO literature, however, has not established a clear association between
arthritis pain and the weather. No study using objective measures of inﬂammation
has found DEMO results (18, 19), and studies using subjective measures of pain have
been conﬂicting. Some ﬁnd that an increase in barometric pressure tends DEMO increase
pain (20), others ﬁnd that it tends to decrease DEMO (21), and others ﬁnd no associa-
tion (22, 23)DEMO Some investigators argue that only a simultaneous change in pressure
and humidity inﬂuences arthritis pain (24), but others ﬁnd no such pattern (DEMO). Sev-
eral studies report that weather e¤ects are immediate (20), whereas others suggest a
lag of several days (26). Due DEMO the lack of clear evidence, medical textbooks—which
once devoted chapters to DEMO relation of weather and rheumatic disease—now devote
less than a page to the topic (27, 28).
The contrast between the strong belief DEMO arthritis pain is related to the weather
and the weak evidence found in the research literature is puzzling. How do people
acquire and maintain DEMO belief ? Research on judgment under uncertainty indicates
that both laypeople and experts sometimes detect patterns where none exist. In par-
ticular, people often perceive positive serial correlations in random sequences of coin
tosses (29), stockmarket prices (30), or basketball shots (31). We hypothesize DEMO a
similar bias occurs in the evaluation of correlations between pairs of time series, and
that it contributes to the belief that arthritis pain is related to the weather. We
explored this hypothesis by testing (i ) whether arthritis patients’ perceptions are
consistent with their data and (ii ) whether people perceive associations between
uncorrelated time series.
We obtained data DEMO rheumatoid arthritis patients (n ¼ 18) on pain (assessed by
DEMO patient), joint tenderness (evaluated by the physician), and functional DEMO
(based on a standard index) measured twice a month for 15 months (32). We also
obtained local weather reports on barometric pressure, temperature, and humidity
378 Redelmeier and Tversky
Figure 15.1
Random walk sequences. The upper sequence DEMO each pair represents daily arthritis pain for 30 consecutive
observations; the DEMO sequence represents daily barometric pressure during the same period. For both A
and B, the correlation between changes in pain and changes in pressure is 0.00.
for the corresponding time period. Finally, we interviewed patients about their beliefs
concerning their arthritis pain. All patients but one believed that DEMO pain was
related to the weather, and all but two believed DEMO e¤ects were strong, occurred
within a day, and were related to barometric pressure, temperature, or humidity.
We computed the correlations between pain DEMO the speciﬁc weather component
and lag mentioned by each patient. The mean of these correlations was 0.016 and
none was signiﬁcant at P < DEMO: 05. We also computed the correlation between pain
and barometric pressure DEMO each patient, using nine di¤erent time lags ranging from
2 days DEMO to 2 days backward in 12-hr increments. The mean of these correla-
tions was 0.003, and only 6% were signiﬁcant at P < 0:05. Similar results were
obtained in analyses using the two other measures DEMO arthritis and the two other
measures of the weather. Furthermore, we DEMO no consistent pattern among the
few statistically signiﬁcant correlations.
We next presented college students (n ¼ 97) with pairs of sequences displayed
graphically. DEMO top sequence was said to represent a patient’s daily arthritis pain
over 1 month, and the bottom sequence was said to represent daily barometric pres-
sure during the same month (ﬁgure 15.1). Each sequence was generated as a normal
random walk and all participants evaluated six pairs DEMO sequences: a positively cor-
On the Belief That Arthritis Pain Is Related to the Weather 379
DEMO pair (r ¼þ0: 50), a negatively correlated pair (r DEMO:50), and four uncorre-
lated pairs. Participants were asked to classify each pair of sequences as (i ) positively
related, (ii ) negatively related, or (iii ) unrelated. Positively related sequences were
deﬁned DEMO follows: ‘‘An increase in barometric pressure is more likely to be DEMO
panied by an increase in arthritis pain rather than a decrease on that day (and a
decrease in barometric pressure is more likely to be accompanied by a decrease
rather than an increase in arthritis pain DEMO that day).’’ Negatively related sequences
and unrelated sequences were deﬁned similarly.
We found that the positively correlated pair and the negatively correlated pair
DEMO correctly classiﬁed by 89% and 93% of respondents, respectively. However,
DEMO uncorrelated pairs were consistently classiﬁed as related. For example, the two
DEMO sequences in ﬁgure 15.1A were judged as positively related by 87%, DEMO
negatively related by 2%, and as unrelated by 11% of participants. DEMO two uncorre-
lated sequences in ﬁgure 15.1B were judged as positively related by 3%, as negatively
related by 79%, and as unrelated by DEMO of participants. The remaining two pairs of
uncorrelated sequences were correctly classiﬁed by 59% and 64% of participants.
Evidently, the intuitive notion of association di¤ers from the statistical concept of
association.
Our results indicate that people DEMO to perceive an association between uncorre-
lated time series. We attribute this phenomenon to selective matching, the tendency
to focus on salient coincidences, DEMO capitalizing on chance and neglecting con-
trary evidence (33–35). For DEMO, selective matching leads people to look for
changes in the weather DEMO they experience increased pain, and pay little attention
to the weather DEMO their pain is stable. For graphs, selective matching leads people
to DEMO on segments where the two sequences seem to move together (in DEMO same or
opposite direction), with insu‰cient regard to other aspects of the data. In both
cases, a single day of severe pain and extreme weather might sustain a lifetime of
belief in a relation between DEMO The cognitive processes involved in evaluating
graphs are di¤erent from those involved in evaluating past experiences, yet all intu-
itive judgments of covariation are vulnerable to selective matching.
Several psychological factors could contribute to the belief DEMO arthritis pain is
related to the weather, in addition to general DEMO and traditional popularity.
The desire to have an explanation for a worsening of pain may encourage patients
to search for conﬁrming evidence and neglect DEMO instances (36). This search
is facilitated by the availability of DEMO components and time lags for linking
changes in arthritis to changes in the weather (37). Selective memory may further
enhance the belief that arthritis pain is related to the weather if coincidences are more
memorable DEMO mismatches (38). Selective matching, therefore, can be enhanced by
380 Redelmeier and Tversky
both motivational and memory e¤ects; our study of graphs, however, suggests that it
can operate even in the absence DEMO these e¤ects.
Selective matching can help explain both the prevalent belief that arthritis pain is
related to the weather and the failure of medical DEMO to ﬁnd consistent correla-
tions. Our study, of course, does not imply that arthritis pain and the weather are
unrelated for all patients. DEMO, it is possible that daily measurements over
many years of our DEMO would show a stronger correlation than observed in our
data, at DEMO for some patients. However, it is doubtful that sporadic correlations
could DEMO the widespread and strongly held beliefs about arthritis and the weather.
The observation that the beliefs are just as prevalent in San Diego (where the
weather is mild and stable) as in Boston (where the DEMO is severe and volatile)
casts further doubt on a purely physiological explanation (39). People’s beliefs about
arthritis pain and the weather may tell more about the workings of the mind than of
the body.
DEMO
1. Adams, F. (1991) The Genuine Works of Hippocrates (Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore).
2. Webster, J. (1859) Lancet i, 588–589.
3. Mitchel, S. W. (1877) Am. J. Med. Sci. 73, 305–329.
4. Everett, J. T. (1879) Med. J. Exam. 38, 253–260.
5. Abdulpatakhov, D. D. (1969) Vopr. Revm. 9, 72–76.
DEMO Nava, P., & Seda, H. (1964) Bras. Med. 78, 71–74.
7. Pilger, A. (1970) Med. Klin. Munich 65, 1363–1365.
DEMO Hollander, J. L. (1963) Arch. Environ. Health 6, 527–536.
9. Guedj, D., & Weinberger, A. (1990) Ann. Rheum. Dis. 49, 158–159.
10. Lawrence, J. S. (1977) Rheumatism in Population (Heinemann Med. Books, London), pp. 505–517.
11. Rose, M. B. (1974) Physiotherapy 60, 306–309.
12. Rasker, J. J., Peters, H. J. G., & Boon, K. L. (1986) Scand. J. Rheumatol. 15, 27–36.
13. Laborde, J. M., Dando, W. A., & Powers, M. J. (1986) Soc. Sci. Med. 23, 549–554.
14. Shutty, DEMO S., Cundi¤, G., & DeGood, D. E. (1992) Pain 49, 199–204.
15. Hill, D. F., & Holbrook, W. P. (1942) Clinics 1, 577–581.
16. Balfour, W. (1916) Observations with Cases Illustrative of a New, Simple, and Expeditious Mode of
Curing DEMO and Sprains (Muirhead, Edinburgh).
17. Edstrom, G., Lundin, DEMO, & Wramner, T. (1948) Ann. Rheum. Dis. 7, 76–92.
DEMO Latman, N. S. (1981) J. Rheumatol. 8, 725–729.
19. Latman, N. S. (1980) N. Engl. J. Med. 303, 1178.
20. DEMO, E. B., Vanzant, F. R., & Rowntree, L. G. (1929) J. Am. Med. Assoc. 92, 1995–2000.
21. Guedj, D. (DEMO) Ann. Rheum. Dis. 49, 158–159.
On the Belief That Arthritis Pain Is Related to the Weather 381
DEMO Dordick, I. (1958) Weather 13, 359–364.
23. Patberg, W. DEMO, Nienhuis, R. L. F., & Veringa, F. (1985) J. Rheumatol. 12, 711–715.
24. Hollander, J. L., & Yeostros, S. DEMO (1963) Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 44, 489–494.
25. Sibley, J. T. (1985) J. Rheumatol. 12, 707–710.
26. Patberg, W. R. (1989) Arthritis Rheum. 32, 1672–1629.
27. Hollander, J. L., ed. (1960) Arthritis and Allied Conditions (Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia), 6th ed.,
pp. 577–581.
28. McCarty, D. J., ed. (1989) DEMO and Allied Conditions (Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia), 11th ed.,
p. 25.
29. Bar-Hillel, M., & Wagenaar, W. (1991) Adv. Appl. Math. 12, 428–454.
30. Malkiel, B. G. (1990) A DEMO Walk Down Wall Street (Norton, New York).
31. Gilovich, DEMO, Vallone, R., & Tversky, A. (1985) Cognit. Psychol. 17, 295–314.
32. Ward, M. M. (1993) J. Rheumatol. 21, 17–21.
33. Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A., eds. (1982) Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases (Cambridge Univ. Press, DEMO York).
34. Nisbett, R., & Ross, L. (1980) DEMO Inference: Strategies and Shortcomings of Social Judgment
(Prentice–Hall, London), DEMO 90–112.
35. Gilovich, T. (1991) How We Know What Isn’t DEMO: The Fallibility of Human Reasoning in Everyday Life
(The Free Press, New York).
36. Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. DEMO (1969) J. Abnorm. Psychol. 74, 271–280.
37. Abelson, R. P. (1995) Statistics as Principled Argument (Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J.), pp. 7–8.
38. Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973) Cognit. Psychol. 5, 207–232.
39. Jamison, R. N., Anderson, K. O., & Slater, M. A. (1995) Pain 61, 309–315.

16 Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring: Advances in Support Theory
Yuval Rottenstreich and Amos Tversky
The study of intuitive probability judgment has shown that DEMO often do not fol-
low the extensional logic of probability theory (DEMO, e.g., Kahneman, Slovic, & Tver-
sky, 1982). In DEMO, alternative descriptions of the same event can give rise to
di¤erent DEMO judgments, and a speciﬁc event (e.g., that 1,000 people DEMO die
in an earthquake) may appear more likely than a more DEMO event (e.g., that
1,000 people will die in a natural disaster). To accommodate such ﬁndings, Tversky
and Koehler (1994) have developed a nonextensional theory of belief in which sub-
jective probability is DEMO attached to events, as in other models, but to descriptions of
events, called hypotheses. According to this account, called support theory, each
hypothesis A has a support value, sðAÞ, corresponding to the strength DEMO the evidence
for this hypothesis. The judged probability,holds, assuming that DEMO and only one of them obtains, is given byPðA; BÞ, DEMO hypothesis A rather than B
sðAÞ :
PðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞþ sðBÞ
Thus, judged probability is interpreted in terms of the support of the focal
hypothesis A relative to the alternative hypothesis B. The key assumption DEMO support
theory is that unpacking a description of an event (e.g., a plane crash, C ) into dis-
joint components (e.g., an accidental plane crash, Ca , caused by human error or
mechanical failure, or a nonaccidental plane crash, Cn , caused by terrorism or DEMO
tage) generally increases its support. Thus, the support of the explicit disjunction
Ca 4Cn is equal to or greater than the support of DEMO implicit disjunction C that does
not mention any cause. That is, DEMO asðCa 4CnÞ. The rationale for this assumption
is twofold. First, unpacking DEMO implicit hypothesis may remind people of possibilities
they might have overlooked. Second, the explicit mention of a possibility tends to
increase its salience and hence its perceived support.
Support theory provides a uniﬁed framework for the DEMO and the interpreta-
tion of a wide range of ﬁndings. It predicts that the judged probability of an event
increases by unpacking the focal DEMO and decreases by unpacking the alterna-
tive hypothesis. For instance, the DEMO probability that a given person will die a
natural rather than an unnatural death increases by listing various causes of natural
death (e.g., DEMO attack, stroke, cancer) and decreases by listing various causes of
DEMO death (e.g., car accident, homicide, ﬁre). Furthermore, support DEMO
implies that the judged probability of a hypothesis plus the judged probability of its
complement, evaluated by di¤erent groups of participants, adds up DEMO one. For ﬁner
384 Rottenstreich and Tversky
partitions, however, the sum of the judged DEMO of a set of mutually exclusive
and exhaustive hypotheses generally is greater than one. These predictions have been
conﬁrmed in numerous studies; earlier experiments are reviewed by Tversky and
Koehler (1994), some later experiments are discussed by Fox and Tversky (in press).
This article presents a signiﬁcant generalization of support theory that allows sub-
additivity for explicit disjunctions. DEMO illustrate this extension, consider the possibil-
ities that the winner of DEMO next presidential election in the United States will be a
Democrat (DEMO), a Republican (Rep), or an Independent (Ind ). DEMO original version
of support theory assumes that support is additive for explicit disjunctions, with the
result that sðRep4 IndÞ¼ sðRepÞþ sðIndÞ, and consequently, judged probability (P)
is also additive for explicit disjunctions as in the standard theory of probability. As is
shown next, however, several DEMO suggest that support is subadditive for
explicit disjunctions such that sðRep4IndÞ asðRepÞþ sðIndÞ, and hence
PðRep4 Ind; DemÞ aPðRep; Dem4 Þþ PðInd; DEMO DemÞ:
Ind
That is, the judged probability that the winner DEMO the upcoming election will be a
Republican or an Independent rather than a Democrat is less than or equal to the
judged probability that DEMO winner will be a Republican rather than a Democrat or
an Independent plus the judged probability that the winner will be an Independent
rather DEMO a Republican or a Democrat. More generally, we assume that if DEMO and B
are mutually exclusive hypotheses, and ðA1; A2Þ is recognized as a partition of A,
then sðAÞ asðA1 4A2Þ asðA1 Þþ DEMO This assumption regarding the support
function s imposes the following constraints on the observed measure P. In particu-
lar, the left inequality implies a testable condition, called implicit subadditivity,
PðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞ
sðAÞþ sðBÞ
DEMO sðA1 4A2Þ
sðA1 4A2Þþ sðBÞ because sðAÞ asðA1 4A2Þ
¼ PðA1 4A2; BÞ:
And the right inequality implies a second testable condition, DEMO explicit
subadditivity,
PðA1 4A2; BÞ¼ sðA1 4A2Þ
sðA1 4A2Þþ sðBÞ
DEMO sðA2Þ
sðA1 Þþ sðA2Þþ sðBÞ because sðA1 4A2Þ asðA1Þþ sðA2Þ
a
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 385
a
¼
sð
PðA1; B4A2 Þþ PðA2;
sðA1Þ
sðA1 Þþ sðB4A2Þ
þ
sðA2Þ
A2Þþ sðB4A1Þ
B4A1Þ:
DEMO the same logic
Note that probability theory requires additivity throughout, whereas DEMO theory of
belief functions (Shafer, 1976) assumes superadditivity. Thus, support theory and
Shafer’s theory depart from the probability calculus in opposite directions. DEMO con-
trast between the two theories is discussed in the last section.
Before addressing the cognitive processes that give rise to explicit subadditivity, we
discuss three issues regarding the interpretation of support theory. First, we wish to
emphasize that the predictions of the theory, notably binary complementarity, DEMO
is, PðA; BÞþ PðB; AÞ¼ 1, concern hypotheses not events. This distinction is particu-
larly important in tasks where the alternative to DEMO focal hypothesis is not explicitly
stated. Consider, for example, the outcome of a race between an incumbent and a
challenger, and let In denote the hypothesis that the incumbent will win the race and
Ch DEMO the hypothesis that the challenger will win the race. Support theory
implies that the judged probability of In plus the judged probability of not-In (i.e.,
the incumbent will not win the race) equals one, DEMO the theory is not committed to
the prediction that the judged probability of In plus the judged probability of Ch will
equal one. In DEMO simple example it is immediately obvious that Ch is the same as
not-In, hence additivity is likely to hold, assuming it is clear DEMO there are no other
candidates and that ties are excluded. However, DEMO the hypotheses under discus-
sion are more complicated and the setting is less familiar, additivity need not hold
(see Gonzales & Bonini, 1995; Macchi, Osherson, & Legrenzi, 1995).
Second, the unpacking inequality sðAÞ asðA1 4A2Þ is assumed to hold only when
the judge knows, or believes, that A1 4A2 has the same extension as A. Thus, the
theory predicts that the judged probability that a patient has meningitis ðMÞ, for
example, is less than or equal to the judged DEMO that the patient has either
viral meningitis or nonviral meningitis because their disjunction is clearly coexten-
sional with M . However, the theory does not require that the judged probability
of meningitis will be less than DEMO equal to the judged probability of either viral men-
ingitis ðMvÞ or bacterial meningitis ðMbÞ, unless the judge happens to know that
Mv 4Mb is coextensional with M . Note that a judge presented with the DEMO dis-
junction Mv 4Mb may recognize that it has the same extension as the implicit dis-
junction M even though, presented with M alone, the judge may not be able to
unpack it into Mv and Mb . Thus, the theory permits recognition without recall.
Third, the DEMO theory expresses an observed probability judgment, PðA; BÞ,
in terms of the underlying support, sðAÞ and sðBÞ, of the individual hypotheses.
386 Rottenstreich and Tversky
Although it is possible, in some cases, DEMO predict judged probability from independent
assessments of support (see Tversky & DEMO, 1994), the present theory treats
support as a psychological construct DEMO from probability judgment. A formal
statement of the theory is presented in the Appendix. It provides necessary and suf-
ﬁcient conditions for the representation DEMO probability judgments in terms of sub-
additive support; it also provides DEMO simple method for constructing an essentially
unique support function from observed judgments of probability.
Let us turn now from the interpretation of support theory DEMO the main topic of this
article, namely the psychological processes that DEMO produce explicit subadditivity.
More speciﬁcally, we investigate two such mechanisms, repacking and anchoring,
that are discussed in turn.
As noted in the DEMO version of the theory, a judge presented with an explicit
disjunction DEMO, nevertheless, think about it as an implicit disjunction, and vice
DEMO Consider, for example, the probability that a particular student majors in
industrial, mechanical, or electrical engineering. A judge presented with such an
DEMO disjunction may repack the various disciplines and evaluate the implicit dis-
junction engineering. Because unpacking increases support, repacking reduces sup-
port giving rise to explicit subadditivity. Furthermore, we expect more explicit
subadditivity for disjunctions of similar components than for disjunctions of dissimi-
lar components because similar components are DEMO easily repacked.
A second source of explicit subadditivity is the use of anchoring and adjustment.
Instead of assessing independently the support of each component DEMO an explicit dis-
junction and then adding the separate assessments, the DEMO may assess one of the
components (perhaps the larger or the DEMO familiar) and then adjust this value
upward to accommodate the other DEMO Because such adjustments are gen-
erally insu‰cient (Poulton, 1994; Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1968; Tversky & Kahneman,
1974), the use of this heuristic is likely to produce explicit subadditivity. An individ-
ual who DEMO asked to assess the combined population of the United States and Canada,
for example, may anchor on the U.S. population and then adjust it upward, without
making an explicit assessment of the population of Canada. If frequency, probabil-
ity, or support are evaluated in this manner, we expect subadditivity for explicit dis-
junctions, even if their components are not repacked.
The e¤ects of repacking and anchoring are explored in the DEMO studies.
Studies 1 and 2 test both implicit and explicit subadditivity in intuitive judgments
of probability. Studies 3 and 4 investigate explicit subadditivity in DEMO of
frequency.
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 387
Study 1: Implicit and Explicit Subadditivity
This study employs two problems that have the same formal structure. Let DEMO, A2,
and B denote three mutually exclusive and exhaustive hypotheses, and let A be an
implicit disjunction of A1 and A2 . DEMO each problem, di¤erent groups of participants
evaluated the implicit disjunction PðA; BÞ, the explicit disjunction PðA1 4A2; BÞ,the
component, PðA1; DEMO 4BÞ, and the component PðA2; A1 4BÞ.
A total of 178 Stanford students participated in the study to fulﬁll course re-
quirements. They DEMO divided into four groups of roughly equal size. Every group
evaluated both problems, each in a di¤erent condition. The two problems were
embedded in a packet that included several other questionnaires, unrelated to the
present study. Participants received the packet in class, completed it in their free
time, and returned it anonymously 1 week later.
The ﬁrst problem concerns the outcome of the next presidential election in the
United States. Participants in DEMO implicit group evaluated ‘‘the probability that
the winner of the next presidential election will not be a Democrat.’’ Participants in
the explicit group evaluated DEMO probability that ‘‘the winner of the next presidential
election will be a Republican or an Independent rather than a Democrat.’’ Partic-
ipants in the DEMO remaining groups evaluated either ‘‘the probability that the winner
of the next presidential election will be a Republican rather than a Democrat or an
DEMO or ‘‘the probability that the winner of the next presidential election will
be an Independent rather than a Democrat or a Republican.’’
The second DEMO concerns the outcome of a criminal trial. All participants read
the following scenario:
Susan L. has accused her boss, Frank G., of DEMO sexual advances and the promise of
promotion in exchange for sexual favors. Frank G. denies any wrongdoing. The case has been
brought before a DEMO consisting of seven men and ﬁve women. There were no eyewitnesses,
but Susan’s boyfriend has testiﬁed that she told him about the incidents DEMO question. The jury is
now deliberating.
Participants in the implicit group evaluated ‘‘the probability that this trial will not
result in a guilty verdict.’’ DEMO in the explicit group evaluated ‘‘the probabil-
ity of either a not guilty verdict or a hung jury rather than a guilty verdict.’’ Partic-
DEMO in the two remaining groups evaluated either ‘‘the probability of a not guilty
verdict rather than a guilty verdict or a hung jury’’ or DEMO probability of a hung jury
rather than a not guilty verdict or a guilty verdict.’’
Table 16.1 presents median probability judgments for each of DEMO two problems.
Although support theory does not require strict inequalities for implicit and explicit
388 Rottenstreich and Tversky
Table 16.1
Median Probability Judgments Used to Test DEMO and Explicit Subadditivity in Study 1
Probability judgments
¼
¼
¼
¼
Note: In Problem 1, A1
Problem 2, A1
a
b
g
d
PðA; BÞ
PðA1 4A2; BÞ
PðA1; A2 4BÞ
PðA2; DEMO 4BÞ
¼
¼
not guilty,
Problem 1:
presidential election
Problem 2:
criminal trial
60 50
60 60
59 58
540
Republican, A2 ¼ Independent, A ¼ not Democrat, and B ¼ Democrat. DEMO
A2 ¼ hung jury, A ¼ result other than guilty, and B ¼ guilty.
subadditivity, the statistical tests reported in this article test the strict version of these
inequalities against the null hypothesis of equality. DEMO particular, we used the Mann–
Whitney statistic to test the hypothesis DEMO the judged probability of the implicit
disjunction, PðA; BÞ, is DEMO smaller than the judged probability of the explicit
disjunction, PðA1 4A2; BÞ. This analysis provides some evidence for implicit sub-
additivity in Problem DEMO (p <:05, one-sided) but not in problem 1. We DEMO the same
statistic to test the hypothesis that the judged probability of the explicit disjunction,
PðA1 4A2; BÞ , is strictly smaller than the sum of the judged probabilities of the sin-
gle components, PðA1; A2 4BÞþ PðA2; A1 4BÞ. Because the latter were assessed by
DEMO groups of participants, we generated 100 ‘‘synthetic’’ distributions of such
sums DEMO pairing at random participants from the two groups. The median of the
Mann–Whitney statistics across these distributions was signiﬁcant in both Problem
1 (median p <:05) and Problem 2 (median p <:0001). DEMO, strict explicit sub-
additivity was conﬁrmed for both problems, and strict implicit subadditivity was
observed in the trial problem but not in the DEMO problem. The latter observation
is not too surprising because here the implicit disjunction, non-Democrat, is naturally
unpacked into the explicit disjunction, Republican or Independent.
Study 2: Causal Versus Temporal Unpacking
If implicit and explicit subadditivity are generated by di¤erent mechanisms, as sug-
gested above, their relative DEMO should vary depending on the nature of the
partition. Some partitions are expected to induce primarily implicit subadditivity,
whereas others are expected to DEMO primarily explicit subadditivity. The follow-
ing study explores these e¤ects and estimates their relative contributions.
Participants in the study were 165 Stanford students attending DEMO introductory
economics class. They answered, in a classroom setting, a few questions concerning
the probability of various causes of death. Participants were informed DEMO
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 389
Each year in the United States, approximately 2 million people (or 1% of the population) die
from DEMO variety of causes. In this questionnaire you will be asked to estimate the probability
that a randomly selected death is due to one cause DEMO than another. Obviously, you are not
expected to know the exact DEMO, but everyone has some idea about the prevalence of vari-
ous DEMO of death. To give you a feel for the numbers involved, DEMO that 1.5% of deaths each
year are attributable to suicide.
This study consists of two cases. In case 1 the focal hypothesis, homicide ðHÞ is
unpacked according to the causal agent: homicide by an acquaintance ðHaÞ and
homicide by a stranger ðHsÞ. In case 2 the same focal DEMO, H is unpacked
according to the time of occurrence: daytime homicide ðHdÞ and nighttime homicide
ðHnÞ . The alternative hypothesis in all judgments DEMO accidental death ðXÞ.
In this study, unlike the previous one, the focal and the alternative hypotheses are
not exhaustive; the cause of death may be other than homicide or accident. Thus,
participants here are DEMO to evaluate the conditional probability of the focal
against the alternative hypothesis, assuming that one and only one of them holds. It
is essential, of course, that participants understand and respect this assumption.
Because the DEMO hypothesis ðXÞ in this design is held constant, probability
theory requires DEMO of odds, not of conditional probability. In particular, it
implies RðHa 4Hs; X Þ¼ RðHa; X Þþ RðHs; XÞ, where RðA; BÞ denotes the proba-
bility ratio PðA; BÞ=PðB; AÞ, provided PðB; AÞ 0 0.
We conjectured that the causal partition is more likely to bring to mind additional
possibilities than the temporal partition. Homicide by DEMO acquaintance suggests
domestic violence or a partners’ quarrel, whereas homicide by DEMO stranger suggests
armed robbery or drive-by shooting. In contrast, daytime homicide DEMO nighttime
homicide are less likely to bring to mind disparate acts and hence are more readily
repacked as an implicit disjunction. Consequently, we expect more implicit sub-
additivity in case 1, due to enhanced availability, DEMO more explicit subadditivity in
case 2, due to repacking of the DEMO disjunction.
The study was designed as follows. In case 1, the DEMO were randomly
divided into three groups. One group ðN ¼ 55Þ evaluated the probability of the
implicit disjunction that a randomly selected death is DEMO homicide rather than an
accidental death, PðH; XÞ. A second group ðN ¼ 54Þ evaluated the probability of the
explicit disjunction that a DEMO selected death is a homicide committed by an
acquaintance or a homicide committed by a stranger rather than an accidental death,
PðHa 4Hs; XÞ. A third group ðN ¼ 56Þ evaluated the probability of the DEMO indi-
vidual components, PðHa; XÞ and PðHs; XÞ.
Case 2 DEMO presented to the same participants a few weeks later. The design and
the procedures were the same, except for the use of the temporal partition instead of
390 Rottenstreich and Tversky
Table 16.2
Median Probability Judgments (P ) and Estimated Supports (s) and Weights (w) for the Two Partitions DEMO
Study 2
Homicide unpacked
Hypothesis
Case 1 (causal agent):
acquaintance vs. stranger
Case 2 (by time):
day vs. night
Implicit DEMO; X Þ¼ :20 PðH;
Explicit PðHa 4Hs; X Þ¼ :25 PðHd
PðHa; X Þ¼ :15 PðHd
PðHs; X Þ¼ :DEMO PðHn
Implicit sðHÞ¼ :25 sðHÞ¼ :25
Explicit sðHa 4Hs Þ¼ :DEMO sðHd 4Hn Þ¼ :25
sðHa Þþ sðHs Þ¼ :18 þ:18 ¼ :36 sðHd Þþ sðHn Þ¼ :11 þ
Implicit (I) DEMO ¼ :25=:33 ¼ :76 wHI ¼ :25=:25 ¼ DEMO:00
Explicit (E) wHE ¼ :33=:36 ¼ :92 wHE ¼ :25=:40 ¼ :63
Global wH ¼ :25=:36 ¼ :69 wH ¼ :25=:40 ¼ :63
Note: H denotes DEMO, X denotes accidental death, and Ha, Hs, Hd , Hn denote, respectively, homicide
by an acquaintance, by a stranger, during DEMO, and during nighttime.
X Þ¼ :
4Hn;
; X
; X
Þ¼
Þ¼
20
XÞ¼ :20
:10
:21
:29
¼
:40
the causal partition. As above, the participants were randomly divided into three
groups. One group ðN ¼ 53Þ evaluated the implicit disjunction PðH; XÞ; a second
group ðN ¼ 53Þ evaluated the explicit disjunction PðHa 4Hn; XÞ; and a third group
ðN ¼ 56Þ evaluated the DEMO individual components, PðHd; XÞ and PðHn; XÞ. The
median estimates DEMO both cases are presented in the upper part of table 16.2.
The lower part of table 16.2 presents the supports and the weights derived DEMO the
median judgments, as will be shown later. Note that according DEMO support theory, the
odds PðA; BÞ=½1 PðA; BÞ equal sðAÞ=sðBÞ. DEMO sðX Þ¼ 1, the support of each
focal hypothesis in this DEMO equals the odds of this hypothesis against the alterna-
tive X . For example,
sðHÞ PðH; XÞ :20 :25:
sðHÞ¼ sðXÞ ¼ 1 PðH; XÞ ¼ :80 ¼
Other support values were DEMO similarly.
Support theory o¤ers simple measures of implicit and explicit subadditivity. Let
ðA1; ... ; AnÞ be a partition of the implicit hypothesis A. The ratio
wA ¼ sðAÞ
sðA1 Þ þ  þ sðAnÞ
provides DEMO global measure of the degree of subadditivity induced by the above
partition. Note that wA ¼ 1 if probability judgments are additive, and wA < 1ifthey
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 391
exhibit either implicit or explicit subadditivity. DEMO, lower w implies greater sub-
additivity. To assess the separate contributions DEMO implicit and explicit subadditivity,
deﬁne
wAI ¼ sðAÞ
sðA1 4  4AnÞ
wAE sðA1 4  4AnÞ
¼ sðA1 Þ þ  þ DEMO
so that wA ¼ wAI wAE . Hence, the global measure DEMO subadditivity, wA , is decomposed
into its implicit ðwAI Þ and DEMO ðwAEÞ components that can be estimated from the
data.
Applying the preceding analysis to the data of table 16.2 reveals more implicit
subadditivity in DEMO 1 ðwHI ¼ :76Þ than in case 2 ðwHI ¼ 1:DEMO, and more explicit
subadditivity in case 2 ðwHI ¼ :62Þ than in case 1 ðwHE ¼ :92Þ. Strict implicit sub-
additivity was tested by comparing the supports of the implicit and explicit dis-
junctions in DEMO case, that is, sðHÞ versus sðHa 4HsÞ and sðHÞ versus sðHd 4HnÞ,
using the Mann–Whitney statistic. Strict explicit subadditivity was tested by DEMO
paring the sum of the supports of the component hypotheses, within DEMO data of
a participant, to the support of the corresponding explicit DEMO, that is
sðHaÞþ sðHsÞ versus sðHa 4HsÞ and sðHd Þþ sðHnÞ DEMO sðHd 4HnÞ. The analysis
yielded signiﬁcant strict implicit subadditivity in case 1 ðp <:01Þ but not in case 2,
and signiﬁcant strict DEMO subadditivity in case 2 ðp <:005Þ, but not in case DEMO
These ﬁndings support our conjecture that the causal partition induces more implicit
subadditivity, whereas the temporal partition induces more explicit subadditivity.
Study 3: DEMO Versus Dissimilar Components
Although support theory has been conceived as a model of probability judgment, it
can be readily applied to assessments of percentage or relative frequency (Tversky &
Koehler, 1994). Moreover, judgments DEMO absolute frequency can serve as support for
certain hypotheses. For example, DEMO probability that it will snow in Chicago next
November may be based on an estimate of the frequency of snowy and nonsnowy
Novembers in DEMO last decade. It is instructive, therefore, to test whether assessed
frequency satisﬁes implicit and explicit subadditivity. One might expect that judg-
ments of DEMO frequency are less vulnerable to these biases because the additivity
of frequency is simpler and more intuitive than the additivity of probability.
392 Rottenstreich and Tversky
The study of frequency judgment also provides an DEMO for testing another
potential source of explicit subadditivity, namely a regressive DEMO towards the mid-
point of the scale (e.g., .5), reﬂecting either response bias or random error (see, e.g.,
Erev, Wallsten, & Budescu, 1994). This account implies explicit subadditivity when
the DEMO components are below the midpoint and explicit superadditivity when the
two components are above the midpoint. Because the probability scale is bounded by
one, the above prediction cannot be tested using judgments of probability or relative
DEMO, but it can be readily tested in judgments of absolute frequency.
DEMO participants, 152 Stanford students, were asked to estimate the number of
fellow undergraduates majoring in particular ﬁelds. They were recruited through ads
placed DEMO The Stanford Daily and were paid for their participation. Participants were
run in groups of 8–12 members. In addition to the judgments of frequency, students
participated in several unrelated two-person games. Participants were given the fol-
DEMO instructions:
Consider all Stanford students who have declared one major. We would like you to estimate
the number of students majoring in particular DEMO Obviously, you are not expected to know
the exact ﬁgures. We DEMO interested in your impressions regarding the popularity of di¤erent
majors.
For your information, 120 students major in History. Using this number as a standard of
comparison, please give your best estimates of the following. The three most accurate
respondents will receive a prize of $20.
Twenty-four majors, listed in table 16.3, were divided into three sets of 8. From each
set of 8 majors, we constructed four pairs of similar majors (DEMO, mathematics
and computer science), and four pairs of dissimilar majors (e.g., mathematics and
Italian). Participants were randomly divided into three groups. The participants in
each group evaluated each of the 8 individual majors DEMO one set (e.g., ‘‘The num-
ber of students majoring in mathematics’’), the four similar pairs of majors from
another set (e.g., DEMO total number of students majoring either in political science or
international relations’’), and the four dissimilar pairs from a third set (e.g., DEMO
total number of students majoring either in chemistry or English’’). Thus, each par-
ticipant encountered each major exactly once.
Explicit subadditivity implies that the estimated number of students in a given pair
of majors is DEMO than or equal to the sum of the estimates of the individual majors. If
this phenomenon is driven, at least in part, by DEMO tendency to repack the
individual components, then we should expect greater DEMO for similar than
for dissimilar pairs because it is easier and more natural to pack related majors (e.g.,
mathematics and computer science) DEMO unrelated majors (e.g., mathematics and
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 393
Table 16.3
Median Frequency Estimates and DEMO Actual Number of Students in Each Major (Study 3)
Major
DEMO
estimate
Actual
number
Biology 250 265
Chemistry 100 51
Chemical engineering 70 56
Civil engineering 95 64
Communication 65 66
Comparative literature 40 6
DEMO science 100 104
Electrical engineering 100 102
Earth systems 50 66
Economics 200 261
English 120 200
French 25 7
Geology 36 3
Industrial DEMO 70 64
International relations 100 96
Italian 20 1
Mathematics 50 9
Mechanical engineering 100 97
Petroleum engineering 30 1
Philosophy 50 18
Political DEMO 150 135
Public policy 80 72
Sociology 80 35
Symbolic systems 30 44
Italian). Finally, if participants estimate the total number of students who major in
one of two ﬁelds by anchoring on the larger DEMO and making an insu‰cient
upward adjustment, then we expect the judgments DEMO be more sensitive to the larger
than to the smaller component of each pair.
Table 16.3 presents median estimates for each of the 24 DEMO, along with the
o‰cial numbers. The correlation between the estimated and DEMO values is .93, and
the average absolute deviation of prediction is DEMO, indicating that our respondents
had a reasonably good idea of the DEMO popularity of the various majors at their
university.
Tables 16.4 and 16.5 present, separately for similar and dissimilar pairs, the
median frequency estimates DEMO the pairs, denoted FAB , the median sums of frequency
estimates DEMO the individual majors, computed within the data of each participant and
DEMO FA þFB , and the ratio of these values. The results provide strong evidence
394 Rottenstreich and Tversky
Table 16.4
Median Frequency Estimates for Each Similar DEMO (FAB ), Median Sum of Estimated Components
ðFA
þ
FBÞ, DEMO Their Ratio (Study 3)
Similar pair
Median
estimate (FAB)
Median sum
ðFA
þ
FBÞ

AB
F
þ
F
A
B
DEMO
Chemical engineering and petroleum engineering 50 110 .45
Geology and earth systems 50 110 .45
Mechanical engineering and civil engineering 100 200 .50
Biology DEMO chemistry 200 360 .56
Philosophy and symbolic systems 50 90 .56
Political science and international relations 150 260 .58
English and comparative literature 105 DEMO .66
Economics and public policy 190 275 .69
Math and computer science 130 173 .75
Communication and sociology 115 150 .77
French and Italian DEMO 50 .80
Electrical engineering and industrial engineering 180 160 1.13
Median .62
Table 16.5
Median Frequency Estimates for Each Dissimilar Pair (FAB ), DEMO Sum of Estimated Components
ðFA

AB
F
þ
F
Industrial engineering and political science 145 238 .61
Philosophy and earth systems 70 114 DEMO
Chemistry and English 150 230 .65
Chemical engineering and public policy 80 120 .67
Mechanical engineering and sociology 150 220 .68
Computer science and DEMO 100 135 .74
Electrical engineering and international relations 150 195 .77
Geology and symbolic systems 50 65 .77
Communication and civil engineering 120 155 DEMO
Economics and petroleum engineering 200 250 .80
Biology and comparative literature 220 270 .81
Mathematics and Italian 58 70 .83
Median
A
B
Median
DEMO (FAB)
Median sum
ðFA
þ
FBÞ
þ
FBÞ, and Their Ratio (Study 3)
Dissimilar pair
.76
F
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 395
for subadditivity: The estimate of the pair is less than the sum of the individual esti-
mates in DEMO of 24 cases, and the mean value of FAB=ðFA þFBÞ across DEMO pairs is only
.69. This e¤ect cannot be explained by a regression towards a central value (e.g., 120,
which was given as DEMO standard of comparison) because subadditivity is very much in
evidence for DEMO large and small pairs of majors. Recall that a symmetric error
model predicts subadditivity for pairs of small majors and superadditivity for pairs of
DEMO majors, contrary to the data in tables 16.4 and 16.5.
In DEMO with repacking, the similar pairs tend to be more subadditive than DEMO
dissimilar pairs: The values of FAB=ðFA þFBÞ are generally lower in DEMO 16.4 than
in table 16.5 ðp <:05 by a one-sided Mann–Whitney test). However, the presence
of strict explicit subadditivity in both cases suggests an anchoring and adjustment
process.
To test this account we compared, separately for similar and dissimilar pairs, the
median estimate of each pair, FAB , with the higher of the two medians of estimates
for individual majors forming the pair, denoted FH . For similar pairs, DEMO mean
value of FH was 108, whereas the mean value of DEMO was 113, (t ¼ :22, ns). For dis-
similar pairs, the mean value of FH was 111, whereas the mean DEMO of FAB was 124
(t ¼ :56, ns). Thus, the estimates for the pairs (overall mean ¼ 119) are much DEMO
to the higher of the two majors (overall mean ¼ 109) than to the sum of the individ-
ual estimates (overall mean ¼ 165Þ. These data are consistent with the notion that
participants estimated the DEMO by focusing on the larger component.
Study 4: Anchoring and Adjustment
DEMO instead of evaluating each major separately and then adding these individual esti-
mates, participants evaluate pairs of majors by adjusting one of the estimates, then
participants who had already evaluated one of the majors are likely to use this esti-
mate as an anchor. In this case, the frequency estimate of a pair is higher when the
participants had estimated DEMO the higher rather than the lower component of
that pair. To test this prediction we selected 12 pairs of majors and identiﬁed each of
DEMO components as high or low according to the median estimates in table 16.3. The
participants ðN
¼
81Þ were recruited and run as in DEMO preceding study. They were
divided randomly into three groups. All participants evaluated all 12 pairs. Prior to
this task, however, each group evaluated DEMO di¤erent set of 8 single majors. The single
majors were selected so that for each pair of majors one group evaluated beforehand
the high DEMO more popular major, a second group evaluated the low or less DEMO
major, and a third group did not evaluate either of the DEMO components prior
396 Rottenstreich and Tversky
to the evaluation of the pair. The order DEMO presentation of both individual majors and
pairs of majors was randomized.
If people focus on their prior estimate, we expect participants who ﬁrst evaluated
the high component of a pair to give higher estimates than participants DEMO ﬁrst
evaluated the low component of that pair. And if, in DEMO absence of a prior estimate,
people tend to choose the larger of the two majors as an anchor because it is closer to
DEMO required estimate, we expect participants who made no prior estimate for DEMO given
pair to be closer to those who evaluated the high component than to those who
evaluated the low component.
The results conﬁrmed both DEMO The mean estimate for a pair of majors in
the high condition was 251 students, whereas the mean estimate for a pair of majors
in the low condition was 202 students (t ¼ 3:50, DEMO <:001). The mean estimate in the
neutral condition was 237, signiﬁcantly higher than the median estimate in the low
condition (t DEMO 1:96, p ¼ : 05) but not signiﬁcantly lower than the mean estimate in
the high condition (t ¼ :70, ns).
Summary and Discussion
The present extension of support theory distinguishes between DEMO subadditivity,
induced by unpacking, and explicit subadditivity, resulting from the di¤erence
between the assessment of an explicit disjunction and separate assessments of DEMO dis-
joint components. We have proposed that the former is caused by enhanced avail-
ability, whereas the latter is produced, in part at DEMO, by repacking or anchoring.
Consequently, di¤erent partitions are likely to give rise to di¤erent patterns of sub-
additivity. Study 1 established strict implicit DEMO explicit subadditivity in judgments
of unconditional probability. Study 2 showed that a causal partition produced more
implicit subadditivity, whereas a temporal partition produced more explicit sub-
additivity, in judgments of conditional probability. Study 3 demonstrated greater
explicit subadditivity for similar than for dissimilar components in judgments of fre-
DEMO Study 4 suggested that people follow an anchoring and adjustment heuristic
that focuses on the larger, or the more familiar, component and increases DEMO assess-
ment of that component slightly to accommodate the larger extension.
The use of an anchoring and adjustment heuristic in this context is somewhat DEMO
prising because it seems easy to estimate the components separately and then add the
estimates. Evidently, people are reluctant to add uncertain quantities. If they do not
know the population of Spain and also do not DEMO the population of Portugal, they
are reluctant to estimate each of DEMO numbers separately and add their guesses.
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 397
Instead, they apparently form an overall impression of the combined population of
the two states that is determined DEMO by the larger of the two. Taken together,
the present results imply that an adequate model of probability or frequency judg-
ment should DEMO able to accommodate both implicit and explicit subadditivity. The
current version of support theory provides such a model.
We conclude with a discussion of DEMO relation between support theory and Shafer’s
(1976) theory of belief functions. Although the theory of belief functions is based on
logical rather than DEMO considerations, it has been interpreted by several
authors as a descriptive DEMO of belief. In this theory, as in many other models, the
belief in the disjunction of disjoint events is greater than or equal DEMO the sum of the
beliefs in each of the components. Thus, DEMO theory and the theory of belief
functions depart from the Bayesian model in opposite directions: Support theory
predicts subadditivity, whereas the theory of DEMO functions assumes superadditivity.
Using the notation of table 16.1, probability theory DEMO a ¼ b ¼ g þd, Shafer’s
theory assumes a ¼ DEMO bg þd, and support theory implies a ab  g þd.
DEMO experimental literature provides strong evidence that judged probability of
both lay people and experts is subadditive rather than superadditive (see, e.g., Tver-
sky & Koehler, 1994; Fox & Tversky, in press). For example, options traders who
evaluated a set of four mutually exclusive and exhaustive hypotheses regarding the
closing price of Microsoft stock did not hold any DEMO in reserve, as required by
the theory of belief functions. On DEMO contrary, the sum of the probabilities assigned
to these hypotheses was DEMO greater than 1,1 and options traders were actu-
ally willing to bet on these values (Fox, Rogers, & Tversky, 1996). DEMO we
do not wish to claim that superadditivity cannot arise in certain circumstances, the
experimental evidence suggests that such instances represent the exception rather
than the rule.
What then is the psychological basis for the superadditivity DEMO that
underlies post-Bayesian models of degree of belief? The answer to DEMO question goes
back to Keynes’s (1921) distinction between the balance of evidence in favor of a
given proposition and the weight (or strength) of evidence for this proposition.
Keynes has argued that the standard notion of probability can represent the balance
of evidence but not the weight DEMO evidence because a probability of one half, for
example, may result either from strong evidence for and strong evidence against the
proposition in DEMO or from weak evidence for and weak evidence against that
proposition. Following Keynes, we suggest that superadditivity often holds for judg-
ments of evidence strength, that is, of the degree to which a designated body DEMO evi-
dence supports a particular hypothesis (see Briggs & Krantz, 1992), but it does not
hold for probability judgments that reﬂect the DEMO balance of evidence.
398 Rottenstreich and Tversky
The contrast between these notions is most pronounced DEMO situations where there is
good evidence for some general hypothesis but there is no speciﬁc evidence for any of
its components. Suppose, for example, that there is very strong evidence that a par-
ticular person was murdered, but there is no evidence regarding the identity of the
killer. Let H, Ha , and Hs denote, respectively, homicide, homicide DEMO an acquain-
tance, and homicide by a stranger. If people can DEMO sensible assessments of the
degree to which the evidence conﬁrms each of these hypotheses (say on a scale from 0
to 1), we expect these assessments to be close to 1 for H , and DEMO to 0 for Ha and
for Hs , in accord with Shafer’s (1976) model. On the other hand, the judged proba-
bilities of Ha and Hs are expected to be substantially greater than 0, and their sum
may even exceed the judged probability of H . Judgments DEMO strength of evidence, we
suggest, reﬂect the degree to which a speciﬁc body of evidence conﬁrms a particular
hypothesis, whereas judgments of probability express the relative support for the
competing hypotheses based on the judge’s DEMO knowledge and prior belief. The
two types of judgments, therefore, are expected to follow di¤erent rules. Indeed,
Krantz (1991) has argued DEMO Shafer’s model is more suitable for judgments of evi-
dence strength than for judgments of probability.
Because there is very little data on judgments DEMO evidence strength, we can only
speculate about the rules they follow. DEMO appears that in the absence of speciﬁc evi-
dence, as in DEMO homicide example earlier, such judgments are likely to be super-
additive. DEMO, judgments of evidence strength are unlikely to be superadditive
in general. DEMO illustrate, consider a body of evidence, for example, a fragment DEMO
Linda’s diary expressing moral objection to sexist language. Such evidence, we DEMO
gest, can provide stronger support for the hypothesis that Linda is DEMO feminist bank
teller than for the more inclusive hypothesis that Linda is a bank teller. This pattern,
of course, is not only subadditive; it is actually nonmonotonic. Similarly, a postcard
with an Alpine scene DEMO to provide stronger evidence for the hypothesis that it
came from Switzerland than for the hypothesis that it came from Europe (see e.g.,
Bar-Hillel & Neter, 1993). In these cases the evidence matches the narrower hypoth-
esis better than it matches the broader hypothesis, hence an assessment based on
matching (or representativeness) can give rise to nonmonotonicity DEMO judgment of
evidence strength, as well as in judgment of probability (Tversky & Kahneman,
1983).
To summarize, the experimental evidence described here and elsewhere indicates
that probability judgments, which are based on the balance of evidence, are generally
subadditive. The preceding discussion, however, suggests that judgments of the
strength of a designated body of evidence may DEMO a di¤erent pattern. Such
judgments are likely to be superadditive when there is little evidence for each of the
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 399
component hypotheses, and they are likely to be subadditive (or even nonmonotonic)
when the evidence strongly favors one of the components. Whether or not these
conjectures are valid, we suggest that the discussion of alternative representations of
belief can be illuminated DEMO the distinction between probability judgments based on
the balance of evidence and judgments of the strength of a speciﬁc body of evidence.
Notes
This DEMO was supported by National Science Foundation Grant SBR-9408684 and by National Institutes
of Health Grant MH-53046.
We are indebted to Daniel Kahneman for suggesting DEMO use of anchoring as a source of explicit sub-
additivity and to Peter Wakker for insightful comments on the formal theory. We also thank DEMO
Koehler, David Krantz, and Sivan Rottenstreich for helpful discussions.
1. On the other hand, the prevalence of additivity for binary partitions, called DEMO complementarity,
excludes the dual of the belief function, called the DEMO function. It follows readily that under binary
complementarity all models of upper and lower probability reduce to the standard additive model.
References
Bar-Hillel, M., & Neter, E. (1993). How alike is it versus how likely it is: A disjunction fallacy in proba-
bility judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1119–1131.
Briggs, L., & Krantz, D. (1992). Judging the strength of designated evidence. Journal of Behavioral Deci-
sion Making, 5, 77–106.
Erev, I., Wallsten, T. S., & Budescu, D. V. (1994). Simultaneous over- and underconﬁdence: DEMO role of
error in judgment processes. Psychological Review, 101, 519–527.
Fox, C. R., Rogers, B. A., & Tversky, A. (1996)DEMO Options traders exhibit subadditive decision weights.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, DEMO, 5–19.
Fox, C. R., & Tversky, A. (in press)DEMO A belief-based account of decision under uncertainty. In D. Kahne-
man & A. Tversky (Eds.), Choices, values, and frames. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gonzales, M., & Bonini, N. (1995). DEMO judgments in two-outcome situations: What induces a defect
in complementarity? Unpublished manuscript, Centre de Recherche en Psychologie Cognitive, University
de Provence, Aix-en-Provence, France.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Keynes, J. M. (1921). A treatise on probability. DEMO: Macmillan.
Krantz, D. H. (1991). From indices to mappings: The representational approach to measurement. In D. R.
Brown & E. K. DEMO (Eds.), Frontiers of mathematical psychology: Essays in honor of Clyde Coombs
(pp. 1–52). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Macchi, L., Osherson, D., & Legrenzi, P. (1995, November). Superadditivity with complementary DEMO of
hypotheses. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Judgment and Decision Making, Los
Angeles.
Poulton, E. C. (1994). Behavioral decision theory: A new approach. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Shafer, G. (1976). A mathematical theory of evidence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
400 Rottenstreich and Tversky
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1968)DEMO Relative importance of probabilities and payo¤s in risk taking. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology Monographs, 78(3, Pt. 2).
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. DEMO, 185,
1124–1131.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983)DEMO Extensional vs. intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in
probability judgment. Psychological DEMO, 91, 293–315.
Tversky, A., & Koehler, D. J. (1994). Support theory: A nonextensional representation of subjective
probability. Psychological Review, DEMO, 547–567.
Appendix
Support Theory
This section presents a self-contained, formal statement of support theory and pro-
vides necessary and su‰cient conditions for the DEMO model in terms of judged
probability. This analysis extends the treatment of Tversky and Koehler (1994, the-
orem 1) by introducing explicit subadditivity and by restricting the assumption of
implicit subadditivity.
Let T be a DEMO set including at least two elements, interpreted as states of the
DEMO We assume that exactly one state obtains but it is generally not known to the
judge. Subsets of T are called events. We distinguish DEMO events and description
of events, called hypotheses. We use H to DEMO the set of hypotheses that describe
the events in T and prime ð0Þ to denote the mapping that associates hypotheses with
events. Thus, we assume that each hypothesis A A H corresponds to a unique event
DEMO A T. Di¤erent hypotheses may describe the same event. For example, DEMO
rolling a pair of dice. The hypotheses ‘‘the sum is 3’’ and ‘‘the product is 2’’ describe
the same event: One die shows 1, and the other shows 2. We assume that H is ﬁnite
and that it includes at least one hypothesis for each event. A is DEMO if A0 A T.
A is null if A0 ¼ q. A and B are exclusive if A0 VB0 ¼ q.If A and B DEMO in H, and
they are exclusive and nonnull, then their explicit disjunction, denoted A4B, is also
in H. We assume that 4 DEMO associative and commutative and that ðA4BÞ0 ¼ A0 UB0.
Support theory distinguishes between explicit and implicit disjunctions. Formally,
A is an implicit disjunction, or simply an implicit hypothesis, if it is neither elemen-
tary nor null, and it is not an explicit disjunction (i.e., there are no exclusive nonnull
B; C in H such that A ¼ B4C ). For example, the explicit disjunction, ‘‘Homicide by
an acquaintance or by a stranger,’’ has the same extension as ‘‘Homicide,’’ but DEMO
latter is an implicit hypothesis because it is not an explicit disjunction.
An evaluation frame ðA; BÞ consists of a pair of exclusive hypotheses: The ﬁrst
element, A, is the focal hypothesis that the judge evaluates, and the second element,
Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring 401
B , is the alternative hypothesis. DEMO interpret a person’s probability judgment as a
mapping P from an evaluation frame to the unit interval. To simplify matters, we
assume that PðA; BÞ equals zero if and only if A is null and equals one if and
only if B is null. Thus, PðA; BÞ DEMO the judged probability that A rather than B holds,
assuming that one and only one of them obtains. Obviously, A and B may each
represent an explicit or an implicit disjunction. The extensional counterpart of
DEMO; BÞ in probability theory is the conditional probability PðA0 j A0 DEMO Support
theory is nonextensional because it assumes that probability judgment depends on
the descriptions A and B, not on the events A0 and B0.
As in the original version of the theory, we assume binary complementarity:
PðA; BÞþ PðB; AÞ¼ 1; ðCondition 1Þ
which follows readily from the equation relating judged probability and support. To
formulate the next DEMO assumptions, we introduce the probability ratio RðA; BÞ¼
PðA; BÞ=PðB; AÞ, which is the odds for A against B, assuming B DEMO nonnull. The use
of odds is merely a notational device, not DEMO change in the response scale. Our second
assumption is the product rule:
RðA; BÞRðB; DÞ¼ RðA; CÞRðC; DÞ
RðA; BÞRðB; DEMO RðA; DÞ;
and
ðCondition 2Þ
where each equation holds whenever DEMO arguments of R in that equation are exclu-
sive. Note that according to support theory, RðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞ=sðBÞ. Hence the product
rule follows DEMO this form by cancellation. This assumption is slightly stronger than
the product rule used in the original version of the theory.A1
Our third assumption, called the odds inequality, replaces the unpacking condi-
A is
, and
tion of the original theory. Suppose A1, A2 , and B are mutually exclusive,
implicit, and A1 4A2 is recognized as a partition of A. That is, ðA1 4A2Þ0 ¼ A0
the judge recognizes that A1 4A2 has the same extension as A. Then
RðA; BÞ aRðA1 4A2; BÞ aRðA1; BÞþ RðA2; BÞ: ðCondition 3Þ
Note that DEMO the classical probability axioms both inequalities reduce to equal-
ities. The recognition requirement, which restricts the assumption of implicit sub-
additivity, was not DEMO stated in the original version of the theory, although it
was DEMO in its applications.
The following theorem shows that conditions 1, 2, and 3 are both necessary and
su‰cient for the extended version of DEMO theory.
402 Rottenstreich and Tversky
theorem: Suppose PðA; BÞ is deﬁned for DEMO exclusive A; B A H and that it vanishes
if and DEMO if A is null. Conditions 1, 2, and 3 hold if and only if there exists a non-
negative ratio scale s on DEMO such that for any pair of exclusive hypotheses A; B
sðAÞ
DEMO; BÞ¼ sðAÞþ sðBÞ
Furthermore, if A1 and
a partition of A then
:
ðCondition 4Þ
A2 are exclusive, A is implicit, and ðA1 4A2Þ is recognized as
sðAÞ asðA1 4A2Þ asðA1 Þþ sðA2Þ:
DEMO 5Þ
Proof:
Necessity is straightforward. To prove su‰ciency we assume Conditions 1,
2, and 3 and construct the support function s. Let E ¼fA A Hj A0 A Tg be the set of
elementary DEMO Select some D A E and set sðDÞ¼ 1. For any other elemen-
tary hypothesis C A E such that C0 0D0 , set DEMO RðC; DÞ. Given any A A H such
that A0 0 DEMO, q, select some C A E such that A0 VC0 ¼ q and either C ¼ D or
C0 0D0 . Set sðAÞ¼ DEMO; DÞ if C ¼ D and sðAÞ¼ RðA; CÞRðC; DÞ DEMO It is
easy to verify that the product rule (Condition 2), RðA; BÞRðB; DÞ¼ RðA; CÞRðC; DÞ
and RðA; BÞRðB; DÞ¼ RðA; DÞ, ensures that sðAÞ is independent of the choice DEMO C.
Apply the second equation when A and D are exclusive, DEMO the ﬁrst equation when
they are not. To complete the construction of s, set sðAÞ¼ 0 when A q
A0 ¼ T, set DEMO min
junctions B ¼ B1 4 
To establish the representation for PðA; BÞ, suppose A0 VD
RðA; DÞ. Furthermore, there exists DEMO A
product rule, therefore, sðBÞ¼ RðB; AÞRðA; DÞ, and DEMO RðA; BÞ. Applying
binary complementarity (Condition 1), yields PðA; DEMO sðAÞ=½sðAÞþ sðBÞ for all
s 0 ¼
4PB ðBnÞ, where the DEMO is taken over all explicit dis-
n such that B0 ¼ T.
. When
0
¼
q. Thus, sðAÞ¼
E such that sðBÞ¼ RðB; CÞRðC; DÞ.Bythe
disjoint A, B
A
H, where s is DEMO up to a choice of unit determined by the value of
sðDÞ.
Finally, implicit subadditivity, sðAÞ asðA1 4A2Þ, and explicit subadditivity,
sðA1 4A2Þ asðA1 Þþ sðA2Þ , (see Condition 5), follow respectively from the left hand
and the right hand of the odds inequality (Condition 3), RðA; BÞ aRðA1 4A2; BÞ a
RðA1; BÞþ RðA2; BÞ, provided A0 0 T. Otherwise, these inequalities follow from the
deﬁnition of sðAÞ for A0 ¼ T.
Appendix Note
A1. The ﬁrst DEMO of condition 2 is equivalent to the product rule used in the original theory; the second
part of condition 2 is implied by but does not imply the proportionality assumption of the original theory.
PREFERENCE

Editor’s Introductory Remarks
Amos Tversky studied individual choice behavior throughout his career. DEMO early
work focused on probabilistic models of choice, that is, models that assume a ran-
dom process in which the same choice is DEMO always made even under seemingly
identical conditions. Most theoretical work on probabilistic preferences was based on
the notion of independence among alternatives. In an DEMO study by Tversky and
J. Russo (chapter 18), the assumptions DEMO independence and substitutability were
shown to be equivalent, all capturing the DEMO principle that pair-wise choice
probabilities could be expressed as a function of an underlying scale value, such that
if two alternatives are equivalent in one context, they are substitutable for each other
in any context. While this principle dominated the theoretical work in the ﬁeld,
Tversky focused DEMO ﬁndings showing that choice probabilities were a¤ected not only
by the scale values of alternatives but also by comparability issues that could not
be DEMO by any model that assigns values in a context-independent manner.
In particular, similarity altered discrimination between stimuli and, because similar-
ity could be DEMO without changing the stimuli’s scale values, independence was
violated.
Considerations of DEMO and context already appeared in Tversky’s ﬁrst
published paper (chapter 17), in which he investigated the number of alternatives at a
choice point that, under certain theoretical assumptions, would optimize discrim-
inability. Related considerations DEMO proved central to his insightful analysis of the
intransitivity of preferences (DEMO 19). There, he relied on the psychology of just-
noticeable DEMO to predict violations of transitivity, one of the most basic
axioms DEMO the normative theory of choice. That article raised a number of issues
that proved pivotal in Tversky’s later work. It addressed the tension between DEMO
served violations of transitivity on the one hand, and subjects’ strong DEMO
of transitivity and their reluctance to admit to its violation on the other. It also
addressed the di‰culty of reaching clear conclusions concerning the DEMO status
of such violations in the absence of a compelling analysis of the mechanisms and
costs involved. Simpliﬁcation in the choice process, Tversky suggested, may prove
extremely useful, even if occasionally it fails to yield DEMO optimal choice. When di‰-
culty and precision are taken into account, DEMO component-wise evaluation may prove
superior to independent evaluation despite the fact that the latter necessarily main-
tains transitivity whereas the former does not. Of DEMO interest to Tversky was not
only the systematic violation of normative principles but what these violations
revealed about the psychological mechanisms governing choice.
Continued DEMO in processes that violate independence led to Tversky’s
elimination-by-aspects model (chapter DEMO), a theory of choice based on a covert
406
Shaﬁr
sequential-elimination process, which was able to account for observed dependencies
among options. A considerably more parsimonious version of the model, in which
choice alternatives are represented in a treelike graph, was later developed in collab-
oration with Shmuel Sattath (chapter 21). According to these models, the probability
of selecting an option depends not only on its overall value, but also on its relations
to the other options available. In particular, ‘‘irrelevant alternatives’’ can inﬂuence
choice probabilities because the introduction of an alternative ‘‘hurts’’ similar alter-
natives more than dissimilar ones. Unlike their classical DEMO, these models
allow for the e¤ects of di¤erent agendas on choice DEMO
The empirical study of decision making was motivated largely by earlier work in
economics. A notable development was the publication of von Neumann and DEMO
genstern’s normative treatment of expected utility (1947), which, along with ensuing
modiﬁcations, showed that a few compelling axioms, when satisﬁed, imply that a
person’s choices can be thought of as favoring the alternative DEMO the highest sub-
jective expected utility. In the seventies, Tversky worked DEMO Daniel Kahneman on
a descriptive theory of risky choice, known as DEMO theory (chapter 22.) Prospect
theory incorporates a number of fundamental psychological principles of choice that
di¤er in important ways from those envisioned by DEMO normative account. The theory
predicts decision patterns that dozens of studies have conﬁrmed empirically, and
which contrast directly with the fundamental assumptions of expected utility theory.
Mathematically elegant and psychologically insightful, prospect theory has had a
major inﬂuence in the social sciences. (The original publication in 1979 appears to
be the most cited paper ever published in the prestigious journal DEMO)
Whereas the original formulation of the theory was technically limited to choice
between risky monetary gambles involving at most two nonzero outcomes, a new
version of the model was later developed that applied to uncertain DEMO well as to risky
prospects with any number of outcomes (chapter DEMO).
Among other things, prospect theory posits a value function with DEMO important
properties: (1) it is deﬁned on gains and losses DEMO than total wealth, which cap-
tures the fact that individuals normally DEMO outcomes as departures from some ref-
erence point, rather than in DEMO of ﬁnal assets; (2) it is steeper for losses than DEMO
gains: thus, a loss of $X is more aversive than a gain of $X is attractive, yielding
what is referred to as ‘‘loss aversion’’; and (3) it is concave for gains and convex for
losses, which yields risk aversion in the domain of gains and risk seeking in the
domain of losses (except for very low probabilities, DEMO these patterns reverse).
The above properties may seem compelling and unobjectionable; yet, they lead to
normatively problematic consequences. Because people are risk DEMO or risk seeking
depending on whether they face apparent gains or losses, decision situations can arise
Preference: Editor’s Introductory Remarks 407
in which alternative descriptions of the same decision problem give rise to di¤erent
choices. This is known as a DEMO e¤ect and is in violation of the principle of
invariance, which DEMO that logically equivalent representations of a decision
problem, as well as DEMO equivalent methods of elicitation, yield the same pref-
erences (chapter 24).
Prospect theory also makes a number of psychological assumptions about the
DEMO of probabilities. According to the theory, the value of each outcome DEMO mul-
tiplied by a decision weight, which transforms the relevant probability DEMO its impact
on the decision-maker. Decision weights represent a distortion that captures the
impact of events on the valuation of prospects, not merely the perceived likelihood of
those events. In particular, a nonlinear transformation of the probability scale is
assumed, which overweights low probabilities and underweights moderate and high
probabilities. Tversky and Craig Fox (chapter 30) extend this nonlinear DEMO
tion from risk (where the probabilities associated with outcomes are assumed DEMO be
known) to uncertainty (where the probabilities are not known). An event is found to
have greater impact when it turns possibility DEMO certainty (the certainty e¤ect), or
impossibility into possibility, than when it merely adjusts the likelihood of a possi-
bility. Also, people appear to be less sensitive to uncertainty than to risk, which is
consistent with a two-stage process in which the decision maker ﬁrst assesses the
DEMO of an uncertain event, then transforms this value via the weighting DEMO
tion. One of Tversky’s last major theoretical contributions was a cohesive account of
decision under uncertainty (chapter 32) that incorporates judgments of probability
DEMO to satisfy support theory with decisions under risk, assumed to satisfy DEMO
pect theory.
Tversky conducted several studies documenting the occurrence of framing e¤ects,
certainty e¤ects, and other biases in real-life decisions involving lay people as well as
experts. In a medical study in collaboration with McNeil, Pauker, and Sox (chapter
23), a large number of outpatients, physicians, and graduate students were presented
with alternative therapies for lung cancer, and their choices were shown to be inﬂu-
enced by presumably immaterial variations in the nature of the presentation. In a
study involving choices DEMO political candidates and public referendum issues,
George Quattrone and Tversky (DEMO 25) document framing e¤ects, loss aversion,
and other patterns that are predicted by prospect theory but inconsistent with fun-
damental normative assumptions. DEMO a similar vein, Kahneman and Tversky (chapter
29) explore the DEMO for conﬂict resolution of several cognitive phenomena
that have emerged from the study of decision making, including loss aversion, opti-
mistic overconﬁdence, and the certainty e¤ect. They suggest that such biases can
hinder negotiation and DEMO successful resolution of conﬂict.
408
Shaﬁr
As a result of observations in the earlier work, Tversky became particularly inter-
ested in the relationship between uncertainty and preference. In DEMO investigation of
the relationship between probability judgments and preferences between bets, DEMO
Heath and Tversky (chapter 26) propose the competence hypothesis, according DEMO
which people prefer to bet on beliefs in situations in which they feel competent or
knowledgeable, but prefer to bet on chance when they feel incompetent or ignorant.
Interestingly, this pattern is inconsistent with the familiar ‘‘ambiguity aversion,’’
which predicts a general preference for betting on chance DEMO beliefs whose proba-
bility is ambiguous. Along related lines, Fox and DEMO (chapter 31) present the
comparative ignorance hypothesis: aversion to ambiguity, which emerges only in
comparative settings, is produced by a comparison with less ambiguous events or
with more knowledgeable individuals.
The foregoing ﬁndings call DEMO question the fundamental notion of inferring
beliefs from preferences. Most conceptions of decision making under uncertainty—
both normative and descriptive—are consequentialist in the sense DEMO decisions are
presumed to be determined by an assessment of the potential consequences and their
perceived likelihood. However, Shaﬁr and Tversky (chapter 28) document situations
in which people reason and make choices in a non-consequentialist DEMO For
example, people who eventually make the same choice regardless of DEMO the uncer-
tainty is resolved are seen to make a di¤erent choice while the situation is still
uncertain, contrary to consequentialism. Quattrone and Tversky (chapter 33) ma-
nipulate the diagnostic and causal e¤ectiveness of actions, and thereby illustrate
another violation of consequentialism. They show that people are DEMO to select
actions that are diagnostic of auspicious outcomes even when the actions clearly do
not facilitate the outcome. Among other things, they document ‘‘diagnostic voting,’’
where the belief that one’s actions are diagnostic of DEMO actions of relevant others
appears to increase the reported willingness to vote, despite the fact that this action is
unlikely to a¤ect the ﬁnal outcome in any way.
Foremost in Tversky’s research is the realization that DEMO tend to be
shaped by psychological processes that act independently of normative considera-
tions that the person might endorse upon reﬂection. Such processes underlie DEMO
study of contingent preferences, where purportedly immaterial variations in descrip-
tion, context, or procedure alter respondents’ relative weighting of attributes and,
consequently, their preferences. In the prototypical example, people choose one bet
over DEMO but then price the second bet above the ﬁrst, a phenomenon DEMO as
‘‘preference reversal.’’ Tversky and Richard Thaler (chapter 35) suggest that the
major cause of preference reversals is a di¤erential weighting of probability DEMO
payo¤s in choice versus pricing. In particular, experimental evidence indicates that
Preference: Editor’s Introductory Remarks 409
an attribute of an option is given more weight when it is compatible with the
response format than when DEMO is not. Because the price that the subject assigns to a
bet is expressed in dollars, the payo¤s of the bet, also expressed DEMO dollars, are
weighted more heavily in pricing than in choice. This DEMO the bet with the higher
payo¤ to be evaluated more favorably in pricing than in choice and can give rise to
preference reversals.
Tversky, Shmuel Sattath, and Paul Slovic (chapter 34) contrast choice with
another procedure called ‘‘matching’’ in which the decision maker adjusts one option
to DEMO another. They show that the more prominent dimension tends to loom
larger in choice than in matching or in pricing tasks. They then discuss DEMO in
which the trade-o¤ between attributes is contingent on the nature of the response,
and raise conceptual as well as practical questions concerning DEMO nature, the mean-
ing, and the assessment of preference.
Redelmeier and Tversky explore contingent preferences in medical contexts
(chapter 36) and suggest DEMO looking at a problem from di¤erent perspectives can
change the relative weight assigned to attributes and thus lead to di¤erent choices.
They show that DEMO physicians give more weight to a patient’s personal con-
cerns when they consider the patient as an individual, and more weight to criteria of
e¤ectiveness and cost when they consider the patient as part of a DEMO As a result,
these physicians make di¤erent decisions when evaluating an individual patient than
when considering a group of comparable patients (a discrepancy also found in the
judgments of lay people).
The inﬂuence of DEMO reference states plays a major role in the treatment of
loss aversion in riskless choice (chapter 37). Loss aversion, it is suggested, accounts
for the large disparity often observed between the minimum people are DEMO to
accept to give up an item and the maximum they would be willing to pay to acquire
it. This has far-reaching consequences for DEMO choices and for the willingness to
depart from the status quo. Tversky and Kahneman propose a reference-dependent
theory which posits a preference relation indexed DEMO speciﬁc reference states as a way
to capture the relevant patterns.
Other violations of context-independence are revealed in studies involving legal
decision-making (chapter 40), where Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky focus on
two phenomena: compromise and contrast. Compromise refers to the ﬁnding that the
same option is DEMO more favorably when it is intermediate rather than extreme
in the o¤ered set, and contrast refers to the fact that an option is evaluated more
favorably in the presence of similar options that are inferior to DEMO
Related contextual e¤ects are highlighted in Tversky and Dale Gri‰n’s applica-
tion to judgments of well being (chapter 38). The hedonic impact of an event, they
410
Shaﬁr
suggest, reﬂects a balance of its endowment and contrast e¤ects. The endowment
e¤ect of an event represents its direct contribution to one’s DEMO Good news
and positive experiences make people happier; bad news and DEMO times diminish
their well being. Events also have an indirect contrast e¤ect on the evaluation of
subsequent events. A positive experience makes people happy, but it also renders
similar experiences less exciting. A negative experience makes DEMO unhappy, but it
helps them to appreciate subsequent experiences that are DEMO bad. Interesting impli-
cations are drawn for the notion of Pareto optimality, which is fundamental to wel-
fare economics, since—to the extent that DEMO plays a signiﬁcant role—policies
that ignore contrast e¤ects can technically improve everybody’s lot while still creat-
ing widespread unhappiness.
When faced with the need DEMO choose, decision makers often seek and construct
reasons in order to DEMO the conﬂict and justify their choice. Di¤erent frames,
contexts, and DEMO procedures highlight di¤erent aspects of the options and
bring forth di¤erent reasons and considerations that inﬂuence decision. In chapter
39, Shaﬁr and Tversky consider the role of reasons in the making of decisions. An
analysis based DEMO reasons, they suggest, can accommodate framing and elicitation
e¤ects and can incorporate the comparative inﬂuences and considerations of per-
spective, conﬂict, and DEMO that typically remain outside the purview of value
maximization.
Tversky’s collection of articles concerning the study and nature of preferences (of
which the present volume represents only a small subset) is truly remarkable. All the
more so, reading Tversky’s work makes one wish he had the opportunity to go even
further.
Probabilistic Models of Choice

17 On the Optimal Number of Alternatives at a Choice Point
Amos DEMO
Consider any test task or questionnaire which can be represented as a sequence of
choice points at each of which one out of a DEMO of alternatives is chosen. Multiple-
choice tests, mazes or personality check DEMO are examples. Given a ﬁxed total num-
ber of alternatives for the whole test, we wish to ﬁnd the optimal number of choice
points and the optimal number of alternatives at each choice point.
Let k DEMO the total number of alternatives, and let xi denote the number DEMO alter-
natives at the ith choice point. Thus:
Xxi
¼
1
i
¼
k
ð1Þ
where r is the number of choice points.
DEMO criteria for optimality which one may attempt to maximize will be
considered.
(a) Discrimination capacity: the number n of possible distinct response patterns of a
given test
r
n
¼
Yxi
¼
1
i
ð2Þ
DEMO
For example, consider a multiple-choice diagnostic test or an attitude questionnaire
DEMO on Likert-type items. Let every sequence of responses be regarded as a di¤er-
ent ‘‘personality type’’ or ‘‘attitude proﬁle.’’ Thus, by maximizing n, DEMO maximize the
number of distinct types or proﬁles among which the test enables us to discriminate.
(b) Power: deﬁned as 1 minus the probability of attaining perfect performance by
chance alone. Assuming equal probability of DEMO for all alternatives:
Power
¼
1

!Y
1
x
i
¼
1
i
r
Clearly, we are interested in constructing tests with maximal power.
(c) Uncertainty associated with the set [A ] of DEMO possible response patterns to a given
task.
ð3Þ
H½A¼ X pi log2 pi
¼
log2 Yxi
¼
1
i
¼
1
i
ð4Þ
n
DEMO
414
1
Tversky
Since the three criteria proposed are strictly monotonically related DEMO each other,
maximizing (2) maximizes (3) and (4) as well. If the same number of alternatives is
used at each DEMO point, i.e., xi ¼ xj , for any i and j then
Yxi
r
n ¼ ¼ xr ð5Þ
i¼1
 ¼
and DEMO x r k
xk=x:
¼
n
Let us denote by fkðxÞ the discrimination function xk=x of such a test. fkðxÞ can be
maximized DEMO setting ðd=dxÞ fkðxÞ¼ 0.
d xk=x
Þ¼ dx ðe ln Þ
d d
dx fkðxÞ¼ dx ðxk=x
xk=x
k
e ln xk=x d
dx DEMO
xk=x
¼ Þ¼  ð6Þ
ln x
2 2
x x
xk=x k
¼ x2 ð1
 ln xÞ
Since both x and k DEMO positive ðd=dxÞ fkðxÞ¼ 0 and only if
1  ln x ¼ 0; ln x ¼ 1; or x ¼ e:
Thus DEMO ðxÞ has a unique maximum at x ¼ e ¼ 2:718.
A family of discrimination functions for some di¤erent values of k is DEMO in
ﬁgure 17.1. Note that though the value of fkðxÞ depends rather heavily on k,the
location of its maximum is completely independent of DEMO
(Note, incidentally, that the well-known function f ðpi Þ¼ pi DEMO pi , is a loga-
rithmic transformation of the discrimination function fkðxÞ where k ¼ 1. The above
result may be used to solve DEMO its maximum.
Let log2 y ¼pi log2 pi and let x ¼ 1=pi . Hence:

pi
x1=x
¼ ¼ ¼ f1ðxÞð7Þ
y
DEMO
By (6), f1ðxÞ is maximum at x ¼ e. Indeed DEMO log2 pi is maximum at pi ¼ 1=e ¼
0:368.)
Since x stands for the number of alternatives, we want to ﬁnd the integer which is
closest to the maximum point. Since fkðxÞ is DEMO it should be either 2 or 3.
k
On the Optimal Number of Alternatives at a Choice Point 415
Figure DEMO
A family of discrimination function fkðxÞ for some di¤erent values of k. The dots on the curves denote the
points at which both x DEMO k=x are integers.
To show that 3 gives the desired solution we have to show that fkð3Þ > fkð2Þ for
any k > 0, i.e., 3k=3 > 2k=2 . Raising both sides of the above equation to the 6=k
power yields the desired result.
Hence the use of DEMO alternatives at each choice point will maximize discrimina-
tion capacity, power, and uncertainty of the test.
The ﬁnal result for the case in DEMO both x and k=r are integers is given by the
following theorem.
x1; x2
is maximum will include a maximal
theorem
r k . A sequence for which
number of 3’s without including any 1.Pi¼1 xi DEMO
Consider any sequence of positive integers
Q
r
i¼1 xi

xr
such that
That is, the best solution will include either (i) k=3 choice points with 3 alternatives
each, or (ii) ðk

4Þ=3 choice points with 3 alternatives each and a single choice point
416
Tversky
with 4 alternatives, or (iii) ðk 2Þ=3 choice points with 3 alternatives each and a
single choice point with 2 alternatives, depending on whether the remainder of k
when divided by 3 is DEMO, one, or two, i.e., whether k mod(3) equals DEMO, 1, or 2.
The proof of the theorem is as follows: For every sequence of positive integers,
denoted by S, with DEMO ﬁxed sum, k , which is not in any one of DEMO forms (i), (ii), or
(iii) it is possible to construct another sequence denoted by S0 with the following
properties:
DEMO QPSS.
(1) S0 ¼ ¼ k.
(2) S0 >
(3) S0 is in one of the forms (i), (ii), or (iii).
The construction of such a sequence is done by successive replacements of ele-
ments in the original sequence which do DEMO change its sum. Let S be any sequence of
positive integers. If it contains 1, delete the 1 by adding it to some other element. The
new sequence obtained will have a greater product since
þ DEMO ð8Þ
x 1 > x 1 for any x b1:
If the sequence contains 2’s or 3’s, leave them unchanged. If the sequence contains
4, replace it by a pair of 2’s, leaving both DEMO sum and the product unchanged.
Next, any even x can be DEMO as 2t for some positive integer t. Hence replace
any even x > 4 by its corresponding t -tuple of 2’s. The product of DEMO new sequence
will exceed that of the old one since
2t > 2t for any t > 2: ð9Þ
Similarly, any odd x > 3 can be expressed as 2t þ 3 for some positive integer t. Thus
we may replace any odd x > 3 by a DEMO 3 and its corresponding t-tuple of 2’s. This
replacement will increase the product of the sequence because
2t  3 > 2t þ3: ð10Þ
Repeated application of these replacements will yield a sequence consisting of 2’s DEMO
3’s only.
Finally, replace any triple of 2’s by a pair DEMO 3’s, thus increasing the product since
32 > 23: ð11Þ
The ﬁnal sequence thus obtained will be in one and only one of DEMO desired forms (i),
(ii), or (iii). The maximality of 0 for this sequence follows from the inequalities (8)
through (11). QS
On the Optimal Number of Alternatives at a Choice Point 417
The DEMO of the desired sequence S0 is unique except for order and except in case
(ii) in which either a single 4 or a DEMO of 2’s may be used.
Alternatively, the above theorem may be DEMO as follows: Consider all se-
quences of positive integers x
The DEMO for which
without including any 1. P
1; ir¼1 xi ¼ DEMO
ir¼1 xixis minimum will include a maximal number of 3’s2; ... ; xr with a ﬁxed product k, i.e., Q
Discussion
The criteria proposed will be maximized by constructing tasks whose alternatives are
of the DEMO given by the above theorem. Certainly, additional criteria may be con-
DEMO in deciding upon the number of alternatives to be used. There are, however,
instances in which the above result may be directly applicable.
Whenever the amount of time spent on the test is proportional to DEMO total number
of alternatives, the use of three alternatives at each DEMO point will maximize the
amount of information obtained per time unit. This seems to be true of multiple-
choice tests consisting of questions like: ‘‘which of the following passages best
describes X ’s position?’’ in DEMO the amount of time spent on the question is negli-
gible compared to the time spent on choosing among the alternatives. The result is
DEMO, however, even in instances in which the proportionality assumption does
not hold. All that is needed is that the relative gain in information DEMO exceed the
relative loss in time.
An estimate of the relative gain (or loss) of information, power, and discrim-
inability as a DEMO of some di¤erent values of x for a given k can be obtained
from the graph of fkðxÞ in ﬁgure 17.1. Whenever additional criteria DEMO explicitly
introduced, the above estimate may be taken into account in DEMO an
optimally-designed task.
There exists some empirical evidence (Pressey, 1962), based on the study of auto-
instructional items, which indicates that three-alternative test items are indeed opti-
mal. Since neither time nor the total DEMO of alternatives was controlled, the
results are only suggestive.
Finally, the above result may shed some light on the study of information coding
DEMO processing. In a paper entitled ‘‘Information transmission with elementary audi-
tory displays,’’ Sumby, Chambliss, and Pollack (1958) have used a set DEMO auditory
signals as an alphabet. They employed four stimulus variables, with DEMO, three, and
ﬁve alternatives per variable. In summarizing the results Garner (1962) says: ‘‘Their
results showed that three alternatives per variable gave the best performance, agree-
ing with the suggestion in the Pollack and Ficks (1954) results that three levels per
418
Tversky
dimension are better than two. Certainly, at this stage it seems that the maximum
information transmission will be obtained with humans when DEMO more than three
alternatives are used with a single variable, but DEMO many variables involved,’’
(pp. 122–123). In other words, the data show that perceptual discrimination, mea-
sured by the amount of information transmitted, was maximized when each one of
the dimensions has three levels.
One may hypothesize that the discriminability of the stimuli, or the memory load
associated with them, is directly related to the total number of levels summed over
dimensions. The fact that amplitude, for example, is DEMO relevant dimension does not
contribute to the S ’s memory load; DEMO, it is the number of levels of amplitude
which hinders discrimination. DEMO total number of levels, however, was shown to be
minimal whenever three-level factors are employed. If the above hypothesis is true,
it DEMO that the use of three-level factors will minimize confusion and decrease
memory load. This problem seems worthy of experimental investigation. Taken
together with Garner’s DEMO concerning human capacities to process multi-
dimensional information, these results suggest DEMO the use of three levels per dimen-
sion may be the most e‰cient way to code and process information.
Notes
This research was supported DEMO the Air Force O‰ce of Scientiﬁc Research under contract AF-AFOSR-
196-63, DEMO by Public Health Service Research grant MH-04236.
I wish to thank J. Give’on for his helpful suggestions and Dr. R. M. Dawes for calling DEMO attention to
the relationships between the ﬁnding of Pollack and Ficks and the result reported here.
References
Garner, W. R. Uncertainty and structure as psychological concepts. New York: Wiley, 1962.
Pollack, I., and Ficks, L. Information of elementary multidimensional auditory displays. J. acoust. Soc.
Amer., 1954, 26, 155–158.
Pressey, S. L. Basic unresolved teaching-machine problems, Theory DEMO Practice, 1962, 1, No. 1.
Sumby, W. H., Chambliss, D., and Pollack, I. Information transmission with elementary auditory dis-
plays. DEMO acoust. Soc. Amer., 1958, 30, 423–429.
18 Substitutability and Similarity in Binary Choices
Amos Tversky and J. Edward DEMO
Most probabilistic theories of choice behavior are based on a fundamental principle
that has appeared in several di¤erent forms. The assumptions of simple scalability,DEMO
strong stochastic transitivity, substitutability, and independence are di¤erent versions
of the same basic principle. In the ﬁrst part of the paper, these four assumptions
are shown to be logically equivalent. In the second part, this principle is contrasted
with an alternative hypothesis in an experimental study involving DEMO of rela-
tive size.
To introduce the various conditions, let S DEMO a set of alternatives or stimuli,
denoted x; y; ... ; and let Pðx; yÞ be the probability that x is chosen over y. More
speciﬁcally, we assume that Pðx; yÞþ Pðy; xÞ¼ 1 and that
1 , for all x; y in
Pðx; DEMO 2
S . Furthermore, it is assumed that all choice probabilities DEMO neither 0 nor 1, that is,
all preferences or discriminations DEMO imperfect. These probabilities are usually esti-
mated by the relative frequencies observed in binary choice experiments.
A set of binary choice probabilities satisﬁes simple DEMO if there are real-
valued functions F and u such that for all x; y in S
Pðx; yÞ¼ F½uðxÞ; uðyÞ;
ð1Þ
where F is strictly increasing in its ﬁrst argument and strictly decreasing DEMO the sec-
ond. This property, introduced by Krantz (1964), states that the e¤ect of each stim-
ulus, x , can be summarized by a single scale value, uðxÞ. Two alternatives are thus
equivalent if, and only if, they have the same scale value. (Krantz’s original formu-
lation is slightly weaker as F must only be one-to-one in DEMO argument. The two
formulations, however, are equivalent if F is continuous in both arguments.)
Equation 1 is probably the most general formulation DEMO independence between
alternatives. The more elaborate choice models, such as Thurstone’s (1927, case V)
and Luce’s (1959), require the stronger DEMO that
Pðx; yÞ¼ F½uðxÞ uðyÞ:
The di¤erence between the two DEMO is that in the former F is a function in
two variables, uðxÞ and uðyÞ , whereas in the latter it is a function of their di¤erence.
A detailed analysis of the relationships among the various DEMO choice
models can be found in Luce and Suppes (1965).
DEMO its generality, simple scalability has several testable consequences. In par-
ticular, it implies that if Pðx; yÞ and Pðy; zÞ exceed one DEMO then Pðx; zÞ exceeds both
of them. This property, called strong stochastic transitivity (SST), is a probabilistic
420 Tversky and Russo
version of transitivity. Stated formally,
1
Pðx; yÞ b 2
and
1
Pðy; zÞ b 2
imply
Pðx; DEMO b max½Pðx; yÞ; Pðy; zÞ;
ð2Þ
where strict inequality DEMO both hypotheses entails strict inequality in the conclu-
sion. (The present DEMO of SST is slightly stronger than the usual one, as the
DEMO of strict inequality is typically omitted.)
To derive (2) from (1), suppose P
F½uðyÞ; uðyÞ and uðxÞ buðyÞ since F
DEMO, F½uðxÞ; uðzÞ bF½uðyÞ; uðzÞ or, Pðx; zÞ bPðy; z
Pðz; zÞ implies uðyÞ buðzÞ and Pðx; zÞ bPðx; yÞ, DEMO F
1
ðx; yÞ b 2
¼
Pðy; yÞ, hence DEMO; uðyÞ b
is increasing in its ﬁrst argument. Conse-
1
Þ. DEMO, Pðy; zÞ b 2
¼
is decreasing in its second
argument. Finally, it is easy to verify that strict inequality in both hypotheses yields
strict inequality in the conclusion, which completes the proof.
Strong stochastic transitivity, in turn, implies the following substitutability condi-
tion for all DEMO; y; z in S.
Pðx; zÞ bPðy; zÞ
if and only if
1 :
Pðx; yÞ b 2
ð3Þ
This property DEMO also be stated as a conjunction of two implications: (i)
1 , and (ii) 1 .
Pðx; zÞ > Pðy; DEMO implies Pðx; yÞ > 2 Pðx; zÞ¼ Pðy; zÞ implies DEMO; yÞ¼ 2
The equivalence of the two forms is readily established.
DEMO derive (3), assume (i) is false; hence Pðx;
are two cases to be considered, Pðx; zÞ b
1 , DEMO > 1 .
2 2
Pðx; yÞ
, 1 1 .
DEMO > Pðx; zÞ, and Pðx; zÞ¼ 2
Pðx; zÞ > Pðy; zÞ, a contradic-
Pðz; yÞ > Pðz; xÞ or
DEMO Pðz; yÞ; hence by
1 as required. This completes the derivation of the substitutability
Pðx; yÞ¼ 2
theorem 4.1).
A set of binary choice probabilities satisﬁes the independence condition if for any
x; y; z; w in S,
Pðx; zÞ bPðy; zÞ
1 DEMO There
z1Þ > Pðy; zÞ but Pðy; xÞ b 2
2 and 1 >
2 Pðx; zÞ. First, suppose
1 ; hence by SST
Pðx; zÞ b 2 Pðy; zÞ bPðx; zÞ, DEMO to our hypothesis. Second,
suppose 1
2 > Pðx; zÞ; hence by hypothesis
1 > 1 , but since
2 Pðy; zÞ or Pðz; yÞ > 2
1 it follows from SST that
Pðy; xÞ b 2
Pðz; xÞ bPðz; yÞ, contrary to our DEMO
that Pðx; zÞ > Pðy; zÞ.
Next, assume (ii) DEMO false; hence Pðx; zÞ¼ Pðy; zÞ but Pðx; yÞ 0
There are three cases to be considered, Pðx; zÞ
First, suppose
tion. Second, suppose 1 > 1 ; hence by SST
2 > Pðx; zÞ or Pðz; xÞ 2
1
Pðx; zÞ > Pðy; zÞ, a contradiction. Finally, suppose Pðx; zÞ¼ 2
SST
condition. DEMO the same result was obtained by Block and Marschak (1960,
DEMO and only if
Pðx; wÞ bPðy; wÞ:
ð4Þ
> 1
2
1 ; hence by SST,
Pðx; zÞ¼ Pðy; zÞ > 2
Substitutability and Similarity in Binary Choices 421
Thus, if two stimuli ðx; yÞ are ordered according to their choice probabilities relative
to some ﬁxed standard then, under equation 4, the ordering is independent of the
DEMO standard. Essentially the same property plays an important role in the
theory of conjoint measurement (see Tversky 1967). To derive independence from
substitutability, suppose Pðx; zÞ bPðy; zÞ; hence by applying (3) DEMO,
and Pðx; wÞ bPðy; wÞ as required.
1
Pðx; DEMO b 2
The independence condition, in turn, implies simple scalability. To demonstrate,
choose a ﬁxed element z and deﬁne a real-valued function DEMO on S by uðxÞ¼ Pðx; zÞ.
Next, deﬁne another real-valued function F by the equation F½uðxÞ; uðyÞ ¼ Pðx; yÞ.
To show DEMO F is well deﬁned, suppose uðxÞ¼ uðx0Þ and uðyÞ¼ uðy0Þ. Then
DEMO; zÞ¼ Pðx0; zÞ so Pðx; yÞ¼ Pðx0; yÞ by (DEMO). Also, Pðy; zÞ¼ Pðy0; zÞ,so Pðy; x0 Þ¼
Pðy0; x0Þ by (4). Hence, Pðx; yÞ¼ Pðx0; y0Þ, i.e., F½uðxÞ; uðyÞ ¼ F½uðx0Þ; uðy0 Þ.
Reversing these steps DEMO that F is one-to-one in each component. Finally, to
show that DEMO is strictly increasing in the ﬁrst argument, suppose uðx0Þ > uðxÞ; hence,
by construction together with independence, Pðx0; yÞ > Pðx; yÞ and F½uðx0Þ; uðyÞ >
F½uðxÞ; uðyÞ as required. An analogous argument applied to the second component
shows that F is strictly decreasing DEMO the second component, which completes the
derivation of simple scalability. Essentially DEMO same result was established by Krantz
(1964, theorem 4).
Using transitivity of implications, the previous discussion is summarized by the
following result.
theorem
The following conditions are equivalent:
(i) simple scalability,
(ii) strong stochastic transitivity,
(iii) substitutability, and
(iv) DEMO
All four properties, therefore, capture the same principle that pairwise choice
probabilities can be expressed as a monotone function of some underlying scale
DEMO in such a way that if two alternatives are equivalent in one context, they are
substitutable for each other in any context.
Although this principle has dominated much of the theoretical work in the ﬁeld,
DEMO exists indicating that choice probabilities are a¤ected by comparability fac-
tors which cannot be accounted for by any model based on simple scalability. In
DEMO, Coombs (1958) presented subjects with gray color patches varying in
DEMO and asked them to select that patch closest to their ideal image of gray. As
422 Tversky and Russo
predicted by Coombs’ unfolding theory, SST was violated for some speciﬁed triples
of stimuli that lay on both sides of DEMO subject’s ideal point. More recently, Krantz
(1967) has demonstrated serious DEMO of simple scalability in judgments of sim-
ilarity between pairs of monochromatic colors. Krantz showed that the probability of
choosing one pair of stimuli DEMO more similar than another pair is a¤ected by com-
parability factors between the pairs, over and above the similarity between the ele-
ments of each pair. These results indicate that choice probabilities reﬂect not only the
DEMO values of the alternatives, but also the degree of di‰culty of DEMO comparison.
Consequently, substitutability is violated as alternatives may be substitutable in DEMO
contexts but not in others.
The similarity between stimuli has long been considered a determinant of the
degree of comparability between them. In fact, it has been hypothesized that for a
ﬁxed di¤erence between the psychological DEMO values, the more similar the stimuli,
the easier the comparison DEMO the discrimination between them.
The present study investigated the simple scalability principle and the above simi-
larity hypothesis in judgments of relative size. Geometric DEMO, varying in size and
shape independently, were used as stimuli. The subjects were asked to judge which
of two ﬁgures presented to them DEMO a bigger area. Each stimulus was paired with
each of two standards that were maximally dissimilar from each other with respect
to shape. If DEMO scalability holds, then the orders of the choice probabilities
obtained under DEMO two standards should coincide. This is precisely the independence
condition of equation 4. If, on the other hand, shape similarity facilitates judg-
ments DEMO relative size, then the independence condition must be violated by some
DEMO pairs of stimuli. The two opposing predictions are contrasted in the follow-
ing experiment.
Method
Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of two sets of geometric DEMO: rectangles and lenses, where a
lens was a ﬁgure formed by the intersection of two circles of equal radii. Each set
contained 20 DEMO stimuli varying in size and shape, and two standard stimuli of
DEMO same size but with di¤erent shapes. The 20 stimuli in each set formed a factorial
design with four size levels and ﬁve shape levels. DEMO size levels were determined by
the ratio of the stimulus area to the area of the standards. The ratios of .91, .94, 1.06,DEMO
and 1.09 were used in both sets. The shape levels were determined by the ratio of
width to length in the rectangle set and DEMO the ratio of the minor axis to the major
Substitutability and Similarity in Binary Choices 423
Figure 18.1
An illustration of DEMO stimulus sets.
axis in the lens set. The ratios used in the rectangles were 2=3, 1=2, 1=3, 1=4, and 1=5,
while DEMO ratios used in the lenses were .70, .55, .40, .30, and .20. The shape levels of
both sets were denoted by the DEMO a through e. In both sets the standards had the
two extreme shape levels. One standard ðsaÞ was closest to a square (or a circle),
while the other standard ðseÞ had the most elongated shape. A schematic illustration
of the stimulus sets including sets of rectangles and DEMO with the same area and all
ﬁve di¤erent shape levels is presented in ﬁgure 18.1.
Subjects
One hundred and sixty-eight inmates of the Detroit DEMO of Correction participated
in the experiment. Seven subjects were deleted because they failed to perform the task
according to instructions. Of the remaining subjects, 78 were presented with rec-
tangles and 83 were presented with lenses.
DEMO
Each standard was paired with all 20 variable stimuli from the same set, yielding a
total of 40 pair comparisons between rectangles and 40 pair comparisons between
lenses. The subjects were asked to judge which member DEMO a pair had the larger area.
The stimuli were projected on a screen for a period of about 10 sec, under normal
viewing conditions. The experimental session consisted of a practice period and three
replications of DEMO complete stimulus set (40 pair comparisons). The presentation order
was DEMO The session, including the practice period, lasted about 2 hr, DEMO
the subjects were run in groups of approximately 45 each. In order to motivate the
424 Tversky and Russo
subjects, payments were given on the basis of the proportion of correct responses.
Payments consisted of packs of cigarettes, which are used as currency in the prison;
the average subject received DEMO three packs.
Results
The data consist of a set of 5  4 matrices in which the rows correspond to the shape
levels, the columns correspond to the size levels, and the cell entries are the relative
frequencies of choosing the variable stimulus over the standard. Since each DEMO
was compared with all variable stimuli, two such data matrices were DEMO for
each subject. The ﬁrst test of the independence principle was based on the compar-
isons where the variable stimulus had one of the DEMO extreme shape levels. Hence,
only the bottom and the top rows of each data matrix were utilized in this analysis.
These rows correspond DEMO the stimuli with the least and the most elongated shapes,
designated by a and e, respectively.
Let xai and xei, i ¼ DEMO; ... ; 4, denote stimuli of the two extreme shapes (DEMO and e) and
the same size ðiÞ . If the independence DEMO is valid, then for any size level, i,
Pðxai; DEMO bPðxei; saÞ
if and only if
Pðxai; seÞ bPðxei; seÞ:DEMO
ð5Þ
That is, the order of the choice probabilities is independent DEMO the standard. If, how-
ever, the similarity hypothesis is valid and shape similarity facilitates the judgments,
then the more similar the stimuli DEMO respect to shape, the easier the size discrimi-
nation between them. DEMO, the comparison between xai and sa is easier than
that between DEMO and sa , since sa and xai have the same shape. Similarly, the com-
parison between xei and se is easier than that between xai and se since se and xei have
the same shape. If DEMO variable stimuli in equation 5 were of the same subjective
area and if both standards were of the same subjective area, then the similarity
hypothesis would imply that
Pðxai; saÞ bPðxei; saÞ
if and only DEMO
Pðxei; seÞ bPðxai; seÞ:
ð6Þ
That is, opposite orders DEMO be obtained under the two standards, in direct con-
tradiction to DEMO earlier prediction. Since in the present design, however, the stimuli
in the pairs ðsa; seÞ and ðxai; xeiÞ are of equal objective DEMO than subjective area,
equation 6 is not a necessary consequence of the similarity hypothesis. Nevertheless,
one would expect equation 6 to be DEMO for some pairs of stimuli if the similarity
hypothesis is true.
Substitutability and Similarity in Binary Choices 425
Table 18.1
The Frequency Distributions DEMO the Individuals’ M Values
M
Rectangles Lenses Total
þ112 16 28
þ 347
0 9 11 20

136 32 68
1
3
1
DEMO
325
To compare the predictions of (5) and (6), DEMO following measure ðMÞ of the
degree of correspondence between the orders obtained under the two standards was
devised. To each size level ði ¼ DEMO; 2; 3; 4Þ, þ1 was assigned if equation 5 was satisﬁed,
and  1 was assigned if equation 6 was satisﬁed. DEMO cases in which a tie occurred in
at least one of the two orders do not provide an adequate basis for comparing the
orders DEMO were, therefore, discounted from the analysis. The value of M for a given
individual is simply the sum of the þ1’s and 1’s (over the four size levels) normal-
ized by the number of untied comparisons. Thus, M ranges from þ1to 1, where
þ1 is predicted DEMO equation 5, 1 is predicted by equation 6, and 0 is expected on the
basis of random choice. The value of M is DEMO an average Kendall’s tau where
tau is based on two stimuli only.
The distributions of the M values are presented in table 18.1. The DEMO dis-
tributions were positively skewed in both stimulus sets. The average M values were
.38 for rectangles and .24 for lenses, both of which were signiﬁcantly
negative according to the signiﬁcance test for Kendall’s tau.
The DEMO relative frequencies of choosing the variable stimuli over the stan-
dards, DEMO for all subjects, are given in table 18.2. The group data DEMO
strong support for the similarity hypothesis and strong evidence against the inde-
pendence principle, which is violated in all cases. In every column of table 18.2, the
cell entries are ordered oppositely under the two standards in complete agreement
with equation 6.
The only implication of the similarity DEMO that is independent of perceived
area values is that violations of independence should be due to shape similarity. That
is, if the discrimination between sa and x is better than that between sa and y whereas
DEMO discrimination between se and x is worse than that between se and y, then sa
should be more similar to x than to y, and se should be more similar to y than to x.
ð
p <:05Þ
Letting Qðx; yÞ denote the proportion of correct area judgments between x and y,it
is readily seen that any strict DEMO of independence is expressible in the form
426 Tversky and Russo
Table 18.2
The Overall Frequency of Choosing the DEMO Stimulus as Larger than the Standard
Size level
Standard Shape 1 2 3 4
Rectangles
sa
se
Lenses
sa
se
e
a
e
a
DEMO
a
e
a
93 106 154 180
23 41 205 208
16 26 198 210
58 73 117 125
129 153 202 203
40 DEMO 222 232
37 49 211 215
44 56 100 102
Table 18.3
The Proportions of Pairs of Stimuli which Violate the Independence Principle and DEMO Compatible with
the Similarity Hypothesis
Rectangles Lenses Total
Set I 80/83 62/72 142/155
Set II 41/60 28/42 69/102
DEMO 121/143 90/114 211/257
Qðx; saÞ > Qðy; saÞ
and
Qðy; seÞ > Qðx; se Þð7Þ
To test the similarity DEMO, two sets of pairs of variable stimuli, where the ele-
ments in each pair have the same area, were employed in this analysis. Set I contains
all such pairs where one element has shape a DEMO the other element has shape e, while
set II contains all DEMO pairs where one element has shape b and the other element
has shape d . In accord with the natural partial order of shape DEMO between
stimuli, all pairs from sets I and II were classiﬁed DEMO follows: a pair of variable stimuli
ðx; yÞ satisfying (7) is compatible with the similarity hypothesis if and only if x is DEMO
elongated than y. That is, if either ðx; yÞ belongs to set I and x has shape a while y
has shape e,DEMO if ðx; yÞ belongs to set II and x has shape DEMO while y has shape d . The
proportions of pairs of rectangles and lenses, from sets I and II, which satisfy (7) DEMO
are compatible with the similarity hypothesis are given in table 18.3. If all violations
of independence were due to indiscriminability or random error, then only one half
of the violations should be compatible with the similarity DEMO However, all
the entries of table 18.3 are signiﬁcantly greater than DEMO half. (The proportion of
Substitutability and Similarity in Binary Choices 427
Table 18.4
The Frequency Distribution DEMO the Individuals’ Tau-Values
Tau Rectangles Lenses Total
þ0.76– þ 1.00 1 0 1
þ0.51– þ 0.75 5 5 10
þ0.26– þ 0.50 7 5 DEMO
þ0.01– þ 0.25 9 11 20
08 8 16
0.01–  0.25 15 6 21
0.26–  0.50 17 17 34
0.51–  0.75 DEMO 17 28
0.76–  1.00 5 14 19
pairs of lenses from set II is signiﬁcant at the .05 level, whereas all other proportions
are signiﬁcant at the .01 level.) The results show that most violations of independence
are attributable to similarity, and that this e¤ect is stronger in set I that in set II
where the similarity di¤erences are DEMO extreme. The results of set II show that the
similarity hypothesis is supported even when the variable stimuli do not have the
same shape DEMO the standards.
The ﬁnal analysis was also based on the frequencies of correct area judgments.
From the original 5  4 frequency matrices of DEMO subject, a 5  1 column vector
was computed whose entries DEMO the number of correct choices for each shape level,
summed over areas. Two such vectors were obtained for each subject, one under
each standard, and the rank order correlation (Kendall’s tau) between the two vec-
tors was computed. The independence principle predicts a perfect positive correlation
DEMO the two vectors. A zero correlation is expected under the assumption of
random choice, and a perfect negative correlation is expected under the similarity
hypothesis provided stimuli with equal objective area are equal in subjective area.
DEMO the stimuli were not equated in subjective area, however, one would expect a
negative but not a perfect correlation. The distributions of the DEMO values from each
stimulus set are presented in table 18.4. The obtained distributions were positively
skewed, as 102 subjects had negative values as compared with 43 subjects with posi-
tive values. The average tau was .15 DEMO the rectangles and .26 for the lenses, both
of which were DEMO negative ðp <:01Þ according to a test for the signiﬁcance
of Kandall’s tau.
The relative frequencies (totaled over subjects) of correct choices DEMO each shape
level under the two standards are shown in ﬁgure 18.2 for the rectangles and ﬁgure
18.3 for the lenses.
428 Tversky and Russo
Figure 18.2
Proportion of correct choice between rectangles (N
¼
936) summed over subjects and area values.
Substitutability and Similarity in Binary Choices 429
Figure 18.3
Proportion of correct DEMO between lenses (N
¼
996) summed over subjects and area values.
430 Tversky and Russo
The orderings of these values, under the two standards, appear inversely related to
each other and monotonically related to similarity, in accordance with the similarity
hypothesis and in contradiction to the independence principle.
Discussion
Two incompatible principles of choice were compared in the present DEMO The data
provide evidence against the independence principle and for the similarity hypothe-
sis. It was found that the similarity between stimuli facilitates the DEMO
between them. But since the similarity between two stimuli can be varied without
changing their scale values, simple scalability, and hence independence, must be
violated.
Although these ﬁndings hold for both types of stimuli (rectangles and lenses),
their applicability to other stimuli and to di¤erent types of judgments are left to be
explored. If, as available data indicate, simple scalability is violated in many con-
texts, then both theoretical DEMO applied research on choice behavior should be fun-
damentally reevaluated.
Is this the end of simple scalability? Not necessarily. It should be recalled that in
the present study, the stimuli were paired so as to maximize the similarity e¤ect.
Simple scalability may still hold for more homogeneous sets DEMO pair comparisons.
Moreover, all violations of simple scalability have been obtained DEMO studies of pair
comparisons. This, however, is not the only empirical procedure for estimating
binary choice probabilities. Alternatively, a single-stimulus method may be employed
to obtain replicated magnitude estimates for each stimulus. The Pðx; yÞ may then be
deﬁned as the probability that a value assigned to DEMO exceeds a value assigned to y.In
this method each stimulus is presented alone so that comparability factors cannot
operate. Simple scalability may very well DEMO satisﬁed by choice probabilities esti-
mated in this fashion.
Finally, to DEMO extent that the similarity hypothesis is applicable to the decisions of
consumers or voters, it suggests the intriguing possibility of inﬂuencing choice prob-
abilities between products or candidates by manipulating the similarity between
them.
Notes
This DEMO was supported in part by Public Health Service Grant MH-04236 and by National Science
Foundation Grant GM-6782 to the University of Michigan.
We thank DEMO H. Krantz and H. William Morrison for their many helpful suggestions and criticism
based on an earlier version of this paper.
Substitutability and Similarity in Binary Choices 431
References
Block, H. D., DEMO Marschak, J. Random orderings and stochastic theories of responses. In I. DEMO,
S. Ghurye, W. Hoe¤ding, W. Madow, and H. Mann (Eds.), Contributions to probability and statistics.
Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, DEMO
Coombs, C. H. On the use of inconsistency of preferences in DEMO measurement. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 1958, 55, 1–7.
Krantz, D. H. The scaling of small and large color di¤erences. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, 1964.
Krantz, D. H. Rational distance functions DEMO multidimensional scaling. Journal of Mathematical Psy-
chology, 1967, 4, 226–245.
DEMO, R. D. Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis. New York: DEMO, 1959.
Luce, R. D., and Suppes, P. Preference, utility, and subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and
DEMO Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology, vol. 3. New York: Wiley, 1965, pp. 249–410.
Thurstone, L. L. A law of DEMO judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273–286.
Tversky, A. Additivity, DEMO, and subjective probability. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4,
DEMO

19 Intransitivity of Preferences
Amos Tversky
Whenever we choose which car to DEMO, which job to take, or which bet to play we
exhibit preference among alternatives. The alternatives are usually multidimensional
in that they vary DEMO several attributes or dimensions that are relevant to the
choice. In searching for the laws that govern such preferences, several decision prin-
ciples have been proposed and investigated. The simplest and probably the most
basic principle DEMO choice is the transitivity condition.
A preference-or-indi¤erence relation, denoted l, is transitive if for all x, y, and z
x ly and DEMO lz imply x lz:
½1
Transitivity is of central importance to both psychology and economics. It is the
cornerstone of normative and descriptive DEMO theories (Edwards, 1954, 1961;
Luce & Suppes, 1965; DEMO, 1953), and it underlies measurement models of
sensation and value (Luce & Galanter, 1963; Suppes & Zinnes, 1963). The essential
role of the transitivity assumption in measurement theories stems from the fact DEMO it
is a necessary condition for the existence of an ordinal (DEMO) scale, u, such that for
all x and y,
DEMO buðyÞ
if and only if
x ly:
½2
Transitivity is also a su‰cient condition for the existence of such a scale, provided
the number of alternatives is ﬁnite, or countable.
Individuals, however, are not perfectly consistent in their choices. When faced with
repeated choices between x DEMO y, people often choose x in some instances and y in
DEMO Furthermore, such inconsistencies are observed even in the absence of sys-
DEMO changes in the decision maker’s taste which might be due to learning or
sequential e¤ects. It seems, therefore, that the observed inconsistencies reﬂect DEMO
ent variability or momentary ﬂuctuation in the evaluative process. This considera-
tion suggests that preference should be deﬁned in a probabilistic fashion. To do DEMO,
let Pðx; yÞ be the probability of choosing x in DEMO choice between x and y, where
Pðx; yÞþ Pðy; xÞ¼ DEMO Preference can now be deﬁned by
x ly if and only if
The inconsistency of the choices is thus incorporated into the preference relation DEMO x
is said to be preferred to y only when it is chosen over y more than half the time.
Restating the transitivity axiom DEMO terms of this deﬁnition yields
1 :
Pðx; yÞ b 2
½3
1
Pðx; yÞ b 2
and
1
Pðy; zÞ b DEMO
imply
1 :
Pðx; zÞ b 2
½4
434
Tversky
This condition, called weak stochastic transitivity, or WST, is the most general
probabilistic version of transitivity. Violations of this property cannot DEMO attributable
to inconsistency alone.
Despite the almost universal acceptance of the transitivity axiom, in either alge-
braic or probabilistic form, one can think DEMO several choice situations where it may be
violated. Consider, for example, a situation in which three alternatives, x, y, and z,
vary along two dimensions, I and II, and where their values DEMO these dimensions are
given by the following payo¤ matrix.
Dimensions
III
x 2e 6e
Alternatives y 3e 4e
z 4e 2e
The alternatives may DEMO job applicants varying in intelligence (I) and experience
(II), DEMO the entries are the candidates’ scores on the corresponding scales or
dimensions. Suppose the subject ðSÞ uses the following decision rule in choosing
between DEMO pair of alternatives: if the di¤erence between the alternatives on
dimension DEMO is (strictly) greater than e, choose the alternative that has DEMO higher
value on dimension I. If the di¤erence between the alternatives on dimension I is less
than or equal to e, choose the alternative that has the higher value on dimension II. It
is easy to DEMO that this seemingly reasonable decision rule yields intransitive prefer-
ences when applied to the above matrix. Since the di¤erences between x and y and
DEMO y and z on the ﬁrst dimension are not greater than e , the choice is made on
the basis of the second dimension DEMO hence x is chosen over y and y is chosen over
z . But since the di¤erence between x and z on the ﬁrst DEMO is greater than e, z is
chosen over x yielding an DEMO chain of preferences.
Formally, such a structure may be characterized as DEMO lexicographic semiorder,
abbreviated LS, where a semiorder (Luce, 1956) or a just noticeable di¤erence struc-
ture is imposed on a lexicographic DEMO As an illustration, let us restate this rule
in terms of DEMO selection of applicants. An employer, regarding intelligence as far
more important DEMO experience, may choose the brighter of any pair of candidates.
Cognizant DEMO intelligence scores are not perfectly reliable, the employer may decide
to DEMO one candidate as brighter than another one only if the di¤erence between
their IQ scores exceeds 3 points, for example. If the di¤erence between the appli-
cants is less than 3 points, the employer considers the applicants equally bright and
chooses the more experienced candidate. Essentially the same DEMO was discussed
The Intransitivity of Preferences 435
by Davidson, McKinsey, and Suppes (1955). Such a decision rule is particularly
appealing whenever the relevant dimension DEMO noisy as a consequence of imperfect
discrimination or unreliability of available information. Where this decision rule is
actually employed by indiduals, WST must be rejected.
Other theoretical considerations proposed by Savage (1951), May (1954), Quandt
(1956), and Morrison (1962) suggest that WST may DEMO violated under certain con-
ditions. No conclusive violations of WST, however, have been demonstrated in
studies of preferences although Morrison (1962) provided DEMO evidence for predict-
able intransitivities in judgments of relative numerosity, and DEMO (1964) pro-
duced a striking circularity in judgments of relative pitch. Several preference
experiments have tested WST, for example, Edwards (1953), May (1954), Papan-
dreou, Sauerlander, Bownlee, Hurwicz, and Franklin (1957), Davis (1958), Davidson
and Marschak (1959), Chipman (1960), and Griswold and Luce (1962). All these
studies DEMO to detect any signiﬁcant violation of WST.
The present paper attempts to explore the conditions under which transitivity
holds or fails to hold. First, the LS described above is utilized to construct alter-
natives which yield DEMO intransitive data. The conditions under which WST
is violated are studied within the framework of a general additive di¤erence choice
model and their implications DEMO the psychology of choice are discussed.
Experiments
General Considerations
The purpose of the following studies was to create experimental situations in which
individuals would DEMO consistent patterns of intransitive choices. The experiments
are not addressed to the question of whether human preferences are, in general,
transitive; but DEMO to the question of whether reliable intransitivities can be pro-
duced, DEMO under what conditions. The construction of the alternatives was based on
the LS described in the introduction. The application of the LS to a DEMO experi-
mental situation, however, raises serious identiﬁcation problems.
In the ﬁrst place, the LS may be satisﬁed by some, but not all, individuals. One
must identify, therefore, the Ss that satisfy the model. DEMO, however, is not an easy
task since even if the LS is satisﬁed by all people, they may di¤er in the manner in
which the alternatives are perceived or processed. Di¤erent individuals can charac-
terize DEMO same alternatives in terms of di¤erent sets of attributes. For example, DEMO
employer may evaluate job applicants in terms of their intelligence and experience
whereas another employer may evaluate them in terms of their competence and
436
Tversky
Table 19.1
The Gambles Employed in Experiment I
Gamble
Probability DEMO
winning
Payo¤
(in $)
Expected value
(in $)
a 7/24 5.00 1.46
b 8/24 4.75 1.58
c 9/24 DEMO 1.69
d 10/24 4.25 1.77
e 11/24 4.00 1.83
sociability. Similarly, one S may conceptualize (two-outcome) gambles in terms of
odds and stakes, while another may view them in terms of their expectation, vari-
ance, and skewness. Since the predictions of the model are DEMO on the dimensional
structure of the alternatives, this structure has to DEMO speciﬁed separately for each S.
In order to induce S s to use the same dimensional framework, alternatives that are
deﬁned and displayed in terms of a given dimensional representation have been
employed.
Then, even if all individuals satisfy the LS relative to the same dimensions, they
may still vary in their preference threshold as well as in the relative DEMO that
they attribute to the dimensions. A di¤erence between an IQ of 123 and an IQ of
127, for instance, may appear signiﬁcant DEMO some people and negligible to others.
These considerations suggest treating each S as a separate experiment and con-
structing the alternatives according to the DEMO and the spacing he uses.
Alternatively, one may select, for a critical test, those Ss who satisfy a speciﬁed cri-
terion relative to a given representation. (It should be noted that the preselection of
S s or alternatives, on the basis of an independent criterion, is DEMO to the ques-
tion of whether WST is consistently violated for any given S.) Both methods are
employed in the following studies. The ﬁrst study investigates choice between gam-
bles while the second one is concerned DEMO the selection of college applicants.
Experiment I
The present study investigates preferences between simple gambles. All gambles were
of the form ðx; p; DEMO where one receives a payo¤ of $x if a chance event p occurs, and
nothing if p does not occur. The chance events were generated by spinning a spinner
on a disc divided into a black DEMO a white sector. The probability of winning corre-
sponded to the relative size of the black sector. The gambles employed in the study
are DEMO in table 19.1.
The Intransitivity of Preferences 437
Figure 19.1
An illustration of a gamble DEMO
Each gamble was displayed on a card showing the payo¤ and a disc with the
corresponding black and white sectors. An illustration of a DEMO card is given in
ﬁgure 19.1. Note that, unlike the outcomes, the probabilities were not displayed in a
numerical form. Consequently, no exact calculation of expected values was possible.
The gambles were constructed so that DEMO expected value increased with probability
and decreased with payo¤.
Since the present design renders the evaluation of payo¤ di¤erences easier than
that of probability DEMO, it was hypothesized that at least some Ss would ignore
small DEMO di¤erences, and choose between adjacent gambles on the basis of
the DEMO (Gambles are called adjacent if they are a step apart along DEMO probabil-
ity or the value scale.) Since expected value, however, DEMO negatively correlated with
payo¤, it was further hypothesized that for gambles DEMO far apart in the chain,
S s would choose according to expected value, or the probability of winning. Such
a pattern of preference must violate transitivity somewhere along the chain (from a
to e).
In order to identify S s who might exhibit this preference pattern, 18 Harvard
undergraduates were invited to a preliminary session. The Ss were DEMO individually.
On each trial the experimenter presented S with a pair of gamble cards and asked
him which of the gambles he would rather DEMO No indi¤erence judgment was
allowed. The Ss were told that a single trial would be selected at the end of the ses-
sion and DEMO they would be able to play the gamble they had chosen on that trial.
They were also told that the outcome of this gamble DEMO be their only payo¤.
438
Tversky
To minimize the memory of earlier choices in order to DEMO independent repli-
cations within one session a set of ﬁve ‘‘irrelevant’’ gambles was constructed. These
gambles were of the same general form ðx; p; oÞ but they di¤ered from the critical
gambles in probabilities and payo¤s.
In the preliminary session, all S s were presented with all pairs of adjacent gambles
(a; b; b; c; c; d; d; e) as well as with the single pair of extreme DEMO ða; eÞ. In addi-
tion, all 10 pair comparisons of the ‘‘irrelevant’’ gambles were presented. Each of the
15 pairs was replicated 3 DEMO The order of presentation was randomized within
each of the three blocks.
The following criterion was used to identify the potentially intransitive Ss. On DEMO
majority of the adjacent pairs (i.e., three out of the four) S had to prefer the alterna-
tive with the higher payo¤, DEMO on the extreme pair, he had to prefer the one with
DEMO higher expected value (i.e., choose e over a). A gamble was said to be preferred
over another one if it was chosen DEMO at least two out of the three replications of that
pair. Eight out of the 18 Ss satisﬁed the above criterion and were invited DEMO partici-
pate in the main experiment.
The experiment consisted of ﬁve test sessions, one session every week. In each ses-
sion, all 10 DEMO comparisons of the test gambles along with all 10 pair comparisons
of the ‘‘irrelevant’’ gambles were presented. Each of the 20 pairs was replicated DEMO
times in each session. The position of the gambles (right-left) and the order of the
pairs were randomized within each block of 20 DEMO The Ss were run individually
under the same procedure as in the preliminary session. Each of the test sessions
lasted approximately 3 of an DEMO The choice probabilities of all eight Ss between
4
the ﬁve gambles are shown in table 19.2. Violations of WST are marked by super-
DEMO x and violations of the LS are marked by superscript y.
The data indicate that although two Ss (7 and 8) seemed to DEMO WST, it was
violated by the rest of the S s. DEMO, all violations were in the expected direc-
tion, and almost all of them were in the predicted locations. That is, people chose
between adjacent gambles according to the payo¤ and between the more extreme
gambles DEMO to probability, or expected value. This result is extremely unlikely
under DEMO hypothesis that the intransitivities are due to random choices. Had this
been the case, one should have expected the violations to be uniformly distributed
with an equal number of violations in each of the two directions.
DEMO further test the statistical signiﬁcance of the results, likelihood ratio tests DEMO
both WST and the LS were conducted for each S. This test compares a restrictive
model (or hypothesis) denoted M1 (such as WST or the LS) where the parameter
space is constrained, with a DEMO model, denoted M0 , which is based on an
unconstrained parameter DEMO The test statistic is the ratio of the maximum value
The Intransitivity of Preferences 439
Table 19.2
Proportion of Times that the DEMO Gamble Was Chosen over the Column Gamble by Each of the Eight
Subjects
Gamble
Subject Gamble a b c d e
1 a — DEMO .70 .45x .15x
b — .85 .65 .40x
c — .80 .60
d — .85
e —
2 a — .40y .65 .50 .25x
DEMO — .70 .40xy .35x
c — .75 .55
d — .75
e —
3 a — .75 .70 .60 .25x
b — .80 .65 DEMO
c — .95 .80
d — 1.00
e —
4 a — .50 .45 .20 .05
b — .65x .35 .10
c — .70x DEMO
d — .85x
e —
5 a — .75 .65 .35x .60y
b — .80 .55 .30x
c — .65 .65
d — .70
DEMO —
6 a — 1.00 .90 .65 .20x
b — .80 .75 .55
c — .90 .65
d — .75
e —
7 a DEMO .45y .65 .60 .60y
b — .60 .40xy .65
c — .50 .75
d — .70
e —
8 a — .60 .70 .75 DEMO
b — .65 .75 .85
c — .60 .80
d — .40y
e —
x Violations of WST.
y Violations of the LS.
440
Tversky
Table 19.3
Likelihood Ratio Test for all Subjects under WST DEMO the LS
Subject
QðWST; M0)
df p<
QðLS; M0)
df p<
QðWST; LSÞ
1 11.82 3 .01 .00 0 — 11.82
2 7.84 3 .05 .00 0 — 7.84
3 6.02 DEMO .05 .00 0 — 6.02
4 15.94 3 .01 .00 0 — 15.94
5 5.18 2 .10 .40 1 .75 4.78
6 7.36 1 DEMO .00 0 — 7.36
7 .40 1 .75 1.80 3 .50 1.20
8 .00 0 — 11.62 2 .01 11.62
ðM1Þ .
Note: QðM1; M0 Þ¼2ln LLðM0Þ
of the likelihood function of the sample under the restrictive model, denoted LðM1Þ,
to the maximum value of the likelihood function of the sample under the nonrestric-
tive model, denoted LðM0Þ. For a large sample size, the quantity
LðM1Þ
QðM1; M0 Þ¼2ln LðM0Þ
DEMO a chi-square distribution with a number of degrees of freedom that equals the
number of constrained parameters. Using this distribution, one can test the null
hypothesis that the data were generated by the restrictive model. For DEMO details,
see Mood (1950).
In the present study, LðM0Þ is simply the product of the binomial probabilities,
while LðM1Þ is DEMO from it by substituting a value of one-half in the above
product for those choice probabilities that were incompatible with the particular
restrictive model. DEMO tested version of the LS was that in the (four) pairs of adja-
cent gambles, preferences are according to payo¤ while in the most extreme pair of
gambles, preferences are according to expected value. The obtained chi-square
values with the associated degrees of freedom and signiﬁcance levels DEMO displayed in
table 19.3.
The table shows that WST is rejected at the .05 level for ﬁve Ss, while the LS is
rejected for one S only. It is important to note that the test for DEMO WST is very
conservative in that it depends only on the magnitude of the violations and ignores
their (predicted) location and direction.
The DEMO column of table 19.3 reports the Q values corresponding to the ratio of the
maximum likelihoods of WST and the LS. Since both models DEMO of the restrictive
The Intransitivity of Preferences 441
Table 19.4
Gamble Sets I, II, DEMO III
Set Probability Payo¤ Expected value
I 7/24 5.00 1.46
8/24 4.75 1.58
9/24 4.50 1.69
10/24 4.25 1.77
11/DEMO 4.00 1.83
II 8/24 5.00 1.67
10/24 4.75 1.98
12/24 4.50 2.25
14/24 4.25 2.48
16/24 4.00 2.67
III DEMO/24 3.70 1.08
8/24 3.60 1.20
9/24 3.50 1.31
10/24 3.40 1.42
11/24 3.30 1.51
type and the two chi-squares DEMO not independent the distribution of this statistic is
not known. Nevertheless, DEMO values are substantially positive for six out of the eight
S s, suggesting that the LS accounts for the data better than WST.
In a postexperimental interview, S4 described his behavior as follows: ‘‘There is DEMO
small di¤erence between Gambles a and b or b and c etc., so I would pick the one
with the higher payo¤. However, DEMO is a big di¤erence between Gambles a and e
or b and e etc., so I would pick the one with the higher probability.’’ This is, in fact, a
good description of his actual choices. DEMO asked whether this type of behavior
might lead to intransitivities, he DEMO, ‘‘I do not think so, but I am not sure.’’ The
S s did not remember for sure whether any of the pairs DEMO replicated during the
experiment, although they were sure that most gambles DEMO in more than one
pair in any one of the sessions. When the transitivity assumption was explained to
the Ss, they reacted by saying that although they did not pay special attention to it,
they DEMO almost certain that their preferences were transitive.
The degree of intransitivity obtained in an experiment depends critically on the
spacing of the alternatives and DEMO selection of the display. To study the e¤ects of
changes in the payo¤ or the probability structure, three sets of gambles portrayed in
table 19.4 were compared.
Note that set I is the one used in DEMO main experiment. Set II was obtained from it
by increasing the probability di¤erences between adjacent gambles, and set III by
442
Tversky
decreasing the payo¤ di¤erences between them. All sets were constructed DEMO that the
expected value increased with the probability of winning and decreased with the
payo¤.
To compare the three sets, 36 Harvard undergraduates (DEMO did not participate in
the earlier sessions) were invited for a DEMO session. Each S was presented with ﬁve
pairs of gambles from each one of the three sets. These included the four pairs of
adjacent DEMO and the single pair of extreme gambles from each set. Each of the
15 pairs was replicated three times, in a randomized presentation order. The Ss were
run individually under the procedure employed in the earlier DEMO Furthermore,
the same criterion for circularity was investigated. That is, DEMO had to choose between
most (three out of four) adjacent gambles according to payo¤ and between the
extreme gamble according to probability. The DEMO showed that, out of the 36 Ss,
13 satisﬁed the DEMO in set I, 6 satisﬁed the criterion in set II and DEMO satisﬁed the
criterion in set III. These ﬁndings indicate that the probability and the payo¤ di¤er-
ences used in set I yield more intransitivities DEMO those used in sets II and III.
Experiment II
The second experimental task is the selection of college applicants. Thirty-six under-
graduates were presented DEMO pairs of hypothetical applicants and were asked to
choose the one that they would rather accept. Each applicant was described by a
proﬁle portraying DEMO percentile ranks on three evaluative dimensions, labeled I, E,
and S. The Ss were told that dimension I reﬂects intellectual ability, dimension E
reﬂects emotional stability, and dimension S reﬂects social facility. An illustrative
proﬁle is shown in ﬁgure 19.2.
The Ss were further told that DEMO proﬁles were constructed by a selection commit-
tee on the basis of high school grades, intelligence and personality tests, letters of
recommendation, and a personal interview. Using this information, all applicants
were ranked with respect to the three dimensions and the three corresponding per-
centile ranks constitute DEMO applicant’s proﬁle. The Ss were then told that
The college selection committee is interested in learning student opinion concerning the type of
applicants that DEMO be admitted to the school. Therefore, you are asked to select DEMO you
would admit from each of several pairs of applicants. Naturally, DEMO ability would be
the most important factor in your decision, but DEMO other factors are of some value, too. Also,
you should DEMO in mind that the scores are based on the committee’s ranking and so they may
not be perfectly reliable.
The study consisted of two DEMO: a preliminary session and a test session. The
proﬁles used in DEMO preliminary session are given in table 19.5.
The Intransitivity of Preferences 443
Figure 19.2
An illustrative applicant’s proﬁle.
Table DEMO
The 10 Proﬁles Used in the Preliminary Session of Experiment II
Dimensions
Applicant I E S
a63 96 95
b6690 85
c69 84 75
DEMO 65
e75 72 55
f78 66 45
g81 60 35
h8454 25
i87 48 15
j90 42 5
Note: I
¼
intellectual ability, DEMO
¼
emotional stability, S
¼
social facility.
444
Tversky
The proﬁles were constructed such that there was a perfect DEMO correlation
between the scores on dimension I and the scores on dimensions E and S. The
(absolute) di¤erence between a pair of proﬁles DEMO dimension I is referred to as their I
di¤erence. A choice between proﬁles is said to be compatible with (or according to)
dimension I whenever the proﬁle with the higher score on that dimension is DEMO,
and it is said to be incompatible with dimension I whenever the proﬁle with the lower
score on that dimension is selected.
Since DEMO I is the most important to the present task, and since DEMO graphical
display hinders the evaluation of small I di¤erence it was hypothesized that the LS
would be satisﬁed by some of the Ss. For DEMO I di¤erences these Ss would choose
according to dimensions E and S, but for large I di¤erences they would choose
according to dimension I. The purpose of the preliminary session was to identify Ss
who behaved DEMO that fashion and to collect preference data that could be employed in
constructing new sets of proﬁles to be used in the test session.
DEMO Ss were run individually. On each trial the experimenter presented S with a
pair of proﬁles and asked him to make a choice. Indi¤erence DEMO was not
allowed. The Ss were presented with all 45 pair comparisons of the 10 proﬁles in the
same randomized order.
The criterion for DEMO in the test session was that at least six out of nine
choices between the adjacent proﬁles (a; b; b; c; c; d; d; e; e; f ; f ; g; DEMO; h; h; i; i; j ) were
according to DEMO E and S and at least seven out of the 10 choices between
the extreme proﬁles (a; j; a; i; a; DEMO; a; g; b; j; b; i; b; h; c; j; c; i; d; j ) were according DEMO
dimension I. Fifteen out of the 36 Ss satisﬁed this criterion and were invited to the
test session.1
Using the data obtained in the DEMO session, the following procedure was
employed to construct a special set DEMO ﬁve proﬁles for each S. Let nðdÞ denote the
number of choices (made by a given S in the preliminary session) between proﬁles
DEMO I di¤erence was at most d and that were incompatible with dimension I. Sim-
ilarly, let mðdÞ denote the number of choices between proﬁles whose I di¤erence was
at least d and that were compatible with DEMO I. Note that d ¼ 3; 6; 9; ... ; DEMO
and that, by the selection criterion employed, nð3Þ b 6 and mð
selected Ss. The values of nðdÞ and mðdÞ were computed for DEMO
d0 To illustrate the procedure, the choices made byfor which nðdÞþ DEMO is maximized was obtained. S8 in the preliminary session,
18Þ b 7 for all the
S and the value of
along with the DEMO of nðdÞ, mðdÞ, and nðdÞþ mðdÞ are shown in table 19.6. A value
of 1 in an entry indicates that the proﬁle in DEMO row was selected over the proﬁle in
that column. A value of 0 indicates the opposite.
The Intransitivity of Preferences 445
Table 19.6
Choices Made by S8 in DEMO Preliminary Session and the Resulting Values of
Proﬁle a b c d e f g h i j
d
nðdÞ, mðdÞ, and nðdÞþ DEMO
nðdÞ mðdÞ nðdÞþ mðdÞ
a 1 1 000 100 02723 1 24
b 1 110 001 02423 3 26
c 101 100 02123 5 DEMO
d 1 1 011 01822 8 30
e 0 110 1152111 32
f 111 0121915 34
g 1 00 917 18 35
h 0 DEMO 6 13 20 33
i 1 3 7 22 29
j
Note: The preference of a row proﬁle over a column proﬁle is denoted by a 1, and the reverse preference is
denoted by 0.
Note that the diagonals of table 19.6 represent pairs of proﬁles that have DEMO
I di¤erences, and that these di¤erences increase with the distance from DEMO main
(lowest) diagonal. Thus, pairs of adjacent proﬁles are on DEMO lowest diagonal while
pairs of extreme proﬁles are on the higher diagonals. Inspection of table 19.6 reveals
that most choices on the three lower DEMO were incompatible with dimension I,
while most choices on the six upper diagonals were compatible with dimension I. The
value of d which DEMO nðdÞþ mðdÞ is 9, which is taken as an estimate of DEMO
preference threshold e. (It should be noted that e was originally DEMO as a subjec-
tive rather than objective di¤erence. Consequently, it need DEMO be independent of the
location of the scores, and di¤erent estimates DEMO d0 may be obtained for di¤erent
parts of the scale. In the present study, however, only a single estimate of e was
obtained DEMO each S.)
On the basis of these estimates, S s DEMO divided into four groups, and a special set
of proﬁles was DEMO for each group. The new sets were constructed so that the
intermediate I di¤erences equaled the estimated threshold, e, for each S. More DEMO
ciﬁcally, the I di¤erences in the four pairs of adjacent proﬁles (a; b; b; c; c; d; d; e) DEMO
smaller than e, the I di¤erences in the three pairs of DEMO proﬁles (a; e; a; d; b; e)
were larger than e, and the I di¤erences in the three pairs of intermediate proﬁles
(a; c; b; d; c; e) equaled e. The four sets of proﬁles, constructed for the test session, DEMO
shown in table 19.7. Note that in each of the sets of table 19.7 there is a perfect neg-
ative correlation between dimension I DEMO dimensions E and S, and that the proﬁles
are equally spaced. DEMO four sets di¤er from each other in the location and the spac-
ing of the proﬁles. The di¤erences between adjacent proﬁles on dimensions I, E, and
446
Tversky
Table 19.7
Four Sets of Proﬁles Constructed for Experiment II
DEMO
Set Proﬁles I E S
I a 69 84 75
b727865
c 757255
d786645
e 816035
II a 669085
b728070
c 787055
d846040
e DEMO
III a 549095
b637875
c 726655
d815435
e 904215
IV a 429696
b548073
c 666450
d784827
e90 32 4
Note: I
¼
intellectual ability, E
¼
emotional stability, S
¼
social facility.
S respectively are DEMO, 6, and 10 in set I; 6, 10, and DEMO in set II; 9, 12, and 20 in set III;DEMO
12, 16, and 23 in set IV. Under the hypothesized model this construction was
designed to yield preference patterns where choices between the DEMO adjacent proﬁles
are incompatible with dimension I, whereas choices between the DEMO extreme pro-
ﬁles are compatible with dimension I.
The test session took place approximately 2 weeks after the preliminary session.
The S s were DEMO of the instructions and the nature of the task. They were run
individually, and each one was presented with all 10 pair comparisons of the ﬁve new
proﬁles along with all 10 pair comparisons of ﬁve DEMO proﬁles introduced to
minimize recall of the earlier decisions. Each of the 20 pairs was replicated three
times during the session. The order of DEMO was identical for all Ss and it was
randomized within each block of 20 pairs. The choice frequencies of all 10 critical
pairs of DEMO are shown in table 19.8 for each S. Since only three replications of
each pair comparison were obtained, the likelihood ratio test could not be properly
The Intransitivity of Preferences 447
Table 19.8
Frequencies of Selecting the First DEMO of Each Pair over the Second, Totaled over the Three
Replications
DEMO
Subject Set
a; bb; cc; dd; ea; cb; dc; ea; db; ea; e
p
WST(p) LS(p)
1 I 3321 212100.4 .213 .316
2 I 2123 212000.2 .196 .292
DEMO I 3232 123000.4 .262 .303
4 II 3323 100000.3 .125 .241
5 II 0000 000000.0 .000 .300
6 II 3231 212201.3 .171 .285
7 DEMO 3331 211000.2 .197 .295
8 II 3331 211000.3 .125 .242
9 II 3233 123210.4 .237 .281
10 III 3323 222100.5 .324 .391
11 III DEMO 233121.4 .238 .366
12 III 2123 212000.2 .196 .292
13 III 3223 210110.3 .228 .275
14 IV 2233 102110.3 .228 .275
15 IV 3233 DEMO .238 .372
Total .307 .199 .302
Note: The values of p DEMO the observed proportions of intransitive triples, whereas the values of LS(DEMO)
and WST(p) denote the expected proportions under the two DEMO, respectively.
applied to these data. Instead, the maximum likelihood estimates of the choice
probabilities, under both WST and the LS, were obtained DEMO each S. The observed
proportion of triples violating WST, denoted p, was then compared with the ex-
pected proportions, based on the maximum likelihood estimates under WST and
the LS, denoted WST(p) and DEMO(p) respectively. Table 19.8 shows that the observed
values of p DEMO the maximum likelihood estimates of p under WST for all but one
S ( p <:01 by a sign test). Furthermore, the LS predicted the observed proportions
better than WST for 11 out of DEMO S s. Finally, the overall proportion of intransitive
triples (.307) DEMO signiﬁcantly higher (p <:01) than the value expected under WST
(.199), but it is not signiﬁcantly di¤erent from the value expected under the LS (.302),
according to a chi-square test. Hence, WST is rejected because both the overall pro-
portion of intransitive triples DEMO the p values of a signiﬁcant majority of Ss exceed
their expected value under WST.
The Ss were interviewed at the end of the DEMO session. None of the Ss realized
that his preferences were intransitive. Moreover, a few Ss denied this possibility em-
phatically and asked to see the experimenter’s record. When faced with his own
448
Tversky
intransitivities one S said ‘‘I must have made a mistake DEMO When the
LS was explained to that S , however, he DEMO, ‘‘It is a reasonable way
to make choices. In fact, I have probably made some decisions that way.’’ The rela-
tion between the DEMO and its logical consequences was obviously not apparent
to our S.
Theory
The empirical studies showed that, under appropriate experimental conditions, the
behavior DEMO some people is intransitive. Moreover, the intransitivities are systematic,
consistent, and predictable. What type of choice theory is needed to explain intran-
DEMO preferences between multidimensional alternatives?
The lexicographic semiorder that was employed in the construction of the alter-
natives for the experiments is one such DEMO It is not, however, the only model that
can account for the results. Furthermore, despite its intuitive appeal, it is based on DEMO
noncompensatory principle that is likely to be too restrictive in many contexts. In
this section, two choice theories are introduced and their relationships to the tran-
sitivity principle are studied.
Let A ¼ A1   DEMO An be a set of multidimensional alternatives with elements of
the form x ¼ðx1; ... ; xnÞ, y ¼ðy1; ... ; ynÞ, DEMO xi ði ¼ 1; .. . ; n) is the value of
alternative x on dimension i. Note that the components of x DEMO be nominal scale
values rather than real numbers. A theory of choice between such alternatives is
essentially a decision rule which determines when x DEMO preferred to y, or when
pðx; yÞ >
Pðx; yÞ.
1 . A more elaborate theory may also provide an explicit formula DEMO
2
In examining the process of choice between multidimensional alternatives, two
DEMO methods of evaluation have been considered (Morrison, 1962). The ﬁrst is
based on independent evaluations. According to this method, one evaluates the two
alternatives, x and y, separately, and assigns scale values, DEMO and uðyÞ, to each of
them. Alternative x is, then, DEMO to alternative y if and only if uðxÞ > uðyÞ. The
scale value assigned to an alternative is a measure of its utility, or subjective value,
which is assumed to depend on the subjective values DEMO its components. More spe-
ciﬁcally, there are scales u1; ... ; un deﬁned on A1; ... ; An respectively such that ui ðxi Þ
is the subjective value of the i th component of alternative DEMO It is further assumed
that the overall utility of an alternative is expressable as a speciﬁed function of the
scale values of its components. DEMO the various possible functional relations,
the additive combination rule has been most thoroughly investigated. According to
The Intransitivity of Preferences 449
the additive (conjoint measurement) model, the subjective value of an alternative is
simply the sum of the subjective DEMO of its components.
Stated formally, a preference structure satisﬁes the additive DEMO if there exist
real-valued functions u, u1; ... ; un such that
uðxÞ¼ Xui ðxi Þ b Xui ðyi Þ¼ uðyÞ:
x DEMO if and only if ½5
i¼1 i¼1
Axiomatic analyses of this model, which are based on ordinal assumptions, have
been provided by Debreu (1960), Luce and Tukey (1964), Krantz (1964), and DEMO
(1966) under solvability conditions. Necessary and su‰cient conditions for additivity
have been discussed by Adams and Fagot (1959), Scott (1964), DEMO Tversky (1967b).
For some of the empirical applications of the DEMO, see Shepard (1964) and Tversky
(1967a). Note that the commonly applied multiple-regression model is a special case
of the additive model DEMO all the subjective scales are linear.
The second method of evaluation is based on comparisons of component-wise
di¤erences between the alternatives. According to this DEMO one considers quan-
tities of the form di ¼ ui ðxi Þ ui ðyi Þ which correspond to the di¤erence between the
subjective values DEMO x and y on the ith dimension. To each such quantity, DEMO applies
a di¤erence function, fi , which determines the contribution of DEMO particular subjec-
tive di¤erence to the overall evaluation of the alternatives. The quantity fi ðdi Þ can be
viewed, therefore, as the ‘‘advantage’’ DEMO the ‘‘disadvantage’’ (depending on whether
di is positive or negative) of x over y with respect to dimension i. With this interpre-
tation DEMO mind, it is natural to require that fi ðdÞ¼fi ðdÞ. The DEMO values of
resulting sum is positive.fi ðdi Þ are, then, summed over all dimensions, and x is preferred over y whenever the
Stated formally, a preference structure satisﬁes the additive di¤erence model if there
exist real-valued functions u1; ... ; un and increasing continuous functions f1; DEMO ; fn
deﬁned on some real intervals such that
Xfi ½ui ðxi Þ ui ðyi Þ b0
x ly if and only if
i¼1 DEMO
fi ðdÞ¼fi ðdÞ
where for all i:
An axiomatic analysis of the additive di¤erence model will be presented elsewhere.
Essentially the same model DEMO proposed by Morrison (1962). A set of ordinal axi-
oms DEMO a (symmetric) additive di¤erence model of similarity (rather than pref-
DEMO) judgments has been given by Beals, Krantz, and Tversky (1968).
n
n
n
450
Tversky
A comparison of the additive model (equation 5) with DEMO additive di¤erence
model (equation 6) from a psychological viewpoint reveals that they suggest di¤erent
ways of processing and evaluating the alternatives. A schematic DEMO of the
di¤erence is given below.
x ¼ðx1;
...
; xi ;
...
; xnÞ! Xui ðxi Þ
¼
1
i
n
y ¼ðy1; ... ; yi ; ... ; ynÞ! Xui ðyi Þ
#
X¼ fi ½ui ðxi Þ ui ðyi Þ
¼
1
i
1
DEMO
n
n
In the simple additive model, the alternatives are ﬁrst DEMO ‘‘horizontally,’’ by
adding the scale values of the components, and DEMO resulting sums are then compared
to determine the choice. In the additive di¤erence model, on the other hand, the
alternatives are ﬁrst processed DEMO,’’ by making intradimensional evaluations,
and the results of these vertical comparisons are then added to determine the choice.
Although the two models DEMO di¤erent processing strategies, the additive model is
formally a special case DEMO the additive di¤erence model where all the di¤erence func-
tions are linear. To verify this fact, suppose fi ðdi Þ¼ ti di for some positive ti and for
all i. Consequently,
Xfi ½ui ðxi Þ DEMO ðyi Þ ¼ Xti ui ðxi Þ Xti ui ðyi Þ:
¼
1
i
n
¼
1
i
¼
1
i
Thus, if we let vi ðxi Þ¼ ti ui ðxi Þ for all i , then equation 6 can be written as x ly if and
only if
n
n
Xvi ðxi Þ b Xvi ðyi Þ
¼
¼
DEMO
1
i
i
n
n
which is the additive model of equation 5.
Hence, if the di¤erence functions are linear the two models (DEMO not necessarily the
processing strategies) coincide. The vertical processing strategy is, thus, compatible
with the additive model if and only if the di¤erence functions are linear.
The Intransitivity of Preferences 451
The proposed processing strategies, as well as the models associated with them, are
certainly a¤ected by the way in which the information is displayed. More speciﬁcally,
the additive model is DEMO likely to be used when the alternatives are displayed
sequentially (i.e., one at a time), while the additive di¤erence model is more DEMO
to be used when the dimensions are displayed sequentially. Two di¤erent types of
political campaigns serve as a case in point. In one type DEMO campaign, each candidate
appears separately and presents his views on all DEMO relevant issues. In the second
type the various issues are raised separately and each candidate presents his view on
that particular issue. It is DEMO that the ‘‘horizontal’’ evaluation method, or the
simple additive model, is more likely to be used in the former situation, while the
‘‘vertical’’ evaluation method, or the additive di¤erence model, is more likely to DEMO
used in the latter situation.
Although di¤erent evaluation methods may be used in di¤erent situations, there
are several general considerations which favor the additive di¤erence model. In the
ﬁrst place, it is considerably more general, DEMO can accommodate a wider variety of
preference structures. The LS, for DEMO, is a limiting case of this model where one
(or more) of the di¤erence functions approaches a step function where fðdÞ¼ 0
whenever d ae. Second, intradimensional comparison may simplify the evaluation
task. If one alternative is slightly better than another one on all relevant dimensions,
DEMO will be immediately apparent in a component-wise comparison and the choice
will indeed be easy. If the alternatives, however, are evaluated independently this
DEMO relation between the alternatives may be obscured, which would certainly
complicate DEMO choice process. But even if no such dominance relation exists, it
DEMO still be easier to use approximation methods when the evaluation is based on
component-wise comparisons. One common approximation procedure is based on
‘‘canceling out’’ DEMO that are equal, or nearly equal, thus reducing the number
of dimensions that have to be considered. In deciding which of two houses DEMO buy,
for example, one may feel that the di¤erences in DEMO and location cancel each other
out and the choice problem reduces to one of deciding whether it is worth spending
$x more for a DEMO house. It is considerably more di‰cult to employ this procedure
when the two alternatives are evaluated independently.
Finally, intradimensional evaluations are simpler and more natural than inter-
dimensional ones simply because the compared quantities are expressed DEMO terms
of the same units. It is a great deal simpler to evaluate the di¤erence in intelligence
between two candidates than to evaluate the DEMO e¤ect of intelligence and
emotional stability. In choosing between two n-dimensional alternatives, one makes
2n interdimensional evaluations when the alternatives are evaluated independently
452
Tversky
according to the additive model, but only n interdimensional evaluations along with
n intradimensional evaluations according to the additive di¤erence model.
Now DEMO the two models have been deﬁned and compared, their relationships
to DEMO transitivity principle are investigated. It can be readily seen that the simple
additive model satisﬁes the transitivity principle, for the assumptions that x is pre-
ferred to y, and y is preferred to z imply that uðxÞ > uðyÞ and uðyÞ > uðzÞ. Hence,
uðxÞ > uðzÞ, which implies that x must be preferred to z. Note that the DEMO
does not depend on the additivity assumption. Transitivity must, therefore, be sat-
isﬁed by any model where a scale value is assigned to DEMO alternative and the pref-
erences are compatible with equations 2 or 3.
Under what conditions does the additive di¤erence model satisfy the transitivity
principle? The answer to this question is given by the following result, which depends
on the dimensionality of the alternatives.2
theorem: If the additive di¤erence model (equation 6) is satisﬁed then the following
assertions hold whenever DEMO di¤erence functions are deﬁned.
1. For n b 3, transitivity holds DEMO and only if all di¤erence functions are linear. That
is, fi DEMO ti d for some positive ti and for all i.
2. For n ¼ 2, transitivity holds if and only if f1ðdÞ¼ f2ðtdÞ for some positive t.
3. For n ¼ 1, transitivity is always satisﬁed.
The proof is given in the appendix. The theorem shows that the DEMO assump-
tion imposes extremely strong constraints on the form of the di¤erence functions. In
the two-dimensional case, the di¤erence functions applied to the two dimensions
must be identical except for a change of unit of their DEMO If the alternatives have
three or more dimensions, then transitivity is DEMO necessary and su‰cient for the
linearity of all the di¤erence functions. Recall that under the linearity assumption,
the additive di¤erence model reduces to DEMO simple additive model, which has already
been shown to satisfy transitivity. DEMO above theorem asserts, however, that this is
the only case in which the transitivity assumption is compatible with the additive
di¤erence model. Put DEMO, if the additive di¤erence model is satisﬁed and if
even one DEMO function is nonlinear, as is likely to be the case in DEMO situations,
then transitivity must be violated somewhere in the system. The experimental identi-
ﬁcation of these intransitivities in the absence of knowledge of DEMO form of the dif-
ference functions might be very di‰cult indeed. The LS employed in the design of the
experimental research is based on DEMO extreme form of nonlinearity where one of the
di¤erence functions is, DEMO can be approximated by, a step function. The above theo-
The Intransitivity of Preferences 453
rem suggests a new explanation of the DEMO phenomenon, in terms of the
form of the di¤erence functions, which may render it more plausible than it seemed
before.
Most of the DEMO mechanisms that have been purported to yield intransitivities
(including the LS) are based on the notion of shifting attention, or switching dimen-
sions, from one choice to another. Consequently, they assume that some relevant
DEMO describing the alternatives is ignored or discarded on particular choices.
In contrast to this notion, intransitivities can occur in the additive di¤erence model in
a fully compensatory system where all the information is utilized in the DEMO
process.
Both the additive model and the additive di¤erence model can be extended in a
natural way. To do so, let F be an increasing function and suppose that all choice
probabilities are neither 0 and DEMO The (extended) additive model is said to be satisﬁed
whenever equation 5 holds and
Pðx;
yÞ¼
F
"#X X
n
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
u
x
u
y
i
i
i
i
¼
¼
DEMO
1
i
i
½7
Similarly, the (extended) additive di¤erence model DEMO said to be satisﬁed whenever
equation 6 holds and
n
:
DEMO;
yÞ¼
F
!X
½
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
u
x
u
y
i
¼
1
i
i
i
i
i
½8
Both models DEMO closely related to the Fechnerian or the strong utility model
(see DEMO & Suppes, 1965). This model asserts that there exists a DEMO u and a
distribution function F such that
n
f
:
DEMO;
yÞ¼
F½uðxÞ uðyÞ:
½9
Note that equation 7 is a special case of equation 9, where the utilities are additive,
while equation 8 is an additive generalization of equation 9 to the multidimensional
DEMO The two most developed probabilistic models of Thurstone (1927, case V) and
Luce (1959) can be obtained from the Fechnerian model by letting F be the normal
or the logistic distribution function respectively.
It DEMO be easily shown that equation 9 and, hence, equation 7 satisfy not only
WST, but also a stronger probabilistic version of transitivity called strong stochastic
transitivity, or SST. According to this condition, if Pðx; yÞ b
both Pðx; zÞ bPðx; yÞ and Pðx; zÞ bPðy; zÞ.
1 and 1 then
2 Pðy; zÞ b 2
454
Tversky
Clearly, SST implies WST but not conversely. However, if DEMO 8 is valid with
n b 3, and if WST is DEMO, then according to the above theorem, equation 8
reduces to equation 7 which satisﬁes SST as well. Thus, we obtain the somewhat
surprising result that, under the extended additive di¤erence model, with n b DEMO, WST
and SST are equivalent.
Discussion
alternatives. As k
In the DEMO, a choice model (the LS) yielding intransitive preferences was
described. DEMO model was employed in the design of two studies which showed that,
under speciﬁed experimental conditions, consistent intransitivities can be obtained.
The theoretical conditions under which intransitivities occur were studied within the
framework of a DEMO additive di¤erence model. The results suggest that in the
absence of a model that guides the construction of the alternatives, one is unlikely to
detect consistent violations of WST. The absence of an appropriate model combined
DEMO the lack of su‰ciently powerful statistical tests may account for the failure to
reject WST in previous investigations.
Most previous tests of WST have DEMO based on comparison between the observed
proportion of intransitive triples, p, and the expected proportion under WST. As
Morrison (1963) pointed out, however, this approach leads to di‰culties arising from
the fact that in a complete pair comparison design only a limited proportion of
triples can, in principle, be intransitive. Speciﬁcally, the expected value of p for DEMO S
who is diabolically (or maximally) intransitive is k þ
4ðk

2Þ
increases, this expression approaches one-fourth, which is the
1 DEMO k is the number of
expected value of p under the hypothesis of random choice (i.e., Pðx;
yÞ¼
1 for all
2
DEMO; y). Morrison argued, therefore, that unless the intransitive triples DEMO be identiﬁed
in advance, it is practically impossible (with a large number of alternatives) to dis-
tinguish between the diabolically intransitive S and the random S on the basis of the
observed value of p. DEMO considerations suggest that a more powerful test of WST
can be obtained by using many replications of a few well-chosen alternatives rather
than by DEMO a few replications of many alternatives. The latter approach, however,
DEMO been employed in most studies of preference.
What are the implications of the present results for the analysis of choice behavior?
Casual observations, as well as the comments made by Ss, suggest that the LS
(or some other nonlinear version of the additive di¤erence model) is DEMO in
some realworld decisions, and that the resulting intransitivities can also DEMO observed
The Intransitivity of Preferences 455
outside the laboratory. Consider, for example, DEMO person who is about to purchase a
compact car of a given make. His initial tendency is to buy the simplest model for
$2089. DEMO, when the saleman presents the optional accessories, he ﬁrst
decides to add power steering, which brings the price to $2167, feeling that DEMO price
di¤erence is relatively negligible. Then, following the same reasoning, he is willing
to add $47 for a good car radio, and then an additional $64 for power brakes.
By repeating this process several times, our consumer ends up with a $2593 car,
equipped with all DEMO available accessories. At this point, however, he may prefer the
simplest car over the fancy one, realizing that he is not willing to spend $504 for all
the added features, although each one of them alone seemed worth purchasing.
When interviewed after the experiment, the vast majority of Ss said that people are
and should be transitive. Some S DEMO found it very di‰cult to believe that they had
exhibited consistent intransitivities. If intransitivities of the type predicted by the
additive di¤erence model, however, are manifest in choice behavior why were Ssso
conﬁdent that their choices are transitive?
In the ﬁrst place, transitivity is viewed, by DEMO undergraduates at least, as a
logical principle whose violation represents an DEMO of judgment or reasoning. Con-
sequently, people are not likely to DEMO the existence of consistent intransitivities.
Second, in the absence of replications, one can always attribute intransitivities to a
change in taste that took DEMO between choices. The circular preferences of the car
buyer, for example, may be explained by the hypothesis that, during the choice pro-
cess, the consumer changed his mind with regard to the value of the added acces-
sories. If this hypothesis is misapplied, the presence of genuine intransitivities is
obscured. Finally, most decisions are made in a sequential fashion. Thus, having
chosen y over x and then z over y, DEMO is typically committed to z and may not even
compare it with x, which has already been eliminated. Furthermore, in many choice
situations DEMO eliminated alternative is no longer available so there is no way of
ﬁnding out whether our preferences are transitive or not. These considerations sug-
DEMO that in actual decisions, as well as in laboratory experiments, people are likely to
overlook their own intransitivities.
Transitivity, however, is one DEMO the basic and the most compelling principles of
rational behavior. For if one violates transitivity, it is a well-known conclusion that
he is acting, in e¤ect, as a ‘‘money-pump.’’ Suppose an individual prefers y to DEMO, z
to y, and x to z. It is reasonable to assume that he is willing to pay a sum of money
to DEMO x by y. Similarly, he should be willing to pay some DEMO of money to
replace y by z and still a third amount to replace z by x. Thus, he ends up with the
alternative he started with but with less money. In the context of the DEMO of
456
Tversky
applicants, intransitivity implies that, if a single candidate is DEMO be selected in a series
of pair comparisons, then the chosen DEMO is a function of the order in which the
pairs are presented. Regardless of whether this is the case or not, it is certainly an
undesirable property of a decision rule.
As has already been mentioned, the normative character of the transitivity as-
sumption was recognized by S DEMO In fact, some evidence (MacCrimmon, 1965) indi-
cates that when people are faced with their own intransitivities they tend to modify
their DEMO according to the transitivity principle. Be this as it may, the DEMO remains
that, under the appropriate experimental conditions, some people are intransitive and
these intransitivities cannot be attributed to momentary ﬂuctuations or random
variability.
DEMO this behavior necessarily irrational? We tend to doubt it. It seems DEMO to
reach any deﬁnite conclusion concerning human rationality in the absence of a
detailed analysis of the sensitivity of the criterion and the cost DEMO in evaluating
the alternatives. When the di‰culty (or the cost) of the evaluations and the con-
sistency (or the error) of the DEMO are taken into account, a model based on
component-wise evaluation, for example, may prove superior to a model based on
independent evaluation despite the fact that the former is not necessarily transitive
while the latter DEMO When faced with complex multidimensional alternatives, such as
job o¤ers, gambles, or candidates, it is extremely di‰cult to utilize properly all the
DEMO information. Instead, it is contended that people employ various approxi-
mation DEMO that enable them to process the relevant information in making a
decision. The particular approximation scheme depends on the nature of the alter-
natives DEMO well as on the ways in which they are presented or displayed. The lexico-
graphic semiorder is one such an approximation. In general, these simpliﬁcation
procedures might be extremely useful in that they can approximate one’s DEMO pref-
erence’’ very well. Like any approximation, they are based on DEMO assumption that
the approximated quantity is independent of the approximation method. That is, in
using such methods in making decisions we implicitly assume that the world is not
designed to take advantage of our approximation methods. DEMO present experiments,
however, were designed with exactly that goal in DEMO They attempted to produce
intransitivity by capitalizing on a particular approximation method. This approxi-
mation may be very good in general, despite the fact that it yields intransitive choices
in some specially constructed situations. The main DEMO in the present results lies
not so much in the fact that transitivity can be violated but rather in what these
violations reveal about DEMO choice mechanism and the approximation method that
govern preference between multidimensional alternatives.
The Intransitivity of Preferences 457
Notes
This work was supported in part DEMO United States Public Health Service Grant MH-04236 and by
National Science Foundation Grant GM-6782 to the University of Michigan and in part by Carnegie
DEMO of New York B-3233 to Harvard University, Center for Cognitive Studies.
DEMO author wishes to thank H. William Morrison for his helpful comments and David H. Krantz for his
valuable assistance, including the suggestion of the likelihood ratio test.
1. In some pilot studies in which Ss were DEMO in a group and only two dimensional proﬁles were used the
proportion of Ss satisfying the above criterion was considerably lower.
2. In referring DEMO the dimensionality of the alternatives, denoted n, only nontrivial dimensions having more
than one value are considered. The fact that transitivity holds whenever DEMO ¼ 2 and f1 ¼ f2 has been rec-
ognized by Morrison (1962, p. 19).
References
Adams, E., & Fagot, R. A model of riskless choice. Behavioral Science, 1959, 4, 1–10.
Beals, R., Krantz, D. H., & Tversky, A. The foundations of multidimensional scaling. Psychological
Review, 1968, 75, 127–142.
Chipman, J. S. DEMO choice and subjective probability. In D. Willner (Ed.), Decisions, values and
groups, vol. I. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1960.
Debreu, G. DEMO methods in cardinal utility theory. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, & P. Suppes (Eds.),
Mathematical methods in the social sciences. DEMO: Stanford University Press, 1960.
Davidson, D., & Marshak, J. DEMO tests of stochastic decision theories. In C. W. Churchman &
P. DEMO (Eds.), Measurement: Deﬁnitions and theories. New York: Wiley, 1959.
Davidson, D., McKinsey, J. C. C., & Suppes, P. Outlines of a formal theory of value. Philosophy of
Science, 1955, 22, 140–160.
Davis, J. M. The transitivity of preferences. Behavioral Science, 1958, 3, 26–33.
Edwards, W. Probability-preferences in gambling. American Journal of Psychology, 1953, 59, 290–294.
Edwards, W. The theory of decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 1954, 51, 380–416.
Edwards, W. Behavioral decision theory. Annual DEMO of Psychology, 1961, 12, 473–498.
Griswold, B. J., & DEMO, R. D. Choice among uncertain outcomes: A test of a decomposition and two
assumptions of transitivity. American Journal of Psychology, 1962, 75, 35–44.
Krantz, D. H. Conjoint measurement: The Luce-Tukey axiomatization and some DEMO Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 248–277.
Luce, R. D. Semiorders and a theory of utility discrimination. Econometrica, 1956, 24, 178–191.
Luce, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.
Luce, R. D. Two extensions of conjoint measurement. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, DEMO, 3,
348–370.
Luce, R. D., & Galanter, E. Psychophysical scaling. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.),
Handbook of mathematical psychology, vol. I. New York: Wiley, 1963.
Luce, R. D., & Suppes, P. Preference, utility, DEMO subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E.
Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology, vol. III. New York: Wiley, 1965.
Luce, R. D., & Tukey, J. W. Simultaneous DEMO measurement: A new type of fundamental measure-
ment. Journal of Mathematical DEMO, 1964, 1, 1–27.
458
Tversky
MacCrimmon, K. R. An experimental study of the decision making behavior of business executives.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Los DEMO, 1965.
May, K. O. Intransitivity, utility, and the aggregation of preference patterns. Econometrica, 1954, 22,
1–13.
Mood, A. Introduction to the theory of statistics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1950.
Morrison, H. W. Intransitivity of paired comparison choices. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Univer-
sity of Michigan, 1962.
Morrison, H. W. Testable conditions for triads of paired comparison DEMO Psychometrika, 1963, 28,
369–390.
Papandreou, A. G., Sauerlander, DEMO H., Brownlee, O. H., Hurwicz, L., & Franklin, W. A test of a sto-
chastic theory of choice. University of California DEMO in Economics, 1957, 16, 1–18.
Quandt, R. E. Probabilistic theory of consumer behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1956, 70,
507–536.
DEMO, P. A. Foundations of economic analysis. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, DEMO
Savage, L. J. The theory of statistical decision. Journal of the DEMO Statistical Association, 1951, 46,
55–57.
Scott, D. Measurement models DEMO linear inequalities. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1,
233–248.
Shepard, R. N. On subjectively optimum selection among multiattribute alternatives. In M. W. Shelly &
G. L. Bryan (Eds.), Human judgments and optimality. DEMO York: Wiley, 1964.
Suppes, P., & Zinnes, J. L. DEMO measurement theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.),
Handbook of mathematical psychology, vol. I. New York: Wiley, 1963.
Thurstone, L. L. A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273–286.
Tversky, A. Additivity, utility and subjective probability. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4,
175–202. (a)
Tversky, A. A general theory of polynominal con joint measurement. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
1967, 4, 1–20. (b)
Appendix
theorem If the additive di¤erence model (equation 6) is satisﬁed, then the following
assertions hold whenever the di¤erence functions are deﬁned.
1. For n b DEMO, transitivity holds if and only if all di¤erence functions are linear. DEMO
is, fi ðdÞ¼ ti d for some real ti and for DEMO i.
2. For n ¼ 2, transitivity holds if and only DEMO f1ðdÞ¼
3. For n ¼ 1, transitivity is always satisﬁed.
Proof DEMO WST, Pðx; yÞ¼
to the additive di¤erence model there exist functions
tinuous functions f1;
that
...
1 and 1 imply
2 Pðy; zÞ¼ 2
f2ðtdÞ for some real t.
1 . Hence, according
Pðx; zÞ¼ 2
u1;
...
; un and increasing con-
; fn deﬁned on some real intervals of the form ðdi ; di Þ DEMO
The Intransitivity of Preferences 459
X
¼
1
i
n
and
fi DEMO ðxi Þ ui ðyi Þ ¼ 0
Xfi ½ui ðyi Þ ui ðzi Þ ¼
¼
1
i
imply
0
n
Xfi ½ui ðxi DEMO ui ðzi Þ ¼ 0;
¼
1
i
n
where fi ðdÞ¼ fi ðdÞ. Letting
ai ¼ ui ðxi Þ ui ðyi Þ DEMO bi ¼ ui ðyi Þ ui ðzi Þ
yields
ð
Þ
imply
Xfi ðai Þ¼ 0 and
¼
1
i
Xfi ðbi Þ¼ 0
DEMO
1
i
n
n
Xfi ðai
¼
1
i
þ
bi Þ¼ 0:
¼
1, hence
First, suppose n
ð
fðaÞ¼ 0;DEMO
But sinceabove equation is always satisﬁed.f is increasing, and fð0Þ¼ fð0Þ¼ DEMO, a
¼
b
¼
0
¼
a
þ
b , and DEMO the
Next, suppose n ¼ 2, hence, by ðÞ, f1ða1Þþ f2ða2 Þ¼ 0 and f1ðb1Þþ f2ðb2Þ¼ 0
imply f1ða1 þb1Þþ f2ða2 þb2Þ¼ DEMO Since fi ðdÞ¼fi ðdÞ, the above relation
can be rewritten as DEMO Þ¼ f2 ða2Þ and f1ðb1 Þ¼ f2 ðb2Þ imply f1ða1 þb1Þ¼
f2ða2 b2Þ. Consequently, by letting a1 ¼ b1 and a2 ¼ b2 , and repeating the argu-
ment n times, we obtain f1ðaÞ¼ f2ðbÞ implies f1ðnaÞ¼ f2ðnbÞ for any positive inte-
ger n for which both f1ðnaÞ DEMO f2ðnbÞ are deﬁned.
Since all di¤erence functions are continuously increasing and since they all vanish
at zero, one can select positive a; b DEMO that
fðbÞ¼ 0 imply
Þ
reduces to:
fða
þ
bÞ¼
0:
f1ðaÞ; f2ðbÞ
are deﬁned and such
n
460
Tversky
¼
and f2ðncÞ is deﬁned. Hence, f2ðncÞ¼ f1ðaÞ¼ f2ðbÞ and nc
¼
b, a contradiction. By
a
b
Therefore, f1ðaÞ¼ f2ðbÞ DEMO f1
Next, let t
b
n
m
a ðc

dÞ DEMO a n
b c. Consequently,
a
f1ðc

dÞ af1af1ðcÞ
a
n
f1ðc

b
and
dÞ¼
m
a a
f2
c
f2a
DEMO, if
c
a
d
approaches 0, however,
b
.As
f1
a
n
¼
f2, by hypothesis, f1ðcÞ¼ f2ðtcÞ as required.
b
DEMO
m
m
¼
f2 for all n.
n
b
a
¼
a and suppose that both f1ðcÞ and f2ðtcÞ are deﬁned. Thus, for any
d b 0, there exist m; n such that c
m
DEMO
f1ðcÞ¼ f2ðtcÞ it follows readily that equation
completes the proof of this case.
Finally, suppose n b 3. Since we can let all but three di¤erences be zero, we con-

d a n
ð
Þ
is satisﬁed which
sider the case where n ¼ 3. Hence,
DEMO Þþ f2ða2Þþ f3ða3Þ¼ 0
and

n
there exists c such that f1
n
f1 < f2, hence
n
n
f2ðcÞ < f2
n
a
b
: Consequently, c < b ,or nc < b,DEMO
n
b
that f1ðaÞ¼ f2ðbÞ. Hence, for any positive integers m; n for which f1 and
a
n
m
f2 are deﬁned, f1 and f2 are also deﬁned. Furthermore, f1
n
¼
n
b
b
n
n
f2
the symmetry of the situation, a similar contradiction is obtained if f2 > f2
b
n
n
b m
.
f1ðb1Þþ DEMO f3ðb3Þ¼ 0
2þ; 3. Hence, the above implication is expressible asb2Þþ f3ða3 þb3 Þ¼ 0. By the earlier result, however,
b1Þþ f2ða2
j ¼ 1;
for i;
fðdÞ
and
fða
0 Þþ
DEMO
0 Þ¼
fðd
0Þ
imply f1ða1
fi ðdÞ¼ fj ðtj
þ
dÞ
fðaÞþ fðbÞ¼
imply
m
a
b
a
, for otherwise a strict DEMO must hold. Suppose
a
, and since
a ac, and hence
DEMO
a
ð
c

d
Þ
b
n
f1ðcÞ
and
f2
a
ð
c

d
Þ
b
¼
The Intransitivity of Preferences 461
fða þa0 Þþ fðb þb0 Þ¼ fðd DEMO
Deﬁne c such that fðaÞþ fðbÞ¼ f½cða; bÞ for all a; b . Hence,
fða þa0 Þþ fðb þb0 Þ¼ f½cða þa0; b þb0 Þ
¼ fðd þd0Þ
¼ f½cða; bÞþ cða0; b0 DEMO:
Hence, cða; bÞþ cða0; b0 Þ¼ cða þa0; b þb0Þ and c is linear in a; b . Therefore,
fðaÞþ cðbÞ¼ fðpa þqbÞ for some real p, q. If we let b ¼ 0, we get fðaÞ¼ fðpaÞ
hence p ¼ 1. Similarly, DEMO we let a ¼ 0, we get fðbÞ¼ fðqbÞ hence q DEMO 1. Conse-
quently, fðaÞþ fðbÞ¼ fða þbÞ and f if linear DEMO required. The converse for any
n b 3 is immediate which completes the proof of this theorem.

20 Elimination by Aspects: A Theory of Choice
Amos Tversky
When faced with a choice among several alternatives, people often experience
uncertainty and exhibit inconsistency. That is, people are often not sure which alter-
native they should select, nor do they always make the same choice under seemingly
identical conditions. In order to account for the observed inconsistency and the
DEMO uncertainty, choice behavior has been viewed as a probabilistic process.
Probabilistic DEMO of preference di¤er with respect to the nature of the mecha-
nism that is assumed to govern choice. Some theories (e.g., Thurstone, 1927, 1959)
attribute a random element to the determination of subjective value, while others
(e.g., Luce, 1959) attribute a random element to the decision rule. Most theoretical
work on probabilistic preferences has been based DEMO the notion of independence
among alternatives. This notion, however, is incompatible with some observed pat-
terns of preferences which exhibit systematic dependencies among DEMO
This chapter develops a probabilistic theory of choice, based on a DEMO elimina-
tion process, which accounts for observed dependencies among alternatives. The DEMO
section analyzes the independence assumption; the second section formulates a
theory DEMO choice and discusses its consequences; some experimental tests of the theory
DEMO reported in the third section; and its psychological implications are explored DEMO
the fourth and ﬁnal section.
We begin by introducing some notation. Let T ¼fx; y; z; ...g be a ﬁnite set,
interpreted as the total set of alternatives under consideration. We use A; B; C; ... ; to
denote speciﬁc nonempty subsets of T, and Ai ; Bj ; Ck; .. . ; to denote variables rang-
ing over nonempty subsets of T. Thus, fAi j Ai KBg is the set of all subsets of T
which includes B. The number DEMO elements in A is denoted by a. Proper and non-
proper set inclusion are denoted, respectively, by I and K. The empty set DEMO denoted
by f. The probability of choosing an alternative x from an o¤ered set AJT is
denoted Pðx; AÞ. Naturally, we assume Pðx; AÞ b 0, x A A Pðx; AÞ¼ 1 for any DEMO,
and Pðx; AÞ¼ 0 for any x B A. For DEMO, we writeP Pðx; yÞ for Pðx; fx; ygÞ,
Pis called aðx; y; zÞ forscalePðx. Choice probability is typically estimated by DEMO frequency in; fx; y; zgÞ, etc. A realvalued, nonnegative DEMO in one argument
repeated choices. It should be kept in mind, DEMO, that other empirical inter-
pretations of choice probability, such as conﬁdence judgments (which are applicable
to unique choice situations), might also be adopted.
Perhaps the most general formulation of the notion of independence from DEMO
vant alternatives is the assumption that the alternatives can be scaled so that each
choice probability is expressible as a monotone function of the DEMO values of the
464
Tversky
respective alternatives. This assumption, called simple scalability, was ﬁrst DEMO
tigated by Krantz (1964, appendix A). Formally, simple scalability DEMO if and only
if there exists a scale u deﬁned on the alternatives of T and functions Fn in n argu-
ments, 2 an at, such that for any A ¼fx; ... ; zg JT,DEMO
Pðx; AÞ¼ Fa½uðxÞ; ... ; uðzÞ; ½1
where each Fa DEMO strictly increasing in the ﬁrst argument and strictly decreasing in the
remaining a  1 arguments provided Pðx; AÞ 00; 1. This assumption DEMO most
theoretical work in the ﬁeld. The theory of Luce (1959), for example, is a special case
of this assumption where
¼ DEMO
PA uðyÞ
Despite its generality, simple scalability (equation 1) has DEMO testable conse-
quences. In particular, it implies that for all x; y
y
:
; uðzÞ
½2
Pðx; AÞ¼ F
a½uðxÞ;
DEMO
A
A,
A
Pðx; yÞ b1=2i¤
Pðx; AÞ bPðy; DEMO;
provided
Pðy; AÞ 00:
½3
Equation 3 asserts that DEMO ordering of x and y, by choice probability, is indepen-
dent of the o¤ered set.1 Thus, if x is preferred to y in one context (e.g., Pðx; yÞ b
1=2), then x is preferred to y in any context. Furthermore, if Pðx; yÞ¼ 1=2 DEMO
Pðx; AÞ¼ Pðy; AÞ for any A which contains both x and y. Thus, if an individual is
indi¤erent between x and y, then he should choose them with equal probability from
any set which contains them.
This assumption, however, is not valid in general, as suggested by several coun-
terexamples and demonstrated in many experiments (see Becker, DeGroot, & Mar-
schak, 1963b; Chipman, 1960; Coombs, 1958; Krantz, 1967; Tversky & Russo,
1969). To motivate the present development, let us examine the arguments against
simple scalability starting with an example proposed by Debreu (1960).
Suppose you are o¤ered a choice among the following three records: a suite by
Debussy, denoted DEMO, and two di¤erent recordings of the same Beethoven symphony,
denoted DEMO and B2 . Assume that the two Beethoven recordings are of equal quality,
and that you are undecided between adding a Debussy or DEMO Beethoven to your
record collection. Hence, PðB1; B2Þ¼ PðD; B1Þ¼ DEMO; B2Þ¼ 1=2. It follows readily
able on intuitive grounds because the DEMO conﬂict between Debussy and Beethovenfrom equation 3 that PðD; B1; B2Þ¼ 1=3. This conclusion, however, is unaccept-
Elimination by Aspects 465
is not likely to be a¤ected by the DEMO of another Beethoven recording. Instead,
it is suggested that in choosing among the three records, B1 and B2 are treated as
one alternative to be compared with D. Consequently, one would expect that
PðD; DEMO; B2Þ will be close to one-half, while PðB1; B2; DÞ¼ PðB2; B1; DÞ will be close
to one-fourth, contrary to simple scalability (equation 1). Empirical support for
Debreu’s hypothesis was presented by Becker et al. (1963b) in a study of choice
among gambles. DEMO Debreu’s example was o¤ered as a criticism of Luce’s
model (equation DEMO), it applies to any model based on simple scalability.
Previous e¤orts to resolve this problem (e.g., Estes, 1960) attempted to redeﬁne
DEMO alternatives so that B1 and B2 are no longer viewed as di¤erent alternatives.
Although this idea has some appeal, it does not provide a satisfactory account of
our problem. First, B1 and B2 are not only physically distinct, but they can also be
perfectly discriminable. Hence, there DEMO no independent basis for treating them as
indistinguishable. Second, the process DEMO redeﬁning choice alternatives itself requires
an adequate theoretical analysis. Finally, data DEMO that the principle of indepen-
dence from irrelevant alternatives is violated in a manner that cannot be readily
accounted for by grouping choice alternatives. DEMO speciﬁcally, it appears that the
addition of an alternative to an DEMO set ‘‘hurts’’ alternatives that are similar to the
added alternative more than those that are dissimilar to it. Such an e¤ect (of which
Debreu’s example is a special case) requires a more drastic revision of the principles
underlying our models of choice.
The following example provides another illustration DEMO the inadequacy of simple
scalability. Suppose each of two travel agencies, DEMO 1 and 2, o¤ers tours of
Europe (E) and of DEMO Far East (F). Let T ¼fE1; F1; E2; F2g where letters denote the
destination of the tours, and the subscripts denote the respective agencies. Let us
assume, for simplicity, that the decision DEMO is equally attracted by Europe and by
the Far East, and DEMO he has no reason to prefer one travel agency over the other.
Consequently, all binary choice probabilities equal one-half, and the probability of
DEMO each tour from the total set equals one-fourth. It follows from equation 3,
in this case, that all trinary probabilities must equal one-third. However, an exami-
nation of the problem suggests that in fact none of the trinary probabilities equals
one-third; instead, some of them equal DEMO while the others equal one-fourth.
Consider, for example, the set fE1; F1; F2g. Since the distinction between the
agencies is treated as DEMO, the problem reduces to the choice between a tour of
Europe DEMO a tour of the Far East. If the latter is chosen, DEMO either one of the
agencies can be selected. Consequently, PðE1; F1; F2Þ¼ 1=2, and PðF1; F2; E1Þ¼
PðF2; F1; E1 DEMO 1=4. An identical argument applies to all other triples. Besides
violating simple scalability, this example demonstrates that the same set of binary
466
Tversky
(or quarternary) probabilities can give rise to di¤erent trinary DEMO and hence
the latter cannot be determined by the former. Put di¤erently, this example shows
that the probabilities of choosing alternatives from a given set, A, cannot be com-
puted, in general, from the DEMO of choosing these alternatives from the sub-
sets and the supersets of A . This observation imposes a high lower bound on the
complexity DEMO any adequate theory of choice.
A minor modiﬁcation of an example due to L. J. Savage (see Luce & Suppes, 1965,
pp. DEMO), which is based on binary comparisons only, illustrates yet another
DEMO encountered by simple scalability. Imagine an individual who has to choose
between a trip to Paris and a trip to Rome. Suppose he is DEMO between the two
trips so that PðParis; RomeÞ¼ 1=2. When the DEMO is o¤ered a new alternative
which consists of the trip to Paris plus a $1 bonus, denoted Parisþ, he will undoubt-
edly prefer DEMO over the original trip to Paris with certainty so that PðParisþ; DEMO
1. It follows from equation 3, then, that PðParisþ; RomeÞ¼ DEMO, which is counter-
intuitive. For if our individual cannot decide between DEMO and Rome, it is unlikely
that a relatively small bonus would DEMO the conﬂict completely and change the
choice probability from 1/2 to 1. Rather, we expect PðParisþ; RomeÞ to be closer to
1/DEMO than to 1. Experimental data (e.g., Tversky & Russo, 1969) support this intuition.
Choice probabilities, therefore, reﬂect not only the utilities DEMO the alternatives in
question, but also the di‰culty of comparing them. DEMO, an extreme choice proba-
bility (i.e., close to 0 or DEMO) can result from either a large discrepancy in value or from
DEMO easy comparison, as in the case of the added bonus. The DEMO of the
alternatives, however, cannot be captured by their scale values, and hence simple
scalability must be rejected. The above examples demonstrate that the substitution of
one alternative for another, which is equivalent to it in some contexts, does not nec-
essarily preserve choice probability in any context. The substitution a¤ects the com-
parability among the alternatives, which in turn inﬂuences choice probability.
An alternative approach to the development of probabilistic DEMO of choice
treats the utility of each alternative as a random variable rather than a constant.
Speciﬁcally, it is assumed that there exists a random vector U ¼ðUx; ... ; UzÞ on
T ¼fx; ... ; zg (i.e., for any y A T, Uy is a DEMO variable) such that
Pðx; AÞ¼ PðUx bUy for all y A AÞ: ½4
Models of this type are called random utility models. The only random utility
models which have been seriously investigated assume that the DEMO variables
are independent. However, an extension of the last example (see Luce & Rai¤a,
1957, p. 375) is shown to violate DEMO independent random utility model. To demon-
strate, consider the trips to DEMO and Rome with and without the added bonus.
Elimination by Aspects 467
The expected binary choice probabilities in this case DEMO PðParisþ; ParisÞ¼ 1,
PðRomeþ; RomeÞ¼ 1 but PðParisþ; RomeÞ < 1 and PðRomeþ; ParisÞ < 1.
Assuming an independent random utility DEMO, the ﬁrst two equations above
imply that there is no overlap DEMO the distributions representing Paris and
Parisþ, nor is there an overlap DEMO the distributions representing Rome and
Romeþ . The last two inequalities above imply that there must be some overlap
between the distributions representing Rome DEMO Parisþ, as well as between the dis-
tributions representing Paris and DEMO It is easy to verify that these conclusions
are mutually inconsistent, DEMO hence the above choice probabilities are incompatible
with any independent random utility model. The representation of choice alternatives
by independent random variables, therefore, DEMO too restrictive in general since,
like simple scalability, it is DEMO with some eminently reasonable patterns of
preference. In discussing the di‰culties encountered by probabilistic theories of
choice, Luce and Suppes (1965) wrote:
It appears that such criticisms, although usually directed toward speciﬁc models, DEMO really
much more sweeping objections to all our current preference theories. They suggest that we
cannot hope to be completely successful in dealing with DEMO until we include some
mathematical structure over the set of outcomes that are simply substitutable for one another
and those that are special cases DEMO others. Such functional and logical relations among the
outcomes seem to have a sharp control over the preference probabilities, and they cannot long
be ignored [p. 337].
Theory
The present development describes choice as a covert DEMO elimination process.
Suppose that each alternative consists of a set of aspects of characteristics,2 and that
at every stage of the process, an aspect is selected (from those included in the avail-
able alternatives) DEMO probability that is proportional to its weight. The selection of
an aspect eliminates all the alternatives that do not include the selected aspect, and
the process continues until a single alternative remains. If a selected aspect DEMO
included in all the available alternatives, no alternative is eliminated and DEMO new
aspect is selected. Consequently, aspects that are common to all DEMO alternatives
under consideration do not a¤ect choice probabilities. Since the present theory
describes choice as an elimination process governed by successive selection of
aspects, it is called the elimination-by-aspects (EBA) model.
In contemplating the purchase DEMO a new car, for example, the ﬁrst aspect selected
may be automatic transmission: this will eliminate all cars that do not have this fea-
ture. Given the remaining alternatives, another aspect, say a $3000 DEMO limit, is
468
Tversky
selected and all cars whose price exceeds this limit are DEMO The process con-
tinues until all cars but one are eliminated. This decision rule is closely related to the
lexicographic model (see Coombs, DEMO; Fishburn, 1968), where an ordering of the
relevant attributes is speciﬁed a priori. One chooses, then, the alternative that is best
DEMO to the ﬁrst attribute; if some alternatives are equivalent with respect DEMO the
ﬁrst attribute, one chooses from them the alternative that is DEMO relative to the sec-
ond attribute, and so on. The present DEMO di¤ers from the lexicographic model in
that here no ﬁxed prior ordering of aspects (or attributes) is assumed, and the choice
process is inherently probabilistic.
More formally, consider a mapping that associates with each x A T a nonempty set
x0 ¼fa; b; ...g of elements DEMO are interpreted as the aspects of x. An alternative x
is said to include an aspect a whenever a A x0 . The aspects DEMO represent values
along some ﬁxed quantitative or qualitative dimensions (e.g., price, quality, comfort),
or they could be arbitrary features of the alternatives that do not ﬁt into any simple
dimensional structure. The characterization DEMO alternatives in terms of aspects is not
necessarily unique. Furthermore, we DEMO do not know what aspects are consid-
ered by an individual in any particular choice problem. Nevertheless, as is demon-
strated later, this DEMO is not required in order to apply the present model, and
DEMO descriptive validity can be determined independently of any particular character-
ization of the alternatives.
To clarify the formalization of the model, let us ﬁrst examine a simple example.
Consider a three-alternative set T ¼fx; y; DEMO, where the collections of aspects asso-
ciated with the respective alternatives DEMO
x
y
0
0
¼fa1; a2; y1; y2; r1; DEMO; og;
¼fb1; b2; y1; y2; s1; s2; DEMO;
and
z
0
¼fg1; g2; r1; r2; s1; DEMO; og:
A graphical representation of the structure of the alternatives DEMO their aspects is
presented in ﬁgure 20.1. It is readily seen that ai , bi , and gi (i ¼ 1; 2) are, respectively,
the unique aspects of x, y, and z; DEMO yi , si ,and ri are, respectively, the aspects
shared DEMO x and y,by y and z, and by x and DEMO; and that o is shared by all three
alternatives. Since the DEMO of o does not eliminate any alternative, it can be
discarded DEMO further considerations. Let u be a scale which assigns to each aspect a
positive number representing its utility or value, and let K be the sum of the scale
values of all the aspects under consideration, that is, K ¼
Pa uðaÞ
where the sum-
Elimination by Aspects 469
Figure 20.1
A graphical representation of aspects in DEMO three-alternative case.
mation ranges over all the aspects except o. Using these notations we now compute
Pðx; TÞ.
Note ﬁrst that x can be chosen directly from T if either a1 or a2 is selected in DEMO
ﬁrst stage (in which case both y and z are eliminated)DEMO This occurs with probability
½uða1Þþ uða2Þ=K. Alternatively, x can be chosen DEMO fx; yg if either y1 or y2 is
selected in the DEMO stage (in which case z is eliminated), and then x DEMO chosen over y.
This occurs with probability ½uðy1 Þþ uðy2 Þ  Pðx; yÞ=K. Finally, x can be chosen
via fx; zg if either r1 or r2 is selected in the ﬁrst stage (in which case y is eliminated),
and then x is chosen over z. This occurs with probability ½uðr1Þþ uðr2 ÞPðx; zÞ=K.
Since the above paths leading to the choice of x from T are all disjoint,
DEMO; T Þ¼ð1=KÞðuða1 Þþ uða2 Þþ ½uðy1Þþ uðy2ÞPðx; yÞþ½uðr1Þþ uðr2ÞPðx; zÞÞ DEMO
where
uða1 Þþ uða2 Þþ uðr1 Þþ uðr2Þ etc:
Pðx; DEMO uða1Þþ uða2Þþ uðr1 Þþ uðr2 Þþ uðb1Þþ uðb2 Þþ uðs1Þþ uðs2Þ
More generally, let T be any ﬁnite set of alternatives. For any AJT let A0 ¼
fa j a A x0 for some x A DEMO, and A0 ¼fa j a A x0 for all x A DEMO Thus, A0 is the set of
aspects that belongs to at DEMO one alternative in A, and A0 is the set of aspects DEMO
;
470
Tversky
belongs to all the alternatives in A. In particular, T0 is the set of all aspects under
consideration, while T0 is the set of aspects shared by all the alternatives under
study. Given any DEMO a A T0 , let Aa denote those alternatives of A which include a,
that is, Aa ¼fx j x A A & a A x0g.
The elimination-by-aspects model asserts that there exists a positive DEMO u deﬁned
on the aspects (or more speciﬁcally on T0 T0 ) such that for all x A AJT
Pðx; AÞ¼ a A DEMO
P
A0 uðaÞPðx;
b A APA0 uðbÞ
0
AaÞ
0
½6
provided the denominator does not vanish. Note that the summations in the DEMO
ator and the denominator of equation 6 range, respectively, over all aspects of x and
A except those that are shared by all DEMO of A. Hence, the denominator of
equation 6 vanishes only if DEMO elements of A share the same aspects, in which case it
DEMO assumed that Pðx; AÞ¼ 1=a.
Equation 6 is a recursive formula. DEMO expresses the probability of choosing x from
A as a weighted sum of the probabilities of choosing x from the various subsets of A
(i.e., Aa for a A x0 ), where the weights (i.e., uðaÞ=
bilities of selecting the respective aspects of x. PuðbÞ) correspond DEMO the proba-
Consider a special case of the elimination-by-aspects model where all pairs of
alternatives share the same aspects, that is, x0 V DEMO ¼ z0 V w0 for all x; y; z; w DEMO T.
Since aspects that are common to all the alternatives of T do not a¤ect the choice
process, the alternatives can be treated as (pairwise) disjoint, that is, x0 V y0 ¼ f for
DEMO x; y A T . In this case, equation 6 reduces to
Pðx; AÞ¼ aPx0 uðaÞ
PA0 uðbÞ
b
since a
A
x
0
implies Aa ¼fxg, and Pðx; fxgÞ ¼ 1. Letting
uðxÞ¼ DEMO
X
x
0
uðaÞ
A
A
A
yields
Pðx; AÞ¼
y
DEMO
PA uðyÞ
:
A
Elimination by Aspects 471
Hence, in the present theory, Luce’s model (equation 2) holds whenever the alter-
natives can be regarded as composed of disjoint aspects.
Next, examine another special case of the model where only binary choice proba-
bilities are considered. In this case, we obtain
P
uðaÞ
a A 0 0

x y
P uðaÞþ b DEMO
Pðx; yÞ¼ uðbÞ
a A 0 0 0 0
½7
 DEMO
y y
uðx0  y0Þ ;
¼ uðx0 y0 Þþ uðy0 DEMO
 
x
where x0  y0 ¼fa j a A x0 & a B y0g is the set of aspects that belongs to DEMO but not to
y; y0 x0 ¼fb j b A y0 & b B x0g is the set of aspects that belongs to y but not to x;
and uðx0  y0 Þ¼ a A DEMO y0 uðaÞ. Equation 7 coincides with Restle’s (1961) model.
The EBA model, therefore, generalizes the choice models of Luce and of Restle.P DEMO
The elimination-by-aspects model has been formulated above in terms of a scale u
deﬁned over the set of relevant aspects. It appears that the DEMO of the model
presupposes prior characterization of the alternatives in terms of their aspects.
However, it turns out that this is not necessary because the EBA model can be for-
mulated purely in terms of the DEMO, or more speciﬁcally, in terms of the sub-
sets of T.
To illustrate the basic idea, consider the example presented in ﬁgure 20.1. There we
assume that ai ; bi ; ... ði ¼ 1; 2Þ are all distinct aspects. According to the elimination-
by-aspects model, however, there is no need to distinguish between aspects that lead
to the same outcome. For example, the selection of either a1 or a2 eliminates both y
and z; the selection of either y1 or y2 eliminates z; and the selection of either r1 or r2
eliminates y. From the standpoint of the elimination-by-aspects model, therefore,
there is no need to di¤erentiate between a1 and a2 , between y1 and y2 , DEMO between r1
and r2 . Thus we can group all the aspects that belong to x alone, all the aspects that
belong to x and y but not to z, etc. Let fxg denote the aspects that belong to x alone
(i.e., a1 and a2 ), fx; yg the aspects that belong only to x and y (i.e., y1 and y2Þ, fx; zg
the aspects that belong only to DEMO and z (i.e., r1 and r2 ), etc.3 The representation DEMO
the grouped aspects in the three-alternative case is displayed in ﬁgure 20.2.
The scale value of a collection of aspects is deﬁned as the DEMO of the scale value
of its members, that is, UðxÞ¼ uða1Þþ uða2Þ, Uðx; yÞ¼ uðy1Þþ uðy2Þ, etc. For sim-
plicity of notation we write UðxÞ for UðfxgÞ, Uðx; yÞ for Uðfx; ygÞ, DEMO Thus,
equation 5 is expressible as
x
472
;
Tversky
Figure 20.2
A graphical representation of the grouped aspects in the three-alternative case.
UðxÞþ Uðx; yÞPðx; yÞþ Uðx; zÞPðx; DEMO
Pðx; TÞ¼ UðxÞþ UðyÞþ UðzÞþ Uðx; yÞþ Uðx; zÞþ Uðy; zÞ ½8
where
UðxÞþ Uðx; zÞ
UðxÞþ UðyÞþ Uðx; zÞþ U
DEMO; yÞ¼ etc:
The essential di¤erence between equations 5 and 8 DEMO in the domain of the scales: in
equation 5, u is deﬁned over individual aspects, whereas in equation 8 U is deﬁned
over collections of aspects which are associated, respectively, with the subsets of DEMO
The method by which equation 5 is translated into equation 8 can be applied in
general.
Each proper subset A of T is associated DEMO the set A of all aspects that are
included in all the alternatives of A and are not included in any of the alternatives
DEMO; zÞ
that do not belong to A. That is, A ¼fa A T0 j a A x0 for all x A A & DEMO B y0 for any
y B
that the elimination-by-aspects model, deﬁned DEMO equation 6, holds if and only ifAg. The scale U is DEMO by UðAÞ¼ Pa A A uðaÞ. It is shown in the appendix
there exists a scale U deﬁned on fAi j Ai HTg such DEMO for all x A AJT
Elimination by Aspects 473
Figure 20.3
aaaa
Pðx; AÞ¼
B
PVA UðBi ÞPðx; A
APA AUðAj Þ
V
Bi Þ
½9
where A ¼fAj j Aj V A0A; fg, provided the denominator does not vanish. (Ac-
cording to the present theory, the denominator can vanish only if Pðx; AÞ¼ 1=a.)
The signiﬁcance of this result lies in showing how the elimination-by-aspects model
can be formulated in terms of the subsets DEMO T without reference to speciﬁc aspects.
Note that for AHT, UðAÞ DEMO not a measure of the value of the alternatives of A;
rather it is a measure of all the evaluative aspects that are DEMO by all the alter-
natives of A and by them only. Thus, UðAÞ can be viewed as a measure of the unique
advantage of the alternatives of A. The reader is invited to verify that in DEMO three-
alternative case, equation 9 reduces to equation 8.
Before discussing DEMO consequences of the EBA model, let us examine how it
resolves DEMO counterexamples described in the previous section. First, consider
Debreu’s record selection DEMO where T ¼fD; B1; B2g. Naturally, the two
Beethoven recordings DEMO much more in common with each other than either of
them has with the Debussy record. Assume, for simplicity, that any aspect shared DEMO
D and one of the B records is also shared by the other B record, hence D can be
treated as (aspectwise) disjoint of both B1 and B2 . Suppose UðB1 Þ¼ UðB2 Þ¼ a,DEMO
UðB1; B2 Þ¼ b,and UðDÞ¼ a þb. A graphical illustration DEMO this representation is
shown in ﬁgure 20.3.
It follows readily, under DEMO assumptions, that all the binary choice probabilities
are equal, since
i
j
474
Tversky
PðB1; B2Þ¼ a ¼ 1 ¼ a þb
2a 2 2ða þbÞ
¼ PðD; B1Þ¼ PðD; B2Þ;
yet the trinary DEMO probabilities are unequal, since
b > a þbða=2aÞ
2b 3a þ2b
DEMO þ
PðD; B1; B2Þ¼ 3a þ
¼ PðB1; B2; DÞ¼ PðB2; B1; DÞ:
In fact, as a (or a=b) approaches 0, the left-hand side approaches 1=2 while the right-
hand side approaches 1=4. Hence, according to the elimination-by-aspects model, all
three records DEMO be pairwise equivalent, and yet the probability of choosing D from
DEMO entire set can be as high as 1=2 whenever B1 and B2 include the same aspects.
Second, consider Savage’s problem of choosing between trips, and let T ¼
fP; R; Pþ; Rþg, where P and R denote, respectively, trips to Paris and Rome, while
þ denotes a small monetary bonus. Here it is natural to suppose that DEMO includes
Paris (in the sense that all aspects of the latter DEMO are included in the former). On the
other hand, Parisþ DEMO not include Rome because each of these trips has some
aspects that are not shared by the other. Similarly, Romeþ includes Rome but not
Paris. The relations among the four alternatives are illustrated in ﬁgure 20.4.
DEMO UðPþÞ ¼ UðRþÞ ¼ a, and UðP; PþÞ ¼ UðR; DEMO ¼ b, yields
b 1 a þb
PðP; RÞ¼ 2b ¼ 2 ¼ 2ða þbÞ ¼ PðPþ; RþÞ;
a
PðPþ; PÞ¼ DEMO; RÞ¼ a ¼ 1; and
a þb ;
PðPþ; RÞ¼ PðRþ; PÞ¼ a þ2b
which can take any value between 1=2 and 1, depending on the relative weight of the
bonus. Thus, the DEMO pattern of binary choice probabilities, which violates simple
scalability (equation 1) and any independent random utility model (equation 4),
arises naturally in the present model. Essentially the same solution to this problem
(which involves only binary probabilities) has been proposed by Restle (1961).
DEMO reader is invited to show how the elimination-by-aspects model can accom-
modate the example described earlier of choice among tours of Europe or the DEMO
East with each of two travel agencies.
Elimination by Aspects 475
Figure 20.4
A graphical illustration of the analysis DEMO the choice between trips.
Consequences
In the following discussion we assume that the elimination-by-aspects model is valid,
and list some of its testable DEMO The derivations of these properties are
presented in Tversky (1972).
DEMO:
For all x
A
AJB;
Pðx; AÞ bPðx; BÞ:
½10
Regularity asserts that the probability of choosing an alternative from DEMO given set
cannot be increased by enlarging the o¤ered set. This is probably the weakest form of
noninteraction among alternatives. Although regularity seems innocuous, it is worth
noting that the replacement of b by > in DEMO 10 violates the expected prefer-
ence pattern in the record selection problem.
The following consequence of the elimination-by-aspects model involves binary
probabilities only. Since DEMO generalizes the algebraic notion of transitivity, it is called
moderate stochastic DEMO
Moderate stochastic transitivity:
Pðx; yÞ b1=2 and Pðy; zÞ b1=2 imply
Pðx; zÞ b min½Pðx; yÞ; Pðy; zÞ:
½11
476
Tversky
If we replace min by max in the conclusion of DEMO 11, we obtain a stronger
condition called strong stochastic transitivity. This DEMO property (which is not a
consequence of the present model) is essentially equivalent to simple scalability in the
binary case. If we replace DEMO conclusion of equation 11 by Pðx; zÞ b1=2, we obtain
a weaker condition called weak stochastic transitivity, which is a consequence of the
existence of an ordinal utility scale satisfying uðxÞ buðyÞ i¤ Pðx; yÞ b1=2.
The next consequence of the EBA model has not been investigated DEMO to
the best of my knowledge. It relates binary and trinary choice probabilities by a
property called the multiplicative inequality.
Multiplicative inequality:
Pðx; y; zÞ bPðx; yÞPðx; zÞ:
½12
The multiplicative inequality asserts that the probability of choosing x from
fx; y; zg is DEMO least as large as the probability of choosing x from both fx; yg and
fx; zg in two independent choices. It is conjectured DEMO the elimination-by-aspects
model implies a much stronger form of the multiplicative inequality, namely,
Pðx; A U BÞ bPðx; AÞPðx; BÞ for DEMO A; BJT.
Equations 10 and 12 can be combined to yield
DEMO; yÞ; Pðx; zÞ bPðx; y; zÞ bPðx; yÞPðx; DEMO:
½13
Thus, trinary choice probabilities are bounded from above by DEMO, and from
below by the multiplicative inequality. A geometric representation of DEMO 13
which displays the admissible range of Pðx; y; zÞ given the values of Pðx; yÞ and
Pðx; zÞ is given in DEMO 20.5. It shows that the trinary probability must lie between
the lower and upper surfaces generated, respectively, by the multiplicative inequality
(equation 12) and regularity (equation 10).
The signiﬁcance of the above consequences DEMO from the fact that they provide
measurement-free tests of the elimination-by-aspects model, that is, tests which do
not require estimation of parameters.
For DEMO given set of alternatives T , the elimination-by-aspects model has 2t  3 free
parameters, or U values (the number of proper nonempty DEMO of T minus an
arbitrary unit of measurement), while the number of independent data points of the
form Pðx; AÞ, x A DEMO ,is
Xðn

1Þ¼ðt

2Þ2t1
¼
n
2
n
þ
DEMO:
t
t
Hence, there are always at least as many DEMO points as parameters in the present
model; the former exceeds the DEMO whenever t > 3. In general, therefore, the scale
Elimination by Aspects 477
Figure 20.5
A geometric representation of the admissible DEMO (shaded region) of the trinary probability Pðx; y; zÞ
given the binary probabilities Pðx; yÞ and Pðx; zÞ, under equation 13.
values are uniquely determined by the choice probabilities except in some particular
DEMO, for example, when Pðx; AÞ¼ 1=a for all x A DEMO
Even in the case where t ¼ 3, in which the DEMO of parameters (ﬁve) equals the
number of data points, the DEMO probabilities are severely constrained. The volume
of the subspace generated by the present model is less than 1=2% of the volume of
the entire DEMO space which is a ﬁve-dimensional unit hypercube. The proba-
bility that a point sampled at random, from a uniform distribution over the param-
eter space, satisﬁes the present model, therefore, is less than .005 in this case.
Additional consequences and further developments of the elimination-by-aspects
model are DEMO in Tversky (1972). They include a generalization of the pres-
DEMO model, an extension to ranking, and a proof that the EBA model is a random
utility model, though not an independent one.
Tests
In contrast to the many theoretical studies of probabilistic models of preference (see,
e.g., Becker et al., 1963a; Luce & Suppes, DEMO; Marschak, 1960; Morrison, 1963),
there have been relatively DEMO empirical studies in which these models were tested.
Moreover, much of DEMO available data are limited to binary choices, and most
studies report DEMO analyze only group data (see, e.g., Rumelhart & Greeno, 1971).
478
Tversky
Unfortunately, group data usually do not permit adequate testing of theories of
individual choice behavior because, in general, the compatibility of DEMO data with
the theory is neither a necessary nor a su‰cient condition for its validity. (For an
instructive illustration of this point, see DEMO, 1959, p. 8.) The scarcity of appropriate
data in an DEMO of considerable theoretical interest is undoubtedly due to the di‰-
culties involved in obtaining adequate estimates of choice probabilities for an indi-
vidual subject, particularly outside the domain of psychophysics.
Two consequences of the present model DEMO tested in previous studies. In an
experiment involving choice among gambles, DEMO et al. (1963b) showed that
although simple scalability (equation 1) is systematically violated, the regularity
condition (equation 10) is generally satisﬁed. Similarly, although strong stochastic
transitivity was violated in several studies (e.g., Coombs, 1958; Krantz, 1967; Tver-
sky & Russo, 1969), moderate stochastic transitivity was usually supported. (For
some speciﬁed conditions under which moderate stochastic transitivity, as well as
weak stochastic transitivity, is violated, see Tversky, 1969.) The fact that simple
scalability and strong stochastic DEMO are often violated while regularity and
moderate stochastic transitivity are typically satisﬁed provides some support, albeit
nonspeciﬁc, for the present theory. The following DEMO work was designed to
obtain a more direct test of the EBA model.
Method
To test the model, three di¤erent tasks were selected. The stimuli in Task A were
random dot patterns, in a square frame, varying in size (of square) and density
(of dots). DEMO were presented with pairs and triples of frames and instructed to
choose, in each case, the frame which contained the largest number of DEMO The
stimuli in Task B were proﬁles of college applicants with di¤erent intelligence (I) and
motivation (M) scores. The scores were expressed DEMO percentiles (relative to the pop-
ulation of college applicants), and DEMO as bar graphs. Subjects were presented
with pairs and triples of such proﬁles and asked to select, in each case, the applicant
they DEMO the most promising. The stimuli in Task C were two-outcome gam-
bles of the form ðp; xÞ, in which one wins $x with DEMO p and nothing other-
wise. Each gamble was displayed as a pie diagram, where the probabilities of
winning and not winning were represented, DEMO, by the black and white sec-
tors of the pie. Subjects DEMO presented with pairs and triples of gambles and were
asked to choose the gamble they would prefer to play. (At the end of the study, each
subject actually played for money ﬁve of the gambles chosen by him in the course of
the study. The gambles were played DEMO spinning an arrow on a wheel of fortune and
the subjects won the indicated amont if the arrow landed on the black sector of DEMO
wheel.) Examples of the three types of stimuli are shown in DEMO 20.6.
Elimination by Aspects 479
Figure 20.6
Typical stimulus slides from each of DEMO three tasks.
The same eight subjects participated in all three tasks. They were students in a
Jerusalem high school, ages 16–18. Subjects were run in a single group. The stimuli
were projected on slides and each DEMO indicated his choices by checking an
appropriate box on his response sheet. The study consisted of 12 one-hour sessions,
three times a week, for four weeks. The ﬁrst two sessions were practice sessions in
which DEMO problems and the procedure were introduced and the subjects familiarized
themselves with the stimuli of the task.
Each experimental session included all three tasks, and the ordering of the tasks
was randomized across sessions. Within each DEMO, subjects were presented with var-
ious pairs and triples formed from DEMO basic set of 4 4 ¼ 16 two-dimensional stimuli.
One set of three stimuli of each type was isolated and replicated more than other DEMO
The entire triple was replicated 30 times (three per session) while each of the pairs
within this triple was replicated 20 times (two per session). The following discussion
is concerned with the analysis of DEMO triples. Each triple was constructed so that no
alternative dominates another one with respect to both dimensions, and so that two
of the elements, called x and y, are very similar to each other, while the third ele-
ment, z, is relatively dissimilar to each of DEMO
The subjects were paid a ﬂat fee for the completion of all the sessions. In addition,
each subject received a bonus proportional to DEMO number of correct numerosity
judgments made by him, and was allowed DEMO play, for money, ﬁve gambles selected
randomly from those chosen by him during the study.
Results
The analysis of the results begins by DEMO the constant-ratio rule which is essen-
tially equivalent to Luce’s (1959) model. According to this rule,
Pðx; yÞ
Pðy; xÞ
¼
DEMO; AÞ
Pðy; AÞ
x; y
A
A;
½14
480
Tversky
provided the denominators do not vanish. The constant-ratio rule is DEMO strong version
of the principle of independence from irrelevant alternatives. It requires that the ratio
of Pðx; AÞ and Pðy; AÞ (not merely their order as required by simple scalability) be
independent of the o¤ered set A.
Let T ¼fx; y; zg, and deﬁne
Pyðx; DEMO Pðx; TÞ
Pðx; TÞþ Pðz; TÞ
Pðy; TÞ
Pxðy; DEMO Pðy; TÞþ Pðz; T
Þ
;
Hence, by the constant-ratio rule,
:
Pðx; zÞ¼ Pyðx; zÞ and
Pðy; zÞ¼ DEMO; zÞ:
Put di¤erently, the binary probabilitythe trinary probabilities, since DEMO equation 14 the presence ofPðx; zÞ should equal Pyðx;
the DEMO between x and z.
In the present study, the alternatives were DEMO so that x and y are much more
similar to each other than either of them is to z. Hence, the similarity hypothesis that
is incorporated into the elimination-by-aspects model predicts that the addition of
alternative DEMO to the set fx; zg will reduce Pðx; T
Þ
proportionally more than Pðz; TÞ.
That is, the similar alternative, x, DEMO lose relatively more than the dissimilar alter-
native, z, by the addition of y. Likewise, y is expected to lose relatively more than z
by the introduction of x. Contrary to the constant-ratio rule, therefore, the similarity
hypothesis implies
½15
zÞ, computed from
y is ‘‘irrelevant’’ DEMO
Pðx; zÞ > Pyðx; zÞ
Pðy; zÞ > Pxðy; zÞ:
and
½16
To test the constant-ratio rule, the observed (binary) relative frequencies P^ðx; zÞ
and P^ðy; zÞ were compared, respectively, DEMO P^yðx; zÞ and P^xðy; zÞ computed from
the trinary relative frequencies, separately for each one of the subjects. The observed
and the computed values for all subjects are shown in table 20.1 for each of DEMO three
tasks.
It seems that the constant-ratio model (equation 14) holds in the psychophysical
task (A ), and that it fails in DEMO two preference tasks (B and C ) in the manner pre-
DEMO by the similarity hypothesis (equation 16). Out of 16 individual DEMO
Table 20.1
Observed and Predicted Proportions (under the Constant-Ratio Model) for DEMO Task
Task A (dots) Task B (applicants) Task C (DEMO)
Subject
P^
ðx;zÞ
P^
yðx;zÞ
P^
ð
y;zÞ
P^
xðy;zÞ
P^
ðx;zÞ
P^
yðx;zÞ
P^
ð
y;DEMO
P^
xðy;zÞ
P^
ðx;zÞ
P^
yðx;zÞ
P^
ð
y;zÞ
P^
xðy;zÞ
1 .50 .43 .45 .43 .65 .44 .30 DEMO .35 .12 .50 .46
2 .60 .27 .35 .33 .55 .37 .75 .58 .60 .53 .70 .68
3 .25 .38 .40 .41 .55 .38 DEMO .41 .25 .26 .50 .29
4 .70 .75 .30 .67 .40 .46 .40 .32 .60 .43 .70 .35
5 .65 .52 .35 .39 .65 DEMO .55 .40 .20 .16 .50 .41
6 .40 .39 .45 .52 .35 .20 .40 .38 .65 .54 .60 .44
7 .15 .26 .45 .44 DEMO .77 .35 .40 .55 .42 .65 .50
8 .15 .14 .45 .57 .55 .52 .40 .29 .55 .35 .70 .43
Overall
proportion .425 .405 DEMO .466 .556 .463 .469 .388 .469 .354 .606 .466
pns ns <DEMO <.10 <.01 <.01
Elimination by Aspects 481
482
Tversky
in each task (two per subject), equation 16 was satisﬁed in 13 and 15 cases, respec-
tively, in Tasks B DEMO C ( p <:05 in each case5), and only in 7 cases in Task A.
Essentially the same result was found in DEMO analyses.
The relatively small number of observations does not permit an adequate test of
individual comparisons. Hence, the observed and the computed choice frequencies
were pooled over subjects. The results of a chi-square test of equation DEMO against
equation 16, based on these data, are shown in the last row of table 20.1 for each
comparison in each of the DEMO The same pattern emerges from the analysis of the
pooled data: DEMO observed proportions are signiﬁcantly higher than the computed
ones in tasks B and C, but not in task A.
Since the constant-ratio model is not acceptable, in general, the simplest version of
the elimination-by-aspects model, which is compatible with the similarity hypothesis,
was selected next. Recall DEMO the test stimuli were designed so that x and y are very
similar to each other while z is relatively dissimilar to either of DEMO (see footnote 4).
Thus, we assume that neither x nor y share with z any aspect that they do not share
with DEMO other. Consequently, aside from the aspects shared by all three stimuli, z
can be regarded as (aspectwise) disjoint from both x and DEMO That is, we assume that,
to a reasonable degree of DEMO, Uðx; zÞ¼ U
ð
y; zÞ¼ 0. This assumption
reduces DEMO number of free parameters (from ﬁve to three) at the cost of some loss in
generality.
Let UðxÞ¼ a, UðyÞ¼ b, UðzÞ¼ DEMO, and Uðx; yÞ¼ d (see Figure 7). Under this
DEMO case of the model, there exist nonnegative a, b, c, and d such that
Pðx; yÞ¼ a
a
;
þ
Pðy; zÞ¼ b
b
þ
þ
d
and
d
;
þ
c
Pðx; zÞ¼ a
b
a
þ
c
þ
þ
d
d
þ
c ;
:
c
þ
d
Pðz; x; yÞ¼ a
þ
DEMO
Pðx; y; zÞ¼ a
a
þ
þ
b
d a
þ
þ
b ;
c
þ
d
½17
b
For three alternatives, DEMO are ﬁve independent data points (three binary and two
trinary). DEMO the absence of any restrictions on the parameters, the likelihood function
DEMO the data is maximized by using the observed relative frequencies as estimates of
the parameters, in which case the dimensionality of the parameter space, denoted
dðWÞ , equals ﬁve. In the above version (equation 17) of the elimination-by-aspects
model, we can set c, say, arbitrarily, DEMO the observed proportions are all
expressible in terms of three parameters (DEMO, b, and d ), and the dimensionality of the
restricted DEMO space, denoted dðoÞ, equals three. Let l be the likelihood ratio
LðoÞ=LðWÞ, where L denotes the maximum value of the likelihood function under
Elimination by Aspects 483
Table 20.2
Values of the Test Statistic and DEMO Estimated Values of d for Each Subject in Each of the Tasks
Task A (dots) TaskB (applicants) Task C (gambles)
Subject
w2
d
w2
d
w2
d
1 .133 .29 2.179 .14 .040 DEMO
2 3.025 .89 1.634 .92 .001 .58
3 .849 0 .159 1.18 2.022 .14
4 5.551* 0 6.864* .51 1.053 1.56
5 .951 0 DEMO 1.23 .887 0
6 .401 0 .405 .42 .157 1.18
7 3.740 0 .083 0 .304 1.00
8 4.112 0 .038 .37 1.241 1.44
DEMO: df
* p ¼ :1.
¼
2.
the respective model. If equation 17 holds, then the statistic 2 ln l has an approxi-
mate chi-square distribution with dðWÞ dðoÞ¼ 2 degrees of freedom.
Chandler’s (1969) STEPIT program was employed to obtain maximum likelihood
estimates of the parameters under equation 17 with c ¼ 1. The values of the test
DEMO are reported in table 20.2, along with the estimates of d, for each subject in
all tasks.
Table 20.2 exhibits a very good DEMO between the observed proportions
and the tested version (equation 17) of the EBA model: only 2 out of 24 tests permit
rejecting the model at the conservative .1 level. It should perhaps be noted that DEMO
correspondence between observed choice probabilities and the elimination-by-aspects
model does not necessarily imply that the subjects are actually following a strategy of
elimination by DEMO They might, in fact, employ a di¤erent strategy that is well
approximated by the elimination-by-aspects model. The study of the actual strategies
employed DEMO subjects in choice experiments may perhaps be advanced by investigat-
ing choice probabilities in conjunction with other data such as reaction time, eye
movements, or verbal protocols.
The relation between the predictions of the constant-ratio model (equation 15) and
the similarity hypothesis (equation 16) can be DEMO investigated using the obtained
estimates of the parameter d, reported in DEMO 20.2. It is easy to verify that the
constant-ratio model is compatible with equation 17 if and only if d ¼ 0, while the
similarity hypothesis implies d > 0. Hence, if the former holds, DEMO estimates of d
should be close to 0, whereas if the DEMO holds, the estimates should be substantially
positive. (The magnitude of d should be interpreted in the light of the facts that all
484
Tversky
Figure 20.7
A graphical illustration of the tested version of DEMO EBA model (equation 17).
parameters are nonnegative and c ¼ DEMO, see equation 17 and ﬁgure 20.7.) Inspection of
table 20.2 reveals that the majority of the d estimates in task A are zero, while the
majority of the d estimates in tasks B and C DEMO substantially positive. This agrees
with the results of previous analyses (summarized DEMO table 20.1) according to which
the constant-ratio model is satisﬁed in DEMO A, but not in tasks B and C.
Taken together, the experimental ﬁndings suggest the hypothesis that the constant-
ratio model is valid DEMO choice among unitary alternatives (e.g., dots, colors, sounds)
that are usually evaluated as wholes, but not for composite alternatives (e.g., gam-
bles, applicants) that tend to be evaluated in terms of DEMO attributes or components.
This hypothesis is closely related to a suggestion made by Luce (1959):
If we call a decision that is DEMO subdivided into simpler decisions an elementary choice, then
possibly we can DEMO to ﬁnd Axiom 1 [Luce’s choice axiom] directly conﬁrmed for elementary
choices but probably not for more complex ones [p. 133].
Research on multidimensional DEMO based on similarity, or proximity, data (e.g.,
Shepard, 1964a; Torgerson, 1965) has also shown that judgments of unitary and
composite stimuli (sometimes referred to as analyzable and unanalyzable) are gov-
erned DEMO di¤erent rules. Much additional research, however, is required in order to
assess the validity and the generality of the proposed hypothesis.
Finally, the distinction between unitary and composite stimuli is logically inde-
pendent of whether DEMO inconsistency reﬂected in choice probabilities is attributable
to imperfect discrimination or to a conﬂict among incompatible criteria. (For a dis-
cussion of this last distinction, see Block & Marschak, 1960.) Although choice
experiments in psychophysics typically involve imperfect discrimination with unitary
stimuli while preference experiments are usually DEMO with conﬂict among
composite alternatives, the other two combinations also exist.
Elimination by Aspects 485
Discussion
Strategic Implications
A major feature of the DEMO model is that the probability of select-
ing an alternative depends not only on its overall value, but also on its relations to
the other available alternatives. This gives rise to study of strategic factors in DEMO
design and the presentation of choice alternatives. Speciﬁcally, the present model
DEMO a method for investigating questions concerning optimal design or location
of alternatives in order to maximize (or minimize) choice probability under speciﬁed
constraints. DEMO following examples are intended to illustrate the scope and the
nature of such a study.
First, consider a problem of binary comparisons. Suppose y and z are given, and
we search for x such that Pðx; yÞ is maximized under the constraints that z has no
aspects in common with any other alternative, and thatBy the former constraint, z DEMO be viewed as a standard of comparison. Hence, thePðy; zÞ and Pðx; zÞ are ﬁxed.
latter constraint can be interpreted as meaning that the overall values of y and of x
(evaluated relative to z) are held ﬁxed. Thus, only the position of x relative to DEMO can
be varied to maximize Pðx; yÞ. Under these conditions, the present model implies
that if Pðx; zÞ > Pðy; zÞ, x0 should include as much of y0 as possible. If, on the other
hand, Pðx; zÞ < Pðy; zÞ, x0 should include as DEMO of y0 as possible. The degree of
overlap between x0 and y0 can be regarded as an index of the di‰culty of comparing
them. DEMO x0 includes y0 , the comparison is trivial, and Pðx; yÞ is maximal. If x0 and y0
are disjoint, the comparison is much more di‰cult, and Pðx; yÞ is less extreme.
In the light DEMO this interpretation, the above result asserts that it is in the DEMO
interest of the favored alternative to make the comparison as easy as possible, while
it is in the best interest of the nonfavored alternative to make the comparison as dif-
ﬁcult as possible. This certainly makes DEMO: any increase in the di‰culty of com-
paring the alternatives adds DEMO to the judgment process and makes Pðx; yÞ
closer to 1=2. DEMO to this logic, drastically di¤erent policies are prescribed
depending on whether DEMO is the favored or the nonfavored alternative. Advertising
campaigns based on slogans such as ‘‘All aspirins are the same—why pay more?’’
and ‘‘This DEMO is completely di¤erent from any other car in its class,’’ illustrate,
respectively, the policies recommended to the favored and the nonfavored alter-
natives. Note that these policies could be employed in the design of DEMO as well
as in their advertisements.
Second, let T ¼fx; y; ... ; zg and suppose that all pairwise choice probabilities are
ﬁxed and that we wish to select a set AJT which includes both DEMO and y so that the
ratio Pðx; AÞ=Pðy; AÞ is maximized. According to the elimination-by-aspects model,
486
Tversky
the above ratio is maximized when A consists of alternatives (which are not domi-
nated by y) that ‘‘cover’’ as much of y as possible without ‘‘covering’’much of x.If x
and y are products DEMO some market A, for example, then the present model predicts
that the relative advantage of x over y is maximized when the other DEMO
products are as similar to y and dissimilar to x as possible. The example of choice
among records discussed in the introduction and the DEMO e¤ect demonstrated
in table 20.1 illustrate the point. Note that this maximization problem cannot be
investigated in Luce’s model (equation 2), for example, since by the constant-ratio
rule Pðx; AÞ=Pðy; AÞ¼ Pðx; yÞ=Pðy; xÞ, x; y A A, and hence is independent of A.
According to the EBA model, in contrast, the above ratio can, in principle, be arbi-
trarily large, provided Pðx; yÞ 0 0.
Thus, if the present theory is valid, one can take advantage DEMO the so-called ‘‘irrel-
evant alternatives’’ to inﬂuence choice probabilities. This result is based on the idea
that the introduction of an additional alternative ‘‘hurts’’ DEMO alternatives more
than dissimilar ones. This is a familiar notion in the context of group choice. The
present development suggests that it is an DEMO determinant of individual choice
behavior as well. In practice, problems such DEMO the design of a product or a political
campaign involve many speciﬁc constraints concerning the nature of the product or
the candidate. To the DEMO that these constraints can be translated into the present
framework, the DEMO model can be used (or abused) to determine
the optimal design, or location, of choice alternatives.
Psychological Interpretation
The EBA model accounts DEMO choice in terms of a covert elimination process based
on sequential selection of aspects. Any such sequence of aspects can be regarded as a
DEMO state of mind which leads to a unique choice. In light of this interpretation,
the choice mechanism at any given moment in time DEMO entirely deterministic; the
probabilities merely reﬂect the fact that at di¤erent DEMO in time di¤erent states
of mind (leading to di¤erent choices) may prevail. According to the present theory,
choice probability is an increasing DEMO of the values of the relevant aspects.
Indeed, the elimination-by-aspects model DEMO compensatory in nature despite the fact
that at any given instant in time, the choice is assumed to follow a conjunctive (or a
DEMO) strategy. Thus, the present model is compensatory ‘‘globally’’ with
respect to choice probability but not ‘‘locally’’ with regard to any particular state of
DEMO
In the proposed model, aspects are interpreted as desirable features; the selection
of any particular aspect leads to elimination of all alternatives that DEMO not contain
Elimination by Aspects 487
the selected aspect. Following the present development, one can formulate a dual
model where aspects are interpreted as disadvantages, or regrets, associated with the
alternatives. According to such a model, the DEMO of a particular aspect leads to
the elimination of all alternatives that contain the selected aspect. This model is also
based on the notion DEMO elimination by aspects, except that here an alternative is
chosen if DEMO only if none of its aspects is selected, whereas in the DEMO developed in
this paper an alternative is selected if and only if it includes all the selected aspects.
The former model may be more DEMO when the deﬁning features of the alter-
natives are naturally viewed as undesirable. In choosing among various insurance
policies, for example, it may DEMO more natural to apply the strategy of elimination by
aspects to the various risks and premiums, treated as disadvantages or regrets, than
to DEMO them as relative advantages with respect to some reference points.6
Although the present model has been introduced and discussed in terms of aspects,
DEMO have shown that it requires no speciﬁc assumptions concerning the structure of
these aspects. In the course of the investigation, however, assumptions concerning
DEMO structure and/or the relative weights of aspects were sometimes introduced. In
discussing the Paris–Rome problem, for example, we assumed that Parisþ (i.e., a trip
to Paris plus an added bonus) includes Paris in DEMO sense that all aspects of the latter
are included in the former. Similarly, in analyzing Debreu’s example, we assumed
that the two recordings DEMO and B2 of the Beethoven symphony are very similar to
each other, whereas the suite by Debussy is relatively dissimilar to either of them.
Essentially the same assumption was employed in the analysis of the experimental
DEMO In all these instances, speciﬁc assumptions about the structure or the DEMO
weights of aspects were added to the model on the basis of some prior analysis of the
alternatives. The addition of such assumptions strengthens DEMO predictions of the
model and tightens its empirical interpretation. These assumptions, DEMO, must be
carefully examined because the inadequacy of an added assumption DEMO erroneously
be interpreted as a failure of model.
To illustrate this point, consider the following example of choice between articles
of clothing. Let J denote a jacket, S a pair of matching slacks, and C DEMO coat. Suppose
that the coat is more valuable than the jacket, DEMO PðC; JÞ > 1=2. But since the slacks
and the jacket DEMO well matched, PðJS; CSÞ > 1=2, where JS and CS DEMO the
options consisting of the combined respective articles. Both JS and CS share the
same article, S; hence one might be tempted to DEMO S as a collection of aspects
shared by the two alternatives. According to the elimination-by-aspects model, such
aspects could be deleted without a¤ecting the choice process. Consequently, under
the proposed interpretation of S, PðJS; CSÞ¼ PðJ; CÞ contrary to the assumptions.
488
Tversky
Further reﬂection, however, reveals that the interpretation of S DEMO a collection of
aspects common to both options is inappropriate. The fact that the jacket and the
slacks form an attractive outﬁt implies that DEMO alternative has some gestaltlike
properties, or that the option JS includes DEMO aspects that are not included in either
J or S alone. Hence, the fact that the option JS includes both J and S as components
does not, by itself, justify the conclusion that the aspects DEMO JS can be partitioned into
those associated with J and S alone.
Rational Choice and the Logic of Elimination by Aspects
The following television DEMO serves to introduce the problem. ‘‘There are
more than two dozen companies in the San Francisco area which o¤er training in
computer programming.’’ The DEMO puts some two dozen eggs and one walnut
on the table to represent the alternatives, and continues: ‘‘Let us examine the facts.
How DEMO of these schools have on-line computer facilities for training?’’ The
announcer removes several eggs. ‘‘How many of these schools have placement ser-
vices DEMO would help ﬁnd you a job?’’ The announcer removes some more eggs.
‘‘How many of these schools are approved for veterans’ beneﬁts?’’ DEMO continues
until the walnut alone remains. The announcer cracks the nutshell, DEMO reveals the
name of the company and concludes: ‘‘This is all DEMO need to know in a nutshell.’’
This commercial illustrates the logic of elimination by aspects; it also suggests that
this logic has some normative appeal as a method of choosing among many complex
alternatives. The appeal DEMO this logic stems primarily from the fact that it is easy to
state, defend, and apply. In choosing among many complex alternatives such DEMO new
cars or job o¤ers, one typically faces an overwhelming amount DEMO relevant informa-
tion. Optimal policies for choosing among such alternatives usually require involved
computations based on the weights assigned to the various relevant factors, or on the
compensation rates associated with the critical variables. Since man’s DEMO com-
putational facilities are quite limited (Shepard, 1964b; Slovic & DEMO, 1971),
the above method is di‰cult to apply.
Moreover, DEMO seems that people are reluctant to accept the principle that (even DEMO
important) decisions should depend on computations based on subjective estimates
of DEMO or values in which the decision maker himself has only limited conﬁ-
dence. When faced with an important decision, people appear to search for an anal-
ysis of the situation and a compelling principle of choice DEMO will resolve the
decision problem by o¤ering a clear-cut choice without relying on estimation of rel-
ative weights, or on numerical computations. (Altogether DEMO seem to have more
conﬁdence in the rationality of their decisions than in the validity of their intuitive
Elimination by Aspects 489
estimates, and the fact that the former depends on the latter is often met with a
mixture of resistance and DEMO)
The strategy of elimination by aspects (illustrated by the above DEMO) pro-
vides an example of such a principle: It is relatively easy to apply, it involves no
numerical computations, and it is DEMO to explain and justify in terms of a priority
ordering deﬁned on the aspects. Inasmuch as people look for a decision rule that not
DEMO looks sensible, but which also seems easy to defend to oneself DEMO well as to
others, the principle of elimination by aspects appears DEMO Its uncritical appli-
cation, however, may lead to very poor decisions. For virtually any available alter-
native, no matter how inadequate it might be, one can devise a sequence of selected
aspects or, equivalently, describe a particular state of mind that leads to the choice of
DEMO alternative.
Indeed, the purpose of advertisement is to induce a state DEMO mind in the decision
maker which will result in the purchase of the advertised product. This is typically
accomplished by increasing the salience and DEMO availability of the desired state of
mind. Being inﬂuenced by such factors, people are often lured into adopting a state
of mind which, DEMO further reﬂection, appears atypical or inadequate. Shepard
(1964b) tells of DEMO person who is induced to purchase the Encyclopedia Britannica by
imagining how he would read it in his free time and impress his friends DEMO his
newly acquired knowledge. Only after failing to consult the Encyclopedia Britannica
for a long period of time does the person realize how inappropriate DEMO state of mind
was that had led him to purchase those many dusty volumes.
From a normative standpoint, the major ﬂaw in the principle of elimination by
aspects lies in its failure to ensure that the DEMO retained are, in fact, superior
to those which are eliminated.
In the problem addressed by the above commercial, for instance, the existence DEMO
placement services that would help the trainee to ﬁnd a job is certainly a desirable
aspect of the advertised program. Its use as a DEMO for elimination, however, may
lead to the rejection of programs whose overall quality exceeds that of the advertised
one despite the fact that DEMO do not o¤er placement services.
In general, therefore, the strategy of elimination by aspects cannot be defended as
a rational procedure of choice. DEMO the other hand, there may be many contexts in
which it DEMO a good approximation to much more complicated compensatory
models and could thus serve as a useful simpliﬁcation procedure. The conditions
under which the approximation DEMO adequate, and the manner in which this principle
could be utilized DEMO facilitate and improve decision making, are subjects for future
investigations.
490
Tversky
Notes
The research was supported, in part, by National DEMO Foundation Grant GB-6782. Much of the work
reported in this paper was accomplished while the author was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced DEMO
in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford, California, during 1970–1971.
I wish DEMO thank the Center for the generous hospitality. I am grateful to David H. Krantz for many
invaluable discussions throughout the years, to Maya Bar-Hillel for her assistance in both theoretical and
experimental phases of the investigation, and to Edward N. Pugh for his help in the analysis of DEMO data. I
have also beneﬁted from discussions with Clyde H. Coombs, DEMO M. Dawes, R. Duncan Luce, Jacob
Marschak, J. E. Russo, and Paul Slovic.
1. Simple scalability is, in fact, equivalent (see Tversky, 1972) to the following order independence
assumption. For x; y A A B, and z A B, Pðx; AÞ bPð y; AÞ i¤ Pðz; B U fxgÞ aPðz; B U fygÞ provided
the terms on the two sides of either inequality are not both DEMO or 1.
2. The representation of choice alternatives as collections of measurable aspects was developed by Restle
(1961) who formulated a binary choice DEMO based on this representation. As will be shown later, the
present DEMO reduces to Restle’s in the two-alternative case. A related representation of choice alter-
natives was developed by Lancaster (1966) who assumed that economic DEMO possess, or give rise to,
multiple characteristics (or aspects) DEMO ﬁxed proportion, and that these characteristics determine the con-
sumer’s choice. DEMO theory, however, is nonprobabilistic.
3. In this paper, the superbar DEMO used exclusively to denote collections of aspects. It should not be confused
with a common use of this symbol to denote set complement.
4. DEMO following stimuli were employed in the study. Task A: x ¼ð13 DEMO 13; 4=5Þ, y ¼ð14  14; 3=4Þ, and
generate the pattern, and the second component is the proportion of cells of the matrix that contain dots.z ¼ð28  28; 1=5Þ where the ﬁrst component of each stimulus is the size of the underlying matrix used to
DEMO B: x ¼ð78; 25Þ, y ¼ð75; 35Þ, and z DEMO; 90Þ where the ﬁrst and second components of each pair
denote, respectively, intelligence and motivation scores of the applicants. Task C: x DEMO; 4:00Þ,
the probability of winning and the amount to DEMO won in each of the gambles in Israeli pounds.y ¼ð1=4; 3:DEMO, and z ¼ð2=3; 1:00Þ, where the ﬁrst and second DEMO of each pair are, respectively,
5. This signiﬁcance level should DEMO interpreted with caution because of the potential dependency between
the observations of each subject.
6. George Miller remarked that people seem to be better DEMO ﬁnding what is wrong with an alternative than
what is good about it. This certainly is true of some people, who might then ﬁnd the ‘‘negative’’ version of
the model less objectionable or more compatible with DEMO way of thinking.
References
Becker, G. M., DeGroot, M. H., & Marschak, J. Stochastic models of choice behavior. Behavioral Science,
1963, 8, 41–55. (a)
Becker, G. M., DeGroot, M. DEMO, & Marschak, J. Probabilities of choices among very similar objects.
Behavioral Science, 1963, 8, 306–311. (b)
Block, H. D., & Marschak, J. Random orderings and stochastic theories of responses. In I. DEMO,
S. Ghurye, W. Hoe¤ding, W. Madow, & H. Mann (Eds.), Contributions to probability and statistics.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, DEMO
Chandler, J. P. STEPIT—Finds local minima of a smooth function of DEMO parameters. Behavioral
Science, 1969, 14, 81–82.
Chipman, J. S. Stochastic choice and subjective probability. In D. Willner (Ed.), Decisions, values, and
groups, vol. 1. New York: Pergamon Press, 1960.
Coombs, DEMO H. On the use of inconsistency of preferences in psychological measurement. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 1958, 55, 1–7.
Elimination by Aspects 491
Coombs, C. H. A theory of data. New York: Wiley, 1964.
Debreu, G. Review of R. D. Luce, DEMO choice behavior: A theoretical analysis. American Economic
Review, 1960, 50, 186–188.
Estes, W. K. A random-walk model for choice behavior. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, & P. Suppes (Eds.),
Mathematical DEMO in the social sciences, 1959. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1960.
DEMO, P. C. Utility theory. Management Science, 1968, 13, 435–453.
Krantz, D. H. The scaling of small and large color di¤erences. (Doctoral DEMO, University of Penn-
sylvania) Ann Arbor, Mich.: University Microﬁlms, DEMO No. 65–5777.
Krantz, D. H. Rational distance function for multidimensional scaling. DEMO of Mathematical Psychol-
ogy, 1967, 4, 226–245.
Lancaster, K. J. A new approach to consumer theory. Journal of Political Economy, 1966, DEMO, 132–157.
Luce, R. D. Individual choice behavior: A thoretical analysis. DEMO York: Wiley, 1959.
Luce, R. D., & Rai¤a, H. DEMO and decisions. New York: Wiley, 1957.
Luce, R. D., & Suppes, P. Preference, utility, and subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E.
Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology, III. New York: Wiley, 1965.
Marschak, J. Binary-choice constraints DEMO random utility indicators. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, &
DEMO Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical methods in the social sciences, 1959. Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1960.
Morrison, H. W. Testable conditions for DEMO of paired comparison choices. Psychometrika, 1963, 28,
369–390.
Restle, DEMO Psychology of judgment and choice. New York: Wiley, 1961.
Rumelhart, DEMO L., & Greeno, J. G. Similarity between stimuli: An experimental DEMO of the Luce and Restle
choice models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, DEMO, 8, 370–381.
Shepard, R. N. Attention and the metric structure DEMO the stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psy-
chology, 1964, 1, DEMO (a)
Shepard, R. N. On the subjectively optimum selection among multiattribute alternatives. In M. W. Shelly
& G. L. Bryan (Eds.), Human judgments and optimality. New York: Wiley, 1964. (b)
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. C. comparison of Bayesian and regression approaches to the study of infor-
mation processing in judgment. Organizational Behavior and DEMO Performance, 1971, 6, 649–744.
Thurstone, L. L. A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273–286.
Thurstone, L. L. DEMO measurement of values. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1959.
Torgerson, DEMO S. Multidimensional scaling of similarity. Psychometrika, 1965, 30, 379–393.
Tversky, A. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 31–48.
Tversky, DEMO Choice by elimination. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, in press.
Tversky, A., & Russo, J. E. Similarity and substitutability in binary choices. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 1969, 6, 1–12.
Appendix
This appendix estalishes the equivalence of the two formulations (equations 6 and 9)
of the elimination-by-aspects model. Let T be a ﬁnite set of alternatives. For DEMO
x A T , let x0 denote the set of aspects associated with x. For any AJT , deﬁne
A0 ¼fa j a A DEMO for some x A Ag, A0 ¼fa j a A x0 DEMO all x A Ag, and A ¼fa j a A x0
492
Tversky
for all x A A & a B y for DEMO y B Ag. We wish to show that there exists a positive
scale u on T0 T0 satisfying equation 6 if and only if DEMO exists a scale U on
fAi j Ai HTg satisfying equation 9. Ai HT
It follows at once from the above deﬁnitions that0 A DEMO j g
of T0 T , since any a T 
6 holds. For any AHT , deﬁne
Anonnegative anda ¼ Ab ¼ A DEMO 0i¤
T0
. By the positivity of
UðAf. Note that ifÞ¼ Pa A A uðaÞ a; b A B then for all
A ¼
B. Furthermore, since
a A
X
0
A0 Pðx; AaÞuðaÞ¼ x DEMO VA aX
X
A Bi
forms a partition
belongs to exactly one Ai . Suppose equation
u, U is
AHT,
x
A
i VA
x
i
Pðx; AaÞuðaÞ
Pðx; A V Bi Þ aX
DEMO Bi ÞUðBi Þ:
Bi
uðaÞ
x
¼
¼
0
V fBi
numerator in equation 6 can be expressed as
B
B
A
B
DEMO
VA Pðx; A
(The condition x A Bi under the summation sign is deleted because for any x B Bi ,
Pðx; DEMO V Bi Þ¼ 0. Similarly, since fb j b A A0 DEMO g¼fb j b A Aj for some Aj such
that Aj VA and Aj V A0fg, the denominator in equation 6 can be expressed as
b A
X
0
A0 uðbÞ¼ A
X
A AUðAj
Þ
DEMO
where
j
A
Bi g
forms a partition of x
0
,DEMO
A ¼fAj
j
Aj
V
A0A; fg:
Thus, equation 6 reduces to equation 9, since
a A x
P
A0 uðaÞPðx; DEMO
b A APA0 uðbÞ
0
0
¼
B
PVA UðBi ÞPðx; DEMO
APA AUðAj Þ
V
Bi Þ
i
j
Conversely, suppose equation DEMO holds. That is, there exists a scale U such that
Pðx; AÞ is given by the right-hand side of the above equation. For DEMO x A T , let
x0 ¼fAi HT j x A Ai g, and u ¼ U , hence equation 9 reduces to equation 6. Finally,
if either of the above denominators vanishes, so does the other.
A
21 Preference Trees
Amos Tversky and Shmuel Sattath
The analysis of choice DEMO has concerned many students of social science.
Choices among political candidates, DEMO products, investment plans, transporta-
tion modes, and professional careers have DEMO investigated by economists, political
scientists, and psychologists using a variety of empirical and theoretical methods. An
examination of the empirical literature indicates that DEMO behavior is often incon-
sistent, hierarchical, and context dependent.
Inconsistency refers to the observation that people sometimes make di¤erent
choices under seemingly identical DEMO Although inconsistency can be ex-
plained as the result of learning, DEMO, or change in taste, it tends to persist even
when the e¤ects of these factors are controlled or minimized. Furthermore, even in
an essentially unique choice situation that cannot be replicated, people often experi-
ence doubt regarding their decisions and feel that in a di¤erent state of DEMO, they
might have made a di¤erent choice. The observed inconsistency and DEMO experienced
uncertainty associated with choice behavior have led several investigators to concep-
tualize choice as a probabilistic process and to use the concept of DEMO probability
as a basis for the measurement of strength of preference (DEMO, 1959; Marschak,
1960; Thurstone, 1927).
Choice among many alternatives appears to follow a hierarchical elimination pro-
cess. When faced with DEMO alternatives (e.g., job o¤ers, houses, cars), people appear
to eliminate various subsets of alternatives sequentially according to some hierarchi-
cal structure, rather than scanning all the options in an exhaustive manner. This
strategy DEMO particularly appealing when the number of alternatives is large and an
exhaustive evaluation is either not feasible or costly in time and e¤ort. Indeed, these
considerations have led several theorists (notably Simon, 1957) to modify the clas-
sical criterion of maximization and to view the choice process DEMO a search for an
acceptable alternative that satisﬁes certain criteria. Such a search is naturally exe-
cuted by a sequential elimination procedure.
Choice behavior DEMO to be context dependent. That is, the strength of prefer-
ence DEMO one alternative over another depends on the context of the other available
alternatives. Furthermore, choice probability depends not only on the values of the
alternatives but also on their similarity or comparability (see, e.g., Tversky, 1972b).
An analysis of the structural relations among the alternatives, DEMO, is an essen-
tial element of any theory that purports to DEMO the e¤ects of similarity and con-
text on choice.
This article develops a probabilistic, context-dependent choice model—called
preference tree —based on a hierarchical elimination process. The ﬁrst part illustrates
494 Tversky and Sattath
the tree model and investigates its formal properties DEMO their psychological signiﬁ-
cance. In the second part, the model is DEMO to several sets of choice data that
are represented as preference trees. The problem of constrained choice is investigated
in the third section, and the implications of the tree model are discussed in the last
section.
DEMO
To motivate and develop the theory of preference trees, we discuss, ﬁrst, the more
general model of elimination by aspects (EBA). DEMO to this model (Tversky,
1972a, 1972b), each alternative is viewed as a collection of measurable aspects, and
choice is described as a covert process of eliminations. At each stage in the process,
DEMO selects an aspect (from those included in the available alternatives) with proba-
bility that is proportional to its measure. The selection of an DEMO eliminates all
alternatives that do not include this aspect, and the DEMO continues until a single
alternative remains. Consider, for example, the choice of a restaurant for dinner.
The ﬁrst aspect selected may be seafood; this eliminates all restaurants that do not
serve acceptable seafood. From the DEMO alternatives another aspect, say a price
level, is selected, and DEMO alternatives that do not meet this criterion are eliminated.
The process continues until one restaurant—which includes all the selected aspects—
remains.
To characterize this DEMO in formal terms, some notation is introduced. Let
T ¼fx; y; z; ...g be the total ﬁnite set of alternatives under study, and let A, B, C
denote nonempty subsets ofx from an DEMO set A. Naturally,T. Let Pðx; AÞ be the probability of DEMO alternative
x
X
A Pðx; AÞ¼ 1
A
for all AHT , and Pðx; AÞ¼ 0 for x B A. For simplicity, we write Pðx; yÞ for
Pðx; fx; ygÞ. Choice probabilities are typically estimated from relative frequency of
selecting x on repeated choices from A. DEMO, consider a mapping that associates
each x in T with a DEMO nonempty set x0 ¼fa; b; ...g of elements that are interpreted
as the aspects of x. An alternative x is said to include DEMO aspect a whenever a is an
element of x0 . The present theory represents choice alternatives as collections of
aspects that denote all valued DEMO of the options including quantitative attri-
butes (e.g., price, quality) and nominal attributes (e.g., automatic transmission on a
Preference Trees 495
Figure 21.1
Schematic representation of three alternatives, x, DEMO, and z, with their associated feature sets denoted a, b,DEMO
and so on.
car, fried rice on a menu). The DEMO analysis, however, does not require prior
identiﬁcation of the aspects associated with each alternative.
For any subset A of T, let A0 be the set of aspects that belong to at least one
alternative in DEMO; that is, A0 ¼fa j a A x0 for some x A Ag. In particular, T0 is the
family of all aspects under consideration. For any a in T0 , let Aa ¼fx A Aj DEMO A x0g
denote the set of all alternatives of A that include a. Note that A0 is a set of aspects,
and Aa DEMO a set of alternatives. Using these constructs, the EBA model can DEMO be
deﬁned as follows.
A family of choice probabilities
nonnegative scale u deﬁned on T0
Pðx; AÞ¼ a
P
x
0
A
b
uðaÞPðx; AaÞ :
PA0 uðbÞ
A
such that for all x
ð1Þ
DEMO recursive formula, which deﬁnes the EBA model, expresses the probability of
Pðx; AÞ, x
AHT , satisﬁes EBA if there exists a
DEMO
AHT
choosing x from A as a weighted sum of the probabilities Pðx; AaÞ of choosing x
from proper subsets of A . It is easy to show that aspects common to all alternatives
under consideration DEMO not a¤ect choice probability and will, therefore, be discarded.
To illustrate the model, consider the case of three alternatives where A ¼fx; DEMO; zg,
and let x0 ¼fa; y; d; lg, DEMO ¼fb; y; m; lg, and z0 ¼fg; d; m; lg (see ﬁgure 21.1). Thus,
A
496 Tversky and Sattath
Aa ¼fxg, Ay ¼fx; yg, Ad ¼fx; zg, Al ¼fx; y; zg, and so on. Discarding l, which is
shared by all alternatives, and normalizing the scale u DEMO that uðaÞþ uðbÞþ uðgÞþ
uðdÞþ uðyÞþ uðmÞ¼ 1 yields
Pðx; AÞ¼ DEMO; AaÞþ uðyÞPðx; AyÞþ uðdÞPðx; AdÞ
¼ uðaÞþ uðyÞPðx; yÞþ uðdÞPðx; zÞ;
where
uðaÞþ uðdÞ uðx0  y0Þ :
Pðx; yÞ¼ uðaÞþ uðdÞþ uðbÞþ uðmÞ ¼ uðx0  y0 Þþ uðy0 x0Þ
This DEMO for binary choice probabilities coincides with Restle’s (1961) model.
According to the EBA model, x can be chosen from A (a) if a is selected ﬁrst, (b) if y
is selected ﬁrst and then either a or d are selected later, and (c) if d is selected ﬁrst and
then either a or y are selected DEMO The probability of choosing x from A, therefore,
is the DEMO of the probabilities associated with these outcomes.
Since there may be many aspects that are unique to x or common to x and y DEMO,
a, y, and so on should be interpreted as collections of aspects. However, for the pur-
poses of the present treatment, DEMO is possible to combine all aspects that are unique to
x and treat them as a single aspect. Formally, for any nonempty proper subset A of T
let A ¼fa j a A x0 for all DEMO A A and a B y0 for any y A T Ag. Thus, A is the set of
aspects shared by all alternatives of A that are not shared by any alternative in
T A, and fAj A0T; qg is a partition of the set of all aspects into 2n  2 aspect
sets. To avoid additional notation we use DEMO, b , and others, to denote these aspect sets
and suppress the distinction between individual aspects and collections of aspects.
If all pairs DEMO distinct alternatives in T are disjoint aspectwise, that is, x0 V y0 is
a in x0 , hence equation 1 reduces to
null, then Pðx; Aa Þ¼ 1 for any
aP uðaÞ
Pðx; AÞ¼ DEMO uðbÞ ¼ y
uðxÞ
PA uðyÞ
A x0
;
A A0
DEMO
X
uðxÞ¼ a uðaÞ: ð2Þ
x0
This is the choice model DEMO by Luce (1959, 1977). When all choice proba-
bilities are nonzero, Luce’s model is equivalent to the assumption that the ratio
A
A
Preference Trees 497
Pðx; AÞ=ðPðy; AÞ is a constant that depends DEMO x and y but not on the o¤ered set A.
Hence, DEMO is called the constant-ratio model (CRM). This model is simple DEMO parsi-
monious; it expresses all probabilities of choice among n alternatives DEMO terms of n
scale values. (Since the unit of measurement is DEMO, the number of independent
parameters to be estimated is one less DEMO number of scale values.) The CRM, how-
ever, fails to DEMO for the e¤ects of similarity between alternatives on choice
probability, as DEMO by several authors (e.g., Debreu, 1960; Luce & Suppes, DEMO;
Restle, 1961; Rumelhart & Greeno, 1971; Tversky, 1972b)DEMO The relevant experimen-
tal studies were reviewed by Luce (1977).
DEMO contrast, EBA provides a natural explanation of the similarity e¤ect. Further-
DEMO, it has several testable consequences that impose considerable constraints on
observed DEMO probabilities and permit a measurement-free test of a model. The
EBA model, however, does not restrict the structure of the aspects in any DEMO, and
hence it yields a large number of scale values ð2n
DEMO
2Þ, limiting its use as a scaling
model. In particular, EBA cannot be estimated from binary choice probabilities,
since the number of DEMO exceeds the number of data points. The question
arises, then, whether EBA can be signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed by imposing some structure
on the set DEMO aspects. Stated di¤erently, can we formulate an adequate theory of
choice DEMO is less restrictive than CRM and more parsimonious than EBA? We DEMO
view CRM as the set-theoretical analogue of a unidimensional representation and
EBA as the counterpart of a high dimensional representation. What, then, is DEMO
analogue of low dimensionality in a set-theoretical representation?
In this article we investigate the representation of choice alternatives as a treelike
graph. A DEMO is a collection of points, called nodes, some of which are linked
directly by lines called edges or links. A sequence of adjacent DEMO with no cycles is
called a path. A (rooted) tree is a graph (containing a distinguished node called
the root) in which DEMO two nodes are joined by a unique path. For ease of reference,
we place the root at the top of the tree and DEMO terminal nodes at the bottom, as in
ﬁgure 21.2. To interpret DEMO rooted tree as a family of aspect sets, we associate each
DEMO node of the tree with a single alternative in T and each link of the tree with
the set of aspects that are shared DEMO all the alternatives that include (or follow from)
that link DEMO are not shared by any of the alternatives that do not include that link.
Naturally, the length of each link in the tree represents the measure of the respective
set of aspects. Hence, the set of all aspects that belong to a given alternative is rep-
resented by DEMO path from the root of the tree to the terminal node associated with
the alternative, and the length of the path represents the overall measure of the
alternative.
498 Tversky and Sattath
Figure 21.2
Tree representation of the choice among DEMO
An illustrative example of a tree representation of a menu is presented in ﬁgure
21.2. The set of alternatives consists of ﬁve entrees (steak, roast beef, lamb, sole, and
trout) that appear as the terminal nodes of the tree. Thus, the link labelled l repre-
sents the aspects shared by all meat entrees but not ﬁsh, y represents the aspects
shared by steak and roast beef but not lamb or DEMO, and g represents the unique
aspects of lamb. The names of DEMO alternatives are displayed vertically and the sug-
gested labels of the clusters (deﬁned by the links) are displayed horizontally.
A tree representation imposes DEMO on the family T ¼fx0 j x A Tg of aspect
sets associated with a given set of alternatives. In particular, a tree deﬁnes a hierar-
chical structure on the alternatives in T induced by associating DEMO link a of the tree
with the set Ta ¼fx A T j a A x0g of all alternatives that include or follow from DEMO
link. In ﬁgure 21.2, for example, Tm ¼fsole; troutg and DEMO ¼fsteakg. It is easy to
verify that for any two links a, b in a tree, either Ta ITb, Tb ITa ,or DEMO V Tb is
empty. The constraints implied by the tree greatly restrict the structure under con-
sideration and drastically reduce the number of parameters DEMO 2n  2 (the number
of proper nonempty subsets of T )to2n  2 that correspond to the maximal number
Preference Trees 499
of links in a tree with n terminal nodes. DEMO appreciate the nature of the constraints,
note that the paths that connect any three terminal nodes with the root either all
meet at DEMO same node or two paths join at one node and the third path joins them at
a higher node, that is, one that DEMO closer to the root. In ﬁgure 21.2, for example, steak
and roast beef join ﬁrst, and then lamb joins them later.
This property of trees implies the following inclusion rule: For all x, y, z in T,
either x0 V y0 Ix0 V z0 or DEMO V z0 Ix0 V y0 . That is, one out of DEMO two binary
intersections of three alternatives includes the other. Equivalently, any DEMO of T
with three elements contains one alternative, say z, such that z0 V x0 ¼ z0 V y0,
which in turn DEMO included in x0 V y0 . We denote this relation by ðx; yÞz, with or
without a comma. Thus, the tree in ﬁgure 21.2 is described as ((steak, roast beef )
lamb) (DEMO, trout). The upper portion of ﬁgure 21.3 illustrates the inclusion DEMO by a
Venn diagram, and the lower portion of ﬁgure 21.3 DEMO the corresponding tree.
A comparison of ﬁgure 21.1 and the upper portion of ﬁgure 21.3 reveals that under
the inclusion rule, two out of the three binary intersections coincide with the triple
intersection ðx0 V z0 DEMO y0 V z0 ¼ x0 V y0 V z0Þ, hence the DEMO of parameters or
aspect sets reduces in this case from six to four, excluding l, which represents the
aspects shared by all three DEMO The following elementary result, proved in
appendix A, shows that the inclusion rule is not only necessary but also su‰cient for
representation by DEMO tree.
structure theorem. A family fx0 j A g of aspect sets is representable by a tree
i¤ either x0 V y0 Ix0 V DEMO or x0 V z y0 for all x, y, z in T.
x T
0 Ix0 V
When the family fx0 j x DEMO Tg of aspect sets satisﬁes the inclusion rule, the process
of DEMO by aspects reduces to elimination by tree (EBT). That is, one selects
a link from the tree (with probability that is proportional to its length) and then
eliminates all alternatives that do not include the selected link. The same process is
then applied to the selected DEMO until one alternative remains. In ﬁgure 21.3, for
example, Pðx; DEMO; y; zgÞ ¼ uðaÞþ uðyÞuðaÞ=½uðaÞþ uðbÞ and Pðz; fx; y; zgÞ ¼ uðgÞ,
assuming the measure u is normalized so that uðaÞþ uðbÞþ uðgÞþ uðyÞ¼ 1. Elimi-
nation by tree, then, is DEMO the application of elimination by aspects to a tree
structure. Note that CRM corresponds to a degenerate tree or a bush with only one
DEMO node—the root.
Hierarchical Elimination
The representation of choice alternatives as a tree suggests an alternative decision
model in which the tree is viewed as DEMO hierarchy of choice points.1 This theory, called
500 Tversky and Sattath
Figure 21.3
An illustration of the inclusion rule DEMO
0
V
y
0
Ix
0
V
z
0
as a Venn-diagram (above) and as a tree (below).
Preference Trees 501
the hierarchical elimination model (HEM), can be described as follows. One begins at
the top of the tree and selects DEMO among the major branches or the links that follow
directly from the root. One then proceeds to the next choice point at the bottom DEMO
the selected link, and the process is repeated until the chosen DEMO contains a single
alternative. The probability of choosing an alternative x from an o¤ered set A is the
product of the probabilities of selecting DEMO branches containing x at each stage of the
process, and the DEMO of selecting a branch is proportional to its overall
weight. For example, the probability of choosing trout from the choice set presented
in ﬁgure 21.2 equals the probability of selecting ﬁsh over meat multiplied by the
DEMO of choosing trout over sole. Thus, each node in the tree DEMO treated as a
choice point, and one proceeds in order from DEMO top to the bottom of the hierarchy.
To deﬁne the HEM in a more formal manner, let Aa denote the set of alternatives
in A that include the link a, that is, Aa ¼fx A DEMO a A x0g. Deﬁne a j b if b follows
directly from a, that is, Aa IAb , and Ag IAb implies Ag DEMO . Let uðaÞ denote the
length of a, and let mðaÞ DEMO the measure or total length of all links that follow from
a, including a. In ﬁgure 21.3, for example, y j a, DEMO j b, and mðyÞ¼ uðaÞþ uðbÞþ uðyÞ.
If T is a DEMO and AHT, A ¼fx0 j x A Ag is also a DEMO that is referred to as a
subtree of T. Naturally, the DEMO j and the measure u on T induce correspond-
ing relations and measures on A . Finally, for BHA, let PðB; AÞ denote the proba-
bility that the alternative selected from A is also an DEMO of B, that is,
PðB; AÞ¼ x
X
B Pðx; AÞ:
A
A family of choice probabilities, Pðx; AÞ, DEMO A AHT , is said to satisfy HEM if
there exists a tree T with a measure u such that the following three conditions DEMO:
ðaÞ
If g
j
b and b
j
a then PðAa; Ag Þ¼ PðAa; AbÞPðAb; AgÞ;
ðbÞ
if g
j
b and g
j
a then PðAa; AgÞ
PðAb; AgÞ
¼
mðaÞ ; provided PðAb; AgÞ 00:
mðbÞ
ðcÞ
The above conditions also DEMO for any subtree A

of T; with the induced
structure DEMO A:
ð3Þ
The ﬁrst condition implies that the probability of selecting x from T is the product
of the probabilities of selecting the DEMO that contain x at each junction. This
condition is readily testable, DEMO it is formulated directly in terms of choice
probability with no reference to the scale u. The second condition states that the
502 Tversky and Sattath
probabilities of selecting one branch rather than another DEMO a given junction are pro-
portional to the weights of the respective branches—deﬁned as the total length of all
their links. If we view DEMO junction as a pan balance and the weight of each subtree
as mass, then b can be interpreted as a weighing process where the probability of
choice among subtrees is proportional to their masses. The third DEMO ensures
that a and b apply not only to the entire tree but also to any subtree obtained by
deleting alternatives from T . DEMO avoid complications we assume that any two alter-
natives have some distinctive aspect with a nonzero measure, however small.
The notion of hierarchical elimination and the idea of elimination by tree represent
di¤erent comceptions of the DEMO process that assume a tree structure. EBT
describes Pðx; AÞ as DEMO weighted sum of the probabilities Pðx; AaÞ of selecting x from
DEMO various subsets of A. In HEM, on the other hand, Pðx; AÞ is expressed as a
product of the probabilities PðAa; AbÞ, b j a of selecting a subtree containing x at each
level DEMO the hierarchy. Compare, for example, the two formulas for the probability of
choosing steak from the set of entrees T displayed in ﬁgure DEMO To simplify the
notation, we suppress the scale u and write DEMO for uðaÞ, and so on. Furthermore, the
scale is normalized so that a þb þg þd þr þy þl þm ¼ 1. According DEMO EBT,
then
PðSteak; T
Þ¼
a
þ
y
a
þ
DEMO
þ
l
 
y

a
þ

a
þ
b
þ
g
þ
y
a
þ
b
þ
g
þ
y
a
DEMO
b
;
a
a
whereas according to HEM,
PðSteak; T Þ¼ða
þ
b
þ
g
þ
y
þ
lÞ 
þ
b
DEMO
y
a
þ
b
þ
g
þ
y

:
a
þ
b
a
a
The di¤erence in form reﬂects a di¤erence in DEMO strategy. EBT assumes free
access; that is, each aspect can be selected (as a basis for elimination) at any stage of
the DEMO On the other hand, HEM assumes sequential access; that is, DEMO are
considered in a ﬁxed hierarchical fashion. The constrast between models based on
random and on sequential access can also be found in theoretical DEMO of mem-
ory and pattern recognition.
It would appear that EBT is applicable to decisions, such as the selection of a res-
taurant or the choice of a movie, for which there is no ﬁxed sequence of choice
points, whereas HEM seems appropriate for decisions that induce a natural hierar-
chy of choice points. A student who has to decide DEMO to do after graduation, for
example, is more likely to consider the alternatives in a hierarchical manner. That is,
ﬁrst decide whether DEMO go to graduate school, travel, or take a job, and DEMO then
Preference Trees 503
evaluate in detail the relevant alternatives, e.g., graduate DEMO, travel plans, or job
opportunities. The preceding discussion suggests that EBT and HEM capture di¤er-
ent decision strategies that might be followed in DEMO situations. However, the
following theorem establishes a rather surprising result that DEMO the di¤erence in
mathematical form and psychological interpretation, the two models DEMO actually
equivalent.
equivalence theorem. EBT and HEM are equivalent; that is, any set of choice
probabilities satisﬁes one model i¤ it satisﬁes the DEMO
The proof of the equivalence theorem is given in appendix B. It shows that, given a
tree T with a measure u, EBT DEMO HEM yield identical choice probabilities, and
hence it is impossible to DEMO between these strategies on the basis of these
data alone. It might be possible, however, that other data such as verbal protocols,
DEMO time, or eye movements can be used to distinguish between the DEMO strat-
egies. To avoid confusion, we shall use the term preference DEMO or pretree to denote
the choice probabilities generated by EBT or by HEM, irrespective of the particular
strategy.
An immediate corollary of the equivalence of EBT and HEM is that any alternat-
ing strategy consisting of DEMO mixture of EBT is also equivalent to them. For example,
a person may choose a restaurant according to EBT and select an entree DEMO to
HEM, or vice versa. It is a remarkable fact that DEMO the various strategies obtained by
alternating EBT and HEM yield identical choice probabilities. Thus, pretree pro-
vides a versatile representation of choice that is compatible with both random-access
and sequential-access strategies.
Consequences
We turn now to DEMO general properties and testable consequences of the tree
model, starting with DEMO similarity e¤ect. There are two distinct ways in which the
similarity between alternatives a¤ects choice probability. First, similarity, or the
presence of common DEMO, creates statistical dependence among alternatives. If x
has more in common DEMO y than with z, for example, then the addition of x to the
set fz; yg tends to hurt the similar alternative y more than the less similar one z.In
the extreme case in which DEMO is almost identical to y, the addition of x will divide DEMO
probability of choosing y by two and leave the probability of choosing z unchanged.
Second, similarity facilitates comparison. If x is more similar to y than to z and
1 ,then 1 . Thus,
Pðy; zÞ¼ 2 Pðx; zÞ will be less extreme than Pðx; yÞ, that is, closer to 2
the more similar pair generally yields DEMO more extreme choice probability because
similarity facilitates the comparison between the alternatives.
504 Tversky and Sattath
To illustrate the e¤ects of similarity, consider a hypothetical example of choice
among transportation modes. Suppose the available alternatives include DEMO airlines,
a1 and a2 , and two trains, t1 and DEMO . Suppose further that there is no reason to prefer
one airline over the other, but train t2 has a very slight but clear advantage over t1,
since it makes one less stop along the DEMO Because the train is more comfortable but
the plane is faster, DEMO one is undecided whether to ﬂy or take a train. Hence,
1 ;
Pða1; a2 Þ¼ 2
Pðt2; t1Þ¼ 1;
and
1 :
Pða1; t1Þ¼ Pða2; t1Þ¼ 2
Let Pðx; xyzÞ DEMO Pðx; fx; y; zgÞ. It follows at once from CRM DEMO
ft1; a1; a2g
1 . Introspection suggests, however, that the selection from
Pðt1; t1a1a2Þ¼ 3
is likely to be viewed as a choice between a train and a plane, so a1 and a2 are treated
as one alternative that is compared with t1 . Consequently, Pðt1; t1a1a2Þ will be close
to 1 , and the two other trinary choice probabilities will be close to 1 . The common-
2 4
DEMO between a1 and a2 , therefore, produces a statistical dependence that DEMO
the relative advantage of the odd alternative t1.
Furthermore, CRM implies DEMO if two alternatives are equivalent in one context,
then they are substitutable in any context. That is, it should be possible to sub-
stitute one for the other without changing choice probability. Since
1 and
DEMO; t1Þ¼ 2
Pðt2; t1Þ¼ 1, we obtain by substitution Pðt2; a1 Þ¼ 1. This result, however, seems
implausible because the slight, albeit deﬁnite, advantage of t2 over t1 is not likely to
eliminate all conﬂict in the choice between t2 and a1. Pðt2; a1Þ, DEMO, is expected
to be signiﬁcantly smaller than 1, contrary to CRM. (Further discussions of this
problem, originally presented by Debreu, 1960, DEMO be found in Luce and Suppes,
1965, pp. 334–335; and Tversky, 1972b, pp. 282–284.)
Figure 21.4 represents the above example DEMO a preference tree. It is easy to verify
that according to the tree model with a ¼ b and y þa ¼ d, Pða1; a2Þ¼ Pðt1; a1Þ¼
Pðt2; t1 Þ¼ 1, but Pðt2; a2 Þ¼ ðg þdÞ=ðg þ
approaches 0. Furthermore, Pðt1; t1a1a2Þ¼ d=ð2d þ
DEMO , 1 as g
Pðt1; a2Þ¼ 2 2
2dÞ, which approaches1
aÞ, which approaches 2
as a
approaches 0. Hence the tree model provides a simple and parsimonious account of
the similarity e¤ects that are DEMO with CRM.
The e¤ects of similarity on choice probability can also be explained by a Thur-
stonian or a random utility model such as DEMO additive-random-aspect model (Tver-
sky, 1972a). In this development each aspect a is represented by a random variable
Va , each x in DEMO is represented by the random variable Vx ¼ a A x0 Va and, following
the random utility model, Pðx; AÞ¼ PðVx > Vy for all y A AÞP. This model, like EBA,
Preference Trees 505
Figure 21.4
A preference tree for the choice among DEMO of transportation.
accounts for the observed dependence among the alternatives in terms of their com-
mon aspects, which produce positive correlations among the respective random
variables. An additive-random-aspect model di¤ers from the present development in
that DEMO aspects are represented by random variables rather than by constants and
choice is described as a comparison of sums of random variables rather than DEMO a
sequential elimination process. Nevertheless, it was shown (Tversky, 1972a) that
EBA, and hence pretree, is also expressible as a random DEMO model, though not
necessarily an additive one. A random utility analogue DEMO the tree model, developed
by McFadden (reference note 1), is discussed later.
The following testable properties were derived from EBA (see Sattath & Tversky,
1976; Tversky, 1972a, 1972b). Since EBT is a special case of EBA, these properties
apply to the tree model as well.
1 1 , then
Pðx; yÞ b 2 Pðy; DEMO b 2
Moderate stochastic transitivity If and Pðx; zÞ b
minðPðx; yÞ, Pðy; zÞÞ . This is a probabilistic form of the DEMO assumption. Note
that the tree model does not entail the stronger property in which min is replaced by
max.
Regularity Pðx; AÞ bPðx; DEMO U BÞ. The probability of selecting x from a given
o¤ered set cannot be increased by enlarging that set.
The multiplicative inequality Pðx; A V BÞ bPðx; AÞPðx; BÞ. The probability of se-
lecting x DEMO A V B is at least as large as the probability of choosing x from both A
and B in two independent choices.
506 Tversky and Sattath
Figure 21.5
A preference tree for three alternatives, x, y, and z.
The properties discussed so far follow from DEMO general EBA model. We turn
now to some new properties of binary choice probabilities that characterize the tree
model. To simplify the exposition, we introduce the probability ratio Rðx; yÞ¼
Pðx; yÞ=Pðy; xÞ and restrict the discussion to the case in which Pðx; yÞ 0 0 so that
Rðx; yÞ is always well deﬁned. The results can be readily extended to deal with choice
probabilities that equal 0 or 1. Consider, ﬁrst, the case of three alternatives, and note
that any subtree DEMO three elements has the form portrayed in ﬁgure 21.5 except for the
permutation of the alternatives and the possibility of vanishing links. We use DEMO
parentheses notation to describe the structure of the tree; for example, the tree in
ﬁgure 21.5 is described by ðxyÞz and the tree DEMO ﬁgure 21.4 by (a1a2 )(t1t2 ).
Using the notation of ﬁgure 21.5, it follows at once that Rðx; yÞ¼ a=b is DEMO
extreme (i.e., further from 1) than Rðx; zÞ=Rðy; zÞ¼ DEMO þyÞ=ðb þyÞ. Hence any
three elements that form a subtree ðxyÞz satisfy the following trinary condition.
If Rðx; yÞ b 1, then
Rðx; yÞ b Rðx; zÞ b1;
Rðy; zÞ ð4Þ
where a DEMO inequality in the hypothesis implies strict inequalities in the conclusion
and an equality in the hypothesis implies equalities in the conclusion.
Preference Trees 507
Figure 21.6
Preference trees for four alternatives, x, DEMO, v, and w.
The trinary condition (equation 4) reﬂects the similarity hypothesis in that the
commonality between alternatives enhances their discriminability. This DEMO seen
most clearly in the case where y > 0, a > b, and b þy ¼ g, that is, Rðx; yÞ > 1 and
Rðy; zÞ¼ 1. (See ﬁgure 21.5.) According to the trinary condition, Rðx; yÞ¼ a=b >
ða þyÞ=ðb þyÞ¼ Rðx; zÞ: Although y and z are pairwise equivalent, Pðx; yÞ DEMO
Pðx; zÞ because x shares more aspects with y than with DEMO Note that when y vanishes,
Rðx; yÞ¼ Rðx; zÞ=Rðy; DEMO, as required by CRM. In this case, where ðxyÞz, ðxzÞy, and
ðzyÞx all hold, we omit the parentheses altogether and write xyz.
Next, let us consider sets of four alternatives. It is easy to verify that up to per-
mutations of alternatives, any subtree of four elements has one of the two forms dis-
played in ﬁgure 21.6, including degenerate forms with one or more vanishing links. It
follows readily DEMO in the tree ðxyÞðvwÞ, portrayed in the left portion of ﬁgure DEMO,
Rðx; vÞ ða þyÞ=ðg þlÞ ða þyÞ=ðd þlÞ Rðx; wÞ :
Rðy; vÞ ¼ ðb þyÞ=ðg þlÞ ¼ ðb þyÞ=ðd þlÞ DEMO Rðy; wÞ ð5Þ
If we interpret Rðx; vÞ=Rðy; vÞ as DEMO indirect measure of preference for x over y,
measured relative to a standard v, then the above quarternary condition asserts that
this measure is the same for di¤erent standards (v and w) provided that DEMO pairs
ðx; yÞ and ðv; wÞ belong to distinct clusters.
If the relation among the four alternatives under consideration has the form
depicted DEMO the right portion of ﬁgure 21.6, that is ððxyÞvÞw then the DEMO quar-
ternary condition holds.
Rðx; vÞ Rðy; vÞ ða bÞ=g ða þy gÞ=g Rðx; vÞ Rðv; vÞ :
Rðx; wÞ Rðy; wÞ ¼ ða bÞ=d ¼ ða þy gÞ=d ¼ Rðx; wÞ Rðv; wÞ ð6Þ
Note that under CRM the quarternary conditions hold for any four alternatives.
508 Tversky and Sattath
At this point, the reader may suspect that the consideration of more elaborate tree
structures involving larger sets of alternatives DEMO yield additional independent
consequences. However, the following theorem shows that the DEMO and the quar-
ternary conditions are not only necessary but are also su‰cient to ensure the repre-
sentation of binary choice probabilities as a DEMO tree.
representation theorem. A set of nonzero binary choice probabilities satisﬁes the
tree model with a given structure i¤ the trinary (equation 4) DEMO the quarternary
(equations 5 and 6) conditions are satisﬁed relative to that structure.
The theorem shows that if equations 4, 5, and DEMO are satisﬁed relative to some tree
structure, then there exists a DEMO scale u deﬁned on that structure such that
Pðx; yÞ¼ uðx
DEMO

uðx
0

y
0
Þ
y
0 Þþ
uðy
0
and

x
0Þ
0 y0Þ :
Rðx; yÞ¼ uðx0 x0Þ
DEMO
Recall that uðx0 y0Þ is the measure of the aspects of x that are not included in y
or the length of the path DEMO the terminal node associated with x to the meeting
point of the paths from x and y to the root.
The proof of the DEMO theorem is presented in appendix C. This result
shows, in e¤ect, how to construct a preference tree from binary choice probabilities
whenever the DEMO conditions hold. The trinary and quarternary conditions are
readily testable, given DEMO speciﬁed tree structure. Moreover, they can be used to
determine which DEMO, if any, is compatible with the data. Recall that at least
one permutation of every triple must satisfy equation 4 and at least DEMO permutation
of every quadruple must satisfy equation 5 or equation 6. Hence, by ﬁnding the
appropriate permutations of all triples and quadruples, any DEMO structure that is
compatible with the data will emerge. It can be veriﬁed that the scale values (i.e., the
lengths of the links DEMO with a particular tree structure) are uniquely deter-
mined up to DEMO arbitrary unit of measurement whenever binary choice probabilities
are not one half. The tree structure, however, is not always unique. That is, a given
set of binary choice probabilities could be compatible with more than DEMO tree
structure. An example of this kind is presented in appendix D, along with a proof of
the proposition that the tree structure is uniquely determined by the set of binary and
trinary choice probabilities.
Preference Trees 509
Furthermore, if both binary and trinary choice probabilities are available, they
must satisfy the following conditions. Suppose the tree model holds with ðxyÞz (see
ﬁgure 21.5), then
Pðx; zÞ ¼ a DEMO b a þ ya=ða þbÞ Pðx; xyzÞ
Pðz; xÞ g g ¼ Pðz; xyzÞ
and
ð7Þ
Pðx; yÞ ¼ a a þ DEMO þbÞ Pðx; xyzÞ ;
Pðy; xÞ b ¼ b þ DEMO þbÞ ¼ Pðy; xyzÞ ð8Þ
provided all choice probabilities are nonzero. DEMO, according to the tree model with
ðxyÞz, the constant-ratio rule (DEMO 8) holds for the adjacent pair ðx; yÞ, but
not DEMO the split pair ðx; zÞ . Note that this rule is DEMO by equation 7 in the direc-
tion implied by the similarity hypothesis for ðxyÞz. Since y is closer to x than to z in
DEMO structure (in the sense that y0 V x0 Iy0 V z0 ), the addition of y to the set fx; zg
reduces the probability of choosing x proportionally more than the probability of
choosing z. DEMO the other hand, since z is equally distant from x and DEMO y (in the
sense that x0 V z0 ¼ y0 V DEMO ), the addition of z to the set fx; yÞ reduces the proba-
bilities of choosing x and y by the same factor.
DEMO Probabilities
So far, we have modeled the process by which an DEMO chooses among alter-
natives. Because of the di‰culties in obtaining independent repeated choices from the
same individual, most available data consist of the proportions of individuals who
selected the various alternatives, referred to as group data or aggregate probabilities.
It should be emphasized that these data do not DEMO to group decision making,
they merely characterize the aggregate preferences of di¤erent individuals.
It is well-known that most probabilistic models for individual choice (including
CRM and EBA) are not preserved by aggregation. That is, DEMO probabilities could
violate the model even though each individual satisﬁes it, DEMO vice versa. Consider,
for instance, the case of three individuals, 1, 2, 3, and three alternatives, x, y, z.
DEMO the observed choice probabilitiestively, .75, .75, and .15 for individual DEMO; .15, .75, and .75 for individual 2; and .75,Pðx; yÞ, Pðy; zÞ, and Pðz; xÞ are, respec-
.15, and .75 for individual 3. The individual choice probabilities all satisfy EBA, but
the expected aggregate probabilities .55, .55, and .55, respectively, DEMO EBA.
Hence, the validity of EBA as a model for individual DEMO is neither necessary nor
su‰cient for its validity as an aggregate model. Nevertheless, we contend that similar
510 Tversky and Sattath
principles govern both types of choice data and DEMO a new interpretation of EBA
as an aggregate model.
Suppose each individual chooses in accordance with the following sequential
elimination rule. Given an o¤ered DEMO A, select some (nonempty) subset of A,say B,
DEMO eliminate all the alternatives that do not belong to B. Repeat the process until
the selected subset consists of a single alternative. Let QAðBÞ DEMO the proportion of
subjects who ﬁrst select B when presented with the o¤ered set A, that is, the propor-
tion of subjects who DEMO all elements of A B in the ﬁrst stage. Naturally,
XHA QAðBi Þ¼ 1;
and QAðAÞ¼ 1i¤ A consists of a single DEMO Note that QAðBÞ is an elimina-
B
i
tion probability, not DEMO choice probability. The two constructs are related via the fol-
lowing equation.
X
Pðx; AÞ¼ B HA QAðBi ÞPðx; Bi Þ: ð9Þ
Thus, the proportion of subjects who choose x from A is obtained by summing, over
all proper subsets Bi of A , the proportion of individuals who ﬁrst select Bi multi-
plied by the proportion of subjects DEMO choose x from the selected subset. This gen-
eral elimination model, DEMO itself, does not restrict the observed choice probabilities
because we can DEMO set QAðBÞ¼ Pðx; AÞ,if B ¼fxg, and QAðBÞ¼ 0 otherwise.
Nevertheless, it provides a method for characterizing probabilistic choice models in
terms of the constraints they impose on the elimination probabilities.
A family of DEMO probabilities, QAðBÞ, BHAHT , satisﬁes proportionality
i¤ for all A, DEMO, C, Bi , Cj in T,
PP
QAðBÞ QTðBi Þ ;
QAðCÞ ¼ QTðCj Þ ð10Þ
where the summations range, respectively, over all subsets Bi , Cj of T such that
Bi V DEMO ¼ B and Cj V A ¼ C . It is assumed that the denominators are either both
positive or both zero. This condition DEMO that for any AHT , the values of QA are
computable from the values of QT . More speciﬁcally, the percentage of subjects who
ﬁrst select B when presented with the o¤ered set A is proportional DEMO the percentage
of subjects presented with the total set T who ﬁrst select any subset Bi that includes,
in addition to B, only elements that do not belong to A.
i
Preference Trees 511
To illustrate the proportionality condition, consider the choice among entrees. Let
T ¼fr; s; tg and A ¼fr; tg, DEMO r, s, and t denote, respectively, roast beef, steak,DEMO
and trout. According to proportionality, therefore,
QAðrÞ ¼ QTðrÞþ QTðr; sÞ :
QAðtÞ QTðtÞþ QTðt; sÞ
Note that in the binary DEMO, where A ¼fr; tg, QAðrÞ¼ Pðr; AÞ¼ Pðr; tÞ.
DEMO rationale behind the proportionality condition is the assumption that upon
restricting the o¤ered set from T to A, all individuals who ﬁrst selected B U C from
T, CHT A, will now select B from DEMO, since the alternatives of C are no longer
available. For example, those who ﬁrst selected fr; sg from T will select roast beef
when restricted to A because now steak is not on the menu. DEMO following theorem
shows that the (aggregate) process described above is compatible with EBA.
aggregation theorem. A set of aggregate choice probabilities on T DEMO compatible
with EBA i¤ there exist elimination probabilities on T that satisfy equations 9 and
10.
The proof of this theorem is readily reduced DEMO earlier results. (See the appendix in
Tversky, 1972b, and theorem DEMO in Tversky, 1972a.) They show that if equation 9 and
equation 10 hold, then
PQðBPi ÞPQððxB; Ai Þ
V
Pðx; AÞ¼ Bi Þ ;
where QðBi Þ¼ QTðBi Þ and the summations range over all Bi HT such that Bi V A is
nonempty. This form, in turn, is shown to be equivalent to EBA. Hence, the DEMO
gation theorem provides a new interpretation of EBA as a model for group data.
It is instructive to compare the above version of the DEMO model to the original
version deﬁned in equation 1. First, note DEMO the scale QðBÞ is not a measure of the
overall value of the alternatives of B. Rather, it reﬂects the degree to which they form
a good cluster, as evinced by the proportion of subjects who ﬁrst selected B when
presented with T. The counterpart of QðBÞ in DEMO original version of the EBA model
is uðBÞ, the measure of DEMO aspects that belong to all alternatives of B and do not
belong to any alternative in T B.
The individual version of the EBA DEMO assumes that at any point in time, one
has a ﬁxed DEMO of the relevant aspect sets, which, in turn, induces a (lexico-
graphic) ordering of the available alternatives. However, at a di¤erent DEMO in time,
one may be in a di¤erent state of mind that yields di¤erent ordering of aspects and
512 Tversky and Sattath
alternatives. Indeed, the stochastic component was introduced into the model to
accommodate such momentary ﬂuctuations. The new aggregate version of DEMO
assumes that each individual has a ﬁxed ordering of the relevant aspect sets, and the
stochastic component of the model is associated with di¤erences between individuals
rather than with changes within an individual. Hence, the former version explains
choice probabilities in terms of an intraindividual distribution of states DEMO mind,
whereas the latter version explains the data in terms of an interindividual distribution
of tastes.
The EBA model may provide a useful DEMO of aggregate data because the same
principles that give rise to EBA as a model of individual choice appear to apply to
group data. DEMO a case in point, let us reexamine the similarity e¤ect using DEMO trans-
portation problem discussed earlier. Suppose the group is divided equally between
the train t1 and the plane a1 and is also equally divided DEMO the two airlines a1
and a2 . Hence,
1 :
DEMO; a1Þ¼ Pða1; a2 Þ¼ 2
We propose that the proportion of individuals who choose the train t1 from the
lies between 1 and DEMO because the addition of a2
2 3
o¤ered set ft1; a1; a2g to ft1; a1g is
likely to a¤ect those who chose a1 more than those who chose t1 . More generally, the
addition of a new alternative or product (e.g., a low-tar cigarette or a DEMO candi-
date) hurts similar alternatives (e.g., other low-tar cigarettes and DEMO liberal candi-
dates) more than less similar alternatives.
Furthermore, as in the case of individual choice, the similarity between options
appears to enhance the discrimination between them. Suppose that each individual
prefers train t2 over DEMO t1 , since it is slightly faster. Suppose further that the group
is equally divided between a1 and t1 ,so 1 . Contrary to CRM, which
Pða1; t1Þ¼ 2
1 and 1 because
implies Pðt2; a1Þ¼ 1, we predict that Pðt2; a1Þ is likely to be DEMO 2
many of those who prefer a1 over t1 are not likely to switch from a plane to a train
because of the slight, albeit clear, advantage of the faster train. Since the same cor-
relational pattern emerges from both individual and group data, the EBA model may
be applicable to both, although the assumptions and the parameters of the model
have di¤erent interpretations in the two cases.
Consider, for example, DEMO assumption that the alternative set T ¼fa1; a2; t1g in
the transportation problem has a tree structure ða1a2Þt1 . In the individual version, the
tree assumption implies that any aspect shared by the train and DEMO one of the air-
lines is also shared by the other airline. In the aggregate case, the tree assumption
entails that both QTða1; DEMO and QTða2; t1Þ vanish; that is, nobody eliminates from T
Preference Trees 513
one airline only. Hence, if all individuals share the same tree structure but not nec-
essarily the same preferences, the aggregate data will generally exhibit the same
qualitative structure. The actual measure derived DEMO aggregate data, however, does
not relate to the measures derived from individual data in any simple manner.
Applications
In this section we apply DEMO tree model to several sets of individual and aggregate
choice probabilities reported in the literature, construct tree representations for these
data, and test DEMO against CRM. As was demonstrated in the previous section,
the trinary and the quarternary conditions provide necessary and su‰cient con-
ditions for the DEMO of binary choice probabilities as a preference tree. For
error-free data, DEMO, these conditions can readily be applied to ﬁnd a tree
structure DEMO is compatible with the data. Since data are fallible, however, the con-
struction of the most appropriate tree structure, the estimation of link lengths, and
the evaluation of the adequacy of the tree model pose nontrivial computational and
statistical problems.
In this article we do not develop DEMO comprehensive solution to the construction,
estimation, and evaluation problems. Instead, we rely on independent judgments
(e.g., similarity data) for the construction of the tree and employ standard iterative
maximization methods to estimate its DEMO To evaluate goodness of ﬁt, we
test the tree model, assuming the hypothesized tree structure, against the binary ver-
sion of Luce’s CRM.
It has been shown by Luce (1959) that the binary CRM, according to which
Pðx; yÞ¼ vðxÞ=ðvðxÞþ vðyÞÞ, is essentially equivalent to DEMO following product rule:
Pðx; yÞPðy; zÞPðz; xÞ¼ Pðx; zÞPðz; yÞPðy; xÞ;
that is,
Rðx; yÞRðy; zÞRðz; xÞ¼ 1: ð11Þ
Thus, any two intransitive cycles through the same set DEMO alternatives are equiprob-
able. On the other hand, the trinary condition (equation 4) yields
1
If Pðx; yÞ > 2 and ðxyÞz;DEMO
Rðx; yÞRðy; zÞRðz; xÞ > 1; ð12Þ
then
or
Pðx; yÞPðy; zÞPðz; xÞ > Pðx; zÞPðz; yÞPðy; xÞ:
514 Tversky and Sattath
Any hypothesized tree structure, therefore, can be DEMO to test whether the
product rule is violated in the predicted direction.
The analysis of the data proceeds as follows. We start with a DEMO set of individ-
ual or collective pair comparison data along with a hypothesized tree structure,
derived from a priori considerations or inferred from DEMO data. Maximum likeli-
hood estimates for both CRM and pretree are obtained using Chandler’s (1969)
iterative program (stepit ), and the two models are compared via a likelihood ratio
test. In addition, we perform an estimate-free comparison of the two models by con-
trasting the product DEMO (equation 11) and the trinary inequality (equation 12).
Choice DEMO Celebrities
Rumelhart and Greeno (1971) investigated the e¤ects of similarity on choice proba-
bility and compared the choice models of Luce (1959) DEMO Restle (1961). The stimuli
were nine celebrities including three politicians (L. B. Johnson, Harold Wilson,
Charles De-Gaulle), three athletes (DEMO Unitas, Carl Yastrzemski, A. J. Foyt),
and three movie DEMO (Brigitte Bardot, Elizabeth Taylor, Sophia Loren). The sub-
jects DEMO
¼
234Þ were presented with all 36 pairs of names and were instructed to
choose for each pair ‘‘the person with whom they would DEMO spend an hour dis-
cussing a topic of their choosing’’ (p. DEMO).
On the basis of a chi-square test for goodness of ﬁt applied to the aggregate
choice probabilities, Rumelhart and Greeno (1971) were able to reject Luce’s model,
w2ð28Þ¼ 78:2, p <:001, but not a particular version of Restle’s model, w2ð19Þ¼
21:9, p >:25. Recall that Restle’s model coincides with the binary form DEMO the EBA
model.
The list of celebrities used in this study naturally suggests the following tree struc-
ture with three branches corresponding to the DEMO di¤erent occupations represented
in the list: (LBJ, HW, CDG) (JU, CY, AJF) (BB, ET, SL). The estimates DEMO the
parameters of the tree,2 displayed in ﬁgure 21.7, are DEMO to those obtained by
Edgell, Geisler, and Zinnes (1973), DEMO corrected the procedure used by Rumelhart
and Greeno (1971) and proposed a simpliﬁcation of the model that amounts to the
above tree structure. DEMO tree model appears to ﬁt the data well, w2ð25Þ¼ 30:0,DEMO
p >:20, although it has only three more parameters than DEMO model.
Since pretree includes CRM, the likelihood ratio test can be DEMO to test and com-
pare them. The test is based on the fact that if model 1 is valid and includes model 2,
DEMO under the standard assumptions, 2 lnðL1=L2Þ has a chi-square distribution
with DEMO degree of freedom, where L1 and L2 denote the likelihood functions DEMO
model 1 and model 2 and d1 and d2 denote the respective numbers of parameters. If
the inclusive model is saturated, that is, DEMO no constraints, then the above test is
Preference Trees 515
Figure 21.7
Preference tree for choice among celebrities.
equivalent DEMO the common chi-square test for goodness of ﬁt. When the likelihood
ratio test is applied to the present data, CRM is rejected in favor of pretree,
w2ð3Þ¼ 48:2, p <:001. The average absolute deviation between predicted and
observed probabilities is .036 for CRM and .023 DEMO pretree.
It should be noted (see Falmagne, reference note 2) DEMO the test statistics for pre-
tree do not have an exact chi-square distribution because the parameter space asso-
ciated with the model is constrained DEMO only by the equations implied by the
quarternary conditions but also by the trinary inequality. The result, however, is a
stricter test of DEMO, since the inequalities imposed on the solution can only reduce
goodness DEMO ﬁt.
Since the product rule (equation 11) and the trinary inequality (equation 12) are
the key binary properties that give rise, respectively, to CRM and pretree, it is
instructive to compare them directly. DEMO the tree structure presented in ﬁgure
21.7, the trinary inequality applies DEMO 9 6 ¼ 54 triples, and it is satisﬁed in 89% DEMO
the cases. Because the various triples are not independent, no simple DEMO test is
516 Tversky and Sattath
readily available. To obtain some indication about the DEMO of the e¤ect, we com-
puted the value of RðxyzÞ¼ Rðx; yÞRðy; zÞRðz; xÞ for all triples satisfying ðxyÞz and
Rðx; yÞ > 1. The median of these values equals 1.40, and the interquartile range is
1.13–1.68. Recall that under CRM the trinary inequality is expected DEMO hold in 50%
of the cases and the median RðxyzÞ should equal one. The summary statistics for all
the studies in this section are DEMO in table 21.1.
Political Choice
The next three data sets were obtained from Lennart Sjo¨ berg, who collected both
similarity and preference data for several sets of stimuli and showed a positive cor-
relation between interstimulus DEMO (derived from multi-dimensional scaling)
and the standard deviation of utility DEMO (derived from a Thurstonian model).
Sjo¨ berg (1977) and DEMO berg and Capozza (1975) conducted parallel studies of prefer-
ences for Swedish and Italian political parties. In these experiments 215 Swedish
students and DEMO Italian students were presented with all pairs of the seven leading
Swedish and Italian parties, respectively. The subjects ﬁrst rated the similarity be-
tween all 21 pairs of parties on a scale from 1 to 9 DEMO then indicated for each pair
which party they preferred. In addition, DEMO subjects were presented with all 35 triples
of parties and were asked to choose one party from each triple.
The average similarities between the DEMO were ﬁrst used to construct an additive
similarity tree according to the addtree method developed by Sattath and Tversky
(1977). In this construction, which generalizes the familiar hierarchical clustering
scheme, the stimuli are represented DEMO terminal nodes in a tree so that the dissimilar-
ity between stimuli corresponds to the length of the path that joins them. For illus-
DEMO, we present in ﬁgure 21.8 the addtree solution for the similarities DEMO the
Swedish parties. The product-moment correlation between rated similarities and path
length is : 96. Assuming the tree structure derived from addtree, Chandler’s (1969)
stepit program was employed to search for maximum likelihood estimates DEMO the
parameters of pretree, using the observed choice probabilities. The obtained DEMO
ence tree for the Swedish data is presented in ﬁgure 21.9, DEMO the preference tree for
the Italian data is presented in ﬁgure 21.10.
Several comments about the relations between similarity and preference trees are
in DEMO First, the rules for computing dissimilarity and preference from a given DEMO
are di¤erent. The dissimilarity between x and y is represented by the length of the
path (i.e., the sum of the links) that connects x and y, and the degree of preference
Rðx; yÞ DEMO represented by the ratio of the respective paths. Second, the numerical
DEMO of the links in the two representations tend to di¤er systematically. In gen-
Preference Trees 517
Figure 21.8
Additive tree (addtree) representation of the DEMO between Swedish political parties.
eral, the distances between the root and DEMO terminal nodes vary much more in a
preference tree (due to DEMO presence of extreme choice probabilities) than in a simi-
larity tree. DEMO, some links that appear in the similarity tree sometimes
vanish in DEMO estimation of pretree (as can be seen by comparing ﬁgures 21.8 DEMO
21.9), indicating the presence of aspects that a¤ect judged similarity but not choice
probability. Third, the root in a similarity tree is essentially arbitrary, since the dis-
tance between nodes is una¤ected by the choice of root. The probability of choice in
pretree, however, is highly DEMO to the choice of a root. Consequently, several
alternative roots were DEMO and the best-ﬁtting structure was selected in each case.
Tests of goodness of ﬁt indicate that pretree provides an excellent account of the
Swedish DEMO, w2ð11Þ¼ 5:8, p >:5, with an average absolute DEMO of .012,
for CRM. Pretree also provides a reasonable account of the Italian data,compared with w2ð15Þ¼ 49:1, p <:001, DEMO an average absolute deviation of .038
w2ð11Þ¼ 19:5, p >:DEMO, with an average absolute deviation of .023, compared with
w2ð15Þ¼ 67:6, p <:001, with an average absolute deviation of .042 DEMO CRM. The
applications of the likelihood ratio test indicate that pretree ﬁts these data signiﬁ-
518 Tversky and Sattath
Figure 21.9
Preference tree for choice among Swedish DEMO parties.
cantly better than CRM; the test statistics are w2ð4Þ¼ 43:DEMO, p <:001, for the Swed-
ish data and w2ð4Þ¼ 48:1, p <:001, for the Italian data. Furthermore, for the
Swedish data, the trinary inequality is satisﬁed in 96% of the cases ðN ¼ 23Þ,the
median RðxyzÞ equals 1.73, and the interquartile range is 1.38–2.27. For the Italian
data, the trinary inequality is satisﬁed in 78% of the cases ðN ¼ 18Þ, the median
RðxyzÞ equals 1.74, and the interquartile range is .93–2.78.
The availability of both binary and trinary probabilities in the political studies
permitted an additional test of pretree. DEMO from equation 7 that the tree model
implies
Pðx; zÞ > DEMO; xyzÞ ;
Pðz; xÞ Pðz; xyzÞ
provided ðxyÞz;
whereas CRM implies that the two ratios are equal. For the Swedish data, the above
inequality is satisﬁed in 87% of the cases ðN
¼
DEMO, the median Pðx; zÞPðz; xyzÞ=
Preference Trees 519
Figure 21.10
Preference tree for choice among Italian political DEMO
Pðz; xÞPðx; xyzÞ equals 1.28, and the interquartile range is DEMO For the Italian
data, the inequality is satisﬁed in 81% of DEMO cases ðN ¼ 36Þ, the median of the above
product ratio DEMO 1.19, and the interquartile range is .86–2.28. Note that under
CRM
DEMO; zÞPðz; xyzÞ=Pðz; xÞPðx; xyzÞ¼ uðxÞuðzÞ=uðzÞuðxÞ¼ 1:
Choice between Academic Disciplines
In a third study conducted by Sjo¨ berg (1977), the alternatives consisted of the fol-
lowing 12 academic disciplines that comprise the DEMO science program at the
University of Go¨ teborg in Go¨ teborg, DEMO: psychology, education, sociology,
anthropology, geography, political science, law, economic history, economics, busi-
ness administration, statistics, and computer science. A group of 85 students from
that university ﬁrst rated the similarity DEMO all pairs of disciplines on a 9-point
scale and then indicated for each of the 66 pairs the discipline they preferred.
As in the DEMO preceding analyses, the tree structure was obtained via addtree, and
stepit was employed to search for maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters.
520 Tversky and Sattath
Figure 21.11
Preference tree for choice among social DEMO
The resulting preference tree for the choice between the 12 social sciences is presented
in ﬁgure 21.11.
A chi-square test for goodness of ﬁt DEMO w2ð50Þ¼ 45:5, p >:25, for pretree,
compared with w2ð55Þ¼ 69:1, p >:05, for CRM, and the likelihood ratio test rejects
CRM in favor of pretree, w2ð5Þ¼ 23:6, DEMO <:001. The average absolute deviation
between predicted and observed probabilities is .025 for pretree and .035 for CRM.
Finally, the trinary inequality is satisﬁed in 84% of the cases ðN ¼ 86Þ, the median
RðxyzÞ equals 1.52, and the interquartile range is 1.21–1.86.
Choice between Shades of Gray
In a classic study of unfolding theory, Coombs (1958) used as stimuli 12 patches of
gray that varied in brightness. The subjects DEMO presented with all possible sets of 4
stimuli and were asked to rank them from the most to the least representative gray.
Preference Trees 521
Figure 21.12
A schematic preference tree for the choice DEMO shades of gray.
Binary choice probabilities were estimated for each subject by the proportion of
rank orders in which one stimulus was ranked above DEMO other. The data provided
strong support for Coomb’s probabilistic unfolding model, DEMO which the stimuli are
represented as random variables and the derived choice probabilities reﬂect momen-
tary ﬂuctuations in one’s perceptions of the stimuli as DEMO as in one’s notion of the
ideal gray.
To represent Coombs’ data as a tree, consider a line representing variation in
brightness (with DEMO and black at the two endpoints) that is folded in the DEMO at
a point corresponding to the prototypical gray. The stimuli can now be represented
as small branches stemming from this folded line (see ﬁgure 21.12). Because of the
large number of zeros and ones in DEMO data, we did not attempt to estimate the tree.
Instead, we inferred from the data the characteristic folding point of each subject and
DEMO the induced tree structure to compare, separately for each subject, the trinary
inequality against the product rule, letting Pðx; yÞ denote the DEMO that x is
judged to be farther than y from the prototypical gray. Triples involving zero prob-
ability were excluded from the analysis. The DEMO for each one of the four subjects,
presented in the bottom part of table 21.1, show that the product rule (equation 11) is
violated in the manner implied by the trinary inequality (equation 12).
Table 21.1 summarizes the analyses of the studies discussed in this DEMO The
left-hand part of the table describes the statistics for the trinary inequality, where N
is the number of tested triples, p is DEMO percentage of triples that conﬁrm the trinary
522 Tversky and Sattath
Table 21.1
Summary Statistics for the Comparison of DEMO Constant-Ratio Model (CRM) and Pretree
Trinary inequality statistics CRM Pretree Di¤erence
Study N p RR1 R3 d w2 df d w2 df w2 DEMO
Rumelhart &
Greeno (1971)
Celebrities 54 89 1.40 1.13 1.68 0.36 78.2** 28 .023 30.0 25 48.2** 3
Sjo¨ berg (1977)
Swedish parties 23 96 1.73 1.38 2.27 .038 49.1** 15 .012 5.8 DEMO 43.3** 4
Sjo¨ berg &
Capozza (1975)
Italian parties 18 78 1.74 .93 2.78 .042 67.6** 15 .023 19.5 11 48.1** 4
DEMO berg (1977)
Social sciences 86 84 1.52 1.21 1.86 .035 DEMO 55 .025 45.5 50 23.6** 5
Coombs (1958)
Shades of DEMO
Subject 1 99 83 2.06 1 4
Subject 2 139 76 5.08 1 9
Subject 3 127 70 1.45 .58 3.52
Subject 4 184 DEMO 6.66 2.84 100
Note: p ¼ % triples conﬁrming the trinary DEMO R is median value of RðxyzÞ¼ Rðx; yÞRð y; zÞ
Raverage absolute deviation between observed and predicted choice probabilities. *ðz; xÞ. R1 ¼ First quartile of distribution of RðxyzÞ. R3 ¼ third quartile of distribution DEMO <:05. ** Rpð<:xyz001.Þ. d ¼
inequality, R is the median value of RðxyzÞ¼ Rðx; yÞRðy; zÞRðz; xÞ, and R1 DEMO R3
are the ﬁrst and third quartiles of the distribution of RðxyzÞ. The right-hand part
of table 21.1 describes the measures of goodness of DEMO for both CRM and pretree,
where d is the average absolute deviation between observed and predicted choice
probabilities.
Tree Representation of Choice Data
DEMO examination of the trinary inequality provides an estimate-free comparison of
CRM and pretree. The results described in table 21.1 show that in all data DEMO,
CRM is violated in the direction implied by the similarity hypothesis and the
assumed tree structure. The statistical tests for the correspondence between DEMO
and data indicate that pretree o¤ers an adequate account of the data that is sig-
niﬁcantly better than the account o¤ered by CRM. Apparently, the introduction of a
few additional parameters that correspond to aspects shared DEMO some of the alter-
natives results in a substantial improvement in goodness of ﬁt. Furthermore, pretree
yields interpretable hierarchical representations of the alternatives under study along
with the measures of the relevant aspect sets.
Preference Trees 523
The preceding analyses relied on similarity data or on DEMO priori considerations to
construct the tree structure and used choice probabilities to test the model and to
estimate the tree. This procedure avoids the DEMO involved in using the same data
for constructing the tree and for testing its validity. It is also attractive because simi-
larity data are DEMO obtained and they are typically more stable and less variable
than preferences. An examination of Sjo¨ berg’s data, for example, shows that subjects
DEMO reveal markedly di¤erent preferences tend, nevertheless, to exhibit considerable
agreement in judgments of similarity. The only drawback of this procedure is that it
DEMO to produce the best tree whenever the similarities and the preferences follow
di¤erent structures. The development of an e¤ective algorithm for constructing a tree
DEMO fallible preferences and the development of appropriate estimation and testing
procedures remain open problems for future research.
The correspondence between the observed and the DEMO choice probabilities
indicates that the tree structures inferred from judgments of similarity generally agree
with the structures implied by the observed choice probabilities. This DEMO supports
the notion of correspondence between similarity and preference structures originated
by Coombs (1964) and underscores the potential use of similarity scaling techniques
DEMO the analysis of choice behavior. Other analyses of the relations between the repre-
sentations of similarity and of preference, based on multidimensional scaling, DEMO
reported by Carroll (1972), Nygren and Jones (1977), Sjo¨ berg (1977), and Ste¿re
(1972).
Constrained Choice and the DEMO of Agenda
The preceding development, like other models of choice, deals with the selection of a
single element from some o¤ered set. The DEMO section investigates choice that is
constrained by a partition imposed on the o¤ered set. For example, the choice of an
alternative from the set fx; y; v; wg can be constrained by the requirement to choose
ﬁrst between fx; yg and fv; wg and then to DEMO a single element from the selected
pair. Constraints of this type are common; they could be imposed by others, induced
by circumstances, or adopted for convenience.
For example, the decision regarding a new appointment is sometimes introduced
as an initial decision between a senior and a junior DEMO, followed by a later
choice among the respective junior or senior DEMO Deadlines and other time
limits provide another source of constraint. Suppose the alternatives of AHT , for
example, are no longer available after April 1. Prior to this date, therefore, one has
to decide whether DEMO choose an element of A or to select an element from T A,in
524 Tversky and Sattath
which case the choice of a particular element DEMO be delayed. The selection of an
agenda and the grouping of options for voting (which have long been recognized as
inﬂuential procedures) are DEMO examples of external constraints.
There are many situations, however, in which a person constrains his choice to
reduce cost or e¤ort. Consider, for example, a consumer who intends to purchase one
item from a set fx; y; v; wg of four competing products. Suppose there are two stores
in town that are quite distant from each other; one store carries only x and y, and the
other carries only v and w. Under such circumstances, the consumer is likely to select
ﬁrst a store and then a product, because he has to decide which store to enter but he
does not have to choose a product DEMO entering the store. Similarly, people typi-
cally select a restaurant ﬁrst DEMO an entree later—even when they are thoroughly
familiar with the available menus. Thus, the need to make some decisions (e.g., of a
restaurant) at an early stage and the common tendency to delay decisions (DEMO, of
an entree) to a later stage constrain the sequence of choices leading to the selected
alternative.
The e¤ect of an agenda on DEMO decision making has been investigated by an
economist, Charles R. Plott, and a lawyer, Michael E. Levine, from Caltech. Levine
and Plott (1977) conducted an ingenious study of a ﬂying club, to which DEMO belong,
whose members had to decide on the size and composition of the club’s aircraft ﬂeet.
There were a few hundred competing alternatives, and the group was to meet once
and decide by a majority DEMO Levine and Plott constructed an agenda designed to
maximize the chances of selecting the alternative they preferred. The group followed
this agenda, and indeed chose the option favored by the authors. A second study
demonstrated the DEMO of agenda under controlled laboratory conditions. Plott and
Levine (1978) developed a model of individual voting behavior and used it to con-
struct DEMO agenda for each alternative, designed to enhance the selection of that DEMO
native. The results indicate that although the speciﬁc model was not fully supported,
the imposed agenda had a substantial e¤ect on group choice.
DEMO Theoretical Analysis
An agenda or a constraint imposed on an o¤ered set induces a hierarchical structure
or a tree on that set. Suppose, for example, that fB; C; Dg is a partition of A; DEMO,
under the constraint ½½B½C½D, the choice of an alternative from DEMO proceeds by ﬁrst
choosing between D and B U C and then choosing between B and C,if D is elimi-
nated in the DEMO stage. It is essential to distinguish here between the intrinsic tree
structure (deﬁned in terms of the relations among the aspects that characterize the
alternatives) and the imposed structure that characterizes the external constraints.
The choice among fx; y; v; wg, for example, whose aspects form the tree ðxyÞðvwÞ,
Preference Trees 525
may be constrained by the requirement to choose ﬁrst DEMO fx; wg and fy; vg.To
avoid confusion we use parentheses, DEMO example, ðxyÞv, to characterize the intrinsic
tree, and brackets, for example, ½xyz, to denote the imposed constraints.
Let Pðx; ½A½BÞ, DEMO A A, A V B ¼ f denote the probability of DEMO x from
A U B , subject to the constraint of choosing ﬁrst between A and B. The present
treatment is based on the DEMO assumption.
U
Pðx; ½A½BÞ ¼ Pðx; AÞPðA; A BÞ
ð13Þ
DEMO
U
¼ Pðx; AÞ y A Pðy; A BÞ:
A
That is, the probability of choosing x under ½A½B is decomposable into two
independent choices: The choice of x from A and the choice of A from ½A½B.
Furthermore, the latter choice is reduced to the selection of any element of A from
the o¤ered set A U DEMO Hence for A ¼fx; yg and B ¼fv; wg, Pðx; ½xy½vwÞ ¼
Pðx; yÞðPðx; xyvwÞþ Pðy; xyvwÞÞ. Equation 13 does not assume any choice model, it
merely expresses the probability of a constrained choice in terms of the probabilities
of nonconstrained choices.
A choice model DEMO called invariant if the probability of choice is una¤ected by
constraints imposed on o¤ered sets. Thus, invariance implies that Pðx; ½A½BÞ ¼
Pðx; A U BÞ for all x A A U B . It DEMO easy to see that CRM is invariant. In fact, the
invariance DEMO is equivalent to Luce’s (1959) choice axiom, which asserts that
DEMO; AÞ¼ Pðx; BÞPðB; AÞ whenever BHA and Pðx; AÞ > 0. Consequently, Luce’s
model is the only invariant theory of choice; DEMO other models violate invariance in
one form or another.
Two hierarchical structures or trees deﬁned on the same set of alternatives are
called compatible DEMO there exists a third tree, deﬁned on the same alternatives, that is
a reﬁnement of both. Reﬁnement is used here in a nonstrict DEMO so that every tree is
a reﬁnement of itself. Thus, ððxyÞzÞðuvwÞ DEMO compatible with ðxyzÞððuvÞwÞ because
both are coarsenings of ððxyÞzÞððuvÞwÞ. On the other hand, ðxyÞz and ðxzÞy are
incompatible, since there is no tree DEMO is a reﬁnement of both. Note that the
(degenerate) tree structure implied by CRM is compatible with any tree. The relation
between the DEMO preference tree and the imposed agenda is described in the
following theorem.
compatibility theorem. If equation 13 holds and pretree is valid, then a set of
choice probabilities is una¤ected by constraints i¤ the constraints are DEMO
with the structure of the tree.
526 Tversky and Sattath
A proof of the theorem is given in DEMO E. The following discussion explores
the simplest example of the e¤ect of agenda. Suppose that T ¼fx; y; zg, pretree
holds and the intrinsic tree is ðxyÞz. Let a, b , and g denote the measures of the unique
aspects of x, y, and z, respectively, and let y denote the measure of the aspects shared
by x and y. (See ﬁgure 21.5.) Setting a þb þg þy ¼ DEMO, yields
Pðx; xyzÞ¼ a þ ya=ða þbÞ; Pðy; xyzÞ¼ b þ yb=ða þbÞ; Pðz; xyzÞ¼ g:
the tree structure, hence it does not inﬂuence choice probability. The other two par-There are three DEMO constraints in this case. The ﬁrst, ½xyz, coincides with
titions, DEMO and ½ yzx, are symmetric with respect to x and y, hence we investigate
only the former. By equation 13 we have Pðy; ½xzyÞ¼ Pðy; xyzÞ. More generally, an
imposed partition, for example, DEMO, does not change the probability of selecting the
isolated alternative, for example, y. The imposed constraint, however, can have a
substantial e¤ect on the probability of selecting other alternatives, for example, x and
DEMO Since
Pðx; ½xzyÞ¼ Pðx; zÞðPðx; xyzÞþ Pðz; xyzÞÞ;
then
Pðx; ½xzyÞ > Pðx; xyzÞ
i¤
Pðz; xyzÞPðx; zÞ > DEMO; xyzÞPðz; xÞ:
In the tree model, with ðxyÞz, this inequality is always satisﬁed (see equation 7)
because
Pðx; zÞ DEMO a þy > a þ ya=ða þbÞ ¼ Pðx; xyzÞ ;
Pðz; xÞ g g Pðz; xyzÞ
hence, Pðx; ½xzyÞ > DEMO; xyzÞ. Imposing the partition ½xzy, therefore, on the tree
ðxyÞz DEMO beneﬁcial to x, immaterial for y, and harmful to z.
To interpret this result, recall that x and y share more aspects with each other than
with z. In the absence of external constraints, z beneﬁts directly from the competition
between x and y, as demonstrated by the above inequality that shows that x loses
proportionally more than z DEMO the addition of y to the set fx; zg. The constraint DEMO
reduces, in e¤ect, the direct competition between x and y and enhances x at the
expense of z.
A numerical example illustrates this DEMO Suppose a ¼ :0001, b ¼ :0999, y ¼ :DEMO,
and g ¼ :5: In a free choice, therefore, Pðz; xyzÞ¼ :5, Pðy; xyzÞ¼ :4995, and
Preference Trees 527
Pðx; xyzÞ¼ :0005 because x is practically dominated DEMO y. Under the constraint
½xzy, however, the probabilities of choosing z, y, and x, respectively, are .2761,
.4995, and .2244. Thus, the imposed partition increases the probability of choosing x
from .0005 to .2244. This occurs because x fares well against z, but performs badly
against y. In a regular choice, where x is compared directly to y, its chances are
negligible. Under the partition ½xzy, however, these chances improve greatly because
there is an even chance to eliminate DEMO in the ﬁrst stage and a close to even chance to
eliminate z in the second stage.
The above treatment of constrained choice should DEMO viewed as a ﬁrst approxima-
tion because its assumptions probably do not always hold. First, the alternatives in
question may not form a tree. Second, the independence condition (embodied in
equation 13) may fail in many situations. Finally, the probability of selecting A over
B may not equal U
number of elements that could induce a bias to choose DEMO larger or the smaller set.Px A A Pðx; A BÞ —particularly DEMO A and B have a di¤erent
Nevertheless, the proposed model appears DEMO provide a promising method for the
analysis of constrained choice.
Constrained Choices among Prospects and Applicants
This experiment investigates the e¤ect of agenda on DEMO choice and tests the
implications of the preceding analysis. Two parallel studies are reported using hypo-
thetical prospects (study 1) and college applicants (study 2) as choice alternatives.
Each prospect was described as having p% chance to win $a and ð100  pÞ% chance
to win nothing, denoted ð$a; p%Þ. Each applicant was characterized by a high school
grade point average (GPA) and an average score on the Scholastic Aptitude DEMO
(SAT). The subjects were reminded that the SAT has a DEMO of 800, with an
average of about 500, and that GPA is computed by letting A ¼ 4, B ¼ 3, and DEMO on.
One hundred students from Stanford University, Stanford, California, participated
DEMO each of the two studies. Every subject was presented individually with 10 triples of
alternatives, each displayed on a separate card. Each triple was divided into a pair of
alternatives and an odd alternative, and the subject was instructed to decide ﬁrst
whether he or she preferred the DEMO alternative or one of the members of the pair. If
the odd alternative was selected, the elements of the triple were not considered again.
If the pair was selected, the subject was given an opportunity to choose between its
members after the presentation of all 10 triples. The DEMO was designed to reduce the
dependence between the trinary and the binary choices.
The subjects in study 1 were asked to imagine that they DEMO actually faced with
the choice between the displayed prospects and to indicate the decision they would
have made in each case. The subjects in DEMO 2 were asked to select from each triple
528 Tversky and Sattath
the applicant that they preferred. Subjects were reminded DEMO their task was to
express their preferences rather than to predict which applicant was most likely to be
admitted to college. The participants in DEMO studies were asked to consider each
choice carefully and to treat each triple as a separate choice problem.
The alternatives in each triple, denoted x, y, z, were constructed so that (a) x and y
are very similar, (b) z is not very similar to either x or y, and (c) the advantage of y
over x on one dimension appears greater than the advantage of x over DEMO on the other
dimension so that y is preferable to x. In study 1, z is a sure prospect, whereas x and
y DEMO risky prospects with similar probabilities and outcomes and with y superior to x
in expected value. For example,
sure, denoted ($25). DEMO study 2, x
moderate SAT, and z is an applicant with a relatively low GPA and fairly high
SAT. For example, x ¼ð3:5; 562Þ, y ¼ð3:4; 596Þ, and z ¼ð2:5; 725Þ. The results of
a pilot study indicated that .1 on the DEMO scale is roughly equivalent to 20 SAT
points. According to this criterion for overall quality, applicant y is ‘‘better’’ than
x in all cases. All triples of prospects and applicants are displayed in tables 21.2
and DEMO
The present experiment was designed to compare choice under ½xyz with choice
under ½xzy. Hence, for each triple, half of the subjects had DEMO choose ﬁrst between
the pair ðx; yÞ and z, and the remaining half had to choose ﬁrst between the pair
ðx; zÞ and y. Each subject made ﬁve choices under ½xyz and ﬁve choices under DEMO
The order of triples and constraints, as well as the positions DEMO the option cards
(i.e., left, center, right) were all DEMO
Because alternatives x and y have much more in common with each other than
with z, the tree structure that best approximates the triples is ðxyÞz. Hence, the con-
straint ½xyz is compatible with the natural structure of the alternatives, whereas the
constraint ½xzy is not. The preceding analysis implies that the latter should enhance
the choice of x, hinder the choice of z, and have no substantial e¤ect on the choice of
y. Stated formally,
x ¼ð$40; 75%Þ, y ¼ð$50; 70%Þ, and z ¼ $25 for
and y are applicants with relatively high GPA and
dðxÞ¼ Pðx; ½xzyÞ Pðx; ½xyzÞ > 0;
dðyÞ¼ DEMO; ½xzyÞ Pðy; ½xyzÞ¼ 0;
and
dðzÞ¼ Pðz; ½xzyÞ Pðz; ½xyzÞ < 0:
Obviously, in the absence of any e¤ect due to the imposed constraints, dðxÞ¼
dðyÞ¼ dðzÞ¼ 0. The proportions of subjects who chose x and y in each triple under
Table 21.2
Probabilities of Choice among Prospects under Two Di¤erent Constraints: Study 1
Constraints
Triple
x ($; %)
y ($; %)DEMO
z ($)
½xyz
Pðx;½xyzÞ
Pðz;½xyzÞ
Pðx;½xzyÞ
Pðz;DEMO
dðxÞ
dðyÞ
dðzÞ
1 (40; 75) (50; 70) (DEMO) .08 .22 .18 .20 .10 .08 .02
2 (80; 15) (75; 20) (10) .12 .40 .24 .32 .12 .04 .08
3 (65; 90) (75; 85) (55) .12 .42 DEMO .46 .08 .12 .04
4 (120; 5) (85; 10) (5) .08 .54 .18 .38 .10 .06 .16
5 (75; DEMO) (100; 25) (20) .04 .54 .20 .48 .16 .10 .06
6 (125; 35) (120; 40) (35) .04 DEMO .18 .32 .14 .02 .12
7 (30; 65) (40; DEMO) (15) .18 .36 .30 .40 .12 .16 .04
8 (35; 95) (45; 90) (30) .06 .40 .16 .28 .10 .02 .12
9 (50; 85) (60; 80) (40) DEMO .48 .22 .30 .18 .00 .18
10 (65; 25) (95; 20) (15) .02 .42 .24 .28 .22 .08 .14
.078 DEMO .210 .342 .132 .052 .080
M
Alternatives
½xzy
E¤ects
Note: $ DEMO amount to be won. % ¼ chances to win. dðxÞ¼ Pðx;½xzyÞ Pðx;½xyzÞ, dðyÞ¼ Pðy;½xzyÞ Pðy;½xyzÞ, dðzÞ¼ Pðz;½xzyÞ
Pðz;DEMO Numbers in parentheses indicate choice alternatives.
Preference Trees 529
Table 21.3
Probabilities of Choice among Applicants under Two Di¤erent Constraints: Study 2
Constraints
Triple
Alternatives ðGPA; SATÞ½xyz
xy z Pðx;½xyzÞ
Pðz;½xyzÞ
Pðx;½xzyÞ Pðz;½xzyÞ
dðxÞ
dðyÞ
dðzÞ
1(3:3; 654) (3:2; 692) (2:2; 773) .16 .40 .30 .32 .14 .06
2(3:6; 592) (3:5; 625) (DEMO:6; 785) .18 .38 .28 .26 .10 .02 .12
3(3:5; 579) (3:7; 571) (2:5; 701) DEMO .48 .18 .40 .18 .10
4(3:1; 602) (3:DEMO; 641) (2:1; 730) .14 .36 .22 .26 .08 DEMO .10
5(2:9; 521) (3:1; 515) (2:3; 703) .04 .50 .20 .34 .16 .00 .16
6(2:DEMO; 666) (2:9; 661) (2:0; 732) .06 .40 .26 .24 .20 .04 .16
7(3:8; 587) (3:7; 629) (2:6; 744) .14 .38 .28 .30 .14 .06 .08
8(3:4; 600) (3:6; 590) (DEMO:4; 755) .06 .40 .24 .30 .18 .08 .10
9(3:7; 718) (3:9; 712) (3:1; 798) DEMO .40 .20 .22 .20 .02 .18
10 (3:5; 562) (3:4; 596) (2:5; 725) .20 .28 .26 .30 .06 .08 .02
M .098 .398 .242 .294 .144 .040
Note: GPA ¼ grade point average. SAT ¼ Scholastic Aptitude Test. dðxÞ¼ Pðx;½xzyÞPðx;DEMO, dðyÞ¼ Pðy;½xzyÞPðy;½xyzÞ, dðzÞ¼
Numbers in parentheses indicate choice alternatives.Pðz;½xzyÞPðz;½xyzÞ.
.08
.08
.104
½xzy
E¤ects
530 Tversky and Sattath
Preference Trees 531
the two constraints are presented in tables 21.2 and DEMO along with the values of
dðxÞ, dðyÞ, and dðzÞ deﬁned above.
The results reported in tables 21.2 and 21.3 tend to conﬁrm the DEMO pattern
of choices. In both studies the values of dðxÞ are all positive, and the values of dðzÞ
are negative with a few small exceptions. Furthermore, in both study 1 and study 2,
the means of dðxÞ are signiﬁcantly positive, yielding tð9Þ¼ 9:2 and tð9Þ¼ 8:6, re-
spectively, p <:001, whereas the means of dðzÞ are signiﬁcantly negative, yielding
tð9Þ¼3:0, p <:05, in study 1, and tð9Þ¼5:5, p <:001, in study 2. The means of
dðyÞ were also negative, yielding tð9Þ¼2:3 and tð9Þ¼2:8, respectively, :01 <
p <:05. Hence, the shift from the natural constraint ½xyz to the constraint ½xzy
increases the chances of DEMO and decreases the chances of z and, to a lesser extent, of y.
The latter e¤ect, which departs from the predicted pattern, DEMO reﬂect a response
bias against the odd alternative.
The pattern of results described above seems to exclude two alternative simple
models that produce an DEMO e¤ect. Suppose choices are made at random so that
one chooses between the odd and the paired alternatives with equal probability. As a
consequence,DEMO
dðxÞ¼ Pðx; ½xzyÞ Pðx; ½xyzÞ¼
dðyÞ¼ Pðy; ½xzyÞ Pðy; ½xyzÞ¼
1
2
1
2


1
2
1
2


DEMO
2
1
2

¼
1
2
¼
0;
1 > 0,
4
and
1
dðzÞ¼ Pðz; ½xzyÞ Pðz; ½xyzÞ¼ 2
DEMO
1
2

1
2
¼
1 < 0;
4
which are incompatible with the experimental ﬁndings.
The random choice model gives a DEMO advantage to the odd alternative, hence
its failure suggests a di¤erent DEMO, according to which the odd alternative su¤ers a
setback perhaps because DEMO prefer to delay the choice and avoid commitment.
This hypothesis, however, implies dðxÞ¼ 0, dðyÞ < 0 and dðzÞ > 0—again contrary
to the data.
Since all triples have the same structure, it is possible to pool all x choices, y
choices, and z choices across DEMO and test our hypotheses within the data of each
subject. Let Pi ðx; ½xzyÞ denote the proportion of triples in which subject i made an x
choice under the constraint ½xzy, and so forth. Let di ðxÞ¼ Pi ðx; ½xzyÞ Pi ðx; ½xyzÞ,
di ðzÞ¼ Pðz; ½xzyÞ Pi ðz; ½xyzÞ, and let Di ¼ di ðxÞ di DEMO Thus, Di measures the
advantage of x over z due to DEMO shift from ½xyz to ½xzy. Recall that in the absence
of an agenda e¤ect, di ðxÞ¼ di ðzÞ¼ Di ¼ 0, whereas under DEMO proposed model,
di ðxÞ > 0 > di ðzÞ, hence, Di has a positive expectation. The means of the Di dis-
532 Tversky and Sattath
tributions are .21 in study 1 and .25 DEMO study 2, which are signiﬁcantly positive,
yielding tð99Þ¼ 4:2 DEMO tð99Þ¼ 5:8, respectively, p <:001 in both cases. In study 1,
60% of the Di s are positive and 22% DEMO; in study 2, 62% are positive and
18% negative. Hence, DEMO predicted pattern of choices is also conﬁrmed in a within-
subjects comparison in which choices are pooled over trials rather than over subjects.
In DEMO, the data show that imposed constraints have a signiﬁcant impact on
DEMO behavior and conﬁrm the major predictions of the proposed model of con-
strained choice. The present results about individual choice, which are based on the
correlational pattern among the alternatives, should be distinguished from the results
of Plott and Levine (1978), who demonstrated the e¤ect of agenda on the outcome of
group decision based on majority vote. An agenda DEMO introduces strategic consid-
erations that could a¤ect the outcome of a voting process even if it does not change
the ordering of the options DEMO any single individual, much as group decision can be
intransitive even DEMO its members are all transitive. Although di¤erent e¤ects seem
to contribute to the failure of invariance in individual and in collective choice, they
are probably both present, for example, in many forms of committee decision DEMO
ing. The inﬂuence of procedural constraints on either individual or social choice
emerges as a subject of great theoretical and practical signiﬁcance. For if DEMO choice
of a new sta¤ member, for example, depends on whether the initial decision concerns
the nature of the appointment (e.g., junior DEMO senior) or the ﬁeld (e.g., perception vs.
social), then DEMO order in which decisions are made becomes an important component
of the choice process that cannot be treated merely as a procedural matter.
The DEMO model of individual choice under constraints may serve three related
functions. First, it could be used to predict the manner in which choices among
political candidates, market products, or public policies are a¤ected by the DEMO
tion or the change of agendas. Second, the model may be DEMO to construct an
agenda to maximize the probability of a desired outcome. Experienced politicians
and seasoned marketeers are undoubtedly aware of the e¤ects of DEMO and sepa-
rating options. A formal model may nevertheless prove useful, DEMO in com-
plex decisions for which the number of alternatives is large and computational
demands exceed cognitive limitations. Third, the model can be employed by a group
or a committee as a framework for the discussion DEMO comparison of di¤erent agen-
das. Although an optimal or a fair agenda may not exist, the analysis might help
clarify the issues and facilitate the choice. If all members of the group, for example,
perceive the available options in terms of the same tree structure, even though they
have di¤erent weights and preferences, then the use of an agenda that is compatible
with that structure is recommended because it ensures invariance. DEMO applications of
Preference Trees 533
the present development for the construction, selection, and DEMO of agendas
remain to be developed.
Discussion
Individual choice behavior is variable, complex, and context dependent, and the
attempts to model it are at best incomplete. Even the most basic axioms of preference
are consistently DEMO under certain circumstances. (See, e.g., Kahneman & Tver-
sky, 1979; Lichtenstein & Slovic 1971; Tversky, 1969.) The present treatment does
DEMO attempt to develop a comprehensive theory of choice, but analyzes in DEMO a
particular strategy that appears to govern several decision processes. There are
undoubtedly decision processes that are not compatible with pretree. Some of them
DEMO perhaps be explained by EBA, but others may require di¤erent theoretical
DEMO The selection of a choice model, however, generally involves a balance
between generality or scope on the one hand and simplicity or predictive DEMO on
the other. Pretree may be regarded as an intermediate model that is much less
restrictive than CRM, since it is compatible with the similarity hypothesis; yet it is
much more parsimonious than the general EBA model, since it has at most 2n 2
rather than 2n  2 parameters.
Furthermore, the tree model may provide a useful approximation to a more com-
plex structure in the same way that a two-dimensional DEMO often provides a use-
ful representation of a higher dimensional structure. Consider, for example, a person
who is about to take a 1-week DEMO to a single European country and is o¤ered a
choice between France (F) and Italy (I) and between a luxury tour (L) and an econ-
omy tour (E). Naturally, the luxury tour is much more comfortable, but it is also
considerably more expensive than the economy tour. It is easy to see that the four
available DEMO, FL,FE,IL,IE , do not satisfy the inclusion rule DEMO for any
triple, each alternative shares di¤erent aspects with the other DEMO Hence, the EBA
model cannot be reduced to a tree in DEMO case, although it can be approximated by a
tree—provided one of DEMO attributes looms much larger than the others.
Suppose the decision maker is concerned about the site of the trip (Italy vs.
France), but is not overly concerned about comfort or price. In this case, the weights
associated with the tour type (luxury vs. economy) would be DEMO in comparison
with the weights associated with the sites. Hence, the DEMO choice probabilities
may be approximated fairly well by the treedecision maker is much more concerned about the type of tour than about its site, hisðFLFEÞðILIEÞ. On the other hand, if the
choice probabilities will be better described by the tree ðFLILÞðFEIEÞ. The quality of
534 Tversky and Sattath
either approximation depends on the degree to which DEMO attribute dominates the
other, and it can be assessed directly by DEMO the trinary and the quarternary
conditions. An extension of the tree model that deals with factorial structures will be
described elsewhere.
Hierarchical or treelike DEMO of choice have been recently employed by students
of economics and market research who investigate questions such as the share of the
market to DEMO captured by a new product or the probability that a consumer will
switch from one brand to another. Luce’s (1959) model provides the DEMO answers
to such questions, but as we have already seen, it is too restrictive. Perhaps the sim-
plest way of extending CRM is DEMO assume that the o¤ered set of alternatives can be
partitioned into classes so that the model holds within each homogeneous class, even
though it does not hold for heterogeneous sets.
This assumption underlies the analysis of DEMO switching developed by the Hen-
dry Corporation and described by Kalwani and Morrison (1977). According to the
Hendry model, the probability that DEMO consumer will purchase a new brand, given that
he switched from DEMO old one, is proportional to the market share of the new DEMO,
provided the two brands belong to the same class of the partition. The application of
this model, therefore, requires prior identiﬁcation of DEMO appropriate partition or tree
structure, which is presumably constructed on the DEMO of informed intuition. The
similarity-based scaling procedure employed in this article and the test of the neces-
sary trinary and quarternary conditions could perhaps DEMO used to construct and val-
idate the partition to which the analysis of brand switching is applied.
The partition of the alternatives into homogeneous DEMO satisfying CRM was
also used by McFadden (1976; McFadden, reference DEMO 1) in his theoretical and
empirical analyses of probabilistic choice. As DEMO economist, McFadden was primar-
ily interested in aggregate demand for alternatives (e.g., di¤erent modes of transpor-
tation) as a function of measured DEMO of the alternatives and the decision
makers (e.g., cost, travel DEMO, income). The Thurstonian, or random utility, model
provides a DEMO framework for such an analysis that assumes, in accord with
classical DEMO theory, that each individual maximizes his utility function deﬁned
over the DEMO set of alternatives; the random component reﬂects the sampling of
individuals DEMO di¤erent utility functions.
McFadden (reference note 1) began with the multinomial logit (MNL) model in
which
Pðx; AÞ¼ exp Xxi yi 
i
y
X
A
A
exp Xyi yi ;
i
Preference Trees 535
where x1; ... ; xn are speciﬁed attributes of x and y1; ... ; yn are parameters estimated
from the data. This is clearly a special case of Luce’s model (equation 2), where
log uðxÞ is a linear function in the parameters y1; ... ; yn . It is expressible as a random
utility model by DEMO an extreme value distribution FðtÞ¼ exp½exp ðat þbÞ,
a > 0. (See, e.g., Luce, 1977; Yellott, 1977.)
The MNL DEMO been applied to several economic problems, notably transportation
planning (McFadden, DEMO), but the failure of context independence led McFadden
(reference note DEMO) to develop a more general family of choice models, called general-
ized extreme value models, that are compatible with the similarity hypothesis. One
model from this family, called the nested logit model, assumes a DEMO structure in
which the probabilities of choice at each level of the tree conform to the MNL model
(see McFadden, reference note 1)DEMO Although the nested logit model does not coincide
with pretree, the DEMO models are su‰ciently close that the former may be regarded as
a random utility counterpart of the latter.
Psychological models of individual choice fall DEMO three overlapping classes:
decomposition models, probabilistic models, and process models. Decomposition
models express the overall value of each alternative as a function DEMO the scale values
associated with its components. This class includes all variations of expected utility
theory as well as the various adding and averaging DEMO Probabilistic models
relate choice data to an underlying value structure through a probabilistic process.
The models of Thurstone and Luce are prominent examples. Process DEMO attempt
to capture the mental operations that are performed in the course of a decision. This
approach, pioneered by Simon, has led to DEMO development of computer models
designed to simulate the decision-making process. Pretree, DEMO the more general
EBA, belongs to all three classes. It is DEMO decomposition model that expresses the
overall value of an alternative as an additive combination of the values of its aspects.
Unlike most decomposition models, however, the relation between the observed
choice and the underlying value structure is probabilistic, and the formal theory is
interpretable as a process model of choice behavior that is based on successive elim-
inations following a DEMO structure.
This article exhibits three correspondence relations (a) the equivalence of elimina-
tion by tree and the hierarchical elimination model, (b) the compatibility of aggre-
gate choice and the individual EBA model, and (DEMO) the correspondence between
preference and similarity trees. The three results, however, have di¤erent theoretical
and empirical status. The equivalence of EBT and HEM is a mathematical fact that
permits the application of the tree model DEMO both random and hierarchical decision
processes. The second result o¤ers a new interpretation of EBA as an aggregate
536 Tversky and Sattath
choice model, thereby providing a rationale for applying EBA to aggregate data.
Finally, the compatibility of similarity and preference trees is an empirical observa-
tion that suggests that the two processes are DEMO through a common underlying
structure.
Notes
This work was supported by the O‰ce of Naval Research under Contract N00014-79-C-0077 to Stanford
University.
This article DEMO beneﬁted from discussions with R. M. Dawes, J. C. Falmagne, W. Hutchinson, D. H.
Krantz, D. Kahneman, and D. McFadden. We are particularly grateful to L. Sjo¨ berg for making his data
available to DEMO and to I. Gati and P. Smith for their help in the analysis of the data.
1. The present notion of a preference tree DEMO be distinguished from the concept of a decision tree
commonly used in the analysis of decisions under uncertainty.
2. To obtain compact ﬁgures, we use a heavy line (see ﬁgure 21.7) to indicate double length DEMO an extra
heavy line (see ﬁgure 21.11) to indicate tenfold length.
Reference Notes
1. McFadden, D. Econometric models for probabilistic choices (Cowles DEMO Discussion Paper).
Unpublished manuscript, Yale University, 1978.
2. Falmagne, DEMO C. Probabilistic theories of measurement. Paper presented at the Soviet-American Seminar
on Decision Models, Tbilisi, Soviet Union, April 1979.
References
Carroll, J. DEMO Individual di¤erences and multidimensional scaling. In R. N. Shepard, A. K. DEMO, &
S. B. Nerlove (Eds.), Multidimensional scaling: Theory and applications in the behavioral sciences (vol. 1).
New York: Seminar DEMO, 1972.
Chandler, J. P. stepit —Finds local minima of a smooth function of several parameters. Behavioral
Science, 1969, 14, 81–82.
Coombs, DEMO H. On the use of inconsistency of preferences in psychological measurement. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 1958, 55,1–7.
Coombs, C. H. A theory of data. New York: Wiley, 1964.
Debreu, G. Review of R. D. Luce, Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis. American Economic
Review, 1960, 50, 186–188.
Edgell, S. E., Geisler, W. S., DEMO, & Zinnes, J. L. A note on a paper by Rumelhart and Greeno. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 1973, 10, 86–90.
Kahneman, DEMO, & Tversky, A. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under DEMO Econometrica, 1979, 47,
263–291.
Kalwani, M. V., & Morrison, D. G. A parsimonious description of the Hendry system. Management
Science, DEMO, 23, 467–477.
Levine, M. E., & Plott, C. R. DEMO inﬂuence and its implications. Virginia Law Review, 1977, 63,
561–604.
Preference Trees 537
Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. Reversal of preference between bids and choices in gambling decisions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1971, 89, 46–55.
Luce, R. D. Individual choice behavior: A theoretical DEMO New York: Wiley, 1959.
Luce, R. D. The choice axiom DEMO twenty years. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1977, 15, 215–
233.
DEMO, R. D., & Suppes, P. Preference, utility, and subjective DEMO In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, &
E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology (vo1. 3). New York: DEMO, 1965.
Marschak, J. Binary-choice constraints and random utility indicators. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, &
P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical DEMO in the social sciences. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press,
1960.
McFadden, D. Quantal choice analysis. A survey. Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 1976, 5,
363–390.
Nygren, T. E., & Jones, L. E. Individual di¤erences in perception and preferences for political candidates.
Journal DEMO Experimental Social Psychology, 1977, 13, 182–197.
Plott, C. R., & Levine, M. E. A model of agenda inﬂuence on committee decision. DEMO Economic
Review, 1978, 68, 146–160.
Restle, F. Psychology of judgment and choice. New York: Wiley, 1961.
Rumelhart, D. L., & DEMO, J. G. Similarity between stimuli: An experimental test of the Luce and Restle
choice models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 8, 370–381.
Sattath, S., & Tversky, A. Unite and conquer: A multiplicative DEMO for choice probabilities. Econo-
metrica, 1976, 44, 79–89.
Sattath, S., & Tversky, A. Additive similarity trees. Psychometrika, 1977, 42, 319–345.
Simon, H. A. Models of man. New York: Wiley, 1957.
Sjo¨ berg, L. Choice frequency and similarity. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 1977, 18, 103–115.
Sjo¨ berg, L., & Capozza, D. Preference and DEMO structure of Italian political parties. Italian Journal of
Psychology, 1975, 2, 391–402.
Ste¿re, V. Some applications of multidimensional scaling to social science DEMO In A. K. Romney,
R. N. Shepard, & S. B. DEMO (Eds.), Multidimensional scaling: Theory and applications in the behav-
ioral sciences (vo1. 2). New York: Seminar Press, 1972.
Thurstone, DEMO L. A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, DEMO
Tversky, A. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 31–48.
Tversky, A. Choice by elimination. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9, 341–367. (a)
Tversky, A. Elimination by aspects: A theory DEMO choice. Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 281–299. (b)
Yellott, DEMO I., Jr. The relationship between Luce’s choice axiom, Thurstone’s theory of comparative
judgment, and the double exponential distribution. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, DEMO, 15, 109–
144.
Appendix A
Proof of the Structure Theorem
To show that a tree representation of T ¼fx0 j x A Tg DEMO the inclusion rule, let
tðxÞ denote the path from the root DEMO the tree to the terminal node associated with x.
538 Tversky and Sattath
For any x, y, z in T , there are four possible tree structures, and they all satisfy the
DEMO rule as shown below. (a) If tðxÞ and tðyÞ meet below tðzÞ,then x0 V y0 I
x0 V z0 . (b) DEMO tðxÞ and tðzÞ meet below tðyÞ, then x0 V z0 Ix0 DEMO y0 . (c) If tðyÞ and
tðzÞ meet below tðxÞ, DEMO x0 V y0 ¼ x0 V z0 . (d) If tðxÞ, tðyÞ, and tðzÞ all meet at the
same node, then x0 V y0 ¼ x0 V z0.
To establish the su‰ciency of the DEMO rule, let Ta ¼fx A T j a A x0g, and let
SðTÞ be the set of all Ta for any a in DEMO . To prove that T ¼fx0 j x A Tg is a tree, it
su‰ces to show that SðTÞ is a hierarchical clustering. That is, for any a, b in T0,
either Ta ITb, Tb ITa ,or Ta V Tb is empty. Suppose SðTÞ is not a hierarchical
clustering. Then there exist some distinct aspects a, b in T0 and some x, y, z in T such
that x DEMO Ta V Tb, y A
included in x0 V z0 , DEMO
quently, x0 V y0 neither includes nor is included in x
DEMO Tb , and z A Tb Ta . Hence, a is DEMO in x
a is not included in z0 and b is not included in
0
V
0 V y0, b is
y0 . Conse-
z0 , and the inclusion rule is
violated, as required.
Appendix B
Proof of the Equivalence Theorem
(i) EBT implies HEM.
If EBT DEMO for T, then it must also hold for any AHT with DEMO induced tree
structure. Hence, it su‰ces to demonstrate the ﬁrst two DEMO of equation 3.
(a) If g b and b j a, then PðAa; Ag Þ¼ PðAa; AbÞPðAb; AgÞ.
(b) If DEMO b and g j a, then PðAa; AgÞ ¼ mðaÞ , provided mðb
PðAb; AgÞ mðbÞ
We begin with the following auxiliary result. If b j a,then
Pðx; Ab Þ¼ Pðx; AaÞ mðaÞ :
mðbÞ uðbÞ
Let a1; ... ; an be a sequence of links leading from x to a. That is,
aiþ1 j ai , i ¼ 1; ... ; n  1, and an ¼ a. Assuming EBT and b j a,
uðanÞ uðan1Þ
Pðx; Ab Þ¼ mðbÞ uðbÞ Pðx; Aan Þþ mðbÞ uðbÞ Pðx; Aan Þ DEMO 
uða1Þ
mðbÞ uðbÞ
j
j
þ
Pðx; Aa1
Þ
1
DEMO
0 0.
Aa1 ¼fxg,
Preference Trees 539
¼
uðanÞ
mðbÞ uðbÞ
mðaÞ
mðbÞ uðbÞ Pðx; AaÞ
Þþ
þ
as required. To prove b we assume that g
j
DEMO and g
j
a, hence
since
Px A Aa Pðx; Aa Þ¼ P
g
To prove a, suppose
j
PðAa; AgÞ
PðAb; AgÞ
¼
¼
x
PAa Pðx; AgÞ
P Pðx; AgÞ
P
DEMO
x
Ab
mðaÞ
x Aa Pðx; AaÞ mðgÞ uðgÞ
mðbÞ
x DEMO Pðx; AbÞ mðgÞ uðgÞ
mðaÞ ;
mðbÞ
x A Ab Pðx; Ab Þ¼ 1:
b and b j a. By our auxiliary result
¼
A
A
A
A
PðAb; Ag Þ¼ x
X
Ab Pðx; Ag Þ¼ mðbÞ=ðmðgÞ uðgÞÞ;
A
¼
¼
uðanÞ
mðbÞ uðbÞ
Pðx; Aan
Pðx; Aan
Þþ
mðanÞ
mðbÞ
uðanÞ uðan1Þ
uðbÞ mðan DEMO uðanÞ Pðx; Aan1
uða1Þ
mðanÞ uða
mðanÞ uðanÞ Pðx; Aan
mðbÞ uðbÞ
Þ
nÞ Pðx; Aa
and
PðAa; Ag Þ¼ xXA Aa DEMO; AgÞ
X
x A Aa
PðA
Pðx; AbÞ mðbÞ
mðgÞ uðgÞ
mðbÞ
a; AbÞ mðgÞ uðgÞ
a; AbÞPðAb; AgÞ:
PðA
¼
¼
¼
Þ þ 
1
Þ
540 Tversky and Sattath
(ii) HEM implies EBT.
We have to DEMO that for any AHT, Pðx; AÞ satisﬁes equation 1. The proof is by
induction on the cardinality of A. Let a1; .. . ; an be the sequence of segments leading
from x to the DEMO of A. That is, fxg¼ Aa1 ; aiþ1 j ai , DEMO ¼ 1; ... ; n  1, and Aan ¼ A.If
g j b; x A Ab , and equation 3 holds, DEMO
Pðx; Ag Þ¼ mðbÞ Pðx; AbÞ:
mðgÞ uðgÞ
Thus, DEMO the inductive hypothesis, we obtain
¼
niP¼11 uðai ÞPðx; Aai Þ
¼ mðanÞ uðanÞ ;
which is the recursive expression for Pðx;
Appendix C
Proof of the Representation Theorem
mðan1Þ
mðanÞ uðanÞ
uðan1Þ
mðanÞ DEMO
uðan1Þ
mðanÞ uðanÞ
Pðx; Aan1
Þþ
m
Pðx; Aan
Þ¼
¼
Pðx; Aan1
Pðx; Aan1
Þ
mðan1
mðan
ðan1
mðan
AÞ.
Þþ
DEMO
Þ
Þ
Þ
u
u
u
u
ð
ð
ð
ð
an1Þ
a
nÞ
an1Þ
a
nÞ
Pðx; Aan1
niP¼12 uðai ÞPðx; Aai DEMO
mðan1 Þ uðan1Þ
2
4
Þ
3
5
77
66
The proof is divided into a series of lemmas. Let PT denote the set DEMO binary choice
probabilities deﬁned for all pairs of elements in T.
lemma 1. If T ¼fx; y; zg,then PT satisﬁes pretree with DEMO i¤ the trinary in-
equality (equation 4) is satisﬁed in this form.
Proof.
Necessity is obvious. To prove su‰ciency, we use the notation of ﬁgure
21.5, where Rðx; yÞ b 1. Set a ¼ DEMO, b ¼ Rðy; xÞ, and select y b 0 so DEMO ½Rðx; zÞ
Rðy; zÞy ¼ Rðy; zÞ Rðy; xÞRðx; DEMO, and let g ¼ Rðz; xÞð1 þyÞ. Note that when
Rðx; yÞ > 1, y is uniquely deﬁned and positive, and when Rðx; yÞ¼ 1, y can be
chosen arbitrarily.
Preference Trees 541
Let PT be the set of binary probabilities obtained DEMO using the above expressions
for a, b, g, and y DEMO the deﬁning equations of the model. It can be veriﬁed, after DEMO
algebra, that PT ¼ PT as required.
Before we go further, note that if PT satisﬁes pretree with ðxyÞz and Rðx; yÞ > 1,
then b=a ¼ Rðy; xÞ. Furthermore,
y
a
y b
a a
þ
þ
1
¼
y
y
þ
þ
a
DEMO
¼
Rðx; zÞ
Rðy; zÞ
implies
y
a
¼
Rðy; DEMO Rðy; xÞRðx; zÞ ;
Rðx; zÞ Rðy; zÞ
and
DEMO
þ
g
a
1 Rðy; xÞ
¼ Rðx; zÞ Rðy; DEMO
Hence, the lengths of all links are determined up to multiplication DEMO a positive
constant. Furthermore, the present model readily entails the following DEMO
lemma 2. A A and
x B A, and suppose that DEMO A and BP¼fx; y; vg are sets of objects such that y; v
the same in both structures.) Then the measures onA DEMO PB satisfy pretree. (It is assumed thatA0 and B0 can be DEMO so thatPðv; yÞ is
uðv0 y0Þ as well as uðy0 v0Þ DEMO the same in both measures.
lemma 3. Suppose A ¼fx; y; vg and B ¼fy; v; wg satisfy pretree, with representing
measures uA and uB , in the forms ðxyÞv and ð yvÞw, respectively. If C ¼ A U B ¼
fx; y; v; wg satisﬁes the appropriate quarternary condition with ðxyÞðvwÞ or with
ððxyÞvÞw , then DEMO exists a representing measure u on C0 that extends both uA and
uB . Naturally, we assume that uA and uB were selected according to Lemma 2.
Proof.
uAðb
þ
Consider the form ðxyÞðvwÞ (see the left portion of ﬁgure 21.6). By lemma 2,
yÞ¼ uBðb DEMO
deﬁne a measure u on C
and uAðl uBðl þgÞ. Hence, DEMO and uB can be used to
. To show that u is a representing measure on C0 we have to
0
þ
gÞ¼
show DEMO Rðx; wÞ¼ uðy
þ
aÞ=uðl
þ
dÞ. Since C satisﬁes pretree, it follows from
equation 5 that
y
a
¼
a
þ
g
DEMO
¼
Rðx; zÞ
implies
g
a
¼
Rðz; xÞ
ð
y; zÞ Rðy; xÞRðx; zÞ
þ
1
Rðx; zÞ Rðy; zÞ
R
:
542 Tversky and Sattath
Rðx; wÞ¼ Rðy; wÞRðx; vÞRðv; yÞ
DEMO þyÞuða þyÞuðl þgÞ
¼ uðl þdÞuðl þgÞuðb þyÞ
uðy þaÞ :
DEMO uðl þdÞ
Next, consider the form (see the right portion of ﬁgure 21.6). Here, we
have to show that Rðx; ððxyÞvÞw DEMO þlÞ=uðdÞ. Applying equation 6, it follows
that wÞ¼ uða
Rðx; wÞ¼ ð1


ða
þ
yÞ

1
uðgÞ
u
1
uðb
DEMO; vÞÞRðy; wÞþ Rðv; wÞðRðx; vÞ Rðy; vÞÞ
Rðy; vÞ
þy þ
uðdÞ
1

lÞ

þ
uð
uðg þlÞ
uðdÞ
DEMO þyÞ
uðgÞ

ða
þ
yÞ
uðb
þ
yÞ
uðgÞ

uðgÞ
u
¼
¼
uða þy þlÞ ;
uðdÞ
as required.
lemma 4. PT satisﬁes pretree with a speciﬁed structure i¤ for every S HT DEMO four
elements or less, PS satisﬁes pretree relative to the same DEMO
Proof. Necessity is immediate. Su‰ciency is proved by induction on the cardinality
of T, denoted n. Suppose n > 4, and assume that DEMO lemma holds for any cardinality
smaller than n.
Suppose ðxyÞv holds for any v in T. Let A
¼
T fxg and B ¼fx; y; vg.Bythe
induction hypothesis, both PA and PB satisfy pretree with DEMO appropriate structure.
By lemma 2 we can assume, with no loss DEMO generality, that the measures of y and v
in A0 coincide DEMO their measures in B0 . Since any aspect in T0 appears either in A0
or in B0 and since the aspects that appear in DEMO trees have the same measure, we
can deﬁne the measure of DEMO aspect in T0 by its measure in A0 or in B0 . Letting P
denote the calculated binary probability function, we show that PT ¼ PT.
Since PA ¼ PA and PB ¼ PB , it DEMO to be shown that Pðx; wÞ¼ Pðx; wÞ for any
w A T B.
Let C ¼fx; y; v; wg, which DEMO pretree, by assumption, with either ðxyÞðvwÞ
or ððxyÞvÞw. Since C ¼ B U fy; v; wg , lemma 3 implies that the DEMO measure
Preference Trees 543
on C0 coincides with the restriction to C0 of DEMO deﬁned measure on T0 . Hence,
Pðx; wÞ¼ Pðx; wÞ as required.
In conclusion, lemma 3 together with lemma 1 shows that the trinary and the
quarternary conditions are necessary and su‰cient for the DEMO of quad-
ruples. Lemma 4 shows that if pretree is satisﬁed by all quadruples, then it is satisﬁed
by the entire object set. This completes the proof of the representation theorem.
Appendix D
Uniqueness Considerations
It DEMO readily from the representation theorem that given a tree structure, the
DEMO u is unique up to multiplication by a positive constant whenever none of the
binary choice probabilities equals 1 . We show that the DEMO structure is uniquely
2
determined by the binary and the trinary choice probabilities, but not by the binary
data alone.
To show that binary choice probabilities do not always determine a unique tree
structure, consider two di¤erent trees ðxyÞz and ð yzÞx, and let a, b, g denote, respec-
tively, the unique aspects of x, y, z. DEMO y denote the aspects shared by x and y, and
let DEMO denote the aspects shared by y and z. Let u and v be the measures associated
with ðxyÞz and ð yzÞx , respectively, and suppose that
uðaÞ¼ 2; uðbÞ¼ 1; uðgÞ¼ 1; and uðyÞ¼ 2;
vðaÞ¼ 8; vðbÞ¼ 3; vðgÞ¼ 1; and vðlÞ¼ 1:
By the assumed tree structures, uðlÞ¼ vðyÞ¼ 0. It is easy to verify that the two trees
yield identical binary choice probabilities: Pð
3 , 4 .We
Pðy; zÞ¼ 4 Pðx; zÞ¼ 5
2 ,
x; yÞ¼ 3
next show that the tree structure is uniquely determined by the binary and the trinary
choice probabilities, provided all binary probabilities are nonzero. Consider a tree
ðxyÞz with a measure u, and aspects a, b, g, y deﬁned as above. Assume uðaÞ, uðbÞ,DEMO
uðgÞ, and uðyÞ are nonzero. It follows from ðxyÞz that
Pðx; yÞ uðaÞ uðaÞþ uðyÞuðaÞ=ðuðaÞþ uðbÞÞ Pðx; xyzÞ :
Pðy; xÞ ¼ uðbÞ ¼ uðbÞþ uðyÞuðbÞ=ðuðaÞþ uðbÞÞ ¼ Pðy; xyzÞ
Suppose the data were compatible with another tree structure, say
of generality. By the same argument ð yzÞx with no loss
Pðy; zÞ ¼ Pðy; xyzÞ ;
Pðz; yÞ Pðz; xyzÞ
544 Tversky and Sattath
and
uðbÞþ uðyÞ uðbÞþ uðyÞuðbÞ=ðuðaÞþ uðbÞÞ ;
uðgÞ ¼ uðgÞ
hence uðaÞ or uðyÞ vanishes, a contradiction. Given binary and trinary proba-
bilities, therefore, the structure of any triple and, hence, of the entire tree is uniquely
determined.
Appendix E
Proof of the Compatibility Theorem
It follows readily from HEM (see equation 3) that
DEMO; AÞ¼ Pðx; A1ÞPðA1; A2Þ
...
PðAn1; AnÞ
for some sequence A1; ... ; An , such that An ¼ A and Ai HAiþ1, i ¼ 1; ... ; n  1. We
show DEMO that the sequence can be chosen so that ai ¼ i þ 1, 1 ai an, where ai is
the cardinality of Ai DEMO This condition is obviously satisﬁed in a binary tree in which
each node joins, at most, two links. Suppose then that the tree DEMO three links
that meet at the same node, for example, d j g, d j b, and d j a. Hence, by part b of
equation 3,
PðAa; Ad Þ¼
¼
mðaÞ
mðaÞþ mðbÞþ mðgÞ
PðAa; Aa
U
AbÞPðAa
¼
U
mðaÞ
mðaÞþ mðbÞ
Ab; AdÞ;

mðaÞþ mðbÞ
mðaÞþ mðbÞþ mðgÞ
and the result is readily extended to nodes with k links. Under pretree, therefore,
Pðx; AÞ is expressible as a product where each factor PðAi ; Aiþ1Þ is a probability of
choosing between two branches.
Under equation 13, the probability of selecting x from A under a speciﬁed agenda
equals Pðx; B1ÞPðB1; B2Þ ... PðBm; AÞ, for some B1 HB2  HBm HA. By compati-
bility, there exists a tree and hence a binary tree that reﬁnes both the agenda and the
intrinsic tree structure. By DEMO above argument, Pðx; AÞ is expressible as a product
Pðx; DEMO; A2Þ ... PðAn1; AnÞ, where ai ¼ i þ 1, 1 ai an, corresponding to a
binary tree that reﬁnes both structures. Thus, each Bj , j ¼ 1; ... ; m, appears among
the Ai 0 si ¼ 1; ... ; n. Suppose Bj ¼ Ai and Bjþ1 ¼ Aiþt , hence
PðBj ; Bjþ1Þ¼ PðAi ; Aiþt Þ¼
iþ
Y
1 PðAk; Akþ1Þ;
¼
k i
DEMO
Preference Trees 545
and
Pðx; AÞ¼ Pðx; A1ÞPðA1; A2Þ
...
PðAn1; An Þ¼ Pðx; B1ÞPðB1; B2Þ
...
PðBm; AÞ:
Hence, choice probability is una¤ected by an agenda that is compatible with the
DEMO structure of a preference tree.
If the agenda is not compatible with the intrinsic tree, there exists some x, y, z in T
such that both ðxyÞz and ½xzy hold. It is easy to verify (see the discussion in the text)
thatpatability condition.Pðx; xyzÞ 0Pðx; DEMO in this case, which establishes the necessity of the com-

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

22 Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky
Introduction
Expected utility theory has dominated the analysis of decision DEMO under risk. It
has been generally accepted as a normative model of rational choice [24], and widely
applied as a descriptive model of economic behavior, e.g. [15, 4]. Thus, it is assumed
that all reasonable people would wish to obey the axioms of the theory [47, 36], and
that most people actually do, most of the time.
The DEMO chapter describes several classes of choice problems in which prefer-
ences systematically violate the axioms of expected utility theory. In the light of these
DEMO we argue that utility theory, as it is commonly interpreted and DEMO,
is not an adequate descriptive model and we propose an alternative account of choice
under risk.
Critique
Decision making under risk can be DEMO as a choice between prospects or gambles.
A prospect ðx1; p1 ;...; xn; pnÞ is a contract that yields outcome xi with DEMO
pi , where p1 þ p2 þ  þ pn ¼ 1. To simplify notation, we omit null outcomes and
use ðx; pÞ DEMO denote the prospect ðx; p; 0; 1  pÞ that DEMO x with probability p and 0
with probability 1  p. The (riskless) prospect that yields x with certainty is denoted
by ðxÞ DEMO The present discussion is restricted to prospects with so-called objective or
standard probabilities.
The application of expected utility theory to choices between prospects is DEMO on
the following three tenets.
(i) Expectation: Uðx1; p1 ;DEMO ; xn; pnÞ¼ p1uðx1 Þ þ  þ pnuðxnÞ.
That is, the overall utility of a prospect, denoted by U , is the expected utility of its
outcomes.
(ii) Asset Integration: ðx1; p1 ;.. .; xn; pnÞ is acceptable at asset position w i¤
DEMO þx1; p1 ;...; w þxn; pnÞ > uðwÞ.
That is, a prospect is acceptable if the utility resulting from integrating the pros-
pect with one’s assets exceeds the utility of those assets alone. Thus, the domain of
the utility function is ﬁnal states (which include one’s asset position) rather than
gains or losses.
550 Kahneman and Tversky
Although the domain of the utility function is DEMO limited to any particular class of
consequences, most applications of the DEMO have been concerned with monetary
outcomes. Furthermore, most economic applications introduce DEMO following addi-
tional assumption.
(iii) Risk Aversion: u is concave DEMO
00
< 0Þ.
A person is risk averse if he prefers the certain prospect ðxÞ to any risky prospect
with expected value x. In DEMO utility theory, risk aversion is equivalent to the
concavity of the DEMO function. The prevalence of risk aversion is perhaps the best
known generalization regarding risky choices. It led the early decision theorists of the
eighteenth DEMO to propose that utility is a concave function of money, and DEMO
idea has been retained in modern treatments (Pratt [33], Arrow [4]).
In the following sections we demonstrate several phenomena which violate these
DEMO of expected utility theory. The demonstrations are based on the responses of
students and university faculty to hypothetical choice problems. The respondents
were presented DEMO problems of the type illustrated below.
Which of the following would you prefer?
A: 50% chance to win 1,000,
50% chance to win nothing;
B: 450 for sure.
The outcomes refer to Israeli currency. To appreciate the signiﬁcance of the amounts
involved, note that the median net monthly income for a family is about 3,000 DEMO
pounds. The respondents were asked to imagine that they were actually faced with
the choice described in the problem, and to indicate the decision they would have
made in such a case. The responses were anonymous, and the instructions speciﬁed
that there was no ‘‘correct’’ answer to such DEMO, and that the aim of the study
was to ﬁnd out DEMO people choose among risky prospects. The problems were pre-
sented in questionnaire form, with at most a dozen problems per booklet. Several
forms of each questionnaire were constructed so that subjects were exposed to the
problems DEMO di¤erent orders. In addition, two versions of each problem were used DEMO
which the left-right position of the prospects was reversed.
The problems described in this paper are selected illustrations of a series of e¤ects.
Every DEMO has been observed in several problems with di¤erent outcomes and pro-
babilities. Some of the problems have also been presented to groups of students DEMO
faculty at the University of Stockholm and at the University of Michigan. The pat-
tern of results was essentially identical to the results obtained DEMO Israeli subjects.
The reliance on hypothetical choices raises obvious questions regarding the valid-
ity of the method and the generalizability of the results. We DEMO keenly aware of these
Prospect Theory 551
problems. However, all other methods that have been used to test utility theory
also su¤er from severe drawbacks. Real choices can DEMO investigated either in the
ﬁeld, by naturalistic or statistical observations of DEMO behavior, or in the labo-
ratory. Field studies can only provide DEMO rather crude tests of qualitative predictions,
because probabilities and utilities cannot be adequately measured in such contexts.
Laboratory experiments have been designed to DEMO precise measures of utility and
probability from actual choices, but these DEMO studies typically involve
contrived gambles for small stakes, and a large DEMO of repetitions of very similar
problems. These features of laboratory gambling complicate the interpretation of the
results and restrict their generality.
By default, the method of hypothetical choices emerges as the simplest procedure
by which a DEMO number of theoretical questions can be investigated. The use of
the method relies on the assumption that people often know how they would behave
DEMO actual situations of choice, and on the further assumption that the DEMO have
no special reason to disguise their true preferences. If people are reasonably accu-
rate in predicting their choices, the presence of common and systematic violations of
expected utility theory in hypothetical problems provides presumptive evidence
DEMO that theory.
Certainty, Probability, and Possibility
In expected utility theory, DEMO utilities of outcomes are weighted by their proba-
bilities. The present section describes a series of choice problems in which people’s
preferences systematically violate DEMO principle. We ﬁrst show that people overweight
outcomes that are considered certain, relative to outcomes which are merely proba-
ble—a phenomenon which we label the certainty e¤ect.
The best known counter-example to expected utility theory which DEMO the cer-
tainty e¤ect was introduced by the French economist Maurice Allais in 1953 [2].
Allais’ example has been discussed from both normative and DEMO standpoints
by many authors [28, 38]. The following pair of choice DEMO is a variation of
Allais’ example, which di¤ers from the original DEMO that it refers to moderate rather
than to extremely large gains. The number of respondents who answered each prob-
lem is denoted by N , and the percentage who choose each option is given in brackets.
Problem 1: Choose between
A: 2,500 with probability .33, B: DEMO,400 with certainty.
2,400 with probability .66,
0 with probability .01;
N
¼
72 [18] [82]*
552 Kahneman and Tversky
Problem 2: Choose between
C: 2,500 DEMO probability .33, D: 2,400 with probability .34,
0 with probability .67; 0 with probability .66.
N
¼
72 [83]* [17]
The data show that 82 per cent of the subjects chose B in DEMO 1, and 83 per
cent of the subjects chose C in DEMO 2. Each of these preferences is signiﬁcant at
the .01 level, DEMO denoted by the asterisk. Moreover, the analysis of individual patterns
of DEMO indicates that a majority of respondents (61 per cent) made the modal
choice in both problems. This pattern of preferences violates expected utility DEMO
in the manner originally described by Allais. According to that theory, DEMO uð0Þ¼ 0,
the ﬁrst preference implies
uð2;400Þ >:33uð2;500Þþ :66uð2;400Þ
or
:34uð2;400Þ >:33uð2;500Þ
while the second DEMO implies the reverse inequality. Note that problem 2 is
obtained from problem 1 by eliminating a .66 chance of winning 2400 from both
prospects DEMO consideration. Evidently, this change produces a greater reduction in
desirability when DEMO alters the character of the prospect from a sure gain to a probable
one, than when both the original and the reduced prospects are uncertain.
A simpler demonstration of the same phenomenon, involving only two-outcome
gambles is given below. This example is also based on Allais [2].
Problem DEMO:
N
¼
A:
ð4;000;:80Þ, or B: (3,000).
95 [20] [80]*
Problem 4:
N
¼
C:DEMO
ð4;000;:20Þ,or D:
ð3;000;:25Þ.
95 [65]* [35]
In this pair of problems as well as in all other DEMO in this section, over half
the respondents violated expected utility theory. DEMO show that the modal pattern of
preferences in problems 3 and 4 is not compatible with the theory, set uð0Þ¼ 0,
and recall that the choice of B implies uð3;000Þ=uð4;000Þ > 4=5, whereas the choice
of C implies the reverse inequality. Note that the prospect DEMO ¼ð4;000;:20Þ can be
expressed as ðA;:25Þ, while DEMO prospect D ¼ð3;000;:25Þ can be rewritten as ðB;:25Þ.
The substitution axiom of utility theory asserts that if B is preferred DEMO A, then any
(probability) mixture ðB; pÞ must be preferred to the mixture ðA; pÞ. Our subjects did
Prospect Theory 553
not obey this axiom. Apparently, reducing the probability of winning from 1.0 to .25
has a greater e¤ect than the reduction DEMO .8 to .2. The following pair of choice
problems illustrates the certainty e¤ect with non-monetary outcomes.
Problem 5:
A: 50% chance to win a
three-week tour of
England, France,
and Italy;
B: DEMO one-week tour of England,
with certainty.
N
¼
72 [22] [78]*
Problem 6:
C: 5% chance to win a
three-week tour of
England, France,
and Italy;
D: 10% chance to win DEMO one-
week tour of England.
N
¼
72 [67]* [33]
The certainty e¤ect is not the only type of violation of the substitution axiom.
DEMO situation in which this axiom fails is illustrated by the following problems.
Problem 7:
N
¼
A:
ð6;000;:45Þ,B:
ð3;000;:90Þ.
66 [14] [86]*
Problem 8:
N
¼
C:
ð6;000;:001Þ,D:
ð3;000;:002Þ:
66 DEMO [27]
Note that in problem 7 the probabilities of winning are substantial (.90 and .45),
and most people choose the prospect where DEMO is more probable. In problem 8,
there is a possibility of winning, although the probabilities of winning are minuscule
(.002 and .001) in both prospects. In this situation where winning is possible but not
DEMO, most people choose the prospect that o¤ers the larger gain. Similar DEMO
have been reported by MacCrimmon and Larsson [28].
The above problems illustrate common attitudes toward risk or chance that cannot
be captured by the DEMO utility model. The results suggest the following empirical
generalization concerning the manner in which the substitution axiom is violated. If
ð
y; pqÞ is equivalent to ðx; pÞ, then
ð
y; pqrÞ is preferred to ðx; prÞ,0 < p; q; r < 1.
554 Kahneman and Tversky
Table 22.1
Preferences between Positive and Negative Prospects
DEMO prospects Negative prospects
Problem 3: (4;000;:80) < (DEMO,000). Problem 30 :(4;000;:80) > (3,DEMO).
N ¼ 95 [20] [80]* N ¼ 95 [92]* [8]
Problem 4: (4;000;:20) > (3;000;:25). DEMO 40 :(4;000;:20) < (3;000;:25).
N ¼ 95 [65]* [35] N ¼ 95 [42] [58]
Problem 7: (3;000;:90) > (6;000;:45). Problem 70 :(3;000;:90) < (6;000;:
N ¼ DEMO [86]* [14] N ¼ 66 [8] [92]*
Problem 8: (3;000;:002) < (6;000;:001). Problem 80 :(3;DEMO;:002) > (6;000;:
N ¼ 66 [27] [73]* N ¼ 66 [70]* [30]
45).
001).
This property is DEMO into an alternative theory, developed in the second part
of the DEMO
The Reﬂection E¤ect
The previous section discussed preferences between positive prospects, DEMO, prospects
that involve no losses. What happens when the signs of DEMO outcomes are reversed so
that gains are replaced by losses? The DEMO column of table 22.1 displays four of
the choice problems that were discussed in the previous section, and the right-hand
column displays choice problems in which the signs of the outcomes are reversed. We
use x DEMO denote the loss of x, and > to denote the prevalent DEMO, i,e., the
choice made by the majority of subjects.
In each of the four problems in table 22.1 the preference between negative DEMO
pects is the mirror image of the preference between positive prospects. Thus, the
reﬂection of prospects around 0 reverses the preference order. We label this pattern
the reﬂection e¤ect.
Let us turn now to the implications DEMO these data. First, note that the reﬂection
e¤ect implies that risk DEMO in the positive domain is accompanied by risk seeking
in the negative domain. In problem 30 , for example, the majority of subjects were
willing to accept a risk of .80 to lose 4,000, in preference to a sure loss of 3,000,
although the gamble DEMO a lower expected value. The occurrence of risk seeking
in choices between negative prospects was noted early by Markowitz [29]. Williams
[48] reported data DEMO a translation of outcomes produces a dramatic shift from
risk aversion to risk seeking. For example, his subjects were indi¤erent between
ð100;:65; 100;:35Þ and (0), indicating risk aversion. They were also DEMO be-
tween ð200;:80Þ and ð100Þ, indicating risk seeking. A recent review by Fishburn
Prospect Theory 555
and Kochenberger [14] documents the prevalence of risk seeking DEMO choices between
negative prospects.
Second, recall that the preferences between the DEMO prospects in table 22.1 are
inconsistent with expected utility theory. The preferences between the corresponding
negative prospects also violate the expectation principle in the DEMO manner. For
example, problems 30 and 40 , like problems 3 DEMO 4, demonstrate that outcomes
which are obtained with certainty are overweighted DEMO to uncertain outcomes.
In the positive domain, the certainty e¤ect contributes DEMO a risk averse preference for
a sure gain over a larger gain that is merely probable. In the negative domain, the
same e¤ect leads to a risk seeking preference for a loss that is merely probable DEMO a
smaller loss that is certain. The same psychological principle—the overweighting of
certainty—favors risk aversion in the domain of gains and risk seeking in DEMO domain
of losses.
Third, the reﬂection e¤ect eliminates aversion for uncertainty DEMO variability as an
explanation of the certainty e¤ect. Consider, for example, the prevalent preferences
for (3,000) over ð4;000;:80Þ and for ð4;000;:20Þ over ð3;000;:25Þ. To resolve this
DEMO inconsistency one could invoke the assumption that people prefer prospects
that have high expected value and small variance (see, e.g., Allais [2]; DEMO
[30]; Tobin [41]). Since ð3;000Þ has no variance while DEMO;000;:80Þ has large variance,
the former prospect could be DEMO despite its lower expected value. When the
prospects are reduced, however, the di¤erence in variance between ð3;000;:25Þ and
ð4;000;:DEMO may be insu‰cient to overcome the di¤erence in expected value. Because
ð3;000Þ has both higher expected value and lower variance than ð4;000;:80Þ, this
account entails that the sure loss should be preferred, DEMO to the data. Thus, our
data are incompatible with the notion DEMO certainty is generally desirable. Rather, it
appears that certainty increases the DEMO of losses as well as the desirability of
gains.
Probabilistic Insurance
The prevalence of the purchase of insurance against both large and small losses DEMO
been regarded by many as strong evidence for the concavity of the utility function for
money. Why otherwise would people spend so much money DEMO purchase insurance
policies at a price that exceeds the expected actuarial cost? However, an examination
of the relative attractiveness of various forms of DEMO does not support the
notion that the utility function for money is concave everywhere. For example, peo-
ple often prefer insurance programs that o¤er limited coverage with low or zero
deductible over comparable policies that o¤er DEMO maximal coverage with higher
556 Kahneman and Tversky
deductibles—contrary to risk aversion (see, e.g., Fuchs [16]). Another type of insur-
ance problem in which people’s responses DEMO inconsistent with the concavity
hypothesis may be called probabilistic insurance. To illustrate this concept, consider
the following problem, which was presented to 95 DEMO University students.
Problem 9: Suppose you consider the possibility of insuring DEMO property against damage,
e.g., ﬁre or theft. After examining the DEMO and the premium you ﬁnd that you have no clear
preference between the options of purchasing insurance or leaving the property uninsured.
It is DEMO called to your attention that the insurance company o¤ers a new program called
probabilistic insurance. In this program you pay half of the regular DEMO In case of dam-
age, there is a 50 per cent DEMO that you pay the other half of the premium and the insurance
company covers all the losses; and there is a 50 per cent chance that you get back your insur-
ance payment and su¤er all DEMO losses. For example, if an accident occurs on an odd day DEMO the
month, you pay the other half of the regular premium DEMO your losses are covered; but if the
accident occurs on an DEMO day of the month, your insurance payment is refunded and your
DEMO are not covered.
Recall that the premium for full coverage is such that you ﬁnd this insurance barely worth
its cost.
Under these circumstances, would you purchase probabilistic insurance:
Yes, No.
N
¼
95 [20] [80]*
Although problem 9 may appear contrived, it is worth noting that probabilistic
insurance represents many forms of protective action where one pays a DEMO cost
to reduce the probability of an undesirable event—without eliminating it altogether.
The installation of a burglar alarm, the replacement of old tires, DEMO the decision to
stop smoking can all be viewed as probabilistic insurance.
The responses to problem 9 and to several other variants of the DEMO question
indicate that probabilistic insurance is generally unattractive. Apparently, reducing
the DEMO of a loss from p to p= 2 is less valuable than reducing the probability
of that loss from p=2to 0.
In contrast to DEMO data, expected utility theory (with a concave u) implies that
DEMO insurance is superior to regular insurance. That is, if at asset DEMO w
one is just willing to pay a premium y to insure against a probability p of losing x,
then one should deﬁnitely DEMO willing to pay a smaller premium ry to reduce the
probability of losing x from p to ð1 rÞp,0 < r < 1. DEMO, if one is indi¤erent
between ðw x; p; w; 1  pÞ and ðw  yÞ, then one should prefer probabilistic insur-
anceTo prove this proposition, we show thatðw x; ð1 rÞp; w  y; rp; w  ry; 1  pÞ over regular insurance ðw  yÞ:
puðw

xÞþ ð1

pÞuðwÞ¼ uðw
DEMO
yÞ
Prospect Theory 557
implies
ð1 rÞpuðw xÞþ rpuðw  yÞþð1  pÞuðw DEMO ryÞ > uðw  yÞ:
Without loss of generality, we DEMO set uðw xÞ¼ 0 and uðwÞ¼ 1. Hence, uðw  yÞ¼
DEMO  p, and we wish to show that
rpð1  pÞþð1 DEMO pÞuðw  ryÞ > 1  p or uðw  ryÞ > 1  rp
which holds if and only if u is concave.
DEMO is a rather puzzling consequence of the risk aversion hypothesis of utility
theory, because probabilistic insurance appears intuitively riskier than regular insur-
ance, DEMO entirely eliminates the element of risk. Evidently, the intuitive notion of
DEMO is not adequately captured by the assumed concavity of the utility function for
wealth.
The aversion for probabilistic insurance is particularly intriguing because all
DEMO is, in a sense, probabilistic. The most avid buyer of insurance remains vul-
nerable to many ﬁnancial and other risks which his policies DEMO not cover. There
appears to be a signiﬁcant di¤erence between probabilistic insurance and what may
be called contingent insurance, which provides the certainty of coverage for a speci-
ﬁed type of risk. Compare, for example, DEMO insurance against all forms of
loss or damage to the contents of your home and contingent insurance that elimi-
nates all risk of loss DEMO theft, say, but does not cover other risks, e.g., ﬁre. We
conjecture that contingent insurance will be generally more attractive than proba-
DEMO insurance when the probabilities of unprotected loss are equated. Thus, two
DEMO that are equivalent in probabilities and outcomes could have di¤erent
values depending on their formulation. Several demonstrations of this general phe-
nomenon are described DEMO the next section.
The Isolation E¤ect
In order to simplify the choice between alternatives, people often disregard compo-
nents that the alternatives share, DEMO focus on the components that distinguish them
(Tversky [44]). This DEMO to choice problems may produce inconsistent prefer-
ences, because a pair DEMO prospects can be decomposed into common and distinctive
components in more than one way, and di¤erent decompositions sometimes lead to
di¤erent preferences. We refer to this phenomenon as the isolation e¤ect.
Problem 10: Consider the following two-stage game. In the ﬁrst stage, there is a probability of
.75 to end the game without winning anything, and a probability of .25 to move into the sec-
ond stage. If you reach the second DEMO you have a choice between
558 Kahneman and Tversky
Figure 22.1
The representation of problem 4 as DEMO decision tree (standard formulation).
ð4;000;:80Þ
and (3,DEMO).
Your choice must be made before the game starts, i.e., before the outcome of the ﬁrst stage is
known.
Note that in DEMO game, one has a choice between :25 :80 ¼ :DEMO chance to win
4,000, and a :25 1:0 ¼ : 25 chance to win 3,000. Thus, in terms of ﬁnal outcomes
and probabilities one faces a choice between ð4;000;:20Þ and ð3;000;:25Þ,asin
problem 4 above. However, the dominant preferences DEMO di¤erent in the two prob-
lems. Of 141 subjects who answered problem 10, 78 per cent chose the latter pros-
pect, contrary to DEMO modal preference in problem 4. Evidently, people ignored the
ﬁrst stage DEMO the game, whose outcomes are shared by both prospects, and considered
problem 10 as a choice between (3,000) and ð4;000;:80Þ, as in problem 3 above.
The standard and the sequential formulations of problem 4 are represented as
decision trees in ﬁgures 22.1 and DEMO, respectively. Following the usual convention,
squares denote decision nodes and DEMO denote chance nodes. The essential di¤er-
ence between the two representations is in the location of the decision node. In the
standard form (ﬁgure 22.1), the decision maker faces a choice between two risky
prospects, whereas in the sequential form (ﬁgure 22.2) he faces a choice DEMO a
risky and a riskless prospect. This is accomplished by introducing a dependency
between the prospects without changing either probabilities or outcomes. Speciﬁ-
cally, the event ‘‘not winning 3,000’’ is included in the event ‘‘not DEMO 4,000’’ in
the sequential formulation, while the two events are DEMO in the standard
formulation. Thus, the outcome of winning 3,000 DEMO a certainty advantage in the
sequential formulation, which it does not DEMO in the standard formulation.
Prospect Theory 559
Figure 22.2
The representation of problem 10 as a DEMO tree (sequential formulation).
The reversal of preferences due to the DEMO among events is particularly
signiﬁcant because it violates the basic supposition of a decision-theoretical analysis,
that choices between prospects are determined solely by DEMO probabilities of ﬁnal
states.
It is easy to think of decision problems that are most naturally represented in one
of the forms above rather DEMO in the other. For example, the choice between two
di¤erent risky DEMO is likely to be viewed in the standard form. On the other
hand, the following problem is most likely to be represented in the sequential form.
One may invest money in a venture with some probability DEMO losing one’s capital if
the venture fails, and with a choice DEMO a ﬁxed agreed return and a percentage of
earnings if it succeeds. The isolation e¤ect implies that the contingent certainty of the
ﬁxed return DEMO the attractiveness of this option, relative to a risky venture with
DEMO same probabilities and outcomes.
The preceding problem illustrated how preferences may be altered by di¤erent
representations of probabilities. We now show how choices may DEMO altered by vary-
ing the representation of outcomes.
Consider the following problems, which were presented to two di¤erent groups of
subjects.
Problem 11: DEMO addition to whatever you own, you have been given 1,000. DEMO are now asked
to choose between
N
¼
A:
ð1;000;:50Þ, and B: (500).
70 [16] [84]*
Problem 12: In addition to whatever you own, you have been given 2,000. You are now asked
to choose between
560 Kahneman and Tversky
N
¼
C:
ð1;000;:50Þ, DEMO D:
ð500Þ.
68 [69*] [31]
The majority of subjects chose B in the ﬁrst problem and C in the second. These
preferences conform DEMO the reﬂection e¤ect observed in table 22.1, which exhibits risk
aversion DEMO positive prospects and risk seeking for negative ones. Note, however,
DEMO when viewed in terms of ﬁnal states, the two choice problems DEMO identical.
Speciﬁcally,
A ¼ð2;000;:50; 1;000;:50Þ¼ DEMO;
and B ¼ð1;500Þ¼ D:
In fact, problem 12 DEMO obtained from problem 11 by adding 1,000 to the initial bonus,
and subtracting 1,000 from all outcomes. Evidently, the subjects did not integrate the
bonus with the prospects. The bonus did not enter DEMO the comparison of prospects
because it was common to both options in each problem.
The pattern of results observed in problems 11 and 12 DEMO clearly inconsistent with
utility theory. In that theory, for example, the same utility is assigned to a wealth of
$100,000, regardless of whether it was reached from a prior wealth of $95,000 or
DEMO,000. Consequently, the choice between a total wealth of $100,000 DEMO even
chances to own $95,000 or $105,000 should be independent of whether one currently
owns the smaller or the larger of these DEMO amounts. With the added assumption of
risk aversion, the theory entails DEMO the certainty of owning $100,000 should always
be preferred to the gamble. However, the responses to problem 12 and to several of
the previous questions suggest that this pattern will be obtained if the individual
DEMO the smaller amount, but not if he owns the larger amount.
DEMO apparent neglect of a bonus that was common to both options in problems 11
and 12 implies that the carriers of value or utility DEMO changes of wealth, rather than
ﬁnal asset positions that include current DEMO This conclusion is the cornerstone of
an alternative theory of risky choice, which is described in the following sections.
Theory
The preceding discussion reviewed several empirical e¤ects which appear to invali-
date expected utility theory as DEMO descriptive model. The remainder of the chapter
presents an alternative account of individual decision making under risk, called
prospect theory. The theory is developed for simple prospects with monetary out-
comes and stated probabilities, but it can be extended to more involved choices.
Prospect theory distinguishes two phases DEMO the choice process: an early phase of
editing and a subsequent DEMO of evaluation. The editing phase consists of a pre-
Prospect Theory 561
liminary analysis of the o¤ered prospects, which often yields a simpler representation
of these prospects. In the second phase, the edited prospects are evaluated and the
prospect of highest value is chosen. We DEMO outline the editing phase, and develop a
formal model of the DEMO phase.
The function of the editing phase is to organize and reformulate the options so as
to simplify subsequent evaluation and choice. Editing consists DEMO the application of
several operations that transform the outcomes and probabilities associated with the
o¤ered prospects. The major operations of the editing phase are DEMO below.
Coding. The evidence discussed in the previous section shows that people normally
perceive outcomes as gains and losses, rather than as ﬁnal states of wealth or welfare.
Gains and losses, of course, are deﬁned DEMO to some neutral reference point. The
reference point usually corresponds to the current asset position, in which case gains
and losses coincide with the actual amounts that are received or paid. However, the
location of the reference point, and the consequent coding of outcomes as gains
or losses, can be a¤ected by the formulation of the o¤ered prospects, and DEMO the
expectations of the decision maker.
Combination. Prospects can sometimes be simpliﬁed by combining the probabilities
associated with identical outcomes. For example, the prospect ð200;:25; 200;:25Þ will
be reduced to ð200;:50Þ, and evaluated in this form.
Segregation. Some prospects contain a riskless component DEMO is segregated from
the risky component in the editing phase. For example, the prospect ð300;:80;
200;:20Þ is naturally decomposed into a sure gain of 200 and the risky prospect
ð100;:80Þ. Similarly, the prospect ð400;:40; 100;:60Þ is readily seen to DEMO of a
sure loss of 100 and of the prospect ð300;:DEMO
The preceding operations are applied to each prospect separately. The following
operation is applied to a set of two or more prospects.
Cancellation. The DEMO of the isolation e¤ects described earlier is the discarding of
components that are shared by the o¤ered prospects. Thus, our respondents appar-
ently ignored the ﬁrst stage of the sequential game presented in problem 10, because
this stage was common to both options, and they evaluated the prospects with
respect to the results of the second stage (see ﬁgure 22.2). Similarly, they neglected
the common bonus that was added to the prospects in problems 11 and 12. Another
type of cancellation involves the DEMO of common constituents, i.e., outcome-
probability pairs. For example, the DEMO between ð200;:20; 100;:50; 50;:30Þ and
ð200;:20; 150;:50; 100;:30Þ can be reduced by cancellation DEMO a choice between
ð100;:50; 50;:30Þ and ð150;:50; 100;:30Þ.
562 Kahneman and Tversky
Two additional operations that should be mentioned are DEMO and the
detection of dominance. The ﬁrst refers to the simpliﬁcation of prospects by rounding
probabilities or outcomes. For example, the prospect ð101;:DEMO is likely to be recoded
as an even chance to win 100. A particularly important form of simpliﬁcation
involves the discarding of extremely unlikely DEMO The second operation
involves the scanning of o¤ered prospects to detect dominated alternatives, which are
rejected without further evaluation.
Because the editing operations facilitate the task of decision, it is assumed that
they are performed whenever possible. However, some editing operations either per-
mit or prevent the application of others. For example, ð500;:20; 101;:49Þ will appear
DEMO dominate ð500;:15; 99;:51Þ if the second constituents of DEMO prospects are
simpliﬁed to ð100;:50Þ . The ﬁnal edited prospects DEMO, therefore, depend on the
sequence of editing operations, which is DEMO to vary with the structure of the
o¤ered set and with the format of the display. A detailed study of this problem is
beyond DEMO scope of the present treatment. In this paper we discuss choice problems
where it is reasonable to assume either that the original formulation of DEMO prospects
leaves no room for further editing, or that the edited DEMO can be speciﬁed
without ambiguity.
Many anomalies of preference result from the editing of prospects. For example,
the inconsistencies associated with the isolation DEMO result from the cancellation of
common components. Some intransitivities of choice are explained by a simpliﬁca-
tion that eliminates small di¤erences between prospects (see Tversky [43]). More
generally, the preference order between prospects need not be invariant across con-
texts, because the same o¤ered prospect could be edited in di¤erent ways depending
on the context in which it appears.
DEMO the editing phase, the decision maker is assumed to evaluate each DEMO the
edited prospects, and to choose the prospect of highest value. DEMO overall value of an
edited prospect, denoted V , is expressed DEMO terms of two scales, p and v.
The ﬁrst scale, p, associates with each probability p a decision weight pðpÞ, which
reﬂects DEMO impact of p on the over-all value of the prospect. However, DEMO is not a
probability measure, and it will be shown later DEMO pðpÞþ pð1  pÞ is typically less
than unity. The second scale, v, assigns to each outcome x a number vðxÞ, which
reﬂects the subjective value of that outcome. Recall that outcomes are deﬁned rela-
DEMO to a reference point, which serves as the zero point of DEMO value scale. Hence, v
measures the value of deviations from that DEMO point, i.e., gains and losses.
The present formulation is concerned with simple prospects of the form ðx; p; y; qÞ,
which have at most two non-zero outcomes. In such a prospect, one receives x with
Prospect Theory 563
probability p, y with probability q, and nothing DEMO probability 1  p q, where
p þq a 1. An DEMO prospect is strictly positive if its outcomes are all positive, i.e.,DEMO
if x; y > 0 and p þq ¼ 1; it is strictly negative if its outcomes are all negative. A
prospect is DEMO if it is neither strictly positive nor strictly negative.
The basic equation of the theory describes the manner in which p and v are DEMO
bined to determine the over-all value of regular prospects.
If ðx; DEMO; y; qÞ is a regular prospect (i.e., either p þq < 1, or x b0 by,or
x a0 ay), then
Vðx; p; y; qÞ¼ pðpÞvðxÞþ pðqÞvðyÞð1Þ
where vð0Þ¼ 0, pð0Þ¼ DEMO, and pð1Þ¼ 1. As in utility theory, V is deﬁned on pros-
pects, while v is deﬁned on outcomes. The two scales coincide for sure prospects,
where Vðx; 1:0Þ¼ VðxÞ¼ vðxÞ.
Equation (DEMO) generalizes expected utility theory by relaxing the expectation princi-
ple. An DEMO analysis of this representation is sketched in the appendix, which
describes DEMO that ensure the existence of a unique p and a ratio-scale v sat-
isfying equation (1).
The evaluation of strictly positive and strictly negative prospects follows a di¤erent
rule. In the editing phase such prospects DEMO segregated into two components: (i) the
riskless component, i.e., DEMO minimum gain or loss which is certain to be obtained or
paid; (ii) the risky component, i.e., the additional gain or loss which is actually at
stake. The evaluation of such prospects is described DEMO the next equation.
If p þq ¼ 1 and either x > y > 0or x < y < 0, then
Vðx; p; y; qÞ¼ vðyÞþ pðpÞ½vðxÞ vðyÞ:
ð2Þ
That is, the value DEMO a strictly positive or strictly negative prospect equals the value of
the riskless component plus the value-di¤erence between the outcomes, multiplied by
the weight associated with the more extreme outcome. For example, Vð400;:25;
DEMO;:75Þ¼ vð100Þþ pð:25Þ½vð400Þ vð100Þ . The essential feature of equation (2) is
that a decision weight is applied to the value-di¤erence vðxÞ vðyÞ, which repre-
sents the risky component of the prospect, but DEMO to vðyÞ, which represents the
riskless component. Note that the right-hand DEMO of equation (2) equals pðpÞvðxÞþ
½1 pðpÞvðyÞ. Hence, equation (2) reduces to equation (1) if pðpÞþ pð1  pÞ¼ 1.
As will be shown later, this condition is not generally satisﬁed.
Many elements of the evaluation model have appeared in previous attempts to
modify expected DEMO theory. Markowitz [29] was the ﬁrst to propose that utility be
deﬁned on gains and losses rather than on ﬁnal asset positions, an assumption which
564 Kahneman and Tversky
has been implicitly accepted in most experimental measurements DEMO utility (see, e.g.,
[7, 32]). Markowitz also noted DEMO presence of risk seeking in preferences among
positive as well as among negative prospects, and he proposed a utility function
which has convex and concave regions in both the positive and the negative domains.
His treatment, however, retains the expectation principle; hence it cannot account for
the DEMO violations of this principle; see, e.g., table 22.1.
The replacement DEMO probabilities by more general weights was proposed by
Edwards [9], and DEMO model was investigated in several empirical studies (e.g.,
[3, 42]). Similar models were developed by Fellner [12], who introduced the concept
of decision weight to explain aversion for ambiguity, and by van Dam [46] who
attempted to scale decision weights. For other critical analyses of DEMO utility
theory and alternative choice models, see Allais [2], Coombs [6], Fishburn [13], and
Hansson [22].
The equations of prospect theory retain DEMO general bilinear form that underlies
expected utility theory. However, in order DEMO accomodate the e¤ects described in the
ﬁrst part of the paper, DEMO are compelled to assume that values are attached to
changes rather than to ﬁnal states, and that decision weights do not coincide with
stated probabilities. These departures from expected utility theory must lead to nor-
matively DEMO consequences, such as inconsistencies, intransitivities, and
violations of dominance. Such DEMO of preference are normally corrected by the
decision maker when he realizes that his preferences are inconsistent, intransitive, or
inadmissible. In many situations, however, the decision maker does not have the
opportunity to discover that his preferences could violate decision rules that he
wishes to obey. In DEMO circumstances the anomalies implied by prospect theory are
expected to occur.
The Value Function
An essential feature of the present theory is that the DEMO of value are changes in
wealth or welfare, rather than ﬁnal DEMO This assumption is compatible with basic
principles of perception and judgment. Our perceptual apparatus is attuned to the
evaluation of changes or di¤erences rather DEMO to the evaluation of absolute mag-
nitudes. When we respond to attributes such as brightness, loudness, or temperature,
the past and present DEMO of experience deﬁnes an adaptation level, or reference
point, and stimuli are perceived in relation to this reference point [23]. Thus, an
object at a given temperature may be experienced as hot or cold to DEMO touch
depending on the temperature to which one has adapted. The same principle applies
to non-sensory attributes such as health, prestige, and wealth. DEMO same level of
Prospect Theory 565
wealth, for example, may imply abject poverty for DEMO person and great riches for
another—depending on their current assets.
The emphasis on changes as the carriers of value should not be taken to DEMO that
the value of a particular change is independent of initial position. Strictly speaking,
value should be treated as a function in two DEMO: the asset position that serves
as reference point, and the magnitude of the change (positive or negative) from that
reference point. An DEMO attitude to money, say, could be described by a
book, DEMO each page presents the value function for changes at a particular asset
position. Clearly, the value functions described on di¤erent pages are not identical:
they are likely to become more linear with increases in assets. DEMO, the prefer-
ence order of prospects is not greatly altered by DEMO or even moderate variations in
asset position. The certainty equivalent of the prospect ð1;000;:50Þ, for example, lies
between 300 and 400 for most people, in a wide range of asset positions. Conse-
quently, the representation of value as a function in one argument generally provides
a satisfactory approximation.
Many sensory and perceptual dimensions share the property that DEMO psychological
response is a concave function of the magnitude of physical change. For example, it
is easier to discriminate between a change of 3 and a change of 6 in room temper-
ature, than it is to discriminate between a change of 13 and a change of 16 DEMO
propose that this principle applies in particular to the evaluation of monetary
changes. Thus, the di¤erence in value between a gain of 100 and a gain of 200
appears to be greater than the di¤erence between DEMO gain of 1,100 and a gain of 1,200.
Similarly, DEMO di¤erence between a loss of 100 and a loss of 200 appears greater than
the di¤erence between a loss of 1,100 and a DEMO of 1,200, unless the larger loss is
intolerable. Thus, we hypothesize that the value function for changes of wealth is
normally concave DEMO the reference point (v 00ðxÞ < 0, for x > 0) and often convex
below it (v 00ðxÞ > 0, for x < 0). That is, the marginal value of both gains and losses
generally decreases with their magnitude. Some support for this hypothesis has DEMO
reported by Galanter and Pliner [17], who scaled the perceived magnitude DEMO mone-
tary and non-monetary gains and losses.
The above hypothesis regarding the shape of the value function was based on
responses to gains and DEMO in a riskless context. We propose that the value function
which is derived from risky choices shares the same characteristics, as illustrated in
the following problems.
Problem 13:
N
¼
ð6;000;:25Þ,or
ð4;000;:25; 2;000;:25Þ.
68 [18] [82]*
566 Kahneman and Tversky
Problem 13
0
:
N
¼
ð6;000;:25Þ,or
ð4;000;:25; 2;000;:25Þ.
64 [70]* DEMO
Applying equation 1 to the modal preference in these problems yields
pð:25Þvð6;000Þ < pð:25Þ½vð4;000Þþ vð2;000Þ and
pð:25Þvð6;000Þ > pð:25Þ½vð4;000Þþ vð2;000Þ:
Hence, vð6;000Þ < vð4;DEMO vð2;000Þ and vð6;000Þ > vð4;000Þþ vð2;000Þ.
These preferences are in accord with the hypothesis that the value function is concave
DEMO gains and convex for losses.
Any discussion of the utility function for money must leave room for the e¤ect of
special circumstances on preferences. DEMO example, the utility function of an individ-
ual who needs $60,DEMO to purchase a house may reveal an exceptionally steep rise
near the critical value. Similarly, an individual’s aversion to losses may increase
sharply near the loss that would compel him to sell his house and move DEMO a less
desirable neighborhood. Hence, the derived value (utility) function DEMO an individual
does not always reﬂect ‘‘pure’’ attitudes to money, since DEMO could be a¤ected by
additional consequences associated with speciﬁc amounts. Such perturbations can
readily produce convex regions in the value function for gains and DEMO regions in
the value function for losses. The latter case may be more common since large losses
often necessitate changes in life style.
A DEMO characteristic of attitudes to changes in welfare is that losses loom larger
than gains. The aggravation that one experiences in losing a sum of DEMO appears
to be greater than the pleasure associated with gaining the same amount [17]. Indeed,
most people ﬁnd symmetric bets of the form DEMO;:50; x;:50Þ distinctly unattractive.
Moreover, the aversiveness of symmetric fair bets generally increases with the size of
the stake. That is, if x > y b 0, then ðy;:50; y;:DEMO is preferred to ðx;:50; x;:50Þ.
According to equation (1), therefore,
vðyÞþ vðyÞ > vðxÞþ vðxÞ
and
vðyÞ vðxÞ > vðxÞ vðyÞ:
Setting y ¼ 0 yields vðxÞ < vðxÞ, DEMO letting y approach x yields v0ðxÞ <
v0 ðxÞ, provided v0 , the derivative of v, exists. Thus, the value function for DEMO is
steeper than the value function for gains.
In summary, we DEMO proposed that the value function is (i) deﬁned on deviations
from the reference point; (ii) generally concave for gains and commonly convex for
losses; (iii) steeper for losses than for gains. A value function which satisﬁes these
Prospect Theory 567
Figure 22.3
A hypothetical value function.
properties is displayed DEMO ﬁgure 22.3. Note that the proposed S -shaped value function
is steepest at the reference point, in marked contrast to the utility function postulated
by Markowitz [29] which is relatively shallow in that region.
Although the DEMO theory can be applied to derive the value function from
preferences between prospects, the actual scaling is considerably more compli-
cated than in utility theory, because of the introduction of decision weights. For
example, decision DEMO could produce risk aversion and risk seeking even with a
linear value function. Nevertheless, it is of interest that the main properties ascribed
to the value function have been observed in a detailed analysis of von DEMO
Morgenstern utility functions for changes of wealth (Fishburn and Kochenberger
[14])DEMO The functions had been obtained from thirty decision makers in various ﬁelds
of business, in ﬁve independent studies [5, 18, 19, 21, 40]. Most utility functions for
gains were concave, most functions for losses were convex, and only three individuals
exhibited risk aversion for both gains and losses. With a single exception, utility
functions were considerably steeper for losses than for gains.
The Weighting Function
In prospect theory, the value of each outcome is multiplied by a decision weight.
Decision weights are DEMO from choices between prospects much as subjective
probabilities are inferred from preferences in the Ramsey–Savage approach. How-
568 Kahneman and Tversky
ever, decision weights are not probabilities: they DEMO not obey the probability axioms
and they should not be interpreted as measures of degree or belief.
Consider a gamble in which one can DEMO 1,000 or nothing, depending on the toss
of a fair DEMO For any reasonable person, the probability of winning is .50 in DEMO
situation. This can be veriﬁed in a variety of ways, e.g., by showing that the subject is
indi¤erent between betting on heads or DEMO, or by his verbal report that he considers
the two events DEMO As will be shown below, however, the decision weight
pð:50Þ which is derived from choices is likely to be smaller than .50. DEMO weights
measure the impact of events on the desirability of prospects, DEMO not merely the
perceived likelihood of these events. The two scales coincide (i.e., pðpÞ¼ p)ifthe
expectation principle holds, but not otherwise.
The choice problems discussed in the present paper were formulated in terms of
DEMO numerical probabilities, and our analysis assumes that the respondents
adopted the DEMO values of p. Furthermore, since the events were identiﬁed only by
DEMO stated probabilities, it is possible in this context to express decision DEMO as a
function of stated probability. In general, however, the decision weight attached to
an event could be inﬂuenced by other factors, e.g., ambiguity [10, 11].
We turn now to discuss the salient properties DEMO the weighting function p, which
relates decision weights to stated probabilities. DEMO, p is an increasing function
of p, with pð0Þ¼ 0 and pð1Þ¼ 1. That is, outcomes contingent on an impossible
event are ignored, and the scale is normalized so thatassociated with the probability p to the weight associated with the certain event.pðpÞ is the ratio of the DEMO
We ﬁrst discuss some properties of the weighting function for small probabilities.
The preferences in problems 8 and 80 suggest that for small values DEMO p, p is a sub-
additive function of p, i.e., DEMO > rpðpÞ for 0 < r < 1. Recall that in problem 8,
ð6;000;:001Þ is preferred to ð3;000;:002Þ. DEMO
pð:001Þ > vð3;000Þ > 1 by the concavity of v:
pð:002Þ vð6;000Þ 2
The reﬂected preferences in problem 80 DEMO the same conclusion. The pattern of
preferences in problems 7 and 70 , however, suggests that subadditivity need not hold
for large values of p.
Furthermore, we propose that very low probabilities are generally overweighted,
that is, pðpÞ > p for small p. Consider the following choice problems.
Problem 14:
N
¼
ð5;000;:001Þ, or (5).
72 [72]* [28]
Prospect Theory 569
Problem 14
0
:
N
¼
ð5;000;:DEMO,or
ð5Þ.
72 [17] [83]*
Note that in problem 14, people DEMO what is in e¤ect a lottery ticket over the
expected value of that ticket. In problem 140 , on the other hand, they prefer a small
loss, which can be viewed as the payment of an insurance premium, over a small
probability of a large loss. Similar observations have been reported by Markowitz
[29]. In the present theory, the preference for the lottery in problem 14 implies
pð:001Þvð5;000Þ > vð5Þ, hence pð:001Þ > vð5Þ=vð5;000Þ >:001, assuming the value
function for gains is concave. The readiness to pay for insurance in problem DEMO
implies the same conclusion, assuming the value function for losses is DEMO
It is important to distinguish overweighting, which refers to a property DEMO decision
weights, from the overestimation that is commonly found in the DEMO of the
probability of rare events. Note that the issue of overestimation does not arise in the
present context, where the subject is assumed to adopt the stated value of p. In many
real-life situations, overestimation and overweighting may both operate to increase
the impact of rare events.
DEMO pðpÞ > p for low probabilities, there is evidence to suggest DEMO, for all
0 < p < 1, pðpÞþ pð1  pÞ < 1. We label this property subcertainty. It is readily
seen that DEMO typical preferences in any version of Allias’ example (see, e.g., DEMO
1 and 2) imply subcertainty for the relevant value of p. DEMO equation (1) to the
prevalent preferences in problems 1 and 2 yields, respectively,
vð2;400Þ > pð:66Þvð2;400Þþ pð:33Þvð2;500Þ;
i.e.,
½1

and
pð:66vð2;400Þ > pð:33Þvð2;DEMO
pð:33Þvð2;500Þ > pð:34Þvð2;400Þ;
hence,
1 pð:66Þ > pð:34Þ; or pð:66Þþ pð:34Þ < 1:
and some data reported by MacCrimmon and Larsson [28] imply subcertainty forApplying DEMO same analysis to Allais’ original example yields pð:89Þþ pð:11Þ < 1,
additional values of p.
570 Kahneman and Tversky
The slope of p in the interval ð0; 1Þ can be viewed as a measure of the sensitivity of
preferences DEMO changes in probability. Subcertainty entails that
p
is regressive with
respect to p, i.e., that preferences are generally less sensitive to variations of DEMO
bility than the expectation principle would dictate. Thus, subcertainty captures an
DEMO element of people’s attitudes to uncertain events, namely that the sum DEMO the
weights associated with complementary events is typically less than the weight asso-
ciated with the certain event.
Recall that the violations of the DEMO axiom discussed earlier in this paper
conform to the following rule: DEMO ðx; pÞ is equivalent to ðy; pqÞ then ðx; prÞ DEMO not
preferred to ðy; pqrÞ,0 < p; q; r DEMO 1. By equation (1),
pðpÞvðxÞ¼ pð pqÞvðyÞ implies pð prÞvðxÞ apð pqrÞvðyÞ;
hence,
pð pqÞ a pð pqrÞ :
pðpÞ pð prÞ
Thus, for a ﬁxed ratio of probabilities, the ratio DEMO the corresponding decision
weights is closer to unity when the probabilities are low than when they are high.
This property of p, called subproportionality, imposes considerable constraints on
the shape of p: it holds if DEMO only if log p is a convex function of log p.
It is of interest to note that subproportionality together with the overweighting of
DEMO probabilities imply that p is subadditive over that range. Formally, it DEMO be
shown that if pðpÞ > p and subproportionality holds, then DEMO > rpðpÞ,0 < r < 1,
providedFigure 22.4 presents a hypothetical weighting function which satisﬁes overweight-p is monotone and continuous over ð0; 1Þ.
ing and subadditivity for small values of p, as well as subcertainty and subpropor-
tionality. These properties entail that p is relatively shallow DEMO the open interval and
changes abruptly near the end-points where pð0Þ¼ 0 and pð1Þ¼ 1. The sharp drops
or apparent discontinuities of p at DEMO endpoints are consistent with the notion that
there is a limit to how small a decision weight can be attached to an event, if it is
given any weight at all. A similar quantum of doubt DEMO impose an upper limit on
any decision weight that is less than unity. This quantal e¤ect may reﬂect the cate-
gorical distinction between certainty DEMO uncertainty. On the other hand, the simpli-
ﬁcation of prospects in DEMO editing phase can lead the individual to discard events of
extremely low probability and to treat events of extremely high probability as if they
DEMO certain. Because people are limited in their ability to comprehend and evaluate
extreme probabilities, highly unlikely events are either ignored or overweighted, and
Prospect Theory 571
Figure 22.4
A hypothetical weighting function.
the di¤erence between DEMO probability and certainty is either neglected or exagger-
ated. Consequently, p DEMO not well-behaved near the end-points.
The following example, due to Zeckhauser, illustrates the hypothesized non-
linearity of p. Suppose you are compelled to DEMO Russian roulette, but are given the
opportunity to purchase the removal DEMO one bullet from the loaded gun. Would you
pay as much to reduce the number of bullets from four to three as you would DEMO
reduce the number of bullets from one to zero? Most people DEMO that they would be
willing to pay much more for a reduction of the probability of death from 1/6 to zero
than for DEMO reduction from 4/6 to 3/6. Economic considerations would lead one to pay
more in the latter case, where the value of money is presumably reduced by the con-
siderable probability that one will not DEMO to enjoy it.
An obvious objection to the assumption that 0p involves comparisons
between prospects of the form ðx; p; x; qÞ and ðx; p0p; xð;pqÞ0Þ, where p þq ¼ p0 þq0 <DEMO
1. Since any individual will surely be indi¤erent between the two prospects, it could
be argued that this observation entails pðpÞþ pðqÞ¼ pðp0 Þþ pðq0Þ, which in turn
implies that p is the identity function. This argument is invalid in the present theory,
which assumes that the DEMO of identical outcomes are combined in the edit-
ing of prospects. A more serious objection to the nonlinearity of p involves poten-
tial violations DEMO dominance. Suppose x > y > 0, p > p0 , DEMO p þq ¼ p0 þq0 < 1;
hence, ðx; p; y; qÞ dominates ðx; p0; y; q0Þ. If preference obeys dominance, then
572 Kahneman and Tversky
0 0
pðpÞvðxÞþ pðqÞvðyÞ > pðp ÞvðxÞþ pðq DEMO;
or
pðpÞ pðp0Þ > vðyÞ :
pðq0 Þ pðqÞ vðxÞ
DEMO, as y approaches x, pðpÞ pðp0Þ approaches pðq0 Þ pðqÞ. Since p  p0 ¼
q0 q, p must be essentially linear, DEMO else dominance must be violated.
Direct violations of dominance are prevented, DEMO the present theory, by the
assumption that dominated alternatives are detected DEMO eliminated prior to the
evaluation of prospects. However, the theory permits DEMO violations of domi-
nance, e.g., triples of prospects so that A is preferred to B, B is preferred to C ,and C
DEMO A. For an example, see Rai¤a [34, p. 75].
Finally, DEMO should be noted that the present treatment concerns the simplest deci-
sion task in which a person chooses between two available prospects. We have DEMO
treated in detail the more complicated production task (e.g., bidding) DEMO the
decision maker generates an alternative that is equal in value to a given prospect.
The asymmetry between the two options in this situation DEMO introduce systematic
biases. Indeed, Lichtenstein and Slovic [27] have constructed pairs DEMO prospects A and
B, such that people generally prefer A over DEMO, but bid more for B than for A. This
phenomenon has DEMO conﬁrmed in several studies, with both hypothetical and real
gambles, e.g., Grether and Plott [20]. Thus, it cannot be generally assumed that DEMO
preference order of prospects can be recovered by a bidding procedure.
Because prospect theory has been proposed as a model of choice, the inconsistency
of bids and choices implies that the measurement of values and decision DEMO
should be based on choices between speciﬁed prospects rather than on bids or other
production tasks. This restriction makes the assessment of v and DEMO more di‰cult
because production tasks are more convenient for scaling than pair comparisons.
Discussion
In the ﬁnal section we show how prospect theory accounts DEMO observed attitudes
toward risk, discuss alternative representations of choice problems induced DEMO shifts
of reference point, and sketch several extensions of the present DEMO
Risk Attitudes
The dominant pattern of preferences observed in Allais’ example (DEMO 1 and 2)
follows from the present theory i¤
Prospect Theory 573
pð:33Þ > vð2;400Þ > pð:33Þ
pð:DEMO vð2;500Þ 1 pð:66Þ
:
Hence, the violation of the independence axiom is attributed in this case to sub-
certainty, and more speciﬁcally to the inequality pð:34Þ < 1 pð:66Þ. This analysis
DEMO that an Allais-type violation will occur whenever the v-ratio of the two non-
zero outcomes is bounded by the corresponding p-ratios.
Problems 3 through DEMO share the same structure, hence it su‰ces to consider one
pair, say problems 7 and 8. The observed choices in these problems are DEMO by
the theory i¤
pð:001Þ > vð3;000Þ > pð:45Þ :
pð:002Þ vð6;000Þ pð:90Þ
The violation of the substitution axiom is attributed in this case to the sub-
proportionality of p. DEMO utility theory is violated in the above manner, there-
fore, whenever the v-ratio of the two outcomes is bounded by the respective p-ratios.
DEMO same analysis applies to other violations of the substitution axiom, both DEMO the
positive and in the negative domain.
We next prove that the preference for regular insurance over probabilistic insur-
ance, observed in Problem 9, follows from prospect theory—provided the probability
of loss is overweighted. That is, if ðx; pÞ is indi¤erent to ðyÞ, then ðyÞ is
preferred to ðx; p=2; y; p=2; y=2; 1  pÞ. For simplicity, we deﬁne for x b 0,
fofðxxÞ¼. Applying prospect theory, with the natural extension of equation 2, we wish tovðxÞ. Since DEMO value function for losses is convex, f is a concave function
DEMO that
pðpÞ f ðxÞ¼ f ðyÞ implies
f ðyÞ a f ðy=2Þþ pðp=2Þ½ f ðyÞ f ðy=2Þ þ pðp=2Þ½ f ðxÞ f ðy=2Þ
¼ DEMO f ðxÞþ pðp=2Þ f ðyÞþ½1 2pðp=2Þ f ðy=2Þ:
Substituting for f ðxÞ and using the concavity of f , it su‰ces to show DEMO
ð
f yÞ a pðp=2Þ f ðyÞþ pðp=2Þ f
pðpÞ
ðyÞþ ðyÞ=2 pðp=2Þ f ðyÞ
f
or
pðpÞ=2 apðp=2Þ;
which follows from the DEMO of p:
574 Kahneman and Tversky
According to the present theory, attitudes toward risk are determined jointly by v
and p, and not solely by the utility function. It is therefore instructive to examine the
conditions under which DEMO aversion or risk seeking are expected to occur. Consider
the choice between the gamble ðx; pÞ and its expected value ð pxÞ.If x > 0, risk
seeking is implied whenever pðpÞ > vð pxÞ=vðxÞ, which DEMO greater than p if the value
function for gains is concave. Hence, overweighting ðpðpÞ > pÞ is necessary but not
su‰cient for risk seeking in the domain of gains. Precisely the same condition is
necessary but DEMO su‰cient for risk aversion when x < 0. This analysis restricts risk
seeking in the domain of gains and risk aversion in the domain DEMO losses to small
probabilities, where overweighting is expected to hold. Indeed DEMO are the typical
conditions under which lottery tickets and insurance policies are sold. In prospect
theory, the overweighting of small probabilities favors both gambling and insurance,
while the S -shaped value function tends to inhibit DEMO behaviors.
Although prospect theory predicts both insurance and gambling for small proba-
bilities, we feel that the present analysis falls far short of a fully adequate account of
these complex phenomena. Indeed, there is evidence from both experimental studies
[37], survey research [26], and observations of economic DEMO, e.g., service and
medical insurance, that the purchase of insurance DEMO extends to the medium range
of probabilities, and that small probabilities DEMO disaster are sometimes entirely
ignored. Furthermore, the evidence suggests that minor DEMO in the formulation
of the decision problem can have marked e¤ects on the attractiveness of insurance
[37]. A comprehensive theory of insurance behavior should DEMO, in addition to
pure attitudes toward uncertainty and money, such factors as the value of security,
social norms of prudence, the aversiveness of a large number of small payments
spread over time, information and misinformation regarding probabilities and out-
comes, and many others. Some e¤ects of these variables could be described within
the present framework, e.g., as DEMO of reference point, transformations of the
value function, or manipulations of probabilities or decision weights. Other e¤ects
may require the introduction of variables DEMO concepts which have not been consid-
ered in this treatment.
Shifts of Reference
So far in this paper, gains and losses were deﬁned by the amounts of money that are
obtained or paid when a prospect DEMO played, and the reference point was taken to be
the status DEMO, or one’s current assets. Although this is probably true for most DEMO
problems, there are situations in which gains and losses are coded DEMO to an
expectation or aspiration level that di¤ers from the status quo. For example, an
unexpected tax withdrawal from a monthly pay check is experienced as a loss, not as
Prospect Theory 575
a reduced gain. Similarly, an entrepreneur who is weathering a slump with greater
success than his competitors may interpret a small DEMO as a gain, relative to the larger
loss he had reason DEMO expect.
The reference point in the preceding examples corresponded to an asset position
that one had expected to attain. A discrepancy between the reference DEMO and the
current asset position may also arise because of recent changes in wealth to which
one has not yet adapted [29]. Imagine a DEMO who is involved in a business venture,
has already lost 2,000 and is now facing a choice between a sure gain of DEMO,000 and an
even chance to win 2,000 or nothing. If he has not yet adapted to his losses, he is
likely to code the problem as a choice between ð2;000;:50Þ and ð1;000Þ rather
than as a choice between ð2;000;:50Þ and ð1;000Þ. As we have seen, the former rep-
resentation induces more adventurous choices than the latter.
A change of reference point alters the preference DEMO for prospects. In particular,
the present theory implies that a negative translation of a choice problem, such as
arises from incomplete adaptation to recent losses, increases risk seeking in some
situations. Speciﬁcally, if a DEMO prospect ðx; p; y; 1
ðx To prove this proposition, note thatz; p; y z; 1  pÞ is preferred over ðzÞ for x; y;
 pÞ is just acceptable, then
DEMO > 0, with x > z.
Vðx; p; y; 1

Furthermore,
pÞ¼ 0i¤
pðpÞvðxÞ¼ pð1

pÞvðyÞ:
Vðx

DEMO
> pðpÞvðxÞ pðpÞvðzÞþ pð1
þ
¼pð1  pÞvðyÞ pðpÞvðzÞþ pð1 
þpð1  pÞvðzÞ by substitution;
¼pðpÞvðzÞþ pð1  pÞvðzÞ
> vðzÞ½pðpÞþ pð1 DEMO pÞ since vðzÞ
> vðzÞ by subcertainty:
z; p; y
pðpÞvðx


z; 1

zÞþ pð1
pð1

pÞvðzÞ
pÞ


pÞvðyÞ
by the properties of v;
pÞvðyÞ
< vðzÞ;DEMO
pÞvðy

zÞ
This analysis suggests that a person who has not made peace with his losses is likely
to accept gambles that would DEMO unacceptable to him otherwise. The well known
576 Kahneman and Tversky
observation [31] that the tendency to bet on DEMO shots increases in the course of the
betting day provides some support for the hypothesis that a failure to adapt to losses
or to DEMO an expected gain induces risk seeking. For another example, consider an
DEMO who expects to purchase insurance, perhaps because he has owned it DEMO the
past or because his friends do. This individual may code the decision to pay a pre-
mium y to protect against a loss DEMO as a choice between ðx þy; p; y; 1  DEMO and (0)
rather than as a choice between ðx; pÞ and ðyÞ. The preceding argument entails
that insurance is likely to be DEMO attractive in the former representation than in the
latter.
Another important case of a shift of reference point arises when a person for-
mulates DEMO decision problem in terms of ﬁnal assets, as advocated in decision DEMO
sis, rather than in terms of gains and losses, as people usually do. In this case, the
reference point is set to zero on the scale of wealth and the value function is likely to
DEMO concave everywhere [39]. According to the present analysis, this formulation
essentially DEMO risk seeking, except for gambling with low probabilities. The
explicit formulation DEMO decision problems in terms of ﬁnal assets is perhaps the most
e¤ective procedure for eliminating risk seeking in the domain of losses.
Many economic DEMO involve transactions in which one pays money in
exchange for a desirable prospect. Current decision theories analyze such problems
as comparisons between the status DEMO and an alternative state which includes the
acquired prospect minus its cost. For example, the decision whether to pay 10 for the
gamble ð1;000;:01Þ is treated as a choice between ð990;:01; 10;:99Þ and (0). In this
analysis, readiness to purchase the positive prospect is equated to willingness to
accept the corresponding mixed prospect.
DEMO prevalent failure to integrate riskless and risky prospects, dramatized in the
DEMO e¤ect, suggests that people are unlikely to perform the operation of DEMO
tracting the cost from the outcomes in deciding whether to buy a gamble. Instead, we
suggest that people usually evaluate the gamble and its cost separately, and decide to
purchase the gamble if the combined value is positive. Thus, the gamble ð1;000;:01Þ
will be purchased DEMO a price of 10 if pð:01Þvð1;000Þþ vð10Þ > 0.
If this hypothesis is correct, the decision to pay 10 for ð1;000;:01Þ, for example, is
no longer equivalent to the decision to accept the gamble ð990;:01; 10;:99Þ. Fur-
thermore, prospect DEMO implies that if one is indi¤erent between ðxð1  pÞ;
p; px; 1  pÞ and (0) then one will not DEMO px to purchase the prospect ðx; pÞ.
Thus, people are expected to exhibit more risk seeking in deciding whether to accept
a fair DEMO than in deciding whether to purchase a gamble for a fair price. The
location of the reference point, and the manner in which choice problems are coded
and edited emerge as critical factors in the analysis DEMO decisions.
Prospect Theory 577
Extensions
In order to encompass a wider range of DEMO problems, prospect theory should be
extended in several directions. Some generalizations DEMO immediate; others require
further development. The extension of equations (1) DEMO (2) to prospects with any
number of outcomes is straightforward. When the number of outcomes is large,
however, additional editing operations may be invoked to simplify evaluation. The
manner in which complex options, e.g., compound prospects, are reduced to simpler
ones is yet to be DEMO
Although the present chapter has been concerned mainly with monetary outcomes,
the theory is readily applicable to choices involving other attributes, e.g., DEMO of
life or the number of lives that could be lost or saved as a consequence of a policy
decision. The main properties of DEMO proposed value function for money should apply
to other attributes as well. In particular, we expect outcomes to be coded as gains or
losses relative to a neutral reference point, and losses to loom larger than gains.
The theory can also be extended to the typical situation of DEMO, where the
probabilities of outcomes are not explicitly given. In such DEMO, decision weights
must be attached to particular events rather than to DEMO probabilities, but they are
expected to exhibit the essential properties that DEMO ascribed to the weighting func-
tion. For example, if A and DEMO are complementary events and neither is certain,
pðAÞþ pðBÞ should be less than unity—a natural analogue to subcertainty.
The decision weight associated with DEMO event will depend primarily on the per-
ceived likelihood of that event, which could be subject to major biases [45]. In addi-
tion, DEMO weights may be a¤ected by other considerations, such as ambiguity or
DEMO Indeed, the work of Ellsberg [10] and Fellner [12] implies that DEMO
reduces decision weights. Consequently, subcertainty should be more pronounced for
vague DEMO for clear probabilities.
The present analysis of preference between risky options has developed two
themes. The ﬁrst theme concerns editing operations that determine how DEMO are
perceived. The second theme involves the judgmental principles that govern the
evaluation of gains and losses and the weighting of uncertain outcomes. Although
DEMO themes should be developed further, they appear to provide a useful DEMO
for the descriptive analysis of choice under risk.
Appendix
In this appendix we sketch an axiomatic analysis of prospect theory. Since a com-
plete DEMO treatment is long and tedious, we merely outline the essential
578 Kahneman and Tversky
steps and exhibit the key ordinal properties needed DEMO establish the bilinear repre-
sentation of equation (1). Similar methods DEMO be extended to axiomatize equa-
tion (2).
Consider the set DEMO all regular prospects of the form ðx; p; y; qÞ DEMO p þq < 1.
The extension to regular prospects with p þq ¼ 1 is straightforward. Let l denote
the relation of preference between DEMO that is assumed to be connected, sym-
metric and transitive, and let F denote the associated relation of indi¤erence. Natu-
rally, ðx; DEMO; y; qÞ Fðy; q; x; pÞ. We also assume, as is implicit in our notation, that
ðx; p; 0; DEMO Fðx; p; 0; rÞ, and ðx; p; y; DEMO Fðx; p; z; 0Þ. That is, the null outcome and
the impossible event have the property of a multiplicative zero.
Note that DEMO desired representation (equation (1)) is additive in the probability-
outcome pairs. Hence, the theory of additive conjoint measurement can be applied to
obtain a scale V which preserves the preference order, and interval scales f and g in
two arguments such that
Vðx; p; y; qÞ¼ f ðx; pÞþ gðy; qÞ:
The key axioms used DEMO derive this representation are:
ðx; p; y
00
q
00
Þ
Fðz; rÞ:
Independence: ðx; p; y; qÞ lðx; p; y0q0Þ i¤ ðx0; p0; y; qÞ lðx0; p0; y0; q0Þ.
Cancellation: If ðx; p; y0q0Þ lðx0; p0; DEMO; qÞ and ðx0; p0; y00; q 00Þ lðx00; p00; y
ðx; p; y00; q00Þ lðx00; p 00; y; DEMO
Solvability: If ðx; p; y; qÞ lðz; rÞ lðx; p; y0q0Þ
then there exist y00; q 00 such that
It DEMO been shown that these conditions are su‰cient to construct the desired
additive representation, provided the preference order is Archimedean [8, 25]. Fur-
thermore, since ðx; p; y; qÞ Fðy; q; x; pÞ, f ðx; pÞþ gðy; qÞ¼ f ðy; qÞþ gðx; pÞ, and
letting q ¼ 0 yields f ¼ g.
Next, consider the set of all prospects of the form ðx; pÞ with a single non-zero
outcome. In this case, the bilinear model reduces to Vðx; DEMO pðpÞvðxÞ. This is the
multiplicative model, investigated in [35] and [25]. DEMO construct the multiplicative
representation we assume that the ordering of the probability-outcome pairs satisﬁes
independence, cancellation, solvability, and the Archimedean axiom. In addition, we
assume sign dependence [25] to ensure the proper multiplication of signs. It should be
noted that the solvability axiom used in [35] and DEMO must be weakened because the
probability factor permits only bounded solvability.
0
; q
0
Þ, then
for some outcome z and probability r,
Prospect Theory 579
Combining the additive and the multiplicative representations yields
Vðx; p; y; qÞ¼
f ½pðpÞvðxÞ þ
f ½pðqÞvðyÞ:
Finally, we impose a new distributivity axiom:
ðx; p; y; pÞ Fðz; pÞ
i¤
ðx; q; y; qÞ Fðz; qÞ:
Applying this axiom to the above representation, we obtain
f ½pðpÞvðxÞ þ
implies
f ½pðpÞvðyÞ ¼
f ½pðpÞvðzÞ
f ½pðqÞvðxÞ þ
f ½pðqÞvðyÞ ¼
f DEMO:
Assuming, with no loss of generality, that pðqÞ < pðpÞ, and letting
¼ pðpÞvðyÞ, g ¼ pðpÞvðzÞ, and y ¼ pðqÞ=pðpÞ, yields f ðaÞþ f ð
f ðyaÞþ f ðybÞ¼ f ðygÞ for all 0 < y < 1.
Because f is strictly monotonic we DEMO set
yf 1½ f ðaÞþ f ðbÞ ¼ f 1½ f ðyaÞþ f ðybÞ.
The solution to this functional equation is f
a
bÞ¼
DEMO
pðpÞvðxÞ,
f
ðgÞ
implies
g
¼
f 1½ f
ðaÞþ
f
ð
bÞ. Hence,
yg
¼
ðaÞ¼
kac [1]. Hence, Vðx; DEMO; y; qÞ¼
k½pðpÞvðxÞc c , for some k; c > DEMO The desired bilinear form is obtained
by redeﬁning the scales p, DEMO, and V so as to absorb the constants k and c.
DEMO
þ
k½pðqÞvðyÞ
Notes
This work was supported in part by grants from the Harry F. Guggenheim Foundation and from the
Advanced Research Projects Agency DEMO the Department of Defense and was monitored by O‰ce of Naval
Research under Contract N00014-78-C-0100 (ARPA Order No. 3469) under Subcontract 78-072-0722
from DEMO and Designs, Inc. to Perceptronics, Inc. We also thank the Center for Advanced Study in
the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford for its support.
DEMO are indebted to David H. Krantz for his help in the formulation of the appendix.
References
[1] Acze´ l, J. Lectures on Functional Equations and Their Applications. New York: Academic Press, 1966.
[2] Allais, M. ‘‘Le Comportement de l’Homme Rationnel devant le Risque, Critique des Postulats et Axi-
omes de l’Ecole Americaine,’’ Econometrica, 21 (1953), 503–546.
DEMO Anderson, N. H., and J. C. Shanteau. ‘‘Information Integration in Risky Decision Making,’’ Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 84 (1970), 441–451.
DEMO Arrow, K. J. Essays in the Theory of Risk-Bearing. Chicago: Markham, 1971.
[5] Barnes, J. D., and J. E. Reinmuth. ‘‘Comparing Imputed and Actual Utility Functions in a Competi-
tive Bidding Setting,’’ Decision DEMO, 7 (1976), 801–812.
580 Kahneman and Tversky
[6] Coombs, C. H. ‘‘Portfolio Theory and the Measurement of Risk,’’ in Human Judgment and Decision
Processes, ed. by M. F. Kaplan and S. Schwartz. New York: Academic Press, 1975, pp. 63–85.
[7] Davidson, D., P. Suppes, and S. Siegel. Decision-Making: An Experimental Approach. Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press, 1957.
[8] Debreu, G. ‘‘Topological Methods in Cardinal Utility Theory,’’ Mathematical Methods in the Social
Sciences, ed. by K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1960, pp.
16–26.
[9] Edwards, DEMO ‘‘Subjective Probabilities Inferred from Decisions,’’ Psychological Review, 69 (1962),DEMO
109–135.
[10] Ellsberg, D. ‘‘Risk, Ambiguity and the Savage Axioms,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75 (1961),
643–669.
[11] Fellner, DEMO ‘‘Distortion of Subjective Probabilities as a Reaction to Uncertainty,’’ Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 75 (1961), 670–690.
[12] ———. Probability and Proﬁt—A DEMO of Economic Behavior Along Bayesian Lines. Homewood,
Illinois: Richard D. DEMO, 1965.
[13] Fishburn, P. C. ‘‘Mean-Risk Analysis with Risk Associated with Below-Target Returns,’’ American
Economic Review, 67 (1977), 116–126.
[14] DEMO, P. C., and G. A. Kochenberger. ‘‘Two-Piece von Neumann-Morgenstern Utility Func-
tions,’’ forthcoming.
[15] Friedman, M., and L. J. Savage. ‘‘The DEMO Analysis of Choices Involving Risks,’’ Journal of
Political Economy, 56 (1948), 279–304.
[16] Fuchs, V. R. ‘‘From Bismark to Woodcock: DEMO ‘Irrational’ Pursuit of National Health Insurance,’’
Journal of Law and Economics, 19 (1976), 347–359.
[17] Galanter, E., and P. Pliner. DEMO Matching of Money against Other Continua,’’ in Sen-
sation and Measurement, ed. by H. R. Moskowitz et al. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, DEMO, pp. 65–76.
[18] Grayson, C. J. Decisions under Uncertainty: Drilling DEMO by Oil and Gas Operators. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Graduate School of DEMO, Harvard University, 1960.
[19] Green, P. E. ‘‘Risk Attitudes and DEMO Investment Decisions,’’ Chemical Engineering Progress,
59 (1963), 35–40.
DEMO Grether, D. M., and C. R. Plott. ‘‘Economic Theory of Choice and the Preference Reversal Phenom-
enon,’’ American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[21] Halter, A. N., and G. W. Dean. Decisions under Uncertainty. Cincinnati: South Western Publishing
Co., 1971.
[22] Hansson, B. ‘‘The Appropriateness of DEMO Expected Utility Model,’’ Erkenntnis, 9 (1975), 175–194.
[23] Helson, H. Adaptation-Level Theory. New York: Harper, 1964.
[24] Keeney, R. DEMO, and H. Rai¤a. Decisions with Multiple Objectives: Preferences and Value Tradeo¤s.
New York: Wiley, 1976.
[25] Krantz, D. H., D. R. DEMO, P. Suppes, and A. Tversky. Foundations of Measurement. New York:
Academic Press, 1971.
[26] Kunreuther, H., R. Ginsberg, L. Miller, P. Sagi, P. Slovic, B. Borkan, and N. Katz. Disaster Insur-
ance Protection: Public Policy Lessons. New York: Wiley, 1978.
[27] Lichtenstein, S., and P. Slovic. ‘‘Reversal of Preference Between Bids and Choices DEMO Gambling
Decisions,’’ Journal of Experimental Psychology, 89 (1971), 46–55.
[28] MacCrimmon, K. R., and S. Larsson. ‘‘Utility Theory: Axioms versus Paradoxes,’’ in Expected
Utility Hypothesis and the Allais Paradox, ed. by M. Allais and O. Hagen, forthcoming in Theory and
Decision.
Prospect Theory 581
[29] Markowitz, H. ‘‘The Utility of Wealth,’’ Journal of Political Economy, 60 (1952), 151–158.
[30] ———. Portfolio Selection. DEMO York: Wiley, 1959.
[31] McGlothlin, W. H. ‘‘Stability of Choices DEMO Uncertain Alternatives,’’ American Journal of Psy-
chology, 69 (1956), 604–615.
[32] Mosteller, F., and P. Nogee. ‘‘An Experimental Measurement of DEMO,’’ Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 59 (1951), 371–404.
[33] Pratt, J. W. ‘‘Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large,’’ Econometrica, 32 (1964), 122–136.
[34] Rai¤a, H. Decision Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices Under Uncertainty. Reading, Massa-
chusetts: Addison-Wesley, DEMO
[35] Roskies, R. ‘‘A Measurement Axiomatization for an Essentially Multiplicative Representation DEMO
Two Factors,’’ Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 2 (1965), 266–276.
[36] Savage, L. J. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley, 1954.
[37] Slovic, P., B. Fischho¤, S. Lichtenstein, B. Corrigan, and B. Coombs. ‘‘Preference for Insuring
against Probable Small Losses: Insurance Implications,’’ Journal of Risk and Insurance, 44 (1977),
237–258.
[38] Slovic, P., and A. Tversky. ‘‘Who Accepts Savage’s Axiom?,’’ Behavioral Science, 19 (1974), 368–373.
[39] Spetzler, C. S. ‘‘The Development of Corporate Risk Policy for Capital Investment Decisions,’’ IEEE
Transactions on DEMO Science and Cybernetics, SSC-4 (1968), 279–300.
[40] Swalm, R. DEMO ‘‘Utility Theory—Insights into Risk Taking,’’ Harvard Business Review, 44 (1966),
123–136.
[41] Tobin, J. ‘‘Liquidity Preferences as Behavior Towards Risk,DEMO Review of Economic Studies, 26 (1958),
65–86.
[42] Tversky, A. ‘‘Additivity, Utility, and Subjective Probability,’’ Journal of Mathematical Psychology,DEMO
(1967), 175–201.
[43] ———. ‘‘Intransitivity of Preferences,’’ Psychological Review, 76 (1969), 31–48.
[44] ———. ‘‘Elimination by Aspects: A Theory DEMO Choice,’’ Psychological Review, 79 (1972), 281–299.
[45] Tversky, DEMO, and D. Kahneman. ‘‘Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,’’ Science, 185
(1974), 1124–1131.
[46] van Dam, C. ‘‘Another Look at Inconsistency in Financial Decision-Making,’’ presented at the Sem-
inar on Recent DEMO in Finance and Monetary Economics, Cergy-Pontoise, March, 1975.
[47] von DEMO, J., and O. Morgenstern. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, DEMO: Prince-
ton University Press, 1944.
[48] Williams, A. C. ‘‘Attitudes DEMO Speculative Risks as an Indicator of Attitudes toward Pure Risks,’’
Journal of Risk and Insurance, 33 (1966), 577–586.

23 On the Elicitation of Preferences for Alternative Therapies
Barbara J. McNeil, Stephen G. Pauker, Harold C. Sox, Jr., and Amos Tversky
There is a growing appreciation in the general public and the medical profession DEMO
the need to incorporate patients’ preferences into medical decision making. To
achieve this goal, the physican must provide the patient with data about the possible
outcomes of the available therapies, and the patient must be able to comprehend and
use these data. In this chapter we investigate how DEMO use statistical information
regarding the possible outcomes of alternative therapies. We have focused on a par-
ticular medical problem (operable lung cancer) and DEMO the participants to choose
between surgery and radiation therapy on the basis of simple descriptions of their
possible consequences. Four variables were investigated: the input data presented to
the subjects (life expectancy or cumulative probability), the characterization or
framing of the outcomes (in terms of mortality or in terms of survival), the identiﬁ-
cation of the treatments (surgery or radiation therapy vs. unidentiﬁed treatments
labeled ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B’’), and DEMO population of respondents (physicians, patients, and
graduate students).
Methods
DEMO Clinical Problem
Lung cancer was selected for study because it o¤ers a clear-cut choice between two
alternative therapies—irradiation and surgery—that yield di¤erent patterns of DEMO
vival probabilities. A previous study of this problem, using a formal DEMO
approach,1,2 found that an appreciable number of patients preferred radiation ther-
apy to surgery despite the lower long-term survival associated with radiation DEMO
apy,3 presumably because it does not involve the risk of perioperative death.
As in the previous study on lung cancer, we used data reported by Mountain and
his colleagues on the results of surgery4,5 DEMO data reported by Hilton6 on the results
of radiation therapy for operable lung cancer. These reports and others indicate that
for 60-year-old patients treated DEMO surgery the average operative mortality rate is
10 per cent, and DEMO average ﬁve-year survival rate is about 34 per cent. The survival
rates at one, two, three, and four years are 68, 51, 40, and 35 per cent, respectively.
For radiation therapy there is DEMO no treatment mortality, and the ﬁve-year
survival rate is 22 per DEMO; survival rates at one, two, three, and four years are 77,
44, 28, and 23 per cent, respectively. Other data from the National Cancer Institute
on the excess risk of death from DEMO cancer and on age-speciﬁc annual mortality
rates were used to adjust the survival data to other age groups.7 The comparison of
584 McNeil, Pauker, Sox, and Tversky
the two treatments shows that surgery o¤ers better long-term prospects at the cost of
a greater immediate DEMO
Input Data
Two types of data were used. The ﬁrst type, DEMO cumulative-probability data,
included the probability of survival (or death) immediately after the treatment, one
year after the treatment, and ﬁve years DEMO the treatment. The one-year point was
chosen because it represents the short-term range in which survival after radiation
therapy is higher than survival after DEMO; the ﬁve-year point was chosen because
it is commonly used in DEMO to evaluate and compare alternative treatments.
The second type, called life-expectancy DEMO, included the probability of survival
(or death) immediately after the DEMO and the life expectancy associated with
each treatment—that is, the average DEMO of years lived after the treatment.
The survival curve describing the results after surgery has a longer tail (i.e., it is
more skewed DEMO the right) than the survival curve for radiation therapy. Thus, the
proportion of patients who will survive more than 10 years, for example, is greater
for surgery than for radiation therapy. Consequently, the use DEMO life expectancy,
which is a¤ected by the long tail, is DEMO to make surgery appear more attractive
than it would with the use of one-year and ﬁve-year survival rates, which are not
a¤ected by the long tail.
Identiﬁcation of Treatment
For about half the respondents, the input data were identiﬁed as resulting from
surgery or radiation therapy; for the remaining respondents, the treatments were
not identiﬁed and the alternatives were labeled ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B.’’ The input data
describing the results of A were DEMO to the results of surgery, and the data
describing the results DEMO B were identical to those of radiation therapy. This variation
was introduced to assess the extent to which choices are determined by prior con-
DEMO (or misconceptions) about surgery and radiation therapy.
Framing of Outcome
The cumulative probabilities presented to about half the subjects referred to survival
after DEMO particular time—e.g., to a 68 per cent chance of living for DEMO than one
year. The cumulative probabilities presented to the rest of the subjects referred to
mortality—e.g., to a 32 per cent chance of dying by the end of one year. Recent
work by cognitive psychologists on DEMO framing of decision problems indicates that
the characterization of outcomes in terms of the probability of survival rather than
the probability of death can DEMO a substantial e¤ect on people’s preferences.8,9
On the Elicitation of Preferences for Alternative Therapies 585
More speciﬁcally, this work suggested that the impact of perioperative mortality on
the comparison between DEMO two treatments would be greater when it was framed as
a di¤erence between mortality rates of 0 per cent and 10 per cent, than when it was
framed as a di¤erence between survival rates of 100 DEMO cent and 90 per cent. Because
the risk of perioperative death is the major disadvantage of surgery relative to radi-
ation therapy, we hypothesized that surgery would be selected more frequently when
the problem was described DEMO terms of the probability of living than when it was
described in terms of the probability of dying.
Subject Population
Three groups of respondents DEMO investigated: patients, physicians, and students.
None of the subjects were DEMO to have lung cancer. The patients were 238 men
with chronic medical problems who were being treated as outpatients by internists
at the Palo DEMO Veterans Administration Medical Center. Their ages ranged from
40 to 80 years, with an average age of 58 years, which is similar to DEMO age distribu-
tion of patients with lung cancer. The physicians were 424 radiologists whose ages
ranged from 28 to 67 years, with an average age of 43 years; these subjects were
taking postgraduate courses at the Harvard Medical School and the Brigham and
Women’s Hospital. Since physicians normally DEMO an essential role in the choice of
therapy, their own preferences DEMO of considerable interest. The third group con-
sisted of 491 graduate students from Stanford Business School, who had completed
several courses in statistics and decision theory. Their average age was 29 years. They
were included in DEMO study so that we could examine the e¤ects of age and analytic
training.
We expected the students, who were younger than both the patients and the
physicians, to choose surgery more often than the other two groups. We also
expected the physicians and the students, who had more formal training than the
patients, to be less a¤ected by the variation in framing.
Procedure
Each subject was assigned to one of four conditions DEMO by the combinations
of label (identiﬁed or unidentiﬁed) and frame (DEMO or dying). The number of sub-
jects in each group is shown in table 23.1. All subjects received both cumulative-
probability data and DEMO data, in that order. All subjects received the
input data appropriate DEMO their age group. Subjects who received the input data in
an identiﬁed format and with outcome presented as the probability of dying were
given DEMO following instructions.
586 McNeil, Pauker, Sox, and Tversky
Table 23.1
Numbers of Subjects Given Data in Various Ways
Outcome Presented as Outcome Presented as
Probability DEMO Dying Probability of Living
Treatment Treatment Treatment Treatment
Population Identiﬁed Unidentiﬁed Identiﬁed Unidentiﬁed
Patients 60 60 59 59
Physicians 80 135 87 122
Students DEMO 64 101 130
Surgery for lung cancer involves an operation on the lungs. Most patients are in the hospital
for two or three weeks DEMO have some pain around their incisions; they spend a month or DEMO
recuperating at home. After that, they generally feel ﬁne.
Radiation therapy DEMO lung cancer involves the use of radiation to kill the tumor and
requires coming to the hospital about four times a week for six DEMO Each treatment takes a
few minutes and during the treatment, patients DEMO on a table as if they were having an x-ray.
During the course of the treatment, some patients develop nausea and vomiting, but DEMO the
end of the six weeks they also generally feel ﬁne.
Thus, after the initial six or so weeks, patients treated with either DEMO or radiation ther-
apy feel about the same.
Next, the subjects DEMO presented with the following cumulative probability data,
which were also displayed in a table.
Of 100 people having surgery, 10 will die during treatment, 32 will have died by one year, and
66 will DEMO died by ﬁve years. Of 100 people having radiation therapy, none DEMO die during
treatment, 23 will die by one year, and 78 will die by ﬁve years.
Which treatment would you prefer?
After DEMO subjects made a choice, they were told that the above data DEMO the
experience of many hospitals and that they would now be asked to consider new
information pertaining to a speciﬁc hospital and to make DEMO new choice on the basis
of these data.
At this single hospital, 10 per cent of the patients who have surgery die during the perioper-
ative period. The patients who survive treatment have a life expectancy (e.g., average number
of remaining years) of 6.8 years. The life DEMO of all patients who undergo surgery
(including those who die in DEMO postoperative period) is 6.1 years. With radiation therapy,
nobody dies DEMO treatment, and the life expectancy of the patients who undergo radiation
DEMO is 4.7 years.
Which treatment would you prefer?
On the Elicitation of Preferences for Alternative Therapies 587
Table 23.2
Percentages DEMO Subjects Choosing Radiation Therapy over Surgery
Outcome and Treatment Variables
Dying Living
identiﬁed unidentiﬁed identiﬁed unidentiﬁed
Type of Data treatment treatment treatment treatment Overall
(No. of subjects) (336) (259) (247) (311) (DEMO)
Cumulative probability*
Patients 40 68 22 31 40
Physicians 50 62 16 51 47
Students 43 53 17 27 35
Overall 44 61 DEMO 37 40
Life expectancyy
Patients 35 50 19 27 28
Physicians 28 39 9 41 31
Students 21 41 9 24 22
Overall 25 DEMO 11 31 27
*Immediately after treatment and at one and ﬁve years thereafter.
y Probability of surviving or dying from immediate treatment plus life DEMO thereafter. The dichot-
omy between probability of dying and probability of living in this group applies only to the data concern-
ing the immediate DEMO period.
The subjects who received the data in an unidentiﬁed format were presented with
di¤erent background information:
Both treatment A and treatment B DEMO medications which are administered to the patient hos-
pitalized for cancer. Both are given intravenously and neither one has signiﬁcant side e¤ects.
Treatments A DEMO B are considered equal except in their survival rates.
The input data concerning cumulative probability and life expectancy were the
same as those for DEMO identiﬁed treatments except that surgery and radiation therapy
were replaced by ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B,’’ respectively. For the subjects who received the input
data DEMO in terms of the probability of survival, the probability of dying DEMO
replaced throughout by the probability of living. The patients were interviewed indi-
vidually. The physicians and the students responded to a written questionnaire.
Results
DEMO percentages of respondents who chose radiation therapy rather than surgery are
shown in table 23.2 for each of the experimental conditions. The results for DEMO
588 McNeil, Pauker, Sox, and Tversky
cumulative-probability condition and for the life-expectancy condition were sub-
mitted to two separate 3-by-2-by-2 analyses of variance DEMO an arcsin transforma-
tion.10 The e¤ects of all four independent variables were signiﬁcant ðP < 0:001Þ.
Moreover, table 23.2 reveals a highly regular pattern: with one minor exception there
are no ‘‘cross-over’’ interactions among the major dependent variables—input data,
identiﬁcation of treatment, and the outcome frame. For example, all entries under
‘‘cumulative probability’’ exceed the corresponding entries under ‘‘life expectancy.’’
We shall summarize the main e¤ects in turn.
Input Data
DEMO expected, subjects who had received life-expectancy data chose radiation therapy
less DEMO overall (27 per cent) than did subjects who had received cumulative-
probability data (40 per cent). An examination of individual choices revealed that 59
per cent of the subjects chose surgery under both types DEMO data and 26 per cent chose
radiation therapy under both types. Hence, 85 per cent of the respondents made
the same choice under both conditions. Fourteen per cent of the respondents chose
radiation therapy in the DEMO condition and surgery in the life-
expectancy condition; only 1 per DEMO made the opposite choices.
Identiﬁcation of Treatment
Overall, radiation therapy was DEMO 42 per cent of the time when it was not iden-
tiﬁed and only 26 per cent of the time when it was identiﬁed. DEMO, identiﬁcation
of the two treatments favors surgery over radiation therapy.
Framing DEMO Outcome
As predicted, surgery was relatively less attractive in the mortality DEMO (probability
of dying) than in the survival frame (probability of DEMO). On the average, radiation
therapy was preferred to surgery 42 DEMO cent of the time in the mortality frame and
25 per cent of the time in the survival frame.
Subject Population
Radiation therapy was DEMO popular among the students (28 per cent of all re-
sponses), somewhat more popular among the patients (34 per cent), and DEMO popu-
lar among the physicians (39 per cent). The general DEMO of preferences, however,
was very similar in all three groups DEMO large di¤erences in age, income, and
lifestyle.
On the Elicitation of Preferences for Alternative Therapies 589
Discussion
We presented DEMO large number of outpatients, physicians, and graduate students with
information describing the possible outcomes of two alternative therapies for lung
cancer. The respondents DEMO to comprehend and use these data. An interview
with the patients after the experiment indicated that they understood the data and
were able to DEMO important items of information. However, the choices of both
naive subjects (patients) and sophisticated subjects (physicians) were inﬂuenced by
several variations in the nature of the data and the form in which they were
DEMO
The ﬁnding that data on life expectancy favored surgery where as data on cumu-
lative probability favored radiation therapy is not surprising in view DEMO the fact that
the survival distribution for surgery is much more skewed than the survival distribu-
tion for radiation therapy. However, this result illustrates the di‰culty of selecting
appropriate summary data; seemingly reasonable statistics (e.g., the mean or the
median of a distribution) are likely to bias the decision maker in favor of one therapy
or another.
The ﬁnding DEMO radiation therapy was less attractive when the treatments were
identiﬁed indicates that people relied more on preexisting beliefs regarding the treat-
ments than on DEMO statistical data presented to them. We do not know, however,
DEMO these beliefs were based on valid evidence or reﬂected a widely shared bias
against radiation therapy. In the former case, the input data should be expanded to
include additional information that was presumably used by the DEMO in the
identiﬁed format only. In the latter case, subjects should DEMO informed before the elic-
itation process in an attempt to reduce their biases.
Perhaps our most notable ﬁnding is the e¤ect on people’s choices DEMO presenting the
data in terms of survival or death. Surgery appeared to be much more attractive
when the outcomes were framed in terms of DEMO probability of survival rather than in
terms of the probability of death. We attribute this result to the fact that the risk of
perioperative DEMO looms larger when it is presented in terms of mortality than when
it is presented in terms of survival. Unlike the preceding e¤ects, which can be justiﬁed
or at least rationalized, this e¤ect of using di¤erent terminology to describe outcome
represents a cognitive illusion. The e¤ect observed in DEMO study is large (25 per cent
vs. 42 per cent) and consistent: It holds for both cumulative-probability and life-
expectancy data, for DEMO identiﬁed and unidentiﬁed treatments, and for all three
populations of subjects. DEMO to our surprise, the e¤ect was not generally smaller for
the DEMO (who had considerable experience in evaluating medical data) or for
590 McNeil, Pauker, Sox, and Tversky
the graduate students (who DEMO received statistical training) than for the patients
(who had neither).
One might be tempted to conclude from this study that there is DEMO point in devis-
ing methods for the explicit elicitation of patients’ preferences, since they are so sus-
ceptible to the way the data are presented, and to implicit suggestions and other
biases. However, it should DEMO noted that the preferences expressed by the physicians,
which are likely to play an important part in the advice they give to patients, were
subject to the same biases. In addition, there is little reason to believe that more
informal procedures in which the treatments are described DEMO general terms without
quantitative statistical data are less susceptible to the e¤ects of di¤erent methods of
presentation.
Variations in types of data presentation can DEMO used to assess the sensitivity of
preferences with respect to the available alternatives. If a patient prefers surgery over
radiation therapy, for example, DEMO the data are presented as cumulative proba-
bilities or as life expectancy and whether the probabilities are presented in terms of
mortality or in DEMO of survival, the preference may be assumed to be reasonably
certain. DEMO, on the other hand, a change of presentation leads to a reversal of prefer-
ence, then additional data, discussions, or analyses are probably needed. We suggest
that an awareness of the e¤ects of presentation DEMO physicians and patients could
help reduce bias and improve the quality of medical decision making.
Notes
Supported in part by the Henry J. Kaiser DEMO Foundation. Dr. Pauker is a recipient of a research
Career Development Award (K04-GM-00349).
We are indebted to our volunteers for the generous gift of their time for this study.
References
1. Rai¤a H. Decision analysis: introductory lectures on choices under uncertainty. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1968.
DEMO Keeney RL, and Rai¤a H. Decision with multiple objectives: preferences and value tradeo¤s. New
York: John Wiley, 1976.
3. McNeil BJ, Weichselbaum R, and Pauker SG. Fallacy of the ﬁve-year survival in lung cancer. N Engl J
Med. 1978; 299:1397–401.
4. Mountain CT. The relationship of prognosis to morphology and the anatomic extent of disease: studies
of a new clinical staging system. In: Israel L, and Chahinian AP, eds. Lung cancer: natural history, prog-
nosis, and therapy. New York: Academic Press, 1976:107–40.
5. Mountain CF, Carr DT, and DEMO WAD. A system for clinical staging of lung cancer. Am J
Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med. 1974; 120:130–8.
On the Elicitation of Preferences for Alternative Therapies 591
6. Hilton G. DEMO position relating to cancer of the lung: results with radio-therapy alone. DEMO
1960; 15:17–8.
7. Axtell LM, Cutler SJ, and Myers DEMO, eds. End results in cancer (report no. 4). Bethesda, DEMO:
National Cancer Institute, 1972. (DHEW publication no. (NIH) 73-272).
8. Kahneman D, and Tversky A. Prospect theory: an analysis DEMO decision under risk. Econometrica. 1979;
47:263–91.
9. Tversky A, DEMO Kahneman D. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science. 1981;
211:453–8.
10. Snedecor GW, and Cochran WG. Statistical methods. 6th ed. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University
Press, 1967.

24 Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions
Amos Tversky and Daniel DEMO
The modern theory of decision making under risk emerged from a logical analysis
of games of chance rather than from a psychological analysis of DEMO and value.
The theory was conceived as a normative model of an idealized decision maker, not
as a description of the behavior of real people. In Schumpeter’s words, it ‘‘has a
much better claim to being called a logic of choice than a psychology of value’’
(1954, DEMO 1058).
The use of a normative analysis to predict and explain actual behavior is defended
by several arguments. First, people are generally thought to be e¤ective in pursuing
their goals, particularly when they have incentives and opportunities to learn from
experience. It seems reasonable, then, to DEMO choice as a maximization process.
Second, competition favors rational individuals and DEMO Optimal decisions
increase the chances of survival in a competitive environment, DEMO a minority of
rational individuals can sometimes impose rationality on the whole market. Third,
the intuitive appeal of the axioms of rational choice DEMO it plausible that the
theory derived from these axioms should provide an acceptable account of choice
behavior.
The thesis of the present chapter is DEMO, in spite of these a priori arguments, the
logic of choice does not provide an adequate foundation for a descriptive theory of
decision DEMO We argue that the deviations of actual behavior from the normative
model are too widespread to be ignored, too systematic to be dismissed as random
error, and too fundamental to be accommodated by relaxing the normative system.
We ﬁrst sketch an analysis of the foundations of the theory DEMO rational choice and
then show that the most basic rules of the theory are commonly violated by decision
makers. We conclude from these ﬁndings DEMO the normative and the descriptive
analyses cannot be reconciled. A descriptive model of choice is presented, which
accounts for preferences that are anomalous in the normative theory.
A Hierarchy of Normative Rules
The major achievement of DEMO modern theory of decision under risk is the derivation
of the expected utility rule from simple principles of rational choice that make
no reference DEMO long-run considerations (von Neumann and Morgenstern 1944).
The axiomatic analysis DEMO the foundations of expected utility theory reveals four
substantive assumptions—cancellation, transitivity, dominance, and invariance—
besides the more technical assumptions of comparability and continuity. The sub-
594 Tversky and Kahneman
stantive assumptions can be ordered by their normative DEMO, from the cancellation
condition, which has been challenged by many theorists, to invariance, which has
been accepted by all. We brieﬂy discuss DEMO assumptions.
Cancellation. The key qualitative property that gives rise to expected utility theory is
the ‘‘cancellation’’ or elimination of any state of the world DEMO yields the same out-
come regardless of one’s choice. This notion has been captured by di¤erent formal
properties, such as the substitution axiom of von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944),
the extended sure-thing principle of DEMO (1954), and the independence condition
of Luce and Krantz (1971). Thus, if A is preferred to B, then the prospect DEMO winning
A if it rains tomorrow (and nothing otherwise) should be preferred to the prospect of
winning B if it rains tomorrow because DEMO two prospects yield the same outcome
(nothing) if there is no rain tomorrow. Cancellation is necessary to represent prefer-
ence between prospects as DEMO maximization of expected utility. The main argument
for cancellation is that only one state will actually be realized, which makes it rea-
sonable to evaluate the outcomes of options separately for each state. The choice
between DEMO should therefore depend only on states in which they yield di¤erent
outcomes.
Transitivity. A basic assumption in models of both risky and riskless choice DEMO the
transitivity of preference. This assumption is necessary and essentially su‰cient for
the representation of preference by an ordinal utility scale u such that DEMO is preferred
to B whenever uðAÞ > uðBÞ . Thus transitivity is satisﬁed if it is possible to assign to
each option a value DEMO does not depend on the other available options. Transitivity
is likely to hold when the options are evaluated separately but not when the con-
DEMO of an option depend on the alternative to which it is compared, as implied,
for example, by considerations of regret. A common DEMO for transitivity is that
cyclic preferences can support a ‘‘money pump,’’ in which the intransitive person is
induced to pay for a series DEMO exchanges that returns to the initial option.
Dominance. This is perhaps the most obvious principle of rational choice: if one
option is better than another in one state and at least as good in all other DEMO, the
dominant option should be chosen. A slightly stronger condition—called stochastic
DEMO that, for unidimensional risky prospects, A is preferred to B if
the cumulative distribution of A is to the right of the cumulative DEMO of B.
Dominance is both simpler and more compelling than cancellation and transitivity,
and it serves as the cornerstone of the normative theory DEMO choice.
Invariance. An essential condition for a theory of choice that claims normative status
is the principle of invariance: di¤erent representations of the same choice problem
should yield the same preference. That is, the preference between options should be
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 595
independent of their description. DEMO characterizations that the decision maker,
on reﬂection, would view as DEMO descriptions of the same problem should lead
to the same choice—even without the beneﬁt of such reﬂection. This principle of
invariance (or extensionality [Arrow 1982]), is so basic that it is tacitly assumed in
the DEMO of options rather than explicitly stated as a testable axiom. For
example, decision models that describe the objects of choice as random variables all
assume that alternative representations of the same random variables should be
treated DEMO Invariance captures the normative intuition that variations of form that
do not a¤ect the actual outcomes should not a¤ect the choice. A related concept,DEMO
called consequentialism, has been discussed by Hammond (1985).
The four principles underlying expected utility theory can be ordered by their
normative appeal. DEMO and dominance seem essential, transitivity could be
questioned, and cancellation has been rejected by many authors. Indeed, the inge-
nious counterexamples of Allais (1953) and Ellsberg (1961) led several theorists to
abandon cancellation DEMO the expectation principle in favor of more general repre-
sentations. Most of these models assume transitivity, dominance, and invariance
(e.g., Hansson 1975; Allais 1979; Hagen 1979; Machina 1982; Quiggin 1982; Weber
1982; Chew 1983; Fishburn 1983; Schmeidler 1984; Segal 1984; Yaari 1984; Luce
and Narens 1985). Other developments abandon transitivity but maintain invariance
DEMO dominance (e.g., Bell 1982; Fishburn 1982, 1984; Loomes and DEMO 1982).
These theorists responded to observed violations of cancellation and transitivity by
weakening the normative theory in order to retain its status as DEMO descriptive model.
However, this strategy cannot be extended to the failures DEMO dominance and invari-
ance that we shall document. Because invariance and dominance are normatively
essential and descriptively invalid, a theory of rational decision cannot provide an
adequate description of choice behavior.
We next illustrate failures of DEMO and dominance and then review a de-
scriptive analysis that traces these failures to the joint e¤ects of the rules that govern
the framing DEMO prospects, the evaluation of outcomes, and the weighting of proba-
bilities. Several phenomena of choice that support the present account are described.
Failures DEMO Invariance
In this section we consider two illustrative examples in which the condition of invari-
ance is violated and discuss some of the factors DEMO produce these violations.
The ﬁrst example comes from a study of preferences between medical treatments
(McNeil et al. 1982). Respondents were given statistical information about the out-
596 Tversky and Kahneman
comes of two treatments of lung cancer. The DEMO statistics were presented to some
respondents in terms of mortality rates and to others in terms of survival rates. The
respondents then indicated their DEMO treatment. The information was presented
as follows.1
Problem 1 (Survival frame)DEMO
Surgery: Of 100 people having surgery 90 live through the post-operative DEMO, 68 are alive
at the end of the ﬁrst year and DEMO are alive at the end of ﬁve years.
Radiation Therapy: Of DEMO people having radiation therapy all live through the treatment, 77
are DEMO at the end of one year and 22 are alive at the end of ﬁve years.
Problem 1 (Mortality frame)
Surgery: Of DEMO people having surgery 10 die during surgery or the post-operative period, DEMO
die by the end of the ﬁrst year and 66 die by the end of ﬁve years.
Radiation Therapy: Of 100 people having radiation therapy, none die during treatment, 23 die
by the end of DEMO year and 78 die by the end of ﬁve years.
The inconsequential di¤erence in formulation produced a marked e¤ect. The overall
percentage of respondents DEMO favored radiation therapy rose from 18% in the sur-
vival frameradiation therapy over surgery evidently looms larger when stated as a reduction ofðN ¼ DEMO to 44% in the mortality frame ðN ¼ 336Þ. The advantage of
the risk of immediate death from 10% to 0% rather than as DEMO increase from 90% to
100% in the rate of survival. The framing e¤ect was not smaller for experienced
physicians or for statistically sophisticated business DEMO than for a group of
clinic patients.
Our next example concerns decisions between conjunctions of risky prospects
with monetary outcomes. Each respondent made two DEMO, one between favor-
able prospects and one between unfavorable prospects (Tversky and Kahneman
1981, p. 454). It was assumed that the two selected prospects would be played
independently.
Problem 2 ðN ¼ 150Þ. Imagine DEMO you face the following pair of concurrent decisions. First
examine both decisions, then indicate the options you prefer.
Decision (i) Choose between:
A. a sure gain of $240 [84%]
B. 25% chance to gain DEMO and 75% chance to gain nothing [16%]
Decision (ii) Choose between:
C. a sure loss of $750 [13%]
D. 75% chance to DEMO $1000 and 25% chance to lose nothing [87%]
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 597
The total number of DEMO in denoted by N , and the percentage who chose
each option is indicated in brackets. (Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the data were
obtained DEMO undergraduate students at Stanford University and at the University
of British Columbia.) The majority choice in decision i is risk averse, while the
DEMO choice in decision ii is risk seeking. This is a common pattern: choices
involving gains are usually risk averse, and choices involving losses DEMO often risk
seeking—except when the probability of winning or losing is small (Fishburn and
Kochenberger 1979; Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Hershey and Schoemaker 1980).
Because the subjects considered the two decisions simultaneously, they expressed,
in e¤ect, a preference for the portfolio A and D over the portfolio B and C. How-
ever, the preferred portfolio is actually dominated by the rejected one! The combined
options are as follows.
A & D: 25% chance to win $240 and 75% chance to lose DEMO
B & C: 25% chance to win $250 and 75% chance DEMO lose $750.
When the options are presented in this aggregated form, DEMO dominant option is
invariably chosen. In the format of problem 2, DEMO, 73% of respondents chose
the dominated combination A and D, and only 3% chose B and C. The contrast
between the two formats DEMO a violation of invariance. The ﬁndings also sup-
port the general point that failures of invariance are likely to produce violations of
stochastic dominance DEMO vice versa.
The respondents evidently evaluated decisions i and ii separately in problem 2,
where they exhibited the standard pattern of risk aversion DEMO gains and risk seeking in
losses. People who are given these problems are very surprised to learn that the
combination of two preferences that DEMO considered quite reasonable led them to
select a dominated option. The same pattern of results was also observed in a scaled-
down version of DEMO 2, with real monetary payo¤ (see Tversky and Kahneman
1981, DEMO 458).
As illustrated by the preceding examples, variations in the DEMO of decision
problems produce systematic violations of invariance and dominance that cannot be
defended on normative grounds. It is instructive to examine two mechanisms DEMO
could ensure the invariance of preferences: canonical representations and the use DEMO
expected actuarial value.
Invariance would hold if all formulations of the same prospect were transformed
to a standard canonical representation (e.g., a cumulative DEMO distribution of
the same random variable) because the various versions would DEMO all be evaluated
in the same manner. In problem 2, for DEMO, invariance and dominance would
598 Tversky and Kahneman
both be preserved if the outcomes of the DEMO decisions were aggregated prior to
evaluation. Similarly, the same choice would DEMO made in both versions of the medical
problem if the outcomes were coded in terms of one dominant frame (e.g., rate of
survival)DEMO The observed failures of invariance indicate that people do not sponta-
neously aggregate concurrent prospects or transform all outcomes into a common
frame.
The DEMO to construct a canonical representation in decision problems contrasts
with other cognitive tasks in which such representations are generated automatically
and e¤ortlessly. In particular, our visual experience consists largely of canonical
representations: objects do not appear to change in size, shape, brightness, or color
when we move around them or when illumination varies. A white circle seen from a
DEMO angle in dim light appears circular and white, not ellipsoid and DEMO Canonical
representations are also generated in the process of language comprehension, DEMO
listeners quickly recode much of what they hear into an abstract propositional form
that no longer discriminates, for example, between the active and DEMO passive voice
and often does not distinguish what was actually said from what was implied or
presupposed (Clark and Clark 1977). Unfortunately, DEMO mental machinery that
transforms percepts and sentences into standard forms does not automatically apply
to the process of choice.
Invariance could be satisﬁed even DEMO the absence of a canonical representation if
the evaluation of prospects were separately linear, or nearly linear, in probability and
monetary value. If DEMO ordered risky prospects by their actuarial values, invari-
ance and dominance DEMO always hold. In particular, there would be no di¤erence
between the DEMO and the survival versions of the medical problem. Because the
evaluation of outcomes and probabilities is generally non-linear, and because people
do not spontaneously construct canonical representations of decisions, invariance
commonly fails. Normative models of choice, which assume invariance, therefore
cannot provide an adequate descriptive account of DEMO behavior. In the next
section we present a descriptive account of risky choice, called prospect theory, and
explore its consequences. Failures of invariance DEMO explained by framing e¤ects that
control the representation of options, in DEMO with the nonlinearities of value
and belief.
Framing and Evaluation of Outcomes
Prospect theory distinguishes two phases in the choice process: a phase of framing
and editing, followed by a phase of evaluation (Kahneman and DEMO 1979). The
ﬁrst phase consists of a preliminary analysis of the decision problem, which frames
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 599
the e¤ective acts, contingencies, and outcomes. Framing is controlled by the manner
in which the choice problem is presented as well as by norms, habits, and expec-
DEMO of the decision maker. Additional operations that are performed prior to
evaluation include cancellation of common components and the elimination of
options that are DEMO to be dominated by others. In the second phase, the framed
DEMO are evaluated, and the prospect of highest value is selected. The DEMO
distinguishes two ways of choosing between prospects: by detecting that one DEMO
nates another or by comparing their values.
For simplicity, we conﬁne DEMO discussion to simple gambles with numerical proba-
bilities and monetary outcomes. Let ðx; p; y; qÞ denote a prospect that yields x with
probability p and y with probability q and that preserves the status DEMO with proba-
bility ð1  p qÞ. According to prospect theory, DEMO are values vðÞ, deﬁned on
gains and losses, and decision weights pðÞ, deﬁned on stated probabilities, such that
the overall value of DEMO prospect equals pðpÞvðxÞþ pðqÞvðyÞ. A slight modiﬁcation is
required if all outcomes of a prospect have the same sign.2
The Value Function
Following Markowitz (1952), outcomes are expressed in prospect theory as positive
or negative DEMO (gains or losses) from a neutral reference outcome, which is
DEMO a value of zero. Unlike Markowitz, however, we propose that the value
function is commonly S shaped, concave above the reference point, DEMO convex
below it, as illustrated in ﬁgure 24.1. Thus the di¤erence DEMO subjective value between
a gain of $100 and a gain of $200 is greater than the subjective di¤erence between a
gain of $1,100 DEMO a gain of $1,200. The same relation between value di¤erences
holds for the corresponding losses. The proposed function expresses the property that
the DEMO of a marginal change decreases with the distance from the reference point
in either direction. These hypotheses regarding the typical shape of the value DEMO
may not apply to ruinous losses or to circumstances in which particular amounts
assume special signiﬁcance.
A signiﬁcant property of the value function, called loss aversion, is that the re-
sponse to losses is more extreme than the response to gains. The common reluctance
to accept a fair DEMO on the toss of a coin suggests that the displeasure of losing a sum
of money exceeds the pleasure of winning the same amount. DEMO the proposed value
function is (i) deﬁned on gains and losses, (ii) generally concave for gains and convex
for losses, and (iii) steeper for losses than for gains. These properties of the value
function have been supported in many studies of risky choice involving monetary
DEMO (Fishburn and Kochenberger 1979; Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Hershey
and DEMO 1980; Payne, Laughhunn, and Crum 1980) and human lives (DEMO
600 Tversky and Kahneman
Figure 24.1
A typical value function.
sky 1977; Eraker and Sox 1981; Tversky and Kahneman 1981; Fischho¤ 1983). DEMO
aversion may also contribute to the observed discrepancies between the amount of
money people are willing to pay for a good and the compensation DEMO demand to
give it up (Bishop and Heberlein 1979; Knetsch and Sinden 1984). This e¤ect is
implied by the value function if DEMO good is valued as a gain in the former context
and as a loss in the latter.
Framing Outcomes
The framing of outcomes and DEMO contrast between traditional theory and the present
analysis are illustrated in the following problems.
Problem 3 ðN
between
¼
126Þ: Assume yourself richer by $300 than you are today. You have to choose
a sure gain DEMO $100 [72%]
50% chance to gain $200 and 50% chance to gain nothing [28%]
Problem 4 ðN
between
¼
128Þ: Assume yourself richer by $500 than you are today. You have to choose
a sure loss DEMO $100 [36%]
50% chance to lose nothing and 50% chance to lose $200 [64%]
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 601
As implied by the DEMO function, the majority choice is risk averse in problem 3 and
DEMO seeking in problem 4, although the two problems are essentially identical. DEMO
both cases one faces a choice between $400 for sure and an even chance of $500 or
$300. Problem 4 is obtained from problem DEMO by increasing the initial endowment by
$200 and subtracting this amount from both options. This variation has a substantial
e¤ect on preferences. Additional questions DEMO that variations of $200 in initial
wealth have little or no e¤ect on choices. Evidently, preferences are quite insensitive
to small changes of wealth but highly sensitive to corresponding changes in reference
point. These observations show DEMO the e¤ective carriers of values are gains and
losses, or changes DEMO wealth, rather than states of wealth as implied by the rational
DEMO
The common pattern of preferences observed in problems 3 and 4 is of special
interest because it violates not only expected utility theory but DEMO all other
normatively based models of choice. In particular, these data DEMO inconsistent with
the model of regret advanced by Bell (1982) and by Loomes and Sugden (1982) and
axiomatized by Fishburn (1982). This follows from the fact that problems 3 and 4
yield identical DEMO and an identical regret structure. Furthermore, regret theory
cannot accommodate the DEMO of risk aversion in problem 3 and risk seeking
in problem 4—even without the corresponding changes in endowment that make the
problems extensionally equivalent.
DEMO of reference can be induced by di¤erent decompositions of outcomes into
risky and riskless components, as in the above problems. The reference point can
also be shifted by a mere labeling of outcomes, as illustrated in the following prob-
lems (Tversky and Kahneman 1981, p. 453).
DEMO 5 ðN ¼ 152Þ: Imagine that the U.S. is preparing for DEMO outbreak of an unusual Asian
disease, which is expected to kill DEMO people. Two alternative programs to combat the disease
have been proposed. Assume that the exact scientiﬁc estimates of the consequences of the
programs are DEMO follows:
If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be DEMO [72%]
If Program B is adopted, there is 1=3 probability that DEMO people will be saved, and 2=3 prob-
ability that no people DEMO be saved. [28%]
In problem 5 the outcomes are stated in positive terms (lives saved), and the majority
choice is accordingly risk averse. The prospect of certainly saving 200 lives is more
attractive than a DEMO prospect of equal expected value. A second group of
respondents was given the same cover story with the following descriptions of the
alternative programs.
602 Tversky and Kahneman
Problem 6 ðN ¼ 155Þ:
If Program DEMO is adopted 400 people will die. [22%]
If Program D is adopted there is 1=3 probability that nobody will die, and 2=3 probability that
600 people will die. [78%]
In problem 6 the outcomes are stated DEMO negative terms (lives lost), and the majority
choice is accordingly DEMO seeking. The certain death of 400 people is less acceptable
than a two-thirds chance that 600 people will die. Problems 5 and 6, however, are
essentially identical. They di¤er only in that the former is framed in terms of the
number of lives saved (relative to an expected loss of 600 lives if no action is taken),
whereas the latter is framed in terms of the number of lives lost.
On DEMO occasions we presented both versions to the same respondents and
discussed with them the inconsistent preferences evoked by the two frames. Many
respondents expressed DEMO wish to remain risk averse in the ‘‘lives saved’’ version and
risk seeking in the ‘‘lives lost’’ version, although they also expressed a wish for their
answers to be consistent. In the persistence of their appeal, framing e¤ects resemble
visual illusions more than computational errors.
Discounts and Surcharges
DEMO the most distinctive intellectual contribution of economic analysis is the
systematic consideration of alternative opportunities. A basic principle of economic
thinking is that opportunity DEMO and out-of-pocket costs should be treated alike.
Preferences should depend only on relevant di¤erences between options, not on how
these di¤erences are labeled. This principle runs counter to the psychological ten-
dencies that make preferences susceptible DEMO superﬁcial variations in form. In partic-
ular, a di¤erence that favors DEMO A over outcome B can sometimes be framed
either as an advantage of A or as a disadvantage of B by suggesting either B DEMO A as
the neutral reference point. Because of loss aversion, the DEMO will loom larger
when A is neutral and B-A is evaluated as a loss than when B is neutral and A-B is
evaluated as DEMO gain. The signiﬁcance of such variations of framing has been noted in
several contexts.
Thaler (1980) drew attention to the e¤ect of labeling DEMO di¤erence between two
prices as a surcharge or a discount. It is easier to forgo a discount than to accept a
surcharge because the DEMO price di¤erence is valued as a gain in the former case and
as a loss in the latter. Indeed, the credit card lobby is said to insist that any price
di¤erence between cash and card purchases DEMO be labeled a cash discount rather
than a credit surcharge. A similar idea could be invoked to explain why the price
response to slack DEMO often takes the form of discounts or special concessions
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 603
(Stigler and Kindahl 1970). Customers may be expected to show less resistance to
the eventual DEMO of such temporary arrangements than to outright price
increases. Judgments of fairness exhibit the same pattern (Kahneman, Knetsch, and
Thaler, in this DEMO).
Schelling (1981) has described a striking framing e¤ect in a context of tax policy.
He points out that the tax table can DEMO constructed by using as a default case either
the childless family (DEMO is in fact done) or, say, the modal two-child family. DEMO tax
di¤erence between a childless family and a two-child family is naturally framed as an
exemption (for the two-child family) in the ﬁrst DEMO and as a tax premium (on the
childless family) in the second frame. This seemingly innocuous di¤erence has a large
e¤ect on judgments DEMO the desired relation between income, family size, and tax.
Schelling reported that his students rejected the idea of granting the rich a larger
DEMO than the poor in the ﬁrst frame but favored a larger tax premium on the
childless rich than on the childless poor in the DEMO frame. Because the exemption
and the premium are alternative labels for the same tax di¤erences in the two cases,
the judgments violate invariance. DEMO the consequences of a public policy in
positive or in negative terms can greatly alter its appeal.
The notion of a money illusion is DEMO applied to workers’ willingness to
accept, in periods of high inﬂation, increases in nominal wages that do not protect
their real income—although they DEMO strenuously resist equivalent wage cuts in
the absence of inﬂation. The essence of the illusion is that, whereas a cut in the
nominal wage is always recognized as a loss, a nominal increase that does not pre-
serve real income may be treated as a gain. Another manifestation DEMO the money
illusion was observed in a study of the perceived fairness of economic actions (Kah-
neman, Knetsch, and Thaler, in press)DEMO Respondents in a telephone interview eval-
uated the fairness of the action described in the following vignette, which was
presented in two versions that di¤ered only in the bracketed clauses.
A company is making a small DEMO It is located in a community experiencing a recession with
substantial unemployment [but no inﬂation/and inﬂation of 12%]. The company decides to
[decrease DEMO and salaries 7%/increase salaries only 5%] this year.
Although the loss of real income is very similar in the two versions, the proportion of
respondents who judged the action of the company ‘‘unfair’’ or ‘‘very DEMO was
62% for a nominal reduction but only 22% for a nominal increase.
Bazerman (1983) has documented framing e¤ects in experimental studies of DEMO
gaining. He compared the performance of experimental subjects when the outcomes
of bargaining were formulated as gains or as losses. Subjects who bargained over DEMO
allocation of losses more often failed to reach agreement and more often failed to
604 Tversky and Kahneman
discover a Pareto-optimal solution. Bazerman attributed these observations DEMO the
general propensity toward risk seeking in the domain of losses, DEMO may increase
the willingness of both participants to risk the negative consequences of a deadlock.
Loss aversion presents an obstacle to bargaining whenever the DEMO evalu-
ate their own concessions as losses and the concessions obtained from the other party
as gains. In negotiating over missiles, for example, DEMO subjective loss of security
associated with dismantling a missile may loom larger than the increment of security
produced by a similar action on the DEMO part. If the two parties both assign a
two-to-one ratio to the values of the concessions they make and of those they obtain,
DEMO resulting four-to-one gap may be di‰cult to bridge. Agreement will be much
easier to achieve by negotiators who trade in ‘‘bargaining chips’’ that are DEMO
equally, regardless of whose hand they are in. In this mode DEMO trading, which may be
common in routine purchases, loss aversion tends to disappear (Kahneman and
Tversky 1984).
The Framing and Weighting of Chance Events
In expected-utility theory, the utility of each possible outcome is weighted by its
probability. In prospect theory, the value of an uncertain outcome is multiplied by a
decision weight pðpÞ, which is a monotonic function of p but is not a probability.
The weighting function p DEMO the following properties. First, impossible events are
discarded, that is, DEMO 0, and the scale is normalized so that pð1Þ¼ 1, but the
function is not well behaved near the end points (Kahneman and Tversky 1979).
Second, for low probabilities, pðpÞ > p, but pðpÞþ pð1

pÞ a 1 (subcertainty).
Thus low probabilities are overweighted, moderate and high probabilities are
underweighted, and the latter e¤ect DEMO more pronounced than the former. Third,
pð prÞ=pðpÞ < pð pqrÞ=pð pqÞ for all 0 < p; q; r a 1 (subproportionality). That is,
for any ﬁxed probability ratio r, the ratio of decision weights is closer to unity when
the probabilities are low DEMO when they are high, for example, pð:1Þ=pð:2Þ >
DEMO:4Þ=pð:8Þ . A hypothetical weighting function that satisﬁes these properties is shown
in ﬁgure 24.2. Its consequences are discussed in the next section.3
DEMO Dominance
The major characteristic of the weighting function is the overweighting of proba-
bility di¤erences involving certainty and impossibility, for example, pð1:0Þ DEMO:9Þ or
pð:1Þ pð0Þ , relative to comparable di¤erences in the middle of the scale, for exam-
ple, pð:3Þ pð:2Þ. DEMO particular, for small p, p is generally subadditive, for example,
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 605
Figure 24.2
A typical DEMO function.
pð:01Þþ pð:06Þ > pð:07Þ. This property can lead to violations of dominance, as
illustrated in the following pair of problems.
Problem 7 ðN ¼ 88Þ. Consider the following two lotteries, described by the percentage of
marbles of di¤erent colors in each box and the DEMO of money you win or lose depending on
the color of a randomly drawn marble. Which lottery do you prefer?
Option A
Option DEMO
90% white 6% red 1% green 1% blue 2% yellow
$0 win $45 win $30 lose $15 lose $15
90% white 6% red 1% DEMO 1% blue 2% yellow
$0 win $45 win $45 lose $10 lose $15
It is easy to see that option B dominates option A: for every color the outcome of B
is at least as desirable DEMO the outcome of A. Indeed, all respondents chose B over A.
DEMO observation is hardly surprising because the relation of dominance is highly
transparent, so the dominated prospect is rejected without further processing. The
next problem is e¤ectively identical to problem 7, except that colors yielding identical
outcomes (red and green in B and yellow and blue in A) DEMO combined. We have
proposed that this operation is commonly performed by the decision maker if no
dominated prospect is detected.
606 Tversky and Kahneman
Problem 8
Option C
Option D
The formulation DEMO problem 8 simpliﬁes the options but masks the relation of domi-
nance. Furthermore, it enhances the attractiveness of C, which has two positive DEMO
comes and one negative, relative to D, which has two negative outcomes and one
positive. As an inducement to consider the options carefully, participants were
informed that one-tenth of them, selected at random, would DEMO play the gam-
bles they chose. Although this announcement aroused much excitement, 58% of the
participants chose the dominated alternative C. In answer to another question the
majority of respondents also assigned a higher cash equivalent DEMO C than to D. These
results support the following propositions. (i) Two formulations of the same problem
elicit di¤erent preferences, in violation of invariance. (ii) The dominance rule is
obeyed when its application is DEMO (iii) Dominance is masked by a frame in
which the inferior option yields a more favorable outcome in an identiﬁed state of
the DEMO (e.g., drawing a green marble). (iv) The discrepant preferences are consis-
tent with the subadditivity of decision weights. The role of DEMO may be
illuminated by a perceptual example. Figure 24.3 presents the well-known Mu¨ ller-
Lyer illusion: the top line appears longer than the bottom line, although it is in fact
shorter. In ﬁgure 24.4, the DEMO patterns are embedded in a rectangular frame, which
makes it apparent DEMO the protruding bottom line is longer than the top one. This
judgment has the nature of an inference, in contrast to the perceptual impression that
mediates judgment in ﬁgure 24.3. Similarly, the ﬁner partition introduced in problem
7 makes it possible to conclude that option D is superior DEMO C, without assessing their
values. Whether the relation of dominance is DEMO depends on framing as well as
on the sophistication and experience of the decision maker. The dominance relation
in problems 8 and 1 could DEMO transparent to a sophisticated decision maker, although
it was not transparent DEMO most of our respondents.
Certainty and Pseudocertainty
The overweighting of outcomes that are obtained with certainty relative to outcomes
that are merely probable gives DEMO to violations of the expectation rule, as ﬁrst
noted by Allais (1953). The next series of problems (Tversky and Kahneman 1981,
ðN ¼ 124Þ. Which lottery do you prefer?
90% white 6% DEMO 1% green 3% yellow
$0 win $45 win $30 lose $15
90% white 7% red 1% green 2% yellow
$0 win $45 lose $10 DEMO $15
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 607
Figure 24.3
The Mu¨ DEMO illusion.
p. 455) illustrates the phenomenon discovered by Allais and its DEMO to the
weighting of probabilities and to the framing of chance events. Chance events were
realized by drawing a single marble from a bag DEMO a speciﬁed number of
favorable and unfavorable marbles. To encourage thoughtful answers, one-tenth of
the participants, selected at random, were given an opportunity to play the gambles
they chose. The same respondents answered problems 9–11, in that order.
Problem 9 ðN
¼
77Þ. Which of the following DEMO do you prefer?
A. a sure gain of $30 [78%]
B. 80% chance to win $45 and 20% chance to win nothing [22%]
DEMO 10 ðN
¼
81Þ. Which of the following options do you prefer?
C. 25% chance to win $30 and 75% chance to win DEMO [42%]
D. 20% chance to win $45 and 80% chance to win nothing [58%]
Note that problem 10 is obtained from problem 9 by DEMO the probabilities of
winning by a factor of four. In expected utility theory a preference for A over B
in problem 9 implies a DEMO for C over D in problem 10. Contrary to this pre-
diction, the majority preference switched from the lower prize ($30) to the higher one
($45) when the probabilities of winning were substantially reduced. DEMO called this
phenomenon the certainty e¤ect because the reduction of the probability of winning
608 Tversky and Kahneman
from certainty to .25 has a greater e¤ect DEMO the corresponding reduction from .8
to .2. In prospect theory, the DEMO choice in problem 9 implies vð45Þpð:80Þ <
vð30Þpð1:0Þ, whereas the modal choice in problem 10 implies vð45Þpð:20Þ >
vð30Þpð:25Þ . The observed violation of expected utility theory, then, is implied DEMO the
curvature of p (see ﬁgure 24.2) if
pð:20Þ > vð30Þ > pð:80Þ :
pð:25Þ vð45Þ pð1:0Þ
Allais’s problem has attracted the attention of numerous theorists, who attempted
to provide a normative rationale for the certainty e¤ect by relaxing the cancellation
rule (see, e.g., Allais 1979; Fishburn 1982, 1983; Machina 1982; Quiggin DEMO; Chew
1983). The following problem illustrates a related phenomenon, called the pseudo-
certainty e¤ect, that cannot be accommodated by relaxing cancellation because it
also involves a violation of invariance.
Problem 11 ðN
¼
85Þ: Consider the following two stage game. In the ﬁrst stage, there is a 75%
chance to end the game without winning anything, and a 25% chance to move into the second
stage. If you reach the DEMO stage you have a choice between:
E. a sure win of $30 [74%]
F. 80% chance to win $45 and 20% chance to DEMO nothing [26%]
Your choice must be made before the outcome of the ﬁrst stage is known.
Because there is one chance in four to DEMO into the second stage, prospect E
o¤ers a .25 probability of DEMO $30, and prospect F o¤ers a :25 :80 ¼ :DEMO
probability of winning $45. Problem 11 is therefore identical to problem 10 in terms
of probabilities and outcomes. However, the preferences in the two problems di¤er:
most subjects made a risk-averse choice in problem 11 DEMO not in problem 10. We call
this phenomenon the pseudocertainty e¤ect because an outcome that is actually
uncertain is weighted as if it were DEMO The framing of problem 11 as a two-stage
game encourages respondents to apply cancellation: the event of failing to reach the
second stage is discarded prior to evaluation because it yields the same outcomes in
both DEMO In this framing problems 11 and 9 are evaluated alike.
Although problems 10 and 11 are identical in terms of ﬁnal outcomes and their
DEMO, problem 11 has a greater potential for inducing regret. Consider a
DEMO maker who chooses F in problem 11, reaches the second stage, but fails to
win the prize. This individual knows that the choice DEMO E would have yielded a gain
of $30. In problem 10, DEMO the other hand, an individual who chooses D and fails to
DEMO cannot know with certainty what the outcome of the other choice would have
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 609
been. This di¤erence could DEMO an alternative interpretation of the pseudo-
certainty e¤ect in terms of regret (e.g., Loomes and Sugden 1982). However, the
certainty and the pseudocertainty e¤ects were found to be equally strong in a modi-
ﬁed DEMO of problems 9–11 in which opportunities for regret were equated across
problems. This ﬁnding does not imply that considerations of regret play no role DEMO
decisions. (For examples, see Kahneman and Tversky [1982, p. 710].) It merely indi-
cates that Allais’s example and the pseudocertainty e¤ect are DEMO controlled by
the nonlinearity of decision weights and the framing of contingencies rather than by
the anticipation of regret.4
The certainty and pseudocertainty e¤ects DEMO not restricted to monetary outcomes.
The following problem illustrates these phenomena in a medical context. The
respondents were 72 physicians attending a meeting of DEMO California Medical Asso-
ciation. Essentially the same pattern of responses was obtained from a larger group
ðN
¼
180Þ of college students.
Problem 12 DEMO ¼ 72Þ. In the treatment of tumors there is sometimes a choice between two
types of therapies: (i) a radical treatment such as extensive surgery, which involves some risk of
imminent death, (ii) DEMO moderate treatment, such as limited surgery or radiation therapy. Each
of DEMO following problems describes the possible outcome of two alternative treatments, for
DEMO di¤erent cases. In considering each case, suppose the patient is a DEMO male.
Assume that without treatment death is imminent (within a month) and that only one of the
treatments can be applied. Please indicate DEMO treatment you would prefer in each case.
Case 1
Treatment A: DEMO chance of imminent death and 80% chance of normal life, with DEMO expected
longevity of 30 years. [35%]
Treatment B: certainty of a DEMO life, with an expected longevity of 18 years. [65%]
Case 2
DEMO C: 80% chance of imminent death and 20% chance of normal DEMO, with an expected
longevity of 30 years. [68%]
Treatment D: 75% chance of imminent death and 25% chance of normal life, with an expected
longevity of 18 years. [32%]
Case 3
Consider a new case DEMO there is a 25% chance that the tumor is treatable and a 75% chance
that it is not. If the tumor is not treatable, death is imminent. If the tumor is treatable, the
outcomes of the treatment are as follows:
Treatment E: 20% chance of imminent death and 80% chance of normal life, with an expected
longevity of 30 years. [32%]
Treatment F: certainty of normal life, with an expected DEMO of 18 years. [68%]
610 Tversky and Kahneman
The three cases of this problem correspond, respectively, to problems 9–11, and
the same pattern of preferences is observed. DEMO case 1, most respondents make a risk-
averse choice in favor DEMO certain survival with reduced longevity. In case 2, the
moderate treatment DEMO longer ensures survival, and most respondents choose the
treatment that o¤ers DEMO higher expected longevity. In particular, 64% of the physi-
cians who DEMO B in case 1 selected C in case 2. This is another example of Allais’s
certainty e¤ect.
The comparison of cases 2 and 3 DEMO another illustration of pseudocertainty.
The cases are identical in terms of the relevant outcomes and their probabilities, but
the preferences di¤er. In particular, DEMO of the physicians who chose C in case 2
selected F in case 3. The conditional framing induces people to disregard the event of
DEMO tumor not being treatable because the two treatments are equally ine¤ective in
this case. In this frame, treatment F enjoys the advantage of pseudocertainty. It
appears to ensure survival, but the assurance is conditional on the treatability of the
tumor. In fact, there is only a .25 chance of surviving a month if this option is
chosen.
The conjunction of DEMO and pseudocertainty e¤ects has signiﬁcant implica-
tions for the relation between normative and descriptive theories of choice. Our
results indicate that cancellation is actually DEMO in choices—in those problems
that make its application transparent. Speciﬁcally, we DEMO that people make the same
choices in problems 11 and 9 and in cases 3 and 1 of problem 12. Evidently, people
‘‘cancel’’ an event that yields the same outcomes for all options, in two-stage or
nested structures. Note that in these examples cancellation is satisﬁed in problems
DEMO are formally equivalent to those in which it is violated. The empirical validity of
cancellation therefore depends on the framing of the problems.
The DEMO concept of framing originated from the analysis of Allais’s problems
by Savage (1954, pp. 101–4) and Rai¤a (1968, pp. 80–86), who reframed these
examples in an attempt to make the application of cancellation DEMO compelling.
Savage and Rai¤a were right: naive respondents indeed obey the DEMO axiom
when its application is su‰ciently transparent.5 However, the contrasting preferences
DEMO di¤erent versions of the same choice (problems 10 and 11 and DEMO 2 and 3 of
problem 12) indicate that people do not DEMO the same axiom when its application
is not transparent. Instead, they DEMO (non-linear) decision weights to the proba-
bilities as stated. The status of cancellation is therefore similar to that of dominance:
both rules DEMO intuitively compelling as abstract principles of choice, consistently
obeyed in transparent DEMO and frequently violated in nontransparent ones.
Attempts to rationalize the preferences in Allais’s example by discarding the cancel-
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 611
lation axiom face a DEMO di‰culty: they do not distinguish transparent formulations
in which cancellation is DEMO from nontransparent ones in which it is violated.
Discussion
In the preceding sections we challenged the descriptive validity of the major tenets of
expected DEMO theory and outlined an alternative account of risky choice. In this
section we discuss alternative theories and argue against the reconciliation of nor-
mative DEMO descriptive analyses. Some objections of economists to our analysis and
conclusions are addressed.
Descriptive and Normative Considerations
Many alternative models of risky choice, designed to explain the observed violations
of expected utility theory, have been developed in the last decade. These models
divide into the following four classes. (i) Nonlinear functionals (e.g., Allais 1953,
1979; Machina 1982) are obtained by eliminating the cancellation condition alto-
gether. These models do DEMO have axiomatizations leading to a (cardinal) measure-
ment of utility, DEMO they impose various restrictions (i.e., di¤erentiability) on the
utility functional. (ii) The expectations quotient model (axiomatized by Chew and
MacCrimmon 1979; Weber 1982; Chew 1983; Fishburn 1983) replaces cancellation
by a weaker substitution axiom and represents the value of a prospect by the ratio DEMO
two linear functionals. (iii) Bilinear models with nonadditive probabilities (e.g.,DEMO
Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Quiggin 1982; Schmeidler 1984; Segal 1984; Yaari
1984; Luce and Narens 1985) assume various restricted versions of DEMO (or
substitution) and construct a bilinear representation in which the utilities of out-
comes are weighted by a nonadditive probability measure or by DEMO nonlinear
transform of the probability scale. (iv) Nontransitive models represent preferences by
a bivariate utility function. Fishburn (1982, 1984) axiomatized such models, while
Bell (1982) and Loomes and Sugden (1982) interpreted them in terms of expected
regret. For further theoretical developments, see Fishburn (DEMO).
The relation between models and data is summarized in table 24.1. The stub col-
umn lists the four major tenets of expected utility DEMO Column 1 lists the major
empirical violations of these tenets and cites a few representative references. Column
2 lists the subset of models discussed DEMO that are consistent with the observed
violations.
The conclusions of table 24.1 may be summarized as follows. First, all the above
models (as DEMO as some others) are consistent with the violations of cancellation
612 Tversky and Kahneman
Table 24.1
Summary of Empirical Violations and Explanatory DEMO
Tenet Empirical violation Explanatory model
Cancellation Certainty e¤ect (Allais 1953, 1979; Kahneman and Tversky All models
1979) (problems 9–10, and 12 DEMO 1 and 2])
Transitivity Lexicographic semiorder (Tversky 1969) Bivariate models
Preference reversals (Slovic and Lichtenstein 1983)
Dominance Contrasting risk attitudes (DEMO 2) Prospect theory
Subadditive decision weights (problem 8)
Invariance Framing e¤ects (problems 1, 3–4, 5–6, 7–8, 10–11, and 12) Prospect theory
produced by the certainty e¤ect.6 Therefore, Allais’s ‘‘paradox’’ cannot be used to
compare or evaluate competing nonexpectation models. Second, bivariate (non-
DEMO) models are needed to explain observed intransitivities. Third, only pros-
pect theory can accommodate the observed violations of (stochastic) dominance and
invariance. DEMO some models (e.g., Loomes and Sugden 1982; Luce and Narens
DEMO) permit some limited failures of invariance, they do not account for the range of
framing e¤ects described in this article.
Because framing e¤ects DEMO the associated failures of invariance are ubiquitous, no
adequate descriptive theory DEMO ignore these phenomena. On the other hand, because
invariance (or extensionality) is normatively indispensable, no adequate prescriptive
theory should permit its violation. DEMO, the dream of constructing a theory
that is acceptable both descriptively DEMO normatively appears unrealizable (see also
Tversky and Kahneman 1983).
Prospect DEMO di¤ers from the other models mentioned above in being
unabashedly descriptive and in making no normative claims. It is designed to explain
preferences, whether or not they can be rationalized. Machina (1982, p. 292) claimed
that prospect theory is ‘‘unacceptable as a descriptive model of behavior toward
DEMO because it implies violations of stochastic dominance. But since the violations
of dominance predicted by the theory have actually been observed (see problems 2
and 8), Machina’s objection appears invalid.
Perhaps the major ﬁnding of DEMO present article is that the axioms of rational
choice are generally satisﬁed in transparent situations and often violated in non-
transparent ones. For example, when the relation of stochastic dominance is trans-
parent (as in the aggregated version of problem 2 and in problem 7), practically
everyone DEMO the dominant prospect. However, when these problems are framed
so that DEMO relation of dominance is no longer transparent (as in the segregated DEMO
sion of problem 2 and in problem 8), most respondents violate dominance, as pre-
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 613
dicted. These results contradict DEMO theories that imply stochastic dominance as well
as others (e.g., Machina 1982) that predict the same choices in transparent and non-
transparent contexts. The same conclusion applies to cancellation, as shown in the
discussion of pseudocertainty. It appears that both cancellation and dominance have
normative appeal, although neither one is descriptively valid.
The present results and analysis—particularly the role DEMO transparency and the
signiﬁcance of framing—are consistent with the conception of bounded rationality
originally presented by Herbert Simon (see, e.g., Simon 1955, DEMO; March 1978;
Nelson and Winter 1982). Indeed, prospect theory is an attempt to articulate some of
the principles of perception and DEMO that limit the rationality of choice.
The introduction of psychological considerations (DEMO, framing) both enriches and
complicates the analysis of choice. Because the framing of decisions depends on the
language of presentation, on the context of choice, and on the nature of the display,
our treatment of the process is necessarily informal and incomplete. We have identi-
ﬁed DEMO common rules of framing, and we have demonstrated their e¤ects on
DEMO, but we have not provided a formal theory of framing. Furthermore, the
present analysis does not account for all the observed failures of DEMO and
invariance. Although some intransitivities (e.g., Tversky 1969) can be DEMO by
discarding small di¤erences in the framing phase, and others (e.g., Rai¤a 1968, p. 75)
arise from the combination of transparent DEMO nontransparent comparisons, there
are examples of cyclic preferences and context e¤ects (see, e.g., Slovic, Fischho¤, and
Lichtenstein 1982; Slovic and Lichtenstein 1983) that require additional explanatory
mechanisms (e.g., multiple reference points and variable weights). An adequate
account of choice cannot ignore these e¤ects DEMO framing and context, even if they are
normatively distasteful and mathematically DEMO
Bolstering Assumptions
The assumption of rationality has a favored position in economics. It is accorded
all the methodological privileges of a self-evident truth, a reasonable idealization,
a tautology, and a null hypothesis. Each of these interpretations either puts the
hypothesis of rational action beyond question or places DEMO burden of proof squarely
on any alternative analysis of belief and choice. The advantage of the rational model
is compounded because no other theory DEMO judgment and decision can ever match it
in scope, power, and simplicity.
Furthermore, the assumption of rationality is protected by a formidable set of
defenses in the form of bolstering assumptions that restrict the signiﬁcance DEMO any
observed violation of the model. In particular, it is commonly DEMO that sub-
stantial violations of the standard model are (i) restricted to insigniﬁcant choice
614 Tversky and Kahneman
problems, (ii) quickly eliminated by learning, DEMO (iii) irrelevant to economics because
of the corrective function of market forces. Indeed, incentives sometimes improve the
quality of decisions, experienced decision DEMO often do better than novices, and
the forces of arbitrage and DEMO can nullify some e¤ects of error and illusion.
Whether these factors ensure rational choices in any particular situation is an
empirical issue, to be settled by observation, not by supposition.
It has frequently been claimed (DEMO, e.g., Smith 1985) that the observed failures of
rational models DEMO attributable to the cost of thinking and will thus be eliminated by
proper incentives. Experimental ﬁndings provide little support for this view. Studies
reported DEMO the economic and psychological literature have shown that errors that are
prevalent in responses to hypothetical questions persist even in the presence of sig-
DEMO monetary payo¤s. In particular, elementary blunders of probabilistic rea-
soning (Grether 1980; Tversky and Kahneman 1983), major inconsistencies of choice
(Grether DEMO Plott 1979; Slovic and Lichtenstein 1983), and violations of stochastic
DEMO in nontransparent problems (see problem 2 above) are hardly reduced by
incentives. The evidence that high stakes do not always improve decisions is DEMO
restricted to laboratory studies. Signiﬁcant errors of judgment and choice can be
documented in real world decisions that involve high stakes and serious deliberation.
DEMO high rate of failures of small businesses, for example, is not easily reconcilied
with the assumptions of rational expectations and risk aversion.
Incentives DEMO not operate by magic: they work by focusing attention and by DEMO
longing deliberation. Consequently, they are more likely to prevent errors that DEMO
from insu‰cient attention and e¤ort than errors that arise from misperception or
faulty intuition. The example of visual illusion is instructive. There is no DEMO
mechanism by which the mere introduction of incentives (without the added DEMO
tunity to make measurements) would reduce the illusion observed in ﬁgure DEMO, and
the illusion vanishes—even in the absence of incentives—when the display DEMO altered
in ﬁgure 24.4. The corrective power of incentives depends on the nature of the par-
ticular error and cannot be taken for granted.
DEMO assumption of the rationality of decision making is often defended by the
argument that people will learn to make correct decisions and sometimes by DEMO
evolutionary argument that irrational decision makers will be driven out by rational
ones. There is no doubt that learning and selection do take place DEMO tend to
improve e‰ciency. As in the case of incentives, however, no magic is involved.
E¤ective learning takes place only under certain conditions: it requires accurate and
immediate feedback about the relation between the situational DEMO and the
appropriate response. The necessary feedback is often lacking for the decisions made
by managers, entrepreneurs, and politicians because (i) outcomes DEMO commonly
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 615
Figure 24.4
A transparent DEMO of the Mu¨ ller-Lyer illusion.
delayed and not easily attributable to a particular action; (ii) variability in the envi-
ronment degrades the reliability of the feedback, especially where outcomes of low
probability are involved; (iii) there is often no information about what the outcome
would have been if another decision had been taken; and (iv) most important deci-
sions are unique and therefore provide little opportunity for learning (see Einhorn
and Hogarth 1978). The conditions for organizational learning are hardly DEMO
Learning surely occurs, for both individuals and organizations, but any claim that a
particular error will be eliminated by experience must be supported DEMO demonstrating
that the conditions for e¤ective learning are satisﬁed.
Finally, it DEMO sometimes argued that failures of rationality in individual decision
making are inconsequential because of the corrective e¤ects of the market (Knez,
Smith, DEMO Williams 1985). Economic agents are often protected from their own
irrational predilections by the forces of competition and by the action of arbi-
DEMO, but there are situations in which this mechanism fails. Hausch, Ziemba, and
Rubenstein (1981) have documented an instructive example: the market DEMO win bets
616 Tversky and Kahneman
at the racetrack is e‰cient, but the market for bets on place and show is not. Bettors
commonly underestimate the DEMO that the favorite will end up in second or
third place, DEMO this e¤ect is su‰ciently large to sustain a contrarian betting strategy
with a positive expected value. This ine‰ciency is found in spite of the DEMO incen-
tives, of the unquestioned level of dedication and expertise among DEMO in
racetrack markets, and of obvious opportunities for learning and for DEMO
Situations in which errors that are common to many individuals are unlikely to be
corrected by the market have been analyzed by Haltiwanger and DEMO (1985)
and by Russell and Thaler (1985). Furthermore, DEMO and Yellen (1985) have
presented their near-rationality theory, in which DEMO prevalent errors in responding
to economic changes (e.g., inertia or money illusion) will (i) have little e¤ect on the
individual (thereby DEMO the possibility of learning), (ii) provide no opportu-
nity for arbitrage, and yet (iii) have large economic e¤ects. The claim that the market
can be trusted to correct the e¤ect of individual irrationalities DEMO be made with-
out supporting evidence, and the burden of specifying DEMO plausible corrective mecha-
nism should rest on those who make this claim.
The main theme of this article has been that the normative and DEMO descriptive
analyses of choice should be viewed as separate enterprises. This conclusion suggests
a research agenda. To retain the rational model in its customary DEMO role, the
relevant bolstering assumptions must be validated. Where these assumptions DEMO, it is
instructive to trace the implications of the descriptive analysis (e.g., the e¤ects of loss
aversion, pseudocertainty, or the money illusion) for public policy, strategic decision
making, and macroeconomic phenomena (see DEMO 1982; Akerlof and Yellen
1985).
Notes
This work was supported DEMO contract N00014-84-K-0615 from the O‰ce of Naval Research to Stanford
University. The present article reviews our work on decision making under risk from a DEMO perspective,
discussed primarily in the ﬁrst and last sections. Most of the empirical demonstrations have been reported
in earlier publications. Problems 3, 4, 7, 8, and 12 are published here for the ﬁrst time.
1. All problems are presented in the text exactly as they were DEMO to the participants in the
experiments.
2. If p þq ¼ 1 and either x > y > 0or x < y < 0, the value of a prospect is given by vð yÞþ
pð pÞ½vðxÞ DEMO yÞ, so that decision weights are not applied to sure outcomes.
DEMO The extension of the present analysis to prospects with many (nonzero) outcomes involves two addi-
tional steps. First, we assume that continuous (DEMO multivalued) distributions are approximated, in the
framing phase, by discrete DEMO with a relatively small number of outcomes. For example, a uni-
DEMO distribution on the interval ð0; 90Þ may be represented by the DEMO prospect ð0;:1; 10;:1; ... ;
90;:1Þ. Second, in the multiple-outcome case the weighting function, ppð pi Þ, must depend on the proba-
bility vector p, not only on the component pi , i ¼ 1; .. . ; n. For example, Quiggin (1982) uses the function
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 617
ppð pi Þ¼ pð DEMO Þ=½pð p1 Þþ  þ pð pn Þ. As in the two-outcome case, the weighting function is assumed to
satisfy subcertainty, ppð p1 DEMO þ  þ ppð pnÞ a 1, and subproportionality.
4. In DEMO modiﬁed version—problems 90 –110 —the probabilities of winning were generated by drawing a
number from a bag containing 100 sequentially numbered tickets. In problem DEMO , the event associated
with winning $45 (drawing a number between DEMO and 20) was included in the event associated with win-
ning DEMO (drawing a number between one and 25). The sequential setup DEMO problem 11 was replaced by the
simultaneous play of two chance devices: the roll of a die (whose outcome determines whether the game DEMO
on) and the drawing of a numbered ticket from a bag. DEMO possibility of regret now exists in all three
problems, and problem DEMO and 110 no longer di¤er in this respect because a decision maker would always
know the outcomes of alternative choices. Consequently, regret theory cannot explain either the certainty
e¤ect (90 vs. 100 ) or the pseudocertainty e¤ect (100 vs. 110 ) observed in the modiﬁed problems.
5. It is noteworthy that the conditional framing used in problems 11 and 12 (case 3) is much more e¤ective
in eliminating the common responses to Allais’s paradox than the partition framing introduced by Savage
(see, e.g., Slovic and Tversky 1974). This is probably due to the fact DEMO the conditional framing makes it
clear that the critical options are identical—after eliminating the state whose outcome does not depend on
one’s choice (i.e., reaching the second stage in problem 11, an untreatable tumor in DEMO 12, case 3).
6. Because the present article focuses on DEMO with known probabilities, we do not discuss the
important violations of DEMO due to ambiguity (Ellsberg 1961).
References
Akerlof, G. A., DEMO Yellen, J. 1985. Can small deviations from rationality make signiﬁcant di¤erences DEMO
economic equilibria? American Economic Review 75:708–20.
Allais, M. 1953. Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant le risque: Critique des postulats et axiomes
de l’Ecole Ame´ ricaine. Econometrica 21:503–46.
Allais, M. 1979. The foundations of a positive theory of choice involving risk and a criticism of DEMO pos-
tulates and axioms of the American School. In M. Allais and O. Hagen (eds.), Expected Utility Hypotheses
and the Allais Paradox. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Arrow, K. J. 1982. Risk perception in psychology and economics. DEMO Inquiry 20:1–9.
Bazerman, M. H. 1983. Negotiator judgment. American Behavioral DEMO 27:211–28.
Bell, D. E. 1982. Regret in decision making under DEMO Operations Research 30:961–81.
Bishop, R. C., and Heberlein, T. DEMO 1979. Measuring values of extra-market goods: Are indirect measures
biased? American Journal of Agricultural Economics 61:926–30.
Chew, S. H. 1983. A generalization of the quasilinear mean with applications to the measurement of
income inequality DEMO decision theory resolving the Allais paradox. Econometrica 51:1065–92.
Chew, S. DEMO, and MacCrimmon, K. 1979. Alpha utility theory, lottery composition, and the Allais para-
dox. Working Paper no. 686. Vancouver: University of British Columbia.
Clark, H. H., and Clark, E. V. 1977. Psychology and Language. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Einhorn, H. J., and Hogarth, R. M. 1978. Conﬁdence in judgment: Persistence of the illusion of DEMO
Psychological Review 85:395–416.
Ellsberg, D. 1961. Risk, ambiguity, and DEMO Savage axioms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 75:643–69.
Eraker, S. E., and Sox, H. C. 1981. Assessment of patients’ preferences for therapeutic outcomes. Medical
Decision Making 1:29–39.
Fischho¤, B. 1983. Predicting frames. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cogni-
tion 9:103–16.
Fishburn, P. C. 1982. Nontransitive measurable utility. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 26:31–67.
618 Tversky and Kahneman
Fishburn, P. C. 1983. Transitive measurable utility. Journal of Economic Theory 31:293–317.
Fishburn, P. C. 1984. SSB utility theory and decision making under uncertainty. Mathematical Social
Sciences 8:253–85.
Fishburn, P. C. 1985. Uncertainty aversion and separated e¤ects in decision making under uncertainty.
DEMO paper. Murray Hill, N.J.: AT&T Bell Labs.
Fishburn, P. DEMO, and Kochenberger, G. A. 1979. Two-piece von Neumann–Morgenstern utility functions.
Decision Sciences 10:503–18.
Grether, D. M. 1980. Bayes rule as a descriptive model: The representativeness heuristic. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 95:537–57.
Grether, DEMO M., and Plott, C. R. 1979. Economic theory of choice and the preference reversal phenome-
non. American Economic Review 69:623–38.
Hagen, O. 1979. Towards a positive theory of preferences under risk. In M. Allais DEMO O. Hagen (eds.),
Expected Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Haltiwanger, J., and Waldman, M. 1985. Rational expectations DEMO the limits of rationality: An analysis
of heterogeneity. American Economic Review DEMO:326–40.
Hammond, P. 1985. Consequential behavior in decision trees and expected DEMO Institute for Mathe-
matical Studies in the Social Sciences Working Paper no. 112. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University.
Hansson, B. 1975. The appropriateness of the expected utility model. Erkenntnis 9:175–93.
Hausch, D. B.; Ziemba, W. T.; and Rubenstein, M. E. 1981. E‰ciency of the market DEMO racetrack betting.
Management Science 27:1435–52.
Hershey, J. C., and Schoemaker, P. J. H. 1980. Risk taking and problem context in the domain of losses:
An expected utility analysis. Journal of Risk and Insurance DEMO:111–32.
Kahneman, D.; Knetsch, J. L.; and Thaler, R. DEMO In this issue. Fairness and the assumptions of economics.
Kahneman, D.; Knetsch, J. L.; and Thaler, R. In press. Perceptions of fairness: Entitlements in the market.
American Economic Review.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica
DEMO:263–91.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. 1982. The psychology of DEMO Scientiﬁc American 246:160–73.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. 1984. DEMO, values, and frames. American Psychologist 39:341–50.
Knetsch, J. L., and Sinden, J. A. 1984. Willingness to pay and compensation demanded: DEMO
evidence of an unexpected disparity in measures of value. Quarterly Journal of Economics 99:507–21.
Knez, P.; Smith, V. L.; and Williams, A. W. 1985. Individual rationality, market rationality and value
estimation. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 75:397–402.
Loomes, G., and Sugden, DEMO 1982. Regret theory: An alternative theory of rational choice under uncer-
DEMO Economic Journal 92:805–24.
Luce, R. D., and Krantz, D. DEMO 1971. Conditional expected utility. Econometrica 39:253–71.
Luce, R. D., and Narens, L. 1985. Classiﬁcation of concatenation measurement structures according to
scale type. Journal of Mathemical Psychology 29:1–72.
Machina, M. J. 1982. ‘‘Expected utility’’ analysis without the independence axiom. Econometrica 50:277–
323.
McNeil, B. J.; Pauker, S. G.; Sox, H. C., Jr.; and Tversky, A. 1982. On the elicitation of preferences for
alternative therapies. New England DEMO of Medicine 306:1259–62.
March, J. G. 1978. Bounded rationality, ambiguity, and the engineering of choice. Bell Journal of Eco-
nomics 9:587–608.
Markowitz, H. 1952. The utility of wealth. Journal of Political Economy 60:151–58.
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions 619
Nelson, R. R., DEMO Winter, S. G. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Payne, J. W.; Laughhunn, D. J.; and Crum, R. 1980. Translation of gambles and aspiration level e¤ects DEMO
risky choice behavior. Management Science 26:1039–60.
Quiggin, J. 1982. A DEMO of anticipated utility. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 3:323–43.
Rai¤a, H. 1968. Decision Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices under Uncertainty. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley.
Russell, T., and Thaler, R. 1985. The relevance of quasi-rationality in competitive markets. American
Economic Review 75:1071–82.
Savage, L. J. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley.
Schelling, T. DEMO 1981. Economic reasoning and the ethics of policy. Public Interest 63:37–61.
Schmeidler, D. 1984. Subjective probability and expected utility without additivity. Preprint Series no. 84.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, Institute for Mathematics and Its DEMO
Schumpeter, J. A. 1954. History of Economic Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Segal, U. 1984. Nonlinear decision weights with the independence axiom. Working Paper in Economics
no. 353. Los Angeles: University of California, DEMO Angeles.
Simon, H. A. 1955. A behavioral model of rational choice. DEMO Journal of Economics 69:99–118.
Simon, H. A. 1978. Rationality as DEMO and as product of thought. American Economic Review: Papers
and Proceedings DEMO:1–16.
Slovic, P.; Fischho¤, B.; and Lichtenstein, S. 1982. DEMO mode, framing, and information processing
e¤ects in risk assessment. In R. M. Hogarth (ed.), New Directions for Methodology of Social and Behav-
ioral Science: Question Framing and Response Consistency. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Slovic, P., and Lichtenstein, S. 1983. Preference reversals: A broader perspective. American Economic
Review 73:596–605.
Slovic, P., and Tversky, A. 1974. Who accepts Savage’s axiom? Behavioral Science 19:368–73.
Smith, V. L. 1985. DEMO economics: Reply. American Economic Review 75:265–72.
Stigler, G. J., DEMO Kindahl, J. K. 1970. The Behavior of Industrial Prices. New York: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Thaler, R. H. 1980. Towards a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 1:39–60.
DEMO, A. 1969. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review 76:105–10.
Tversky, A. 1977. On the elicitation of preferences: Descriptive and prescriptive considerations. In D. E.
Bell, R. L. Keeney, and H. Rai¤a (eds.), Conﬂicting Objectives in Decisions. New York: Wiley.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, DEMO 1981. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science
211:453–58.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. 1983. Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in
probability judgment. Psychological Review 90:293–315.
von Neumann, J., and Morgenstern, O. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.
Weber, R. J. 1982. The DEMO paradox, Dutch auctions, and alpha-utility theory. Working paper. Evan-
ston, DEMO: Northwestern University.
Yaari, M. E. 1984. Risk aversion without decreasing marginal utility. Report Series in Theoretical Eco-
nomics. London: London School of Economics.

25 Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice
George A. Quattrone DEMO Amos Tversky
The assumption of individual rationality plays a central role in the social sciences,
especially in economics and political science. Indeed, it is commonly assumed that
most if not all economic and political agents DEMO the maxims of consistency and
coherence leading to the maximization of utility. This notion has been captured by
several models that constitute the rational DEMO of choice including the expected
utility model for decision making under risk, the riskless theory of choice among
commodity bundles, and the Bayesian DEMO for the updating of belief. These
models employ di¤erent assumptions about the nature of the options and the infor-
mation available to the decision DEMO, but they all adopt the principles of coherence
and invariance that DEMO the prevailing notion of rationality.
The rational theory of choice has been used to prescribe action as well as to
describe the behavior of DEMO, entrepreneurs, voters, and politicians. The use of
the rational theory DEMO a descriptive model has been defended on the grounds that
people are generally e¤ective in pursuing their goals, that the axioms underlying the
theory are intuitively compelling, and that evolution and competition favor rational
individuals over less rational ones. The objections to the rationality assumption were
primarily psychological. DEMO human animal, it has been argued, is often controlled
by emotions and desires that do not ﬁt the model of calculating rationality. More
DEMO objections to the maximization doctrine have been cognitive rather than
motivational. Following the seminal work of Herbert Simon (1955, 1978) and the
emergence of cognitive psychology, it has become evident that human rationality
is bounded by limitations on memory and computational capabilities. Furthermore,
the experimental analysis DEMO inference and choice has revealed that the cognitive
machinery underlying human judgment and decision making is often inconsistent
with the maxims of rationality. These DEMO have led to the development of a
descriptive analysis of judgment and choice that departs from the rational theory in
many signiﬁcant respects (see, e.g., Abelson and Levi 1985; Dawes 1988; Kahneman,
Slovic, and Tversky 1982; Tversky and Kahneman 1986).
We contrast the rational theory of choice with a descriptive psychological analysis,
using a series DEMO questions involving political candidates and public referenda. These
problems are used to illustrate the di¤erences between rational and descriptive
theories of choice and to DEMO their predictions. Some of the questions probed our
respondents’ views about familiar political issues, such as the Equal Rights Amend-
ment and the prevalence of crime in black neighborhoods compared to white
622 Quattrone and Tversky
neighborhoods. In other cases involving the test of DEMO hypotheses, such as risk
aversion, we introduced hypothetical problems in order to achieve experimental
control and eliminate the inﬂuence of irrelevant factors. The DEMO of hypothetical
problems raises obvious questions regarding the generality and the applicability of
the ﬁnding. Nevertheless, we believe that the use of carefully worded questions can
address key issues regarding people’s values and beliefs so long DEMO respondents take
the questions seriously and have no particular reason to disguise or misrepresent
their true preferences. Under these conditions hypothetical questions can be DEMO to
compare alternative theories of political choice that cannot be readily tested using
available survey and voting data. Our results, of course, do DEMO provide deﬁnitive
conclusions about political decision making, but they may shed DEMO on the for-
mation of political judgment and stimulate new hypotheses that can be tested in
national election surveys in the years to come.
DEMO focus on expected utility theory, which is the major normative theory DEMO deci-
sion making under risk (von Neumann and Morgenstern 1947; Rai¤a 1968; Savage
1954). This model is contrasted with prospect theory, DEMO descriptive analysis devel-
oped by Kahneman and Tversky (1979, 1984). The ﬁrst section deals with the role of
the reference point and DEMO impact on the choice between political candidates. In the
second section we test the assumption of invariance and contrast it with a psycho-
physical DEMO of numerical scales. The third section deals with the perception and
the weighting of chance events, and the role of uncertainty in choice. The fourth
section addresses the classical issue of the rationality of voting. It DEMO, again, a
rational analysis based on the probability of casting a decisive vote with a less ratio-
nal analysis that incorporates an element DEMO self-deception. The implications of the
present analysis are discussed in the ﬁfth and ﬁnal section.
Reference E¤ects, Risk Attitudes, and Loss Aversion
The DEMO utility function, derived from the expected utility model, has two
essential characteristics. First, it is deﬁned on wealth, or ﬁnal asset position. DEMO, a
person with wealth W accepts an even chance to win DEMO,000 or lose $500 if the dif-
ference between the utility of W þ $1;000 and the utility of W (the upside) DEMO
the di¤erence between the utility of W and the utility of W  $500 (the downside).
Second, the utility function is concave; that is, the subjective value of an additional
dollar diminishes with the total amount of money one has. The ﬁrst assumption
(asset integration) DEMO necessitated by basic considerations of coherence. The second
assumption (concavity) was introduced by Bernoulli (1954) to accommodate the
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 623
Figure 25.1
A DEMO value function.
common observations of risk aversion, and it has played DEMO essential role in eco-
nomics. A person is risk-averse if he or she prefers a sure outcome over a risky
prospect that has an DEMO or greater expected value. For example, most people pre-
fer $100 DEMO sure over an even chance to win $200 or nothing. Risk aversion is
implied by the concavity of the utility scale because the utility DEMO 2x is less than twice
the utility of x.
Although risk aversion is quite common, particularly for prospects with positive
outcomes, risk seeking DEMO also prevalent, particularly for prospects with negative
outcomes. For example, most people ﬁnd a sure loss of $100 more aversive than an
even DEMO to lose $200 or nothing. To explain the combination of risk aversion and
risk seeking, prospect theory replaces the traditional concave utility function for
wealth by an S-shaped function for changes of wealth. In this theory, therefore, the
carriers of values are positive or negative changes (i.e., gains and losses) deﬁned rel-
ative to a neutral reference point. Furthermore, the value function is assumed to be
concave above the reference point and convex below it, giving rise to risk aversion in
the domain of gains and risk seeking in the domain of losses. As in DEMO classical
theory, it is assumed that the di¤erence between $100 and DEMO is subjectively larger
than the (numerically equivalent) di¤erence between $1,100 and $1,200. Unlike the
classical theory, however, it is assumed DEMO the di¤erence between a loss of $100
and a loss of $200 is subjectively larger than the numerically equivalent di¤erence
between a loss of DEMO,100 and a loss of $1,200. Thus, the value function DEMO prospect
theory is steepest at the origin and it gets shallower as one moves away from the
reference point in either direction. An important DEMO of the value function—
called loss aversion—is that the downside is considerably steeper than the upside;
624 Quattrone and Tversky
that is, losses loom larger than the corresponding gains. A typical value function with
these characteristics is given in ﬁgure DEMO
Attitudes towards Risk
Expected utility theory and prospect theory yield di¤erent predictions. The classical
theory predicts risk aversion independent of the reference point, whereas prospect
theory predicts risk aversion in the domain of gains and risk DEMO in the domain
of losses (except for small probabilities). Furthermore, prospect theory implies
that shifts in the reference point induced by the DEMO of the problem will have
predictable e¤ects on people’s risk preferences. These phenomena are illustrated in
the following four problems, each involving a choice between alternative political
prospects.
The respondents to these and other problems reported DEMO this article were under-
graduates at Stanford University or at the University of California at Berkeley. The
problems were presented in a questionnaire in DEMO classroom setting. Each problem
involved a simple choice between two candidates or positions on a public referen-
dum. The respondents were asked to imagine DEMO facing the choice described,
and they wee assured that the responses were anonymous and that there were no
correct or incorrect answers. The DEMO of respondents in this and all subsequent
problems is denoted by N, and the percentage who chose each outcome is given in
parentheses.
Problem 1 (N
¼
89)
Suppose there is a continent consisting of ﬁve nations, Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and
Epsilon. The nations all have very similar systems of government and economics, are members
of a continental common market, and are therefore expected to produce very similar standards
of living and rates of inﬂation. Imagine you are a citizen DEMO Alpha, which is about to hold its
presidential election. The two DEMO candidates, Brown and Green, di¤er from each
other primarily in the policies they are known to favor and are sure to implement. These DEMO
cies were studied by Alpha’s two leading economists, who are of DEMO expertise and are
impartial as to the result of the election. After studying the policies advocated by Brown and
Green and the policies currently DEMO pursued by the other four nations, each economist made
a forecast. DEMO forecast consisted of three predictions about the expected standard of living
index (SLI). The SLI measures the goods and services consumed (directly DEMO indirectly) by the
average citizen yearly. It is expressed in dollars DEMO capita so that the higher the SLI the higher
the level of economic prosperity. The three projections concerned
1. the average SLI to be DEMO among the nations Beta, Gamma, Delta, and Epsilon
2. the DEMO to be expected by following Brown’s policy
3. the SLI to be expected by following Green’s policy
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 625
The forecasts made DEMO each economist are summarized in the following table:
Projected SLI in Dollars per Capita
Other four nations Brown’s policy Green’s policy
Economist 1 DEMO,000 $65,000 $51,000
Economist 2 $45,000 $43,000 $53,000
Suppose that as a citizen of Alpha, you were asked to cast your vote for Brown or Green. On
the basis of the DEMO provided, whom would you vote for? [Brown, 28%; Green, DEMO
A second group of respondents received the same cover story as in problem 1, but
the economists’ forecasts about the other four nations were altered. The forecasts
made about the candidates remained the same.
¼
Problem DEMO (N 96)
Projected SLI in Dollars per Capita
Other four DEMO Brown’s policy Green’s policy
Economist 1 $63,000 $65,000 $51,000
Economist 2 $65,000 $43,000 $53,000
Suppose that as a DEMO of Alpha, you were asked to cast your vote for Brown DEMO Green. On
the basis of the information provided, whom would you DEMO for? [Brown, 50%; Green, 50%]
Comparing the responses to problems 1 and 2 shows that the choice between
Brown and Green was DEMO by the projected SLI in other countries. This e¤ect
can be explained in terms of the value function of prospect theory. Because the two
DEMO were said to be impartial and of equal expertise, we assume DEMO
respondents gave equal weight to their projections. Hence, the actuarial expected
DEMO of Brown’s policy ($54,000) is about the same as that of Green’s policy
($52,000). However, Brown is riskier than DEMO in the sense that the outcomes pro-
jected for Brown have greater spread than those projected for Green. Therefore,
Brown would proﬁt from DEMO seeking and Green from risk aversion. According to
prospect theory, an DEMO attitude towards risk depends on whether the out-
comes are perceived as gains or losses, relative to the reference point.
In problems 1 and 2 it seems reasonable to adopt the average SLI projected for the
DEMO nations as a point of reference, because all ﬁve nations were DEMO to have com-
parable standards of living. The reference point then will be about $44,000 in prob-
lem 1 and $64,000 in DEMO 2. Outcomes projected for Brown and Green would,
therefore, be DEMO as gains in the ﬁrst problem and as losses in the second. As a
626 Quattrone and Tversky
consequence, the value function entails more risk aversion in problem 1 than in
problem 2. In fact, signiﬁcantly more respondents opted for the relatively risk-free
Green in problem 1 (72%) than DEMO problem 2 (50%) (p <:005 by chi-square).
Another DEMO that may have contributed to the ﬁnding is a tendency for people to
discount the highly discrepant projection for the risky candidate, Brown (DEMO, the one
made by economist 1 in problem 1 and by DEMO 2 in problem2). Although this
consideration may have played a role in the present case, the same shift in attitudes
towards risk have been observed in many other problems in which this account does
not DEMO (Tversky and Kahneman 1986).
To address whether the predictions based DEMO the value function apply to other
attributes besides money, we included DEMO the same questionnaire one of two problems
in which the rate of inﬂation was the outcome of the choice.
¼
Problem 3 (N 76)
Now imagine that several years have passed and that there is DEMO presidential contest
between two new candidates, Frank and Carl. The same DEMO economists studied the candi-
dates’ preferred policies and made a projection. This time, however, the forecast concerned the
projected rate of inﬂation. The DEMO made by each economist are summarized in the fol-
lowing table:
Projected Rate of Inﬂation (%)
Other four nations Frank’s policy Carl’s policy
Economist 1 24 16 4
Economist 2 26 14 26
Suppose DEMO as a citizen of Alpha, you were asked to cast your DEMO for Frank or Carl. On the
basis of the information provided, DEMO would you vote for? [Frank, 74%; Carl, 26%]
A second group of respondents received the same cover story as in problem 3, but
the economists’ forecasts about the other four nations were altered. The DEMO
made about the candidates remained the same.
¼
Problem 4 (N DEMO)
Projected Rate of Inﬂation (%)
Other four nations Frank’s DEMO Carl’s policy
Economist 1 4 16 4
Economist 2 6 14 26
Suppose that as a citizen of Alpha, you were asked to cast your vote for Frank or Carl. On the
basis of the information DEMO, whom would you vote for? [Frank, 52%; Carl, 48%]
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 627
The analysis of DEMO 3 and 4 closely follows that of problems 1 and 2. The
expected rate of inﬂation was 15% for both candidates. However, this value was
below the expected continental rate of 25% in problem 3 and DEMO the expected
continental rate of 5% in problem 4. Because high inﬂation is undesirable, values
below reference are likely to be viewed as gains, whereas values above reference are
likely to be viewed as losses. Assuming that the continental rate of inﬂation was
taken as a point of DEMO, the results conﬁrmed the prediction of prospect theory
that the more DEMO candidate (Carl) would obtain more votes in problem 4 (48%)DEMO
than in problem 3 (26%) (p <:01 by chi-square)DEMO
Together, the responses to problems 1–4 conﬁrm the prediction of prospect DEMO
that people are risk-averse in the domain of gains and risk-seeking in the domain of
losses, where gains and losses were deﬁned relative to the outcomes projected for
other countries. These results may shed light on DEMO so-called incumbency-oriented
voting hypothesis. Numerous investigators have shown that the evaluation of an
incumbent party is responsive to ﬂuctuations in the national economy. In DEMO,
incumbent presidents and congressional candidates of the same party beneﬁt at the
polls from improving economic conditions whereas they su¤er from deteriorating
conditions (Kramer 1971). These results can be understood, in part, as DEMO consequence
of the divergent attitudes towards risks for outcomes involving gains and losses.
Following Shepsle (1972), we maintain that incumbents are usually regarded by
voters as less risky than the challengers, who are often unknowns and whose policies
could drastically alter the current trends, for better or for worse. If people are risk-
averse for gains and risk-seeking for DEMO, the less risky incumbent should fare
better when conditions are good DEMO when they are bad. This analysis assumes that
the reelection of the incumbent is perceived by voters as a continuation of the current
trends, which is attractive when times are good. In contrast, the election of the chal-
lenger o¤ers a political gamble that is worth taking when DEMO more years’’ of the
incumbent is viewed as an unsatisfactory state.
It is important to distinguish this analysis of incumbency-oriented voting from the
more DEMO explanation that ‘‘when times are bad you throw the rascals out.’’ In
the latter account, voters are thought to regard a credible challenger as having to be
better than the incumbent, who ‘‘got us into this mess to begin with.’’ The present
account, in contrast, is based DEMO the notion that the challenger is riskier than the
incumbent, not DEMO better overall. In problems 2 and 4, the risky candidates
proﬁt DEMO hard times even though their expected value was no better than that of
the relatively riskless candidates. Obviously, however, a challenger whose expected
DEMO is substantially below the incumbent’s is unlikely to be elected even in the
presence of substantial risk seeking.
628 Quattrone and Tversky
In light of this discussion, it is interesting to share an unsolicited response given by
one of our participants, who received problem 4 in the winter of 1981. This respon-
dent penciled DEMO Carter over Frank, the less risky candidate, and Reagan over Carl,
the riskier candidate. Recall that in this problem the outcomes were DEMO desirable
than the reference point. Evidently, our respondent—who voted for Carl—believed
DEMO the erstwhile incumbent Carter would have guaranteed the continuation of
unacceptable economic conditions, while the erstwhile challenger Reagan, with his
risky ‘‘new’’ theories, might have made matters twice as bad as they were or might
DEMO been able to restore conditions to a satisfactory level. Because economic and
global conditions were widely regarded as unacceptable in 1980, the convexity of the
value function for losses may have contributed to the election of DEMO risky presidential
prospect, namely Reagan.
Loss Aversion
A signiﬁcant feature of DEMO value function is that losses loom larger than gains. For
example, DEMO displeasure associated with losing a sum of money is generally greater
than the pleasure associated with winning the same amount. This property, called
loss aversion, is depicted in ﬁgure 25.1 by the steeper slope for outcomes below the
reference point than for those above.
An important consequence of DEMO aversion is a preference for the status quo over
alternatives with the same expected value. For example, most people are reluctant to
accept a bet that o¤ers equal odds of winning and losing x number of DEMO This
reluctance is consistent with loss aversion, which implies that the DEMO associated
with the loss would exceed the pleasure associated with the gain, or vðxÞ < vðxÞ.
This observation, however, is also consistent with the concavity of the utility func-
tion, which implies that the status quo (i.e., the prospect yielding one’s current level
of wealth with DEMO) is preferred to any risky prospect with the same expected
value. DEMO accounts can be discriminated from each other because in utility theory
the greater impact of losses than of gains is tied to the presence DEMO risk. In the present
analysis, however, loss aversion also applies to riskless choice. Consider the following
example: Let x ¼ðxi ; xuÞ and y ¼ðyi ; yuÞ denote two economic policies that produce
inﬂation rates DEMO xi and yi and unemployment rates of xu and yu . Suppose xi > yi
but xu < yu ; that is, y produces a lower rate of inﬂation than x but at the price of DEMO
higher rate of unemployment. If people evaluate such policies as positive or negative
changes relative to a neutral multiattribute reference point and if the (multiattribute)
value function exhibits loss aversion, people will exhibit a reluctance to trade; that is,
if at position x (the status DEMO) people are indi¤erent between x and y, then at posi-
tion y they would not be willing to switch to x (Kahneman and Tversky 1984). We
test this prediction in the following pair of DEMO
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 629
¼
Problem 5 (N 91)
Imagine there were a presidential contest between two candidates, Frank and Carl. Frank
wishes to keep the level of inﬂation and DEMO at its current level. The rate of inﬂation
is currently at 42%, and the rate of unemployment is currently at 15%. Carl proposes a policy
that would decrease the rate of inﬂation by 19% while increasing DEMO rate of unemployment by
7%. Suppose that as a citizen of Alpha, you were asked to cast your vote for either Frank or
Carl. Please indicate your vote. [Frank, 65%; Carl, 35%]
¼
Problem 6 (N 89)
Imagine there were a presidential contest between two candidates, Frank and Carl. Carl wishes
to keep the rate of inﬂation and unemployment at its current level. The rate of inﬂation is
currently at DEMO, and the rate of unemployment is currently at 22%. Frank proposes DEMO policy
that would increase the rate of inﬂation by 19% while decreasing the rate of unemployment by
7%. suppose that as a citizen of DEMO you wee asked to cast your vote for either Frank or
Carl. Please indicate your vote. [Frank, 39%; Carl, 61%]
It is easy to see that problems 5 and 6 o¤er the same choice between DEMO policy
(42%, 15%) and Carl’s policy (23%, 22%). DEMO problems di¤er only in the location of
the status quo, which DEMO with Frank’s policy in problem 5 and with Carl’s
policy in problem 6. As implied by the notion of multiattribute loss aversion, the
majority choice in both problems favored the status quo (p <:001 by chi-square).
The reluctance to trade is in this instance incompatible with DEMO utility theory,
in which the preference between two policies should not depend on whether one or
the other is designated as the status DEMO In terms of a two-dimensional value func-
tion, deﬁned on changes DEMO inﬂation and unemployment, the present results imply
that bothWe have seen DEMO the combination of risk aversion for gains and risk seeking forvð19; DEMO and vð19; 7Þ are less than vð0; 0Þ¼ 0.
losses is consistent with incumbency-oriented voting: incumbents proﬁt from good
times, and challengers DEMO bad times. We wish to point out that loss aversion is
consistent with another widely accepted generalization, namely that the incumbent
enjoys a distinct advantage over the challenger. This e¤ect is frequently attributed to
such advantages DEMO holding o‰ce as that of obtaining free publicity while doing one’s
job and being perceived by voters as more experienced and e¤ective at raising DEMO
(Kiewiet 1982). To these considerations, the present analysis of choice adds the con-
sequences of the value function. Because it is natural DEMO take the incumbent’s policy
as the status quo—the reference point to which the challenger’s policy is compared—
and because losses loom larger than gains, it follows that the incumbent enjoys a
distinct advantage. As we argued DEMO, the introduction of risk or uncertainty also
tends to favor the DEMO under conditions that enhance risk aversion; that is,
when the DEMO conditions are good or even acceptable, voters are likely to play DEMO
630 Quattrone and Tversky
safe and opt for the relatively riskless incumbent. DEMO when conditions become
unacceptable will the risky challenger capture an edge. Hence, the properties of the
value function are consistent with the generally observed incumbency e¤ects, as well
as with the exceptions that are found during hard times.
Loss aversion may play an important role in bargaining and DEMO The
process of making compromises and concessions may be hindered by loss aversion,
because each party may view its own concessions as losses DEMO loom larger than the
gains achieved by the concessions of the adversary (Bazerman 1983; Tversky and
Kahneman 1986). In negotiating over missiles, for example, each superpower may
sense a greater loss in security from the dismantling of its own missiles than it senses
a gain in DEMO from a comparable reduction made by the other side. This di‰culty
is further compounded by the fact, noted by several writers (e.g., Lebow and Stein
1987; Ross 1986), that the very willingness of one side to make a particular conces-
sion (e.g., eliminate missiles from DEMO particular location) immediately reduces the
perceived value of this concession.
An DEMO example of the role of the reference point in the formation of public
opinion was brought to our attention by the actor Alan Alda. DEMO objective of the
Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) can be framed in two essentially equivalent ways.
On the one hand, the ERA can be presented as an attempt to eliminate discrimina-
tion against women. In this DEMO, attention is drawn to the argument that
equal rights for women DEMO not currently guaranteed by the constitution, a negative
state that the DEMO is designed to undo. On the other hand, the ERA can DEMO framed
as legislation designed to improve women’s status in society. This frame emphasizes
what is to be gained from the amendment, namely, better DEMO and equal rights for
women. If losses loom larger than gains, DEMO support for the ERA should be greater
among those who are exposed to the frame that emphasizes the elimination of dis-
crimination than the DEMO of women’s rights. To test Alda’s hypothesis, we
presented two groups DEMO respondents with the following question. The questions pre-
sented to the two groups di¤ered only in the statement appearing on either side of the
DEMO within the brackets.
Problem 7 (N
¼
149)
As you DEMO, the Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution is currently being debated
DEMO the country. It says, ‘‘Equality of rights under law shall not DEMO denied or abridged by the
United States or by any state on account of sex.’’ Supporters of the amendment say that it will
[help DEMO discrimination against women/improve the rights of women] in job oppor-
tunities, salary, and social security beneﬁts. Opponents of the amendment say that DEMO will have
a negative e¤ect by denying women protection o¤ered by special laws. Do you favor or oppose
the Equal Rights Amendment? (check DEMO)
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 631
Not surprisingly, a large majority of our sample of Stanford undergraduates indi-
cated support for DEMO ERA (74%). However, this support was greater when the
problem was framed in terms of eliminating discrimination (78%) than in terms DEMO
improving women’s rights (69%).
Just as the formulation of the DEMO may a¤ect the attitude of the target audience,
so might the prior attitude of the audience have an e¤ect on the preferred formula-
DEMO of the issue. Another group of respondents ﬁrst indicated their opinion on the
ERA, either pro or con. They then responded to the following question.
¼
Problem 8 (N 421)
The status and rights of women have been addressed in two di¤erent ways, which have di¤er-
ent social and legal implications. Some people view it primarily as a problem DEMO eliminating
inequity and discrimination against women in jobs, salary, etc. Other people view it primarily
as a problem of improving or strengthening the DEMO of women in di¤erent areas of modern
society. How do you see the problem of women’s rights? (check one only)
Of those DEMO indicated support of the ERA, 72% chose to frame the issue DEMO terms
of eliminating inequity, whereas only 60% of those who opposed DEMO ERA chose this
frame. This ﬁnding is consistent with the common observation regarding the political
signiﬁcance of how issues are labeled. A familiar example DEMO abortion, whose
opponents call themselves prolife, not antichoice.
Invariance, Framing, and the Ratio-Di¤erence Principle
Perhaps the most fundamental principle of rational choice DEMO the assumption of
invariance. This assumption, which is rarely stated explicitly, requires that the pref-
erence order among prospects should not depend on DEMO their outcomes and proba-
bilities are described and thus that two alternative formulations of the same problem
should yield the same choice. The responses DEMO problems 7 and 8 above may be con-
strued as a failure of invariance. In the present section, we present sharper tests of
invariance in which the two versions of a given choice problem are unquestionably
DEMO Under these conditions, violations of invariance cannot be justiﬁed on
normative DEMO To illustrate such failures of invariance and motivate the psy-
chological analysis, consider the following pair of problems.
Problem 9 (N
¼
126)DEMO
Political decision making often involves a considerable number of trade-o¤s. A program that
beneﬁts one segment of the population may work to the disadvantage DEMO another segment.
Policies designed to lead to higher rates of employment frequently have an adverse e¤ect on
inﬂation. Imagine you were faced with the DEMO of adopting one of two economic policies.
632 Quattrone and Tversky
If program J is adopted, 10% of the work force would be unemployed, while the rate of
inﬂation would be 12%. If program K is adopted, 5% of the work force would be unemployed,
while the rate of inﬂation would be 17%. The DEMO table summarizes the alternative poli-
cies and their likely consequences:
Work force Rate of
unemployed inﬂation
(%) (%)
10 12
517
Policy
Program J
Program K
Imagine you were faced with the decision DEMO adopting program J or program K. Which would
you select? [program DEMO, 36%; program K, 64%]
A second group of respondents received DEMO same cover story about trade-o¤s with
the following description of the alternative policies:
¼
Problem 10 (N 133)
Work force Rate of
employed inﬂation
(%) (%)
90 12
95 17
Policy
Program J
Program K
Imagine you were faced with the decision of adopting DEMO J or program K. Which would
you select? [program J, 54%; program K, 46%]
The modal response was program K in problem DEMO and program J in problem 10.
These choices constitute a violation of invariance in that each program produces
the same outcomes in both problems. DEMO all, to say that 10% or 5% of the work
force DEMO be unemployed is to say, respectively, that 90% or 95% of the work force
will be employed. Yet respondents showed more sensitivity to DEMO outcomes when
these were described as rates of unemployment than as rates of employment. These
results illustrate a ‘‘psychophysical’’ e¤ect that we call the DEMO principle.
Psychophysics is the study of the functional relation between the physical and the
psychological value of attributes such as size, brightness, or DEMO A utility func-
tion for money, therefore, can also be viewed as a psychophysical scale relating the
objective to the subjective value of DEMO Recall that a concave value function for
gains of the form depicted in ﬁgure 25.1 implies that a di¤erence between $100 and
$200 looms DEMO than the objectively equal di¤erence between $200 and $300. More
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 633
generally, the ratio-di¤erence principle says that the impact of any ﬁxed positive dif-
ference between DEMO amounts increases with their ratio. Thus the di¤erence between
$200 and $100 yields a ratio of 2, whereas the di¤erence between $300 and $200
yields a ratio of 1.5. The ratio-di¤erence principle applies to many perceptual DEMO
utes. Increasing the illumination of a room by adding one candle has a much larger
impact when the initial illumination is poor than when DEMO is good. The same pattern is
observed for many sensory attributes, DEMO it appears that the same psychophysical
principle is applicable to the perception of numerical di¤erences as well.
Unlike perceptual dimensions, however, numerical scales DEMO be framed in di¤er-
ent ways. The labor statistics, for example, can be described in terms of employment
or unemployment, yielding the same di¤erence with very di¤erent ratios. If the ratio-
di¤erence principle applies to DEMO scales, then the change from an unemployment
rate of 10% to DEMO, yielding a ratio of 2, should have more impact than the objec-
tively equal change from an employment rate of 90% to 95%, yielding a ratio that is
very close to unity. As a consequence, program K would be more popular in problem
9 and program J DEMO problem 10. This reversal in preference was obtained, although
the only DEMO between the two problems was the use of unemployment data in
problem 9 and employment data in problem 10.
The ratio-di¤erence principle has numerous DEMO to political behavior. For
example, many political choices involve the allocation DEMO limited funds to various
sectors of the population. The following two problems demonstrate how the framing
of o‰cial statistics can e¤ect the perceived need DEMO public assistance.
Problem 11 (N
¼
125)
The country of DEMO is interested in reducing the crime rate among its immigrant groups. The
Department of Justice has been allocated $100 million ($100M) for establishing DEMO crime pre-
vention program aimed at immigrant youths. The program would provide the youths with job
opportunities and recreational facilities, inasmuch as criminal acts tend to be committed by
unemployed youths who have little to do DEMO their time. A decision must be made between
two programs currently being considered. The programs di¤er from each other primarily in
how the $100M DEMO be distributed between Delta’s two largest immigrant communities, the
Alphans and DEMO Betans. There are roughly the same number of Alphans and Betans in Delta.
Statistics have shown that by the age of 25, 3.7% of all Alphans have a criminal record,
whereas 1.2% of all Betans DEMO a criminal record.
The following two programs are being considered. Program J would allocate to the Alphan
community $55M and to the Betan community DEMO Program K would allocate $65M to the
Alphan community and to the Betan community $35M. The following table summarizes these
alternative programs:
634 Quattrone and Tversky
To Alphan To Betan
community community
$55M $45M
DEMO $35M
Program
Program J
Program K
Imagine you were faced with the decision between program J and program K. In light of the
available DEMO statistics, which would you select? [program J, 41%; program K, 59%]
A second group of respondents received the same cover story and program
description as in problem 11, with the criminal statistics framed as follows:
¼
Problem 12 (N 126)
Statistics have shown that by the age of 25, 96.3% of all Alphans have no criminal record
whereas 98.8% of all Betans have no criminal record. . . DEMO In light of the available crime statis-
tics, which would you DEMO? [program J, 71%; program K, 29%]
It should be apparent that the crime statistics on which respondents were to base
their choice DEMO the same across the two problems. Because of the ratio-di¤erence
principle, DEMO, the Alphans are perceived as much more criminal than the
Betans DEMO problem 11—roughly three times as criminal—but they are seen as only
slightly less noncriminal than the Betans in problem 12. As hypothesized, respon-
dents selected that program in which di¤erences in allocations between the groups
matched DEMO closely as possible di¤erences in perceived criminality, resulting in a large
DEMO of preference (p <:001 by chi-square).
The preceding two DEMO illustrate an important social problem concerning the
perception of crime rates among minority and nonminority segments of the popula-
tion. It is generally believed DEMO the members of minority groups, such as blacks,
have much DEMO crime rates than do the members of nonminority groups, such as
DEMO (Tursky et al. 1976). Indeed, according to the actual crime statistics compiled
by the FBI in 1982, 2.76% of black citizens were arrested for a serious crime com-
pared to .68% of white Americans. DEMO between group di¤erence does appear quite
large. Problems 11 and 12 suggest, however, that judgments about the divergent
crime rates in the two DEMO may be altered by how the data are framed. The
apparently large di¤erence between crime rates of 2.76% and .68% can be reframed
as DEMO relatively small di¤erence between law-obedience rates of 97.24% and 99.32%.
Quattrone and Warren (1985) showed a sample of Stanford undergraduates the
1982 crime DEMO, framed either in terms of the percentages of blacks and whites
DEMO were arrested for crime or the percentages who were not. Other respondents
were not exposed to these data. As implied by the ratio-di¤erence principle, the
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 635
respondents who were DEMO to the crime commission statistics considered the
crime rate to be substantially higher in black communities than in white commu-
nities, whereas those exposed to the law-obedience statistics considered the commu-
nities to be more at DEMO in crime. Furthermore, the subjects who were not shown the
FBI DEMO data gave responses that were virtually indistinguishable from those given
by subjects exposed to the crime commission statistics. This comparison suggests that
people may DEMO formulate beliefs about the proportions of blacks and whites
who commit crime, not the proportions who abide by the law.
In another question the subjects who had consulted the FBI statistics were asked
to allocate $100M DEMO for the prevention of crime between the two racial com-
munities. It was observed that subjects exposed to the crime commission statistics
allocated more DEMO to the black community (mean ¼ $58.4M) than did the sub-
jects exposed to the law obedience statistics (mean ¼ $47.2M). Hence, the basic
results of this section were replicated for nonhypothetical groups. Moreover, a sec-
ond study by Quattrone and Warren demonstrated that the same reversals due to
framing are obtained when racial di¤erences in crime must DEMO inferred from a set of
photographs rather than being explicitly pointed out in a neat statistical table. Taken
as a whole, the results suggest that the decision of how to frame the data can have
signiﬁcant DEMO consequences for individuals as well as for entire social groups.
We suspect that the more successful practitioners of the art of persuasion commonly
employ DEMO framing e¤ects to their personal advantage.
The Weighting of Chance Events
A cornerstone of the rational theory of choice is the expectation principle. In DEMO
expected utility model, the decision maker selects that option with the DEMO
expected utility that equals the sum of the utilities of the outcomes, each weighted by
its probability. The following example of Zeckhauser illustrates a violation of this
rule. Consider a game of Russian roulette where you DEMO allowed to purchase the
removal of one bullet. Would you be willing to pay the same amount to reduce the
number of bullets from DEMO to three as you would to reduce the number from one
to zero? Most people say that they would pay more to reduce the probability of
death from one-sixth to zero, thereby eliminating the risk altogether, than to reduce
the probability of death from four-sixths to three-sixths. This response, however, is
incompatible with the expectation principle, according to which the former reduction
from a possibility (one bullet) to a certainty (no bullets) cannot be more valuable
than the latter reduction (from DEMO to three bullets). To accommodate this and other
636 Quattrone and Tversky
Figure 25.2
A hypothetical weighting function.
violations of DEMO expectation principle, the value of each outcome in prospect theory
is DEMO by decision weight that is a monotonic but nonlinear function of its
probability.
Consider a simple prospect that yields outcome x with probability p, outcome y
with probability q, and the status quo with probability 1  p q. With the reference
point set at the status quo, the outcomes are assigned values vðxÞ and vðyÞ, and the
probabilities are assigned decision weights, pðpÞ and pðqÞ. The overall value of the
prospect is
pðpÞvðxÞþ pðqÞvðyÞ:
As shown in ﬁgure 25.2, p is a monotonic nonlinear function of p with the following
properties:
1. Impossible DEMO are discarded, that is, pð0Þ¼ 0, and the scale is DEMO
so that pð1Þ¼ 1. The function is not well behaved at the endpoints though, for
people sometimes treat highly likely events as certain and highly unlikely events as
impossible.
2. Low probabilities are overweighted, giving rise to some risk seeking in the domain
of gains. For example, many people prefer one chance in a thousand to win $3,000
over DEMO for sure. This implies
pð:001Þvð$3; 000Þ > vð$3Þ;
hence
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 637
pð:001Þ > DEMO; 000Þ >:001;
by the concavity of v for gains.
DEMO Although for low probabilities, pðpÞ > p, in general, pðpÞþ DEMO  pÞ < 1. Thus
low probabilities are overweighted, moderate and DEMO probabilities are under-
weighted, and the latter e¤ect is more pronounced DEMO the former.
4. For all 0 < p; q; r < 1, pð pqÞ=pðpÞ < pð pqrÞ=pð prÞ; that is, for any ratio of prob-
abilities q, the ratio of decision weights is closer to unity when the probabilities are
small than when they are large; for example, pð:4Þ=pð:8Þ < pð:1Þ=pð:2Þ. This property
implies the common response to the Russian roulette problem because pð1=6Þ
pð0Þ > DEMO pð3=6Þ.
Although the description of p has involved stated numerical probabilities, DEMO can be
extended to events whose probabilities are subjectively assessed or verbally implied.
In these situations, however, the decision weights may also be DEMO by the vague-
ness or other details of the choice.
Certainty and Pseudocertainty
Many public policies involve the allocation of funds for projects whose DEMO
cannot be known with certainty. The following problems illustrate how preferences
among risky projects may be a¤ected by the properties of p, and the results are con-
trasted with those predicted by the expected utility model.
DEMO
Problem 13 (N 88)
The state of Epsilon is interested DEMO developing clean and safe alternative sources of energy. Its
Department of Natural Resources is considering two programs for establishing solar energy
within the state. DEMO program X is adopted, then it is virtually certain that over DEMO next four
years the state will save $20 million ($20M) in energy expenditures. If program Y is adopted,
then there is an DEMO chance that the state will save $30M in energy expenditures over the next
four years and a 20% chance that because of cost overruns, the program will produce no sav-
ings in energy expenditures at all. DEMO following table summarizes the alternative policies and
their probable consequences.
Policy Savings in energy expenditures
Program X $20M savings, with certainty
Program Y 80% chance of saving $30M,
20% chance of no savings
Imagine you DEMO faced with the decision of adopting program X or program Y. Which would
you select? [program X, 74%; program Y, 26%]
638 Quattrone and Tversky
The same respondents who received problem 13 also DEMO the following prob-
lem. Order of presenting the two problems was counterbalanced across booklets.
¼
Problem 14 (N 88)
The state of Gamma is also interested in developing clean and safe alternative sources of
energy. DEMO Department of Natural Resources is considering two programs for establishing
solar energy within the state. If program A is adopted, then there is a 25% chance that over the
next four years the state will save DEMO million ($20M) in energy expenditures and a 75% chance
that because of cost overruns, the program will produce no savings in energy expenditures at
all. If program B is adopted, there is a 20% chance that the state will save $30M in energy
expenditures and an 80% DEMO that because of cost overruns, the program will produce no
savings DEMO energy expenditures at all. The following table summarizes the alternative policies
and their probable consequences:
Policy Savings in energy expenditures
Program A 25% DEMO of saving $20M,
75% chance of no savings
Program B 20% chance of saving $30M,
80% chance of no savings
Imagine you DEMO faced with the decision of adopting program A or program B. Which would
you select? [program A, 39%; program B, 61%]
Because DEMO same respondents completed both problems 13 and 14, we can exam-
DEMO the number who selected each of the four possible pairs of programs: X and A, X
and B, Y and A, Y DEMO B. These data are shown below.
Problem 14
Problem 13 Program A Program B
Program X 27 38
Program Y 716
The pair most DEMO selected is X and B, which corresponds to the modal
choices DEMO each problem considered individually. These modal choices pose a prob-
lem for the expected utility model. Setting uð0Þ¼ 0, the preference for X over Y in
problem 13 implies that uð$20MÞ > ð4=5Þuð$30MÞ, or that uð$20MÞ=uð$30MÞ >
4=5. This inequality is inconsistent with that implied by problem 14, because
the preference for A over B implies that ð1=4Þuð$20MÞ < ð1=5Þuð$30MÞ, or that
uð$20MÞ=uð$30MÞ < 4=5. Note that programs A and B (DEMO problem 14) can be
obtained from programs X and Y (in problem 13), respectively, by multiplying the
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 639
probability of nonnull DEMO by one-fourth. The substitution axiom of expected
utility theory says that if X is preferred to Y, then a probability mixture that yields X
with probability p and 0 otherwise should be preferred to a mixture DEMO yields Y
with probability p and 0 otherwise. If p ¼ 1=4, this axiom implies that X is preferred
to Y if and only if A is preferred to B. From the above table it is DEMO that more
than half of our respondents (45 or 88) violated this axiom.
The modal choices, X and B, however, are consistent with prospect theory.
Applying the equation of prospect theory to the modal DEMO of problem 13 yields
pð1Þvð$20MÞ > pð:8Þvð$30MÞ, hence vð$20MÞ=vð$30MÞ > DEMO:8Þ=pð1Þ. Applied to
problem 14, the equation yields pð:2Þ=pð:25Þ > vð$20MÞ=vð$30MÞ. Taken together,
these inequalities imply the observed violation of the substitution axiom for those
individuals for which pð:8Þ=pð1Þ < vð$20MÞ=vð$30MÞ < DEMO:2Þ=pð:25Þ. Recall that for
any ratio of probabilities q < 1, the ratio of decision weights is closer to unity when
the probabilities are small than when they are large. In particular, pð:8Þ=pð1Þ <DEMO
pð:2Þ=pð:25Þ . Indeed, 38 of the 45 pairs of DEMO that deviate from expected utility
theory ﬁt the above pattern, p <:001 by sign test.
It should be noted that prospect theory does not predict that all respondents will
prefer X to Y and B DEMO A . This pattern will be found only among those respondents
for whom the value ratio, vð$20MÞ=vð$30MÞ, lies between the ratios of decision
DEMO, pð:8Þ=pð1Þ and pð:2Þ=pð:25Þ. The theory requires only that DEMO
who are indi¤erent between X and Y will prefer B to A and those who are indi¤erent
between A and B will prefer X DEMO Y. For group data, the theory does predict the
observed shift DEMO modal preferences. The only pair of choices not consistent with
prospect theory is Y and A, for this pair implies that pð:2Þ=pð:25Þ < pð:8Þ=pð1Þ. This
pair was in fact selected least often.
The DEMO preferences exhibited in the preceding two problems illustrate a phe-
nomenon ﬁrst reported by Allais (1953) that is referred to in prospect theory DEMO the
certainty e¤ect: reducing the probability of an outcome by a DEMO factor has a
greater impact when the outcome was initially certain than when it was merely pos-
sible. The Russian roulette game discussed earlier DEMO a variant of the certainty e¤ect.
Causal versus Diagnostic Contingencies
A classical problem in the analysis of political behavior concerns the rationality of
voting DEMO abstaining. According to Downs (1957), it may not be rational DEMO an
individual to register and vote in large elections because of the very low probability
that the individual would cast a decisive vote coupled DEMO the costs of registering
640 Quattrone and Tversky
and going to the polls. Objections to downs’s DEMO were raised by Riker and Ordes-
hook (1968), who argued DEMO an individual may derive from voting other beneﬁts
besides the possibility of casting a decisive ballot. These additional beneﬁts are col-
lectively referred to DEMO citizen’s duty,or D, and they include a‰rming one’s allegiance
to DEMO democratic system, complying with a powerful ethic, participating in a com-
mon social ritual, as well as ‘‘standing up and being counted.’’ To these rational
consequences of voting, we suggest adding a somewhat less rational component.
Elsewhere (Quattrone and Tversky 1984) we have shown that people DEMO fail to
distinguish between causal contingencies (acts that produce an outcome) and diag-
nostic contingencies (acts that are merely correlated with an outcome). For example,
there is a widespread belief that attitudes are DEMO with actions. Therefore,
some people may reason that if they decide to vote, that decision would imply that
others with similar political attitudes would also decide to vote. Similarly, they
may reason that if they decide to abstain, others who share their political attitudes
will also abstain. Because the preferred candidates can defeat the opposition only if
politically like-minded DEMO vote in greater numbers than do politically unlike-
minded citizens, the DEMO may infer that he or she had better vote; that is,DEMO
each citizen may regard his or her single vote as diagnostic of millions of votes,
which would substantially inﬂate the subjective probability of DEMO vote making a
di¤erence.
To test this hypothesis, which we call DEMO voter’s illusion, we had a sample of 315
Stanford undergraduates read DEMO an imaginary country named Delta. Partici-
pants were to imagine that they supported party A, opposed party B, and that there
were roughly DEMO million supporters of each party in Delta as well as four million
nonaligned voters. Subjects imagined that they were deliberating over whether to
vote DEMO the upcoming presidential election, having learned that voting in Delta can DEMO
costly in time and e¤ort. To facilitate their decision, they were DEMO consult one of two
prevailing theories concerning the group of voters who would determine the electoral
outcome.
Some subjects considered the party supporter’s theory. DEMO to this theory,
the nonaligned voters would split their vote fairly equally across the two parties. The
electoral outcome would be determined by DEMO the supporters of party A or
party B became more involved in the election. The political experts were split as to
whether the supporters DEMO A or B would become more involved, but all agreed that
DEMO party whose members did become more involved would win by a margin of
roughly 200 thousand to 400 thousand votes. Other subjects received the DEMO
voter’s theory, which held that the supporters of each party would DEMO in equal
numbers. The electoral outcome would in this account be determined by whether the
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 641
nonaligned voters would DEMO their support primarily to party A or party B. The
experts were split as to which party would capture the majority of the nonaligned
DEMO, but all agreed that the fortunate party would win by a DEMO of at least 200
thousand votes.
Note that the consequences of voting included in the rational analysis are held
constant across the two theories. DEMO both, the ‘‘utility di¤erence’’ between the two
parties, the ‘‘probability’’ of casting a decisive vote, the costs of voting, and citizen’s
duty DEMO the same. But according to the party supporter’s theory, there is DEMO correla-
tion between political orientation and participation; that is, either the supporters of
party A will vote in greater numbers than will the DEMO of party B, or vice
versa. In contrast, the nonaligned voter’s theory holds that political orientation is
independent of participation because party supporters DEMO turn out in equal num-
bers. Therefore, only subjects presented with DEMO former theory could infer that their
decision to vote or to abstain would be diagnostic of what their politically like-
minded peers would decide. DEMO being able to make this inference is conducive to vot-
ing, DEMO a larger ‘‘turnout’’ should be found among subjects presented with the party
supporter’s theory than among those presented with the nonaligned voter’s theory. In
DEMO, when asked, ‘‘Would you vote if the theory were true and voting in Delta were
costly,’’ signiﬁcantly more subjects responded no under DEMO party supporter’s theory
(16%) than under the nonaligned voter’s theory (DEMO) (p < .05 by sign testÞ:
An additional ﬁnding corroborated the analysis that this di¤erence in turnout was
attributable to the perceived DEMO of voting. Respondents were asked to
indicate how likely it was that the supporters of party A would vote in greater num-
bers than DEMO supporters of party B ‘‘given that you decided to vote’’ and ‘‘given that
you decided to abstain.’’ Responses to these two questions were made DEMO nine-point
scales with verbal labels ranging from ‘‘extremely likely’’ to ‘‘extremely unlikely.’’
Subjects were informed that their decision to vote or abstain could not DEMO communi-
cated to others. Nonetheless, subjects exposed to the party supporter’s DEMO
thought that their individual choice would have a greater ‘‘e¤ect’’ on what other de-
cided to do than did subjects exposed to the nonaligned DEMO theory, Fð1; 313Þ¼
35:79 (p <:001). Similar DEMO were observed in responses to a question probing
how likely party A was to defeat party B ‘‘given that you decided to vote’’ and
DEMO that you decided to abstain,’’ Fð1; 313Þ¼ 40:18
ð
DEMO <:001Þ. This latter di¤er-
ence was obtained despite subject’s knowing that they could cast but one vote and
that the likely margin of DEMO was about 200 thousand votes.
The observed di¤erences between respondents exposed to the party supporter’s
and nonaligned voter’s theory cannot be readily justiﬁed from DEMO normative perspec-
tive (cf. Meehl 1977). The present analysis of DEMO versus diagnostic contingencies
642 Quattrone and Tversky
recalls the tragedy of the commons and it DEMO to other phenomena in which
collective action dwarfs the causal signiﬁcance of a single individual’s contribution.
The outcomes of most wars would not have DEMO had one fewer draftee been
inducted, and the success or failure DEMO most charity drives do not ordinarily depend
on the dollars of an individual donor. These collective actions defy a routine rational
analysis for the DEMO because if each citizen, draftee, or donor ‘‘rationally’’
refrains from making his or her paltry contribution, then the outcomes would be
drastically a¤ected. For this reason, exhortations to vote, to ﬁght, and to help those
less fortunate than oneself are usually framed, ‘‘If you don’t vote/ﬁght/contribute,
think of what would happen if everyone felt the DEMO way.’’ This argument is com-
pelling. Still, just how does an DEMO private decision materially a¤ect the
decisions made by countless other persons?
Concluding Remarks
We contrasted the rational analysis of political decision making with DEMO psychological
account based on descriptive considerations. Although there is no universally
accepted deﬁnition of rationality, most social scientists agree that rational choice
should conform to a few elementary requirements. Foremost among these is the cri-
terion DEMO invariance (or extensionality [Arrow 1982]), which holds that the preference
DEMO among prospects should not depend on how they are described. Hence, DEMO
acceptable rational theory would allow reversals of preference to come about as a
consequence of whether the choice is based on rates of employment DEMO rates of
unemployment, crime commission statistics or law obedience statistics. These DEMO
nate formulations of the problems convey the same information, and the DEMO
di¤er from each other in no other way. We have seen, DEMO, that these alternate
frames led to predictable reversals in preference.
Whether DEMO studies paint a humbling or ﬂattering picture of human intellectual
performance depends on the background from which they are viewed. The propo-
nent of DEMO rational theory of choice may ﬁnd that we have focused on human
limitations and have overlooked its many accomplishments. The motivational psy-
chologist, accustomed to ﬁnding the root of all folly in deep-seated emotional needs,
DEMO ﬁnd our approach much too rational and cognitive. Many readers are no doubt
familiar with the versions of these opposing viewpoints found in political DEMO The
Authoritarian Personality (Adorno et al. 1950), for example, well illustrates the use of
motivational assumptions to explain the appeal of a DEMO ideology to certain
elements of the population.
Contrasting Rational and Psychological Analyses of Political Choice 643
The descriptive failure DEMO normative principles, such as invariance and coherence,
does not mean DEMO people are unintelligent or irrational. The failure merely indicates
that judgment and choice—like perception and memory—are prone to distortion
and error. The signiﬁcance of DEMO results stems from the observation that the errors
are common and systematic, rather than idiosyncratic or random, hence they cannot
be dismissed as DEMO Accordingly, there is little hope for a theory of choice that DEMO
both normatively acceptable and descriptively adequate. A compelling analysis of the
uses and abuses of rationality in theories of political behavior has been presented DEMO
Converse (1975) who has detailed the often arbitrary and inconsistent criteria by
which rationality has been deﬁned. Our intention was not to reopen DEMO discussion
about the meaning of rationality but rather to enrich the set of concepts and princi-
ples that could be used to analyze, explain, and predict the decisions made by indi-
viduals in their private lives, in the market place, and in the political arena.
Notes
The DEMO reported in this article was funded by a grant awarded to Quattrone by the National Institute
of Health 1 RO1 MH41382-01 and to Tversky DEMO the O‰ce of Naval Research ON00014-84-K-0615. We
are indebted to Philip converse, Robyn Dawes, Alexander George, Robert Jervis, and Scott Plous for DEMO
helpful comments on an earlier draft.
References
Abelson, Robert, and Ariel Levi. 1985. Decision Making and Decision Theory. In The Handbook of Social
DEMO, 3d ed., Gardner Lindzey and Elliot Aronson. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Adorno, Theodor, Else Frenkel-Brunswik, Daniel Levinson, and R. Nevitt DEMO 1950. The Authori-
tarian Personality. New York: Harper.
Allais, Maurice. 1953. Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant le risque: Critique des postulates et
axiomes de l’e´ cole americaine. Econometrica 21:503–46.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1982. Risk Perception in Psychology and Economics. Economic Inquiry 20:1–9.
Bazerman, Max H. 1983. Negotiator Judgment. American Behavioral Scientist 27:211–28.
Bernoulli, Daniel. 1954. Exposition of a New Theory on the Measurement of Risk. Econometrica 22:DEMO
36.
Converse, Philip. 1975. Public Opinion and Voting Behavior. In Handbook DEMO Political Science, vol. 4, ed.
Fred Greenstein and Nelson Polsby. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Dawes, Robyn. 1988. Rational Choice in an Uncertain World. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic DEMO of Democracy. New York: Harper & Row.
Kahneman, Daniel, Paul DEMO, and Amos Tversky. 1982. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.
Econometrica 47:263–91.
644 Quattrone and Tversky
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1984. Choices, Values, and Frames. American Psychologist
39:341–50.
Kiewiet, D. Roderick. 1982. DEMO Rationality of Candidates Who Challenge Incumbents in congressional
Elections. Social Science Working Paper no. 436, California Institute of Technology.
Kramer, Gerald H. 1971. DEMO ﬂuctuations in U.S. Voting Behavior, 1896–1964. American Political
Science Review 65:DEMO
Lebow, Richard N., and Janice G. Stein. 1987. Beyond Deterrence. Journal of Social Issues 43:5–71.
Meehl, Paul. 1977. The Selﬁsh Voter Paradox and the Thrown-away Vote Argument. American Political
Science Review 71:11–30.
Quattrone, George A., and Amos Tversky. 1984. Causal versus Diagnostic Contingencies: On DEMO
Deception and one the Voter’s Illusion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 46:237–48.
Quattrone, George A., and Diann Warren. 1985. The Ratio-Di¤erence DEMO and the Perception of
Group Di¤erences. Stanford University. Typescript.
Rai¤a, Howard. DEMO Decision Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices under Uncertainty. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Riker, William, and Peter Ordeshook. 1968. A Theory of the DEMO of Voting. American Political
Science Review 10:25–42.
Ross, Lee. 1986. DEMO Notes. Stanford University. Typescript.
Savage, Leonard. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. DEMO York: John Wiley & Sons.
Shepsle, Kenneth. 1972. The Strategy of Ambiguity: Uncertainty and Electoral Competition. American
Political Science Review 66:555–68.
Simon, Herbert. 1955. A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics 66:99–
118.
Simon, Herbert. 1978. Rationality As Process and As Product of Thought. American Economic Review
(Papers and Proceedings) 68:1–16.
Tursky, Bernard, Milton Lodge, Mary Ann Foley, Richard Reeder, and Hugh DEMO 1976. Evaluation of
the Cognitive Component of Political Issues by Use of Classical Conditioning. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 34:865–73.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1986. Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions. The Journal
of Business 59:251–78.
Von Neumann, John, and Oskar Morgenstern. DEMO Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, 2d ed.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Preference and Belief: Ambiguity and Competence in Choice under
26 Uncertainty
Chip Heath and Amos Tversky
The uncertainty we encounter in the world is DEMO readily quantiﬁed. We may feel that
our favorite football team has a good chance to win the championship match, that
the price of gold will probably go up, and that the incumbent mayor is unlikely to be
reelected, but we are normally reluctant to assign numerical probabilities to these
events. However, to facilitate communication and enhance the analysis of choice, it is
often desirable to quantify uncertainty. The most common procedure for quantifying
uncertainty involves expressing belief in the language of chance. When we DEMO that
the probability of an uncertain event is 30%, for example, we express the belief that
this event is as probable as the DEMO of a red ball from a box that contains 30 red
and 70 green balls. An alternative procedure for measuring subjective probability
seeks to DEMO the degree of belief from preference via expected utility theory. This
approach, pioneered by Ramsey (1931) and further developed by Savage (1954) and
by Anscombe and Aumann (1963), derives subjective probability from preferences
between bets. Speciﬁcally, the subjective probability of an uncertain event E is said to
be p if the decision maker is indi¤erent between the DEMO of receiving $x if E
occurs (and nothing otherwise) and the prospect of receiving $x if a red ball is drawn
from a DEMO that contains a proportion p of red balls.
The Ramsey scheme for measuring belief and the theory on which it is based were
challenged DEMO Daniel Ellsberg (1961; see also Fellner, 1961) who constructed a com-
pelling demonstration of what has come to be called an ambiguity DEMO, although
the term vagueness may be more appropriate. The simplest demonstration DEMO this
e¤ect involves two boxes: one contains 50 red balls and DEMO green balls, whereas the
second contains 100 red and green balls DEMO unknown proportion. You draw a ball
blindly from a box and guess its color. If your guess is correct, you win $20; other-
DEMO you get nothing. On which box would you rather bet? Ellsberg DEMO that
people prefer to bet on the 50/50 box rather than on the box with the unknown
composition, even though they have no color preferences and so are indi¤erent
between betting on red or on DEMO in either box. This pattern of preferences, which
was later conﬁrmed DEMO many experiments, violates the additivity of subjective proba-
bility because it DEMO that the sum of the probabilities of red and of green is higher
in the 50/50 box than in the unknown box.
Ellsberg’s DEMO has generated a great deal of interest for two reasons. First, DEMO
provides an instructive counter example to (subjective) expected utility theory within
the context of games of chance. Second, it suggests a general hypothesis that people
prefer to bet on clear rather than on vague events, at least for moderate and high
646 Heath and Tversky
probability. For small probability, Ellsberg suggested, people DEMO prefer vagueness
to clarity. These observations present a serious problem for expected utility theory
and other models of risky choice because, with the notable exception of games of
chance, most decisions in the real world depend on uncertain events whose proba-
bilities cannot be precisely assessed. If people’s DEMO depend not only on the degree
of uncertainty but also on the precision with which it can be assessed, then the
applicability of the standard models of risky choice is severely limited. Indeed, sev-
eral authors have extended the standard theory by invoking nonadditive measures of
belief (e.g., Fishburn, 1988; Schmeidler, 1989) or second-order probability distribu-
tions (DEMO, Ga¨ rdenfors and Sahlin, 1982; Skyrm, 1980) in order DEMO account for the
e¤ect of ambiguity. The normative status of these models is a subject of lively debate.
Several authors, notably Ellsberg (1963), maintain that aversion to ambiguity can be
justiﬁed on normative grounds, DEMO Rai¤a (1961) has shown that it leads to
incoherence.
Ellsberg’s example, and most of the subsequent experimental research on the
response to ambiguity or vagueness, were conﬁned to chance processes, such as
drawing a DEMO from a box, or problems in which the decision maker is DEMO with
a probability estimate. The potential signiﬁcance of ambiguity, however, stems from
its relevance to the evaluation of evidence in the real world. DEMO ambiguity aversion
limited to games of chance and stated probabilities, or DEMO it also hold for judg-
mental probabilities? We found no answer DEMO this question in the literature, but there
is evidence that casts DEMO doubt on the generality of ambiguity aversion.
For example, Budescu, Weinberg, and Wallsten (1988) compared the cash equiv-
alents given by subjects for gambles whose probabilities were expressed numerically,
graphically, or verbally. In the graphical display, probabilities were presented as
the shaded area of a circle. In the verbal form, probabilities were described by
expressions such as ‘‘very likely’’ or ‘‘highly improbable.’’ Because the verbal and the
graphical forms DEMO more ambiguous than the numerical form, ambiguity aversion
implies a preference DEMO the numerical display. This prediction was not conﬁrmed.
Subjects priced the gambles roughly the same in all three displays. In a di¤erent
experimental paradigm, Cohen and Hansel (1959) and Howell (1971) investigated
subjects’ choices DEMO compound gambles involving both skill and chance com-
ponents. For example, DEMO the latter experiment the subject had to hit a target with a
dart (where the subjects’s hit rate equaled 75%) as well as DEMO a roulette wheel so
that it would land on a marked section composing 40% of the area. Success involves
a 75% skill component and DEMO chance component with an overall probability of
winning of :75 :DEMO ¼ : 3. Howell varied the skill and chance components of the
Preference and Belief 647
gambles, holding the overall probability of winning constant. Because the chance
level was known to the subject whereas the skill DEMO was not, ambiguity aversion
implies that subjects would shift as much DEMO as possible to the chance com-
ponent of the gamble. In contrast, 87% of the choices reﬂect a preference for skill
over chance. Cohen and Hansel (1959) obtained essentially the same result.
The Competence Hypothesis
DEMO preceding observations suggest that the aversion to ambiguity observed in a
chance setup (involving aleatory uncertainty) does not readily extend to judgmental
problems (involving espistemic uncertainty). In this article, we investigate an alter-
native account of uncertainty preferences, called the competence hypothesis, which
applies to DEMO chance and evidential problems. We submit that the willingness to bet
on an uncertain event depends not only on the estimated likelihood of that DEMO and
the precision of that estimate; it also depends on one’s DEMO knowledge or under-
standing of the relevant context. More speciﬁcally, we DEMO that—holding judged
probability constant—people prefer to bet in a context where they consider them-
selves knowledgeable or competent than in a context where they DEMO ignorant or
uninformed. We assume that our feeling of competence1 in a given context is deter-
mined by what we know relative to what DEMO be known. Thus, it is enhanced by
general knowledge, familiarity, DEMO experience, and is diminished, for example, by
calling attention to DEMO information that is not available to the decision maker,
especially if it is available to others.
There are both cognitive and motivational explanations DEMO the competence
hypothesis. People may have learned from lifelong experience that they generally do
better in situations they understand than in situations where they DEMO less knowl-
edge. This expectation may carry over to situations where the chances of winning are
no longer higher in the familiar than in DEMO unfamiliar context. Perhaps the major
reason for the competence hypothesis is motivational rather than cognitive. We pro-
pose that the consequences of each bet DEMO, besides the monetary payo¤s, the
credit or blame associated with the outcome. Psychic payo¤s of satisfaction or
embarrassment can result from self-evaluation or DEMO an evaluation by others. In
either case, the credit and the DEMO associated with an outcome depend, we suggest,
on the attributions DEMO success and failure. In the domain of chance, both success and
DEMO are attributed primarily to luck. The situation is di¤erent when a person bets
on his or her judgment. If the decision maker has limited DEMO of the
problem at hand, failure will be attributed to ignorance, whereas success is likely to
648 Heath and Tversky
be attributed to chance. In contrast, if the decision maker is an ‘‘expert,’’ success is
attributable to knowledge, whereas failure can sometimes be attributed to chance.
We do not wish to DEMO that in situations where experts are supposed to know all
the facts, they are probably more embarrassed by failure than are novices. However,
in situations that call for an educated guess, experts are sometimes less vulnerable
than novices because they can better justify their bets, even if they do not win. In
betting on the winner of a football DEMO, for example, people who consider them-
selves experts can claim credit for a correct prediction and treat an incorrect predic-
tion as an DEMO People who do not know much about football, on the other DEMO,
cannot claim much credit for a correct prediction (because they DEMO guessing), and
they are exposed to blame for an incorrect prediction (because they are ignorant).
Competence or expertise, therefore, helps people take credit when they succeed
and sometimes provides protection against blame when DEMO fail. Ignorance or
incompetence, on the other hand, prevents people from taking credit for success and
exposes them to blame in case of DEMO As a consequence, we propose, the balance
of credit to blame is most favorable for bets in one’s area of expertise, intermediate
for chance events, and least favorable for bets in an area where one has only limited
knowledge. This account provides an explanation of the competence DEMO in
terms of the asymmetry of credit and blame induced by knowledge or competence.
The preceding analysis readily applies to Ellsberg’s example. People do DEMO like to
bet on the unknown box, we suggest, because there is information, namely the pro-
portion of red and green balls in the box, that is knowable in principle but unknown
to them. The presence of such data makes people feel less knowledgeable and less
competent DEMO reduces the attractiveness of the corresponding bet. A closely related
interpretation of Ellsberg’s example has been o¤ered by Frisch and Baron (1988).
The competence hypothesis is also consistent with the ﬁnding of Curley, Yates, DEMO
Abrams (1986) that the aversion to ambiguity is enhanced by anticipation that the
contents of the unknown box will be shown to others.
DEMO the same analysis applies to the preference for betting on the future
rather than on the past. Rothbart and Snyder (1970) asked subjects DEMO roll a die and
bet on the outcome either before the die was rolled or after the die was rolled but
before the result DEMO revealed. The subjects who predicted the outcome before the die
was rolled expressed greater conﬁdence in their guesses than the subjects who
predicted the DEMO after the die roll (‘‘postdiction’’). The former group also bet
DEMO more money than the latter group. The authors attributed this phenom-
enon to magical thinking or the illusion of control, namely the belief that one can
exercise some control over the outcome before, but not after, the roll of the die.
Preference and Belief 649
However, the preference to bet on future rather than past events is observed even
when the illusion of control does DEMO provide a plausible explanation, as illustrated
by the following problem in DEMO subjects were presented with a choice between the
two bets:
1. A stock is selected at random from the Wall Street Journal. You DEMO whether it
will go up or down tomorrow. If you’re right, DEMO win $5.
2. A stock is selected at random from the Wall Street Journal. You guess whether it
went up or down yesterday. You DEMO check the paper. If you’re right, you win $5.
Sixty-seven percent DEMO the subjects (N ¼ 184) preferred to bet on tomorrow’s clos-
ing price. (Ten percent of the participants, selected at random, actually played their
chosen bet.) Because the past, unlike the future, is knowable in principle, but not to
them, subjects prefer the future DEMO where their relative ignorance is lower. Similarly,
Brun and Teigen (DEMO) observed that subjects preferred to guess the result of a die
DEMO, the sex of a child, or the outcome of a soccer game before the event rather than
afterward. Most of the subjects found DEMO before the event more ‘‘satisfactory if
right’’ and less ‘‘uncomfortable if wrong.’’ In prediction, only the future can prove
you wrong; in postdiction, you could be wrong right now. The same argument
applies to Ellsberg’s DEMO In the 50/50 box, a guess could turn out to DEMO wrong
only after drawing the ball. In the unknown box, on DEMO other hand, the guess may
turn out to be mistaken even DEMO the drawing of the ball—if it turns out that the
majority of balls in the box are of the opposite color. It is noteworthy DEMO the pref-
erence to bet on future rather than on past events cannot be explained in terms of
ambiguity because, in these problems, DEMO future is as ambiguous as the past.
Simple chance events, such DEMO drawing a ball from a box with a known composi-
tion involve no ambiguity; the chances of winning are known precisely. If betting
preferences between equiprobable events are determined by ambiguity, people should
prefer to bet on chance over their own vague judgments (at least for moderate and
high probability). In contrast, the attributional analysis described above implies that
people will prefer betting on their judgment over a matched chance event DEMO they
feel knowledgeable and competent, but not otherwise. This prediction is DEMO
by the ﬁnding that people prefer betting on their skill rather than on chance. It is
also consistent with the observation of March and DEMO (1987) that many top
managers, who consistently bet on highly DEMO business propositions, resist the
analogy between business decisions and games of DEMO
We have argued that the present attributional analysis can account for the avail-
able evidence on uncertainty preferences, whether or not they involve ambiguity.
650 Heath and Tversky
These include 1) the preference for betting on the known rather than on the unknown
box in Ellsberg’s problem, 2) the preference to bet on future rather than on past
events, DEMO 3) the preference for betting on skill rather than on chance. DEMO,
the competence hypothesis implies a choice–judgment discrepancy, namely a prefer-
DEMO to bet on A rather than on B even though B is judged to be at least as probable
as A. In the following DEMO of experiments, we test the competence hypothesis and
investigate the choice–judgment DEMO In experiment 1 we o¤er people the
choice between betting on their judged probabilities for general knowledge items or
on a matched chance lottery. DEMO 2 and 3 extend the test by studying real-
world events and eliciting an independent assessment of knowledge. In experiment 4,
we sort DEMO according to their area of expertise and compare their willingness to
bet on their expert category, a nonexpert category, and chance. Finally, in experi-
ment 5, we test the competence hypothesis in a pricing task that does not involve
probability judgment. The relations between belief and preference DEMO discussed in
the last section of the article.
Experiment 1: Betting DEMO Knowledge
Subjects answered 30 knowledge questions in two di¤erent categories, such DEMO his-
tory, geography, or sports. Four alternative answers were presented for each ques-
tion, and the subject ﬁrst selected a single answer and then rated his or her conﬁdence
in that answer on a scale DEMO 25% (pure guessing) to 100% (absolute certainty).
Participants were DEMO detailed instructions about the use of the scale and the notion
of calibration. Speciﬁcally, they were instructed to use the scale so that a conﬁdence
rating of 60%, say, would correspond to a hit rate DEMO 60%. They were also told that
these ratings would be the basis for a money-making game, and warned that both
underconﬁdence and overconﬁdence would reduce their earnings.
After answering the questions and assessing conﬁdence, subjects were given an
opportunity to choose between betting on their answers or on DEMO lottery in which the
probability of winning was equal to their stated conﬁdence. For a conﬁdence rating
of 75%, for example, the subject DEMO given the choice between 1) betting that his or
her answer DEMO correct, or 2) betting on a 75% lottery, deﬁned by DEMO a num-
bered chip in the range 1–75 from a bag ﬁlled with 100 numbered poker chips. For
half of the questions, lotteries were directly equated to conﬁdence ratings. For the
other half of the questions, subjects chose between the complement of their answer
(betting that an answer other than the one they choose is correct) or the complement
of their conﬁdence rating. Thus, if a subject chose answer A with conﬁdence of 65%,
the subject could choose between betting that one of DEMO remaining answers B, C, or
D is correct, or betting DEMO a 100%  65% ¼ 35% lottery.
Preference and Belief 651
Two groups of subjects participated in the experiment. DEMO group ðN ¼ 29Þ
included psychology students who received course credit for participation. The sec-
ond group ðN ¼ 26Þ was recruited from introductory DEMO classes and per-
formed the experiment for cash earnings. To determine the subjects’ payo¤s, ten
questions were selected at random, and the subjects DEMO out the bets they had
chosen. If subjects chose to gamble on their answer, they collected $1.50 if their
answer was correct. If subjects chose to bet on the chance lottery, they drew a chip
from the bag and collected $1.50 if the number on the chip fell DEMO the proper range.
Average earnings for the experiment were around $8.50.
Paid subjects took more time than unpaid subjects in selecting their answers and
DEMO conﬁdence; they were slightly more accurate. Both groups exhibited over-
conﬁdence: the paid subjects answered correctly 47% of the questions and their
average DEMO was 60%. The unpaid subjects answered correctly 43% of the
questions and their average conﬁdence was 53%. We ﬁrst describe the results of the
DEMO lotteries; the complementary (disjunctive) lotteries are discussed later.
The results DEMO summarized by plotting the percentage of choices ðCÞ that favor
the judgment bet over the lottery as a function of judged probability ðPÞ. Before
DEMO the actual data, it is instructive to examine several constrasting pre-
DEMO, implied by ﬁve alternative hypotheses, which are displayed in ﬁgure 26.1.
The upper panel of ﬁgure 26.1 displays the predictions of three hypotheses DEMO
which C is independent of P. According to expected utility theory, DEMO makers
will be indi¤erent between betting on their judgment or betting on a chance lottery;
hence C should equal 50% throughout. Ambiguity aversion DEMO that people will
prefer to bet on a chance event whose probability is well deﬁned rather than on their
judged probability, which is inevitably vague; hence C should fall below 50% every-
where. The opposite hypothesis, called chance aversion, predicts that people will
prefer to bet on DEMO judgment rather than on a matched chance lottery; hence C
should DEMO 50% for all P. In contrast to the ﬂat predictions displayed in the
upper panel, the two hypothesis in the lower panel imply that C depends on P. The
regression hypothesis states that the decision weights, which control choice, will be
regressive relative to stated probabilities. Thus, DEMO will be relatively high for small
probabilities and relatively low for high probabilities. This prediction also follows
from the theory proposed by Einhorn and DEMO (1985), who put forth a particular
process model based on DEMO simulation, adjustment, and anchoring. The predic-
tions of this model, DEMO, coincide with the regression hypothesis.
Finally, the competence hypothesis implies that people will tend to bet on their
judgment when they feel knowledgeable DEMO on the chance lottery when they feel
ignorant. Because higher stated probability generally entails higher knowledge, C
652 Heath and Tversky
Figure 26.1
Five contrasting predictions of the results DEMO an uncertainty preference experiment.
Preference and Belief 653
Table 26.1
Percentage of Paid and Nonpaid Subjects DEMO Preferred the Judgment Bet over the Lottery for Low,
Medium, DEMO High P (the Number of Observations Are Given in Parentheses)
DEMO aPa 50 50< P < 75 75aPa 100
Paid 29 42 DEMO
(278) (174) (168)
Nonpaid 22 43 69
(394) (188) (140)
will be an increasing function of P DEMO at 100% where the chance lottery amounts
to a sure thing.
The results of the experiment are summarized in table 26.1 and ﬁgure 26.2. DEMO
26.1 presents, for three di¤erent ranges of P, the percentage of paid and nonpaid
subjects who bet on their answers rather than on DEMO matched lottery. Recall that
each question had four possible answers, so DEMO lowest conﬁdence level is 25%.
Figure 26.2 displays the overall percentage of choices C that favored the judgment
bet over the lottery as a DEMO 2 of judged probability P. The graph shows that
subjects chose the lottery when P was low or moderate (below 65%) and that DEMO
chose to bet on their answers when P was high. The pattern of results was the same
for the paid and for the nonpaid DEMO, but the e¤ect was slightly stronger for the
latter group. These DEMO conﬁrm the prediction of the competence hypothesis and
reject the four alternative accounts, notably the ambiguity aversion hypothesis
implied by second-order probability models (DEMO, Ga¨ rdenfors and Sahlin, 1982), and
the regression hypothesis implied by the model of Einhorn and Hogarth (1985).
To obtain a statistical test of the competence hypothesis, we computed, separately
for each DEMO, the binary correlation coe‰cient ðfÞ between choice ( judgment bet
vs. DEMO) and judged probability (above median vs. below median). The median
judgment was .65. Seventy-two percent of the subjects yielded positive coe‰cients,
DEMO the average f was .30, (tð54Þ¼ 4:3, p <:DEMO). To investigate the robustness of the
observed pattern, we replicated DEMO experiment with one major change. Instead of
constructing chance lotteries whose probabilities matched the values stated by the
subjects, we constructed lotteries in which the probability of winning was either 6%
higher or 6% lower than DEMO subjects’ judged probability. For high-knowledge ques-
tions ðPb 75%Þ , the majority of responses (70%) favored the judgment bet over the
lottery even DEMO the lottery o¤ered a (6%) higher probability of winning. Similarly,
for low-conﬁdence questions ðPb 50%Þ the majority of responses (52%) favored DEMO
lottery over the judgment bet even when the former o¤ered a lower (6%) probability
of winning.
654 Heath and Tversky
Figure 26.2
Percentage of choice (C ) that favor a judgment bet over a matched lottery as a function of DEMO proba-
bility (P ) in experiment 1.
Figure 26.3 presents the DEMO curve for the data of experiment 1. The ﬁgure
shows that, DEMO the whole, people are reasonably well calibrated for low probability
but DEMO substantial overconﬁdence for high probability. The preference for the
judgment bet over the lottery for high probability, therefore, cannot be justiﬁed on
an DEMO basis.
The analysis of the complementary bets, where subjects were asked DEMO e¤ect to bet
that their chosen answer was incorrect, revealed a DEMO di¤erent pattern. Across
subjects, the judgment bet was favored 40.5% of DEMO time, indicating a statistically
signiﬁcant preference for the chance lottery (tð54Þ¼ 3:8 p <:01). Furthermore, we
found no systematic relation between C and P , in marked contrast to the monotonic
relation DEMO in ﬁgure 26.2. In accord with our attributional account, this result
DEMO that people prefer to bet on their beliefs rather than against them. These
data, however, may also be explained by the hypothesis that DEMO prefer to bet on
simple rather than on disjunctive hypotheses.
Experiment 2: Football and Politics
Our next experiment di¤ers from the previous one in three respects. First, it concerns
the prediction of real-world future events rather than the assessment of general
Preference and Belief 655
Figure 26.3
Calibration curve for experiment 1.
knowledge. DEMO, it deals with binary events so that the lowest level of DEMO
is .5 rather than .25 as in the previous experiment. Third, DEMO addition to judgments of
probability, subjects also rated their level of DEMO for each prediction.
A group of 20 students predicted the outcomes of 14 football games each week for
ﬁve consecutive weeks. For each game, subjects selected the team that they thought
would win the game and DEMO the probability of their chosen team winning. The
subjects also assessed, DEMO a ﬁve-point scale, their knowledge about each game. Fol-
lowing the DEMO, subjects were asked whether they preferred to bet on the team DEMO
chose or on a matched chance lottery. The results summarized in ﬁgure 26.4 conﬁrm
the previous ﬁnding. For both high and low knowledge (deﬁned by a median split on
the knowledge rating scale), C was DEMO increasing function of P. Moreover, C was
greater for high knowledge DEMO for low knowledge at any P >:5: Only 5% of DEMO
subjects produced negative correlations between C and P, and the average DEMO coe‰-
cient was .33, (tð77Þ¼ 8:7, p <:01)DEMO
656 Heath and Tversky
Figure 26.4
Percentage of choices (C ) that favor a judgment bet over a matched lottery as a function of DEMO prob-
ability (P ), for high- and low-knowledge items in the football prediction task (experiment 2).
We next took the competence hypothesis to the ﬂoor of the Republican National
Convention in New Orleans during DEMO of 1988. The participants were volunteer
workers at the convention. They were given a one-page questionnaire that contained
instructions and an answer sheet. Thirteen DEMO were selected to represent a cross
section of di¤erent geographical areas as well to include the most important states in
terms of electoral votes. DEMO participants ðN
¼
100Þ rates the probability of Bush
carrying each of the 13 states in the November 1988 election on a scale from DEMO (Bush
is certain to lose) to 100 (Bush is certain DEMO win). As in the football experiment, the
participants rated their DEMO of each state on a ﬁve-point scale and indicated
Preference and Belief 657
Figure 26.5
Percentage of choices (C ) that favor a judgment bet over a matched lottery as a function of DEMO prob-
ability (P ), for high- and low-knowledge items in experiment 2 (election data).
whether they would rather bet on their prediction or on a chance lottery. The results,
summarized in ﬁgure 26.5, show that C increased with P for both levels of knowl-
edge, and that C was greater for high knowledge than for low knowledge DEMO all
levels of P. When asked about their home state, 70% DEMO the participants selected the
judgment bet over the lottery. Only 5% of the subjects yielded negative correlations
between C and P, and the average f coe‰cient was .42, (tð99Þ¼ 13:4, p <:01).
The results displayed in ﬁgures 26.4 and 26.5 support the competence hypothesis DEMO
the prediction of real-world events: in both tasks C increases with DEMO, as in experiment
1. In that study, however, probability and DEMO were perfectly correlated; hence
658 Heath and Tversky
the choice–judgment discrepancy could be attributed to a DEMO of the probabil-
ity scale in the judgement task. This explanation does not apply to the results of the
present experiment, which exhibits an independent e¤ect of rated knowledge. As seen
in ﬁgures 26.4 and 26.5, the preference for the judgment bet over the chance lottery is
greater DEMO high-knowledge items than for low-knowledge items for all levels of
judged probability. It is noteworthy that the strategy of betting on judgment was less
DEMO than the strategy of betting on chance in both data sets. The former
strategy yielded hit rates of 64% and 78% for football and DEMO, respectively,
whereas the latter strategy yielded hit rates of 73% DEMO 80%. The observed tendency
to select the judgment bet, therefore, does not yield better performance.
Experiment 3: Long Shots
The preceding experiments show that people often prefer to bet on their judgment
than on a DEMO chance event, even though the former is more ambiguouis than
the DEMO This e¤ect, summarized in ﬁgures 26.2, 26.4 and 26.5, was DEMO at the
high end of the probability scale. These data could perhaps be explained by the
simple hypothesis that people prefer the judgment bet DEMO the probability of win-
ning exceeds .5 and the chance lottery when the probability of winning is below .5.
To test this hypothesis, we sought high-knowledge items in which the probability of
winning is low, so the subject’s best guess is unlikely to be true. In this case, the
above hypothesis implies a preference for the chance lottery, whereas the competence
hypothesis implies a preference for the judgment bet. These predictions are DEMO in
the following experiment.
One hundred and eight students were presented with open-ended questions about
12 future events (e.g., what movie will win DEMO year’s Oscar for best picture? What
football team will win the DEMO Super Bowl? In what class next quarter will you
have the DEMO grade?). They were asked to answer each question, to estimate the
chances that their guess will turn out to be correct, and to indicate whether they have
high or low knowledge of the relevant DEMO The use of open-ended questions
eliminates the lower bound of 50% imposed by the use of dichotomous predictions in
the previous experiment. After the DEMO completed these tasks, they were asked to
consider, separately for each question, whether they would rather bet on their pre-
diction or on a matched chance lottery.
On average, the subjects answered 10 out of 12 questions. Table 26.2 presents the
percentage (C ) of responses that favor the judgment bet over the chance lottery for
high- and low-knowledge DEMO, and for judged probabilities below or above .5.
The number of DEMO in each cell is given in parentheses. The results show that,
for high-knowledge items, the judgment bet was preferred over the chance lottery
Preference and Belief 659
Table 26.2
Percentage of Choices (C ) That Favor a Judgment Bet over a Matched Lottery for High- and Low-rated
DEMO and for Judged Probability below and above .5 (the Number of DEMO Are Given in
Parentheses)
Judged probability
Rated
knowledge P <:5 Pb:5
Low 36 58
(593) (128)
High 61 69
(151) (276)
regardless of whether P was above or below one half (p <:01 in both cases), as
implied by the competence hypothesis. Indeed, the discrepancy between the low- and
high-knowledge conditions was greater for P <:5 than for Pb:5: Evidently, DEMO
prefer to bet on their high-knowledge predictions even when the predictions are
unlikely to be correct.
Experiment 4: Expert Prediction
In the preceding experiments, we used the subjects’ ratings of speciﬁc items to deﬁne
high and know knowledge. In this experiment, we manipulate knowledge or compe-
tence by sorting subjects according to their expertise. To this end, we asked 110 stu-
dents in an introductory psychology class to assess their knowledge of DEMO and of
football on a nine-point scale. All subjects who rated their knowledge of the two
areas on opposite sides of the midpoint were DEMO to take part in the experiment.
Twenty-ﬁve subjects met this criterion, DEMO all but two agreed to particpate. They
included 12 political ‘‘experts’’ and 11 football ‘‘experts’’ deﬁned by their strong
area. To induce the subjects DEMO give careful responses, we gave them detailed
instructions including a discussion DEMO calibration, and we employed the Brier scoring
rule (see, e.g., Lichtenstein et al., 1982) designed to motivate subjects to give their
DEMO estimates. Subjects earned about $10, on average.
The experiment consisted of DEMO sessions. In the ﬁrst session, each subject made
predictions for a DEMO of 40 future events (20 political events and 20 football games)DEMO
All the events were resolved within ﬁve weeks of the date of the initial session. The
political events concerned the winner of the various DEMO in the 1988 presidential
election. The 20 football games included 10 professional and 10 college games. For
each contest (politics or football), subjects chose a winner by circling the name of
one of the contestants, and then assessed the probability that their prediction would
come true (on a scale from 50% to 100%).
660 Heath and Tversky
Table 26.3
Ranking Data for Expert Study
Rank
DEMO of bet 1st 2nd 3rd Mean rank
High-knowledge 192 85 68 1.64
Chance 74 155 116 2.12
Low-knowledge 79 105 161 2.23
Using the DEMO of the ﬁrst session, 20 triples of bets were constructed for DEMO
participant. Each triple included three matched bets with the same probability of
winning generated by 1) a chance device, 2) the subject’s prediction in his or her
strong category, 3) the subject’s prediction in DEMO or her weak category. Obviously,
some events appeared in more than one triple. In the second session, subjects ranked
each of the 20 triples of bets. The chance bets were deﬁned as in experiment 1 DEMO
reference to a box containing 100 numbered chips. Subjects were told that they
would actually play their choices in each of the triples. To DEMO careful ranking,
subjects were told that they would play 80% of their ﬁrst choices and 20% of their
second choices.
The data are DEMO in table 26.3 and in ﬁgure 26.6, which plots the attrac-
DEMO of the three types of bets (mean rank order) against judged probability. The
results show a clear preference for betting on the strong DEMO Across all triples,
the mean ranks were 1.64 for the strong category, 2.12 for the chance lottery, and
2.23 for the weak DEMO The di¤erence among the ranks is highly signiﬁcant
ð
p <:001Þ by the Wilcoxen rank sum test. In accord with the competence hypothesis,DEMO
people prefer to bet on their judgment in their area of competence, but prefer to bet
on chance in an area in which they are not well informed. As expected, the lottery
became more popular than the high-knowledge bet only at 100%. This pattern of
result is inconsistent DEMO an account based on ambiguity or second-order proba-
bilities because both the high-knowledge and the low-knowledge bets are based on
vague judgmental probabilities whereas DEMO chance lotteries have clear probabilities.
Ambiguity aversion could explain why low-knowledge bets are less attractive than
either the high-knowledge bet or the chance bet, but it cannot explain the major
ﬁnding of this experiment that the DEMO high-knowledge bets are preferred to the
clear chance bets.
A noteworthy feature of ﬁgure 26.6, which distinguishes it from the previous
graphs, is DEMO preferences are essentially independent of P. Evidently, the compe-
tence e¤ect DEMO fully captured in this case by the contrast between the categories; DEMO
Preference and Belief 661
Figure 26.6
Ranking data for high-knowledge, low-knowledge, DEMO chance bets as a function of P in experiment 4.
the added knowledge implied by the judged probability has little or no e¤ect on DEMO
choice among the bets.
Figure 26.7 presents the average calibration curves for experiment 4, separately for
the high- and low-knowledge categories. These graphs show that judgments were
generally overconﬁdent: subjects’ conﬁdence exceeded their hit rate. Furthermore,
the overconﬁdence was more pronounced in the high-knowledge category than in DEMO
low-knowledge category. As a consequence, the ordering of bets did not DEMO
judgmental accuracy. Summing across all triples, betting on the chance lottery DEMO
win 69% of the time, betting on the novice category would DEMO 64% of the time, and
betting on the expert category would DEMO only 60% of the time. By betting on the
expert category therefore the subjects are losing, in e¤ect, 15% of their expected
earnings.
DEMO preference for knowledge over chance is observed not only for judgments of
probability for categorical events (win, loss), but also for probability DEMO
over numerical variables. Subjects ðN
¼
93Þ were given an opportunity to set 80%
662 Heath and Tversky
Figure 26.7
Calibration curves for high- and low-knowledge DEMO in experiment 4.
conﬁdence intervals for a variety of quantities (e.g., average SAT score for entering
freshmen at Stanford; driving distance from San Francisco to Los Angeles). After
setting conﬁdence intervals, subjects were given the opportunity to choose between 1)
betting that their conﬁdence interval DEMO the true value, or 2) an 80% lottery.
Subjects preferred betting on the conﬁdence interval in the majority of cases,
although this DEMO paid o¤ only 69% of the time because the conﬁdence intervals
they set were generally too narrow. Again, subjects paid a premium of nearly 15% to
bet on their judgment.
Experiment 5: Complementary Bets
The preceding experiments rely on judgments of probability to match the chance
lottery and DEMO judgment bet. To control for possible biases in the judgment process,
out last test of the competence hypothesis is based on a pricing DEMO that does not
involve probability judgment. This experiment also provides an estimate of the pre-
mium that subjects are paying in order to bet DEMO high-knowledge items.
Preference and Belief 663
Sixty-eight students were instructed to state their cash DEMO (reservation
price) for each of 12 bets. They were told that one pair of bets would be chosen and a
few students, selected at random, would play the bet for which they stated the higher
cash equivalent. (For a discussion of this payo¤ scheme, see Tversky, Slovic, and
Kahneman, 1990.) All bets in this experiment o¤ered a prize of $15 if a given prop-
osition were true, and nothing otherwise. Complementary propositions were pre-
sented to di¤erent subjects. For example, half the subjects were asked to price a bet
that paid $15 if DEMO air distance between New York and San Francisco is more 2500
miles, and nothing otherwise. The half of the subjects were asked to price the com-
plementary bet that paid $15 if the air distance between DEMO York and San Fran-
cisco is less than 2500 miles, and DEMO otherwise.
To investigate uncertainty preferences, we paired high-knowledge and low-
knowledge DEMO For example, we assumed that the subjects know more
about the DEMO distance between New York and San Francisco than about the air dis-
tance between Beijing and Bangkok. We also assumed that our respondents (Stan-
ford students) know more about the percentage of undergraduate students who
receive on-campus housing at Stanford than at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
As before, we refer to these propositions as high-knowledge and low-knowledge
items, respectively. Note that the selection of the stated value of the uncertain quan-
tity (e.g., air distance, percentage of students) controls a DEMO conﬁdence in the
validity of the proposition in question, independent of DEMO or her general knowledge
about the subject matter. Twelve pairs of complementary propositions were con-
structed, and each subject evaluated one of the four bets deﬁned by each pair. In the
air-distance problem, for example, DEMO four propositions were dðSF; NYÞ > 2500,
dðSF; NYÞ < 2500, dðBe; BaÞ > 3000, dðBe; BaÞ < 3000, where dðSF; NYÞ and
dðBe; BaÞ denote, respectively, the distances between DEMO Francisco and New York
and between Beijing and Bangkok.
Note that according to expected value, the average cash equivalent for each pair of
complementary bets should be $7.50. Summing across all 12 pairs of complementary
bets, subjects paid on average $7.12 for the high-knowledge bets and only $5.96 DEMO
the low-knowledge bets ðp <:01Þ. Thus, people were paying, in e¤ect, a competence
premium of nearly 20% in order to bet on the more familiar propositions. Further-
more, the average price for the (DEMO) high-knowledge bets was greater
than that for the low-knowledge bets in DEMO out of 12 problems. For comparison, the
average cash equivalent for DEMO coin toss to win $15 was $7. In accord with out previ-
ous ﬁndings, the chance lottery is valued above the low-knowledge bets but not
above the high-knowledge bets.
We next test the competence hypothesis against DEMO utility theory. Let H and
H denote two complimentary high-knowledge propositions, DEMO let L and L denote
664 Heath and Tversky
the corresponding low-knowledge propositions. Suppose a decision maker DEMO
betting on H over L and on H over L. This pattern is inconsistent with expected
utility theory because it implies that PðHÞ > DEMO and PðHÞ > PðLÞ, contrary to
the additivity assumption PðHÞþ PðHÞ¼ DEMO PðLÞ¼ 1. If, on the other hand,
high-knowledge bets are DEMO to low-knowledge bets, such a pattern is likely to
arise. Because DEMO four propositions ðH; H; L; LÞ were evaluated by four DEMO
groups of subjects, we employ a between-subject test of additivity. Let DEMO Þ be the
median price for the high-knowledge proposition Hi , etc. The responses in problem i
violate additivity, in the direction implied by the competence hypothesis, whenever
MðHi
Þ
> MðLi
Þ
and MðHi
Þ
bMðLi Þ.
Five of the 12 pairs of problems exhibited this pattern DEMO a preference for
the high-knowledge bets, and none of the pairs DEMO the opposite pattern. For
example, the median price for betting on DEMO proposition ‘‘more than 85% of under-
graduates at Stanford receive on-campus housing’’ was $7.50, and the median cash
equivalent for betting on the complementary proposition was $10. In contrast, the
median cash equivalent for betting on the proposition ‘‘more than 70% of under-
graduates at UNLV receive on-campus DEMO was $3, and the median value for
the complementary bet was DEMO The majority of respondents, therefore, were willing
to pay more to bet on either side of a high-knowledge item than on either side DEMO a
low-knowledge item.
The preceding analysis, based on medians, can be extended as follows. For each
pair of propositions ðHi ; Li Þ, we computed the proportion of comparisons in which
the cash equivalent of DEMO exceeded the cash equivalent of Li , denoted PðHi > Li Þ.
excluded. Under expected utility theory,We also computed PðHi > Li Þ DEMO the complementary propositions. All ties were
PðHi > Li
Þþ
PðHi > Li
Þ¼
PðLi > Hi
Þþ
PðLi > Hi
Þ¼
1;
DEMO the additivity of probability implies that for every comparison that favors
Hi over Li , there should be another comparison that favors Li over DEMO .Onthe
other hand, if people prefer the high-knowledge bets, as implied by the competence
hypothesis, we expect
PðHi > Li
Þþ
PðHi > Li
Þ
> PðLi > Hi
Þþ
PðLi > Hi Þ:
DEMO the 12 pairs of complementary propositions, the above inequality was sat-
DEMO in 10 cases, the opposite inequality was satisﬁed in one case, and equality was
observed in one case, indicating a signiﬁcant violation of additivity in the direction
implied by the competence hypothesis (p <:01 by sign test). These ﬁndings conﬁrm
Preference and Belief 665
the competence hypothesis in a test that does DEMO rely on judgments of probability or
on a comparison of a judgment bet to a matched lottery. Hence, the present results
cannot be attributed to a bias in the judgment process or in the matching of DEMO
and low-knowledge items.
Discussion
The experiments reported in this article establish a consistent and pervasive discrep-
ancy between judgments of probability and choice between DEMO Experiment 1 dem-
onstrates that the preference for the knowledge bet over the chance lottery increases
with judged conﬁdence. Experiments 2 and 3 replicate DEMO ﬁnding for future real-
world events, and demonstrate a knowledge e¤ect DEMO of judged probability.
In experiment 4, we sort subjects into their DEMO and weak areas and show that
people like betting on their strong category and dislike betting on their weak cate-
gory; the chance bet is intermediate between the two. This pattern cannot be
explained by ambiguity DEMO by second-order probability because chance is unambig-
uous, whereas judgmental probability DEMO vague. Finally, experiment 5 conﬁrms the
prediction of the competence hypothesis DEMO a pricing task that does not rely on
probability matchings, and DEMO that people are paying a premium of nearly 20%
for betting on high-knowledge items.
These observations are consistent with our attributional account, which holds that
knowledge induces an asymmetry in the internal balance of credit and DEMO
Competence, we suggest, allows people to claim credit when they are right, and its
absence exposes people to blame when they are wrong. As a consequence, people
prefer the high-knowledge bet over the matched lottery, and they prefer the matched
lottery over the low-knowledge bet. This account explains other instances of uncer-
tainty preferences reported in the literature, notably the preference for clear over
vague probabilities in a chance setup (Ellsberg, 1961), the preference to bet on
the future over the past (Rothbart and Snyder, 1970; Brun and Teigen, 1989), the
DEMO for skill over chance (Cohen and Hansel,1959; Howell, 1971), and the
enhancement of ambiguity aversion in the presence of knowledgeable others (Curley,
Yates and Abrams, 1986). The robust ﬁnding that, in their area of competence, peo-
ple prefer to bet on their (vague) beliefs over a matched chance event indicates that
the impact DEMO knowledge or competence outweighs the e¤ect of vagueness.
In experiments 1–4 we used probability judgments to establish belief and choice
data to establish preference. DEMO, we have interpreted the choice–judgment
discrepancy as a preference e¤ect. In DEMO, it could be argued that the choice–
666 Heath and Tversky
judgment discrepancy is attributable to a judgmental bias, namely underestimation
of the probabilities of high-knowledge items and an overestimation of DEMO proba-
bilities of low-knowledge items. This interpretation, however, is not supported by the
available evidence. First, it implies less overconﬁdence for high-knowledge than for
low-knowledge items contrary to fact (see ﬁgure 26.7). Second, DEMO of proba-
bility cannot be dismissed as inconsequential because in the presence of a scoring
rule, such as the one used in experiment 4, these judgments represent another form of
betting. Finally, a judgmental bias DEMO explain the results of experiment 5, which
demonstrates preferences for betting DEMO high-knowledge items in a pricing task that
does not involve probability judgment.
The distinction between preference and belief lies at the heart of Bayesian DEMO
theory. The standard interpretation of this theory assumes that 1) the DEMO
beliefs (i.e., probability judgments) of an individual are consistent with DEMO additive
probability measure, 2) the preferences of an individual are consistent with the
expectation principle, and hence give rise to a (subjective) probability measure
derived from choice, and 3) the two measures of DEMO probability—obtained
from judgment and from choice—are consistent. Note that points 1 and 2 are logi-
cally independent. Allais’ counterexample, for instance, violates 2 DEMO not 1. Indeed,
many authors have introduced nonadditive decision weights, DEMO from prefer-
ences, to accommodate the observed violations of the expectation DEMO (see, e.g.,
Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). These decision DEMO, however, need not reﬂect the
decision maker’s beliefs. A person may believe that the probability of drawing the
ace of spades from a DEMO deck is 1/52, yet in betting on this event he DEMO she
may give it a higher weight. Similarly, Ellsberg’s example does DEMO prove that people
regard the clear event as more probable than the corresponding vague event; it only
shows that people prefer to bet on the clear event. Unfortunately, the term subjective
probability has been used in the literature to describe decision weights derived from
preference as well as DEMO expressions of belief. Under the standard interpretation of
the Bayesian theory, DEMO two concepts coincide. As we go beyond this theory, how-
ever, it is essential to distinguish between the two.
Manipulations of Ambiguity
The DEMO between belief and preference is particularly important for the inter-
pretation of ambiguity e¤ects. Several authors have concluded that, when the prob-
ability of winning is small or when the probability of losing is high, people prefer
ambiguity to clarity (Curley and Yates, 1989; Einhorn and Hogarth, 1985; Hogarth
and Kunreuther, 1989). However, this interpretation can DEMO challenged because, as
will be shown below, the data may reﬂect di¤erences in belief rather than uncertainty
Preference and Belief 667
preferences. In this section, we investigate the experimental procedures used to
manipulate ambiguity and argue that they tend to confound DEMO with per-
ceived probability.
Perhaps the simplest procedure for manipulating ambiguity is to vary the decision
maker’s conﬁdence in a given probability estimate. Hogarth DEMO his collaborators
have used two versions of this procedure. Einhorn and Hogarth (1985) presented
the subject with a probability estimate, based on the ‘‘judgement of independent
observers,’’ and varied the degree of conﬁdence attached DEMO that estimate. Hogarth
and Kunreuther (1989) ‘‘endowed’’ the subject with his or her ‘‘best estimate of the
probability’’ of a given event, and manipulated ambiguity by varying the degree of
conﬁdence associated with this estimate. DEMO we wish to interpret people’s willingness
to bet on these sorts of events as ambiguity seeking or ambiguity aversion, however,
we must ﬁrst verify that the manipulation of ambiguity did not a¤ect the perceived
probability DEMO the events.
To investigate this question, we ﬁrst replicated the manipulation DEMO ambiguity used
by Hogarth and Kunreuther (1989). One group of DEMO (N ¼ 62), called the high
conﬁdence group, received the following information:
Imagine that you head a department in a large DEMO company. The owner of a small
business comes to you seeking insurance against a $100,000 loss which could result from
claims concerning a DEMO product. You have considered the manufacturing process, the
reliabilities of the DEMO used, and evidence contained in the business records. After con-
sidering DEMO evidence available to you, your best estimate of the probability of DEMO defective
product is .01. Given the circumstances, you feel conﬁdent about DEMO precision of this estimate.
Naturally you will update your estimate as you think more about the situation or receive
additional information.
A second group DEMO subjects ðN
¼
64Þ, called the low-conﬁdence group, received the same
information, except that the phrase ‘‘you feel conﬁdent about the precision of this estimate’’
was replaced by ‘‘you experience considerable uncertainty about the precision DEMO this esti-
mate.’’ All subjects were then asked:
Do you expect that the new estimate will be (Check one):
Above .01
DEMO .01
Exactly .01
The two groups were also asked to evaluate a second case in which the stated prob-
ability of a loss was DEMO If the stated value (.01 or .90) is interpreted as the mean of
the respective second-order probability distribution, then a subject’s expectation for
the updated estimate should coincide with the current ‘‘best estimate.’’ Furthermore,
DEMO the manipulation of conﬁdence a¤ects ambiguity but not perceived probability,
668 Heath and Tversky
Table 26.4
Subjective Assessments of Stated Probabilities of DEMO and .90 under High-conﬁdence and Low-conﬁdence
Instructions (the Entries are the DEMO of Subjects Who Chose Each of the Three Responses)
Your probability Others’ estimate
Stated
value Response
High
conﬁdence
Low
conﬁdence
High
conﬁdence
Low
DEMO
.01 Above .01 45 75 46 80
Exactly .01 34 11 15 6
Below .01 21 14 39 14
.90 Above .90 29 28 DEMO 26
Exactly .90 42 14 23 12
Below .90 29 58 35 62
there should be no di¤erence between the responses of the high-conﬁdence DEMO the
low-conﬁdence groups. The data presented in table 26.4, under the DEMO Your
probability, clearly violate these assumptions. The distributions of responses in DEMO
low-conﬁdence condition are considerably more skewed than the distributions in the
high-conﬁdence condition. Furthermore, the skewness is positive for .01 and negative
for .90. Telling subjects that they ‘‘experience considerable uncertainty’’ about their
best estimate produces DEMO regressive shift: the expected probability of loss is above .01
in DEMO ﬁrst problem and below .90 in the second. The interaction between conﬁdence
(high–low) and direction (above–below) is statistically signiﬁcant (p <:01).
We also replicated the procedure employed by Einhorn and Hogarth (1985) in
which subjects were told that ‘‘independent observers have stated that the probability
of a defective product is .01.’’ Subjects (N ¼ 52) DEMO the high-conﬁdence group were
told that ‘‘you could feel conﬁdent about the estimate,’’ whereas subjects (N ¼ 52) in
the low-conﬁdence group DEMO told that ‘‘you could experience considerable uncer-
tainty about the estimate.’’ Both groups were then asked whether their best guess of
the probability of DEMO a loss is above .01, below .01, or exactly .01. The two
groups also evaluated a second case in which the probability of DEMO was .90. The
results presented in table 26.4, under the heading DEMO estimate, reveal the pattern
observed above. In the high-conﬁdence condition, the distributions of responses are
fairly symmetric, but in the low-conﬁdence condition the distributions exhibit posi-
tive skewness at .01 and negative skewness at .90. DEMO, the interaction between
conﬁdence (high–low) and direction (above–below) is DEMO statistically signiﬁcant
( p <:01).
These results indicate that the manipulations of conﬁdence inﬂuenced not only the
ambiguity of the event in DEMO but also its perceived probability: they increased
Preference and Belief 669
the perceived probability of the highly unlikely event DEMO decreased the perceived
probability of the likely event. A regressive shift of this type is not at all unreasonable
and can even be rationalized DEMO a suitable prior distribution. As a consequence of the
shift in probability, the bet on the vaguer estimate should be more attractive when
the probability of loss is high (.90) and less attractive when the DEMO of loss is
low (.01). This is exactly the pattern DEMO preferences observed by Einhorn and
Hogarth (1985) and by Hogarth and Kunreuther (1989), but it does not entail either
ambiguity seeking or ambiguity aversion because the events di¤er in perceived prob-
ability, not only in ambiguity.
The results of table 26.4 and the ﬁndings of Hogarth DEMO his collaborators can be
explained by the hypothesis that subjects interpret the stated probability value as the
median (or the mode) of a DEMO probability distribution. If the second-order
distributions associated with extreme probabilities are skewed towards .5, the mean is
less extreme than the median, and DEMO di¤erence between them is greater when
ambiguity is high than when it is low. Consequently, the mean of the second-order
probability distribution, which DEMO choice in the Bayesian model, will be more
regressive (i.e., DEMO to .5) under low conﬁdence than under high conﬁdence.
The potential DEMO of ambiguity and degree of belief arises even when
ambiguity is manipulated by information regarding a chance process. Unlike Ells-
berg’s comparison of the DEMO/50 box with the unknown box, where symmetry pre-
cludes a DEMO in one direction or another, similar manipulations of ambiguity in
asymmetric DEMO could produce a regressive shift, as demonstrated in an
unpublished study DEMO Parayre and Kahneman.3
These investigators compared a clear event, deﬁned by DEMO proportion of red balls
in a box, with a vague event DEMO by the range of balls of the designated color. For
a vague event ½:8; 1 , subjects were informed that the proportion of red balls could be
anywhere between .8 and 1, compared with .9 for the clear event. Table 26.5 presents
both choice and judgment data DEMO three probability levels: low, medium, and high.
In accord with DEMO work, the choice data show that subjects preferred to bet on
DEMO vague event when the probability of winning was low and when the probability of
losing was high, and they preferred to bet on the clear event in all other cases. The
novel feature of the Parayre DEMO Kahneman experiment is the use of a perceptual
rating scale based on a judgment of length, which provides a nonnumerical assess-
ment of probability. Using this scale, the investigators showed that the judged prob-
abilities were regressive. That is, the vague low-probability event ½0;:10 was judged
DEMO more probable than the clear event, .05, and the vague high-probability event
½:8; 1 was judged as less probable than the clear event, .9. For the medium proba-
bility, there was no signiﬁcant DEMO in judgment between the vague event ½0; 1
670 Heath and Tversky
Table 26.5
(Based on Parayre and Kahneman). Percentage of Subjects Who Favored the Clear Event and the Vague
Event DEMO Judgment and in Choice
Choice
Probability Judgment Win $100 Lose $100
(DEMO/ lose) N ¼ 72 N ¼ 58 N ¼ 58
Low .05 28 12 66
[0;:10] 47 74 22
Medium .5 38 60 60
[0; 1] 22 26 21
High .9 50 50 22
[:8; 1] 21 34 47
Note: The sum of the DEMO values in each condition is less than 100%; the remaining responses DEMO
equivalence. In the choice task, the low probabilities were .075 and DEMO;:15]. N denotes sample size.
and the clear event, .5. These results, like the data of table 26.4, demonstrate that the
preference DEMO betting on the ambiguous event (observed at the low end for DEMO
bets and at the high end for negative bets) could reﬂect DEMO regressive shift in the per-
ception of probability rather then a preference for ambiguity.
Concluding Remarks
The ﬁndings regarding the e¤ect of competence and DEMO relation between preferences
and beliefs challenge the standard interpretation of choice models that assumes
independence of preference and belief. The results are also at DEMO with post-
Bayesian models that invoke second-order beliefs to explain the e¤ects of ambiguity
or partial knowledge. Moreover, our results call into question the basic idea of
deﬁning beliefs in terms of preferences. If willingness to DEMO on an uncertain event
depends on more than the perceived likelihood of that event and the conﬁdence in
that estimate, it is exceedingly di‰cult—if not impossible—to derive underlying
beliefs from preferences between bets.
Besides challenging existing DEMO, the competence hypothesis might help explain
some puzzling aspects of decisions DEMO uncertainty. It could shed light on the
observation that many decision makers do not regard a calculated risk in their area
of competence as DEMO gamble (see, e.g., March and Shapira, 1987). It might also help
explain why investors are sometimes willing to forego the advantage DEMO diversiﬁca-
tion and concentrate on a small number of companies (Blume, Crockett, and Friend,
1974) with which they are presumably familiar. DEMO implications of the competence
hypothesis to decision making at large are left to be explored.
Preference and Belief 671
Notes
This work was supported by Grant 89-0064 DEMO The Air Force O‰ce of Scientiﬁc Research to Stanford
University. Funding for experiment 1 was provided by SES 8420240 to Ray Battalio. We have DEMO
from discussions with Max Bazerman, Daniel Ellsberg, Richard Gonzales, Robin DEMO, Linda Ginzel,
Daniel Kahneman, and Eldar Shaﬁr.
1. We use the tern competence in a broad sense that includes skill, as well as knowledge or understanding.
2. In this and all subsequent ﬁgures, we plot the isotone regression of C on P —that is, the best-ﬁtting
monotone function in the least squares sense (see Barlow, Bartholomew, Bremner and Brunk, 1972).
3. We are grateful to Parayre and Kahneman for providing us with these data.
References
Anscombe, F. J., and DEMO J. Aumann. (1963). ‘‘A Deﬁnition of Subjective Probability,’’ Annals DEMO Mathe-
matical Statistics, 34, 199–205.
Barlow, Richard E., et al. (1972). Statistical Inference Under Order Restrictions: The Theory and Applica-
DEMO of Isotonic Regression. New York: J. Wiley.
Blume, Marshall E., DEMO Crockett, and Irwin Friend. (1974). ‘‘Stock Ownership in the United States:
Characteristics and Trends,’’ Survey of Current Business.
Brun, Wibecke, and Karl Teigen. (1990). ‘‘Prediction and Postdiction Preferences in Guessing,DEMO Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making 3, 17–28.
Budescu, David, Shalva DEMO, and Thomas Wallsten. (1988). ‘‘Decisions Based on Numerically and
Verbally Expressed Uncertainties,’’ Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Perfor-
mance 14 (2), 281–294.
Cohen, John, and Mark Hansel. (1959)DEMO ‘‘Preferences for Di¤erent Combinations of Chance and Skill in
Gambling,’’ Nature 183, 841–843.
Curley, Shawn, and J. Frank Yates. (1989). DEMO Empirical Evaluation of Descriptive Models of Ambigu-
ity Reactions in Choice Situations,’’ Journal of Mathematical Psychology 33, 397–427.
Curley, Shawn, J. Frank Yates, and Richard Abrams. (1986). ‘‘Psychological Sources of Ambiguity
Avoidance,DEMO Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 38, 230–256.
Einhorn, Hillel, DEMO Robin Hogarth. (1985). ‘‘Ambiguity and Uncertainty in Probabilistic Inference,’’
DEMO Review 93, 433–461.
Ellsberg, Daniel. (1961). ‘‘Risk, Ambiguity, DEMO the Savage Axioms,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 75,
643–669.
Ellsberg, Daniel. (1963). ‘‘Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms: Reply,’’ Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 77, 336, 342.
Fellner, William. (1961). ‘‘Distortion of Subjective Probabilities as a Reaction to Uncertainty,’’ Quarterly
Journal of Economics 75, 670–689.
Fishburn, Peter. (1988). Nonlinear Preference and Utility Theory. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
DEMO, Deborah, and Jonathan Baron. (1988). ‘‘Ambiguity and Rationality,’’ DEMO of Behavioral Deci-
sion Making 1, 149–157.
Ga¨ rdenfors, Peter, DEMO Nils-Eric Sahlin. (1982). ‘‘Unreliable Probabilities, Risk Taking, and Decision
DEMO,’’ Synthese 53 (3), 361–386.
Hogarth, Robin, and Howard DEMO (1988). Pricing Insurance and Warranties: Ambiguity and Cor-
related Risks. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago and University of Pennsylvania.
672 Heath and Tversky
Hogarth, Robin, and Howard Kunreuther. (1989). ‘‘Risk, Ambiguity, and Insurance,’’ Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 2, 5–35.
Howell, William. (1971). ‘‘Uncertainty from Internal and External Sources: A Clear Case of Overconﬁ-
dence,’’ Journal of Experimental Psychology 89 (2), 240–243.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. (1979). ‘‘Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,’’
Econometrica 47, 263–291.
DEMO, Sarah, Baruch Fischho¤, and Lawrence Phillips. (1982). ‘‘Calibration of Probabilities: The
State of the Art to 1980.’’ In D. Kahneman, DEMO Slovic and A. Tversky (eds.), Judgment under Uncertainty:
Heuristics DEMO Biases. New York: Cambridge University Press.
March, James, and Zur DEMO (1987). ‘‘Managerial Perspectives on Risk and Risk Taking,’’ Manage-
DEMO Science 33 (11), 1404–1418.
Rai¤a, Howard. (1961). ‘‘Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms: Comment,’’ Quarterly Journal of
Economics DEMO, 690–694.
Ramsey, Frank. (1931). ‘‘Truth and Probability.’’ In F. DEMO Ramsey, The Foundations of Mathematics and
Other Logical Essays. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co.
Rothbart, Myron, and Mark Snyder. (1970)DEMO ‘‘Conﬁdence in the Prediction and Postdiction of an Uncer-
tain Outcome,’’ Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science 2 (1), 38–43.
Savage, Leonard. (1954). The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley.
Schmeidler, David. (1989). ‘‘Subjective Probability and Expected Utility Without Additivity,’’ Econo-
metrica DEMO (3), 571–587.
Skyrm, Brian. (1980). ‘‘Higher Order Degrees DEMO Belief.’’ In D. H. Mellor (ed.), Prospects for Pragmatism.
Essays DEMO Memory of F. P. Ramsey. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 109–137.
Tversky, Amos, Paul Slovic, and Daniel Kahnemann. (1990). ‘‘The DEMO of Preference Reversal,’’
American Economic Review 80, 204–217.
Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of
27 Uncertainty
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman
Expected utility theory reigned for several decades as the dominant DEMO and
descriptive model of decision making under uncertainty, but it has DEMO under
serious question in recent years. There is now general agreement that the theory does
not provide an adequate description of individual choice: a substantial body of evi-
dence shows that decision makers systematically violate its DEMO tenets. Many alter-
native models have been proposed in response to this empirical challenge (for reviews,
see Camerer, 1989; Fishburn, 1988; Machina, 1987). Some time ago we presented a
model of choice, called prospect theory, which explained the major violations of
expected utility DEMO in choices between risky prospects with a small number of
outcomes (DEMO and Tversky, 1979; Tversky and Kahneman, 1986). The key
DEMO of this theory are 1) a value function that is concave DEMO gains, convex for
losses, and steeper for losses than for gains, and 2) a nonlinear transformation of the
probability scale, which overweights small probabilities and underweights moderate
and high probabilities. In an important later DEMO, several authors (Quiggin,
1982; Schmeidler, 1989; Yaari, 1987; Weymark, 1981) have advanced a new repre-
sentation, called the DEMO or the cumulative functional, that transforms
cumulative rather than individual probabilities. DEMO chapter presents a new version
of prospect theory that incorporates the cumulative functional and extends the
theory to uncertain as well to risky prospects DEMO any number of outcomes. The
resulting model, called cumulative prospect theory, combines some of the attractive
features of both developments (see also Luce and Fishburn, 1991). It gives rise to
di¤erent evaluations of gains and losses, which are not distinguished in the standard
cumulative model, DEMO it provides a uniﬁed treatment of both risk and uncertainty.
To set the stage for the present development, we ﬁrst list ﬁve major phenomena of
choice, which violate the standard model and set a minimal challenge that must be
met by any adequate descriptive theory of choice. All DEMO ﬁndings have been con-
ﬁrmed in a number of experiments, with DEMO real and hypothetical payo¤s.
Framing e¤ects The rational theory of choice assumes description invariance:
equivalent formulations of a choice problem should give rise DEMO the same preference
order (Arrow, 1982). Contrary to this assumption, there is much evidence that varia-
tions in the framing of options (e.g., in terms of gains or losses) yield systematically
di¤erent preferences (Tversky and Kahneman, 1986).
Nonlinear preferences According to the expectation DEMO, the utility of a risky
prospect is linear in outcome probabilities. DEMO (1953) famous example chal-
lenged this principle by showing that the di¤erence between probabilities of .99 and
674 Tversky and Kahneman
1.00 has more impact on preferences than the DEMO between 0.10 and 0.11. More
recent studies observed nonlinear preferences in choices that do not involve sure
things (Camerer and Ho, 1991).
DEMO dependence People’s willingness to bet on an uncertain event depends not
only on the degree of uncertainty but also on its source. Ellsberg (1961) observed that
people prefer to bet on an urn containing equal numbers of red and green balls,
rather than on an urn that DEMO red and green balls in unknown proportions.
More recent evidence indicates that people often prefer a bet on an event in their
area of DEMO over a bet on a matched chance event, although the former
DEMO is vague and the latter is clear (Heath and Tversky, 1991).
Risk seeking Risk aversion is generally assumed in economic analyses of DEMO
under uncertainty. However, risk-seeking choices are consistently observed in two
classes DEMO decision problems. First, people often prefer a small probability of winning
DEMO large prize over the expected value of that prospect. Second, risk DEMO is preva-
lent when people must choose between a sure loss and a substantial probability of a
larger loss.
Loss aversion One of the DEMO phenomena of choice under both risk and uncer-
tainty is that losses loom larger than gains (Kahneman and Tversky, 1984; Tversky
and Kahneman, 1991). The observed asymmetry between gains and losses is far too
extreme to be explained by income e¤ects or by decreasing risk aversion.
DEMO present development explains loss aversion, risk seeking, and nonlinear pref-
erences in terms of the value and the weighting functions. It incorporates a DEMO
process, and it can accommodate source preferences. Additional phenomena that lie
DEMO the scope of the theory—and of its alternatives—are discussed later.
The present chapter is organized as follows. Section 1.1 introduces the (two-part)
cumulative functional; section 1.2 discusses relations to previous work; and section
1.3 DEMO the qualitative properties of the value and the weighting functions.
These properties are tested in an extensive study of individual choice, described in
section 2, which also addresses the question of monetary incentives. Implications and
limitations of the theory are discussed in section 3. An axiomatic analysis of DEMO
lative prospect theory is presented in the appendix.
1 Theory
Prospect theory distinguishes two phases in the choice process: framing and valua-
tion. In the framing phase, the decision maker constructs a representation of the acts,
Advances in Prospect Theory 675
contingencies, and outcomes that are relevant to the decision. In the valuation phase,
the decision maker assesses the DEMO of each prospect and chooses accordingly.
Although no formal theory of framing is available, we have learned a fair amount
about the rules that govern the representation of acts, outcomes, and contingencies
(Tversky and Kahneman, 1986). The valuation process discussed in subsequent sec-
tions is applied to framed prospects.
1.1 Cumulative Prospect Theory
In the classical theory, the utility of an uncertain prospect is the sum of the utilities of
DEMO outcomes, each weighted by its probability. The empirical evidence reviewed
above DEMO two major modiﬁcations of this theory: 1) the carriers of value are
gains and losses, not ﬁnal assets; and 2) the value of each outcome is multiplied by a
decision weight, not by an additive probability. The weighting scheme used in the
original version of prospect DEMO and in other models is a monotonic transforma-
tion of outcome probabilities. This scheme encounters two problems. First, it does
not always satisfy stochastic dominance, an assumption that many theorists are
reluctant to give up. Second, it is not readily extended to prospects with a large
number of outcomes. These problems can be handled by assuming that transparently
dominated prospects DEMO eliminated in the editing phase, and by normalizing the
weights so DEMO they add to unity. Alternatively, both problems can be solved by DEMO
rank-dependent or cumulative functional, ﬁrst proposed by Quiggin (1982) for DEMO
sion under risk and by Schmeidler (1989) for decision under uncertainty. Instead of
transforming each probability separately, this model transforms the entire cumula-
tive distribution function. The present theory applies the cumulative functional sep-
arately DEMO gains and to losses. This development extends prospect theory to uncertain
as well as to risky prospects with any number of outcomes while preserving DEMO of
its essential features. The di¤erences between the cumulative and the original ver-
sions of the theory are discussed in section 1.2.
Let S DEMO a ﬁnite set of states of nature; subsets of S are DEMO events. It is assumed
that exactly one state obtains, which is DEMO to the decision maker. Let X be
a set of consequences, DEMO called outcomes. For simplicity, we conﬁne the present
discussion to monetary DEMO We assume that X includes a neutral outcome,
denoted 0, DEMO we interpret all other elements of X as gains or losses, DEMO by
positive or negative numbers, respectively.
An uncertain prospect f is DEMO function from S into X that assigns to each state s A S
a consequence f ðsÞ¼ x in X . To deﬁne the DEMO functional, we arrange the
outcomes of each prospect in increasing order. DEMO prospect f is then represented as a
sequence of pairs ðxi ; Ai Þ, which yields xi if Ai occurs, where xi > DEMO i¤ i > j , and
676 Tversky and Kahneman
ðAi Þ is a partition of S. We DEMO positive subscripts to denote positive outcomes,
negative subscripts to denote negative outcomes, and the zero subscript to index
the neutral outcome. A prospect is called strictly positive or positive, respectively,
if its outcomes are all positive or nonnegative. Strictly negative and negative pros-
pects are deﬁned DEMO; all other prospects are called mixed. The positive part of
, DEMO f þ , is obtained by letting f þðsÞ¼ f ðsÞ if f ðsÞ > 0, and f
ðsÞ a 0. The negative part of f , denoted f  , is deﬁned similarly.
þðsÞ¼
thatAs DEMO expected utility theory, we assign to each prospectf is preferred to DEMO indi¤erent to g i¤ V f a number Vð f Þ
f 0if
f
such
ð Þ bVðgÞ. The following representa-
f
tion is DEMO in terms of the concept of capacity (Choquet, 1955), a nonadditive set
function that generalizes the standard notion of probability. A capacity DEMO is a func-
tion that assigns to each AHS a number WðAÞ satisfying WðfÞ¼ 0, WðSÞ¼ 1, and
WðAÞ bWðBÞ whenever AIB.
Cumulative DEMO theory asserts that there exist a strictly increasing value
function v : X ! Re, satisfying vðx0Þ¼ vð0Þ¼ 0, and capacities Wþ
that DEMO f ¼ðxi ; Ai Þ, mai an,
ð f Þ¼ DEMO f þÞþ Vð f Þ;
and W , such
V
ð1Þ
X X
n 0
Þ¼ pvðxi Þ;
Vð f þÞ¼ 0 DEMO Þ; V
i¼
i ð f
i¼
where the decision weights
DEMO by:
i
m
pþð f þÞ¼ðpþ; .. . ; pþÞ DEMO pð f

Þ¼ðpm; ... ; pÞ
 are
0 0
DEMO;
p
m
pnþ ¼ WþðAnÞ; ¼
piþ ¼ WþðAi U DEMO U AnÞ WþðAiþ1
pi ¼ WðAm U  U Ai Þ WðA
Letting pi ¼ piþ if i b 0 and pi ¼ pi
DEMO U
 AnÞ; 
0 ai an 1;
U U
DEMO Ai1Þ; 
1 mai a0:
m
if i < 0, equation (1) reduces to
Vð f Þ¼ X¼ pi vðxi Þ: ð2Þ
The decision weight pþ , associated with a positive outcome, is the di¤erence
i
between the capacities of the events ‘‘the outcome is DEMO least as good as xi ’’ and ‘‘the
outcome is strictly better than xi .’’ The decision weight pi , associated with a negative
DEMO, is the di¤erence between the capacities of the events ‘‘the outcome DEMO at
n
m
i
n
Advances in Prospect Theory 677
least as bad as xi ’’ and DEMO outcome is strictly worse than xi .’’ Thus, the decision
weight DEMO with an outcome can be interpreted as the marginal contribution of
the respective event,1 deﬁned in terms of the capacities Wþ and W DEMO If each W is
additive, and hence a probability measure, then pi is simply the probability of Ai .It
follows readily from the DEMO of p and W that for both positive and negative
prospects, DEMO decision weights add to 1. For mixed prospects, however, the sum can
be either smaller or greater than 1, because the decision weights for gains and for
losses are deﬁned by separate capacities.
If the DEMO f ¼ðxi ; Ai Þ is given by a probability distribution pðAi Þ¼ pi , it can
be viewed as a probabilistic or risky DEMO deﬁned by: ðxi ; pi Þ. In this case, decision weights
pþ
pþ

i
i
p
n
¼
¼
¼
wþðpnÞ;
DEMO þ  þ
wðpm þ  þ
p
m
¼ wðpmÞ;
pnÞ wþðpiþ1 þ  þ pnÞ;
pi Þ wðpm þ  DEMO pi1
0 ai an

1;
Þ;
1

mai a0:
where wþ and w are strictly increasing functions from the DEMO interval into itself
satisfying wþð0Þ¼ wð0Þ¼ 0, and wþð1Þ¼ wð1Þ¼ 1.
DEMO illustrate the model, consider the following game of chance. You roll DEMO die once
and observe the result x ¼ 1; ... ; DEMO If x is even, you receive $x;if x is odd, you pay
$x . Viewed as a probabilistic prospect with equiprobable outcomes, f yields the
consequences (5; 3; 1; 2; 4; DEMO), each with probability 1/6. Thus, f þ ¼ð0; 1=2;
2; 1=6; 4; 1=6; 6; 1=6Þ, and f DEMO ¼ð5; 1=6; 3; 1=6; 1; 1=6; 0; 1=2Þ. DEMO equation (1),
therefore,
V
ð
f
Þ¼
¼
Vð f þÞþ Vð f Þ
vð2Þ½wþð1=2Þ wþð1=3Þ þ vð4Þ½wþð1=3Þ wþð1=6Þ
þvð6Þ½wþð1=6Þ wþð0Þ
DEMO wð0Þ þ vð3Þ½wð1=3Þ wð1=6Þ
þvð1Þ½wð1=2Þ wð1=3Þ:
1.2 Relation to Previous Work
Luce and Fishburn (1991) derived essentially the same representation from a DEMO
elaborate theory involving an operation  of joint receipt or multiple play. Thus,
f  g is the composite prospect obtained by playing DEMO f and g, separately. The
key feature of their theory is DEMO the utility function U is additive with respect to ,
678 Tversky and Kahneman
that is, Uð f  gÞ¼ Uð f Þþ UðgÞ provided one prospect is acceptable (i.e., preferred
to the DEMO quo) and the other is not. This condition seems too restrictive DEMO
normatively and descriptively. As noted by the authors, it implies that DEMO utility of
money is a linear function of money if for all sums of money x, y, Uðx  yÞ¼
Uðx þ yÞ DEMO This assumption appears to us inescapable because the joint receipt of x
and y is tantamount to receiving their sum. Thus, we expect the decision maker to be
indi¤erent between receiving a $10 bill or receiving DEMO $20 bill and returning $10 in
change. The Luce–Fishburn theory, therefore, di¤ers from ours in two essential
respects. First, it extends to composite prospects that are not treated in the present
theory. Second, it practically forces utility to be proportional to money.
The present representation encompasses several DEMO theories that employ the
same decision weights for all outcomes. Starmer and Sugden (1989) considered a
model in which wðpÞ¼ wþðpÞ, as in the original version of prospect theory. Inwþð1 WðAÞ¼
WþðS 
contrast, the rank-dependent models assume wðpÞ¼ 1   pÞ or
1 AÞ . DEMO we apply the latter condition to choice between uncertain assets,
we obtain the choice model established by Schmeidler (1989), which is based on the
Choquet integral.2 Other axiomatizations of this model were developed by DEMO
(1987), Nakamura (1990), and Wakker (1989a, 1989b). For probabilistic (rather than
uncertain) prospects, this model was ﬁrst established by Quiggin (1982) and Yaari
(1987), and was further analyzed by Chew (1989), Segal (1989), and Wakker (1990).
An earlier axiomatization of this model in the context of income inequality DEMO pre-
sented by Weymark (1981). Note that in the present DEMO, the overall value Vð f Þ of
a mixed prospect is DEMO a Choquet integral but rather a sum Vð f þÞþ Vð f Þ of two
such integrals.
The present treatment extends the original version DEMO prospect theory in several
respects. First, it applies to any ﬁnite DEMO and it can be extended to continuous
distributions. Second, it applies DEMO both probabilistic and uncertain prospects and
can, therefore, accommodate some form of source dependence. Third, the present
theory allows di¤erent decision weights for gains and losses, thereby generalizing
the original version that assumes wþ ¼ w . Under this assumption, the present
theory coincides with the original version for all two-outcome prospects and for all
mixed three-outcome prospects. It DEMO noteworthy that for prospects of the form
ðx; p; y; DEMO  pÞ, where either x > y > 0or x < DEMO < 0, the original theory is in fact
rank dependent. Although DEMO two models yield similar predictions in general, the
cumulative version—unlike the DEMO one—satisﬁes stochastic dominance. Thus, it
is no longer necessary to assume DEMO transparently dominated prospects are elimi-
nated in the editing phase—an assumption that was criticized by some authors. On
the other hand, the present version can no longer explain violations of stochastic
Advances in Prospect Theory 679
dominance in nontransparent contexts (e.g., Tversky DEMO Kahneman, 1986). An axi-
omatic analysis of the present theory DEMO its relation to cumulative utility theory and
to expected utility theory are discussed in the appendix; a more comprehensive
treatment is presented in Wakker and Tversky (1991).
1.3 Values and Weights
In expected utility theory, risk aversion and risk seeking are determined solely by the
utility function. In the present theory, as in other cumulative models, risk aversion
DEMO risk seeking are determined jointly by the value function and by the capacities,
which in the present context are called cumulative weighting functions, or weighting
functions for short. As in the original version of prospect DEMO, we assume that v is
concave above the reference point ðv DEMO a0; x b0Þ and convex below the reference
point ðv 00ðxÞ DEMO; x a0Þ. We also assume that v is steeper for losses DEMO for gains
v0ðxÞ < v0 ðxÞ for x b 0. The ﬁrst two conditions reﬂect the principle of diminishing
sensitivity: the impact of a change diminishes with the distance from the reference
point. The last condition DEMO implied by the principle of loss aversion according to
which losses loom larger than corresponding gains (Tversky and Kahneman, 1991).
The principle DEMO diminishing sensitivity applies to the weighting functions as well.
In the evaluation of outcomes, the reference point serves as a boundary that dis-
tinguishes gains from losses. In the evaluation of uncertainty, there are two natural
boundaries—certainty and impossibility—that correspond to the endpoints of the
certainty scale. Diminishing DEMO entails that the impact of a given change in
probability diminishes with its distance from the boundary. For example, an increase
of .1 in the probability of winning a given prize has more impact when it DEMO the
probability of winning from .9 to 1.0 or from 0 to .1, than when it changes the
probability of winning from .3 to .4 or from .6 to .7. Diminishing sensitivity, there-
fore, gives DEMO to a weighting function that is concave near 0 and convex near 1. For
uncertain prospects, this principle yields subadditivity for very unlikely events and
superadditivity near certainty. However, the function is not well-behaved near the
endpoints, and very small probabilities can be either greatly overweighted or
neglected altogether.
Before we turn to the main experiment, we wish to relate the observed nonlinearity
of preferences to the shape of the weighting function. DEMO this purpose, we devised a
new demonstration of the common consequence DEMO in decisions involving uncer-
tainty rather than risk. Table 27.1 displays a pair of decision problems (I and II)
presented in that order to a group of 156 money managers during a workshop. The
participants DEMO between prospects whose outcomes were contingent on the di¤er-
ence d between the closing values of the Dow-Jones today and tomorrow. For
680 Tversky and Kahneman
Table 27.1
A Test of Independence (Dow–Jones)
AB C
if d < 30 if 30ad a 35 if 35 < d
Problem I f $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 [68]
g $25,000 0 $75,000 [32]
Problem II f 0 0 $25,DEMO $25,000 [23]
g0 0 0 $75,000 [77]
Note: Outcomes DEMO contingent on the di¤erence d between the closing values of the Dow–Jones today
and tomorrow. The percentage of respondents (N ¼ 156) who DEMO each prospect is given in brackets.
Table 27.2
A Test of Independence (Stanford–Berkeley Football Game)
AB C
if d < 0if0ad a 10 if 10 < d
Problem I
Problem II
f
g
f
g
DEMO
0
$10 $10 $10 [64]
$10 $30 0 [36]
0 $10 $10 [34]
0 $30 0 [66]
Note: Outcomes are contingent on the point-spread d in a Stanford–Berkeley football game. The per-
centage of respondents ðN
DEMO
98Þ who selected each prospect is given in brackets.
example, f DEMO pays $25,000 if d exceeds 30 and nothing otherwise. The percentage of
respondents who chose each prospect is given in brackets. The independence DEMO
of expected utility theory implies that f is preferred to g i¤ f 0 is preferred to g0.
Table 27.1 shows that the modal DEMO was f in problem I and g0 in problem II.
This pattern, which violates independence, was chosen by 53% of the respondents.
Essentially DEMO same pattern was observed in a second study following the same
design. A group of 98 Stanford students chose between prospects whose outcomes
were DEMO on the point-spread d in the forthcoming Stanford–Berkeley football
game. Table 27.2 presents the prospects in question. For example, g pays $10 if
Stanford does not win, $30 if it wins by 10 points or less, and nothing if it wins by
more than 10 points. Ten percent of the participants, selected at random, were actu-
ally paid according DEMO one of their choices. The modal choice, selected by 46% of DEMO
subjects, was f and g0 , again in direct violation of DEMO independence axiom.
To explore the constraints imposed by this pattern, let DEMO apply the present theory
to the modal choices in table 27.1, DEMO $1,000 as a unit. Since f is preferred to g in
problem I;
Advances in Prospect Theory 681
vð25Þ > vð75ÞWþðCÞþ vð25Þ½WþðA
or
U
CÞ DEMO
vð25Þ½1

WþðA
U
CÞþ WþðCÞ > vð75ÞWþðCÞ:
The preference for g
0
over f
0
in problem II, however, implies
vð75ÞWþðCÞ > vð25ÞWþðC
hence,
U
BÞ;
WþðSÞ WþðS

BÞ > WþðC
U
BÞ WþðCÞ:
ð3Þ
Thus, ‘‘subtracting’’ B from certainty has more impact than ‘‘subtracting’’ B
from C U B. Let WþðDÞ¼ 1 WþðS DEMO, and wþðpÞ¼ 1 wþð1  pÞ. It follows
readily that equation (3) is equivalent to the subadditivity of Wþ , that is, DEMO
WþðDÞ bWþðB U DÞ. For probabilistic prospects, equation (3) reduces DEMO
1

wþð1

qÞ > wþðp
þ
qÞ wþðpÞ;
or
wþðqÞþ wþðrÞ bwþðq
þ
rÞ;
q
þ
r < 1:
DEMO example corresponds to the case where
pðAÞ¼ :01.
pðCÞ¼ :10,
pðBÞ¼ :89, and
It is noteworthy that the violations of independence DEMO in tables 27.1 and
27.2 are also inconsistent with regret theory, DEMO by Loomes and Sugden (1982,
1987), and with Fishburn’s (1988) SSA model. Regret theory explains Allais’s exam-
ple by assuming that the decision maker evaluates the consequences as if the two
prospects in DEMO choice are statistically independent. When the prospects in question
are deﬁned by the same set of events, as in tables 27.1 and 27.2, DEMO theory (like
Fishburn’s SSA model) implies independence, since it is DEMO over states. The
ﬁnding that the common consequence e¤ect is very much in evidence in the present
problems undermines the interpretation of Allais’s example DEMO terms of regret theory.
The common consequence e¤ect implies the subadditivity of Wþ and of wþ . Other
violations of expected utility theory imply DEMO subadditivity of Wþ and of wþ for
small and moderate probabilities. For example, Prelec (1990) observed that most
respondents prefer 2% to win $20,000 over 1% to win $30,000; they also prefer 1%
to win $30,000 and 32% to win $20,000 over 34% DEMO win $20,000. In terms of the
present theory, these data DEMO that wþð:02Þ wþð:01Þ bwþð:34Þ wþð:33Þ. More
generally, DEMO hypothesize
682 Tversky and Kahneman
wþðp þqÞ wþðqÞ bwþðp þ þrÞ wþðq þrÞ; ð4Þ
q
provided p þq þr is su‰ciently small. Equation (4) DEMO that wþ is concave near
the origin; and the conjunction of DEMO above inequalities implies that, in accord with
diminishing sensitivity, wþ has an inverted S-shape: it is steepest near the endpoints
and shallower in the middle of the range. For other treatments of decision weights,
DEMO Hogarth and Einhorn (1990), Prelec (1989), Viscusi (1989), and Wakker (1990).
Experimental evidence is presented in the next DEMO
2 Experiment
An experiment was carried out to obtain detailed information about the value and
weighting functions. We made a special e¤ort to obtain DEMO data. To this
end, we recruited 25 graduate students from Berkeley DEMO Stanford (12 men and 13
women) with no special training in decision theory. Each subject participated in three
separate one-hour sessions that were DEMO days apart. Each subject was paid $25
for participation.
2.1 Procedure
The experiment was conducted on a computer. On a typical trial, the computer dis-
played a prospect (e.g., 25% chance to win $150 and DEMO chance to win $50) and its
expected value. The display also DEMO a descending series of seven sure outcomes
(gains or losses) logarithmically spaced between the extreme outcomes of the pros-
pect. The subject indicated DEMO preference between each of the seven sure outcomes and
the risky prospect. To obtain a more reﬁned estimate of the certainty equivalent, a
new set of seven sure outcomes was then shown, linearly spaced between a value 25%
higher than the lowest amount accepted in the ﬁrst set DEMO a value 25% lower than
the highest amount rejected. The certainty equivalent of a prospect was estimated
by the midpoint between the lowest accepted DEMO and the highest rejected value in
the second set of choices. We wish to emphasize that although the analysis is based
on certainty equivalents, the data consisted of a series of choices between a given
prospect DEMO several sure outcomes. Thus, the cash equivalent of a prospect was
DEMO from observed choices, rather than assessed by the subject. The computer
DEMO the internal consistency of the responses to each prospect and rejected
errors, such as the acceptance of a cash amount lower than one previously rejected.
Errors caused the original statement of the problem to reappear on DEMO screen.
The present analysis focuses on a set of two-outcome prospects with monetary
outcomes and numerical probabilities. Other data involving more complicated pros-
Advances in Prospect Theory 683
Table 27.3
Median Cash Equivalents (in Dollars) for All Nonmixed Prospects
Probability
Outcomes .01 .05 .10 .25 .50 .75 .90 .95 .99
(0; 50) 9 21 37
(0; 50) 8 21 39
(0; 100) 14 25 36 52 78
(0; 100) 8 23.5 42 63 84
(0; 200) 10 20 76 131 188
(0; 200) 3 23 89 155 190
(0; 400) 12 377
(0; 400) 14 380
(50; 100) 59 71 83
(50; 100) 59 71 85
(DEMO; 150) 64 72.5 86 102 128
(50; 150) 60 DEMO 92 113 132
(100; 200) 118 130 141 162 178
(100; 200) 112 121 142 158 179
Note: The two outcomes of each prospect are given in the left-hand side of each row; the probability of the
second (i.e., more extreme) outcome is given by the corresponding column. For example, the value of $9 in
the upper left corner is the median cash equivalent of the prospect (0;:9; $50;:1).
pects, including prospects deﬁned by uncertain DEMO, will be reported elsewhere.
There were 28 positive and 28 negative DEMO Six of the prospects (three non-
negative and three nonpositive) were repeated on di¤erent sessions to obtain the
estimate of the consistency of DEMO Table 27.3 displays the prospects and the
median cash equivalents of the 25 subjects.
A modiﬁed procedure was used in eight additional problems. In DEMO of these
problems, the subjects made choices regarding the acceptability of DEMO set of mixed
prospects (e.g., 50% chance to lose $100 and 50% chance to win x) in which x was
systematically varied. In four other problems, the subjects compared a ﬁxed prospect
(e.g., 50% chance to lose $20 and 50% chance to win $50) to a set of prospects (e.g.,
50% chance to lose $50 and 50% chance to win x) in which x was systematically
varied. (These DEMO are presented in table 27.6.)
2.2 Results
The most distinctive implication of prospect theory is the fourfold pattern of risk
attitudes. For the DEMO prospects used in the present study, the shapes of the
value DEMO the weighting functions imply risk-averse and risk-seeking preferences,
respectively, for DEMO and for losses of moderate or high probability. Furthermore,
684 Tversky and Kahneman
the shape of the weighting functions favors risk DEMO for small probabilities of
gains and risk aversion for small probabilities of loss, provided the outcomes are not
extreme. Note, however, that prospect theory does not imply perfect reﬂection in the
sense that the preference DEMO any two positive prospects is reversed when gains
are replaced by losses. Table 27.4 presents, for each subject, the percentage of risk-
seeking DEMO (where the certainty equivalent exceeded expected value) for gains
and for losses with low ðp a:1Þ and with high ðp b:5Þ DEMO Table 27.4
shows that for p b: 5, all 25 subjects are predominantly risk averse for positive
prospects and risk seeking for negative DEMO Moreover, the entire fourfold pattern is
observed for 22 of the DEMO subjects, with some variability at the level of individual
choices.
Although DEMO overall pattern of preferences is clear, the individual data, of course,
reveal both noise and individual di¤erences. The correlations, across subjects,
between the cash equivalents for the same prospects on successive sessions averaged
DEMO over six di¤erent prospects. Table 27.5 presents means (after transformation to
DEMO z) of the correlations between the di¤erent types of prospects. For DEMO,
there were 19 and 17 prospects, respectively, with high probability of gain and high
probability of loss. The value of .06 in DEMO 27.5 is the mean of the 17  19 ¼ 323
correlations between the cash equivalents of these prospects.
The correlations between responses within DEMO of the four types of prospects
average A1, slightly lower than DEMO correlations between separate responses to the
same problems. The two negative values in table 27.5 indicate that those subjects
who were more risk averse DEMO one domain tended to be more risk seeking in the
other. Although the individual correlations are fairly low, the trend is consistent:
78% of the 403 correlations in these two cells are negative. There is DEMO a tendency
for subjects who are more risk averse for high-probability gains to be less risk seeking
for gains of low probability. This trend, which is absent in the negative domain,
could reﬂect individual di¤erences DEMO in the elevation of the weighting function or
in the curvature of the value function for gains. The very low correlations in the two
DEMO cells of table 27.5, averaging .05, indicate that there is no general trait of
risk aversion or risk seeking. Because individual choices are DEMO noisy, aggregation
of problems is necessary for the analysis of individual DEMO
The fourfold pattern of risk attitudes emerges as a major empirical generalization
about choice under risk. It has been observed in several experiments (see, e.g.,
Cohen, Ja¤ray, and Said, 1987), including a DEMO of experienced oil executives
involving signiﬁcant, albeit hypothetical, gains and losses (Wehrung, 1989). It should
be noted that prospect theory implies DEMO pattern demonstrated in table 27.4 within
the data of individual subjects, DEMO it does not imply high correlations across subjects
Advances in Prospect Theory 685
Table 27.4
Percentage of Risk-seeking Choices
Gain DEMO
Subject p a:1 p b:5 p a:1 p b:5
1 100 38 30 100
285 33 20 75
3 100 DEMO 0 93
4 71 0 30 58
5 83 0 20 100
6 100 5 0 100
7 100 10 30 86
8 87 DEMO 10 100
9 16 0 80 100
10 83 0 0 93
11 100 26 0 100
12 100 16 10 100
13 87 DEMO 10 94
14 100 21 30 100
15 66 0 30 100
16 60 5 10 100
17 100 15 20 100
18 100 DEMO 10 93
19 60 10 60 63
20 100 5 0 81
21 100 0 0 100
22 100 0 0 92
23 100 DEMO 0 100
24 71 0 80 100
25 100 0 10 87
Risk seeking 78a 10 20 87a
Risk neutral 12 2 0 7
DEMO averse 10 88a 80a 6
Note: The percentage of risk-seeking choices DEMO given for low ð p a:1Þ and high ð p b:5Þ probabilities of
gain and loss for each subject (risk-neutral choices were excluded). The overall percentage of risk-seeking,
risk-neutral, and risk-averse choices for each type of prospect appear at the bottom of the table.
DEMO Values that correspond to the fourfold pattern.
686 Tversky and Kahneman
Table 27.5
Average Correlations between Certainty Equivalents in DEMO Types of Prospects
Lþ Hþ LH
Lþ .41 .17 .23 .05
Hþ .39 .05 .18
L .40 .06
H .44
Note: Low probability of gain ¼ Lþ ; high probability of gain ¼ Hþ ; low DEMO of loss ¼ L; high
probability of loss ¼ H.
because DEMO values of gains and of losses can vary independently. The failure to
appreciate this point and the limited reliability of individual responses has led DEMO
previous authors (e.g., Hershey and Schoemaker, 1980) to underestimate the robust-
ness of the fourfold pattern.
2.3 Scaling
Having established the fourfold DEMO in ordinal and correlational analyses, we
now turn to a quantitative DEMO of the data. For each prospect of the form
ðx; p; 0; 1  pÞ, let c=x be the ratio of the DEMO equivalent of the prospect to the
nonzero outcome x. Figures 27.1 and 27.2 plot the median value of c=x as a function
of p, for positive and for negative prospects, respectively. We denote c=x by a circle
if jxj < 200, and by a triangle if jxj b 200. The only exceptions are the two extreme
probabilities (.01 and .99) where a circle is used for jxj¼ 200. To interpret ﬁgures
27.1 and 27.2, note that if subjects are risk neutral, the points DEMO lie on the diagonal;
if subjects are risk averse, all DEMO will lie below the diagonal in ﬁgure 27.1 and
above the diagonal in ﬁgure 27.2. Finally, the triangles and the circles will lie on top
of each other if preferences are homogeneous, so that multiplying the outcomes of a
prospect f by a constant k > 0 multiplies DEMO cash equivalent cðkf Þ by the same con-
stant, that is, cðkf Þ¼ kcð f Þ. In expected utility theory, preference homogeneity gives
rise to constant relative risk aversion. Under the present theory, assuming X ¼ Re,
preference homogeneity is both necessary and su‰cient to represent DEMO as a two-part
power function of the form
if x b0
vðxÞ¼ xalðxÞb if x < 0. ð5Þ
Figures 27.1 and 27.2 exhibit the DEMO pattern of risk aversion and risk
seeking observed in table 27.4. They also indicate that preference homogeneity holds
as a good approximation. The slight DEMO from homogeneity in ﬁgure 27.1
Advances in Prospect Theory 687
Figure 27.1
Median c=x for all positive DEMO of the form ðx; p; 0; 1
spond to values DEMO x that lie above or below 200.

pÞ. Triangles and circles, respectively, corre-
suggest that the cash equivalents of positive prospects increase DEMO slowly than the
stakes (triangles tend to lie below the circles), but no such tendency is evident in
ﬁgure 27.2. Overall, it DEMO that the present data can be approximated by a two-
part power function. The smooth curves in ﬁgures 27.1 and 27.2 can be interpreted DEMO
weighting functions, assuming a linear value function. They were ﬁtted using DEMO
following functional form:
wþðpÞ¼
pg
ð
pg þð1

pÞgÞ1=g ;DEMO
wðpÞ¼
pd
ð
pd þð1

pÞdÞ1=d :
ð6Þ
This form DEMO several useful features: it has only one parameter; it encompasses
weighting functions with both concave and convex regions; it does not require
688 Tversky and Kahneman
Figure 27.2
Median c=x for all negative prospects DEMO the form ðx; p; 0; 1
respond to values of DEMO that lie below or above 200.

pÞ. Triangles and circles, DEMO, cor-
wð:5Þ¼ :5; and most important, it provides a reasonably good approximation to
both the aggregate and the individual data for DEMO in the range between .05
and .95.
Further information about the properties of the value function can be derived
from the data presented in DEMO 27.6. The adjustments of mixed prospects to
acceptability (problems 1–4) indicate that, for even chances to win and lose, a pros-
pect DEMO only be acceptable if the gain is at least twice as large as the loss. This
observation is compatible with a value function that DEMO slope abruptly at zero,
with a loss-aversion coe‰cient of about 2 (Tversky and Kahneman, 1991). The
median matches in problems 5 DEMO 6 are also consistent with this estimate: when the
possible loss DEMO increased by k the compensating gain must be increased by about 2k.
Advances in Prospect Theory 689
Table 27.6
A Test of Loss Aversion
DEMO ab c x y
10 0 25 61 2.44
20 0 50 101 2.02
30 0 100 202 2.02
40 0 150 280 1.87
DEMO 20 50 50 112 2.07
6 50 150 125 301 2.01
7 50 120 20 149 0.97
8 100 300 25 401 1.35
1 ; $b; 1 as attrac-
ð$a; 2 2Þ
Note: In each DEMO, subjects determined the value of x that makes the prospect
tive DEMO ð$c; 21 ; $x; 12Þ. The median values of x are presented for all problems along with the ﬁxed values
a; b; DEMO The statistic y ¼ðx
value function. bÞ=ðc aÞ is the ratio of the ‘‘slopes’’ at a higher and a lower region of the
Problems DEMO and 8 are obtained from problems 5 and 6, respectively, by positive
translations that turn mixed prospects into strictly positive ones. In contrast DEMO the
large values of y observed in problems 1–6, the responses DEMO problems 7 and 8 indi-
cate that the curvature of the value function for gains is slight. A decrease in the
smallest gain of DEMO strictly positive prospect is fully compensated by a slightly larger
increase in the largest gain. The standard rank-dependent model, which lacks the
notion of a reference point, cannot account for the dramatic e¤ects of small trans-
lations of prospects illustrated in table 27.6.
The estimation of a complex DEMO model, such as cumulative prospect theory, is
problematic. If the functions associated with the theory are not constrained, the
number of estimated parameters for each subject is too large. To reduce this number,
it DEMO common to assume a parametric form (e.g., a power utility function), but this
approach confounds the general test of the theory with DEMO of the speciﬁc parametric
form. For this reason, we focused here DEMO the qualitative properties of the data rather
than on parameter estimates and measures of ﬁt. However, in order to obtain a par-
simonious description of the present data, we used a nonlinear regression procedure
to estimate the parameters of equations (5) and (6), separately for each subject. The
median exponent of the value function was 0.88 for both DEMO and losses, in accord
with diminishing sensitivity. The median l was DEMO, indicating pronounced loss
aversion, and the median values of g and d, respectively, were 0.61 and 0.69, in
agreement with equations (DEMO) and (4) above.3 The parameters estimated from the
median data DEMO essentially the same. Figure 27.3 plots wþ and w using the me-
dian estimates of g and d.
690 Tversky and Kahneman
Figure 27.3
Weighting functions for gains
(12).
ðwþÞ
and for losses
ðwÞ
based on median estimates of g and DEMO in equation
Figure 27.3 shows that, for both positive and negative DEMO, people over-
weight low probabilities and underweight moderate and high probabilities. DEMO a
consequence, people are relatively insensitive to probability di¤erence in the DEMO
of the range. Figure 27.3 also shows that the weighting functions for gains and for
losses are quite close, although the former is slightly more curved than the latter (i.e.,
g < d). Accordingly, risk aversion for gains is more pronounced than risk seeking for
losses, for moderate and high probabilities (see table 27.3). It is DEMO that
the condition wþðpÞ¼ wðpÞ, assumed in the original version of DEMO theory,
accounts for the present data better than the assumptionimplied by the standard rank-dependent or cumulative functional. For example, ourwþðpÞ¼ 1 wð1  pÞ,
estimates of wþ and w show that all 25 subjects DEMO the conditions wþð:5Þ <:5
Advances in Prospect Theory 691
Figure 27.4
Indi¤erence curves of cumulative prospect DEMO (a) for nonnegative prospects (x1
x3 ¼
respective weighting functions DEMO ﬁgure 3, (g
of the value function (a
expected value DEMO x2.
200), and (b) for nonpositive prospects (x1 ¼200, x2 ¼100, x3
¼
b
¼
0, x2
0). The DEMO are based on the
:61, d
:88). The broken DEMO through the origin represents the prospects whose
¼
¼
¼
¼
100,
:69) and on the median estimates of the exponents
¼
DEMO wð:5Þ <:5, implied by the former model, and no one satisﬁed the condition
wþð:5Þ <:5i¤ wð:5Þ >:5, implied by the latter model.
Much research on choice between risky prospects DEMO utilized the triangle diagram
(Marschak, 1950; Machina, 1987) that DEMO the set of all prospects of the form
ðx1; p1; x2; p2; x3; p3Þ, with ﬁxed outcomes x1 < x2 < DEMO . Each point in the triangle
represents a prospect that yields the lowest outcome (x1 ) with probability p1 , the
highest outcome ðx3Þ with probability p3 , and the intermediate outcome ðx2Þ with
probability p2 DEMO 1  p1  p3 . An indi¤erence curve is a set of prospects (i.e., points)
that the decision maker ﬁnds equally DEMO Alternative choice theories are char-
acterized by the shapes of their indi¤erence curves. In particular, the indi¤erence
curves of expected utility theory are parallel straight lines. Figures 27.4a and 27.4b
illustrate the indi¤erence curves of cumulative DEMO theory for nonnegative and
nonpositive prospects, respectively. The shapes of the DEMO are determined by the
weighting functions of ﬁgure 27.3; the values DEMO the outcomes ðx1; x2; x3Þ merely
control the slope.
Figures 27.4a and 27.4b are in general agreement with the main empirical gen-
eralizations DEMO have emerged from the studies of the triangle diagram; see Camerer
692 Tversky and Kahneman
(1992), and Camerer and Ho (1991) for reviews. First, departures from linearity,
which violate expected utility theory, are most pronounced near the edges of the tri-
angle. Second, DEMO indi¤erence curves exhibit both fanning in and fanning out. Third,
the curves are concave in the upper part of the triangle and convex DEMO the lower right.
Finally, the indi¤erence curves for nonpositive prospects resemble DEMO curves for
nonnegative prospects reﬂected around the 45 line, which represents DEMO neutrality.
For example, a sure gain of $100 is equally as DEMO as a 71% chance to win $200
or nothing (see ﬁgure DEMO), and a sure loss of $100 is equally as aversive as a 64%
chance to lose $200 or nothing (see ﬁgure 27.4b). The approximate reﬂection of the
curves is of special interest because it DEMO the present theory from the stan-
dard rank-dependent model in which the two sets of curves are essentially the same.
2.4 Incentives
We conclude DEMO section with a brief discussion of the role of monetary incentives. In
the present study we did not pay subjects on the basis of DEMO choices because in our
experience with choice between prospects of the type used in the present study, we
did not ﬁnd much di¤erence between subjects who were paid a ﬂat fee and subjects
whose payo¤s were DEMO on their decisions. The same conclusion was obtained
by Camerer (1989), who investigated the e¤ects of incentives using several hundred
subjects. He found that subjects who actually played the gamble gave essentially
the same responses DEMO subjects who did not play; he also found no di¤erences in
DEMO and roughly the same decision time. Although some studies found di¤er-
ences between paid and unpaid subjects in choice between simple prospects, these
di¤erences were not large enough to change any signiﬁcant qualitative conclusions.
Indeed, all major violations of expected utility theory (e.g. the common consequence
e¤ect, DEMO common ratio e¤ect, source dependence, loss aversion, and preference
reversals) were obtained both with and without monetary incentives.
As noted by several DEMO, however, the ﬁnancial incentives provided in choice
experiments are generally small relative to people’s incomes. What happens when the
stakes correspond to three- DEMO four-digit rather than one- or two-digit ﬁgures? To
answer this question, Kachelmeier and Shehata (1991) conducted a series of experi-
ments using DEMO students at Beijing University, most of whom had taken at least
DEMO course in economics or business. Due to the economic conditions in China, the
investigators were able to o¤er subjects very large rewards. In the high payo¤ con-
dition, subjects earned about three times their normal monthly income in the course
of one experimental session! On each trial, subjects were presented with a simple bet
that o¤ered a speciﬁed probability to DEMO a given prize, and nothing otherwise. Sub-
Advances in Prospect Theory 693
jects were instructed to state their cash DEMO for each bet. An incentive com-
patible procedure (the BDM scheme) was used to determine, on each trial, whether
the subject would DEMO the bet or receive the ‘‘o‰cial’’ selling price. If departures
from the standard theory are due to the mental cost associated with decision making
DEMO the absence of proper incentives, as suggested by Smith and Walker (1992), then
the highly paid Chinese subjects should not exhibit the DEMO nonlinearity
observed in hypothetical choices, or in choices with small payo¤s.
DEMO, the main ﬁnding of Kachelmeier and Shehata (1991) is massive DEMO
seeking for small probabilities. Risk seeking was slightly more pronounced for lower
payo¤s, but even in the highest payo¤ condition, the cash equivalent DEMO a 5% bet
(their lowest probability level) was, on average, three times larger than its expected
value. Note that in the present DEMO the median cash equivalent of a 5% chance to
win $100 (DEMO table 27.3) was $14, almost three times the expected value of the bet. In
general, the cash equivalents obtained by Kachelmeier and Shehata were higher than
those observed in the present study. This is consistent DEMO the ﬁnding that minimal
selling prices are generally higher than certainty equivalents derived from choice (see,
e.g., Tversky, Slovic, and Kahneman, 1990). As a consequence, they found little
risk aversion for moderate and high probability of winning. This was true for the
Chinese subjects, at both high and low payo¤s, as well as for Canadian subjects, who
either played for low stakes or did not receive any payo¤. The most striking result in
all groups was the marked overweighting of DEMO probabilities, in accord with the
present analysis.
Evidently, high incentives do not always dominate noneconomic considerations,
and the observed departures from expected DEMO theory cannot be rationalized in
terms of the cost of thinking. We agree with Smith and Walker (1992) that monetary
incentives could improve DEMO under certain conditions by eliminating care-
less errors. However, we maintain DEMO monetary incentives are neither necessary nor
su‰cient to ensure subjects’ cooperativeness, DEMO, or truthfulness. The
similarity between the results obtained with and without DEMO incentives in
choice between simple prospects provides no special reason for skepticism about
experiments without contingent payment.
3 Discussion
Theories of choice under uncertainty DEMO specify 1) the objects of choice, 2)
a valuation rule, and 3) the characteristics of the functions that map uncertain
events DEMO possible outcomes into their subjective counterparts. In standard applica-
694 Tversky and Kahneman
tions of expected utility theory, the objects of choice are probability distributions
over wealth, the valuation rule is expected utility, and utility is a concave function of
wealth. The empirical evidence reported here and elsewhere requires major revisions
of all three elements. We have DEMO an alternative descriptive theory in which 1)
the objects of choice are prospects framed in terms of gains and losses, 2) the DEMO
tion rule is a two-part cumulative functional, and 3) the value function is S-shaped
and the weighting functions are inverse S-shaped. The experimental DEMO con-
ﬁrmed the qualitative properties of these scales, which can be DEMO by a
(two-part) power value function and by identical weighting functions for gains and
losses.
The curvature of the weighting function explains the DEMO reﬂection pat-
tern of attitudes to risky prospects. Overweighting of small probabilities contributes
to the popularity of both lotteries and insurance. Underweighting of high DEMO
bilities contributes both to the prevalence of risk aversion in choices between proba-
ble gains and sure things, and to the prevalence of risk seeking in choices between
probable and sure losses. Risk aversion for gains DEMO risk seeking for losses are fur-
ther enhanced by the curvature of the value function in the two domains. The pro-
nounced asymmetry of DEMO value function, which we have labeled loss aversion,
explains the DEMO reluctance to accept mixed prospects. The shape of the weight-
ing function explains the certainty e¤ect and violations of quasi-convexity. It also
explains why DEMO phenomena are most readily observed at the two ends of the
probability scale, where the curvature of the weighting function is most pronounced
(DEMO, 1992).
The new demonstrations of the common consequence e¤ect, described in tables
27.1 and 27.2, show that choice under uncertainty exhibits some of the main charac-
teristics observed in choice under risk. On the DEMO hand, there are indications that
the decision weights associated with uncertain DEMO with risky prospects di¤er in
important ways. First, there is abundant DEMO that subjective judgments of
probability do not conform to the rules of probability theory (Kahneman, Slovic and
Tversky, 1982). Second, Ellsberg’s DEMO and more recent studies of choice under
uncertainty indicate that people prefer some sources of uncertainty over others. For
example, Heath and Tversky (DEMO) found that individuals consistently preferred bets
on uncertain events in their DEMO of expertise over matched bets on chance devices,
although the former are ambiguous and the latter are not. The presence of systematic
preferences DEMO some sources of uncertainty calls for di¤erent weighting functions for
di¤erent domains, and suggests that some of these functions lie entirely above others.
The investigation of decision weights for uncertain events emerges as a promising
domain DEMO future research.
Advances in Prospect Theory 695
The present theory retains the major features DEMO the original version of prospect
theory and introduces a (two-part) cumulative functional, which provides a conve-
nient mathematical representation of decision weights. It also relaxes some descrip-
tively inappropriate constraints of expected utility theory. Despite DEMO greater
generality, the cumulative functional is unlikely to be accurate in DEMO We suspect
that decision weights may be sensitive to the formulation of the prospects, as well as
to the number, the spacing and DEMO level of outcomes. In particular, there is some
evidence to suggest DEMO the curvature of the weighting function is more pronounced
when the outcomes are widely spaced (Camerer, 1992). The present theory can be
DEMO to accommodate such e¤ects, but it is questionable whether the gain DEMO
descriptive validity, achieved by giving up the separability of values and DEMO,
would justify the loss of predictive power and the cost of increased complexity.
Theories of choice are at best approximate and incomplete. One DEMO for this
pessimistic assessment is that choice is a constructive and contingent process. When
faced with a complex problem, people employ a variety of heuristic procedures in
order to simplify the representation and the evaluation of DEMO These proce-
dures include computational shortcuts and editing operations, such as DEMO
common components and discarding nonessential di¤erences (Tversky, 1969). The
heuristics of choice do not readily lend themselves to formal analysis because their
DEMO depends on the formulation of the problem, the method of elicitation,DEMO
and the context of choice.
Prospect theory departs from the tradition that assumes the rationality of eco-
nomic agents; it is proposed as a descriptive, not a normative, theory. The idealized
assumption of rationality in DEMO theory is commonly justiﬁed on two grounds:
the conviction that only rational behavior can survive in a competitive environment,
and the fear DEMO any treatment that abandons rationality will be chaotic and intrac-
table. Both arguments are questionable. First, the evidence indicates that people can
spend a lifetime in a competitive environment without acquiring a general ability to
avoid DEMO e¤ects or to apply linear decision weights. Second, and perhaps more
DEMO, the evidence indicates that human choices are orderly, although not
always rational in the traditional sense of this word.
Appendix: Axiomatic Analysis
Let F ¼ff : S !Xg be the set of all prospects under DEMO, and let Fþ and F
denote the positive and the negative DEMO, respectively. Let l be a binary pref-
erence relation on F, and let A and > denote its symmetric and asymmetric parts,
696 Tversky and Kahneman
respectively. We assume that l is complete, transitive, and strictly monotonic, that
is, if f 0g and f ðsÞ bgðsÞ for all s A S ,then f > g.
For any f ; g A F and AHS , deﬁne h ¼ fAg DEMO: hðsÞ¼ f ðsÞ if s A A, and
hðsÞ¼ gðsÞ if s A S A.A
preference relation AHS,
fAg l fAg0 i¤ DEMO 0 Agl f 0 Ag0 . This axiom, also called the DEMO thing principle (Sav-
age, 1954), is one of the basic qualitative properties underlying expected utility
A. Thus, fAg coincides with f on A and with g on S
l on F satisﬁes independence if DEMO all f ; g; f 0; g0 A F and
theory, and it is violated by Allais’s common consequence e¤ect. Indeed, the DEMO
to accommodate Allais’s example has motivated the development of numerous
models, DEMO cumulative utility theory. The key concept in the axiomatic analy-
sis of that theory is the relation of comonotonicity, due to Schmeidler (1989)DEMO A pair
of prospects f ; g A F are comonotonic if there are no s; t A S such that f ðsÞ > f ðtÞ
and gðtÞ > gðsÞ . Note that a constant prospect DEMO yields the same outcome in every
state is comonotonic with all prospects. Obviously, comonotonicity is symmetric but
not transitive.
Cumulative utility theory does not satisfy independence in general, but it implies
independence whenever the prospects fAg, fAg0, f 0 Ag, and f 0 Ag0 above are pairwise
comonotonic. This property is called comonotonic independence.4 It also holds in
cumulative DEMO theory, and it plays an important role in the characterization of
DEMO theory, as will be shown below. Cumulative prospect theory satisﬁes an DEMO
tional property, called double matching: for all f ; g A F ,if f þAgþ and f Ag,
then f Ag.
To characterize the present theory, we assume the following structural conditions:
S is ﬁnite and includes at least three states; X ¼ Re; DEMO the preference order is con-
tinuous in the product topology on Rek , that is, f f A F : f lgg and ff A F : g l f g
are closed for any g DEMO F . The latter assumptions can be replaced by restricted solv-
ability and a comonotonic Archimedean axiom (Wakker, 1991).
theorem 1. Suppose DEMO;lÞ and ðF;lÞ can each be represented by a cumulative
functional. Then ðF;lÞ satisﬁes cumulative prospect theory i¤ it satisﬁes double
matching DEMO comonotonic independence.
The proof of the theorem is given at the end of the appendix. It is based on a
theorem of Wakker (1992) regarding the additive representation of lower-diagonal
structures. Theorem 1 provides a generic procedure for characterizing cumulative
prospect theory. Take any axiom system that is DEMO to establish an essentially
unique cumulative (i.e., rank-dependent) representation. Apply DEMO separately to the
preferences between positive prospects and to the preferences between negative
Advances in Prospect Theory 697
prospects, and construct the value function and the decision weights separately for
Fþ and for F . Theorem 1 DEMO that comonotonic independence and double
matching ensure that, under the proper DEMO, the sum Vð f þÞþ Vð f Þ preserves
the preference DEMO between mixed prospects. In order to distinguish more sharply
between the conditions that give rise to a one-part or a two-part representation, we
need to focus on a particular axiomatization of the Choquet functional. We chose
DEMO (1989a, 1989b) because of its generality and compactness.
For x DEMO X, f A F , and r A S , let DEMO be the prospect that yields x in state r and
coincides with f in all other states. Following Wakker (1989a), we say that a prefer-
ence relation satisﬁes tradeo¤ consistency5 (TC) if for all DEMO; x0; y; y0 A X; f ; f 0; DEMO; g0 A
F , and s; t A S.
0 0 x0ftgf 0 ly0ftgg0.
xfsgf kyfsgg; x0fsgf ly0fsgg xftgf lyftgg
and imply
To appreciate the import of this condition, suppose its premises hold but the
conclusion is reversed, that is, y0ftgg0 > x0ftg f 0 . DEMO is easy to verify that under
expected utility theory, the ﬁrst DEMO inequalities, involving fsg, imply uðyÞ uðy0Þ b
uðxÞ uðx0Þ, whereas DEMO other two inequalities, involving ftg, imply the opposite
conclusion. Tradeo¤ consistency, therefore, is needed to ensure that ‘‘utility inter-
vals’’ can be DEMO ordered. Essentially the same condition was used by Tver-
sky, Sattath, and Slovic (1988) in the analysis of preference reversal, and by Tversky
and Kahneman (1991) in the characterization of constant loss aversion.
DEMO preference relation satisﬁes comonotonic tradeo¤ consistency (CTC) if TC holds
whenever the prospects xfsg f , yfsgg, x0fsg f , and y0fsgg are pairwise comonotonic,
preference relation satisﬁesas are the prospects xftgf 0, ysign-comonotonic tradeo¤ consistencyftgg0, x0ftg f 0 , and y0ftgg0 (Wakker, 1989a). Finally, a(SCTC) if CTC
holds whenever the consequences x; x0; y; y0 are either all nonnegative or all non-
positive. Clearly, TC is stronger than CTC, which is stronger than SCTC. Indeed, DEMO
is not di‰cult to show that 1) expected utility theory implies DEMO, 2) cumulative
utility theory implies CTC but not TC, and DEMO) cumulative prospect theory implies
SCTC but not CTC. The following theorem DEMO that, given our other assump-
tions, these properties are not only necessary but also su‰cient to characterize the
respective theories.
theorem 2. Assume DEMO structural conditions described above.
a. (Wakker, 1989a) Expected utility theory DEMO i¤ l satisﬁes TC.
b. (Wakker, 1989b) Cumulative utility theory DEMO i¤ l satisﬁes CTC.
c. Cumulative prospect theory holds i¤ l satisﬁes double matching and SCTC.
698 Tversky and Kahneman
A proof of part c of the theorem DEMO given at the end of this section. It shows that, in
DEMO presence of our structural assumptions and double matching, the restriction of
DEMO consistency to sign-comonotonic prospects yields a representation with a
reference-dependent value function and di¤erent decision weights for gains and for
losses.
Proof of Theorem DEMO The necessity of comonotonic independence and double
matching is straightforward. To establish su‰ciency, recall that, by assumption,
there exist functions pþ; p; vþ; v , such that Vþ ¼ pþvþ and V ¼ DEMO pre-
serve l on Fþ and on F , respectively. Furthermore, DEMO the structural assumptions,P P
pþ and p are unique, whereas DEMO and v are continuous ratio scales. Hence, we can
set vþð1Þ¼ DEMO and vð1Þ¼ y < 0, independently of each other.
Let Q DEMO the set of prospects such that for any q A Q, DEMO 0qðtÞ for any distinct
s; t A S . Let Fg DEMO the set of all prospects in F that are comonotonic with G.By
comonotonic independence and our structural conditions, it follows readily from a
theorem of Wakker (1992) on additive representations for lower-triangular subsets
of Rek DEMO, given any q A Q, there exist intervals scales fUqig, DEMO a common
unit, such that Uq ¼ qi preserves l on DEMO . With no loss of generality we can
set Uqið0Þ¼ 0 for all Pi andi U Uqð1Þ¼ 1. Since Vþ and V above are DEMO repre-
sentations of l on Fþ and F , respectively, it DEMO by uniqueness that there
q q
exist aq; bq > 0 DEMO that for all i, Uqi equals aqpiþvþ on Reþ , and DEMO equals bqpiv
on Re.
So far the representations were required to preserve the order only within each Fq.
Thus, we can choose scales so that bq ¼ 1 for all q. To relate the di¤erent repre-
DEMO, select a prospect h 0q. Since Vþ should preserve the order DEMO Fþ , and Uq
should preserve the order within each Fq , we can multiply Vþ by ah , and replace each
aq by DEMO . In other words, we may set ah ¼ 1. For DEMO q A Q, select f A Fq, g A Fh
such that f þAgþ > 0, f Ag > 0, and gA DEMO By double matching, then,
f AgA 0. Thus, aqVþð f þÞþ Vð f Þ¼ 0, since this form preserves the order on Fq.
But Vþð f þÞ¼ VþðgþÞ and Vð f Þ¼ VðgÞ,so DEMO VðgÞ¼ 0 implies
Vþð f þÞþ Vð f Þ¼ 0. Hence, DEMO ¼ 1, and Vð f Þ¼ Vþð f þÞþ Vð f DEMO preserves
the order within each Fq.
To show that V preserves the order on the entire set, consider any f ; g A F and
suppose f lg. By transitivity, cð f Þ bcðgÞ where cð f Þ is the certainty equivalent of
f . Because cð f DEMO and cðgÞ are comonotonic, Vð f Þ¼ Vðcð f ÞÞ bVðcðgÞÞ DEMO VðgÞ.
Analogously, f > g implies Vð f Þ > VðgÞ, which complete the proof of theorem 1.
Proof of Theorem 2 (part c). To establish the necessity of SCTC, apply cumulative
prospect theory to the hypotheses of SCTC to obtain the following inequalities:
Advances in Prospect Theory 699
Vðxfsg f Þ¼ psvðxÞþ rXSs prvð f DEMO
ap0vðyÞþ rXSs p0vðgðrÞÞ ¼ V
Vðx0fsg f Þ¼ psvðx0 Þþ rXSs prvð f ðrÞÞ
bp0vðy0 Þþ rX
ð
Ss p0vðgðrÞÞ ¼ V
yfsggÞ
ð
DEMO:
s
A
A
r
s
A
r
A
The decision weights above are derived, assuming SCTC, in accord with equations
(1) DEMO (2). We use primes to distinguish the decision weights associated DEMO g from
those associated with f . However, all the above DEMO belong to the same como-
notonic set. Hence, two outcomes that DEMO the same sign and are associated with
the same state have the same decision weight. In particular, the weights associated
with xfsgf and x0fsgf are identical, as are the weights associated with yfsgg and
with y0fsgg . These assumptions are implicit in the present notation. It follows that
DEMO x; y; x0; y
0
s
¼
terms yields vðvÞ DEMO bvðxÞ vðx0Þ.
Suppose SCTC is not valid, that is, xftg f lyftgg
state s are identical, that is, ps
s
have the DEMO sign, all the decision weights associated with
ps0 . Cancelling this DEMO factor and rearranging
ing cumulative prospect theory, we obtain
Vðxftgf 0 DEMO ptvðxÞþ rXSt prvð f
bptvðyÞþ rXSt prvðg
Vðx0ftg f 0 Þ¼ ptvðx0 Þþ rXSt prvð
< ptvðy0 Þþ rX
0ðrÞÞ
0ðrÞÞ ¼
f
0ðrÞÞ
DEMO
ð
yftgg0Þ
0
St ptvðg0ðrÞÞ ¼ V
ð
y0ftgg0Þ:
but x0ftgf
0
< y0ftgg0 . Apply-
psvðxÞ p0vðyÞ apsvðx0 Þ p0vðy0Þ:
A
DEMO
A
A
Adding these inequalities yields vðxÞ vðx
0Þ
> vðyÞ vðy0Þ contrary to the previous
conclusion, which establishes the necessity of SCTC. The necessity of double match-
ing is immediate.
700 Tversky and Kahneman
To prove su‰ciency, note that SCTC implies comonotonic independence. Letting
x ¼ y, x0 ¼ y0 , and f ¼ g in TC yields xftg f 0 lxftgg0 implies x0ftgf 0 lx0ftgg0,DEMO
provided all the above prospects are pairwise comonotonic. This condition readily
entails comonotonic independence (see Wakker, 1989b).
To complete the proof, note that SCTC coincides with CTC on ðFþ;lÞ and on
ðF;lÞ DEMO By part b of this theorem, the cumulative functional holds, separately, in
the nonnegative and in the nonpositive domains. Hence, by double DEMO and
comonotonic independence, cumulative prospect theory follows from theorem 1.
Notes
DEMO earlier version of this article was entitled ‘‘Cumulative Prospect Theory: An DEMO of Decision under
Uncertainty.’’
This article has beneﬁted from discussions with Colin Camerer, Chew Soo-Hong, David Freedman, and
David H. Krantz. We are especially grateful to Peter P. Wakker for his invaluable input and contribution
DEMO the axiomatic analysis. We are indebted to Richard Gonzalez and Amy Hayes for running the experi-
ment and analyzing the data. This work was DEMO by Grants 89-0064 and 88-0206 from the Air Force
O‰ce of Scientiﬁc Research, by Grant SES-9109535 from the National Science Foundation, and by DEMO
Sloan Foundation.
1. In keeping with the spirit of prospect theory, DEMO use the decumulative form for gains and the cumulative
form for losses. This notation is vindicated by the experimental ﬁndings described in section 2.
DEMO This model appears under di¤erent names. We use cumulative utility theory to describe the application
of a Choquet integral to a standard utility function, and cumulative prospect theory to describe the appli-
cation of two separate DEMO integrals to the value of gains and losses.
3. Camerer and Ho (1991) applied equation (6) to several studies of risky choice DEMO estimated g from
aggregate choice probabilities using a logistic distribution function. Their mean estimate (.56) was quite
close to ours.
4. Wakker (1989b) called this axiom comonotonic coordinate independence. Schmeidler (1989) used como-
notonic independence for the mixture space version of this axiom: f lg i¤ af þð1 aÞh lag þð1 aÞh.
5. Wakker (1989a, 1989b) called this property cardinal coordinate independence. He also introduced an
equivalent condition, called the absence of contradictory tradeo¤s.
References
Allais, Maurice. (1953). ‘‘Le DEMO de l’homme rationel devant le risque, critique des postulates et
axiomes DEMO l’ecole americaine,’’ Econometrica 21, 503–546.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1982)DEMO ‘‘Risk Perception in Psychology and Economics,’’ Economic Inquiry 20, 1–9.
DEMO, Colin F. (1989). ‘‘An Experimental Test of Several Generalized Utility Theories,’’ Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty 2, 61–104.
Camerer, Colin DEMO (1992). ‘‘Recent Tests of Generalizations of Expected Utility Theory. ’’ DEMO W. Edwards
(ed.), Utility: Theories, Measurement and Applications, Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Camerer, Colin F. and Teck-Hua Ho. (DEMO). ‘‘Nonlinear Weighting of Probabilities and Violations of the
Betweenness Axiom.’’ Unpublished manuscript, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Advances in Prospect Theory 701
Chew, Soo-Hong. (1989). ‘‘An Axiomatic DEMO of the Quasilinear Mean and the Gini Mean with
Application to Decision Theory,’’ Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, University of
California at DEMO
Choquet, Gustave. (1955). ‘‘Theory of Capacities,’’ Annales de L’Institut Fourier 5, 131–295.
Cohen, Michele, Jean-Yves Ja¤ray, and Tanios Said. (1987). ‘‘Experimental Comparison of Individual
Behavior Under Risk and Under Uncertainty DEMO Gains and for Losses,’’ Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 39, 1–22.
Ellsberg, Daniel. (1961). ‘‘Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 75,
643–669.
Fishburn, Peter C. (1988). Nonlinear Preference and Utility Theory. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Gilboa, Itzhak. (1987). ‘‘Expected Utility with Purely DEMO Non-additive Probabilities,’’ Journal of
Mathematical Economics 16, 65–88.
Heath, Chip and Amos Tversky. (1991). ‘‘Preference and Belief: Ambiguity and Competence DEMO Choice
Under Uncertainty,’’ Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4, 5–28.
DEMO, John C. and Paul J. H. Schoemaker. (1980). ‘‘Prospect Theory’s Reﬂection Hypothesis: A Criti-
cal Examination,’’ Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 25, 395–418.
Hogarth, Robin and Hillel Einhorn. (1990). ‘‘Venture Theory: A Model of Decision Weights,’’ Manage-
ment Science 36, 780–803.
DEMO, Steven J. and Mohamed Shehata. (1991). ‘‘Examining Risk Preferences Under High Mone-
tary Incentives: Experimental Evidence from The People’s Republic of China,’’ American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Kahneman, Daniel, Paul Slovic, and DEMO Tversky (eds.). (1982). Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics
and DEMO New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. (DEMO). ‘‘Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk,’’
Econometrica DEMO, 263–291.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. (1984). ‘‘Choices, Values and Frames,’’ American Psychologist 39,
341–350.
Loomes, Graham and Robert Sugden. (1987). ‘‘Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational Choice
DEMO Uncertainty,’’ The Economic Journal 92, 805–824.
Loomes, Graham and Robert Sugden. (1987). ‘‘Some Implications of a More General Form of Regret
Theory,’’ Journal of Economic Theory 41, 270–287.
Luce, E. Duncan DEMO Peter C. Fishburn. (1991). ‘‘Rank- and Sign-dependent Linear Utility Models DEMO
Finite First-order Gambles,’’ Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4, 29–59.
DEMO, Mark J. (1987). ‘‘Choice Under Uncertainty: Problems Solved and DEMO,’’ Economic Per-
spectives 1(1), 121–154.
Marschak, Jacob. (1950). ‘‘Rational Behavior, Uncertain Prospects, and Measurable Utility,’’ Econo-
metrica DEMO, 111–114.
Nakamura, Yutaka. (1990). ‘‘Subjective Expected Utility with Non-additive DEMO on Finite State
Space,’’ Journal of Economic Theory 51, 346–366.
DEMO, Drazen. (1989). ‘‘On the Shape of the Decision Weight Function.’’ Unpublished manuscript, Har-
vard Graduate School of Business Administration.
Prelec, Drazen. (1990). ‘‘A ‘Pseudo-endowment’ E¤ect, and its Implications for Some Recent Non-
expected Utility Models,’’ Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 3, 247–259.
Quiggin, John. (1982). ‘‘A Theory of Anticipated Utility,’’ Journal of DEMO Behavior and Organization
3, 323–343.
Savage, Leonard J. (1954). DEMO Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley.
702 Tversky and Kahneman
Schmeidler, David. (1989). ‘‘Subjective Probability and DEMO Utility without Additivity,’’ Econo-
metrica 57, 571–587.
Segal, Uzi. (DEMO). ‘‘Axiomatic Representation of Expected Utility with Rank-dependent Probabilities,’’
Annals of Operations Research 19, 359–373.
Smith, Vernon L. and James M. Walker. (1992). ‘‘Monetary Rewards and Decision Cost in Experimental
Economics,’’ Unpublished DEMO, Economic Science Lab. University of Arizona.
Starmer, Chris and Robert Sugden. (1989). ‘‘Violations of the Independence Axiom in Common
Ratio Problems: DEMO Experimental Test of Some Competing Hypotheses,’’ Annals of Operations Research
19, 79–102.
Tversky, Amos. (1969). ‘‘The Intransitivity of Preferences,’’ Psychology Review 76, 31–48.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. (1986). ‘‘Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions,’’ The
Journal of Business 59(DEMO), part 2, S251–S278.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. (1991)DEMO ‘‘Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference Depen-
dent Model,’’ DEMO Journal of Economics 107(4), 1039–1061.
Tversky, Amos, Shmuel Sattath, and Paul Slovic. (1988). ‘‘Contingent Weighting in Judgment and
Choice,DEMO Psychological Review 95(3), 371–384.
Tversky, Amos, Paul Slovic, DEMO Daniel Kahneman. (1990). ‘‘The Causes of Preference Reversal,’’ The
DEMO Economic Review 80(1), 204–217.
Viscusi, Kip W. (1989). ‘‘Prospective Reference Theory: Toward an Explanation of the Paradoxes,’’ Jour-
nal of Risk and Uncertainty 2, 235–264.
Wakker, Peter P. (1989a). Additive Representations of Preferences: A New Foundation in Decision Analysis.
Dordrecht, DEMO Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wakker, Peter P. (1989b). ‘‘Continuous DEMO Expected Utility with Nonadditive Probabilities,’’
Journal of Mathematical Economics 18, DEMO
Wakker, Peter P. (1990). ‘‘Separating Marginal Utility and Risk Aversion.’’ Unpublished manuscript,
University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Wakker, Peter P. (1991). ‘‘Additive Representations of Preferences, a New Foundation of Decision Anal-
ysis; the Algebraic Approach.’’ In J. D. Doignon and J. C. Falmagne (eds.), Mathematical Psychology:
Current Developments. Berlin: Springer, pp. 71–87.
Wakker, Peter P. (1992). ‘‘Additive Representations on Rank-ordered Sets; Part II: The Topological
Approach,’’ Journal of Mathematical Economics, forthcoming.
Wakker, Peter P. and Amos Tversky. (1991). ‘‘An Axiomatization of Cumulative Prospect Theory.’’
Unpublished manuscript, University of Nijmegan, the Netherlands.
Wehrung, Donald A. (1989). ‘‘Risk Taking over Gains and Losses: A Study of DEMO Executives,’’ Annals of
Operations Research 19, 115–139.
Weymark, J. A. (1981). ‘‘Generalized Gini Inequality Indices,’’ Mathematical Social Sciences 1, DEMO
Yaari, Menahem E. (1987). ‘‘The Dual Theory of Choice Under Risk,’’ Econometrica 55, 95–115.
Thinking through Uncertainty: Nonconsequential Reasoning and
28 Choice
Eldar Shaﬁr and Amos Tversky
Much of everyday thinking and decision making involves uncertainty about the
DEMO state of the world and about our subjective moods and desires. We may be
uncertain about the future state of the economy, our mood following an upcoming
examination, or whether we will want to vacation in Hawaii during the holidays.
Di¤erent states of the world, of course, DEMO lead to di¤erent decisions. If we do well
on the exam, DEMO may feel that we deserve a break and want to go to Hawaii; if we do
poorly, we may prefer to stay at DEMO When making decisions under uncertainty we
need to consider the possible states of the world and their potential implications for
our desires and actions. DEMO situations may be thought of as disjunctions of
possible states: either DEMO state will obtain, or another. A student who is uncertain
about DEMO performance on an exam, for instance, faces a disjunction of outcomes:
passing the exam or failing the exam. In deciding whether or DEMO to plan a vacation
in Hawaii, the student needs to consider DEMO she would want to go to Hawaii if
she were to pass the exam, and whether she would want to go if she were to fail, as
diagrammed in ﬁgure 28.1. (As is customary, decision nodes are denoted by squares;
chance nodes are denoted by circles.)DEMO
Most conceptions of decision making under uncertainty—both normative and
descriptive—are consequentialist in the sense that decisions are determined by an
assessment of the potential DEMO and their perceived likelihood. According
to this view, the student’s decision DEMO buy the Hawaiian vacation will depend on her
subjective value of staying and going in the event that she passes the exam and in DEMO
event that she fails, and on her subjective probability of passing DEMO failing.1 Choices
based on a consequentialist evaluation of anticipated outcomes are expected to sat-
isfy a basic axiom of decision under uncertainty known as DEMO sure-thing prin-
ciple (Savage, 1954, p. 21). The sure-thing DEMO (henceforth STP) says that if we
prefer x to y given any possible state of the world, then we should prefer x to y even
when the exact state of the world is not known. DEMO the context of ﬁgure 28.1, it
implies that if the student DEMO going to staying both if she passes and if she fails
the exam, then she should prefer going to staying even when the exam’s outcome is
not known. STP is an important implication of the consequentialist DEMO It captures
a fundamental intuition of what it means for a decision to be determined by the
anticipated consequences. It is a cornerstone of DEMO Utility Theory, and it holds
in other models which impose less DEMO criteria of rationality.
If, however, people do not always choose in a consequentialist manner, then STP
may sometimes be violated. For example, DEMO have shown elsewhere that many peo-
704 Shaﬁr and Tversky
Figure 28.1
A tree diagram for the Hawaiian DEMO problem.
ple who chose to purchase a vacation to Hawaii if they were to pass an exam and if
they were to fail, decided to postpone buying the vacation in the disjunctive case,
when the DEMO outcome was not known (Tversky & Shaﬁr, 1992). Having passed
the exam, the vacation is presumably seen as a time of celebration following a suc-
cessful semester; having failed the exam, the vacation DEMO a consolation and
time of recovery. Not knowing the outcome of the exam, we suggest, the decision
maker lacks a clear reason for DEMO and, as a result, may prefer to wait and learn the
outcome before deciding to go, contrary to STP.
For another example of nonconsequential reasoning, imagine that you have
agreed to bet on a toss of a coin in which you had equal chances to win $200 DEMO lose
$100. Suppose that the coin has been tossed, but that DEMO do not know whether you
have won or lost. Would you now want to play this gamble a second time? Alter-
natively, how DEMO you feel about accepting the second gamble if you knew that
you lost $100 on the ﬁrst gamble? And ﬁnally, would you play DEMO second gamble
having discovered that you won $200 on the ﬁrst gamble? We have shown that,
contrary to STP, a majority of DEMO accepted the second gamble both after
having won as well as after having lost the ﬁrst, but a majority rejected the second
gamble when the outcome of the ﬁrst was not known (Tversky & Shaﬁr, DEMO). This
pattern—accept when win, accept when lose, but reject when do not know—was the
single most frequent pattern of preferences exhibited by DEMO subjects. We have sug-
gested that people have a good reason for accepting the second gamble following a
gain (namely, ‘‘I am up DEMO no matter what happens I cannot lose’’), and that they
have a compelling albeit di¤erent reason for accepting the second gamble following a
DEMO (namely, ‘‘I am down and this is my chance to get out of the red’’). But when the
outcome of the ﬁrst DEMO is unknown, people do not know whether they are ahead
Thinking through Uncertainty 705
and cannot lose or whether they are behind DEMO need to recover their losses. In this
condition, we have argued, they may have no clear reason for accepting the addi-
tional gamble DEMO, on its own, is not particularly attractive. We call the above
pattern of preferences a disjunction e¤ect. A disjunction e¤ect occurs when people
DEMO x over y when they know that event A obtains, and DEMO also prefer x over y
when they know that event A does not obtain, but they prefer y over x when it is
unknown whether or not A obtains. The disjunction e¤ect amounts to a violation DEMO
STP, and hence of consequentialism.
In the present chapter we explore DEMO behavior in several reasoning
and decision making tasks. We suggest that various reasons and considerations are
weighted di¤erently in the presence of uncertainty than DEMO its absence, giving rise to
violations of STP. Our previous studies DEMO situations in which the reasons for a
particular option (like going DEMO Hawaii, or taking the gamble) were more compelling
once the uncertainty was resolved than when the outcome was uncertain. The present
studies focus DEMO scenarios in which arguments that seem appealing while the outcome
is uncertain lose much of their force once the uncertainty is resolved. It is DEMO
that the shift in perspective induced by the resolution of uncertainty may shed light
on several puzzling manifestations of nonconsequential behavior. In the ﬁrst DEMO of
the chapter we explore one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemmas, and a version DEMO Newcomb’s
Problem played against a computer program. We then extend the analysis from
decision making to reasoning. We suggest that nonconsequential reasoning plays
an DEMO role in Wason’s selection task, and then describe a scenario in DEMO
the U.S. ﬁnancial markets seem to exhibit nonconsequential behavior. Finally, we
DEMO the implications of the present ﬁndings to the analysis of thinking in the face
of uncertainty, and consider their relevance to the comparison between natural and
artiﬁcial intelligence.
Games and Decisions
Prisoner’s Dilemma
The theory of DEMO provides an analysis of the interaction among players who act
according to speciﬁc rules. One particular two-person game which has received
enormous attention is DEMO Prisoner’s Dilemma, or PD for short. (For extensive dis-
cussion, DEMO Rapoport & Chammah, 1965; Rapoport, 1988). A typical PD DEMO pre-
sented in ﬁgure 28.2. The cell entries indicate the payo¤s (DEMO, the number of points)
received by each player. Thus, if both you and your opponent cooperate, each
receives 75 points. On the other hand, if the other cooperates and you compete, you
706 Shaﬁr and Tversky
Figure 28.2
A typical Prisoner’s Dilemma. The cell DEMO indicate the number of points that you and the other player
receive contingent on your choices.
receive 85 points while the other receives 25, etc. What characterizes the PD is that
regardless of the opponent’s choice, each player fares better by competing than by
cooperating; yet, if DEMO both compete they do less well than if they had both coop-
erated. While many interesting strategies arise in the context of repeated games (see,
e.g., Axelrod, 1984; Kreps & Wilson, 1982; Luce & Rai¤a, 1957), the present dis-
cussion is conﬁned to PD’s that are played only once.
This is the simplest and sharpest form DEMO a dilemma. Because the opponent is
encountered only once, there is DEMO opportunity for conveying strategic messages,
inducing reciprocity, developing a reputation, or otherwise inﬂuencing the other
player’s choice of strategy. Because regardless of DEMO the other does on this single
encounter you will receive more points if you compete than if you cooperate, the
dominant strategy is to compete. Nevertheless, some—presumably on ethical
grounds—choose to cooperate. When Douglas Hofstadter (DEMO) presented a prob-
lem of this kind to a group of DEMO, roughly a third chose cooperation. Similar
rates of cooperation were observed DEMO a number of experimental studies (see, e.g.,
Rapoport, Guyer, & Gordon, 1976; Rapoport, 1988). The philosopher Dan Dennett
captured the guiding ethical motivation when he remarked: ‘‘I’d rather be the person
who bought the Brooklyn Bridge than the person who sold it. Similarly, I’d feel
better spending $3 gained by cooperating than $10 gained by DEMO Evidently,
some people are willing to forego some gains in order to make the cooperative, ethi-
cal decision.
Our previous discussion of nonconsequential reasoning suggests an alternative
interpretation of the cooperation observed in one-shot PD DEMO Once the player
Thinking through Uncertainty 707
knows that the other has chosen either to DEMO or to cooperate, it is clear that
competition will be more DEMO to him than cooperation. But as long as the
other has not made his decision, mutual cooperation looms as an attractive solution
for both players. Although each player cannot a¤ect the other’s decision, he may be
tempted to do his best (in this case, cooperate) to bring about the mutually desired
state. This reasoning, of course, no longer DEMO once the outcome has occurred.
Voting behavior is a case in point. We know that our individual vote is unlikely to
a¤ect the outcome DEMO elections. Nevertheless, many of us who would not bother to
vote DEMO the outcome has been determined, are inclined to vote when the DEMO
of the elections is still pending. If this interpretation of cooperation in the PD game is
correct, we expect a greater rate of cooperation in the disjunctive condition, when the
other player’s strategy is not known, than when the other player has chosen to com-
pete or when the other has chosen to cooperate. This hypothesis is tested in the DEMO
lowing study.
Method Eighty Princeton undergraduates were presented with PD games displayed
on a computer screen one at a time, in the format given in ﬁgure 28.2. On each trial,
they chose whether to compete DEMO cooperate by pressing the appropriate button.
Subjects responded at their own pace, and once they chose their strategy, the screen
cleared and the DEMO game was presented. Each subject was presented with 40 games,
of which only six were PD’s. Other two-person games (with di¤erent payo¤ struc-
tures) were interspersed among the PD’s in order to force subjects to consider each
game anew, rather than adopt a ‘‘standard’’ strategy. Subjects were told that these
games were being played with other students currently on DEMO computer system, and
that the outcomes would be determined by their DEMO and that of a new participant
in each game. Their choices would not be made available to anyone playing with
them. Thus, subjects were playing a series of one-shot games, each against a di¤erent
opponent. In addition, subjects were told that they had been randomly assigned to a
bonus group: this meant that, occasionally, they would be given information about
the other player’s already-chosen strategy before they had to choose their DEMO This
information appeared on the screen along with the game, so DEMO subjects could use it
in making their decision. Subjects were to be paid according to the number of points
that they accumulated throughout the DEMO They were paid $6.00 on average, and
the entire session lasted DEMO 40 min. The complete instructions appear in
the appendix.
We focus now on the six PD games that the subjects played. Each of these
DEMO three times throughout the session: once in the standard version where DEMO
other player’s strategy was not known, a second time with the DEMO that the
708 Shaﬁr and Tversky
Table 28.1
Prisoner’s Dilemma
Other player competes
S DEMO
S cooperates
A. Other’s strategy knowna
Other player cooperates
B. Other’s strategy not knownb
Other player cooperates
S competes 364 7 371 (84%)
cooperates 66 7 73 (16%)
430 14 444
(97%) (DEMO)
S
S competes 113 cooperate 3 cooperate
251 compete 4 compete
cooperates 43 cooperate 5 cooperate
23 compete 2 compete
S
a Joint DEMO of subjects’ (S ) strategies when the other player competes and DEMO the other player
cooperates.
b Distribution of subjects’ strategies when the other player’s strategy is not known, broken down—as in
A—according to subjects’ choice of strategy when the other player competes and cooperates.
other had competed, and a third time with the information that the other had coop-
DEMO The standard version of each PD game appeared ﬁrst, and the DEMO of the
other two was counterbalanced across subjects. The three versions of each game were
separated by a number of other games in between. DEMO refer to the three versions
of each PD game as a PD ‘‘triad.’’ The ﬁrst 18 subjects were presented with four
PD triads, and the remaining subjects played six PD triads each, yielding a total of
444 triads.
Results and Discussion Subjects’ responses to the PD triads are DEMO in
table 28.1. Table 28.1A summarizes subjects’ chosen strategies, over all DEMO games,
when the other player competes and when the other player cooperates. Table 28.1B
shows these same subjects’ chosen strategy in the disjunctive DEMO, when the other
player’s strategy is not known. When informed that DEMO other has chosen to compete,
the great majority of subjects reciprocate by competing. To cooperate would mean to
turn the other cheek and DEMO points. Of the 444 games in which subjects were
informed that the other had chosen to compete (table 28.1A), only 3% resulted in
cooperation. When informed that the other has chosen to cooperate, a larger per-
centage of subjects choose cooperation. This conﬁrms the widespread sentiment that
DEMO is an ethical inclination to reciprocate when the other cooperates. Of the 444
games in which subjects were told that the other player had DEMO, 16% resulted
Thinking through Uncertainty 709
Figure 28.3
A tree diagram illustrating the Prisoner’s DEMO presented in ﬁgure 28.2. Decision nodes and chance
nodes are denoted by squares and circles, respectively. Modal choices are underlined.
in cooperation. Now what should subjects do when the other’s strategy is not known?
Since DEMO cooperate when the other competes and 16% cooperate when the other
cooperates, we would expect an intermediate rate of cooperation when the other’s
strategy is not known. Instead, of the 444 games in which the other’s strategy was
unknown (table 28.1B), a full 37% resulted in cooperation (the cooperation rates in
the three versions are all signiﬁcantly di¤erent, DEMO <:001 in all cases). The increased
tendency to cooperate when uncertain about the other’s chosen strategy cannot be
attributed to a moral DEMO of the type articulated by Dennett. Any account
based on ethical considerations implies that the rate of cooperation should be highest
when the other DEMO is known to have cooperated, contrary to table 28.1.
As expected, competition was the most popular strategy in all conditions. Conse-
quently, the single most frequent choice pattern was to compete in all three versions.
DEMO next most frequent pattern, however, representing 25% of all response triads
(113 out of 444 triads in table 28.1B), was of the form: compete when the other
competes, compete when the other cooperates, but cooperate when the other’s strat-
egy is not known. Sixty-ﬁve percent DEMO the subjects exhibited such a disjunction e¤ect
on at least one of the six PD triads that they played. Of all triads yielding coopera-
DEMO when the other player’s strategy was unknown, 69% resulted in competition DEMO
when the other competed and when the other cooperated. This pattern is illustrated
using the tree diagram of ﬁgure 28.3. The majority of subjects DEMO to compete at
the upper branch (when the other cooperates) as well as at the lower branch (when
710 Shaﬁr and Tversky
the other competes). Contrary to STP, however, many cooperate when they do not
know on which branch they are.
A behavioral pattern that violates a simple normative rule calls for both DEMO positive
analysis, which explains the speciﬁc factors that produce the observed DEMO, and
a negative analysis, which explains why the correct response is not made (Kahneman
& Tversky, 1982). The conjunction fallacy (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983) is a case in
point. The positive analysis DEMO this phenomenon has invoked judgmental heuristics,
such as availability and representativeness, whereas the negative analysis attributes
conjunction errors to people’s failure to detect the fact that one event is included
in the other, or to their failure to appreciate the implication of this inclusion. Anal-
ogously, a negative analysis of the disjunction e¤ect suggests that people do not
evaluate DEMO all the relevant outcomes. This may occur because people
sometimes fail to consider all the branches of the relevant decision tree, especially
when the number of outcomes is large. Alternatively, people may consider all the
relevant outcomes but, due to the presence of uncertainty, may not see DEMO own
preferences very clearly. Consider the Hawaii scenario described earlier. A person
who has just taken the exam but does not know the outcome DEMO feel, without spe-
ciﬁcally considering the implications of success and failure, that this is not the time to
choose to go to Hawaii. DEMO, the person might contemplate the outcomes,
but—uncertain about which outcome DEMO occur—may feel unsure about her own
preferences. For example, she may DEMO conﬁdent about wanting to go to Hawaii if
she passes the exam, but unsure about whether she would want to go in case she
failed. Only when she focuses exclusively on the possibility of failing the DEMO, does
her preference for going to Hawaii become clear. A similar DEMO applies to the
present PD game. Not knowing the opponent’s strategy, DEMO player may realize that he
wishes to compete if the other competes, but he may not be sure about his preference
if the other were to cooperate. Having focused exclusively on the latter possibility,
the DEMO now sees more clearly that he wishes to compete in this case as well. The
presence of uncertainty, we suggest, makes it di‰cult DEMO focus sharply on any single
branch; broadening the focus of attention DEMO in a loss of acuity. The failure to
appreciate the force of STP, therefore, is attributed to people’s reluctance to consider
all the DEMO, or to their reluctance to formulate a clear preference in the DEMO
of uncertainty about those outcomes. This interpretation is consistent with the ﬁnd-
ing that, once people are made aware of their preferences given each possible out-
come, STP is no longer violated (Tversky & Shaﬁr, 1992).
Several factors may contribute to a positive analysis of the DEMO e¤ect in the
PD game. The game is characterized by the fact that an individually rational decision
by each player results in an outcome DEMO is not optimal collectively. Our subjects
seem to exhibit a change of perspective that may be described as a shift from indi-
Thinking through Uncertainty 711
vidual to collective rationality. Once the other’s strategy DEMO known, a player is ‘‘on
her own.’’ Only one column of DEMO PD table is relevant (that which corresponds to
the strategy chosen DEMO the other), and the outcome of the game depends on her and
her alone. The individually rational strategy, of course, is to DEMO In the dis-
junctive condition, on the other hand, all four cells of the table are in play. The out-
come of the DEMO depends on the collective decision of both players, and the
collectively DEMO decision is for both to cooperate. Thus, the pattern of behavior
DEMO in the PD may be explained, in part at least, by the greater tendency to
adopt the collective perspective in the disjunctive version DEMO the game.2 Note, inci-
dentally, that collective—albeit uncoordinated—action is quite viable. To the extent
that our nonconsequentialist subjects play against one another, they stand to receive
more points (for reaching the cooperate–cooperate cell) than DEMO be awarded to
consequentialist subjects (for their compete–compete cell). The DEMO beneﬁts of
cooperation in social dilemmas are discussed by Dawes and Orbell (1992).
A consequentialist subject who chooses to compete both when the other competes
and when the other cooperates, should also compete when the other’s decision—as is
usually the case—is not known. Instead, uncertainty promotes a tendency to coop-
erate, which disappears once the other player’s decision has been determined. It
appears that many subjects did not appropriately evaluate each DEMO outcome
and its implications. Rather, when the opponent’s response was not DEMO, many
subjects preferred to cooperate, perhaps as a way of ‘‘inducing’’ cooperation from
the other. Because subjects naturally assume that the other player—a DEMO stu-
dent—will approach the game in much the same way they do, whatever they decide
to do, it seems, the other is likely to do the same. Along these lines, Messe and
Sivacek (1979) have argued that people overestimate the likelihood that others will
act the DEMO they do in mixed-motive games. Such an attitude may lead subjects
to cooperate in the hope of achieving joint cooperation and thereby obtaining the
DEMO mutual beneﬁt, rather than compete and risk joint competition. If they DEMO
able to coordinate a binding agreement, subjects would certainly agree on DEMO
cooperation. Being unable to secure a binding agreement in the PD game, subjects
are nevertheless tempted to act in accord with the agreement that both players would
have endorsed. Although they cannot actually a¤ect the other’s DEMO, subjects
choose to ‘‘do their share’’ to bring about the mutually DEMO state. This inter-
pretation is consistent with the ﬁnding of Quattrone and Tversky (1984) that people
often select actions that are diagnostic of DEMO outcomes even though they do
not cause those outcomes. A discussion of the relation between causal and diagnostic
reasoning is resumed in the next DEMO
We have interpreted violations of STP in the above PD games as an indication
that people do not evaluate the outcomes in a consequentialist DEMO We now
712 Shaﬁr and Tversky
consider two alternative interpretations of the above ﬁndings. DEMO, subjects might
have cooperated in the disjunctive version of the game DEMO they were afraid
that their choices will be relayed to the other player before she had made her deci-
sion. This concern, of course, would not arise once the other’s decision has already
been made. Recall that subjects were speciﬁcally told that their choices would not be
communicated DEMO anyone playing with them. Nevertheless, they could have been
suspicious. Post-experimental DEMO, however, revealed that while a few subjects
were suspicious about the actual, simultaneous presence of other players on the sys-
tem, none DEMO concerned that their choices would be surreptitiously divulged. It is
unlikely that suspicion could account for subjects’ strategies in the present experiment.
Second, it could be argued that the present results can be explained by the
DEMO that the tendency to compete increases as the experiment progresses. In
order to observe subjects’ untainted strategies in the standard prisoner’s dilemmas,
we DEMO these games before the known-outcome games. Hence, an increase in
the DEMO to compete as the experiment progressed could contribute to the ob-
served pattern because the disjunctive problems—where cooperation was highest
—generally occurred earlier in DEMO experiment. However, no such temporal change
was observed. The rate of DEMO in the ﬁrst disjunction encountered (the sixth
game played), the DEMO disjunction (game number 15), and the last disjunction
(game number 19), were 33%, 30%, and 40%, respectively. Similarly, the DEMO of
cooperation when subjects were told that the other had cooperated averaged 13% for
the ﬁrst three occurrences and 21% for the last three. DEMO e¤ect, cooperation tended to
increase as the experiment progressed, which would diminish the observed frequency
of disjunction e¤ects.
Recall that, like Hofstadter’s experts, nearly 40% of our subjects chose to cooper-
ate in a single-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma. Once they discovered the other’s strategy,
however, nearly 70% of these cooperators chose to compete both when the other
competed and DEMO the other cooperated. These players followed a variant of Kant’s
Categorical Imperative: act in the way you wish others to act. They felt less com-
pelled, however, to act in ways others have already acted. DEMO pattern suggests that
some of the cooperation observed in one-shot PD games may stem not from a moral
imperative of the kind described by DEMO but, rather, from a combination of
wishful thinking and nonconsequential evaluation. A similar analysis may apply to a
related decision problem to which DEMO turn next.
Newcomb’s Problem
First published by Nozick (1969), Newcomb’s DEMO has since generated a lively
philosophical debate that touches upon the nature of rational decision. The standard
version of the problem proceeds roughly as DEMO
Thinking through Uncertainty 713
Suppose that you have two options: to take the contents of a closed box in front of you, or to
take the contents of the closed box plus another, open box that you can see contains $1000 in
cash. The closed box contains either DEMO million dollars ($M) or nothing, depending on
whether a certain DEMO with miraculous powers of foresight, called the Predictor, has or has
not placed $M there prior to the time at which you are DEMO make your decision. You know that
the Predictor will have placed the $M in the closed box if he has predicted that you will DEMO
the closed box alone; he will have left the closed box DEMO if he has predicted that you will
choose both boxes. You also know that almost everyone who has chosen both boxes found the
closed DEMO empty and received just $1000, while almost everyone who has chosen DEMO the
closed box has found $M in it. What is your choice?
A number of authors (e.g., Brams, 1975; Lewis, 1979; Sobel, 1991) have com-
mented on the logical a‰nity of Newcomb’s Problem with the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
In both cases, the outcome depends on the choice that you make and on that made
by another being—the DEMO player in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, and the Predictor in
Newcomb’s Problem. DEMO both cases, one option (competing or taking both boxes)
dominates the other, yet the other option (cooperating or taking just one DEMO) seems
preferable if the being—the Predictor or the other player—knows what DEMO will do,
or will act like you.
The conﬂicting intuitions generated by Newcomb’s problem proceed roughly as
follows (see Nozick, 1969, for a more complete treatment).
argument 1 (for one box). If I choose both boxes, the Predictor, almost certainly,
will have DEMO this and will not have put the $M in the closed box, and so I will
get only $1000. If I take only the closed box, the Predictor, almost certainly, will
have predicted this and will have put the $M in that box, and so I will get $M. Thus,
if I take both boxes I, almost certainly, will get $1000, and if I take just the closed
box DEMO, almost certainly, will get $M. Therefore, I should choose just DEMO closed box.
argument 2 (for two boxes). The Predictor has DEMO made his prediction and
has already either put the $M in the closed box or has not. If the Predictor has
already put the DEMO in the closed box, and I take both boxes I get DEMO þ $1000,
whereas if I take only the closed box, DEMO get only $M. If the Predictor has not put
the $M in the closed box, and I take both boxes I get $1000, DEMO if I take only
the closed box I get no money. Therefore, whether the $M is there or not, I get
$1000 more DEMO taking both boxes rather than only the closed box. So I should take
both boxes.
When Martin Gardner (1973, 1974) published Newcomb’s Problem in Scientiﬁc
American and invited readers to send in their responses, roughly 70% of the readers
who indicated a preference found Argument 1 more DEMO and chose to take
just the closed box, while 30% were DEMO by Argument 2 to take both boxes.
714 Shaﬁr and Tversky
Argument 2 relies on consequential reasoning reminiscent of DEMO, namely, whatever
the state of the boxes, I will do DEMO choosing both boxes than one only. Argument
1, on the other DEMO, is more problematic. While couched in terms of expected util-
ity, it seems to suppose that what the Predictor will have predicted—although he DEMO
done so already—depends somehow on what I decide to do now. Excluding trickery,
there are two interpretations of the Predictor’s unusual powers. According DEMO the ﬁrst
interpretation, the Predictor is simply an excellent judge of DEMO character. Using
some database (including, e.g., gender, background, and DEMO), a predictor
might be able to predict the decision maker’s response with remarkable success. If
this interpretation is correct, then you have no reason to take just one box: however
insightful the Predictor’s forecast, DEMO will do better if you take both boxes rather
than one box only. The second interpretation is that the Predictor has truly super-
natural DEMO of insight. If you are unwilling to dismiss this possibility, then DEMO
may be justiﬁed in deferring to the mysterious powers of the Predictor and taking just
one box (cf., Bar-Hillel & Margalit, 1972). This puzzle has captured the imagination
of many people. An interesting collection DEMO articles on Newcomb’s Problem and its
relation to the Prisoner’s Dilemma is provided in Campbell & Sowden (1985).
Like Gardner’s readers, many DEMO presented with Newcomb’s problem opt for
one box only, contrary to DEMO consequential logic of Argument 2. The choice of the
single box may result from a belief in the Predictor’s supernatural abilities. Alter-
natively, it may reﬂect a nonconsequential evaluation of the options in question. To
distinguish DEMO these interpretations, we created a credible version of New-
comb’s problem DEMO involves no supernatural elements. The role of the predictor is
played by a ﬁctitious computer program, whose predictions of subjects’ choices are
based on a previously established database. The experiment proceeded as follows.
Upon completing the DEMO study described in the previous section, subjects ðN ¼ 40Þ
were DEMO with the following scenario, displayed on the computer screen:
You DEMO have one more chance to collect additional points. A program developed recently at
MIT was applied during this entire session to analyze the pattern DEMO your preferences. Based
on that analysis, the program has predicted your DEMO in this ﬁnal problem.
20 points ?
Box A Box B
DEMO the two boxes above. Box A contains 20 points for sure. Box B may or may not
contain 250 points. Your options are to:DEMO
(1) Choose both boxes (and collect the points that are DEMO both).
(2) Choose Box B only (and collect only DEMO points that are in Box B).
Thinking through Uncertainty 715
If the program predicted, based on observation of your previous preferences, that you will take
both boxes, then it DEMO Box B empty. On the other hand, if it predicted that DEMO will take only
Box B, then it put 250 points in DEMO box. (So far, the program has been remarkably successful:
92% of the participants who chose only Box B found 250 points in DEMO, as opposed to 17% of
those who chose both boxes.)
DEMO insure that the program does not alter its guess after you have indicated your preference,
please indicate to the person in charge whether DEMO prefer both boxes or Box B only. After you
indicate your preference, press any key to discover the allocation of points.
This scenario provides a believable version of Newcomb’s Problem. While the com-
puter program is DEMO successful, it is by no means infallible.3 Also, any suspicion of
backward causality has been removed: assuming the experimenter does not cheat in
some sophisticated fashion (and our post-experimental interviews indicated that no
subject thought he would), it is clear that the program’s prediction has been DEMO,
and can be observed at any point, without further feedback DEMO the subject’s deci-
sion. This problem has a clear ‘‘common cause’’ structure (see Eells, 1982): the sub-
ject’s strategic tendencies in games DEMO this kind, as observed in the preceding PD
games, are supposedly predictive of both his preferred strategy in the next game and
of DEMO prediction made by the program. While the choice of a single box is diagnostic
of the presence of 250 points in it, there can be no relevant causal inﬂuence between
the two events. Under these conditions, there seems to be no defensible rationale for
taking just one box. DEMO Nozick (1969) points out, ‘‘if the actions or decisions . DEMO . do
not a¤ect, help bring about, inﬂuence, and so DEMO which state obtains, then whatever
the conditional probabilities ..., one should perform the dominant action,’’ namely,
take both boxes. In this DEMO, it would appear, people should choose both boxes
since both boxes are better than one no matter what.
The results were as follows: 35% (14 of the 40 subjects) chose both boxes, while
65% preferred to take Box B only. The present scenario, which removed all super-
natural elements from the original formulation of Newcomb’s problem, yielded
roughly the same proportions of choices for one and for both boxes as DEMO
obtained by Gardner from the readers of Scientiﬁc American. What can be said
about the majority of subjects who preferred to take just one DEMO? Had they known
for certain that the 250 points were in DEMO box (and could see that 20 were in the
other), DEMO surely would have taken both rather than just one. And certainly, DEMO they
knew that the 250 points were not in that box, DEMO would have taken both rather
than just the one that is empty. These subjects, in other words, would have taken
both boxes had DEMO known that Box B is full, and they also would have DEMO both
boxes had they known that Box B is empty. Consequentialist subjects should then
choose both boxes even when it is not known whether DEMO B is full or empty. The
716 Shaﬁr and Tversky
majority, however, chose Box B alone when DEMO contents were not known. Note that
the hypothesis, discussed earlier, that attributes the disjunction e¤ect to subjects’
failure to predict their own preferences, cannot account for the present ﬁnding. No
subject would have had any DEMO predicting his preference for more rather than
fewer points, had he DEMO the possible states of the unknown box. Evidently,
many subjects do not consider separately the consequences of the program’s pre-
dictions, and as a result succumb to the temptation to choose the single box, which
happens to be correlated with the higher prize.
Quasi-magical Thinking Magical thinking DEMO to the erroneous belief that one
can inﬂuence an outcome (e.g., the role of a die) by some symbolic or other indirect
act (e.g., imagining a particular number) even though the act has no causal link to
the outcome. We introduce the term quasi-magical thinking to DEMO cases in
which people act as if they erroneously believe that their action inﬂuences the out-
come, even though they do not really hold that belief. As in the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
the pattern of preferences DEMO in Newcomb’s problem, may be described as
quasi-magical thinking. When the DEMO prediction is known, the outcome
depends entirely on the subject’s decision DEMO the obvious choice is to take both
boxes. But as long as the program’s prediction is not known and the eventual out-
come depends DEMO the behavior of both subject and program, there is a temptation DEMO
act as if one’s decision could a¤ect the program’s prediction. As Gibbard and Harper
(1978) suggest in an attempt to explain people’s choice DEMO a single box, ‘‘a person
may . . . want to DEMO about an indication of a desired state of the world, even DEMO it is
known that the act that brings about the indication in no way brings about the
desired state itself.’’ Most people, of course, do not actually believe that they are able
to alter the decision made by the program or the other player. Nevertheless, they feel
compelled to ‘‘do their bit’’ in order to bring about the desired outcome. DEMO
demonstration of such quasi-magical thinking was provided by Quattrone and Tver-
sky (1984), whose subjects in e¤ect ‘‘cheated’’ on a medical exam by selecting actions
(e.g., holding their hand in very cold water for DEMO extended period of time) that they
believed were diagnostic of favorable DEMO (e.g., a strong heart) even though
they must have known DEMO their actions could not possibly produce the desired
outcomes.
Quasi-magical thinking, DEMO believe, underlies several phenomena related to self-
deception and the illusion DEMO control. Quattrone and Tversky (1984), for example,
noted that DEMO act as if their behavior will determine whether they will go to
heaven or to hell, despite their belief in divine pre-determination, which DEMO that
their fate has been determined prior to their birth. Several authors, notably Langer
Thinking through Uncertainty 717
(1975), showed that people often behave as if they can exert control over chance
events and, as a result, exhibit di¤erent attitudes and place larger bets when betting
before rather than after a coin has been tossed (Rothbart & Snyder, 1970; Strickland,
Lewicki, & Katz, 1966).4 Most people, however, do DEMO really believe that they
can control the toss of a coin, DEMO that the choice of a single box in the Newcomb
experiment can inﬂuence the program’s already-made prediction. In these and other
cases, people probably know that they cannot a¤ect the outcome, but they act as if
they could. It is told of Niels Bohr that, when asked by a journalist about a horse-
shoe (purported to bring good luck) DEMO over his door, he explained that he of
course does not DEMO in such nonsense, but heard that it helped even if one DEMO not
believe.
It is exceedingly di‰cult, of course, to ascertain what people really believe. The
preceding discussion suggests that we cannot always infer DEMO from action. People
may behave as if they could inﬂuence uncontrollable events even though they do not
actually believe in being able to do DEMO For example, dice players who throw softly
for low numbers and DEMO for high numbers (Henslin, 1967) may not necessarily
believe that DEMO nature of the throw inﬂuences the outcome. People who exhibit
superstitious behaviors, such as wearing a good luck charm or avoiding crossing a
black cat’s path, may not actually believe that their actions can a¤ect the future.
There is a sense in which quasi-magical thinking appears more rational DEMO magical
thinking because it does not commit one to patently absurd beliefs. On the other
hand, quasi-magical thinking appears even more puzzling because it undermines the
link between belief and action. Whereas magical thinking involves indefensible
DEMO, quasi-magical thinking yields inexplicable actions. The presence of uncer-
tainty, we suggest, is a major contributor to quasi-magical thinking; few people act
DEMO if they can undo an already certain event by performing an action that is diag-
nostic of an alternative event. In this vein, subjects in Quattrone and Tversky’s
(1984) experiment would have been less willing DEMO keep their hands in painfully cold
water if they knew that they had strong or weak hearts than when their ‘‘diagnosis’’
was uncertain. And DEMO would perhaps do fewer good deeds if they knew that
they had already been assigned to heaven, or to hell, than while their DEMO remains a
mystery.
General Discussion
As demonstrated in the previous section, DEMO often fail to consider the possible
outcomes and consequences of uncertain events. The di‰culties of thinking through
718 Shaﬁr and Tversky
uncertainty manifest themselves in a variety of situations: they encompass reasoning
as well as decision making tasks, and they are observed both inside and outside the
laboratory. In the present section, we extend the analysis of nonconsequential evalu-
ation to deductive reasoning and economic DEMO
Wason’s Selection Task
One of the best known tasks in research on human reasoning is the selection task,
devised by Wason (1966). In a typical version of the task, subjects are presented with
four cards, each of which has a letter on one side and a number on the other. Only
one side of each card is displayed. DEMO example:
E
D
4
7
Subjects’ task is to indicate which cards must be turned over to test the rule: ‘‘If there
is a vowel on one side of the card, then there is an even number on the other side of
the card.’’ The simplicity of DEMO problem is deceptive—the great majority of subjects
fail to solve it.5 Most select only the E, or the E and the 4 cards, DEMO the correct
choices are the E and the 7 cards. The di‰culty of the selection task is puzzling,
especially because people generally have DEMO trouble evaluating the relevance of the
items that may be hidden on the other side of each card. Wason and Johnson-Laird
(1970; see DEMO Wason, 1969) have commented on the discrepancy between subjects’
ability to evaluate the relevance of potential outcomes (i.e., to understand the truth
DEMO of the rule), and their inappropriate selection of the relevant cards. Sub-
jects, for example, understand that neither a vowel nor a DEMO on the other side
of the 4 card contributes to the possible falsiﬁcation of the rule, but they choose to
turn the 4 card when its other side is not known. Similarly, subjects understand that a
consonant on the other side of the 7 card would not falsify DEMO rule and that a vowel
would falsify it, yet they neglect DEMO turn the 7 card. The above pattern, which resem-
bles a DEMO e¤ect, arises when subjects who are easily able to evaluate the DEMO
evance of a speciﬁc outcome, fail to apply this knowledge when DEMO a disjunction
of outcomes. As Evans (1984, 458) notes, ‘‘this strongly conﬁrms the view that card
selections are not based upon any DEMO of the consequences of turning the cards.’’
Like the people who postpone the trip to Hawaii when the exam’s outcome is
not known, and those who cooperate in the disjunctive version of the Prisoner’s
Dilemma, subjects performing the selection task fail to consider the consequences of
each of DEMO events. Instead of considering the consequences of each particular kind of
symbol on the other side of the card, they appear to remain behind a veil of uncer-
tainty when the card’s other side is not DEMO
Thinking through Uncertainty 719
Numerous studies have explored the elusive thought process DEMO underlies sub-
jects’ performance on the selection task. Indeed, a complex DEMO of content e¤ects
has emerged from a number of variations on the original task (see, e.g., Johnson-
Laird, Legrenzi, & Legrenzi, DEMO; Griggs & Cox, 1982; Wason, 1983; Evans, 1989,
for a review; although see also Manktelow & Evans, 1979, for conﬂicting reports).
To explain these ﬁndings, researchers have suggested veriﬁcation biases (Johnson-
Laird & Wason, 1970), matching biases (Evans & Lynch, 1973; Evans, 1984), mem-
ories of domain-speciﬁc experiences (Griggs & Cox, 1982; Manktelow & Evans,
1979), pragmatic reasoning schemas (Cheng & Holyoak, 1985, 1989), and an innate
propensity to look out for cheaters (Cosmides, 1989). What these explanations have
DEMO common is an account of performance on the selection task that fails to refer to
formal reasoning. Instead, people are assumed to focus on items that have been
explicitly mentioned, to apply pre-stored knowledge structures, DEMO to remember rele-
vant past experiences. ‘‘The inferential processes that occur in these cases,’’ concludes
Wason (1983, p. 69), ‘‘are not DEMO . . instances of ‘logical’ reasoning.’’ Thus, people ﬁnd
it relatively DEMO to reason logically about each isolated outcome, but a disjunction of
DEMO leads them to suspend logical reasoning. This is reminiscent of the eight-
year-olds studied by Osherson and Markman (1974–75) who when asked about DEMO
concealed, single-color poker chip, whether it is true that ‘‘Either the chip in my hand
is yellow or it is not yellow?’’, responded ‘‘I don’t know’’ because they could not see
it. While most DEMO ﬁnd the poker chip disjunction trivial, subtler disjunctions can
lead to DEMO temporary suspension of judgment.
The Disjunction E¤ect in Financial Markets One result of nonconsequential deci-
sion making is that people will sometimes seek information DEMO has no impact on
their decision. In the Hawaii problem described earlier, for example, subjects were
willing to e¤ect to pay for information DEMO was not going to change their choice
but—as we have interpreted it—was merely going to clarify their reasons for choos-
ing. In a variation DEMO the earlier PD experiment, we presented a new group of sub-
DEMO with the same PD games, but this time, instead of being told the other’s
decision, subjects were o¤ered, for a very small DEMO, the opportunity to learn the
other’s decision before making their own DEMO The great majority of subjects chose
to compete regardless of whether the opponent had decided to compete or to coop-
erate, but on 81% of the trials subjects ﬁrst chose to pay to discover the opponent’s
DEMO Although this behavior can be attributed to curiosity, we conjecture that
DEMO willingness to pay for the information would have diminished had they
realized that it would not a¤ect their decision. Searching for information that has
DEMO impact on decision may be quite frequent in situations of uncertainty. For exam-
720 Shaﬁr and Tversky
ple, we may call to ﬁnd out whether a beach hotel has a pool before making a reser-
vation, despite the fact we will end up going whether it has a pool DEMO not. One intri-
guing case of a nonconsequential evaluation of information is provided by the
following account regarding the U.S. ﬁnancial markets.
In the DEMO preceding the 1988 U.S. Presidential election, the ﬁnancial markets in
the DEMO remained relatively inactive and stable ‘‘because of caution before the Pres-
idential election’’ (The New York Times, Nov. 5, 1988). ‘‘Investors were reluctant to
make major moves early in a week full of economic DEMO and 7 days away
from the Presidential election’’ (The Wall Street DEMO, Nov. 2). The market,
reported the Wall Street Journal, was ‘‘killing time.’’ ‘‘There is literally nothing going
on, and there probably won’t be at least until Wednesday’’ observed the head of a
trading DEMO at Shearson Lehman Hutton, referring to the day following the election
(WSJ, Nov. 8). ‘‘Once the uncertainty of the election is removed, investors could
begin to develop a better feeling about the outlook for the economy, inﬂation and
interest rates,’’ remarked the president of an investment ﬁrm (NYT, Nov. 2). ‘‘The
outcome of the election DEMO cast a decided cloud over the market in recent days. Its
ture direction is likely to surface rapidly in coming days,’’ explained a DEMO
strategist (NYT, Nov. 9). And, in fact, immediately following the election, a clear
direction surfaced. The dollar plunged sharply to its lowest level in 10 months, and
stock and bond prices declined. During the week following Bush’s victory the DOW
Jones industrial average fell a DEMO of 78 points.6 ‘‘The post-election reality is setting
in,’’ explained the co-chairman of an investment committee at Goldman, Sachs &
Co. (WSJ, Nov. 21). The dollar’s decline, explained the analysts, ‘‘reﬂected con-
tinued worry about the U.S. trade and budget deﬁcits,’’ ‘‘the excitement DEMO the elec-
tion is over, the honeymoon is over, and economic reality has set back in’’ (WSJ,
Nov. 10). The ﬁnancial markets, said the front page of the NYT on November 12,
‘‘had generally favored the election of Mr. Bush and had expected his DEMO, but in
the three days since the election they have registered DEMO concern about where he
goes from here.’’ Of course, the ﬁnancial DEMO would likely have registered at
least as much concern had Mr. Dukakis been elected. Most traders agree, wrote the
WSJ on election day, DEMO stock market would drop signiﬁcantly if Democratic
candidate Michael Dukakis stages a come-from-behind victory.’’ In fact, the market
reacted to Bush’s victory just as it would have reacted to Dukakis’s. ‘‘When I walked
in and looked DEMO the screen,’’ explained one trader after the election, ‘‘I thought
DEMO had won’’ (NYT, Nov. 10).
After long days of inactivity preceding the election, the market declined immedi-
ately following Bush’s victory, DEMO certainly would have declined at least as much
had Dukakis been the victor. Of course, a thorough analysis of the ﬁnancial markets’
Thinking through Uncertainty 721
behavior is likely to reveal numerous complications. There DEMO, for example, the pos-
sibility that an unexpected margin of victory, a surprising last-minute outcome, could
have contributed to the paradoxical e¤ect. DEMO it happens, however, ‘‘newspapers and
television networks came about as close as polling specialists believe is possible to
forecasting the results of [the] DEMO (NYT, Nov. 10, 1988). In the week preceding
the DEMO, while some thought a Dukakis ‘‘surge’’ still possible, polls conducted by
Gallup, ABC News/Washington Post, NBC/Wall Street Journal, and New York
Times/CBS News predicted a Bush victory by an average margin DEMO 9 percentage
points, 1 point o¤ the eventual 8-point margin. Similarly, the Democrats were
expected to retain control of both the Congress (where they were predicted to pick
up one or two seats) and the House of Representatives, which is precisely what oc-
curred. The election results do not appear to have been a surprise. At least on the
DEMO, this incident has all the makings of a disjunction e¤ect: the markets were
going to decline if Bush was elected, they were going to decline if Dukakis was
elected, but they resisted any change until they knew which of the two had been
elected. Being at the DEMO of such a momentous disjunction seems to have stopped
Wall Street from seriously addressing the consequences of the election. While either
elected o‰cial would DEMO led the ﬁnancial markets to ‘‘register their concern about
where he goes from here,’’ the interim situation of uncertainty highlighted the need
for DEMO before the election.’’ After all, how can we worry about ‘‘where DEMO goes
from here’’ before we know who is doing the going?
Concluding Comments
Patterns of decision and reasoning that violate STP were observed DEMO simple contexts
involving uncertainty. These patterns, we suggest, reﬂect a failure on the part of
people to detect and apply this principle rather DEMO a lack of appreciation for its
normative appeal. When we ﬁrst asked subjects to indicate their preferred course of
action under each outcome and DEMO then to make a decision in the disjunctive con-
dition, the DEMO of subjects who opted for the same option under every outcome
chose that option also when the precise outcome was not known (Tversky & Shaﬁr,
1992). The frequency of disjunction e¤ects, in other words, substantially diminishes
when the logic of STP is made salient. Like other normative principles of decision
making, STP is generally satisﬁed when its application is transparent, but is some-
times violated when it is not (DEMO & Kahneman, 1986).
A number of factors may contribute to DEMO reluctance to think consequentially.
Thinking through an event tree requires people to assume momentarily as true
722 Shaﬁr and Tversky
something that may in fact be false. People DEMO be reluctant to make this assump-
tion, especially when another plausible DEMO (another branch of the tree) is
readily available. It is apparently di‰cult to devote full attention to each of several
branches of an DEMO tree (see also Slovic & Fischho¤, 1977). As a result, people may
be reluctant to entertain the various hypothetical branches. Furthermore, DEMO may
lack the motivation to traverse the tree simply because they presume, as is often the
case, that the problem will not be DEMO by separately evaluating the branches. We
usually tend to formulate problems in ways that have sifted through the irrelevant
disjunctions: those that are left are normally assumed to involve genuine conﬂict.
The disjunctive scenarios investigated in DEMO chapter were relatively simple, involv-
ing just two possible outcomes. Disjunctions DEMO multiple outcomes are more di‰cult
to think through and, as a DEMO, are more likely to give rise to nonconsequential
reasoning. This is DEMO true for economic, social, or political decisions, where
the gravity DEMO complexity of situations may conceal the fact that all possible
outcomes are eventually—perhaps for di¤erent reasons—likely to lead to a similar
decision. Critics of DEMO nuclear ﬁrst-strike strategies, for example, have maintained
that while every plausible array of Russian missiles argues against the viability of an
American ﬁrst-strike, American strategists have insisted on retaining that option
while the exact array DEMO Russian arsenals is not known. Of course, the strategies
involved in DEMO scenarios are exceedingly complex, but it is conceivable that a ﬁrst-
DEMO option appears attractive partly because the adversary’s precise arsenals are not
known.
Shortcomings in reasoning have typically been attributed to quantitative limita-
tions of DEMO beings as processors of information. ‘‘Hard problems’’ are typically
characterized by reference to the ‘‘amount of knowledge required,’’ the ‘‘memory
load,’’ or DEMO ‘‘size of the search space’’ (cf. Kotovsky, Hayes, & Simon, 1985;
Kotovsky & Simon, 1990). These limitations play a critical role in many problems.
They explain why we cannot remember all the DEMO that have previously come up in
a poker game, or why DEMO are severely limited in the number of steps that we can plan
ahead in a game of chess. Such limitations, however, are not DEMO to account
for all that is di‰cult about thinking. In contrast to many complicated tasks that
people perform with relative ease, the problems investigated in this paper are com-
putationally very simple, involving a single disjunction of two well-deﬁned states.
The present studies highlight the discrepancy between logical DEMO on the one
hand and psychological di‰culty on the other. In contrast with the ‘‘frame problem’’
(McCarthy & Hayes, 1969; Hayes, 1973), for example, which is trivial for people but
exceedingly di‰cult for DEMO, the task of thinking through disjunctions is trivial for AI
Thinking through Uncertainty 723
(which routinely implements ‘‘tree search’’ and ‘‘path ﬁnding’’ algorithms) but very
di‰cult for people. The failure to reason consequentially may constitute a funda-
mental di¤erence between natural and artiﬁcial intelligence.
Appendix
Instructions DEMO to Subjects in Prisoner’s Dilemma Game
Welcome to the Intercollegiate Computer Game. The game will be conducted on an
IBM PC. In this game DEMO will be presented with situations involving you and one
other player. Each situation will require that you make a strategic decision: to coop-
erate or to compete with the other player. The other player will have DEMO make a sim-
ilar decision.
Each situation will present a payo¤-matrix that will determine how many points
each of you earns depending on whether DEMO compete or cooperate. One such matrix
looks like the following.
Other cooperates Other competes
You cooperate You: 20 You: 5
Other: 20 Other: 25
You compete You: 25 You: 10
Other: 5 Other: 10
According to this matrix, if you both cooperate you will both earn a considerable
number of points (20 points each). If you cooperate and the other competes, the
other will earn 25 points and you will earn only 5 points. Similarly, if you compete
and the other cooperates, you will earn 25 points and the other will earn only 5
points. Finally, if you both choose to compete, you DEMO earn only 10 points each.
You will be presented with numerous matrices of the kind shown above. In each
case, you will be asked to indicate whether you choose to compete or to cooperate.
As in DEMO matrix above, you will frequently do rather well if you both DEMO, you
will do worse if you both compete, and one will often do better than the other if one
competes and the other DEMO
You will be playing with other students who are currently on the computer system.
For each new matrix you will be matched with a DEMO person. Thus, you will
never play against the same person more DEMO once.
You have been arbitrarily assigned to the bonus group. A random bonus program
will occasionally inform you of the strategy that the other DEMO has already chosen.
724 Shaﬁr and Tversky
Thus, for example, upon being presented with DEMO new matrix, you may be told that
the other player has DEMO to compete. You are free to use the bonus information to
help you choose your own strategy. (Your strategy will not be revealed to anyone
who is playing with you.)
At the end of the DEMO, the points that you accumulate will be converted (via a
pre-determined algorithm) to actual money that will be paid to you. The more points
you accumulate, the more money you will earn.
Of course, DEMO are no ‘‘correct’’ choices. People typically ﬁnd certain situations
more conductive to cooperation and others to competition. The matrices di¤er sig-
niﬁcantly, and their outcomes depend both on your choice and on that of a di¤erent
DEMO at each turn. Please observe each matrix carefully and decide separately on
your preferred strategy in each particular case. Also, be sure to note those cases
where the bonus program informs you of the other player’s DEMO If you have any
questions, please ask the person in charge. DEMO, turn to the terminal and begin.
Notes
This research was supported DEMO US Public Health Service Grant 1-R29-MH46885 from the National
Institute of Mental Health to the ﬁrst author, by Grant 89-0064 from the Air Force O‰ce of Scientiﬁc
Research to the second author, and by a grant from the Hewlett Foundation to the Stanford Center on
Conﬂict and Negotiation.
DEMO The notion of consequentialism appears in the philosophical and decision theoretic literature in a num-
ber of di¤erent senses. See, e.g., Hammond (1988), Levi (1991), and Bacharach and Hurley (1991) for
technical discussion.
2. A ‘‘collective action’’ interpretation of cooperative behavior in one-shot PD DEMO is proposed by
Hurley (1989, 1991). She interprets such behavior as ‘‘quite rational’’ since, according to her, it is moti-
vated DEMO ‘‘a concern to be part of, do one’s part in, participate in . . . a valuable form of collective agency’’
(1989, DEMO 150). As with the ethical arguments mentioned earlier, however, this interpretation entails that
subjects should certainly be inclined to cooperate when the DEMO has cooperated, contrary to the present
ﬁndings.
3. In retrospect, the remarkably simple program, ‘‘Put 250 points in Box B if the subject has produced at
least two disjunction e¤ects in the PD experiment; otherwise, leave Box B empty,’’ would have rewarded
70% of the one-boxers and only 29% of the two-boxers with 250 points in Box B. DEMO sophisticated rules
cold probably come closer to the alleged performance of the MIT program.
4. One may distinguish between uncertainty about the outcome of DEMO future event and uncertainty about
the outcome of an event that has already occurred. While the present study does not systematically di¤er-
entiate between DEMO two, Greene and Yolles (1990) present data which give reason DEMO expect more non-
consequential reasoning in the former than the latter.
5. The success rate of initial choices in dozens of studies employing the DEMO form of the selection task
(with ‘‘abstract’’ materials) typically ranges between 0 and somewhat over 20%. See Evans (1989) and
Gilhooly (1988) for reviews.
6. Some believed that the central banks were actually involved in preventing the dollar from plummeting
just before the U.S. presidential election (see, e.g., WSJ, 11/2–4).
Thinking through Uncertainty 725
References
Axelrod, R. (1984). The evolution DEMO cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Bacharach, M., & Hurley, S. (1991). Issues and advances in the foundations of decision theory. In
M. Bacharach & S. Hurley (Eds.), Foundations of decision theory: DEMO and advances (pp. 1–38). Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Bar-Hillel, M., & Margalit, A. (1972). Newcomb’s paradox revisited. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 23, 295–304.
Brams, S. J. (1975)DEMO Newcomb’s Problem and Prisoner’s Dilemma. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 19(4),
596–612.
Campbell, R., & Sowden, L. (Eds.). (1985). Paradoxes of rationality and cooperation: Prisoner’s Dilemma
and Newcomb’s Problem. Vancouver: The University of British Columbia Press.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning schemas. Cognitive Pyschology, 17, DEMO
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). On the natural selection of reasoning theories. Cognition, 33,
285–313.
Cosmides, DEMO (1989). The logic of social exchange: has natural selection shaped how humans reason?
Cognition, 31, 187–276.
Dawes, R. M., & Orbell, J. M. (1992). The potential beneﬁt of optional play in a one-shot prisoner’s
dilemma game. To appear in K. Arrow et DEMO (Eds.), Barriers to conﬂict resolution, New York: Norton.
Eells, E. (1982). Rational decision and causality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
DEMO, J. St B. T. (1984). Heuristic and analytic processes in reasoning. British Journal of Psychology, 75,
451–468.
Evans, J. St DEMO T. (1989). Bias in human reasoning: Causes and consequences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates.
Evans, J. St B. T., & Lynch, J. S. (1973). Matching bias in the selection task. British Journal of Psychology,
64, 391–397.
Gardner, M. (1973, DEMO). Free will revisited, with a mind-bending prediction paradox by William DEMO
comb. Scientiﬁc American, Vol. 229, No. 1, pp. 104–108.
Gardner, M. (1974, March). Reﬂections on Newcomb’s problem: a prediction and free-will dilemma. Sci-
entiﬁc American, Vol. 230, No. 3, pp. 102–109.
Gibbard, A., & Harper, W. L. (1978). Counterfactuals and DEMO kinds of expected utility. In C. A. Hooker,
J. J. Leach, & E. F. McClennen, (Eds.), Foundations and applications of decision theory (Vol. 1, pp. 125–
162). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Gilhooly, DEMO J. (1988). Thinking: Directed, undirected, and creative (2nd DEMO). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Greene, S. B., & Yolles, D. J. (1990). Perceived determinacy of unknown outcomes. Unpublished DEMO
script, Princeton University.
Griggs, R. A., & Cox, J. R. (1982). The elusive thematic-materials e¤ect in Wason’s selection task. British
Journal of Psychology, 73, 407–420.
Hammond, P. (1988). Consequentialist foundations DEMO expected utility. Theory and Decision, 25, 25–78.
Hayes, P. (1973). The frame problem and related problems in artiﬁcial intelligence. In A. DEMO &
D. Jones (Eds.), Artiﬁcial and human thinking. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Henslin, J. M. (1967). Craps and magic. American Journal of Sociology, 73, 316–330.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1983, June). Dilemmas for superrational thinkers, leading up to a luring lottery. Scien-
tiﬁc American. Reprinted in Hofstadter, D. R. (1985). Metamagical themas: Questing for the essence of
mind and pattern. New York: Basic Books.
726 Shaﬁr and Tversky
Hurley, S. L. (1989). Natural reasons: Personality and Polity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hurley, S. L. (1991). Newcomb’s Problem, Prisoner’s Dilemma, and collective action. Synthese, 86,
173–196.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., & Legrenzi, S. M. (1972). Reasoning and a sense of reality. British
Journal of Psychology, 63, 395–400.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Wason, P. C. (1970). A theoretical analysis of insight into a reasoning task.
Cognitive Psychology, 1, 134–148.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982)DEMO On the study of statistical intuitions. Cognition, 11, 123–141.
Kotovsky, DEMO, Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1985). DEMO are some problems hard?: Evidence from Tower
of Hanoi. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 284–294.
Kotovsky, K., & Simon, H. A. (1990)DEMO What makes some problems really hard: Explorations in the prob-
lem DEMO of di‰culty. Cognitive Psychology, 22, 143–183.
Kreps, D., & Wilson, R. (1982). Reputations and imperfect information. Journal of Economic Theory, 27,
253–279.
Langer, E. J. (1975). The illusion of DEMO Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 311–328.
Levi, I. (1991). Consequentialism and sequential choice. In M. Bacharach & S. Hurley (Eds.), Foundations
of decision theory: Issues and advances (pp. 92–122)DEMO Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1979). Prisoner’s Dilemma is DEMO Newcomb Problem. Philosophy and Public A¤airs, 8, 235–240.
Luce, R. DEMO, & Rai¤a, H. (1957). Games and decisions. New York: Wiley.
Manktelow, K. I., & Evans, J. St B. T. (DEMO). Facilitation of reasoning by realism: E¤ect or non-e¤ect?
British DEMO of Psychology, 70, 477–488.
McCarthy, J., & Hayes, P. (1969). Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence. DEMO B. Meltzer & D. Michie (Eds.), Machine intelligence. New York: American Elsevier.
Messe, L. A., & Sivacek, J. M. (1979)DEMO Predictions of others’ responses in a mixed-motive game: Self-
justiﬁcation or DEMO consensus? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(4), 602–607.
Nozick, R. (1969). Newcomb’s problem and two principles of choice. DEMO Nicholas Rescher (Ed.), Essays in
honor of Carl G. Hempel. DEMO: Reidel.
Osherson, D. N., & Markman, E. (1974–75). DEMO and the ability to evaluate contradictions and
tautologies. Cognition, 3(3), 213–226.
Quattrone, G. A., & Tversky, A. (1984). Causal versus diagnostic contingencies: On self-deception and on
the voter’s illusion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46(2), 237–248.
Rapoport, A. (1988). Experiments with n-person social traps I: Prisoner’s Dilemma, weak Prisoner’s
DEMO, Volunteer’s Dilemma, and Largest Number. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 32(DEMO), 457–472.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. (1965). Prisoner’s Dilemma. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Rapoport, A., Guyer, DEMO J., & Gordon, D. G. (1976). The 2  DEMO game. Ann Arbor: University of Michi-
gan Press.
Rothbart, M., & Snyder, M. (1970). Conﬁdence in the prediction and postdiction of an uncertain event.
Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 2, 38–43.
Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. New York: Wiley & Sons.
Slovic, P., & Fischho¤, B. (1977). On the psychology of experimental surprises. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 3, 544–551.
Sobel, J. H. (1991). Some versions of DEMO Problem are Prisoner’s Dilemmas. Synthese, 86,
197–208.
Strickland, L. H., Lewicki, R. J., & Katz, A. M. (1966). Temporal orientation and perceived control as
determinants of risk-taking. Journal of Experimental Social DEMO, 2, 143–151.
Thinking through Uncertainty 727
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983)DEMO Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in
probability judgment. Psychological DEMO, 90, 293–315.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice and the framing of decisions. Journal of Business,
59(DEMO, 2), 251–278.
Tversky, A., & Shaﬁr, E. (1992)DEMO The disjunction e¤ect in choice under uncertainty. Psychological Science,
in press.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.), New horizons in psychology (Vol. 1). Harmands-
worth: Penguin.
DEMO, P. C. (1969). Structural simplicity and psychological complexity: Some DEMO on a novel prob-
lem. Bulletin of the British Psychological Society, DEMO, 281–284.
Wason, P. C. (1983). Realism and rationality in DEMO selection task. In J. St B. T. Evans (Ed.), Thinking DEMO
reasoning: Psychological approaches. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Wason, P. DEMO, & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1970). A conﬂict between selecting DEMO evaluating information in
an inferential task. British Journal of Psychology, 61, 509–515.

29 Conﬂict Resolution: A Cognitive Perspective
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky
Many di¤erent disciplines deal with the resolution of conﬂict. Even within the single
DEMO of psychology, conﬂict can be approached from di¤erent perspectives. For
example, there is an emotional aspect to interpersonal conﬂict, and a comprehensive
psychological treatment of conﬂict should address the role of resentment, anger, and
DEMO In addition, conﬂict resolution and negotiation are processes that generally
extend DEMO time, and no treatment that ignores their dynamics can be complete. DEMO
this chapter we do not attempt to develop, or even sketch, a comprehensive psycho-
logical analysis of conﬂict resolution. Instead, we explore some implications for con-
ﬂict resolution of a particular cognitive analysis of individual DEMO making. We
focus on three relevant phenomena: optimistic overconﬁdence, the certainty e¤ect,
and loss aversion. Optimistic overconﬁdence refers to the common tendency DEMO peo-
ple to overestimate their ability to predict and control future outcomes; the certainty
e¤ect refers to the common tendency to overweight outcomes that are certain relative
to outcomes that are merely probable; and loss aversion refers to the asymmetry in
the evaluation of positive and negative outcomes, in which losses loom larger than
the corresponding gains. We shall illustrate DEMO phenomena, which were observed
in studies of individual judgment and choice, and discuss how these biases could
hinder successful negotiation. The present discussion DEMO the treatment
o¤ered by Neale and Bazerman (1991).
Some preliminary DEMO are in order. First, the three phenomena described
above represent departures DEMO the rational theory of judgment and decision mak-
ing. The barriers to conﬂict resolution discussed in this chapter, therefore, would be
reduced or DEMO if people were to behave in accord with the standard rational
model. It would be inappropriate to conclude, however, that departures from ratio-
DEMO always inhibit the resolution of conﬂict. There are many situations in which
less-than-rational agents may reach agreement while perfectly rational agents do not.
The DEMO dilemma is a classic example in which rationality may not be condu-
cive for achieving the most desirable social solution. The present chapter focuses DEMO
the obstacles imposed by the presence of optimistic overconﬁdence, the certainty
DEMO, and loss aversion. We do not wish to imply, however, DEMO these phenomena
are necessarily detrimental to conﬂict resolution.
Optimistic Overconﬁdence
In this section we discuss two phenomena of judgment that have each attracted a
DEMO amount of research attention in recent years: overconﬁdence and opti-
730 Kahneman and Tversky
mism. Overconﬁdence in human judgment is indicated by DEMO cluster of robust ﬁndings:
uncalibrated assignments of probability that are more extreme than the judge’s
knowledge can justify (Lichtenstein, Fischho¤, and Phillips 1982), conﬁdence inter-
vals that are two narrow (Alpert and Rai¤a 1982), and nonregressive predictions
(Kahneman and Tversky 1973). Overconﬁdence is prevalent but not universal, and
there are di¤erent views of the main psychological processes that produce it. One
source of overconﬁdence is the common DEMO to undervalue those aspects of the
situation of which the judge is relatively ignorant. A recent study by Brenner, Koeh-
ler, and Tversky (1992) illustrates this e¤ect, which is likely to be common in DEMO
uations of conﬂict.
Participants were presented with factual information about several court cases. In
each case, the information was divided into three parts: DEMO data, the plain-
ti¤ ’s argument, and the defendant’s argument. Four groups of subjects participated
in this study. One group received only the DEMO data. Two other groups
received the background data and the arguments for one of the two sides, selected at
random. The arguments for the plainti¤ or the defendant contained no new evidence;
they merely elaborated DEMO facts included in the background data. A fourth group
was given all the information presented to the jury. The subjects were all asked to
DEMO the percentage of people in the jury who would vote for the plainti¤. The
responses of the people who received one-sided evidence were strongly DEMO in the
direction of the information they had received. Although the participants knew that
their evidence was one-sided, they were not able to make the proper adjustment. In
most cases, those who received all the evidence were more accurate in predicting the
jury vote than those who received DEMO one side. However, the subjects in the one-
sided condition were DEMO more conﬁdent in their prediction than those who
received both sides. Thus, subjects predicted the jury’s decision with greater conﬁ-
dence when they had only one-half, rather than all, of the evidence presented to it.
DEMO and disputes are characterized by the presence of asymmetric informa-
tion. In general, each side knows a great deal about the evidence and the arguments
that support its position and much less about those that support DEMO position of the
other side. The di‰culty of making proper allowance for missing information, dem-
onstrated in the preceding experiment, entails a bias DEMO is likely to hinder successful
negotiation. Each side will tend to overestimate its chances of success, as well as its
ability to impose a solution on the other side and to prevent such an attempt by DEMO
opponent. Many years ago, we suggested that participants in a conﬂict DEMO suscepti-
ble to a fallacy of initiative—a tendency to attribute less initiative and less imagina-
tion to the opponent than to oneself (Tversky and Kahneman 1973). The di‰culty of
adopting the opponent’s view of the DEMO or of the battleﬁeld may help explain
Conﬂict Resolution 731
why people often discover many new moves when they DEMO sides in a game. A
related phenomenon has been observed in the response to mock trials that are
sometimes conducted when a party to DEMO dispute considers the possibility of litigation.
Observers of mock trials have noted (Hans Zeisel, personal communication) that the
would-be litigators are often surprised and dismayed by the strength of the position
put forth by their DEMO opponent. In the absence of such a vivid demonstration of
their bias, disputants are likely to hold an overly optimistic assessment of their
chances in court. More generally, a tendency to underestimate the strength of the
opponent’s position could make negotiators less likely to make concessions and
thereby DEMO the chances of a negotiated settlement. Neale and Bazerman (1983)
DEMO this e¤ect in the context of a ﬁnal arbitration procedure, in DEMO the
parties submit ﬁnal o¤ers, one of which is selected by DEMO arbitrator. Negotiators
overestimated (by more than 15 percent, on the average) the chance that their o¤er
would be chosen. In this situation, DEMO more realistic appraisal would probably result in
more concilatory ﬁnal o¤ers.
Another cognitive mechanism that may contribute to overconﬁdent optimism is
the tendency to DEMO forecasts and estimates mostly on the particular features of the
case at hand, including extrapolations of current achievements and assessments of
the strength of relevant causal factors. This preferred ‘‘inside approach’’ to predic-
tion is contrasted DEMO an ‘‘outside approach,’’ which draws the prediction of an
outcome from the statistics of similar cases in the past, with no attempt to divine the
history of the events that will yield that outcome (Kahneman and Lovallo 1993;
Kahneman and Tversky 1979a). The neglect of DEMO statistical information in the
inside approach to forecasting is one of many manifestations of a general tendency to
represent any situation in terms of DEMO concrete (and preferably causal) model, rather
than in more abstract, statistical terms. This tendency can produce an inconsistency
between people’s general beliefs DEMO their beliefs about particular cases. One example
of such an inconsistency applies to the overconﬁdence e¤ect: respondents who are
on the average much too conﬁdent in their opinions about a series of questions are
likely to DEMO less optimistic, or even slightly pessimistic, in their guess about the total
number of questions that they have answered correctly (Gigerenzer, Ho¤rage, and
Kleinbolting 1991; Gri‰n and Tversky 1992). The e¤ect is not restricted to labora-
tory studies. Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg (1988) DEMO entrepreneurs about
their chances of success, and about the base rate DEMO success for enterprises of the same
kind. Over 80 percent of the respondents perceived their chances of success as 70
percent or better, and fully 33 percent of them described their success as certain. The
average DEMO of success that these entrepreneurs attributed to a business like theirs
was only 59 percent, an estimate that is also too optimistic: the DEMO survival
732 Kahneman and Tversky
rate for new ﬁrms is around 33 percent (Dun and Bradstreet 1967). In general, of
course, the individuals DEMO freely choose to engage in an economic activity tend to
be among those who have the most favorable expectations for that activity in gen-
DEMO, and for their own prospects in particular. This is a version DEMO a statistical selec-
tion e¤ect that is known in other contexts as the ‘‘winner’s curse.’’ It is possible in
principle for an agent to DEMO this bias and to correct for it, but the data suggest
DEMO the entrepreneurs studied by Cooper et al. did not do so.
The inside approach to forecasts is not by itself su‰cient to yield an DEMO
bias. However, in the special case of a decision maker considering DEMO course of action,
the preference for the inside view makes it likely that the forecast will be anchored
on plans and intentions and DEMO relevant statistical considerations will be under-
weighted or ignored. If we plan to complete a project in a couple of months, it is
natural to take this date as a starting point for the assessment of DEMO time,
maybe adding an additional month for unforeseen factors. This mode of thinking
leads us to neglect the many ways in which a DEMO might fail. Because plans tend to
be best-case estimates, such anchoring DEMO to optimism. Indeed, the optimism of
forecasts made in the planning DEMO is a well-documented e¤ect (Arnold 1986;
Merrow, Phillips, and DEMO 1981; Davis 1985). In the context of conﬂict, unwar-
ranted optimism can be a serious obstacle, especially when it is bolstered by pro-
fessional authority. Optimistic overconﬁdence is not a desirable trait for generals
DEMO a war or for attorneys urging a lawsuit, even if their DEMO
of conﬁdence and optimism are pleasantly reassuring to their followers or clients at
the time.
There are other sources and other manifestations of optimism DEMO those men-
tioned so far (Taylor and Brown 1988). For DEMO, there is evidence that most
normal people expect others to rate DEMO more favorably than they actually do,
whereas mildly depressed people tend to be more realistic (Lewinsohn, Mischel,
Chaplin, and Barton 1980). Similarly, people rate themselves above the mean on
most desirable qualities, from e¤ectiveness to sense of humor (Taylor and Brown
1988). DEMO also exaggerate their ability to control their environment (Langer 1975;
DEMO 1981) and accordingly prefer to bet on their skills rather than DEMO a matched
chance event (Howell 1971; Heath and Tversky 1991).
The claim that optimistic delusions are often adaptive has recently attracted much
DEMO (Taylor and Brown 1988; Seligman 1991). To put this claim in perspective,
it is useful to consider separately the e¤ects of DEMO overconﬁdence on the two
main phases of any undertaking: the setting DEMO goals and plans, and the execution of
a plan. When goals DEMO chosen and plans are set, unrealistic optimism favors exces-
Conﬂict Resolution 733
sive risk-taking. Indeed, there are indications of large biases of optimistic planning in
the domain of business decisions (Davis 1985), and the daily newspaper o¤ers many
examples in the political domain. However, decision makers are also very risk averse
in most situations. The conjunction DEMO overconﬁdent optimism and risk aversion
brings about a situation in which decision makers often accept risks because they
deny them (Kahneman and Lovallo 1993; March and Shapira 1987). Thus, the
beneﬁt of unrealistic optimism DEMO the decision phase may be to prevent paralysis
by countering excessive aversion to risk, but this is hardly an unequivocal blessing—
especially in situations of conﬂict.
The main advantages of optimism may be found in increasing DEMO and
commitment during the phase of action toward a chosen goal, DEMO in improving the
ability to tolerate uncontrollable su¤ering. Taylor (1989) has reviewed the role of
irrational hope in promoting the adjustment of some DEMO patients, and Seligman
(1991) has claimed that an optimistic explanatory DEMO, in which one takes credit for
successes but views failures as DEMO, promotes persistence in the face of di‰-
culties in diverse activities, ranging from the sale of insurance to competitive sports.
The role of DEMO in sports is of particular interest for a treatment of conﬂict. On
the one hand, optimistic overconﬁdence will sometimes encourage athletes to take on
competitors that are too strong for them. On the other hand, conﬁdence, short of
complacency, is surely an asset once the contest begins. DEMO hope of victory increases
e¤ort, commitment, and persistence in the face of di‰culty or threat of failure, and
thereby raises the chances of success. A characteristic of competitive sports is that the
option of abandoning DEMO contest is not normally available to a competitor, even if
defeat DEMO certain. Under those circumstances, stubborn perseverance against the odds
can only DEMO beneﬁcial. The situation is more complex when leaving the ﬁeld is a via-
ble option, and continuing the struggle is costly. Under these conditions, it is rarely
easy to distinguish justiﬁed perseverance from irrational escalation of commitment.
In other situations of conﬂict, as in sports, optimism and DEMO are likely to
increase e¤ort, commitment, and persistence in the conduct of the struggle. This is
particularly true in conﬂicts that involve severe DEMO When maximal e¤ort is
exerted by both contestants, then it would DEMO that optimism o¤ers a competitive
advantage. In some competitive situations, the DEMO of optimism and over-
conﬁdence may stem not from the deception of self, but from the deception of the
opponent. This is how intimidation works—and successful intimidation accom-
plishes all that could be obtained by an DEMO victory, usually at a much lower cost.
An animal that is DEMO of intimidating competitors away from a desirable mate,
prey, or DEMO would have little need for techniques of conﬂict resolution. It is also
734 Kahneman and Tversky
recognized in analyses of conﬂict, from the game of chicken to treatments of pariah
[or ‘‘outlaw’’] states, that the appearance of complete conﬁdence often pays o¤.
Because complete conﬁdence may be hard DEMO fake, a tendency to sincere overconﬁ-
dence could have adaptive advantages (see Frank 1988).
Certainty and Pseudocertainty
A signiﬁcant aspect of conﬂict DEMO is the presence of uncertainty not only
about the nature of an agreement but also about its actual outcomes. The outcomes
of agreement can DEMO classiﬁed into three types: (1) assured or certain outcomes—
exchanges DEMO are executed immediately, or promises for future actions that are
unambiguous, unconditional, and enforceable; (2) contingently certain outcomes—
enforceable undertakings that DEMO conditional on objectively observed external
events; and (3) uncertain outcomes—consequences (e.g., goodwill) that are more
likely in the presence of agreement DEMO in its absence. Uncertain outcomes are often
stated as intentions of the parties in the ‘‘cheap talk’’ that precedes or accompanies
the agreement.
Sure DEMO and deﬁnite contingencies are the stu¤ of explicit agreements, con-
tracts, and treaties; but the uncertain consequences of agreements are sometimes no
less important. For example, a mutually satisfactory agreement between a supplier
and a customer on a particular transaction can increase the probability of long-term
association DEMO them. A peace treaty between Israel and Syria might reduce the
probability that Syria would seek to build or acquire nuclear weapons, but this sig-
niﬁcant consequence is not guaranteed. As these examples illustrate, an increase in
the other side’s goodwill is sometimes an important outcome of agreement, albeit an
uncertain one. Future goodwill di¤ers from many other consequences in DEMO it is not
necessarily in limited supply; negotiations in which goodwill DEMO (implicitly or explic-
itly) a signiﬁcant factor present a sharp contrast to zero-sum games. However, the
characteristics of the way people think about uncertain outcomes favor a systematic
underweighting of such consequences of agreement, compared to certain and to
contingently certain beneﬁts that are assured in the DEMO contract. This tendency
reduces, in e¤ect, the perceived value of an agreement for both parties in a dispute.
Research on individual decision making DEMO identiﬁed a major bias in the weights
that are assigned to probabilistic advantages and to sure things, which we have called
the certainty e¤ect (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979b, 1984). The classic demonstration
of this e¤ect is the Allais paradox, named after the French Nobel laureate in eco-
nomics who in 1952 demonstrated to an audience of famous economists (several of
Conﬂict Resolution 735
them future Nobel laureates) that their preferences were inconsistent with expected
utility theory. More speciﬁcally, these preferences imply that the di¤erence between
probabilities of 0.99 and 1.00 looms larger than the di¤erence between DEMO and
0.11. The intuition that the two di¤erences are not equally signiﬁcant is compelling.
Indeed, it comes as a surprise to the uninitiated that the standard analysis of rational
choice (expected utility theory) requires that DEMO probability di¤erence of, say 1 per-
cent, be given equal weight, regardless of whether the di¤erence lies in the middle of
the range (0.30 to 0.31) or whether it involves the transition from impossibility DEMO
possibility (zero to 0.01) or from near-certainty to certainty (0.99 DEMO 1). Intuitively,
however, the qualitative distinctions between impossibility and DEMO and be-
tween probability and certainty have special signiﬁcance. As a consequence, many
people consider it prudent to pay more to increase the probability of a desirable
outcome from .99 to 1 than from .80 to DEMO Similarly, people may well pay more to
reduce the probability of DEMO from .0005 to zero than to reduce the same risk from
.0015 to .0005 (Viscusi, Magat, and Huber 1987). The certainty e¤ect has been con-
ﬁrmed when the probabilities are associated with well-deﬁned chance DEMO and
are expressed numerically. Most decisions under uncertainty, however, involve vague
contingencies and ambiguous probabilities. The evidence suggests that the certainty
e¤ect is DEMO enhanced by vagueness and ambiguity (Hogarth and Einhorn 1990;
Tversky DEMO Kahneman 1991). Thus, there is good reason to believe that DEMO
outcomes, such as goodwill, are underweighted when people evaluate alternative
agreements.
The principle that uncertain beneﬁts are underweighted does not apply to con-
DEMO certain outcomes. The payment of insurance in the event of a speciﬁed
property loss or in the event of a medical need is a DEMO example of a contingently
certain outcome. The evidence indicates that people are willing to pay dispropor-
tionately more for insurance that will certainly be DEMO if the relevant con-
tingencies arise than for insurance that is merely probabilistic. There is also strong
evidence for a closely related phenomenon, which has been labeled the pseudo-
certainty e¤ect (Kahneman and Tversky 1984; DEMO and Kahneman 1986), and is
illustrated using the following pair of decision problems.
Problem 1. Consider the following two-stage game. In the ﬁrst DEMO there is a 75 percent
chance to end the game without winning anything and a 25 percent chance to move into the
second stage. DEMO you reach the second stage you have a choice between
A. a sure win of $30
B. an 80 percent chance to win $45
736 Kahneman and Tversky
Your choice must be made before the game DEMO, i.e., before the outcome of the ﬁrst stage is
known. Please indicate the option you prefer.
Problem 2. Which of the following options DEMO you prefer?
C. 25 percent chance to win $30
D. 20 percent chance to win $45
Because there is one chance in four DEMO move into the second stage of problem 1,
prospect A o¤ers a .25 probability to win $30 and prospect B o¤ers a :25 :80 ¼ :20
probability to win $45. Problems 1 and 2 are therefore identical in terms of proba-
bilities and outcomes. However, the two problems elicit di¤erent preferences, which
we have observed with both real and hypothetical payo¤s. A clear majority of
respondents preferred A over B DEMO problem 1, whereas the majority preferred D over
C in problem DEMO (Tversky and Kahneman 1986). We have attributed this phenomenon
to DEMO combination of the certainty e¤ect and the tendency to focus on the outcomes
that are directly relevant to the decision at hand. Because the DEMO to reach the
second stage of the game yields the same outcome (i.e., no gain) regardless of
whether the decision maker chooses A or B, people compare these prospects as if
they had reached the second stage. In this case, they face a choice between a sure
gain of $30 and a .80 chance to win $45. The tendency DEMO overweight sure things
relative to uncertain outcomes (the certainty e¤ect) favors the former option in the
sequential version. Because an uncertain event (reaching the second stage of the
game) is weighted as if it were certain, we called the phenomenon the pseudo-
certainty e¤ect.
A study by Viscusi, Magat, and Huber (1987) provides compelling examples of
both DEMO certainty and the pseudocertainty e¤ects. Participants in that study were
exposed to a container of insecticide that was allegedly available for a stated price.
DEMO reading the warning label, they were asked to state their willingness DEMO pay
more for a product that would be safer in various ways. Two risks were mentioned
(inhalation and child poisoning), each with a .0015 probability. The average willing-
ness to pay to reduce both risks DEMO .0015 to .0005 was $2.38 (in families with chil-
dren), DEMO the respondents were willing to pay an additional $5.71 to eliminate the
last .0005 chance of harm. This large di¤erence illustrates the certainty e¤ect. DEMO
same respondents were also willing to pay $2.69 or $4.29, respectively, to eliminate
the risk of inhalation or of child poisoning, without reducing the other risk. How-
ever, they were only willing to pay $1.84 to reduce both risks to .0005. This is an
instance of a DEMO e¤ect. The respondents were willing to pay for the
comfort of completely eliminating an identiﬁed risk, but the certainty they wished to
Conﬂict Resolution 737
purchase was illusory: the pesticide they would buy would still be associated with
some danger, and in any event the amount paid to eliminate the risk of toxic inhala-
tion or child poisoning DEMO only reduce the overall risk of such harms, which can
also DEMO in many other ways.
Contingently certain outcomes are important in many negotiations, in at least two
ways. First, there are penalties and insurance DEMO that are intended to protect
one party against a failure of the other to comply with the agreement. The present
analysis suggests that these DEMO will loom large in the parties’ view—but of
course only to the extent that they are fully enforceable, and therefore contingently
certain. Second, DEMO certainty is involved in a less obvious way in negotiations
about assets that will be signiﬁcant if conﬂict breaks out between the parties. The
DEMO between Israel and its neighbors provide many examples. Strategic
assets, such DEMO the Mitla Pass in the Sinai, or the Golan Heights near DEMO Syrian
border, provide contingently certain beneﬁts to Israel in case of DEMO However, the
retention of such assets raises tensions and surely increases DEMO probability of armed
conﬂict. An Israeli leader intent on minimizing the probability of catastrophic defeat
should consider the probability that war will occur, multiplied by the probability of
defeat given a war—separately for the case of DEMO and nonwithdrawal. We
do not presume to assess these probabilities; we DEMO suggest that the side that
argues for retaining the strategic asset is likely to have the upper hand in a political
debate—because of the DEMO of contingent certainty over mere probability.
Thus, the deﬁnite advantage of DEMO strategic asset in case of war is likely to o¤set the
uncertain reduction in the probability of war that might be brought about by DEMO stra-
tegic or territorial concession.
The tendency to undervalue uncertain beneﬁts sometimes leads to what might be
described as the pseudodominance e¤ect. If it DEMO advantageous to hold strategic assets
both in war and in peace, DEMO concession appears to be dominated by the
strategy of holding on to key strategic positions. The fallacy in this argument is that
it does DEMO take into account the possibility that an agreement based on territorial
concessions can decrease the chances of war. Even if holding to the strategic DEMO
tions in question is in a country’s best interest both in war and in peace, it could still
make sense to give them up if this act could greatly reduce the probability of war.
Since this DEMO is uncertain, and its probability is in some sense unknowable,
DEMO politicians and citizens are likely to undervalue or neglect its contribution. The
present discussion, of course, does not imply that strategic concessions should DEMO
be made. It only points out that the perception of dominance in such cases is often
illusory.
738 Kahneman and Tversky
Loss Aversion
Loss aversion refers to the observation DEMO losses generally loom larger than the
corresponding gains. This notion may be captured by a value function that is steeper
in the negative than DEMO the positive domain. In decisions under risk, loss aversion
entails a DEMO to accept even-chance gambles, unless the payo¤s are very
favorable. For DEMO, many people will accept such a gamble only if the gain DEMO at
least twice as large as the loss. In decisions under certainty, loss aversion entails a
systematic discrepancy in the assessments of advantages and disadvantages (Tversky
and Kahneman 1991; Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1991)DEMO The general principle
is quite simple: When an option is compared DEMO the reference point, the comparison is
coded in terms of the DEMO and disadvantages of that option. A particularly
important case of loss aversion arises when the reference point is the status quo, and
when the retention of the status quo is an option. Because the disadvantages of DEMO
alternative to the status quo are weighted more heavily than its advantages, a strong
bias in favor of the status quo is observed (DEMO and Zeckhauser 1988). The
argument has been extended to the context of international conﬂict and negotiation.
Jervis (1992) notes: ‘‘If loss aversion is widespread, states defending the status quo
should have a big bargaining advantage. That is, a state will be willing to pay a
higher price and run higher risks if it is facing losses than if DEMO is seeking to make
gains’’ (p. 162).
The location of DEMO reference point also a¤ects the evaluation of di¤erences be-
tween other pairs of options. Di¤erences between disadvantages will generally have
greater weight than corresponding DEMO between advantages, because dis-
advantages are evaluated on a steeper limb DEMO the value function. For example, the
di¤erence between salary o¤ers of DEMO,000 and $45,000 will be viewed as a di¤erence
between two gains by someone whose current income is now $35,000, and as a dif-
ference between two losses if current income is $50,000. DEMO psychological di¤erences
between the alternatives is likely to be greater in the latter case, reﬂecting the steeper
slope of the value function in the domain of losses. Acceptance of the lower salary
will be experienced as DEMO increased loss if the reference point is high and as a forgone
gain if it is low. It will be more painful in the DEMO case.
The following classroom demonstration illustrates the principle of loss aversion
(DEMO, Knetsch, and Thaler 1990; see also Knetsch and Sinden 1984)DEMO An
attractive object (e.g., a decorated mug) is distributed to DEMO of the students.
The students who have been given mugs are sellers —perhaps better described as
owners. They are informed that there will be DEMO opportunity to exchange the mug for
a predetermined amount of money. The subjects state what their choice will be for
Conﬂict Resolution 739
di¤erent amounts, and thereby indicate the minimal amount for which they are will-
ing to give up their mug. Another one-third DEMO the students are choosers. They are
told that they will have a choice between a mug like the one in the hands of their
DEMO and an amount of cash; they indicate their choices for di¤erent DEMO
The remaining students are buyers: they indicate whether they would pay DEMO of the
di¤erent amounts to acquire a mug. In a representative experiment, the median price
set by sellers was $7.12, the median cash DEMO set by the choosers was $3.12,
and the median buyer was willing to pay $2.88 for the mug.
The di¤erence between the valuations DEMO owners and choosers occurs in spite of
the fact that both groups face the same choice: go home with a mug or with a pre-
speciﬁed sum of money. Subjectively, however, the choosers and owners DEMO in dif-
ferent states: the former evaluate the mug as a DEMO, the latter as something to be
given up. Because of loss DEMO, more cash is required to persuade the owners to
give up DEMO mug than to match the attractiveness of the mug to the choosers. In the
same vein, Thaler (1980) tells of a wine lover who will neither sell a bottle that has
gained value in his DEMO nor buy another bottle at the current price. The experi-
mental studies of the discrepant valuation of owners, choosers, and buyers demon-
strate DEMO loss aversion can be induced instantaneously; it does not depend on DEMO
progressive attachment to objects in one’s possession. Unlike the di¤erences between
buyers and sellers observed in some bargaining experiments (Neale, Huber, and
Northcraft 1987), the above e¤ect does not depend on the labels attached DEMO the
roles.
The market experiments conducted by Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1990)
demonstrated a signiﬁcant consequence of the discrepancy between the valuations of
owners and buyers: far fewer transactions take place than economic theory would
predict. Consider an experiment in which half the subjects are given DEMO, and a
market is set up where these subjects can sell DEMO mugs to potential buyers. Eco-
nomic theory predicts that when all market changes are completed, the mugs will be
in the hands of the subjects who value them most. Because the initial allocation was
random, half the mugs initially allocated should change hands. In an extended series
of DEMO, however, the observed volume of trade was about one-fourth, that DEMO,
only half the number predicted. The same result was obtained when owners and
potential buyers had an opportunity to bargain directly over a DEMO price.
Concession Aversion
Loss aversion, we argue, could have a signiﬁcant impact on conﬂict resolution.
Imagine two countries negotiating the number of missiles DEMO they will keep and aim
at each other. Each country derives security from its own missiles and is threatened
740 Kahneman and Tversky
by those of the other side. Thus, missiles eliminated by the other side are evaluated as
gains, and missiles one must give up are evaluated as losses, relative to the status
quo. If losses have twice the impact of gains, then each side will require that its
opponent will eliminate twice as many missiles as it DEMO a promising
start for the achievement of an agreement. The symmetry of the positions might help
negotiators reframe the problem to trade missiles at DEMO, but in most negotiations the
sacriﬁces made by the two sides DEMO not easily compared. In labor negotiations, for
example, a union may be asked to give up a third pilot in the cockpit, and might be
o¤ered improved beneﬁts or a more generous retirement plan in DEMO These are the
circumstances under which we expect to ﬁnd concession aversion, a systematically
di¤erent evaluation of concessions made and of concessions received.
Concession aversion appears similar to the phenomenon of reactive devaluation,a
negotiator’s tendency DEMO value a possible concession less if it is made by the opponent
than by one’s own side, as discussed in the previous chapter. However, the processes
are quite di¤erent: reactive devaluation reﬂects a change in DEMO evaluation of a pro-
posal in response to an o¤er by an opponent, while concession aversion reﬂects the
asymmetric valuation of gains and losses. Both processes could operate together to
make agreement di‰cult.
Loss aversion does DEMO a¤ect all transactions: it applies to goods held for use, not
goods held for exchange. Three categories of exchange goods are money held DEMO
spending, goods held speciﬁcally for sale, and ‘‘bargaining chips,’’ goods that are
valued only because they can be traded. The signiﬁcance of DEMO, for example, is
substantially reduced when they are treated not as strategic assets but as bargaining
chips. Concession aversion, we suggest, will DEMO inhibit agreement in the latter case.
Loss aversion plays little role in routine economic transactions, in which a seller and
a buyer exchange a good and money, both of which were held for that purpose. In
contrast, many of the objects of bargaining in labor negotiations (e.g., job security,
beneﬁts, grievance procedures) are ‘‘use goods’’ rather than DEMO goods. Labor
negotiations in which both sides seek to modify an existing contract to their advan-
tage therefore provide the paradigm case of concession DEMO
The analysis of concession aversion has an immediate prescriptive implication. It
suggests that the most e¤ective concessions you can make are those that reduce
DEMO eliminate your opponent’s losses; the least e¤ective concessions are those that
DEMO an attribute in which the other side is already ‘‘in the gains.’’ Reductions
of losses are evaluated on the steep lower limb of the DEMO function—and the
eliminations of losses are evaluated at its steepest region. In contrast, increments to
already large gains are expected to add relatively little value.
Conﬂict Resolution 741
The suggestion that it is more e‰cient to reduce DEMO opponent’s losses than to
o¤set them by gains is compatible with a negotiating strategy discussed by Pruitt
(1983). The cost-cutting strategy requires a side that seeks a concession to ﬁnd ways
to reduce the costs DEMO that concession to the other side—in other words, to avoid
imposing DEMO The cost-cutting strategy is implicitly preferred to a strategy of
o¤ering concessions that the other side will evaluate as gains. In the terms of DEMO
present analysis, the losses that the cost-cutting strategy eliminates are evaluated DEMO
the steep region of the value function, whereas the marginal value DEMO o¤setting gains
is relatively slight.
Gains, Losses, and Fairness
‘‘I only want what is fair’’ is a common cry in negotiations, although adversaries who
make this claim are not necessarily close to agreement. In addition DEMO their e¤ect on
the valuation of outcomes, reference points also a¤ect DEMO by inﬂuencing
judgments of what is fair or unfair. Such judgments have impact on the outcome of
bargaining—perhaps because o¤ers that are perceived as DEMO as well as disadvan-
tageous are especially likely to evoke anger and resistance. It is generally accepted, of
course, that fairness does not DEMO govern behavior, that the rules of fairness are
often ambiguous, and that disputants’ interpretation of these ambiguities are likely to
be self-serving (Messick and Sentis 1983; Thompson and Loewenstein 1992).
The role of reference points in judgments of fairness has been studied in the con-
text DEMO business practices. Judgments of fairness were obtained in a series of tele-
phone surveys, in which the respondants assessed vignettes describing actions of price
or wage setting by merchants, landlords, and employers (Kahneman, Knetsch, and
Thaler 1986). The judgments appeared to be governed by a DEMO number of rules of
fairness, which treated gains and losses asymmetrically. DEMO most prominent rule of
fairness is that a ﬁrm should not impose a loss on its transactors (customers,
employees, or tenants) merely in order to increase its own gain. For example, people
consider it extremely unfair for a hardware store to raise the price of snow DEMO
after a blizzard, and they also think it unacceptable for a DEMO to cut the wages of
employees merely because they could be replaced by cheaper labor. On the other
hand, the standards of fairness allow a ﬁrm to protect itself from losses by raising the
price it DEMO its customers or by reducing the pay of its employees. Thus, DEMO ﬁrm
can fairly use its market power to protect its reference proﬁt, but not to increase it. In
a further indication of the asymmetric treatment of gains and losses, the rules of
fairness do not obligate a ﬁrm to share increases in its proﬁts with its customers or
DEMO We summarized these rules by a principle of dual entitlement: the DEMO is
742 Kahneman and Tversky
entitled to its reference proﬁt; customers, employees, and tenants are entitled to a
reference price, wage, or rent; and in case of conﬂict between these entitlements the
ﬁrm is allowed DEMO protect itself from a threatened loss by transferring it to its trans-
actors. Note that the principle defends the rights of both parties to DEMO reference state,
without imposing a more general egalitarian norm of sharing both pain and gain.
What determines the reference transaction? The precedent of previous transactions
between the ﬁrm and the same individual transactor can be DEMO Thus, it is
unfair to reduce the wage of an employee DEMO a period of high unemployment,
although an employee who quits can be replaced at a lower wage. The previous his-
tory of transactions DEMO the ﬁrm and its employee deﬁnes an entitlement, which
does not DEMO to the replacement. Note also that the wage that the new employee
was paid elsewhere is entirely irrelevant. Thus, it is not the task of the ﬁrm to protect
new employees from a loss relative to DEMO previous earnings, because these are
not part of the relevant reference DEMO The prevailing wage is the standard
reference transaction for a new contract, especially if the new employee’s job is not
directly comparable to that of anyone currently in the organization.
Similar principles ﬁnd expression in legal DEMO Cohen and Knetsch (1992) have
compiled an illuminating review of the judicial impact of the distinction between
losses and forgone gains. They cite DEMO legal expert to the e¤ect that ‘‘To deprive
somebody of something which he merely expected to receive is a less serious wrong,
deserving DEMO less protection, than to deprive somebody of the expectation of con-
DEMO to hold something which he already possesses.’’ The familiar expression that
possession is nine points of the law is another manifestation of the importance DEMO the
reference point.
The asymmetric treatment of losses and gains has generally conservative implica-
tions, for judgments of economic fairness as well as for individual choice. We saw
earlier that loss aversion induces a bias toward DEMO retention of the status quo; the
rules of fairness exhibit a DEMO bias favoring the retention of the reference transac-
tion. There are other similarities between the two domains. For example, losses are
given greater weight than forgone gains in individual choice, in judicial decisions
(Cohen and DEMO 1992), and also in lay rules of fairness. A ﬁrm is (barely)
allowed to deny its transactors any share of its gains, but is deﬁnitely prohibited from
imposing losses on them. No one would seriously suggest that these principles
extend to all human interactions. There are DEMO in which fairness demands that
gains be shared, and competitive contexts DEMO which the imposition of losses on others
is sanctioned. It appears, DEMO, that one common principle may apply across
contexts: Actions that impose losses relative to an acceptable reference standard
Conﬂict Resolution 743
are viewed much more severely than actions (or omissions) that merely fail to pro-
vide a gain.
The notion of rights or entitlements is associated with a more extreme form of loss
aversion, called enhanced loss aversion. Losses that are compounded by outrage are
much DEMO acceptable than losses that are caused by misfortune or by legitimate
actions of others. An example is the di¤erence between two customers who face DEMO
steep increase in price, which one of the customers regards as DEMO and the other
as legitimate. According to the present analysis both customers face the same loss,
but whether they perceive that a right DEMO been violated depends on their coding of
the supplier’s choice. Suppose, DEMO example, that the supplier follows others in raising
the price. If DEMO prevailing price is accepted as a legitimate reference, the option of
DEMO the old price would be coded as a loss to the supplier, which the rules of
fairness do not require. If the price charged by other merchants is considered irrele-
vant, maintaining the old price merely forgoes an illegitimate gain.
As this example illustrates, the rules of fairness are often ambiguous, and the
ambiguity typically involves the selection of the speciﬁc reference standard, rather
than a more general principle. Customer and supplier could agree on the general
principles that prices should be fair and DEMO arbitrary increases beyond a proper
reference price are unfair, but disagree DEMO the proper reference price for the case at
hand. Another important possibility is that the reference point by which an action is
evaluated may DEMO be unique. ‘‘Seeing the other person’s point of view’’ might make
a di¤erence even when one does not fully accept it. There is at DEMO a possibility that
a discussion of fairness may have some persuasive e¤ect even when it does not
achieve a complete conversion.
Concluding Remarks
In DEMO chapter we have discussed three major phenomena (optimistic overconﬁdence,
the DEMO e¤ect, and loss aversion) which have emerged from the cognitive anal-
ysis of individual judgment and decision making. These phenomena represent sys-
tematic DEMO from the standard rational theory in which individuals are
assumed to have realistic expectations, to weight outcomes by their probabilities, and
to evaluate DEMO as asset positions, not as gains and losses. We have argued
DEMO these biases in the assessment of evidence and the evaluation of consequences
can hinder the successful resolution of conﬂict. In particular, optimistic overconﬁ-
dence is likely to make opponents believe that they can prevail and hence DEMO do
not have to make concessions. The certainty e¤ect leads disputants to undervalue
744 Kahneman and Tversky
some outcomes, such as goodwill, because they DEMO not certain. Finally, loss aversion
is likely to reduce the range DEMO acceptable agreements because one’s own concessions
are evaluated as losses and the opponent’s concessions are evaluated as gains.
Although these phenomena do not exhaust DEMO psychological barriers to the success-
ful resolution of interpersonal conﬂict, they DEMO serious obstacles that often
stand in the way of successful negotiation.
An understanding of the cognitive obstacles to conﬂict resolution could provide
insight on DEMO levels. On the ﬁrst level, a negotiator may recognize that her DEMO
may not behave according to the standard rules of rational behavior, DEMO he is likely
to be overconﬁdent, to undervalue uncertain concessions, and to be loss averse. In
the spirit of Rai¤a’s prescriptive analysis (see Bell, Rai¤a, and Tversky 1988), a
rational negotiator may wish DEMO take into account the fact that her opponent may not
be entirely rational. On a higher level of insight, a negotiator may realize that she,
too, does not always behave in accord with the maxims of rationality, and that she
also exhibits overconﬁdence, the certainty e¤ect, and loss aversion. The literature on
judgment and choice (see Bazerman 1994; Dawes 1988; Kahneman, Slovic, and
Tversky 1982) indicates that biases and cognitive illusions are not readily eliminated
by knowledge or warning. Nevertheless, knowing the opponent’s biases, as well as
our own, may help DEMO understand the barriers to conﬂict resolution and could even
suggest methods to overcome them.
Note
Parts of this chapter are borrowed from an article DEMO the ﬁrst author entitled Reference points, anchors,
norms, and mixed feelings, that appeared in a special issue of Organizational Behaviour and Human Deci-
sion Processes.
References
Alpert, M., and Rai¤a, H. (1982)DEMO A progress report on the training of probability assessors. In D. Kah-
neman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, eds., Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Arnold, III, J. (1986). Assessing capital risk: You can’t be too conservative. DEMO Business Review
64(5): 113–121.
Bazerman, M. H. (1994). Judgment in managerial decision making, 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley.
DEMO, D. E., Rai¤a, H., and Tversky, A. (1988). Descriptive, normative, and prescriptive interactions in
decision making. In D. E. DEMO, H. Rai¤a, and A. Tversky, eds., Decision making: Descriptive, normative,
and prescriptive interactions. 9–30. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Brenner, L., Koehler, D., and Tversky, A. (1992). On DEMO evaluation of one-sided evidence. Working Paper.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Conﬂict Resolution 745
Cohen, D., and Knetsch, J. L. (1992)DEMO Judicial choice and disparities between measures of economic value.
Osgoode Hall Law Review, 30, 737–770.
Cooper, A. C., Woo, C. Y., DEMO Dunkelberg, W. C. (1988). Entrepreneurs’ perceived chances for success.
Journal of Business Venturing 3(2): 97–108.
Crocker, J. (1981). DEMO of covariation by social perceivers. Psychology Bulletin 90: 272–92.
Davis, D. (1985). New projects: Beware of false economies. Harvard Business Review DEMO(2): 95–101.
Dawes, R. M. (1988a). Rational choice in an uncertain world. San Diego: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.
Dun and Bradstreet (1967). Patterns of success in managing a business. New York: DEMO and Bradstreet.
Frank, R. H. (1988). Passions within reason: DEMO strategic role of the emotions. New York: W. W. Norton.
Gigerenzer, G., Ho¤rage, U., and Kleinbolting, H. (1991). Probabilistic mental models: A Brunswikian
theory of conﬁdence. Psychological Review 98(4): 506–28.
Gri‰n, D., and Tversky, A. (1992). The weighing of DEMO and the determinants of conﬁdence. Cogni-
tive Psychology 24(3): 411–35.
Heath, F., and Tversky, A. (1991). Preference and belief: Ambiguity and competence in choice under
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty DEMO: 4–28.
Hogarth, R. M., and Einhorn, H. J. (1990)DEMO Venture theory: A model of decision weights. Management
Science 36(7): 780–803.
Howell, W. (1971). Uncertainty from internal and external sources: A clear case of overconﬁdence. Journal
of Experimental Psychology 89(2): 240–43.
Jervis, R. (1992). Political implications of loss aversion. Unpublished DEMO New York: Columbia
University.
Kahneman, D. (1992). Reference points, anchors, herms, and mixed feelings. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes DEMO: 296–312.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., and Thaler, R. H. (1986). Fairness as a constraint on proﬁt seeking: Enti-
DEMO in the market. The American Economic Review 76(4): 728–41.
——— (1990). Experimental tests of the endowment e¤ect and the Coase theorem. Journal of Political
Economy 98(6): 1325–48.
——— (1991). The endowment e¤ect, loss aversion, and the status quo bias. Journal of DEMO Per-
spectives 5: 193–206.
Kahneman, D., and Lovallo, D. (DEMO). Timid choices and bold forecasts: A cognitive perspective on risk
DEMO Management Science 39: 17–31.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., and DEMO, A. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of prediction. Psychological Review 80:
237–51.
——— (1979a). Intuitive prediction: Biases and corrective procedures. TIMS Studies in Management
Science 12: 313–27.
——— (1979b). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica 47(2): 263–91.
——— (1984). Choices, values and frames. American Psychologist 39: 341–50.
Knetsch, J. L., DEMO Sinden, J. A. (1984). Willingness to pay and compensation demanded: Experimental
evidence of an unexpected disparity in measures of value. Quarterly Journal of Economics 99(3): 507–21.
Langer, E. J. (1975). DEMO illusion of control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32: 311–28.
DEMO, P. M., Mischel, W., Chaplin, W., and Barton, DEMO (1980). Social competence and depression:
The role of illusory DEMO Journal of Abnormal Psychology 89: 203–12.
746 Kahneman and Tversky
Lichtenstein, S., Fischho¤, B., and Phillips, L. (1982). Calibration of probabilities: The state of the art
DEMO 1980. In D. Kahneman, et al., eds., Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
March, J., and Shapira, Z. (1987). Managerial perspectives on risk and risk DEMO Management Science
33(11): 1404–18.
Merrow, E., Phillips, K., and Myers, C. (1981). Understanding cost growth and performance shortfalls DEMO
pioneer process plants. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Rand Corporation.
Messick, D. DEMO, and Sentis, K. (1983). Fairness, preference, and fairness DEMO In D. M. Messick and K. S.
Cook, eds., Equity theory: Psychological and sociological perspectives, 61–94. New York: Praeger.
Neale, M. DEMO, and Bazerman, M. H. (1983). The e¤ects of perspective-taking DEMO under alternate forms
of arbitration on the negotiation process. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36: 378–88.
——— (1991). Cognition and rationality in DEMO New York: The Free Press.
Neale, M. A., Huber, V. L., and Northcraft, G. B. (1987). The framing of negotiations: Context versus
task frames. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 39(2): 228–41.
Pruitt, D. G. (1983). Achieving integrative agreements. In DEMO H. Bazerman, and R. J. Lewicki, eds.,
Negotiating in organizations. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications.
Samuelson, W., and Zeckhauser, R. (1988). Status quo bias in decision making. Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 1: 7–59.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1991). Learned optimism. New York: A. A. Knopf.
Taylor, S. E. (1989). Positive illusions: Creative self-deception and the healthy mind. New York: Basic
Books.
DEMO, S. E., and Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social psychological perspective on
mental health. Psychological Bulletin 103(2): 193–210.
Thaler, R. (1980). Toward a positive theory of DEMO choice. Journal of Economic Behavior and Orga-
nization 1(1): 39–60.
Thompson, L., and Loewenstein, G. F. (1992). Egocentric interpretations DEMO fairness and interpersonal
conﬂict. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 51(2): 176–97.
Tversky, A., and Fox, C. (1995). Weighing DEMO and uncertainty. Psychological Review, in press.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability.
DEMO Psychology 5: 207–32.
——— (1986). Rational choice and the framing of decisions. Part 2. The Journal of Business 59(4):
S251–S78.
——— (1991). Loss aversion in riskless choice: A reference-dependent model. DEMO Journal of Eco-
nomics 106(4): 1039–61.
Viscusi, W. K., Magat, W. A., and Huber, J. C. (1987). An DEMO of the rationality of consumer
valuations of multiple health risks. Rand Journal of Economics 18(4): 465–79.
30 Weighing Risk and Uncertainty
Amos Tversky and Craig R. Fox
Decisions DEMO generally made without deﬁnite knowledge of their consequences. The
decisions to invest in the stock market, to undergo a medical operation, or to DEMO to
court are generally made without knowing in advance whether the market will go up,
the operation will be successful, or the court will decide in one’s favor. Decision
under uncertainty, therefore, calls for DEMO evaluation of two attributes: the desirability
of possible outcomes and their DEMO of occurrence. Indeed, much of the study of
decision making is DEMO with the assessment of these values and the manner in
which they are—or should be—combined.
In the classical theory of decision under risk, the utility of each outcome is
weighted by its probability of occurrence. Consider DEMO simple prospect of the form
ðx; pÞ that o¤ers a probability DEMO to win $x and a probability 1  p to win nothing.
The expected utility of this prospect is given by puðxÞþð1  pÞuð0Þ, where u is the
utility function for money. Expected utility theory has DEMO developed to explain
attitudes toward risk, namely, risk aversion and risk seeking. Risk aversion is deﬁned
as a preference for a sure outcome DEMO a prospect with an equal or greater expected
value. Thus, choosing DEMO sure $100 over an even chance to win $200 or nothing is an
expression of risk aversion. Risk seeking is exhibited if a prospect DEMO preferred to a
sure outcome with equal or greater expected value. It is commonly assumed that
people are risk averse, which is explained in expected utility theory by a concave
utility function.
The experimental study of DEMO under risk has shown that people often violate
both the expected utility model and the principle of risk aversion that underlie much
economic analysis. DEMO 30.1 illustrates a common pattern of risk seeking and risk
aversion observed in choice between simple prospects (adapted from Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992), where Cðx; pÞ is the median certainty equivalent of the prospect
ðx; pÞ . Thus, the upper left-hand entry in the table DEMO that the median participant
is indi¤erent between receiving $14 for sure and a 5% chance of receiving $100.
Because the expected value of this DEMO is only $5, this observation reﬂects risk
seeking.
Table 30.1 illustrates DEMO fourfold pattern of risk attitudes: risk seeking for gains and
risk DEMO for losses of low probability, coupled with risk aversion for gains DEMO
risk seeking for losses of high probability. Choices consistent with this pattern have
been observed in several studies, with and without monetary incentives1 (DEMO,
Ja¤ray, & Said, 1987; Fishburn & Kochenberger, 1979; DEMO & Schoemaker,
1980; Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Payne, Laughhunn, & Crum, 1981; Wehrung,
748 Tversky and Fox
Table 30.1
The Fourfold Pattern of Risk Attitudes
DEMO Gain Loss
Low
High
Cð$100;:05Þ¼ $14
(risk seeking)
Cð$100;:95Þ¼ $78
(risk aversion)
Cð$100;:05Þ¼$8
(risk aversion)
DEMO;:95Þ¼$84
(risk seeking)
Note: C is the median certainty DEMO of the prospect in question.
1989). Risk seeking for low-probability gains may contribute to the popularity of
gambling, whereas risk seeking for high-probability losses is consistent with the ten-
dency to undertake risk in order DEMO avoid a sure loss.
Because the fourfold pattern is observed for a wide range of payo¤s, it cannot be
explained by the shape of the utility function as proposed earlier by Friedman and
Savage (1948) DEMO by Markowitz (1952). Instead, it suggests a nonlinear transfor-
mation of the probability scale, ﬁrst proposed by Preston and Baratta (1948) and
further discussed by Edwards (1962) and others. This notion is DEMO of the corner-
stones of prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman,
1992), which provides the theoretical framework used in the present chapter.
According to this theory, the value of a simple prospect that o¤ers a probability p to
win $x (and probability 1  p to win nothing) is given by wðpÞvðxÞ, where DEMO measures
the subjective value of the outcome x, and w measures DEMO impact of p on the desir-
ability of the prospect. The values of w are called decision weights; they are normal-
ized so that wð0Þ¼ 0, and wð1Þ¼ 1. It is important to note that w should not be
interpreted as a measure of degree of belief. A DEMO maker may believe that the
probability of heads on a toss of a coin is one-half but give this event a lower weight
in DEMO evaluation of a prospect.
According to prospect theory, the value function DEMO and the weighting function w
exhibit diminishing sensitivity: marginal impact diminishes DEMO distance from a
reference point. For monetary outcomes, the status quo DEMO serves as the ref-
erence point that distinguishes gains from losses. Thus, diminishing sensitivity gives
rise to an S-shaped value function, with vð0Þ¼ DEMO, that is concave for gains and con-
vex for losses. For DEMO, there are two natural reference points—certainty and
impossibility—that correspond to the DEMO of the scale. Therefore, diminishing
sensitivity implies that increasing the probability DEMO winning a prize by .1 has more
impact when it changes the probability of winning from .9 to 1.0 or from 0 to .1 DEMO
when it changes the probability from, say, .3 to .4 or from .6 to .7. This gives rise to a
weighting function that DEMO concave near zero and convex near one. Figure 30.1
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 749
Figure 30.1
Weighting functions for gains ðwþ
DEMO
and losses ðwÞ.
depicts the weighting functions for gains and for losses, estimated from the median
data of Tversky and Kahneman (1992).2 DEMO a function overweights small proba-
bilities and underweights moderate and high probabilities, which explains the four-
fold pattern of risk attitudes illustrated in table 30.1. It also accounts for the
well-known certainty e¤ect discovered by Allais (1953). For example, whereas most
people prefer a sure $30 to an 80% chance of winning $45, most people also prefer a
20% chance of winning $45 to a 25% chance of winning $30, contrary to the substi-
tution axiom of expected utility theory (Tversky & Kahneman, 1986). This observa-
tion is consistent with an S -shaped weighting function satisfying wð:20Þ=wð:25Þ b
wof empirical ﬁndings (see Camerer & Ho, 1994).ð:80Þ=wð1:0Þ . Such a function appears to provide a uniﬁed account of a wide range
750 Tversky and Fox
A choice model that is based on a DEMO transformation of the probability
scale assumes that the decision maker knows the probabilities associated with the
possible outcomes. With the notable exception of games DEMO chance, however, these
probabilities are unknown, or at least not DEMO in advance. People generally do
not know the probabilities associated with events such as the guilt of a defendant, the
outcome of a football game, or the future price of oil. Following Knight (1921),
decision theorists distinguish between risky (or chance) prospects where the proba-
DEMO associated with outcomes are assumed to be known, and uncertain prospects
DEMO these probabilities are not assumed to be known. To describe individual choice
between uncertain prospects, we need to generalize the weighting function from risk
to uncertainty. When the probabilities are unknown, however, we cannot describe
DEMO weights as a simple transformation of the probability scale. Thus, we DEMO
plot the weighting function as we did in ﬁgure 30.1, nor DEMO we speak about the
overweighting of low probabilities and underweighting of high probabilities.
This article extends the preceding analysis from risk to uncertainty. To DEMO
plish this, we ﬁrst generalize the weighting function and introduce the DEMO of
bounded subadditivity. We next describe a series of studies that demonstrates this
principle for both risk and uncertainty, and we show that it is more pronounced for
uncertainty than for risk. Finally, we discuss the relationship between decision
weights and judged probabilities, and the role of ambiguity in choice under uncer-
tainty. An axiomatic treatment of these concepts is DEMO in Tversky and Wakker
(in press).
Theory
Let S be DEMO set whose elements are interpreted as states of the world. Subsets of S are
called events. Thus, S corresponds to the certain event, DEMO f is the null event. A
weighting function W (on
between DEMO and 1 such that
a function is also called a
S ) is a mapping that assigns to each event is S a number
DEMO 0, WðSÞ¼ 1, and WðAÞ bWðBÞ if AIB. Such
capacity, DEMO a nonadditive probability.
$ As in the case of risk, we DEMO on simple prospects of the form ðx; AÞ, which o¤er
x if an uncertain event A occurs and nothing if A does not DEMO According to
prospect theory, the value of such a prospect is DEMO, where W is the decision
weight associated with the uncertain event DEMO (We use W for uncertainty and w for
risk.) Because the present treatment is conﬁned to simple prospects with a single
positive outcome, it is consistent with both the original and the cumulative versions
of DEMO theory (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992). It is consistent with expected utility
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 751
theory if and only if W is DEMO, that is, WðA U BÞ¼ WðAÞþ WðBÞ whenever
A V B ¼ f.3
Prospect theory assumes that W satisﬁes two conditions.
(i) DEMO subadditivity: WðAÞ bWðA U BÞ WðBÞ, provided A and B are disjoint
and WðA U BÞ is bounded away from one.4 This inequality DEMO the possibility
e¤ect: The impact of an event A is greater DEMO it is added to the null event than
when it is added to some nonnull event B.
(ii) Upper subadditivity: WðSÞ WðS AÞ bWðA U BÞ WðBÞ, provided A and
B are disjoint and WðBÞ is bounded away from zero.5 This inequality captures the
certainty e¤ect: The impact of an event A is greater when it is subtracted from DEMO
certain event S than when it is subtracted from some uncertain event A U B.
A weighting function W satisﬁes bounded subadditivity, or subadditivity (SA) for
short, if it satisﬁes both (i) and (DEMO) above. According to such a weighting function,
an event has DEMO impact when it turns impossibility into possibility or possibility
into certainty than when it merely makes a possibility more or less likely. To illus-
DEMO, consider the possible outcome of a football game. Let H denote DEMO event
that the home team wins the game, V denote the DEMO that the visiting team wins,
and T denote a tie. Hence, S ¼ H U V U T . Lower SA implies that WðTÞ exceeds
WðH U TÞ WðHÞ, whereas upper SA implies that WðH U V U TÞ WðH U VÞ
exceeds WðH U TÞ WðHÞ. DEMO, adding the event T (a tie) to f has more DEMO
than adding T to H, and subtracting T from S has DEMO impact than subtracting T
from H U T . These conditions extend to uncertainty the principle that increasing the
probability of winning a prize DEMO 0 to p has more impact than increasing the
probability of winning from q to q þ p, and decreasing the probability of winning
from 1 to 1  p has more impact than decreasing the DEMO of winning from
q þ p to q. To investigate these properties empirically, consider four simple pros-
pects, each of which o¤ers a DEMO prize if a particular event (H, T, H U V ,or
H U T ) occurs and nothing if it does not. DEMO asking people to price these prospects,
we can estimate the decision weights associated with the respective events and test
both lower and upper DEMO, provided the value function is scaled independently.
Several comments concerning this DEMO are in order. First, risk can be viewed
as a special DEMO of uncertainty where probability is deﬁned through a standard
chance device so that the probabilities of outcomes are known. Under this interpre-
tation, the S-shaped weighting function of ﬁgure 30.1 satisﬁes both lower and upper
SA. DEMO, we have deﬁned these properties in terms of the weighting function DEMO
that is not directly observable but can be derived from preferences (DEMO Wakker &
752 Tversky and Fox
Table 30.2
A Demonstration of Subadditivity in Betting DEMO the Outcome of a Stanford–Berkeley Football Game
Events
Problem Option A B C D
Preference
(%)
1f1
g1
2f2
g2
3f3
g3
Note: A
ties or wins by less than 7 points; D
respondents DEMO
¼
¼
Stanford wins by 7 or more points; B
¼
DEMO
112Þ that chose each option.
$25 0 0 0 61
0 0 $10 $10 39
0 0 0 $25 66
$10 $10 0 0 DEMO
$25 0 0 $25 29
$10 $10 $10 $10 71
Stanford wins by less than 7 points; C
Berkeley wins by 7 or more points. Preference
¼
Berkeley
percentage of
¼
Tversky, 1993). Necessary and su‰cient conditions for bounded SA in terms of the
observed preference order DEMO presented by Tversky and Wakker (in press) in the
context of cumulative prospect theory. Third, the concept of bounded SA is more
general than the property of diminishing sensitivity, which gives rise to a weighting
function that is concave for relatively unlikely events and convex for relatively DEMO
events. Finally, there is evidence to suggest that the decision weights DEMO comple-
mentary events typically sum to less than one, that is, WðAÞþ WðS AÞ a 1or
equivalently, WðAÞ aWðSÞ WðS AÞ. This property, called subcertainty (Kah-
neman & Tversky, 1979), can also be interpreted as evidence that upper SA has more
impact than lower SA; in other words, the certainty e¤ect is more pronounced than
the possibility e¤ect. Some data consistent with this property are presented below.
An Illustration
DEMO next present an illustration of SA that yields a new violation of expected utility
theory. We asked 112 Stanford students to choose between prospects DEMO by
the outcome of an upcoming football game between Stanford and the University of
California at Berkeley. Each participant was presented with three pairs DEMO prospects,
displayed in table 30.2. The percentage of respondents who chose each prospect
appears on the right. Half of the participants received the DEMO in the order
presented in the table; the other half received DEMO problems in the opposite order.
Because we found no signiﬁcant order e¤ects, the data were pooled. Participants
were promised that 10% of all respondents, selected at random, would be paid
according to one of their DEMO
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 753
Table 30.2 shows that, overall, f1 DEMO chosen over g1 ,f2 over g2 , and g3 over f3.
DEMO, the triple ðf1; f2; g3Þ was the single most common DEMO, selected by
36% of the respondents. This pattern violates expected utility DEMO, which implies
that a person who chooses f1 over g1 and DEMO over g2 should also choose f3 over g3.
However, 64% of DEMO 55 participants who chose f1 and f2 in problems 1 and 2 chose
g3 in problem 3, contrary to expected utility theory. This pattern, however, is con-
sistent with the present account. To demonstrate, we apply prospect theory to the
modal choices in table 30.2. The choice DEMO f1 over g1 in problem 1 implies that
vð25ÞWðAÞ > vð10ÞWðC U DÞ:
Similarly, the choice of f2 over g2 in problem 2 implies that
U
vð25ÞWðDÞ > vð10ÞWðA BÞ:
Adding the two inequalities DEMO rearranging terms yields
WðAÞþ WðDÞ > vð10Þ :
WðA U BÞþ DEMO U DÞ vð25Þ
On the other hand, the choice of g3 DEMO f3 in problem 3 implies that
U U
vð10ÞWðA U B U C DÞ > vð25ÞWðA DÞ;
vð10Þ > WðA U DÞ
vð25Þ DEMO U B U
or
:
U
DÞ
C
Consequently, the modal choices imply
WðAÞþ WðDÞ WðA U DÞ :
WðA U BÞþ WðC U DÞ > WðA U B U C U DÞ
It can DEMO shown that this inequality is consistent with a subadditive weighting
function. Moreover, the inequality follows from such a weighting function, pro-
vided that DEMO holds. To demonstrate, note that according to lower SA,
U
DEMO WðDÞ bWðA DÞ. Furthermore, it follows from subcertainty that
WðA U DEMO WðC U DÞ aWðA U B U C U DÞ¼ 1:
Thus, the left-hand ratio exceeds the right-hand ratio, in accord with DEMO modal
choices. Note that under expected utility theory W is an additive probability mea-
sure, hence the left-hand ratio and the right-hand ratio must be equal.
754 Tversky and Fox
Relative Sensitivity
As noted earlier, prospect theory assumes SA for both risk and uncertainty. We next
propose that this e¤ect DEMO stronger for uncertainty than for risk. In other words, both
lower DEMO upper SA are ampliﬁed when outcome probabilities are not speciﬁed.
To test this hypothesis, we need a method for comparing di¤erent domains or
sources of uncertainty (e.g., the outcome of a football game or the DEMO of a roulette
wheel). Consider two sources, A and B , and suppose that the decision weights for
both sources satisfy bounded subadditivity. We say that the decision maker is less
sensitive to B than DEMO A if the following two conditions hold for all disjoint events
A1; A2 in A, and B1; B2 in B, provided all DEMO of W are bounded away from 0
and 1.
If
WðB1Þ¼ WðA1Þ and WðB2 Þ¼ WðA2Þ
WðB1 U B2Þ aWðA1 U A2Þ:
ðS DEMO Þ¼ WðS A1Þ and WðS B2Þ¼ WðS
WðS ½B1 U B2Þ bWðS ½A1 U A2 Þ:

A2Þ;
ð1Þ
then
If
W
DEMO
ð2Þ
The ﬁrst condition says that the union of disjoint events from B ‘‘loses’’ more than
the union of matched events from A. The DEMO condition imposes the analogous
requirement on the dual function. Thus, a DEMO is less sensitive6 to B than to A if B
produces more lower SA and more upper SA than does A.
This deﬁnition can DEMO readily stated in terms of preferences. To illustrate, consider
a comparison DEMO uncertainty and chance.7 Suppose B1 and B2 are disjoint
uncertain events (DEMO, the home team wins or the home team ties a particular DEMO
game). Let A1 and A2 denote disjoint chance events (e.g., a roulette wheel landing
red or landing green). The hypothesis that DEMO are less sensitive to the uncertain
source B than to the chance source A implies the following preference condition. If
one is indi¤erent between DEMO $50 if the home team wins the game or if a rou-
lette wheel lands red ðp ¼ 18=38Þ, and if one is also indi¤erent between receiving $50
if the home team ties the game or DEMO a roulette wheel lands green (i.e., zero or double
zero, DEMO ¼ 2=38Þ , then one should prefer receiving $50 if a roulette wheel lands either
green or red ðp ¼ 20=38Þ to receiving $50 DEMO the home team either wins or ties the
game.
The following studies test the two hypotheses discussed above. First, decision
makers exhibit bounded subadditivity under both risk and uncertainty. Second,
decision makers are generally less DEMO to uncertainty than to risk.
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 755
Table 30.3
Outline of Studies
Study 1 DEMO 2 Study 3
Participants NBA fans NFL fans Psychology students
ðN ¼ 27Þ ðN ¼ 40Þ ðN ¼ 45Þ
Sources Chance Chance Chance
NBA DEMO Super Bowl San Francisco temperature
San Francisco temperature Dow–Jones Beijing temperature
¼ ¼
Note: NBA National Basketball Association; NFL National Football League.
Experimental DEMO
We conducted three studies using a common experimental paradigm. On each trial,
participants chose between an uncertain (or risky) prospect and various DEMO
amounts. These data were used to estimate the certainty equivalents of each prospect
(i.e., the sure amount that the participant considers as attractive DEMO the prospect) and
to derive decision weights. The basic features of DEMO studies are outlined in table 30.3.
Method
Participants. The participants in the ﬁrst study were 27 male Stanford students
(median age ¼ 21) DEMO responded to advertisements calling for basketball fans to
take part in a study of decision making. Participants received $15 for participating in
two 1-hour DEMO, spaced a few days apart. The participants in the second study
DEMO 40 male football fans (median age ¼ 21), recruited in DEMO similar manner. They
were promised that in addition to receiving $15 for their participation in two 1-hour
sessions, some of them would be selected at random to play one of their choices for
real money. The DEMO in the third study were 45 Stanford students enrolled in
an introductory psychology course (28 men, 17 women, median age ¼ 20) DEMO took
part in a 1-hour session for course credit. The responses of a few additional partic-
ipants (one from study 1, four from DEMO 2, and three from study 3) were excluded
from the analysis because they exhibited a great deal of internal inconsistency. We
also excluded DEMO very small number of responses that were completely out of line with
an individual’s other responses.
Procedure. The experiment was run using a computer. DEMO trial involved a series
of choices between a prospect that o¤ered a prize contingent on chance or an uncer-
tain event (e.g., a DEMO chance to win a prize of $150) and a descending series DEMO sure
payments (e.g., receive $40 for sure). In study 1, the prize was always $75 for half the
756 Tversky and Fox
respondents and $150 for the other half; in studies 2 and 3, the prize for all respon-
dents was $150. Certainty equivalents were inferred from two rounds of such choices.
The ﬁrst DEMO consisted of six choices between the prospect and sure payments,
spaced roughly evenly between $0 and the prize amount. After completing the ﬁrst
DEMO of choices, a new set of seven sure payments was presented, spanning the nar-
rower range between the lowest payment that the respondent DEMO accepted and
highest payment that the respondent had rejected. The program enforced internal
consistency. For example, no respondent was allowed to prefer $30 for sure over a
prospect and also prefer the same prospect over a DEMO $40. The program allowed
respondents to backtrack if they felt they had made a mistake in the previous round
of choices.
The certainty equivalent DEMO each prospect was determined by a linear interpolation
between the lowest value accepted and the highest value rejected in the second round
of choices. DEMO interpolation yielded a margin of error of G$2.50 for the $150 pros-
pects and G$1.25 for the $75 prospects. We wish to emphasize that DEMO our
analysis is based on certainty equivalents, the data consisted of DEMO series of choices
between a given prospect and sure outcomes. Thus, DEMO were not asked to
generate certainty equivalents; instead, these values were inferred from choices.
Each session began with detailed instructions and practice. In DEMO 1, the ﬁrst
session consisted of chance prospects followed by basketball DEMO; the second
session replicated the chance prospects followed by prospects deﬁned DEMO a future
temperature in San Francisco. In study 2, the ﬁrst DEMO consisted of chance pros-
pects followed by Super Bowl prospects; the DEMO session replicated the chance
prospects followed by prospects deﬁned by a future value of the Dow–Jones index.
Study 3 consisted of a single session DEMO which the chance prospects were followed by
prospects deﬁned by a future temperature in San Francisco and Beijing; the order of
the latter two sources was counterbalanced. The order of the prospects within each
source was DEMO
Sources of Uncertainty. Chance prospects were described in terms of a random
draw of a single poker chip from an urn containing 100 chips DEMO consec-
utively from 1 to 100. Nineteen prospects of the form ðx; pÞ were constructed where
p varied from .05 to .95 in multiples of .05. For example, a typical chance prospect
would pay $150 if the number of the poker chip is between 1 and 25, and nothing
otherwise. This design yields 90 tests of lower SA and 90 DEMO of upper SA for each
participant.
Basketball prospects were deﬁned by the result of the ﬁrst game of the 1991
National Basketball Association (NBA) quarter ﬁnal series between the Portland
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 757
Figure 30.2
Event space for prospects deﬁned DEMO the result of the Utah–Portland basketball game. The horizontal axis
refers to the point spread in that game. Each row denotes a target event DEMO deﬁnes a prospect used in
study 1. Segments that extend up to the arrowhead represent unbounded intervals. Each interval includes
the more extreme endpoint DEMO to 0, but not the less extreme endpoint.
Trailblazers and the DEMO Jazz. For example, a typical prospect would pay $150
if Portland DEMO Utah by more than 6 points. The event space is depicted in
ﬁgure 30.2. Each of the 32 rows in the ﬁgure represents a DEMO event A that deﬁnes
an uncertain prospect ðx; AÞ. For example, the top row in ﬁgure 30.2, which consists
of two segments, DEMO the event ‘‘the margin of victory exceeds 6 points.’’ This
design yields 28 tests of lower SA and 12 tests of upper SA. For DEMO, one test of
lower SA is obtained by comparing the decision DEMO for the event ‘‘Utah wins’’ to
the sum of the decision weights for the two events ‘‘Utah wins by up to 12 points’’
and DEMO wins by more than 12 points.’’
Super Bowl prospects were deﬁned by the result of the 1992 Super Bowl game
between the Bu¤alo Bills DEMO the Washington Redskins. The event space is depicted
in ﬁgure 30.3. It includes 28 target events yielding 30 tests of lower SA and 17 DEMO of
upper SA.
Dow–Jones prospects were deﬁned by the change in the Dow–Jones Industrial
Average over the subsequent week. For example, a typical prospect would pay $150
if the Dow–Jones goes up by more than 50 DEMO over the next seven days. The
event space has the same structure as that of the Super Bowl (ﬁgure 30.3).
758 Tversky and Fox
Figure 30.3
Event space for prospects deﬁned by DEMO result of the Super Bowl game between Washington and Bu¤alo
(and DEMO the Dow–Jones prospects). The horizontal axis refers to the point spread in the Super Bowl (and
the change in the Dow–Jones in the next week). Each row denotes a target event that deﬁnes a DEMO
used in study 2. Segments that extend up to the arrowhead represent unbounded intervals. Each interval
includes the more extreme endpoint relative to 0, but not the less extreme endpoint.
San Francisco temperature prospects were deﬁned DEMO the daytime high tempera-
ture in San Francisco on a given future date. The 20 target events used in studies 1
and 3 are DEMO in ﬁgure 30.4. This design yields 30 tests of lower SA and 10 tests
of upper SA. For example, a typical prospect would pay $75 if the daytime high
temperature in downtown San Francisco on April DEMO, 1992, is between 65 and 80.
Similarly, Beijing temperature prospects DEMO deﬁned by the daytime high tempera-
ture in Beijing on a given future day. The event space is identical to the San Fran-
cisco DEMO in study 3, as depicted in ﬁgure 30.4.
Results
To test DEMO and upper SA, the decision weights for each respondent were derived DEMO
follows. Using the choice data, we ﬁrst estimated the certainty equivalent DEMO of each
prospect by linear interpolation, as described earlier. According to DEMO theory, if
Cðx; AÞ¼ y, then
vðyÞ¼ WðAÞvðxÞ
and WðAÞ¼ DEMO The decision weight
associated with an uncertain event A, therefore, can be computed if the value func-
tion v for gains is known. DEMO studies (e.g., Tversky, 1967) have indicated that
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 759
Figure 30.4
Event space for prospects deﬁned DEMO future temperatures in San Francisco and Beijing. The horizontal axis
refers to the daytime high temperature on a given date. Each row denotes a DEMO event that deﬁnes a
prospect used in studies 1 and 3. Segments that extend up to the arrowhead represent unbounded intervals.
Each interval includes DEMO left endpoint but not the right endpoint.
the value function for gains can be approximated by a power function of the form
vðxÞ¼ xa ,0 aa a 1. This form is characterized by the assumption that DEMO
the prize of a prospect by a positive constant multiplies its certainty equivalent by the
same constant.8 This prediction was tested using the data DEMO study 1 in which each
event was paired both with a prize of $75 and with a prize of $150. Consistent with a
power DEMO function, we found no signiﬁcant di¤erence between Cð150; AÞ and
2Cð75; AÞ for any of the sources.
Although the present data are consistent with a power function, the value of the
exponent cannot be estimated from simple prospects because the exponent a can be
absorbed into W. DEMO estimate the exponent for gains, we need prospects with two
positive DEMO Such prospects were investigated by Tversky and Kahneman
(1992), using DEMO same experimental procedure and a similar subject population.
They found that estimates of the exponent did not vary markedly across respondents
and the median DEMO of the exponent was .88. In the analysis that follows, we DEMO
assume a power value function with an exponent of .88 and test lower and upper SA
using this function. We then show that the DEMO of SA is robust with respect to sub-
stantial variations in the exponent. Further analyses are based on an ordinal method
that makes no DEMO about the functional form of v.
760 Tversky and Fox
Table 30.4
Proportion of Tests that Strictly Satisfy DEMO and Upper Subadditivity (SA)
Study 1 Study 2 Study 3
DEMO Lower SA Upper SA Lower SA Upper SA Lower SA Upper SA
Chance .80 .81 .77 .83 .81 .79
Basketball .88 .83
Super Bowl DEMO .87
Dow–Jones .77 .87
S.F. temp. .83 .89 .85 .89
Beijing temp. .89 .91
Note: S.F.
¼
San Francisco; temp.
¼
temperature.
Using DEMO estimated W for each source of uncertainty, we deﬁne measures of DEMO
degree of lower and upper SA as follows. Recall that lower SA requires that
WðAÞ bWðA U BÞ WðBÞ, for A V B ¼ f. Hence, the di¤erence between the two
sides of the inequality,
DðA; BÞ 1WðAÞþ WðBÞ WðA
U
BÞ;
provides a measure of the degree of lower SA. Similarly, recall that upper SA
requires that 1 WðS AÞ bWðA U BÞ WðBÞ,for A V B ¼ DEMO Hence, the dif-
ference between the two sides of the inequality,DEMO
D
0
ðA; BÞ 11

WðS

AÞ WðA
U
DEMO WðBÞ;
provides a measure of the degree of upper SA.
Table 30.4 presents the overall proportion of tests, across participants, that strictly
DEMO lower and upper SA (i.e., D > 0, D0 > DEMO) for each source of uncertainty. Note
that if W were additive (as implied by expected utility theory), then both D and D0
DEMO expected to be zero; hence, all entries in table 30.4 should be close to one-half.
However, each entry in table 30.4 is signiﬁcantly greater than one-half (p <:01, by a
binomial test), DEMO implied by SA.
To obtain global measures of lower and upper SA, let d and d0 , respectively, be the
mean values of DEMO and D0 for a given respondent. Besides serving as summary statis-
tics, these indexes have a simple geometric interpretation if the risky weighting func-
tion is roughly linear except near the endpoints. It is easy to DEMO that within the
linear portion of the graph, D and D0 DEMO not depend on A and B, and the summary
measures d DEMO d0 correspond to the ‘‘lower’’ and ‘‘upper’’ intercepts of the weight-
ing function (see ﬁgure 30.5). Its slope, s ¼ 1 d DEMO , can then be interpreted as a
measure of sensitivity to probability changes. For uncertainty, we cannot plot d and
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 761
Figure 30.5
A weighting function that is DEMO except near the endpoints (d
function; d 0 ¼ ‘‘upper’’ intercept of the weighting function; s ¼
¼
slope).
‘‘lower’’ intercept of the weighting
d0 as in ﬁgure 30.5. However, d and d0 have an analogous interpretation as a ‘‘pos-
sibility gap’’ and ‘‘certainty gap,’’ DEMO, if W is roughly linear except near the
endpoints.9 Note that DEMO expected utility theory, d ¼ d0 ¼ 0 and s ¼ DEMO, whereas
prospect theory implies d b 0, d0 b 0, DEMO s a 1. Thus, prospect theory implies less
sensitivity to changes DEMO uncertainty than is required by expected utility theory. To
test these predictions, we computed the values of d, d0 , and s, separately for each
respondent. Table 30.5 presents the median values of these indexes, across respon-
dent for each source of uncertainty.
In accord with SA, each value of d and d0 in table 30.5 is signiﬁcantly greater DEMO
zero ðp <:05Þ . Furthermore, both indexes are larger for DEMO than for chance:
The mean values of d and of d0 for the uncertain sources are signiﬁcantly greater
than each of the corresponding DEMO for chance (p <:01, separately for each
study). Finally, consistent with subcertainty, d0 tends to exceed d, though this di¤er-
ence is statistically signiﬁcant only in studies 2 and 3 ðp <:DEMO
Recall that all participants evaluated the same set of risky prospects, DEMO that
respondents in each of the three studies evaluated two di¤erent types of uncertain
prospects (see table 30.3). Figure 30.6 plots, for DEMO respondent, the average sensi-
tivity measure s for the two uncertain DEMO against s for the risky source. (One
respondent who produced a DEMO s was excluded from this analysis.) These data
may be summarized DEMO follows. First, all values of s for the uncertain prospects and
DEMO but two values of s for the risky prospects were less than or equal to one as
implied by SA. Second, the values of s are considerably higher for risk (mean s ¼ :74)
762 Tversky and Fox
Figure 30.6
Joint distribution for all respondents of DEMO sensitivity measure s for risk and uncertainty.
than for uncertainty (mean DEMO ¼ : 53), as demonstrated by the fact that 94 out of 111
points lie below the identity line (p <:01 by a sign test). Third, the data reveal a
signiﬁcant correlation between the sensitivity measures for risk and for uncertainty
(r ¼ :37, p <:01). The average correlation between the uncertain sources is DEMO If we
restrict the analysis to studies 1 and 2 that yielded more stable data (in part because
the risky prospects were replicated), the correlation between sensitivity for risk and
for uncertainty increases to .51, and the mean correlation between the uncertain
sources increases to .54. These DEMO indicate the presence of consistent indi-
vidual di¤erences in SA and suggest that sensitivity to uncertainty is an important
attribute that distinguishes among decision DEMO An axiomatic analysis of the
conditions under which one individual is consistently more SA than another is pre-
sented in Tversky and Wakker (in press).
Robustness. The preceding analysis summarized in table 30.5 assumes a DEMO
value function with an exponent a ¼ :88. To investigate whether DEMO above con-
clusions depend on the particular choice of the exponent, DEMO reanalyzed the data
using di¤erent values of a varying from one-half to one. To appreciate the impact of
this di¤erence, consider the prospect that o¤ers a one-third chance to win $100. [We
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 763
Table 30.5
Median Values of d, d 0 , and s , across Respondents, Measuring the Degree of Lower and Upper Sub-
additivity (SA) and Global Sensitivity, Respectively
Study 1 Study 2 Study 3
Source
dd
0
sd d
0
sd d
DEMO
s
Chance .06 .10 .81 .05 .19 .75 .11 .14 .72
Basketball .21 .19 .61
Super Bowl .15 .23 .57
Dow–Jones .12 .22 .67
DEMO temp. .20 .26 .51 .27 .23 .50
Beijing temp. .28 .32 .42
Note: S.F.
¼
San Francisco; temp.
¼
temperature.
choose one-third because, according to ﬁgure 30.1, wð1=3Þ is approximately one-
third.] The certainty equivalent of this prospect is $33.33 if a ¼ 1, but it is only
$11.11 if a ¼ :5. Table 30.6 shows that as a decreases (indicating greater curvature), d
increases and d0 decreases. More important, however, both d and d0 are positive
throughout the range for DEMO sources, and the values of s are signiﬁcantly smaller than
one (p <:01) in all cases. SA, therefore, holds for a fairly wide range of variation in
the curvature of the value function.
DEMO Analysis. The preceding analysis conﬁrmed our hypothesis that people are
less sensitive to uncertainty than to chance using the sensitivity measure s. We next
DEMO to an ordinal test of this hypothesis that makes no assumptions about the value
function. Let B1; B2 denote disjoint uncertain events, and DEMO A1; A2 denote disjoint
chance events. We searched among the responses DEMO each participant for patterns
satisfying
Cðx; S B1Þ aCðx; S A1
Cðx; S B2Þ aCðx; S A2
Cðx; S ½B1 U B2Þ > Cðx;
Þ
Þ
and
but
S ½A1
U
A2Þ:
DEMO
ð4Þ
A response pattern that satisﬁes either condition 3 or 4 provides support for the
hypothesis that the respondent is less sensitive to uncertainty (B) than to chance (A).
Cðx; B1Þ bCðx; A1Þ
DEMO; B1 U B2Þ < Cðx;
or
and
A1
U
Cðx; B2Þ bCðx; A2Þ
A2Þ;
ð3Þ
764 Tversky and Fox
Table 30.6
Median Values of d, d 0 , and s across Respondents, Measuring the Degree of Lower Subadditivity, DEMO
Subadditivity, and Global Sensitivity, Respectively, for Several Values of a DEMO .5 and 1
a
Source and index 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.00
Chance (Study 1)
d
d 0
s
Chance (Study 2)DEMO
d
d 0
s
Chance (Study 3)
d
d 0
DEMO
Basketball
d
d 0
s
Super Bowl
d
d 0
s
Dow–Jones
d
d 0
s
SF temp (Study 1)
d
d 0
s
SF temp (Study 3)
d
d 0
s
Beijing temp
d
d 0
s
Note: SF
¼
San Francisco; temp
.29 DEMO .12 .06 .01
.02 .05 .07 .10 .12
.66 .73 .77 .81 .83
.28 .18 .11 .05 .003
.09 .12 .15 .19 .23
.66 DEMO .74 .75 .75
.33 .24 .17 .11 .06
.05 .08 .11 .14 .17
.59 .65 .69 .72 .75
.40 .33 .26 .21 .16
.10 DEMO .17 .19 .22
.50 .56 .58 .61 .63
.36 .28 .20 .15 .11
.15 .18 .20 .23 .25
.49 .54 .55 .57 .60
.34 DEMO .17 .11 .07
.12 .15 .19 .22 .25
.54 .61 .64 .67 .70
.40 .32 .26 .20 .15
.15 .18 .22 .26 .30
.42 DEMO .49 .51 .52
.47 .39 .33 .27 .22
.15 .18 .20 .23 .26
.39 .43 .48 .50 .52
.48 .40 .34 .28 .23
.21 DEMO .29 .32 .35
.33 .38 .42 .42 .43
¼
temperature.
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 765
Table 30.7
Ordinal Analysis of Di¤erential Sensitivity
DEMO 1 Study 2 Study 3
Source comparison
mm
0
mm
0
mm
0
Basketball vs. chance .85 .64
Super Bowl vs. chance .91 .89
DEMO vs. chance .79 .76
S.F. temp. vs. chance .76 .93 .87 .87
Beijing temp. vs. chance .83 .94
Note: Each entry corresponds to the median value, across respondents, of m and m0 measuring the degree
DEMO which respondents are less sensitive to uncertainty than to chance. S.F. ¼ San Francisco; temp. ¼
temperature.
Several comments regarding this test are in order. First, note that if we replace the
weak inequalities in conditions 3 and 4 with equalities, then these conditions reduce
to the deﬁnition of relative sensitivity (see equations 1 and 2). The above conditions
are better suited for the present experimental design because participants were not
DEMO to ‘‘match’’ intervals from di¤erent sources. Second, the present analysis is
DEMO to contiguous intervals; conditions 3 and 4 may not hold when DEMO
contiguous to noncontiguous intervals (see Tversky & Koehler, 1994). Third, because
of measurement error, the above conditions are not expected to DEMO for all compar-
isons; however, the conditions indicating less sensitivity to uncertainty than to chance
are expected to be satisﬁed more frequently than DEMO opposite conditions.
Let MðB; AÞ be the number of response patterns DEMO satisfy condition 3 above
response patterns that satisfy 3 with the As and Bs interchanged (i.e., less sensitivity(i.e., less sensitivity to uncertainty than to chance). Let MðA; BÞ be the number of
to chance than to uncertainty). The ratio mðB; AÞ¼ MðB; AÞ=ðMðB; AÞþ MðA; BÞÞ
provides a measure of the degree to which a respondent is less sensitive to uncertainty
than to chance, in the sense of condition 3. We deﬁne M0ðB; AÞ, M0ðA; BÞ, and
DEMO; AÞ similarly for preference patterns that satisfy condition 4. If the DEMO is
invariably less sensitive to B than to A, then the DEMO mðB; AÞ and m0ðB; AÞ should
be close to one. On the other hand, if the respondent is not more sensitive to one
source than to another, these ratios should be close to one-half. Table 30.7 presents
the median ratios, across respondent, comparing each of the DEMO uncertain sources to
chance. As predicted, all entries in the table DEMO signiﬁcantly greater than one-half
( p <:05, by t tests), indicating that people are generally less sensitive to uncertainty
than to chance.
766 Tversky and Fox
We conclude this section with a brief methodological DEMO We have attrib-
uted the ﬁndings of bounded subadditivity and lower sensitivity for uncertainty than
for risk to basic psychological attitudes toward risk and DEMO captured by the
weighting function. Alternatively, one might be tempted to DEMO for these ﬁndings
by a statistical model that assumes that the assessment of certainty equivalents, and
hence the estimation of decision weights, is DEMO to random error that is bounded
by the endpoints of the outcome scale, because Cðx; AÞ must lie between 0 and x.
Although DEMO error could contribute to SA, this model cannot adequately
account for DEMO observed pattern of results. First, it cannot explain the subadditivity
observed DEMO simple choice experiments that do not involve (direct or indirect) assess-
ment of certainty equivalents, such as the Stanford–Berkeley problem presented in
table 30.2. More extensive evidence for both lower and upper SA in simple DEMO
between risky prospects is reported by Wu and Gonzalez (1994), DEMO also found
some support for the stronger hypothesis that w is concave for low probabilities
and convex for moderate and high probabilities. Second, a statistical model cannot
readily account for the result of the ordinal analysis DEMO above that respondents
were less sensitive to uncertainty than to chance. Third, because a random error
model implies a bias toward one-half, it DEMO explain the observation that the
decision weight of an event that is as likely as not to occur is generally less than one-
half (see ﬁgures 30.7, 30.8, and 30.9 below). Finally, it should be noted that sub-
additivity and di¤erential sensitivity play an important role DEMO the pricing of risky
and uncertain prospects, regardless of whether these DEMO are driven primarily
by psychological or by statistical factors.
Discussion
The ﬁnal section of this article addresses three topics. First, we explore the relation-
ship between decision weights and judged probabilities. Second, we investigate the
presence of preferences for betting on particular sources of uncertainty. Finally, we
discuss descriptive and normative implications of the present results.
Preference and Belief
The DEMO account distinguishes between decision weights derived from preferences
and degree of belief expressed by probability judgments. What is the relation be-
tween the judged DEMO, PðAÞ, of an uncertain event, A, and its associated
decision weight WðAÞ? To investigate this problem, we asked respondents, after they
completed the choice task, to assess the probabilities of all target events. Following
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 767
Table 30.8
Median Values of d, d 0 , and s , across Respondents, That Measure the Degree of Lower and Upper Sub-
additivity, SA, and Global Sensitivity, Respectively, DEMO Judged Probability
Study 1 Study 2 Study 3
Source
dd
0
sd d
0
sd d
0
s
Basketball .08 .11 .74
Super Bowl DEMO .08 .81
Dow–Jones .07 .08 .84
S.F. temp. .13 .16 .70 .29 .21 .51
Beijing temp. .24 .25 .53
Note: SA
¼
Subadditivity; DEMO
¼
San Francisco; temp.
¼
temperature; s
¼
degree of global sensitivity.
the analysis of decision weights, we deﬁne measures of the degree of lower and upper
SA in probability judgments as follows:
DðA; BÞ 1PðAÞþ PðBÞ PðA U BÞ;
D0ðA; BÞ 11 PðS AÞþ PðBÞ PðA
U
BÞ;
provided A V B ¼ f. Clearly, P is additive if and only if D ¼ D0 ¼ 0 DEMO all disjoint
A; B in S. As before, let d and d0 be the mean values of D and D0 , respectively, and
let s ¼ 1 d d0 . Table 30.8, which is the analog of table 30.5, presents the median
values of d, d0 , and s, across respondents, for each of the ﬁve uncertain sources.
All values of d and d0 in table 30.8 are signiﬁcantly greater DEMO zero ðp <:05Þ,
demonstrating both lower and upper SA for probability judgments. Comparing table
30.8 and table 30.5 reveals that the values DEMO s for judged probabilities (overall mean
.70) are greater than the corresponding uncertain decision weights (overall mean .55).
Thus, probability judgments DEMO less SA than do uncertain decision weights. This
ﬁnding is consistent with a two-stage process in which the decision maker ﬁrst
assesses the probability DEMO of an uncertain event A, then transforms this value by the
DEMO weighting function w. Thus, WðAÞ may be approximated by w½PðAÞ.
We DEMO this model using the median risky and uncertain decision weights
derived from study 2 (assuming a ¼ :88). In ﬁgure 30.7 we DEMO decision weights for
chance prospects as a function of stated (objective) probabilities. In ﬁgures 30.8 and
30.9, respectively, we plot decision weights DEMO Super Bowl prospects and for Dow–
Jones prospects as functions of (DEMO) judged probabilities. The comparison of
these ﬁgures reveals that the data DEMO ﬁgures 30.8 and 30.9 are less orderly than those
in ﬁgure 30.7. This is not surprising because judged probability (unlike stated prob-
ability) DEMO measured with error, and because the uncertain decision weights exhibit
768 Tversky and Fox
Figure 30.7
Median decision weights for chance prospects, from study 2, plotted as a function of stated (objective)
DEMO
greater variability (both within and between subjects) than risky decision weights.
However, the underlying relation between probability and decision weights is nearly
identical in the three ﬁgures.10 This is exactly what we would expect if DEMO uncertain
weighting function W is obtained by applying the risky weighting function w to
judged probabilities.
The subadditivity of probability judgments reported in table DEMO is consistent with
support theory11 (Tversky & Koehler, 1994), according to which PðAÞþ PðBÞ b
PðA U BÞ . The combination of DEMO two-stage model (which is based on prospect
theory) with an analysis of probability judgments (which is based on support theory)
can therefore explain our main ﬁnding that decision weights are more subadditive for
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 769
Figure 30.8
Median decision weights for Super DEMO prospects, from study 2, plotted as a function of median judged
probabilities.
uncertainty than for chance. This model also implies that the decision DEMO asso-
ciated with an uncertain event (e.g., an airplane accident) DEMO when its descrip-
tion is unpacked into its constituents (e.g., an airplane accident caused by mechanical
failure, terrorism, human error, or acts of God; see Johnson, Hershey, Meszaros, &
Kunreuther, 1993)DEMO Furthermore, this model predicts greater subadditivity, ceteris
paribus, when A DEMO B is a contiguous interval (e.g., future temperature between 60
and 80 ) than when A U B is not a contiguous interval (e.g., future temperature less
than 60 or more than 80 ). DEMO more detailed treatment of this model will be pre-
sented elsewhere.
770 Tversky and Fox
Figure 30.9
Median decision weights for Dow–Jones prospects, from study 2, plotted as a function of median judged
probability.
Source Preference
The ﬁnding that people are less sensitive to uncertainty than to DEMO should be dis-
tinguished from the observation of ambiguity aversion: People DEMO prefer to bet on
known rather than unknown probabilities (Ellsberg, 1961). For example, people
generally prefer to bet on either side of a fair coin than on either side of a coin with
an DEMO bias. These preferences violate expected utility theory because they
imply that the sum of the subjective probabilities of heads and of tails is higher DEMO
the unbiased coin than for the coin with the unknown bias.
Recent research has documented some signiﬁcant exceptions to ambiguity aver-
sion. Heath and DEMO (1991) showed that people who were knowledgeable about
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 771
sports but not about politics preferred to DEMO on sports events rather than on chance
events that these people had judged equally probable. However, the same people
preferred to bet on chance events rather than on political events that they had judged
equally probable. DEMO, people who were knowledgeable about politics but not
about sports exhibited DEMO reverse pattern. These data support what Heath and
Tversky call the competence hypothesis: People prefer to bet on their beliefs in sit-
uations where they feel competent or knowledgeable, and they prefer to bet on
chance when they feel incompetent or ignorant. This account is consistent with the
DEMO to bet on the fair rather than the biased coin, but DEMO predicts additional
preferences that are at odds with ambiguity aversion.
The preceding studies allow us to test the competence hypothesis against ambigu-
ity aversion. DEMO that the participants in studies 1 and 2 were recruited for their
knowledge of basketball and football, respectively. Ambiguity aversion implies a
preference for chance over uncertainty because the probabilities associated with the
sports events (e.g., Utah beating Portland) are necessarily vague or imprecise. In
contrast, the competence hypothesis predicts that the sports fans will prefer to bet on
DEMO game than on chance.
To establish source preference, let A and DEMO be two di¤erent sources of uncertainty.
A decision maker is said to prefer source A to source B if for any events A in DEMO and B
in B. WðAÞ¼ WðBÞ implies WðS AÞ > WðS BÞ, or equivalently, Cðx; AÞ¼
Cðx; BÞ implies Cðx; S AÞ > Cðx; S BÞ, x > 0. To test for source DEMO
we searched among the responses of each participants for patterns that satisfy
Cðx; AÞ bCðx; BÞ and Cðx; S AÞ > Cðx; DEMO BÞ. Thus, a decision maker who pre-
fers to bet on DEMO A than to bet on event B, and also prefers to DEMO against A than
to bet against B exhibits a preference for source A over source B. The preference to
bet on either side of DEMO fair coin rather than on either side of a coin with an unknown
bias illustrates such a preference for chance over uncertainty.
A Let DEMO; BÞ be the number of response patterns indicating a preference for DEMO
over source B, as deﬁned above, and let KðB; AÞ DEMO the number of response pat-
terns indicating the opposite preference. For each pair of sources, we computed the
ratio kðA; BÞ¼ KðA; BÞ=ðKðA; BÞþ KðB; AÞÞ, separately for each respondent. This
ratio provides a comparative index of source preference; it should equal one-half if
neither source is preferred to the other, and it should be substantially greater than
one-half if source A is generally preferred to source B.
The present DEMO reveal signiﬁcant source preferences that are consistent with
the competence hypothesis but not with ambiguity aversion. In all three studies,
participants preferred to DEMO on their uncertain beliefs in their area of competence
rather than on known chance events. The basketball fans in study 1 preferred betting
772 Tversky and Fox
on basketball than on chance (median k ¼ :76, p <:05 by t test); the football fans
DEMO study 2 preferred betting on the Super Bowl than on chance (DEMO k ¼ :59,
though this e¤ect is not statistically signiﬁcant); and the students in study 3 (who live
near San Francisco) preferred betting on San Francisco temperature than on chance
(median k ¼ :76, p <:01). Two other comparisons consistent with the DEMO
hypothesis are the preference for basketball over San Francisco temperature in study
1 (median k ¼ :76, p <:05), and the preference for San Francisco temperature over
Beijing temperature in study 3 (median k ¼ :86, p <:01). For further discussions of
DEMO aversion and source preference, see Camerer and Weber (1992), Fox and
Tversky (in press), and Frisch and Baron (1988).
DEMO Comments
Several authors (e.g., Ellsberg, 1961; Fellner, 1961; Keynes, 1921; Knight, 1921),
critical of expected utility theory, distinguished among uncertain prospects according
to the degree to which the uncertainty can DEMO quantiﬁed. At one extreme, uncertainty
is characterized by a known probability DEMO; this is the domain of decision
under risk. At the other DEMO, decision makers are unable to quantify their
uncertainty; this is the domain of decision under ignorance. Most decisions under
uncertainty lie somewhere between DEMO two extremes: People typically do not
know the exact probabilities associated DEMO the relevant outcomes, but they have
some vague notion about their DEMO The role of vagueness or ambiguity in
decision under uncertainty has been the subject of much experimental and theoretical
research.
In the present chapter DEMO have investigated this issue using the conceptual frame-
work of prospect theory. According to this theory, uncertainty is represented by a
weighting function that satisﬁes bounded subadditivity. Thus, an event has more
impact when it turns impossibility into possibility, or possibility into certainty, than
when it merely DEMO a possibility more likely. This principle explains Allais’s
examples (i.e., the certainty e¤ect) as well as the fourfold pattern of risk attitudes
illustrated in table 30.1. The experiments reported in this article demonstrate SA for
DEMO risk and uncertainty. They also show that this e¤ect is more pronounced for
uncertainty than for risk. The latter ﬁnding suggests the more general DEMO that
SA, and hence the departure from expected utility theory, is ampliﬁed by vagueness
or ambiguity. Consequently, studies of decision under risk are likely to underestimate
the degree of SA that characterizes decisions involving real-world DEMO
Subadditivity, therefore, emerges as a unifying principle of choice that is manifested
to varying degrees in decisions under risk, uncertainty, and ignorance.
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 773
The psychological basis of bounded subadditivity includes DEMO judgmental and
preferential elements. As noted earlier, SA holds for judgments DEMO probability (see
table 30.8), but it is more pronounced for DEMO weights (see table 30.5). This
ampliﬁcation may reﬂect people’s a¤ective DEMO to positive and negative out-
comes. Imagine owning a lottery ticket that o¤ers some hope of winning a great
fortune. Receiving a second ticket DEMO the same lottery, we suggest, will increase one’s
hope of becoming rich but will not quite double it. The same pattern appears to DEMO
for negative outcomes. Imagine waiting for the results of a biopsy. Receiving a
preliminary indication that reduces the probability of malignancy by one-half, we
suggest, will reduce fear by less than one-half. Thus, hope and DEMO seem to be sub-
additive in outcome probability. To the extent that the experience of hope and fear is
treated as a consequence of DEMO action, subadditivity may have some normative basis.
If lottery tickets are DEMO primarily for entertaining a fantasy, and protective
action is undertaken largely DEMO achieve peace of mind, then it is not unreasonable to
value DEMO ﬁrst lottery ticket more than the second, and to value the DEMO of a
hazard more than a comparable reduction in its likelihood.
Notes
This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grants SES-9109535 and SBR-9408684. DEMO
article beneﬁtted from discussions with Daniel Kahneman and Peter Wakker.
1. Risk seeking for long shots was reported by Kachelmeier and Shehata (1992) DEMO an experiment con-
ducted in China with real payo¤s that were considerably higher than the normal monthly incomes of the
participants.
2. Figure 30.1 DEMO a minor error in the original drawing.
3. For other discussions of decision weights for uncertain events, see Hogarth and Einhorn (1990), DEMO
(1989), and Wakker (1994).
4. The boundary conditions are needed to ensure that we always compare an interval that includes an
DEMO to an interval that is bounded away from the other endpoint (DEMO Tversky & Wakker, in press, for
a more rigorous formulation).
5. The upper subadditivity of W is equivalent to the lower subadditivity DEMO the dual function W0 ðAÞ¼
1 WðS AÞ.
6. Relative sensitivity is closely related to the concept of relative curvature for subjective dimensions
introduced DEMO Krantz and Tversky (1975).
7. Although probabilities could be generated DEMO various chance devices, we do not distinguish between
them here, and treat risk or chance as a single source of uncertainty.
8. This DEMO from the fact that for t > 0, the value of DEMO prospect ðtx; AÞ is WðAÞðtxÞa ; hence,
V B ¼ DEMO, provided
Cðtx; AÞ¼ WðAÞ1=a tx, which equals tCðx; AÞ.
9. More formally, this holds when WðA U BÞ WðAÞ does not depend on A, for all A
WðAÞ is not too close to zero and WðA U BÞ is not too close to 1.
wð pÞ¼
DEMO Þ, used by Lattimore, Baker, and Witte (1992). It assumes that the relation between w
10. The smooth curves in ﬁgures DEMO and 30.6 were obtained by ﬁtting the parametric form
g g g
dp =ðdp þ½1 
774 Tversky and Fox
and p is linear in a log odds DEMO The estimated values of the parameters in ﬁgures 30.7, 30.8, and 30.9,
respectively, are .69, .69, and .72 for g, DEMO .77, .76, and .76 for d.
11. In this theory, DEMO PðS

AÞ¼ 1; hence, the equations for lower and upper SA coincide.
12. Evidence for substantial SA in the decisions of professional DEMO traders is reported by Fox, Rogers,
and Tversky (1995).
References
Allais, A. M. (1953). Le comportement de l’homme rationel DEMO le risque, critique des postulates et
axiomes de l’ecole americaine. Econometrica, 21, 503–546.
Camerer, C. F., & Ho, T.-H. (1994). Violations of the betweenness axiom and nonlinearity in probability.
Journal of Risk DEMO Uncertainty, 8, 167–196.
Camerer, C. F., & Weber, M. (1992). Recent developments in modeling preferences: Uncertainty and
ambiguity. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 325–370.
Cohen, M., Ja¤ray, J. Y., & Said, T. (1987). Experimental comparisons of individual behavior under risk
and under uncertainty for gains and for losses. Organizational Behavior and DEMO Decision Processes, 39,
1–22.
Edwards, W. (1962). Subjective DEMO inferred from decisions. Psychological Review, 69, 109–135.
Ellsberg, D. (1961). Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75,
643–669.
Fellner, W. (1961). Distortion of subjective probabilities DEMO a reaction to uncertainty. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 75, 670–689.
Fishburn, P. C., & Kochenberger, G. A. (1979). Two-piece von DEMO utility functions.
Decision Sciences, 10, 503–518.
Fox, C. R., Rogers, B., & Tversky, A. (1995). Options traders reveal subadditive DEMO weights. Unpub-
lished manuscript, Stanford University.
Fox, C. R., & DEMO, A. (in press). Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance. Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
Friedman, M., & Savage, L. J. (1948). DEMO utility analysis of choices involving risk. Journal of Political
Economy, 56, 279–306.
Frisch, D., & Baron, J. (1988). Ambiguity and DEMO Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
1, 149–157.
Heath, F., & Tversky, A. (1991). Preference and belief: Ambiguity and competence DEMO choice under
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4, 4–28.
Hershey, J. C., & Schoemaker, P. H. J. (1980). Prospect DEMO reﬂection hypothesis: A critical exami-
nation. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 25, 395–418.
Hogarth, R., & Einhorn, H. (1990). Venture theory: A model of decision weights. Management Science,
36, 780–803.
DEMO, E. J., Hershey, J., Meszaros, J., & Kunreuther, DEMO (1993). Framing, probability distortions, and
insurance decisions. Journal of DEMO and Uncertainty, 7, 35–51.
Kachelmeier, S. J., & Shehata, DEMO (1992). Examining risk preferences under high monetary incentives:
Experimental DEMO from the People’s Republic of China. American Economic Review, 82, 1120–1141.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica,
4, 263–291.
Keynes, J. DEMO (1921). A treatise on probability. London: Macmillan.
Weighing Risk and Uncertainty 775
Knight, F. H. (1921). Risk, uncertainty, and proﬁt. New York: Houghton Mi¿in.
Krantz, D. H., & Tversky, A. (1975). Similarity of rectangles: An analysis of DEMO dimensions. Jour-
nal of Mathematical Psychology, 12, 4–34.
Lattimore, P. DEMO, Baker, J. R., & Witte, A. D. (1992). DEMO inﬂuence of probability on risky choice. Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization, 17, 377–400.
Markowitz, H. (1952). The utility of wealth. DEMO of Political Economy, 60, 151–158.
Payne, J. W., Laughhunn, DEMO J., & Crum, R. (1981). Aspiration level e¤ects in DEMO behavior. Manage-
ment Science, 27, 953–958.
Preston, M. G., & Baratta, P. (1948). An experimental study of the auction value DEMO an uncertain outcome.
American Journal of Psychology, 61, 183–193.
Tversky, DEMO (1967). Utility theory and additivity analysis of risky choices. Journal DEMO Experimental Psy-
chology, 75, 27–36.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, DEMO (1986). Rational choice and the framing of decisions. Journal of DEMO,
59(4, Part 2), 251–278.
Tversky, A., & DEMO, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of DEMO
tainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–323.
Tversky, A., & Koehler, D. K. (1994). Support theory: A nonextensional representation of subjective
probability. Psychological Review, 101, 547–567.
Tversky, A., & DEMO, P. P. (in press). Risk attitudes and decision weights. Econometrica.
Viscusi, W. K. (1989). Prospective reference theory: Toward an explanation of the paradoxes. Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty, 2, 235–264.
Wakker, P. P. (1994). Separating marginal utility and probabilistic risk aversion. Theory and Decision, 30,
1–44.
Wakker, P. P., & Tversky, DEMO (1993). An axiomatization of cumulative prospect theory. Journal of Risk
DEMO Uncertainty, 7, 147–176.
Wehrung, D. A. (1989). Risk taking over gains and losses: A study of oil executives. Annals of Operations
Research, 19, 115–139.
Wu, G., & Gonzalez, R. (1994)DEMO Curvature of the probability weighting function. Unpublished manuscript,
Harvard Business School.

31 Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance
Craig R. Fox and Amos Tversky
DEMO
One of the fundamental problems of modern decision theory is the analysis of deci-
sions under ignorance or ambiguity, where the probabilities of potential outcomes
are neither speciﬁed in advance nor readily assessed on the basis DEMO the available
evidence. This issue was addressed by Knight [1921], who DEMO between
measurable uncertainty or risk, which can be represented by precise DEMO, and
unmeasurable uncertainty, which cannot. Furthermore, he suggested that entrepre-
DEMO are compensated for bearing unmeasurable uncertainty as opposed to risk.
Contemporaneously, DEMO [1921] distinguished between probability, representing
the balance of evidence in favor DEMO a particular proposition and the weight of evi-
dence, representing the DEMO of evidence supporting that balance. He then asked,
‘‘If two probabilities are equal in degree, ought we, in choosing our course of DEMO,
to prefer that one which is based on a greater body of knowledge?’’ [p. 313]. The
distinction between clear and vague probabilities DEMO been rejected by proponents of
the subjectivist school. Although Savage [1954] acknowledged that subjective proba-
bilities are commonly vague, he argued that vagueness has no role in a rational
theory of choice.
Interest in the problem DEMO decision under ignorance was revived by a series of
papers and commentaries published in the early sixties in this Journal. The most
inﬂuential of DEMO papers, written by Ellsberg [1961], presented compelling examples
in which people prefer to bet on known rather than on unknown probabilities (see
also Fellner [1961]). Ellsberg’s simplest example, known as the ‘‘two-color’’ problem,
involves two urns each containing red and black balls. Urn 1 contains DEMO red and 50
black balls, whereas urn 2 contains 100 red DEMO black balls in an unknown propor-
tion. Suppose that a ball is drawn at random from an urn and one receives $100 or
nothing DEMO on the outcome. Most people seem indi¤erent between betting on
red or on black for either urn, yet they prefer to bet on the 50-50 urn rather than on
the urn with the unknown composition. This DEMO of preferences is inconsistent
with expected utility theory because it implies that the subjective probabilities of
black and of red are greater in the DEMO urn than in the unknown urn, and therefore
cannot sum to DEMO for both urns.
Essentially the same problem was discussed by Keynes some 40 years earlier: ‘‘In
the ﬁrst case we know that the urn contains black and white balls in equal pro-
portions; in the second case the proportion of each color is unknown, and each ball is
778 Fox and Tversky
as likely to be black as white. It DEMO evident that in either case the probability of
drawing a white ball is 1 , but that the weight of the argument in favor DEMO this con-
2
clusion is greater in the ﬁrst case’’ [1921, DEMO 75]. In the spirit of Knight and Keynes,
Ellsberg [1961] argued that people’s willingness to act in the presence of uncertainty
depends not DEMO on the perceived probability of the event in question, but also DEMO its
vagueness or ambiguity. Ellsberg characterized ambiguity as ‘‘a quality depending on
the amount, type, and ‘unanimity’ of information, and giving rise to one’s degree of
‘conﬁdence’ in an estimate of relative likelihoods’’ [p. 657].
DEMO preference for the clear over the vague bet has been demonstrated in many
experiments using several variations of Ellsberg’s original problems (for a compre-
hensive review of the literature, see Camerer and Weber [1992]). As noted above,
these observations provide evidence against the descriptive validity of DEMO utility
theory. Furthermore, many authors have attempted to justify the preference DEMO risk
over ambiguity on normative grounds, although Rai¤a [1961] has argued DEMO ambi-
guity can be reduced to risk by tossing a coin to decide whether to guess red or black.
Ambiguity aversion has attracted much DEMO because, with the notable excep-
tion of games of chance, decision makers usually do not know the precise proba-
bilities of potential outcomes. DEMO decisions to undertake a business venture, to go to
court, or to undergo medical treatment are commonly made in the absence of a DEMO
idea of the chances that these actions will be successful. The question arises, then,
whether the ambiguity aversion demonstrated using the Ellsberg urn applies to such
decisions. In other words, is the preference for clear over vague probabilities conﬁned
to the domain of chance, or does it extend to uncertain beliefs based on world
knowledge?
To answer this DEMO, Heath and Tversky [1991] conducted a series of experi-
ments comparing DEMO willingness to bet on their uncertain beliefs with their
willingness to bet on clear chance events. Contrary to ambiguity aversion, they found
that people prefer to bet on their vague beliefs in situations where they feel DEMO
competent or knowledgeable, although they prefer to bet on chance when DEMO do
not. In one study, subjects were asked to choose among DEMO based on three sources
of uncertainty: the results in various states DEMO the 1988 presidential election, the
results of various professional football games, and the results of random draws from
an urn with a known DEMO Subjects who were preselected for their knowledge
of politics and lack of knowledge of football preferred betting on political events
rather than on chance DEMO that they considered equally probable. However, these
subjects preferred betting on DEMO events rather than on sports events that they
considered equally probable. Analogously, subjects who were preselected for their
knowledge of football and lack of knowledge of politics exhibited the opposite pat-
Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 779
tern, preferring football to chance and chance to politics. Another ﬁnding that is
consistent with Heath and Tversky’s DEMO hypothesis but not with ambi-
guity aversion is people’s preference to bet on their physical skills (e.g., throwing
darts) rather than on matched chance events despite the fact that the perceived
probability of success is DEMO for skill and clear for chance [Cohen and Hansel 1959;
Howell 1971].
If ambiguity aversion is driven by the feeling of incompetence, as suggested by the
preceding discussion, the question arises as to what conditions produce this state of
mind. We propose that people’s conﬁdence is undermined DEMO they contrast their
limited knowledge about an event with their superior knowledge about another
event, or when they compare themselves with more knowledgeable individuals.
Moreover, we argue that this contrast between states of knowledge is the predomi-
nant source of ambiguity aversion. When evaluating an uncertain event in DEMO,
people attempt to assess its likelihood—as a good Bayesian would—paying rela-
tively little attention to second-order characteristics such as vagueness or weight of
DEMO However, when people compare two events about which they have di¤er-
DEMO levels of knowledge, the contrast makes the less familiar bet less DEMO or the
more familiar bet more attractive. The main implication of this account, called the
comparative ignorance hypothesis, is that ambiguity aversion will DEMO present when
subjects evaluate clear and vague prospects jointly, but it DEMO greatly diminish or
disappear when they evaluate each prospect in isolation.
A review of the experimental literature reveals a remarkable fact: virtually every
test of ambiguity aversion to date has employed a within-subjects design in which
DEMO compared clear and vague bets, rather than a between-subjects design in
DEMO di¤erent respondents evaluated each bet. This literature, therefore, does not
answer the question of whether ambiguity aversion exists in the absence of a DEMO
between clear and vague bets. In the following series of studies we test the hypothesis
that ambiguity aversion holds in a comparative context (or a within-subjects design)
but that it is reduced or eliminated in DEMO noncomparative context (or a between-
subjects design).
Experiments
Study 1
DEMO following hypothetical problem was presented to 141 undergraduates at Stan-
ford University. It was included in a questionnaire consisting of several unrelated
items that DEMO completed for class credit.
780 Fox and Tversky
Table 31.1
Results of Study 1
Clear bet DEMO bet
Comparative $24.34 $14.85
(2.21) N (1.80)
Noncomparative $17.94 DEMO
(2.50) N (2.87)
¼ ¼
¼ ¼
67 N DEMO
35 N 39
Imagine that there is a bag on the table (Bag A) ﬁlled with exactly 50 red poker chips and 50
DEMO poker chips, and a second bag (Bag B) ﬁlled with DEMO poker chips that are red and black,
but you do not know their relative proportion. Suppose that you are o¤ered a ticket to DEMO game
that is to be played as follows: First, you are to guess a color (red or black). Next, without
looking, you are to draw a poker chip out of one of the DEMO If the color that you draw is the
same as the one you predicted, then you will win $100; otherwise you win nothing. DEMO is the
most that you would pay for a ticket to play such a game for each of the bags? ($0–$100)
Bag DEMO Bag B
50 red chips ? red chips
50 black chips ? black chips
100 total chips 100 total chips
The most that I DEMO be willing to pay for a ticket to Bag A (50 DEMO; 50 black) is:
The most that I would be willing to pay for a ticket to Bag B (? red; ? DEMO) is:
Approximately half the subjects performed the comparative task described DEMO;
the order in which the two bets were presented was counterbalanced. The remaining
subjects performed a noncomparative task: approximately half evaluated the clear
bet alone, and the remaining subjects evaluated the vague bet alone.
Mean willingness to pay for each bet is presented in table 31.1. As DEMO all subse-
quent tables, standard errors (in parentheses) and sample DEMO (N ) are listed below
the means. The data support our DEMO In the comparative condition, there is
strong evidence of ambiguity aversion: subjects were willing to pay on average $9.51
more for the clear DEMO than for the vague bet,the noncomparative condition, there is no DEMO of ambiguity aversion as subjectstð66Þ¼ 6:00, p < 0:001. DEMO, in
paid slightly less for the clear bet than for the DEMO bet, tð72Þ¼:12, n.s. This
interaction is signiﬁcant (z ¼ DEMO:42, p < 0:01).
Study 2
Our next study DEMO the comparative ignorance hypothesis with real money at
stake. Subjects were recruited via signs posted in the psychology building at Stanford
Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 781
Table 31.2
Results of Study 2
DEMO bet Vague bet
Comparative $9.74
(0.49)
Noncomparative $7.58
(0.62)
N
N
¼
¼
52
26
$8.53
(0.58)
$8.04
(0.43)DEMO
N
N
¼
¼
52
26
University, promising a chance to DEMO up to $20 for participation in a brief study.
We recruited 110 students, faculty, and sta¤; six subjects were excluded because of
inconsistent responses.
Subjects were run individually. Participants in the comparative condition priced
both DEMO clear bet and the vague bet. Half the subjects in the noncomparative condi-
tion priced the clear bet alone; the other half priced the vague bet alone. The clear
bet involved a draw from a bag DEMO one red ping-pong ball and one green
ping-pong ball. The vague bet involved a draw from a bag containing two ping-pong
balls, each of which could be either red or green. Subjects were ﬁrst asked to DEMO
the color of the ball to be drawn. Next, they were DEMO to make a series of choices
between receiving $20 if their guess is correct (and nothing otherwise) or receiving $X
for sure. Subjects DEMO their choices on a response sheet that listed the various sure
amounts ($X ) in descending order from $19.50 to $0.50 in steps of 50 cents. They
were informed that some participants would be selected at DEMO to play for real
money. For these subjects, one choice would DEMO selected at random, and the subjects
would either receive $X or DEMO the bet, depending on the preference they had indi-
cated. This DEMO is incentive-compatible because subjects can only make them-
selves worse o¤ by misrepresenting their preferences.
Cash equivalents were estimated by the midpoint between the DEMO amount of
money that was preferred to the uncertain bet, and DEMO highest amount of money for
which the bet was preferred. Mean cash equivalents are listed in table 31.2. The
procedural variations introduced in this DEMO (real bets, monetary incentive, indi-
vidual administration) did not a¤ect the pattern of results. In the comparative con-
dition, subjects priced the clear bet $1.21 higher on average than the vague bet,
tð51Þ¼ DEMO:70, p < 0:01. However, in the noncomparative condition, DEMO priced
the vague bet slightly above the clear bet, tð50Þ¼ :DEMO, n.s. Again, the interaction is
signiﬁcant (z ¼ 1:90, p < 0:05).
Two comments regarding the interpretation of studies DEMO and 2 are in order. First,
subjects in both the comparative and noncomparative conditions were clearly aware
of the fact that they did DEMO know the composition of the vague urn. Only in the
782 Fox and Tversky
Table 31.3
Ellsberg’s Three-Color Problem
10 balls 20 DEMO
Bet white red blue
f1 $50 0 0
g1 0 $50 0
f2 $50 0 $50
g2 0 $50 $50
Decision 1
Decision 2
DEMO task, however, did this fact inﬂuence their prices. Hence, ambiguity
DEMO seems to require a direct comparison between the clear and the vague bet;
an awareness of missing information is not su‰cient (cf. Frisch and Baron [1988]).
Second, it is noteworthy that in both studies 1 and 2, the comparative context
enhanced the attractiveness of the clear bet somewhat more than it diminished the
attractiveness of the vague bet. DEMO comparative ignorance hypothesis, however,
makes no prediction about the relative DEMO of these e¤ects.
Study 3
In addition to the two-color problem described above, Ellsberg [1961] introduced a
three-color problem, depicted in table 31.3. DEMO an urn that contains ten white
subjects are asked to choose betweenballs, and twenty balls that are red and blue in unknown proportion. In decision 1red 0 p a 32 . In decision 2 subjects are DEMO to choose betweenf1 , winning on white ¼ 1 ;or gf21, winning on, winning on
3 ap a1 ,or g2 , winning DEMO either red or blue ¼ 23 .As
suggested by Ellsberg, people DEMO favor f over g in decision 1, andover
p
either white DEMO blue 
3
g f
1 1 2 2
in decision 2, contrary to the independence axiom of expected utility theory.
From the standpoint of the comparative ignorance hypothesis, this problem di¤ers
from the two-color problem because here the description of the bets (especially f2)
involves both clear and vague probabilities. Consequently, we expect some ambiguity
aversion even in a noncomparative context in which each subject evaluates only
one bet. However, we expect a stronger e¤ect in a comparative context in which
each DEMO evaluates both the clear and vague bets. The present study tests these
predictions.
Subjects were 162 ﬁrst-year law students at Willamette University who completed
DEMO short questionnaire in a classroom setting. Three subjects who violated dominance
were excluded from the analysis. Subjects were informed that some people would be
DEMO at random to be paid on the basis of their choices. The instructions included
a
1
p
Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 783
Table 31.4
Results of Study 3
DEMO bet Vague bet
Comparative $55.60
(2.66)
Noncomparative $51.69
(2.94)
N
N
¼
¼
53
54
$44.92
(3.27)
$47.85
(3.65)DEMO
N
N
¼
¼
53
52
a brief description of an incentive-compatible payo¤ scheme (based on Becker,
DeGroot, and Marschak [1964]). DEMO were asked to state their minimum selling
price for the bets displayed in table 31.3. In the comparative condition, subjects
priced all four bets. In the noncomparative condition, approximately half the sub-
jects priced the two complementary clear bets ( f1 and g2 ), and the remaining subjects
priced the two complementary vague bets ( f2 and g1 ). The order of the bets was
counterbalanced.
Let cð f Þ be the DEMO price of bet f . As expected, most subjects in the DEMO
condition priced the clear bets above the vague bets. In particular, DEMO observed
cð f1Þ > cðg1Þ for 28 subjects, cð f1Þ¼ cðg1Þ DEMO 17 subjects, and cð f1Þ < cðg1Þ for 8
subjects, p < 0:01. Similarly, we observed cðg2Þ > cð f2Þ for 36 subjects, cðg2Þ¼ cð f2Þ
for 12 subjects, and cðg2Þ < cð DEMO for 5 subjects, p < 0:001. Moreover, the pattern
implied by ambiguity aversion (i.e., cð f1Þ bcðg1Þ and cð f2Þ acðg2Þ, where at least
one inequality is strict) was exhibited by 62 percent of the subjects.
In order to contrast the comparative and the noncomparative DEMO, we have
added for each subject the selling prices of the DEMO complementary clear bets (i.e.,
cð f1 Þþ cðg2Þ ) and DEMO selling prices of the two complementary vague bets (i.e.,
cðg1 DEMO cð f2Þ ). Obviously, for subjects in the noncomparative condition, DEMO can
compute only one such sum. These sums measure the attractiveness of betting on
either side of the clear and of the vague bets. DEMO means of these sums are presented
in table 31.4. The results conform to expectation. In the comparative condition,
subjects priced clear bets $10.68 DEMO on average than vague bets, tð52Þ¼ 6:23,
p < DEMO: 001. However, in the noncomparative condition, the di¤erence was only DEMO,
tð104Þ¼ 0: 82, n.s. This interaction is marginally signiﬁcant (DEMO ¼ 1:37, p < 0:10).
Inspection of the DEMO bets reveals that for the more probable bets, f2 and g2,DEMO
there was a strong preference for the clear over the vague in the comparative condi-
tion (cðg2
Þ¼
$33:75, cð f2
Þ¼
DEMO for the clear over the vague in the noncomparative condition
$31:67, cð f2
Þ¼
$24:66, tð52Þ¼ 5:85, p < 0:001) and a moderate pref-
ðcðg2
$26:71, tð104Þ¼ 2:05, p < 0:05). However, for the less probable bets,
Þ¼
f1 and g1 , we found no signiﬁcant di¤erences between selling DEMO for clear and
784 Fox and Tversky
vague bets in either the comparative condition (cðg1 Þ¼ $20:26, cð f1Þ¼ $21:85,
tð52Þ¼ 1: 05, n.s.) or the noncomparative condition (cðg1Þ¼ $21:13, cð f1Þ¼ $20:02,
tð104Þ¼ 0:43, n.s.). The aggregate pattern displayed in table 31.4, therefore, is driven
primarily by the more probable bets.
DEMO 4
In the preceding three studies, uncertainty was generated using a DEMO device (i.e.,
drawing a ball from an urn with a DEMO or an unknown composition). Our next
study tests the comparative ignorance hypothesis using natural events. Speciﬁcally,
we asked subjects to price hypothetical DEMO contingent on future temperature in a
familiar city (San Francisco) and an unfamiliar city with a similar climate (Istanbul).
Ambiguity aversion suggests that our subjects (who were living near San Francisco)
should prefer betting on San Francisco temperature, with which they were highly
familiar, DEMO betting on Istanbul temperature, with which they were not.
Subjects were DEMO how much they would be willing to pay to bet on each side of
a proposition that o¤ered a ﬁxed prize if the temperature DEMO a given city is above or
below a speciﬁed value. The exact wording was as follows.
Imagine that you have been o¤ered a ticket DEMO will pay you $100 if the afternoon high tem-
perature in [San Francisco/Istanbul] is at least 60 degrees Fahrenheit one week from today.
DEMO is the most you would be willing to pay for such a ticket?
The most I would be willing to pay is $
DEMO that you have been o¤ered a ticket that will pay you $100 if the afternoon high tem-
perature in [San Francisco/Istanbul] is less DEMO 60 degrees Fahrenheit one week from today.
What is the most you would be willing to pay for such a ticket?
The most DEMO would be willing to pay is $
In the noncomparative condition one group of subjects priced the above two bets
for San Francisco, and a second group of subjects priced the same two bets for
Istanbul. DEMO the comparative condition, subjects performed both tasks, pricing all
four bets. The order of the events (less than 60 degrees/at least 60 degrees) and of the
cities was counterbalanced. To minimize order e¤ects, DEMO subjects were asked before
answering the questions to consider their best guess of the afternoon high tempera-
ture in the city or cities on DEMO they were asked to bet.
Subjects were 189 pedestrians on the University of California at Berkeley cam-
pus who completed a ﬁve-minute survey (that included a few unrelated items) in
exchange for a California lottery ticket. Ten subjects who violated dominance were
excluded from the analysis. There were DEMO signiﬁcant order e¤ects. Let cðSF b 60Þ
denote willingness to pay for the prospect ‘‘Win $100 if the high temperature in San
Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 785
Table 31.5
Results of Study 4
DEMO Francisco bets Istanbul bets
Comparative $40.53 $24.69
(4.27) N (3.09)DEMO
Noncomparative $39.89 $38.37
(5.06) N (6.10)
¼ ¼
¼ DEMO
90 N 90
44 N 45
Francisco one week from today is at least 60 degrees,’’ etc. As in Study 3 we added
DEMO each subject his or her willingness to pay for both sides of complementary bets.
In particular, we computed cðSF b 60Þþ cðSF < 60Þ for the San Francisco bets
and cðIst b 60Þþ cðIst < 60Þ DEMO the Istanbul bets. Table 31.5 presents the means of
these sums. The results again support our hypothesis. In the comparative condition
subjects were willing DEMO pay on average $15.84 more to bet on familiar San Fran-
cisco temperature than on unfamiliar Istanbul temperature, tð89Þ¼ 5:05, p < DEMO:001.
However, in the noncomparative condition subjects were willing to pay DEMO average a
scant $1.52 more to bet on San Francisco than on Istanbul, tð87Þ¼ 0:19, n.s. This
interaction is signiﬁcant (z ¼ 1:68, p < 0:05).
The same pattern holds for the individual bets. In the comparative condition,
cðSF b 60Þ¼ $22:DEMO, and cðIst b 60Þ¼ $15:21, tð89Þ¼ 3:13, p < 0:01. Similarly,
cðSF < 60Þ¼ $17:79 and cðIst < 60Þ¼ $9:49, tð89Þ¼ 4:25, p < 0:001 In DEMO non-
comparative condition, however, cðSF b 60Þ¼ $21:95, and DEMO b 60Þ¼ $21:07,
tð87Þ¼ 0:17, n.s. Similarly, cðSF < 60Þ¼ $17:94, and cðIst < 60Þ¼ $17:29, tð87Þ¼
DEMO: 13, n.s. Thus, subjects in the comparative condition were willing DEMO pay sig-
niﬁcantly more for either side of the San Francisco proposition than they were will-
ing to pay for the corresponding sides of DEMO Istanbul proposition. However, no such
pattern is evident in the noncomparative DEMO Note that unlike the e¤ect
observed in studies 1 and 2, DEMO present e¤ect is produced by the reduction in the
attractiveness of the less familiar bet.
Study 5
We have interpreted the results of the DEMO studies in terms of comparative
ignorance. Alternatively, it might be argued DEMO these results can be explained at
least in part by the more general hypothesis that the di¤erence between cash equiv-
alents of prospects evaluated DEMO isolation will be enhanced by a direct comparison
between them. Such enhancement would apply whether or not the prospects in
question involve di¤erent sources DEMO uncertainty that vary with respect to familiarity
or ambiguity.
786 Fox and Tversky
Table 31.6
Results of Study 5
Bet A DEMO B
Comparative $25.77 $6.42
(3.68) N (1.84)
Noncomparative $23.07 DEMO
(3.42) N (1.27)
¼ ¼
¼ ¼
47 N DEMO
42 N 40
To test this hypothesis, we recruited 129 Stanford DEMO to answer a one-
page questionnaire. Subjects were asked to state their maximum willingness to pay
for hypothetical bets that o¤ered $100 if the DEMO high temperature in Palo Alto
(where Stanford is located) on a particular day falls in a speciﬁed range. The two bets
were described DEMO follows:
[A] Imagine that you have been o¤ered a ticket that will pay you $100 if the afternoon high
temperature two weeks from DEMO in Palo Alto is more than 70 degrees Fahrenheit. What is
the most you would be willing to pay for such a ticket?
DEMO most I would be willing to pay is $
[B] Imagine that you have been o¤ered a ticket that will pay you $100 if DEMO afternoon high
temperature three weeks from today in Palo Alto is less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit. What is
the most you would be willing DEMO pay for such a ticket?
The most I would be willing to pay is $
Subjects in the comparative condition evaluated both [A] DEMO [B] (the order was
counterbalanced). Approximately half the subjects in DEMO noncomparative condition
evaluated [A] alone, and the remaining subjects evaluated [B] DEMO
Because Palo Alto temperature in the springtime (when the study was DEMO)
is more likely to be above 70 degrees than below 65 degrees, we expected bet [A] to
be generally more attractive than bet [B]. The enhancement hypothesis, therefore,
implies that the di¤erence between cðAÞ and cðBÞ will be greater in the comparative
than in the noncomparative DEMO The mean values ofsented in table 31.6. The results do not support the enhancement hypothesis. In thiscðAÞ and cðBÞ are pre-
study, cðAÞ was greater than cðBÞ. However, the di¤erence cðAÞ cðBÞ was roughly
the same in the two conditions (interaction z ¼ 0: 32, n.s). In fact, there were no sig-
niﬁcant di¤erences between the comparative and noncomparative conditions in the
cash equivalents of either prospect (tð87Þ¼ 0:53 for A; n.s.; tð85Þ¼ 0:48 for B, n.s.).
This pattern contrasts sharply with the results of the preceding studies (see especially
table 31.5), that reveal substantially larger di¤erences between stated prices in DEMO
comparative than in the noncomparative conditions. We conclude that the compar-
Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 787
ative ignorance e¤ect observed in studies DEMO cannot be explained by the more gen-
eral enhancement hypothesis.
Study 6
The comparative ignorance hypothesis attributes ambiguity aversion to the contrast
between states DEMO knowledge. In the ﬁrst four studies we provided subjects with a
comparison between more and less familiar events. In our ﬁnal study we provided
DEMO with a comparison between themselves and more knowledgeable individuals.
Subjects were undergraduates at San Jose State University. The following hypo-
thetical problem was included DEMO a questionnaire containing several unrelated items
that subjects completed for class credit.
Kaufman Broad Homes (KBH) is one of the largest home sellers DEMO America. Their stock is
traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
[1] Do you think that KBH stock will close higher or lower Monday DEMO it did yesterday?
(Circle one)
0 KBH will close DEMO
0 KBH will close the same or lower.
[2] Which would you prefer? (Circle one)
0 receive $50 for sure
0 receive DEMO if my prediction about KBH is correct.
Subjects in the noncomparative condition (N ¼ 31) answered the above questions.
Subjects in the comparative DEMO (N ¼ 32) answered the same questions with
the following additional item inserted between questions 1 and 2.
We are presenting this survey DEMO undergraduates at San Jose State University, graduate stu-
dents in economics DEMO Stanford University, and to professional stock analysts.
Subjects were then asked DEMO rate their knowledge of the item on a scale from 0 to 10.
The present account implies that the suggested comparison to more knowledgeable
DEMO (i.e., graduate students in economics and professional stock analysts) will
DEMO the subjects’ sense of competence and consequently decrease their will-
ingness to bet on their own judgment. The results support this prediction. The
uncertain DEMO of winning $150 was preferred to the sure payment of $50 by 68
percent of subjects in the noncomparative condition and by only 41 DEMO of sub-
jects in the comparative condition, w2ð1Þ¼ 4:66, p < 0:05.
We replicated this e¤ect using a di¤erent subject population (undergraduates at
Stanford University enrolled in an introductory psychology course) and a di¤erent
788 Fox and Tversky
uncertain event. The following hypothetical problem was included DEMO a questionnaire
that contained several unrelated items that was completed for class credit.
[1] Do you think that the inﬂation rate in Holland over DEMO past 12 months is greater than or
less than 3.0 percent? (Circle one)
0 less than 3.0 percent
0 at least 3.0 DEMO
[2] Which of the following do your prefer? (Circle one)
0 receive $50 for sure
0 receive $150 if I am right DEMO the inﬂation rate.
As before, subjects in the noncomparative condition (N ¼ 39) evaluated the items
above, and subjects in the comparative DEMO (N ¼ 37) answered the same ques-
tions with the following additional item inserted between questions [1] and [2].
We are presenting this DEMO to undergraduates in Psych 1, graduate students in economics,
and DEMO professional business forecasters.
Subjects were then asked to rate their knowledge of the item on a scale from 0 to 10.
The uncertain prospect DEMO preferred to the sure payment by 38 percent of subjects
in the noncomparative condition and by only 11 percent of subjects in the compara-
DEMO condition, w2ð1Þ¼ 7:74, p < 0:01. Thus, the DEMO to bet on a vague event is
reduced by a suggested comparison to more knowledgeable individuals. Note that
the results of this study, obtained by the mere mention of a more expert population,
should be DEMO from the ﬁnding of Curley, Yates, and Abrams [1986] that
ambiguity aversion is enhanced when people anticipate that their decision will be
evaluated DEMO their peers.
Market Experiments
Before we turn to the implications of the present ﬁndings, the question arises whether
the e¤ects of ambiguity and comparative ignorance persist when decision-makers are
given an opportunity to make multiple decisions DEMO a market setting that provides
incentives and immediate feedback. A positive answer to this question has been pro-
vided by Sarin and Weber [1993], who compared subjects’ bids for clear and for
vague bets in several DEMO markets using sealed bid and double oral auctions.
In one series of studies involving graduate students of business administration from
Cologne University, the clear bet paid 100 Deutsche Marks (DM) if a yellow ball
was DEMO from an opaque urn containing ten yellow and ten white tennis balls, and
nothing otherwise. The vague bet was deﬁned similarly except that the subject did
Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 789
not know the proportion of yellow DEMO white balls, which was sampled from a uni-
form distribution. In DEMO studies, subjects traded both clear and vague bets in each
market. DEMO other studies, subjects traded clear bets in some markets and vague DEMO in
other markets. Thus, all subjects evaluated both clear and vague DEMO The compara-
tive ignorance hypothesis predicts that (1) the clear bet will be generally priced above
the vague bet, and (2) the discrepancy between the prices will be more pronounced
when clear and vague DEMO are traded jointly than when they are traded separately.
The data support both predictions. The di¤erence between the average market price
of the clear DEMO the vague bets across both auction types (for the last trading DEMO
in experiments 11 through 14) was more than DM 20 in DEMO joint markets and less
than DM 5 in the separate markets. This e¤ect was especially pronounced in the
double oral auctions where there was DEMO di¤erence between the market price of the
clear and the vague bets in the separate markets, and a substantial di¤erence (DM
18.5) in the joint markets. Evidently, market setting is not su‰cient to eliminate the
e¤ects of ambiguity and comparative ignorance.
Discussion
The preceding studies provide support DEMO the comparative ignorance hypothesis,
according to which ambiguity aversion is driven primarily by a comparison between
events or between individuals, and it is greatly reduced or eliminated in the absence
of such a comparison. We DEMO to add that the distinction between comparative
and noncomparative assessment refers to the state of mind of the decision-maker,
which we have attempted DEMO control through the experimental context. Of course,
there is no guarantee that subjects in the comparative conditions actually performed
the suggested comparison, or that subjects in the noncomparative conditions did not
independently generate a comparison. DEMO Ellsberg’s two-color problem, for example,
people who are presented with DEMO vague urn alone may spontaneously invoke a
comparison to a 50-50 urn, especially if they have previously encountered such a
problem. However, the DEMO results observed in the preceding studies suggest
that the experimental manipulation was successful in inducing subjects to make a
comparison in one condition but DEMO in the other.
The comparative ignorance hypothesis suggests that when people price an uncer-
tain prospect in isolation (e.g., receive $100 if Istanbul DEMO one week from
today exceeds 60 degrees), they pay little or no attention to the quality or precision of
their assessment of the DEMO of the event in question. However, when people are
asked to DEMO this prospect in the context of another prospect (e.g., receive $100 if
790 Fox and Tversky
San Francisco temperature one week from today exceeds DEMO degrees), they become
sensitive to the contrast in their knowledge regarding the two events, and as a result
price the less familiar or vaguer prospect lower than the more familiar or clearer
prospect (see, DEMO, Heath and Tversky [1991] and Keppe and Weber [forthcoming]).
Similarly, an uncertain prospect becomes less attractive when people are made aware
that DEMO same prospect will also be evaluated by more knowledgeable individuals.
Thus, DEMO aversion represents a reluctance to act on inferior knowledge, and
this DEMO is brought to mind only through a comparison with superior knowl-
edge about other domains or of other people.
Theoretical Implications
The comparative ignorance DEMO violates the principle of procedure invariance,
according to which strategically equivalent elicitation procedures should produce the
same preference order (cf. Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic [1988]). In the preceding
studies, the vague and clear bets were equally valued when priced in isolation, yet the
latter was strictly preferred to the former when the two bets were priced jointly. DEMO
other instances of preference reversal (see, e.g., Tversky and Thaler DEMO), a partic-
ular attribute (in this case knowledge of probabilities) looms larger in comparative
than in noncomparative evaluation. However, the most noteworthy ﬁnding is not the
illustration of a new variety of preference reversal, but rather the conclusion that the
Ellsberg phenomenon is an inherently comparative DEMO
This discrepancy between comparative and noncomparative evaluation raises the
question of which preference should be considered more rational. On the one hand, it
could be argued that the comparative judgment reﬂects people’s ‘‘true’’ preferences
and in DEMO absence of comparison, people fail to properly discount for their igno-
DEMO On the other hand, it might the argued that the noncomparative DEMO
are more rational, and that subjects are merely intimidated by a DEMO with
superior knowledge. As we see it, there is no compelling DEMO to favor one in-
terpretation over the other. The rational theory of choice (or more speciﬁcally, the
principle of procedure invariance) requires that the comparative and noncomparative
evaluations will coincide, but the theory does not provide a method for reconciling
inconsistent preferences.
What are the implications of DEMO present ﬁndings for the analysis of individual
decision-making? To answer this DEMO, it is important to distinguish two phe-
nomena that have emerged DEMO the descriptive study of decision under uncertainty:
source preference and source sensitivity [Tversky and Fox 1995; Tversky and Wak-
ker forthcoming]. Source preference refers to the observation that choices between
prospects depend not only on DEMO degree of uncertainty but also on the source of
Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 791
uncertainty (e.g., San Francisco temperature DEMO Istanbul temperature). Source
preference is demonstrated by showing that a person prefers to bet on a proposi-
tion drawn from one source than DEMO a proposition drawn from another source, and
also prefers to bet DEMO the ﬁrst proposition than against the second (e.g.,
cðSF b DEMO > cðIst b 60Þ, and cðSF < 60Þ > cðIst < DEMO; see Study 4 above). We
have interpreted ambiguity aversion as DEMO special case of source preference, in which
risk is preferred to DEMO, as in Ellsberg’s examples.1
Source sensitivity refers to nonadditivity of decision DEMO In particular, the
descriptive analysis of decision under risk indicates that DEMO impact of a given event
on the value of a prospect is greater when it turns an impossibility into a possibility
or a possibility DEMO a certainty than when it merely makes an uncertain event more
or less probable [Kahneman and Tversky 1979]. For example, increasing the proba-
bility of winning a ﬁxed prize from 0 to 0.1 or 0.9 to DEMO has a greater impact than
increasing the probability from, say, 0.3 to 0.4 Tversky and Fox [1995] have further
shown that this pattern, called bounded subadditivity, is more pronounced for
uncertainty than for chance (DEMO, for vague than for clear probabilities). In other
words, people are less sensitive to uncertainty to chance, regardless of whether or not
they prefer uncertainty than to chance. Thus, source preference and source sensitivity
are logically independent.
The present experiments show that source preference, unlike source sensitivity, is
an inherently comparative phenomenon, and it does not arise DEMO an independent
evaluation of uncertain prospects. This suggests that models based on decision
weights or nonadditive probabilities (e.g., Quiggin [1982]; Gilboa [1987]; DEMO
[1989]; Tversky and Wakker [forthcoming]) can accommodate source sensitivity,
but they do not provide a satisfactory account of source preference because they DEMO
not distinguish between comparative and noncomparative evaluation. One might
attempt to model the comparative ignorance e¤ect using a contingent weighting
approach [Tversky, Sattath, DEMO Slovic 1988] in which the weight associated with an
event depends on whether it is evaluated in a comparative or noncomparative con-
text. The DEMO di‰culties with this, or any other attempt to model the comparative
DEMO e¤ect, is that it requires prior speciﬁcation of the decision-maker’s sense DEMO
his or her competence regarding the event in question and the salience of alternative
states of knowledge. Although these variables can be experimentally manipulated, as
we did in the preceding studies, they cannot easily be measured and incorporated
into a formal model.
Despite the di‰culties in modeling comparative DEMO, it could have signiﬁ-
cant economic implications. For example, an individual who is knowledgeable about
the computer industry but not about the energy DEMO may exhibit ambiguity
792 Fox and Tversky
aversion in choosing whether to invest in a DEMO startup or an oil exploration,
but not when each investment is evaluated independently. Furthermore, the present
account suggests that the order in which the two investments are considered could
a¤ect their valuation. In particular, the less familiar investment might be valued
more when it is considered before DEMO than after the more familiar investment.2 In
light of the present analysis, recent attempts to model ambiguity aversion in ﬁnancial
markets (e.g., Dow, and Werlang [1991] and Epstein and Wang [1994]) may be
incomplete DEMO they do not distinguish between comparative and noncompara-
tive evaluation. In particular, such models are likely to overestimate the degree of
ambiguity aversion in settings in which uncertain prospects are evaluated in isolation
(cf. Sarin and Weber [1993]). The role of comparative ignorance in economic trans-
actions DEMO further empirical investigation.
Notes
This work was supported by grants SES-9109535 and SBR-9408684 from the National Science Founda-
tion. It has beneﬁted from discussion DEMO Martin Weber.
1. Some authors have interpreted as ambiguity aversion the ﬁnding that people prefer to bet on a more
reliable rather than on DEMO less reliable estimate of a given probability p (e.g., Einhorn and Hogarth [1985]).
This demonstration, however, does not establish source preference DEMO it does not also consider the
complements of the events in question. Hence, the above ﬁnding can be attributed to the fact that the
subjective probability associated with the less reliable estimate of p is less DEMO (i.e., closer to 0.5) than
that associated with the more DEMO estimate of p (see Heath and Tversky [1991, Table 4]). More gener-
ally, the oft-cited conclusion that people are ambiguity-averse for high probabilities and ambiguity-seeking
for small probabilities is questionable because the demonstrations on DEMO it is based do not properly
control for variations in subjective probability.
2. Unpublished data, collected by Fox and Weber, showed that an DEMO prospect was priced lower
when evaluated after a familiar prospect than when evaluated before that prospect.
References
Becker, Gordon, Morris DeGroot, and Jacob Marschak, ‘‘Measuring Utility by a Single-Response
Sequential Method,’’ Behavioral Science, DEMO (1964), 226–232.
Camerer, Colin, and Martin Weber, ‘‘Recent Developments in Modeling Preferences: Uncertainty and
Ambiguity,’’ Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, V (1992), 325–370.
Cohen, John, and Mark Hansel, ‘‘Preferences for Di¤erent Combinations of Chance and Skill in Gam-
bling,’’ Nature, CLXXXIII (1959), 841–843.
Curley, Shawn P., J. Frank Yates, DEMO Richard A. Abrams, ‘‘Psychological Sources of Ambiguity Avoid-
ance,’’ Organizational DEMO and Human Decision Processes, XXXVIII (1986), 230–256.
Dow, James, and Sergio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang, ‘‘Uncertainty Aversion, Risk Aversion, and the Opti-
mal Choice of Portfolio,’’ Econometrica, LX (1991), DEMO
Einhorn, Hillel J., and Robyn M. Hogarth, ‘‘Ambiguity and Uncertainty DEMO Probabilistic Inference,’’ Psy-
chological Review, XCIII (1985), 433–461.
Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance 793
Ellsberg, Daniel, ‘‘Risk, Ambiguity and the Savage Axioms,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, LXXV
(1961), DEMO
Epstein, Larry G., and Tan Wang, ‘‘Intertemporal Asset Pricing under DEMO Uncertainty,’’ Econo-
metrica, LXII (1994), 283–322.
Fellner, William, ‘‘Distortion of Subjective Probabilities as a Reaction to Uncertainty,’’ Quarterly Journal
DEMO Economics, LXXV (1961), 670–689.
Frisch, Deborah, and Jonathan Baron, ‘‘Ambiguity and Rationality,’’ Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, I (1988), 149–157.
Gilboa, Itzhak, ‘‘Expected Utility with Purely Subjective Non-additive Probabilities,DEMO Journal of Mathe-
matical Economics, XVI (1987), 65–88.
Heath, DEMO, and Amos Tversky, ‘‘Preference and Belief: Ambiguity and Competence in DEMO under
Uncertainty,’’ Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, IV (1991), 5–28.
Howell, William, ‘‘Uncertainty from Internal and External Sources: A Clear Case of Overconﬁdence,’’
Journal of Experimental Psychology, LXXXI (1971), DEMO
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, ‘‘Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,’’ Econo-
metrica, XLVII (1979), 263–291.
Keppe, Hans-Ju¨ rgen, and Martin Weber, ‘‘Judged Knowledge and Ambiguity Aversion,’’ DEMO and
Decision, forthcoming.
Keynes, John Maynard, A Treatise on Probability (London: Macmillan, 1921).
Knight, Frank H., Risk, Uncertainty, DEMO Proﬁt (Boston: Houghton Mi¿in, 1921).
Quiggin, John, ‘‘A DEMO of Anticipated Utility,’’ Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, III
(1982), 323–343.
Rai¤a, Howard, ‘‘Risk Ambiguity and the Savage Axioms: Comment.’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics,
LXXV (1961), 690–694.
Sarin, DEMO K., and Martin Weber, ‘‘E¤ects of Ambiguity in Market Experiments,’’ Theory and Deci-
sion, XXXIX (1993), 602–615.
Savage, Leonard J., The Foundation of Statistics (New York: John Wiley & Sons, DEMO).
Schmeidler, David, ‘‘Subjective Probability and Expected Utility without Additivity,’’ Econometrica, LVII
(1989), 571–587.
Tversky, Amos and Craig R. Fox, ‘‘Weighing Risk and Uncertainty,’’ Psychological Review, CXLIX
(1995), 269–283.
Tversky, Amos, Shmuel Sattath, and Paul Slovic, ‘‘Contingent Weighting in DEMO and Choice,’’ Psy-
chological Review, XCV (1988), 371–384.
Tversky, Amos, and Richard Thaler, ‘‘Preference Reversals,’’ Journal of Economic Perspectives, IV (1990),
201–211.
Tversky, Amos, and Peter Wakker, DEMO Attitudes and Decision Weights,’’ Econometrica, forthcoming.

32 A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty
Craig R. Fox and DEMO Tversky
Introduction
It seems obvious that the decisions to invest in the stock market, undergo a medical
treatment, or settle out of court DEMO on the strength of people’s beliefs that the
market will go up, that the treatment will be successful, or that the court will DEMO
in their favor. It is less obvious how to elicit and measure such beliefs. The classical
theory of decision under uncertainty derives beliefs about DEMO likelihood of uncertain
events from people’s choices between prospects whose consequences are contingent
on these events. This approach, ﬁrst advanced by Ramsey (1931),1 gives rise to an
elegant axiomatic theory that yields simultaneous measurement DEMO utility and sub-
jective probability, thereby bypassing the thorny problem of DEMO to interpret direct
expressions of belief.
From a psychological (descriptive) perspective, the classical theory can be ques-
tioned on several counts. First, DEMO does not correspond to the common intuition that
belief precedes preference. People typically choose to bet $50 on team A rather than
team B DEMO they believe that A is more likely to win; they do DEMO infer this belief
from the observation that the former bet is more attractive than the latter. Second
and perhaps more important, the classical theory does not consider probability
judgments that could be useful in explaining and DEMO decisions under uncer-
tainty. Third, and most important, the empirical evidence indicates that the major
assumptions of the classical theory that underlie the DEMO of belief from prefer-
ence are not descriptively valid.
This chapter develops a belief-based account in which probability judgments are
used to predict decisions DEMO uncertainty. We ﬁrst review recent work on proba-
bility judgment and on the weighting function of prospect theory that serves as the
basis for DEMO present development. We next formulate a two-stage model of decision
under uncertainty, and explore its testable implications. This model is tested against
the classical theory in two experiments. Finally, we address some empirical, meth-
odological, theoretical, and practical issues raised by the present development.
Theoretical Background
There is an extensive body of research indicating that people’s choices between
risky DEMO depart systematically from expected utility theory (for a review, see
Camerer 1995). Many of these violations can be explained by a nonlinear DEMO
796 Fox and Tversky
Figure 32.1
Weighting function for decision under risk, wð pÞ¼ expðbðln pÞaÞ, with
a
¼
0:7,
b
¼
1 (Prelec 1998).
function (see ﬁgure 32.1) that overweights low probabilities and underweights mod-
erate to high probabilities (Kahneman and Tversky 1979, Tversky and Kahneman
1992, Prelec 1998). Such a function accounts DEMO violations of the independence
axiom (the common consequence e¤ect) and the substitution axiom (the common
ratio e¤ect), ﬁrst demonstrated by Allais (DEMO). It also accommodates the commonly
observed fourfold pattern of risk attitudes: risk seeking for gains and risk aversion
for losses of low probability, together with risk aversion for gains and risk seeking
for losses of high probability (Tversky and Kahneman 1992). Finally, it is consistent
DEMO the observed pattern of fanning in and fanning out in the probability triangle
(Camerer and Ho 1994, Wu and Gonzalez 1998a).
Although DEMO empirical studies have employed risky prospects, where proba-
bilities are assumed DEMO be known, virtually all real-world decisions (with the notable
exception of games of chance) involve uncertain prospects (e.g., investments, litiga-
tion, insurance) where this assumption does not hold. In order to model such deci-
sions we need to extend the key features of the risky DEMO function to the
domain of uncertainty. Tversky and Wakker (1995) established such a generaliza-
tion, within the framework of cumulative prospect theory, DEMO assuming that an event
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 797
has more impact on DEMO when it turns an impossibility into a possibility or a pos-
sibility into a certainty than when it merely makes a possibility more or DEMO likely.
Formally, let W denote the weighting function deﬁned on subsets DEMO a sample
space S, where WðfÞ¼ 0 and WðSÞ¼ 1. W DEMO bounded subadditivity if:
(i) WðAÞ bWðA U BÞ WðBÞ, DEMO
(ii) WðSÞ WðS AÞ bWðA U BÞ WðBÞ,
provided A and B are disjoint and WðBÞ and WðA U BÞ are bounded DEMO from 0
and 1, respectively.2 Condition (i) generalizes the notion DEMO increasing the proba-
bility of winning a prize from 0 to p has more impact than increasing the probability
of winning from q to DEMO þ p, provided q þ p < 1. This condition reﬂects DEMO possibility
e¤ect. Condition (ii) generalizes the notion that decreasing the probability of winning
from 1 to 1  p has more impact than DEMO the probability of winning from
q þ p to q, provided DEMO > 0. This condition reﬂects the certainty e¤ect. Note that risk
can be viewed as a special case of uncertainty where probability is deﬁned DEMO a
standard chance device so that the probabilities of outcomes are known.
Tversky and Fox (1995) tested bounded subadditivity in a series of DEMO using
both risky prospects and uncertain prospects whose outcomes were contingent on
upcoming sporting events, future temperature in various cities, and changes in DEMO
Dow Jones index. The data satisﬁed bounded subadditivity for both risk and uncer-
tainty. Furthermore, this e¤ect was more pronounced for uncertainty than for risk,
indicating greater departures from expected utility theory when probabilities are DEMO
known. The results of these experiments are consistent with a two-stage model in
which the decision maker ﬁrst assesses the probability P of an DEMO event A,
then transforms this value using the risky weighting function,3 w.
In the present chapter we elaborate this two-stage model and DEMO its con-
sequences. To simplify matters, we conﬁne the present treatment DEMO simple prospects
of the form ðx; AÞ that pay $x if DEMO target event A obtains, and nothing otherwise.4
We assume that the DEMO value V of such prospects is given by
Vðx; AÞ¼ vðxÞWðAÞ¼ DEMO; ð1Þ
where v is the value function for monetary gains, w is the risky weighting function,
and PðAÞ is the judged probability DEMO A. The key feature of this model, which dis-
tinguishes it DEMO other theories of decision under uncertainty, is the inclusion of
probability DEMO Note that if WðAÞ can be expressed as w½PðAÞ, as implied DEMO
equation (1), we can predict decisions under uncertainty from decisions DEMO risk
798 Fox and Tversky
and judgments of probability. We further assume that DEMO choices satisfy pros-
pect theory5 (Kahneman and Tversky 1979, Tversky and Kahneman 1992) and
that judged probabilities satisfy support theory (Tversky and DEMO 1994, Rotten-
streich and Tversky 1997), a psychological model of DEMO of belief to which we now
turn.
There is ample evidence that people’s intuitive probability judgments are often
inconsistent with the laws of chance. DEMO particular, di¤erent descriptions of the same
event often give rise to DEMO di¤erent responses (e.g., Fischho¤ et al. 1978),
and the DEMO probability of the union of disjoint events is generally smaller than
the sum of judged probabilities of these events (e.g., Teigen 1974). DEMO accommodate
such ﬁndings, support theory assumes that (subjective) probability is DEMO attached to
events, as in other models, but rather to descriptions of events, called hypotheses;
hence, two descriptions of the same DEMO may be assigned di¤erent probabilities.
Support theory assumes that each hypothesis A has a nonnegative support value sðAÞ
corresponding to the strength of the DEMO for this hypothesis. The judged proba-
bility PðA; BÞ, that hypothesis A rather than B holds, assuming that one and only
one of them obtains, is given by:
PðA; BÞ¼ sðAÞ ;
sðAÞþ sðBÞ ð2Þ
where
sðAÞ asðA1 4A2Þ asðA1 Þþ sðA2Þ; ð3Þ
providedIn this theory, judged probability is interpreted as the support of the focal hy-ðA1; A2Þ is recognized as a partition of A.
pothesis A relative to the alternative hypothesis B (equation 2). The theory further
assumes that (i) unpacking a description of an event A (e.g., homicide) into disjoint
components A1 4A2 (e.g., homicide by an acquaintance, A1 , or homicide by a
stranger, A2 ) generally increases its support, and (ii) the sum of the support of the
component hypotheses is at least as large as the support of their disjunction (equa-
tion (3)). The rationale for these assumptions is that (i) unpacking may remind peo-
ple of possibilities that they have overlooked, DEMO (ii) the separate evaluation of
hypotheses tends to increase their salience and enhance their support.
partitions, however, equations (2) and (3) implyEquation (2) implies binary complementaritysubadditivity: PðA; BÞþ : the judged probabilityPðB; AÞ¼ 1. For ﬁner
of A is less than or equal to the sum of judged probabilities of its disjoint compo-
nents. These DEMO have been conﬁrmed in several studies reviewed by Tversky
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 799
and Koehler (1994). For example, experienced physicians were provided with medi-
cal data regarding the condition of a particular patient who was admitted to the
emergency ward, and asked to evaluate the probabilities of four mutually exclusive
and exhaustive DEMO The judged probability of a prognosis (e.g., that the
patient will survive the hospitalization) against its complement, evaluated by di¤er-
ent groups DEMO physicians, summed to one, in accord with binary complementarity.
However, DEMO sum of the judged probabilities for the four prognoses was substan-
tially greater than one, in accord with subadditivity (Redelmeier et al. 1995)DEMO
Implications
Perhaps the most striking contrast between the two-stage model and the classical
theory (i.e., expected utility theory with risk aversion) concerns the e¤ect of parti-
tioning. Suppose ðA1; ... ; AnÞ is a partition of A, and Cðx; AÞ is the certainty equiv-
alent of DEMO prospect that pays $x if A occurs, and nothing otherwise. The DEMO
theory implies the following partition inequality:
Cðx; A1 Þþ  DEMO Cðx; AnÞ aCðx; AÞ;
ð4Þ
prospect, Cðx;
target DEMO, P
for all real x and AHS . That is, the certainty equivalent of an uncertain prospect
exceeds the sum of certainty equivalents DEMO the subprospects (evaluated indepen-
dently) obtained by partitioning the target event. In the context of expected utility
theory, the partition inequality is implied by risk aversion.6 However, if people fol-
low the two-stage model, DEMO in equation (1), and if the judged probabilities are
subadditive, as implied by support theory, then the partition inequality is not
expected to hold. Such failures are especially likely when the curvature of the DEMO
function (between 0 and $x) is not very pronounced and the target event (A) is par-
titioned into many components. Thus, the partition inequality provides a simple
method for testing the classical theory and DEMO it to the two-stage model.
To test the two-stage model, we DEMO the certainty equivalent of an uncertain
AÞ , from two independent responses: the judged probability of the
follows readily from equation (1) thatðAÞ, and the certainty equivalent of the risky prospect, Cðx; PðAÞÞ.It
if
PðAÞ¼
p;
then Cðx; AÞ¼ Cðx; pÞ:
ð5Þ
This DEMO provides a method for testing the two-stage model that does not
require an estimation of the value function. The following two studies test the DEMO
tion inequality and compare the predictions derived from equation (5) to those of the
classical theory.
800 Fox and Tversky
Experiments
Study 1: Basketball Playo¤s
Method
participants. The participants in this study were 50 students at Northwestern
University (46 men, 4 women; median age ¼ 20) who responded to ﬂiers calling for
fans of professional basketball to take part in a study of DEMO making. Subjects
indicated that they had watched several games of the National Basketball Associa-
tion (NBA) during the regular season (median ¼ 25). They received $10 for com-
pleting a one-hour session and were DEMO that some participants would be selected at
random to play one of their choices for real money and that they could win up to
DEMO
procedure. The experiment was run using a computer. All subjects were run on the
same day, during the beginning of the NBA quarterﬁnals. Subjects were given
detailed instructions and an opportunity for supervised practice. The study DEMO
of four tasks.
The ﬁrst task was designed to estimate subjects’ certainty equivalents (abbreviated
C ) for risky prospects. These prospects were described in terms of a random draw of
a single poker chip from an DEMO containing 100 chips numbered consecutively from 1
to 100. Nineteen prospects of the form ($160; p) were constructed where p varied
from 0.05 to 0.95 in multiples of .05. For example, the ($160;:25) prospect would pay
$160 if the number of the poker chip is between 1 and 25, and nothing otherwise.
Each trial involved a series of choices between a prospect and an ascending series
of sure payments (e.g., receive $40 for sure). The order of the 19 risky prospects was
randomized separately for each subject. Certainty equivalents were inferred from
DEMO rounds of such choices. The ﬁrst round consisted of nine choices between the
prospect and sure payments that were spaced evenly from $0 to DEMO After com-
pleting the ﬁrst round of choices, a new set DEMO nine sure payments was presented,
spanning the narrower range between the lowest payment that the subject had
accepted and the highest payment that DEMO subject had rejected (excluding the end-
points). The program enforced DEMO and internal consistency within a given
trial. For example, the program DEMO not allow a respondent to prefer $30 over a
prospect and also prefer the same prospect over $40. The program allowed subjects
to backtrack DEMO they felt they had made a mistake in the previous round of choices.
For each risky prospect, C was determined by linear interpolation between the
lowest value accepted and the highest value rejected in the second DEMO of choices,
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 801
Table 32.1
Values of DEMO, b, and c Used in the Spinner Games of Study 1 and Median Value of Subjects’ Responses (x)
Fixed prospect Variable prospect
Probability
outcome
0.25
$a
0.25
$b
0.50
$0
0.25
$c
0.25
$x
(Median)
1) 50 100 25 131
2) 30 60 10 DEMO
3) 20 90 40 70
4) 10 110 35 82
5) 85 55 120 31
6) 50 45 75 29
7) 95 25 70 42
8) 115 15 80 43
0.50
$0
yielding a margin of error of G$1.00. Note that although our analysis is based DEMO C,
the data consisted of a series of choices between a given prospect and sure outcomes.
Thus, respondents were not asked to generate C; it was inferred from their choices.
The second task was designed to estimate certainty equivalents for uncertain
prospects. Each prospect o¤ered to pay DEMO if a particular team, division, or con-
ference would win the 1995 NBA championship. At the time of the study, eight
teams remained (Chicago, Indiana, Orlando, New York, Los Angeles, Phoenix, San
Antonio, Houston) representing four divisions (Central, Atlantic, Paciﬁc, Midwest-
DEMO) and two conferences (Eastern, Western). Fourteen prospects of the DEMO
($160; A ) were constructed that o¤ered to pay $160 if a particular team, division, or
conference were to win the 1995 DEMO championship. For example, a typical pros-
pect would pay $160 if DEMO Chicago Bulls win the championship. The elicitation
method was identical to that of the ﬁrst task.
The third task was designed to provide an DEMO test of risk aversion that
makes no assumptions regarding the additivity of subjective probabilities or decision
weights. Subjects were presented with a ‘‘ﬁxed’’ prospect DEMO the form ($a; 0:25; $b;
0:25; $0; 0: 50) and a ‘‘variable’’ prospect of the form ($c; 0:25; $x; 0:25; $0; 0:50).
These DEMO were displayed as ‘‘spinner games’’ that would pay the designated
amount depending on the particular region on which the spinner would land. In each
DEMO, the values of a, b, and c were ﬁxed, while the value of x varied. The initial
value of x was set DEMO to b. Eight such pairs of prospects were constructed (see
table DEMO), presented in an order that was randomized separately for each subject.
On each trial, participants were asked to indicate their preference between the pros-
pects. When a subject preferred the ﬁxed prospect, the value of x increased by $16;
802 Fox and Tversky
when a subject preferred the variable prospect, the value of x decreased by $16.
When a subject’s preference switched from DEMO ﬁxed prospect to the variable prospect
or from variable to ﬁxed, DEMO change in x reversed direction and the increment was
cut in half (i.e., from $16 to $8, from $8 to $4, and DEMO forth) until the increment was
$1. This process was repeated until DEMO subject indicated that the two prospects were
equally attractive. The program did not allow subjects to violate dominance.
The fourth task required participants to DEMO the probability of each target
event (i.e., that a particular team, division, or conference would win the NBA play-
o¤s). The DEMO events were presented in an order that was randomized separately
for each subject. On each trial, subjects could respond by either typing a number
between 0 and 100, or by clicking and dragging a ‘‘slider’’ on a visual scale.
Subjects performed two additional tasks. They judged the probability DEMO one
team rather than another would win the NBA championship assuming that two
particular teams reach the ﬁnals, and they rated the ‘‘strength’’ of each team. These
data are discussed in Fox (1998).
Results
judged probability. The median judged probability for each target event is listed
in DEMO 32.2. The ﬁgure shows that the sum of these probabilities is close to one for
the two conferences, nearly one and a half for the four divisions, and more than two
for the eight teams. This pattern is consistent with the predictions of support theory
that
XP b DEMO b XP ;
teams
divisions
conferences
ð6Þ
and the sum over DEMO two conferences equals one. Moreover, in every case the sum of
DEMO probabilities for the individual teams is greater than the probability of the
respective division, and the sum of the probabilities for the divisions is greater than
the probability of the respective conference, consistent with support theory.7
The same pattern holds in the analysis of individual subjects. The median DEMO of
probabilities for the eight teams was 2.40, the median sum DEMO the four divisions was
1.44, and the median sum of probabilities DEMO the two conferences was 1.00. More-
over, 41 of 50 respondents DEMO equation (6) with strict inequalities, and 49 of 50
respondents DEMO probabilities for the eight teams that summed to more than one
( p < 0: 001 by sign test in both cases).
certainty equivalents. Figure 32.3 presents the median normalized C for each
prospect; that is, the median certainty equivalent divided by $160. The choice data in
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 803
Figure 32.2
Median judged DEMO for all target events in study 1.
ﬁgure 32.3 echo the judgment data in ﬁgure 32.2. In every case, the sum of Cs for the
individual teams is greater than C for the respective division, and the sum of Csfor
the divisions is greater than C for the DEMO conference.8 Furthermore, the sum
of Cs for the 8 teams exceeds DEMO; that is, the sum of the normalized Cs is greater
than one.
Again, the same pattern holds in the analysis of individual subjects. The median
sum of normalized Cs for the 8 teams was 2.08, the median sum for the 4 divisions
was 1.38, and the median sum for the 2 conferences was 0.93. Moreover, the pattern
implied by the partition inequality (equation (4)):
XC a XC a DEMO ;
conferences
teams
divisions
804 Fox and Tversky
Figure 32.3
Median normalized certainty equivalents for all DEMO in study 1.
was satisﬁed by only one respondent, whereas 41 DEMO the 50 respondents satisﬁed the
reverse pattern that is consistent with the two-stage model (p < 0:001):
XC > XC > DEMO :
teams
divisions
conferences
Furthermore, only 5 subjects produced Cs for the 8 teams that summed to less than
$160, whereas 44 subjects produced Cs that summed to more than $160 (p < 0:001).
This pattern violates the partition inequality, with A ¼ S.
comparing models. We next compare the ﬁt of the classical theory to that DEMO the
two-stage model. For each event A, we observed the median DEMO probability
PðAÞ, then searched for the median C of the risky DEMO ðx; pÞ where p
¼
PðAÞ.
For example, the median judged probability that the San Antonio Spurs (SAS)
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 805
would win the NBA DEMO was 0.40, and the median value of Cð$160;:40),
DEMO $59. According to equation (5), therefore, Cð$160; SAS) should equal $59; the
actual value was $60. In cases where the PðAÞ is not a multiple of 5 percent, we
determined the certainty equivalent by linear interpolation.
To ﬁt the classical theory, let C be the certainty equivalent of the prospect
A
ð$160; A). Setting uð0Þ¼ 0, the classical theory yields uðCAÞ¼ uð160ÞPðAÞ, where u
is concave and DEMO is an additive (subjective) probability measure. Hence, PðAÞ¼
uðCAÞ=uð160Þ . DEMO studies (e.g., Tversky 1967, Tversky and Kahneman 1992)
have DEMO that the value function for small to moderate gains can be approxi-
mated by a power function of the form uðxÞ¼ xa, a > 0. To estimate the exponent,
we used data from the ‘‘spinner DEMO described above. If a subject is indi¤erent
between the ﬁxed prospect ð$a; 0:25; $b; 0:25; $0; 0:5Þ and the variable prospect
ð$c; 0:25; $x; 0:25; $0; 0:5Þ then assuming a power utility function, aa þba ¼ ca þxa.
Because a, b, and c are given and the value of DEMO is determined by the subject, one
can solve for a > DEMO The exponent for each subject was estimated using the median
value of a over the eight problems listed in table 32.1. This analysis showed DEMO
participants were generally risk-averse: 32 subjects exhibited a < 1:00 (risk aversion);
14 exhibited a ¼ 1: 00 (risk neutrality); and 4 exhibited a > 1:00 (risk seeking)
( p < 0: 001 by sign test). The median response to each of the eight trials yielded
a ¼ 0:80. The ﬁnding DEMO the majority of subjects exhibited risk aversion in this
task shows that the violations of the partition inequality described earlier cannot be
explained by DEMO convex utility function.
Subjective probabilities were estimated as follows. For each elementary target
event A, we computed ðCA=160Þa and divided these values by their sum to ensure
additivity. Figure 32.4 displays the median C for each DEMO the eight teams along with
the predictions of the two-stage model and the standard theory (assuming a ¼ 0:80,
based on the median response to each item). It is evident from the ﬁgure DEMO the
two-stage model ﬁts the data (mean absolute error ¼ $5.83) substantially better than
does the standard theory (mean absolute error ¼ $23.71).9 The same pattern is evi-
dent in the responses of individual DEMO The two-stage model ﬁts the data better
than does the classical theory for 45 of the 50 subjects (p < 0:001).
Note that the predictions of the two-stage model were derived from two indepen-
DEMO tasks; no parameters were estimated from the ﬁtted data. In contrast, the pre-
dictions of the classical theory were derived by estimating a DEMO for each of the
ﬁtted data points; these estimates were constrained DEMO by the requirement that the
subjective probabilities sum to unity. In light of the substantial advantage conferred
to the classical theory in this comparison, its inferior ﬁt provides compelling evidence
against the additivity of subjective probabilities DEMO are inferred from choice.
806 Fox and Tversky
Figure 32.4
Median certainty equivalents of bets for DEMO eight teams, and predictions of two-stage model and classical
theory (with a ¼ 0:80).
studies of unpacking. We have attributed the DEMO of the partition inequality
to the subadditivity of judged probability that is implied by support theory. A
more radical departure from the classical theory DEMO suggested by the unpacking
principle of support theory, according to which DEMO the description of an
event into an explicit disjunction of constituent events generally increases its judged
probability. Under the two-stage model, therefore, unpacking DEMO description of an
event is also expected to increase the attractiveness of a prospect whose outcome
depends on this event. Furthermore, if this e¤ect is su‰ciently pronounced, it can
give rise to violations of monotonicity where Cðx; AÞ < Cðx; A1 4  4AnÞ even
when A1 DEMO  4An is a proper subset of A.
To explore this possibility, we presented a brief questionnaire to 58 business stu-
dents at Northwestern University shortly before the beginning of the 1996 NBA
playo¤s. The survey DEMO administered in a classroom setting. Prior to the survey,
respondents were presented with the records of all NBA teams listed by their division
DEMO conference. Subjects were randomly assigned to one of two groups. Subjects in
the ﬁrst group (N ¼ 28) stated their certainty equivalent for DEMO prospects: a pros-
pect that o¤ered $75 if the winner of DEMO 1996 playo¤s belongs to the Eastern con-
ference, and a prospect DEMO o¤ered $75 if one of the four leading Western conference
teams (DEMO, Utah, San Antonio, or Los Angeles) would win the 1996 playo¤s.
Subjects in the second group (N ¼ 30) stated their DEMO equivalent for the two
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 807
Table 32.2
Median Judged DEMO and Certainty Equivalent for the Two Conferences and Respective Leading
Teams for the 1996 NBA Playo¤s
Judged
probability
Certainty
equivalents
Eastern Conference 0.78 $50
DEMO Orl4 Ind4 NY 0.90 $60
Western Conference 0.18 $15
Seattle 4 Utah4Sa4 LA 0.20 $15
parallel prospects: a prospect that o¤ered $75 if the winner of the 1996 playo¤s
belongs to the Western conference, and a prospect that o¤ered $75 if one of the four
leading Eastern conference DEMO (Chicago, Orlando, Indiana, or New York) would
win the DEMO playo¤s.10 Each group also assessed the probability of the two target
events that deﬁned the prospects evaluated by the other group. For example, the
group that evaluated the prospect that would pay if an Eastern team DEMO win
assessed the probability that a Western team will win, and DEMO versa.
Table 32.2 presents the median judged probability and certainty equivalent for the
two conferences, and the four leading teams in each conference. Although these
teams had the best record in their respective conferences, some strong teams (e.g., the
defending champion Houston Rockets) were not included in the list. Monotonicity
requires, therefore, that the judged probability and certainty DEMO assigned to
each conference should exceed those assigned to their leading teams. The unpacking
principle, on the other hand, suggests that a nontransparent DEMO (e.g., a
between-subjects test) may produce violations of monotonicity. Indeed, the data of
table 32.2 do not satisfy the monotonicity requirement. There DEMO essentially no dif-
ference in either judged probability or the certainty equivalent between the Western
conference and its four leading teams, whereas the judged probability and the cer-
tainty equivalent assigned to the Eastern conference are DEMO smaller than
those assigned to its four leading teams (p < DEMO:05, by a t-test in each case).11
Violations of monotonicity (or dominance) induced by unpacking have been
observed by several investigators. Johnson et al. (1993), for example, reported that
subjects were willing DEMO pay more for a health insurance policy that covers hospital-
ization for all diseases and accidents than for a policy that covers hospitalization for
DEMO reason. Wu and Gonzalez (1998b) found similar e¤ects in the evaluation of
prospects contingent on diverse events such as the winner of the DEMO Series, the
outcomes of the 1996 elections, and future temperature in Boston. Although the
e¤ects observed in the above studies are not very DEMO, they indicate that
808 Fox and Tversky
unpacking can give rise to nonmonotonicity in judgments DEMO probability as well as
the pricing of uncertain prospects.
Study 2: DEMO Indicators
The above study, like previous tests of bounded subadditivity, relied on subjects’
beliefs regarding the occurrence of various real-world events. In the DEMO study,
subjects were given an opportunity to learn the probability of target events by
observing changes in inﬂation and interest rates in a DEMO economy. This design
allows us to test both the classical theory and the two-stage model in a controlled
environment in which all subjects are DEMO to identical information. It also allows
us to compare subjects’ judged probabilities to the actual probabilities of the target
events.
Method
participants. Subjects were DEMO (N ¼ 92) enrolled in an introductory class in
judgment and decision making at Stanford University. Students were asked to
download a computer DEMO from a world wide web page, run the program, and
e-mail their output to a class account. At the time of the study, the students had been
exposed to discussions of probability theory and judgmental DEMO, but they were
unfamiliar with decision theory. We received 86 complete DEMO Four subjects
were dropped because they apparently did not understand the instructions. The 82
remaining subjects included 49 men and 33 women (median age ¼ 21.5). Most of
them completed the study in less than DEMO hour (median ¼ 47 minutes).
procedure. Subjects were ﬁrst given DEMO opportunity to learn the movement of two
indicators (inﬂation and interest DEMO) in a simulated economy. Each indicator could
move either up or DEMO relative to the previous quarter. In this economy both indi-
cators went up 60 percent of the time, inﬂation went up and interest went down 25
percent of the time, inﬂation went down and interest went up 10 percent of the time,
and both indicators went down DEMO percent of the time. The order of these events was
randomized over 60 quarters of learning, separately for each subject. Participants
were informed that the probabilities of the target events were the same for each
quarter.
DEMO learning procedure was divided into two parts. During the ﬁrst 20 quarters,
subjects merely clicked the mouse to advance to the next quarter DEMO observed
what happened. During the remaining 40 quarters, subjects also played DEMO game in
which they predicted the direction that each indicator would move in the subsequent
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 809
quarter, and they made (hypothetical) bets on their predictions. After each predic-
tion, subjects were given feedback and the computer adjusted their ‘‘bank balance’’
according to whether DEMO had predicted correctly.
The second task was designed to estimate C for risky prospects. We constructed
eleven prospects of the form ð$1600; pÞ that o¤ered to pay $1600 with probability
ð0:01; 0:05; 0:DEMO; 0:15; 0:25; 0:50; 0:75; 0:DEMO; 0:90; 0:95; 0:99Þ. The elicitation procedure
was DEMO to that used in the basketball study, except that all dollar DEMO were
multiplied by 10. Using this method we could estimate C for $1600 prospects within
G$10.
The third task was designed to estimate C DEMO uncertain prospects. Subjects were
ﬁrst given an opportunity to review up to three times a 35-second ‘‘ﬁlm’’ that very
brieﬂy displayed changes in the DEMO indicators over each of the 60 quarters that sub-
jects had previously observed. They were then presented with prospects that o¤ered
$1600 contingent on DEMO movement of the indicators in the next (i.e., 61st) quarter.
DEMO ﬁrst four trials involved movement of a single indicator (e.g., win $1600 if inﬂa-
tion up). The next four trials involved movement DEMO both indicators (e.g., win $1600
if inﬂation up and interest down). The ﬁnal four trials involved negations of the pre-
vious four DEMO (e.g., win $1600 unless inﬂation up and interest down). The order of
prospects within each set of trials was randomized separately for DEMO subject. C was
elicited through a series of choices between uncertain prospects and sure payments,
as in the previous task.
The fourth task DEMO designed to obtain an independent test of risk aversion. The
procedure was essentially identical to the third task of the basketball study, except
that the dollar amounts were multiplied by 10, and the initial value of x for the
variable prospect was set so that the expected value DEMO the two spinner games was
equal (see table 32.7).
In DEMO ﬁfth task, subjects judged the probability of each target event. Subjects DEMO
ﬁrst given an opportunity to review again up to three times a ‘‘ﬁlm’’ of the 60 quar-
ters they had previously observed. The ﬁrst DEMO trials involved the movement of a
single economic indicator (e.g., what is the probability that the following happens:
inﬂation up) or combination of indicators (e.g., inﬂation up and interest down). The
last DEMO trials involved complementary events (e.g., what is the probability that the
following does not happen: inﬂation up and interest down). The order of these events
within each set was randomized separately for each subject, and responses were eli-
cited as in the basketball study.
Subjects performed DEMO additional task involving the acceptability of mixed pros-
pects. The results of this task will not be discussed here.
810 Fox and Tversky
Figure 32.5
Median judged probability as a function DEMO actual probabilities for all target events in study 2.
Results
judged probabilities. Figure 32.5 plots for each target event the median judged
probability against DEMO actual probability. The ﬁgure shows that participants had
learned the probabilities of the target events with impressive accuracy (r ¼ 0:995).
The mean absolute di¤erence (MAD) between median judged probability and actual
probability DEMO 0.048. The median correlation for individual subjects was 0.89
(median MAD DEMO 0.14). Subjects also exhibited a tendency to overestimate low
probabilities and underestimate high probabilities. Of the 82 subjects, 60 both over-
estimated, DEMO average, events with true probabilities less than 50 percent, and
underestimated, on average, events with true probabilities greater than 50 percent
( DEMO < 0:001 by sign test).
The median judged probability for each target event is listed in table 32.3. Each
cell displays the DEMO that the two indicators move as speciﬁed. The median
judged probabilities of the complementary events are given in brackets. For example,
the median DEMO probability that both indicators go up is 0.60, the probability that
DEMO is not the case that both indicators go down is 0.85, DEMO the probability that inﬂa-
tion goes up is 0.75.
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 811
Table 32.3
Median Judged DEMO of All Target Events in Study 2 (Data for Complementary Events DEMO Given in
Brackets)
Interest
Inﬂation Up Down
Up 0.60 0.25
[0.40] [0.71] 0.75
Down 0.15 0.10 0.25
[0.79] [0.85]
0.68 0.30
Table 32.4a
DEMO of Binary Complementarity for Median Judged Probabilities in Study 2
PPi
1.00 0.00PPi D ¼ 1
0.98 0.02
1.00 0.00
0.96
0.94
0.95
Partition
DEMO, D
U, D
UU, UU
UD, UD 0.04
DU, DEMO 0.06
DD, DD 0.05
Mean 0.97
0.03
Note:
median judged DEMO for this partition, and the third columnThe ﬁrst column presents binary DEMO of S, the second column ðPPi Þ presents the sum of
DEMO and one. ðDÞ presents the di¤erence between this
Recall that support theory predicts that the judged probability of an event and its
complement will DEMO to unity (binary complementarity), but in all other cases the
DEMO of the judged probabilities of disjoint events will be greater than or equal to the
judged probability of their union (subadditivity). Table 32.4a presents six tests of
binary complementarity, based on the median response to each item. Each row
presents a binary partition of the sample space, along with the sum of median judged
probabilities for this partition. The DEMO labeled D lists the di¤erence between this
sum and one. For each event, the ﬁrst letter corresponds to inﬂation (U for up, D for
down) and the second to interest. For example, UD is DEMO event ‘‘inﬂation up and
interest down,’’ U is the event ‘‘inﬂation up,’’ and D is the event ‘‘interest down.’’
Complements are denoted DEMO a bar. For example, UU is the event ‘‘it is not DEMO case
that interest up and inﬂation up.’’ As expected, the sum DEMO median judged proba-
bilities for complementary events is close to unity (DEMO ¼ 0.97). However, these
values were systematically smaller than one: the median value of the mean of these
812 Fox and Tversky
Table 32.4b
Tests of Subadditivity for Median Judged DEMO in Study 2
Event Partition
U UU, UD
D DU, DD
UUU, DU
DUD, DD
UU UD, DU, DD
UD UU, DU, DD
DU UU, UD, DD
DD UU, UD, DU
Note: The ﬁrst column presents a target event, the second column DEMO a partition of that event, the
Þ presents the sum of DEMO judged probabilities over the partition, the fourth column
ference between these DEMO values.ðthird columnPÞ presents the median judged probability of the target event, DEMO the ﬁfth columnðPPi ðDÞ presents the dif-
tests for each subject is 0.98; 48 subjects exhibited a mean less than 1.00, 10 exhibited
DEMO mean equal to 1.00, and 24 exhibited a mean greater than DEMO (p < 0:01).
Table 32.4b presents eight tests of DEMO based on median judged proba-
bilities. Each row presents the sum of judged probabilities of disjoint events, the
judged probability of their union, DEMO the di¤erence between them (D). For example,
the ﬁrst DEMO shows that P(inﬂation Up and interest Up) þP(inﬂation Up DEMO interest
Down) ¼ 0.85, and P(inﬂation Up) ¼ 0:DEMO, so that D ¼ 0: 10. As expected, table 32.4b
DEMO that in every case the sum of judged probabilities of disjoint events is greater
than or equal to the judged probability of their union,DEMO and the mean di¤erence
between them is 0.10. Furthermore, 60 of DEMO subjects exhibited this pattern (i.e.,
mean D > 0) on average (p < 0:001 by sign test).
certainty equivalents. The median normalized CA for each target event A is pre-
sented in DEMO 32.5. The corresponding medians for the complementary events are
given in brackets. For example, the median normalized C for the event that both
indicators go up is 0.43 and the median for the complementary event is DEMO It can
be shown that whenevertwo-stage model implies the partition inequality for binary partitions of the samplewðpÞþ wð1  pÞ a 1 and the DEMO function is concave, the
spacetion inequality for ﬁner partitions of13 (i.e., Cðx; AÞþ Cðx; S AÞ aS Cor for binary partitions of other events.ðx; SÞ¼ x), but it does not imply the parti-
Table 32.6a presents six tests of the partition inequality for binary partitions DEMO the
sample space. Analogous to table 32.4a, each row presents a DEMO partition of S
along with the sum of median normalized Cs for this partition and the di¤erence (D)
0.85 0.75 0.10PPi P D ¼
0.25 0.25 0.00
0.75 0.68 0.07
0.35 0.30 0.05
0.50 0.40 DEMO
0.85 0.71 0.14
0.95 0.79 0.16
1.00 0.85 0.15
Mean 0.69 0.59 0.10
PPi

P
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 813
Table 32.5
Median Normalized DEMO Equivalents of All Target Events in Study 2 (Data for Complementary
DEMO Are Given in Brackets)
Interest
Inﬂation Up Down
Up 0.43 0.22
[0.29] [0.48] 0.62
Down 0.13 0.10 0.18
[0.59] [0.76]
0.49 0.28
Table DEMO
Tests of the Partition Inequality for Binary Partitions of S in Study 2
Partition D ¼ PCi 1
0.79PC 0.21 
0.78 0.22
0.73 DEMO
0.70 0.30
0.72 0.28
0.86 0.14
Mean 0.76 0.24
Note:
between this sum and one.normalized certainty equivalents for this partition, and the third columnThe ﬁrst column presents a partition of S, the second column ðPCi Þ
i
U, D
U, D
UU, UU
UD, UD
DEMO, DU
DD, DD
presents the sum of median
ðDÞ presents the di¤erence
Table 32.6b
Tests of the Partition Inequality in Study 2 for DEMO Subsets of S
Event Partition
U UU, UD
D DU, DD
UUU, DU
DUD, DD
UU UD, DU, DD
UD UU, DU, DD
DU UU, UD, DD
DD UU, UD, DU
0.65 0.62 0.03PCi C D ¼
0.23 0.18 0.05
0.56 0.49 0.07
DEMO 0.28 0.04
0.45 0.29 0.16
0.66 0.48 0.18
0.75 0.59 0.16
0.78 0.76 0.02
Mean 0.55 0.46 0.09
PCi

C
Note: The ﬁrst column presents a target event, the second column presents a partition of that event, the
Þ presents the sum of median normalized certainty equivalents over the partition, the
third columnfourth columnðPðCCÞ i presents the median normalized certainty equivalent of the target event, and the ﬁfth
column ðDÞ presents the di¤erence between these two values.
814 Fox and Tversky
Table 32.7
Values of a, b, and DEMO Used in Spinner Games of Study 2, and Median Value of DEMO Responses
Fixed prospect Variable prospect
Probability
outcome
0.25
$a
0.25
$b
0.50
$0
0.25
$c
0.25
$x
(median)
1) 500 1000 250 DEMO
2) 500 700 250 990
3) 200 1200 400 985
4) 200 800 400 600
5) 650 550 800 400
6) 650 350 800 210
7) 1100 100 750 360
8) 1100 250 DEMO 520
ðxÞ
0.50
$0
between this sum and one. As predicted by both the classical theory and the present
account, the partition inequality holds for all comparisons listed in table 32.6a (mean
D ¼0: 24)DEMO It also holds on average for 68 of 82 subjects (p < 0:001).
Table 32.6b presents eight additional tests of the partition inequality based on
proper subsets of S. Analogous to table 32.4b, each entry presents the sum of median
normalized Cs of disjoint events, the normalized C of their union, and the di¤erence
between them. Table 32.6b shows that the partition inequality fails in all cases (mean
D ¼ 0:09).14 Furthermore, 51 of 82 subjects exhibited this pattern on average (i.e.,
D > 0, p < 0:05 by DEMO test).
The preceding results can be summarized as follows. For binary partitions of the
sample space S, judged probabilities (nearly) satisfy binary complementarity (table
32.4a), and certainty equivalents satisfy the partition inequality (DEMO 32.6a). This
pattern is consistent with both the classical theory and the present account. For ﬁner
partitions, however, the data yield subadditivity DEMO judged probabilities (table 32.4b)
and reversal of the partition inequality DEMO certainty equivalents (table 32.6b). This
pattern is consistent with the DEMO model but not with the classical theory.
comparing models. We next compare the ﬁt of the classical theory to that of the
two-stage model DEMO the same method as in the previous study. To ﬁt the classical
theory, the exponent a of the utility function was estimated from the spinner games
and the exponent for each subject was estimated using the DEMO value of a derived
from that subject’s responses to the eight problems listed in table 32.7. Subjects were
generally risk-averse: 48 subjects exhibited a < 1: 00 (risk aversion); 32 exhibited
a ¼ 1: 00 (risk neutrality); and 2 exhibited a > 1:00 (DEMO seeking) (p < 0:001). Ap-
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 815
plying the same analysis DEMO the median response to each of the eight trials yields
a ¼ 0:80.
According to the classical theory with a power utility function, CAa ¼ 1600aPðAÞ.
Recall that in this study subjects learned probabilities by DEMO the frequencies of
the four elementary events (e.g., inﬂation up and interest up). For each elementary
target event A, we computed ðCA=1600Þa , and divided these values by their sum to
ensure additivity. The DEMO probabilities of all other events were derived from
these estimates, assuming DEMO
The two-stage model was estimated using equation (5) as in the previous study.
The data show that this model ﬁts the median certainty DEMO (mean absolute
error ¼ $69) better than the classical theory (DEMO absolute error ¼ $128).15 The
same holds within the data of individual subjects. Using individual estimates of the
parameters, the two-stage model ﬁts the data better than the standard theory for 50
of the 82 DEMO (p < 0:05Þ:
Discussion
The two preceding studies indicate DEMO to a reasonable ﬁrst approximation, the
certainty equivalents of uncertain prospects DEMO be predicted from independent
judgments of probability and certainty equivalents for risky prospects, without esti-
mating any parameters from the ﬁtted data. Moreover, DEMO model can account for
the observed violations of the partition inequality. We conclude this chapter with a
review of related studies, a comment regarding response bias, a discussion of the
problem of source preference, and DEMO closing thoughts concerning practical impli-
cations of the two-stage model.
Previous Studies
In the basketball study reported above, the event space has a hierarchical structure
(conferences, divisions, teams). In the economic indicators study, DEMO event space
has a product structure (inﬂation up/down  interest DEMO/down). Previous tests of
bounded subadditivity employed a dimensional structure in which a numerical vari-
able (e.g., the closing price per share DEMO Microsoft stock two weeks in the future) was
partitioned into intervals (e.g., less than $88, $88 to $94, more than $94). Subjects
priced prospects contingent on these events and assessed their probabilities.
The DEMO of these studies, summarized in table 32.8, are consistent with the
present account. First, consider probability judgments. The column labeled (A,
DEMO A) presents the median sum of judged probabilities for binary partitions DEMO S,
816 Fox and Tversky
Table 32.8
Summary of Previous Studies
Certainty
Judged DEMO equivalents
Sources of
uncertainty ðA; S AÞðA1; .. . ; AnÞ %V
a. NBA fans 27 Playo¤ game 0.99 1.40 1.40 93Study/Population DEMO PC
SF temperature 0.98 1.47 1.27 77
b. NFL fans 40 Super Bowl 1.01 1.48 1.31 78
Dow-Jones 0.99 1.25 1.16 65
c. Stanford DEMO 45 SF temperature 1.03 2.16 1.98 88
Beijing temperature 1.01 1.88 1.75 82
d. Options traders 32 Microsoft 1.00 1.40 1.53 89
(San Francisco) General Electric 0.96 1.43 1.50 89
e. Options traders 28 IBM 1.00 1.27 1.47 82
(Chicago) Gannett Co. 0.99 1.20 1.13 64
Median DEMO 1.42 1.44 82
Note: The ﬁrst three columns identity the subject DEMO, sample sizes, and sources of uncertainty.
Studies a, b, and c are reported in Tversky and Fox (1995) and are based DEMO a sixfold partition. Studies d,
and e are reported in Fox et al. (1996), and are based on a fourfold partition. The next two columns pres-
ðent the median sum of judged probabilities for DEMO binary partitionA1; .. . ; AnÞ of ðA; S AÞ and for n-fold partitions
alents over an n-fold partition ofS. The next column, labeledS. The ﬁnal column, labelled %PC , presents the median sum of normalized certainty equiv-V, presents the percentage of subjects who
violated the partition inequality. A few table entries are based on smaller samples than indicated DEMO
of missing data.
and the column labeled (A1; ... ; An ) presents the median sum of judged probabilities
for ﬁner partitions of DEMO The results conform to support theory: sums for binary
partitions of DEMO are close to one, whereas sums for n-fold partitions are consistently
DEMO than one. Next, consider certainty equivalents. The column labeled
presents the DEMO sum of normalized certainty equivalents for the ﬁnest partitionPC
of S in each study, and the column labeled %V presents the corresponding percent-
age of subjects who violated the partition inequality. In accord with the present
DEMO, the majority of subjects in every study violated the partition inequality, and
the sum of certainty equivalents was often substantially greater than the DEMO This
pattern holds for a wide range of sources, with and DEMO monetary incentives, and
for both naive and expert subjects. Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that sub-
additivity of judged probability is a major DEMO of violations of the partition
inequality.
The studies of Fox et al. (1996) are particularly interesting in this respect.
Participants were professional options DEMO who priced prospects contingent on
the closing price of various stocks. Unlike typical subjects, the options traders
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 817
priced risky prospects by DEMO expected value, yielding vðxÞ¼ x and wðpÞ¼ p.
Like most other DEMO, however, their judged probabilities were subadditive
(i.e., PðA1 Þ þ  þ PðAnÞ > PðAÞ). Under these circumstances, the two-stage model
predicts
Cðx; A1 Þþ  þ Cðx; An Þ¼ PðA1Þx þ DEMO þ PðAnÞx > PðAÞx ¼ Cðx; AÞ;
whereas the classical DEMO requires equality throughout. The data for the options
traders, summarized in DEMO 32.8, conﬁrms the prediction of the two-stage model.
Response Bias
We DEMO attributed the subadditivity of judged probabilities and of decision weights
to basic psychological principles advanced in support theory and prospect theory.
Alternatively, one might be tempted to account for these ﬁndings by a bias toward
the DEMO of the response scale. This bias could be induced by anchoring on the
midpoint of the scale, or by a symmetric error component that is bounded by the
endpoints of the response scale. Although such response DEMO may contribute to sub-
additivity in some studies, it cannot provide DEMO satisfactory account of this phenome-
non. First, there is compelling evidence DEMO bounded subadditivity in simple choices
between uncertain prospects (see e.g., Tversky and Kahneman 1992, tables 32.1 and
32.2; Wu and Gonzalez 1996) that cannot be explained as a response bias.16 Second,
response bias DEMO account for the observation that unpacking the description of a
target event can increase the attractiveness of the corresponding prospect, nor can it
account for the resulting nonmonotonicities described above. Third, a symmetric bias
toward the midpoint of the response scale cannot explain the observation that both
cash DEMO and decision weights for complementary prospects generally sum to
less than one. Finally, it should be noted that the signiﬁcance of subadditivity to
the prediction of judgment and choice is not a¤ected by whether it is DEMO
as a feature of the evaluation process, as a response bias, or as a combination of the
two.
Source Preference
There is evidence DEMO people’s willingness to bet on an uncertain event depends not
only on the degree of uncertainty but also on its source. We next review DEMO phe-
nomenon and discuss its relation to the belief-based account.
A person exhibits source preference if he or she prefers to bet on a DEMO
drawn from one source rather than on a proposition drawn from another source, and
also prefers to bet against the ﬁrst proposition rather than against the second. Source
818 Fox and Tversky
preference was ﬁrst illustrated by Ellsberg (1961) DEMO the following example. Con-
sider an urn containing 50 red and 50 black balls, and a second urn containing 100
red and black balls in an unknown proportion. Suppose you are o¤ered a cash prize
if DEMO correctly guess the color of a ball drawn blindly from one of the urns. Ellsberg
argued that most people would rather bet on a DEMO ball from the ﬁrst urn than on a
red ball from the second, and they also would rather bet on a black ball from the ﬁrst
urn than on a black ball from the second. This DEMO has been observed in several
studies (see Camerer and Weber 1992 DEMO a review). The preference to bet on clear or
known probabilities rather than vague or unknown probabilities has been called
ambiguity aversion.
More DEMO research has shown that although people exhibit ambiguity aversion
in situations of complete ignorance (e.g., Ellsberg’s urn), they often prefer betting
on DEMO vague beliefs than on matched chance events. Indeed, the evidence is DEMO
sistent with a more general account, called the competence hypothesis: people prefer
to bet on their vague beliefs in situations in which they DEMO particularly competent
or knowledgeable, and they prefer to bet on chance DEMO they do not (Heath and
Tversky 1991). For example, subjects who were knowledgeable about football but
not about politics preferred to bet DEMO the outcome of professional football games
than on matched chance events, DEMO they preferred to bet on chance than on the
results of a national election. Analogously, subjects who were knowledgeable about
politics but not about football preferred to bet on the results of an election than on
DEMO chance events, but they preferred to bet on chance than on DEMO
The present studies provide some evidence for source preference that is consistent
with the competence hypothesis. Recall that subjects in study 1 were recruited DEMO
their interest in professional basketball. Indeed, these subjects preferred betting on
DEMO to betting on matched chance events: the median certainty equivalent for
DEMO Eastern Conference ($79) and the Western Conference ($74) were both greater
than the median certainty equivalent for the 50-percent chance prospect ($69). In
contrast, subjects in study 2 did not have special expertise regarding the simulated
economy. Indeed, these subjects generally preferred betting on chance to betting on
the economic indicators. For example, the median certainty equivalent for both
inﬂation and interest going up ($690) was the same DEMO the median certainty equiva-
lent for the 50-percent chance prospect, but DEMO median certainty equivalent for the
complementary event ($470) was considerably lower.
It is evident that source preference cannot be explained by the present DEMO,
though it can be accommodated by a more general belief-based account. For exam-
ple, we can generalize equation (1) by letting WðAÞ¼ F½PðAÞ so that the transfor-
mation F of judged probability depends on DEMO source of uncertainty. One convenient
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 819
parameterization may be deﬁned DEMO WðAÞ¼ðw½PðAÞÞy , where y > 0 is inversely
related to the attractiveness of the source.18 These generalizations no longer satisfy
equation (5), but they maintain the decomposition of W into two components: P,
which reﬂects a person’s belief in the likelihood of the target event; and F (or wy),
which reﬂects a person’s preference to bet DEMO that belief.
Practical Implications
The two-stage model may have important implications for the management sciences
and related ﬁelds. First, the unpacking principle implies that the particular descrip-
tions of events on which outcomes depend may a¤ect DEMO person’s willingness to act.
Hence, the attractiveness of an opportunity such DEMO investment might be increased
by unpacking the ways in which the investment could be proﬁtable; willingness to
take protective action such as the purchase of insurance might be increased by
unpacking the ways in which a DEMO mishap might occur.
Second, violations of the partition inequality suggest that DEMO are willing to pay
more for a prospect when components are evaluated separately; thus, they are willing
to pay a premium, on average, for speciﬁcity. When such decisions are aggregated
over time or across individuals within an organization, this pattern can lead to cer-
tain losses. To illustrate, the ﬁrst author ran a classroom exercise in which MBA
students were divided into six ‘‘ﬁrms’’ of eight students each, and each student was
asked to decide their ﬁrm’s maximum willingness to pay for an DEMO that
would yield $100,000 depending on future movement of indicators in the U.S econ-
omy. The state space was partitioned into eight events (one for each student) so that
each ﬁrm’s portfolio of investments resulted in a certain return of exactly $100,000.
Nevertheless, the six ﬁrms reported willingness-to-pay for the eight investments that
summed to between $107,000 DEMO $210,000.
Concluding Remarks
We have provided evidence that decision weights under uncertainty can be predicted
from judged probabilities of events and risky decision DEMO To the extent that
the two-stage model reﬂects the psychological process underlying decision under
uncertainty, this model suggests two independent sources of departure from the
classical theory: a belief-based source (subadditivity of judged probability) and a
preference-based source (nonlinear weighting of chance events). While the develop-
ment of e¤ective prescriptions for correcting such bias awaits future investigation,
DEMO decomposition of the weighting function o¤ers a new approach to the modeling
820 Fox and Tversky
of decision under uncertainty that integrates probability judgment DEMO the analysis
of choice.19
Notes
1. The notion that beliefs can be measured based on preferences was anticipated by Borel (1924).
2. The boundary conditions are needed to ensure that we always compare an interval DEMO includes an
endpoint to an interval that is bounded away from the other endpoint (see Tversky and Wakker 1995 for a
more rigorous formulation).
3. We use the lower case w to denote the weighting DEMO for risk and the upper case W to denote the
weighting function for uncertainty.
4. The two-stage model has not yet been extensively tested DEMO multiple nonzero outcomes; however, see
Wu and Gonzalez (1998c) for a preliminary investigation.
5. For the simple prospects considered here, the separable and cumulative versions of the theory are
identical.
6. To demonstrate, set uð0Þ¼ 0. Hence, Cðx; A1 Þþ   þ Cðx; An Þ¼ u1ðuðxÞPðA1 ÞÞ þ  þ
umeasure, to be distinguished from1ðuðxÞPðAn ÞÞ au1ðuðxÞPðAÞÞ ¼P, that denotes judged probability.Cðx; AÞ if u is concave. DEMO use P to denote an additive probability
7. In every case this also holds for a signiﬁcant majority of subjects ( p < 0:DEMO by sign tests).
8. In every case this also holds for a signiﬁcant majority of subjects ( p < 0:01).
9. DEMO more conservative test of the standard theory assuming a ¼ 1:00 yields a mean absolute error of
$13.29.
10. Eight teams qualiﬁed for DEMO playo¤s from each conference.
11. Violations of monotonicity are also evident in the certainty equivalent data for study 1 reported in
ﬁgure 32.3. Note DEMO the median certainty equivalent for San Antonio is higher than the median certainty
equivalent for the Midwestern Division; Chicago and Orlando are priced as high as their respective divi-
sions. While these results are consistent with DEMO present account, none of these di¤erences is statistically
signiﬁcant.
12. In DEMO case D > 0 for a signiﬁcant majority of subjects (p < 0:05).
13. The condition wð pÞþ wð1  pÞ a 1, called subcertainty, is generally supported by empirical data (see
e.g., Tversky and Kahneman 1992). It says that the certainty e¤ect is more pronounced than the possibility
e¤ect, and it implies the common ﬁnding that wð0:5Þ < 0:5 (see ﬁgure 32.1).
14. In every case D > 0 for a majority of subjects; this majority is statistically signiﬁcant ( p < 0:05 by sign
test) for all tests but the ﬁrst and fourth listed in the table.
15. DEMO least-square procedure for estimating all subjective probabilities simultaneously subject to the addi-
tivity constraint did not improve the ﬁt of the classical theory.
16. DEMO studies of Wu and Gonzalez (1996) provide evidence of concavity for low probabilities and
convexity for moderate to high probabilities, which are stronger than lower and upper subadditivity,
respectively.
17. To complicate matters further, Fox and Tversky (1995) have shown that ambiguity aversion, which
has been commonly observed when people evaluate both clear and vague propositions jointly, seems to
diminish or disappear when people evaluate only one of these DEMO in isolation.
18. Alternatively, one might accommodate source preference by varying DEMO parameter of the risky weight-
ing function that increases or decreases weights throughout the unit interval. For example, one can vary b
of Prelec’s (1998) two-parameter risky weighting function, wð pÞ¼ expðbðln pÞaÞ, where DEMO > 0 is inver-
sely related to the attractiveness of the source. This has the advantage of manipulating the ‘‘elevation’’ of
A Belief-Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty 821
the function somewhat independently DEMO its degree of ‘‘curvature.’’ For more on elevation and curvature of
the weighting function, see Gonzalez and Wu (1998).
19. This research DEMO conducted while the ﬁrst author was visiting at Northwestern University. It was
supported in part by grant SBR-9408684 from the National Science Foundation to DEMO second author. The
authors thank George Wu and Peter Wakker for helpful discussions and suggestions.
References
Allais, M., ‘‘Le Comportement de l’Homme Rationel DEMO le Risque, Critique des Postulates et Axi-
omes de l’Ecole Americaine,DEMO Econometrica, 21 (1953), 503–546.
Borel. E´ ., ‘‘Apropos of DEMO Treatise on Probability,’’ in H. Kyburg and H. Smokler (eds.), Studies in Sub-
jective Probability (lst Edition), John Wiley & DEMO, New York, 1924.
Camerer, C. F., ‘‘Individual Decision Making,’’ Chapter 8 in J. H. Kagel and A. E. Roth (eds.), Handbook
of Experimental Economics, Princeton University Press, Princetion, NJ, 1995.
DEMO and T.-H. Ho, ‘‘Violations of the Betweenness Axiom and Nonlinearity in DEMO,’’ J. Risk
and Uncertainty, 8 (1994), 167–196.
——— and M. Weber, ‘‘Recent Developments in Modeling Preferences: Uncertainty and Ambiguity,’’
DEMO Risk and Uncertainty, 5 (1992), 325–370.
Ellsberg, D., ‘‘Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,’’ Quarterly J. Economics, 75 (DEMO), 643–669.
Fischho¤, B., P. Slovic, and S. Lichtenstein, ‘‘Fault Trees: Sensitivity of Estimated Failure Probabilities to
Problem Representation,’’ J. Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 4 (1978),
330–344.
Fox, C. R., ‘‘Subadditivity in Judgment and Choice: A Test of the DEMO Axioms and Implications of
Support Theory,’’ Unpublished Manuscript, Duke University DEMO School of Business, Durham, NC,
1998.
———, B. A. DEMO, and A. Tversky, ‘‘Options Traders Exhibit Subadditive Decision Weights,’’ J. Risk
and Uncertainty, 13 (1996), 5–17.
——— and A. Tversky, ‘‘Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance,’’ Quarterly J. Economics, 110
(1995), 585–603.
Gonzalez, R. and G. Wu, ‘‘On the Form of the Probability Weighting Function,’’ Unpublished Manu-
script, Department of Psychology, University DEMO Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 1998.
Heath, C. and A. Tversky, ‘‘Preference and Belief: Ambiguity and Competence in Choice under Uncer-
tainty,DEMO J. Risk and Uncertainty, 4 (1991), 4–28.
Johnson, E. DEMO, J. Hershey, J. Meszaros, and H. Kunreuther, ‘‘Framing, Probability DEMO, and
Insurance Decisions,’’ J. Risk and Uncertainty, 7 (1993), 35–51.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky, ‘‘Prospect Theory: An Analysis DEMO Decision under Risk,’’ Econometrica,4
(1979), 263–291.
Prelec, D., ‘‘The Probability Weighting Function,’’ Econometrica, 60 (1998), 497–528.
Ramsey, F. P., ‘‘Truth and Probability,’’ in R. B. Braithwaite (ed.), The Foundations of Mathematics and
Other Logical Essays by FP Ramsey, Harcourt, Brace and Co., NY, 1931.
Redelmeier, D. A., D. J. Koehler, V. Liberman, and A. Tversky, ‘‘Probability Judgment in Medicine:
Discounting Unspeciﬁed Possibilities,’’ Medical Decision Making, 15 (1995), DEMO
Rottenstreich, Y. and A. Tversky, ‘‘Unpacking, Repacking, and Anchoring: DEMO in Support
Theory,’’ Psychological Review, 2 (1997), 406–415.
Teigen, K. H., ‘‘Subjective Sampling Distributions and the Additivity of Estimates,’’ DEMO J. Psy-
chology, 24 (1974), 97–105.
822 Fox and Tversky
Tversky, A., ‘‘Utility Theory and Additivity Analysis DEMO Risky Choices,’’ J. Experimental Psychology,75
(1967), 27–36.
Tversky, A. and C. R. Fox, ‘‘Weighing Risk and Uncertainty,’’ Psychological Rev., 102 (1995), 269–283.
——— and D. Kahneman, ‘‘Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncertainty,’’
J. Risk and Uncertainty, 5 (1992), 297–323.
Tversky, A. and D. J. Koehler, ‘‘Support Theory: A Nonextensional Representation of Subjective Proba-
bility,’’ Psychological Review, 101 (DEMO), 547–567.
——— and P. P. Wakker, ‘‘Risk Attitudes and Decision DEMO,’’ Econometrica, 63 (1995), 1255–1280.
Wu, G. and R. DEMO, ‘‘Common Consequence E¤ects in Decision Making under Risk,’’ Risk and
DEMO, 16 (1998a), 113–135.
——— and ———, ‘‘Dominance Violations and DEMO Splitting,’’ Unpublished Manuscript, University of
Chicago Graduate School of Business, Chicago, IL, 1998b.
——— and ———, ‘‘Nonlinearity of Decision Weights in Decision Making under Uncertainty,’’ Unpub-
lished Manuscript, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, Chicago, IL, 1998c.
——— and ———, ‘‘Curvature DEMO the Probability Weighting Function,’’ Management Sci., 42 (1996),
DEMO
Contingent Preferences

33 Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion
George A. Quattrone and Amos Tversky
DEMO major problem in the analysis of choice concerns the relationship between actions
and outcomes. A common assumption is that actions have a causal e¤ect DEMO out-
comes. Some actions, however, may be primarily diagnostic of outcomes in that
actions and outcomes may both be consequences of a common DEMO cause.
When actions are merely diagnostic of outcomes, rather than causal, the analysis of
choice becomes more problematic. The extensive literature on Newcomb’s DEMO
is a case in point. In this chapter, we ﬁrst discuss DEMO normative problem of causal
versus diagnostic contingencies. We then turn from the logical to the psychological
analysis, where we argue that decision-makers sometimes fail to distinguish between
causal and diagnostic contingencies. We further relate our psychological DEMO to
the theory of cognitive dissonance and to the concept of self-deception. Next, we
describe an experiment in which subjects selected actions that were diagnostic of the
outcomes, ‘‘good health and longevity,’’ although it was clear to subjects that the
actions would have no causal e¤ect on DEMO state of health. A second experiment is
presented to demonstrate that an individual may view his own choices as diagnostic
of the choices likely DEMO be made by his like-minded peers. The results of the experi-
ment, which are indicative of what we call the ‘‘voter’s illusion’’, may DEMO explain
why some people vote in large elections despite the low probability of casting a
decisive ballot. Finally, we discuss further implications and extensions of these ideas.
The Logic of Decision
Because the outcome of a DEMO often depends on past or future states of nature
that cannot be known with certainty, it is reasonable for the decision-maker to weigh
the possible outcomes of an action by the probability of the states on DEMO they
depend. In many situations, the relevant states of nature are DEMO of one’s
choice. Despite numerous anecdotes to the contrary, the probability DEMO rain does not
depend on whether one has decided to wash one’s car. We shall use the conventional
notation for conditional probabilities, PðS=AÞ, DEMO refer to the probability of a state,
S, given act, A . Thus, the state ‘‘rain’’ is independent of the act ‘‘car wash’’ in the
sense that PðS=AÞ¼ PðS=not AÞ¼ PðSÞ, the marginal (DEMO, pre-decisional) proba-
bility of rain.
It is not always true that the relevant states of nature are independent of one’s
choice. In deliberating DEMO whether to stop smoking, for example, the decision-
maker must weigh the pleasures of tobacco and the pain of withdrawal against the
possibility DEMO premature death. Clearly, the risk of contracting lung cancer (S )DEMO
826 Quattrone and Tversky
not independent of whether one abstains (A) DEMO smoking in that PðS=AÞ <
PðS=not AÞ . Because states may DEMO be independent of one’s choice, the value of
each outcome associated DEMO a particular act should be weighted by the probability
of the outcome conditional on selecting the act (Je¤rey 1965).
This conception becomes problematic when it is recognized that acts may be
causal or diagnostic of DEMO with which they are correlated. Consider the his-
torical controversy over how to interpret the correlation between smoking and can-
cer. It is now DEMO acknowledged that smoking has a direct causal e¤ect on the
etiology of lung cancer. But it has not always been so clear. As late DEMO 1959, R. A.
Fisher, the great statistician, argued that the DEMO could be attributable to a
genetic trait that predisposed the individual towards both smoking and cancer. To
Fisher, smoking was diagnostic of lung cancer, not causal, in that smoking was
merely a sign that the DEMO had been born with the pre-cancerous gene. Despite
the fact that smoking may have a lower expected desirability than abstaining if the
value of DEMO outcomes are weighted by the respective conditional probabilities, Fisher
cited his DEMO thesis as reason enough for lighting up.
One may certainly object to Fisher’s theory about the linkage between smoking
and cancer. But if the DEMO were true, Fisher’s decision to continue smoking is de-
fensible. According DEMO this theory one either has or does not have the pre-cancerous
gene, and hence one’s decision to smoke or not does not facilitate or inhibit the
emergence of cancerous cells. True, smokers are more likely to die of cancer than
non-smokers. But the correlation is channelled through the DEMO or absence of a
genetic trait beyond the individual’s control.
One way to conceptualize the problem is to imagine that the hypothetical pre-
cancerous DEMO exerts its inﬂuence on smoking by ﬁrst producing a yen or an
urge to smoke (Je¤rey 1981). The knowledge that one does not have the urge ðAÞ
or that one does, e¤ectively ‘‘screens o¤’’ the correlation between the act of smok-
ing (not-A) and cancer (S ), in the sense that PðS=A & AÞ¼ PðS=not A & AÞ <
PðS=A & not A Þ¼ PðS=not A & not AÞ. The inequality indicates that among
people without the urge and among people with DEMO urge, smoking is independent of
cancer. The overall correlation between smoking DEMO cancer is merely a consequence
of there being more smokers and pre-cancerous persons among people with the gene-
induced urge than among people without DEMO urge. Hence, upon recognizing that
one has the urge to smoke, one who subscribes to Fisher’s theory ought to light up
because, given the urge, cancer is independent of smoking. Most philosophical anal-
yses of the problem (Nozick 1969; Gibbard and Harper 1978; Skyrms 1980; DEMO
1981) defend smoking under the above assumptions, but question whether it is
always possible to screen o¤ the correlation between action and outcome.
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 827
The Psychology of Choice
We now DEMO from the logical to the psychological analysis, which is complicated by
DEMO fact that causal and diagnostic contingencies are usually confounded in the
real world. Suppose undergraduates know that students who attend a review session
for DEMO ﬁnal examination get better grades than students who do not attend. Does
the correlation between attendance and grade mean that the review session really
DEMO? Or does it mean that reviews are attended primarily by conscientious DEMO
who would do well, session or no? Insofar as there is uncertainty about the causal
or diagnostic signiﬁcance of the action (attendance) DEMO respect to the outcome
(grade), it is reasonable for students DEMO entertain the causal hypothesis, play it
safe and attend the session. DEMO hypothesize, however, that people would select an
action correlated with an auspicious outcome even if they believed that the action is
only diagnostic DEMO the outcome and in no way causal. Thus even if students were
presented with compelling evidence that review sessions have no causal inﬂuence on
DEMO examination performance, and they accept the evidence, they might nonetheless
be tempted to attend, so long as better grades are associated with attendance than
with non-attendance.
This problem is reminiscent of the well-known dilemma faced DEMO Calvinists, who
subscribe to divine pre-determination. As drawn in the left-hand DEMO of ﬁgure 33.1,
Calvinists believe that there are two kinds of people, the chosen and the not-chosen.
Whether one is chosen or not has already been decided by the deity prior to one’s
birth. There DEMO at least two consequences of the deity’s decision. First, the chosen
DEMO enter paradise after death, whereas the not-chosen will su¤er eternal damnation
DEMO hell. Second, the chosen will lead a life of virtue, whereas the not-chosen will lead
a life of sin. Calvinists do not know DEMO among them are the chosen. But they know
that avarice, lust DEMO sloth are sinful acts correlated with eternal damnation. Con-
versely, they DEMO that charity, purity and hard work are virtuous acts correlated
Figure DEMO
Illustrated causal structures.
828 Quattrone and Tversky
with eternal post-mortal bliss. Although the acts are DEMO believed to inﬂuence one’s
posthumous fate, most Calvinists conclude that they DEMO better live by the Book in
that the immediate gratiﬁcations of the ﬂesh seem hardly worth an eternity in hell.
That Calvinists may confuse DEMO and causal contingencies is illustrated by the
following letter circulated by Baptists in 1770: ‘‘Every soul that comes to Christ to be
saved . . . is to be encouraged . . . The coming soul DEMO not fear that he is not elected,
for none but such would be willing to come.’’
What about the ‘‘urge’’ or the temptation DEMO sin? Do Calvinists not recognize that
temptation itself should screen o¤ DEMO correlation between the virtuousness of one’s
act and the location of one’s life after death? After all, only the not-chosen would
even contemplate DEMO dissolute deed. The normative analysis of Fisher’s smoking
theory would suggest that Calvinists ought to transgress upon experiencing the desire
to do so, ceteris paribus, for heaven and hell are independent of action conditional on
the urge to sin. Contrary to this analysis, we believe that many Calvinists would
nonetheless resist the temptation and choose instead the virtuous acts correlated DEMO
paradise.
The notion that people may confuse causal and diagnostic contingencies is familiar
to social psychologists (see Abelson et al. 1968). The theory of cognitive dissonance
(Festinger 1957) is an illustrative case. According to DEMO theory, an individual who
holds two or more cognitions (i.e., DEMO and beliefs) that are psychologically
inconsistent will experience an uncomfortable state DEMO tension, called dissonance. The
individual will then be ‘‘driven’’ to reduce DEMO by changing one or more of the
cognitions so that they are no longer inconsistent. For example, suppose a college
freshman su¤ers embarrassment and exerts considerable physical e¤ort as part of an
initiation procedure to join DEMO fraternity. Having become a member, he discovers that
the organization falls DEMO short of his previous expectations: the food is tasteless, and
the parties are dull. The cognition, ‘‘this is a lousy fraternity,’’ can be regarded as
psychologically inconsistent with the cognition, ‘‘I incurred costs to enter the frater-
nity,’’ in the sense that people do not DEMO expend great e¤ort to attain an
undesirable goal. The resulting dissonance can be reduced by re-evaluating the
fraternity: ‘‘the food is not really all that bad, and the parties are as good as any
on campus.’’ This hypothesized process can be analysed in terms of the confusion
between DEMO and diagnostic contingencies. It is commonly thought that there is a
relationship between the costs one bears to join a group and the overall DEMO
of the group. The causal impact usually ﬂows from ‘‘desirability’’ to ‘‘costs.’’ That is,
one is willing to bear costs to enter a DEMO because it is desirable; the group does not
become desirable because DEMO bore costs to enter it. Dissonance theory predicts,
however, that DEMO may reverse the causal and diagnostic relationships. Thus an
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 829
individual who, in the absence of bearing costs, would rate two groups as equally
desirable would subsequently rate as more desirable the group for which he bore
more costs to DEMO Hence, the cost one bears comes to inﬂuence one’s evaluation of
DEMO group rather than being merely diagnostic of one’s evaluation of the group. The
example also illustrates how causal and diagnostic contingencies are confounded in
DEMO real world. If we knew only that an individual evaluates highly a group he
exerted much e¤ort to join, it is di‰cult to discern whether he was willing to exert the
e¤ort because he had already DEMO the group highly, or whether he evaluated
the group highly because DEMO the e¤ort he expended. Finally, dissonance theory does
not claim that DEMO must engage in actions that are diagnostic of an inference in
order to accept the inference. The freshman does not have to act as DEMO the
fraternity were desirable to accept the belief that it is. The re-evaluation may be
achieved solely through cognitive means. Once the belief is DEMO, however, the
individual may, according to dissonance theory, act in line with the belief; for exam-
ple, he may praise the DEMO in public. In contrast, we suspect that these actions
may not DEMO ‘‘follow from’’ the newly accepted belief. The actions may in part be
motivated by the individual’s attempt to convince himself that the belief is DEMO
Dissonance theory is not inconsistent with the notion that people may select
actions enabling them to make favourable inferences. The theory allows dissonance
to DEMO reduced either through cognitive or behavioural means. What has not been
investigated in the social psychological literature are the conditions under which
people would DEMO ‘‘taken in’’ by their own actions. How could actors reasonably make
a favourable diagnosis from their behaviour when the behaviour was enacted in
order DEMO make the diagnosis? What comfort could a Calvinist derive from a DEMO
act if performed while one is tempted to sin? One possibility DEMO that people do not
quite recognize that for diagnostic contingencies the urge to act (e.g., to smoke or to
sin) screens o¤ the correlation between action and outcome. People may adopt a
quasi-behaviouristic doctrine in DEMO actions speak louder than urges and related
inner states. This account is consistent with Bem’s (1972) theory of self-perception in
that inferences about DEMO self are assumed to be based solely on the observation of
one’s own behaviour and on the external circumstances in which one behaves. It DEMO
also possible, however, that a certain degree of self-deception may contribute to the
acceptance of the diagnosis implied by one’s behaviour. That is, actors may have
to avoid admitting to themselves that the behaviour was DEMO more by the
motive to infer an auspicious antecedent cause than by the auspicious antecedent
cause itself. Calvinists may deny their temptation to sin DEMO convince themselves that
the virtuous act was not selected merely to defend against the inference of not being
chosen.
830 Quattrone and Tversky
Gur and Sackheim (1979) have characterized self-deception DEMO the following
criteria: (a) the individual simultaneously holds two contradictory DEMO, (b) the
individual is not aware of holding one of DEMO beliefs and (c) the lack of awareness
is motivated. We are arguing that when people select actions to infer an auspicious
antecedent cause, then, to accept the inference as valid, they often render themselves
DEMO of the fact that they selected the action just in order to infer the cause.
Unless they deny to themselves that their action was DEMO chosen to make a
favourable diagnosis, they may not attribute the DEMO to the target antecedent cause
but rather to the motive to infer that cause. This view is compatible with the criteria
put forth by DEMO and Sackheim. The beliefs, ‘‘I purposefully engaged in the behav-
iour DEMO make a favourable diagnosis,’’ and ‘‘I did not purposefully engage in the
behaviour to make a favourable diagnosis,’’ are clearly contradictory (a), and one’s
lack of awareness (b) regarding the former belief DEMO motivated by the individual’s
desire to accept the diagnosis implied by behaviour (c). When people select an action
to make a favourable diagnosis, but fail to realize that they purposefully selected the
action in order to make the diagnosis, we classify the action and the denial collec-
tively as a form of deceptive diagnosis.
Deceptive Diagnosis
We now describe DEMO experiment that tested our basic thesis that people select actions
diagnostic of favourable outcomes, even if it is clear that the action does not facili-
tate the outcome. Self-report measures were also included to test the DEMO that,
even if people do engage in the diagnostic behaviour, DEMO favourable diagnosis would
be made primarily by subjects who deny that the action was purposefully selected.
We chose to investigate these issues in a DEMO context. Medical examinations
consist of tests that are diagnostic or indicative of one’s underlying state of health.
How one does on the examination does DEMO, in general, a¤ect one’s state of health.
Rather, it is DEMO state of health that determines how one does on the examination.
If people were given an opportunity, we predict that they would ‘‘cheat’’ on a medi-
cal examination in a direction correlated with desirable outcomes, such as good
health and longevity. To test this hypothesis, we constructed an analogue of the
Calvinist dilemma in the medical realm. Subjects learned that DEMO were two kinds
of hearts, namely, type 1 and type 2. Heart type allegedly had two sets of con-
sequences. First, people with type 1 heart are frequently ill, are prone to heart dis-
ease, and have a shorter-than-average life expectancy. People with type 2 heart enjoy
good health, have a low risk of heart disease, and show DEMO longer-than-average life
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 831
expectancy. Second, heart type was said to determine how exercise would change an
individual’s tolerance to cold water. DEMO of our subjects were informed that a type 1
heart would increase tolerance to cold water after exercise whereas a type 2 heart
would DEMO tolerance. The remaining subjects learned that a type 1 heart would
decrease tolerance to cold water after exercise, whereas a type 2 heart would increase
tolerance. We shall refer to these treatments as the decrease and DEMO conditions,
respectively, to indicate the change in tolerance associated with DEMO health and
longevity. The righthand side of ﬁgure 33.1 illustrates the correlational structure
received by subjects in the decrease condition. All three variables (i.e., heart type, life
expectancy and shifts in tolerance) were treated as continuous. For example, subjects
in the increase condition were led to believe that the closer they are to having a type
2 heart, the more would exercise increase their tolerance and the longer would their
life DEMO be.
Subjects ﬁrst underwent a baseline trial of the cold-pressor pain task (Hilgard et al.
1974), which requires them to submerge their forearms into a chest of circulating
cold water until they can no longer DEMO it. Subjects then pedalled an exercycle for
one minute, which was DEMO by the information about heart types, life expec-
tancy, and tolerance shifts. Subjects then repeated the cold-pressor task to their tol-
erance threshold DEMO the presence of a second ‘‘blind’’ experimenter. Finally, subjects
indicated on DEMO questionnaire whether they believed they were type 1 or type 2 and
whether they had purposefully tried to alter the amount of time they DEMO their arm
in the water on the post-exercise trial. We tested the following three hypotheses:
1. On the post-exercise or ‘‘experimental’’ trial, subjects would shift their tolerance
threshold in the direction correlated with health and DEMO: that is, a downward
shift in the decrease condition and an upward shift in the increase condition. The
prediction for the increase condition DEMO especially noteworthy because it implies that
people will incur painful consequences of their action so long as the action were
diagnostic of an outcome DEMO important than transient pain.
2. By and large, subjects will deny DEMO they purposefully tried to shift their tolerance
on the post-exercise trial.
3. Those subjects who do admit that they had purposefully tried to shift DEMO toler-
ance would be less likely to infer that they had the preferred type 2 heart than would
subjects who deny the attempt to DEMO
Procedure
The subjects were 38 undergraduates at Stanford University. They arrived for an
experiment on the ‘‘psychological and medical aspects of athletics.’’ The experimen-
832 Quattrone and Tversky
tal room was on the physiological ﬂoor of DEMO psychology building where animals,
chemicals and electronic equipment are readily visible. The location was selected
to establish credibility for our alleged interest in DEMO matters. A female
experimenter, wearing a white lab coat, told subjects that the purpose of the study
was to examine the e¤ects of DEMO changes in temperature on heart rate after exer-
cise. The research question was allegedly inspired by wondering what were the coro-
nary implications of DEMO jumping into a cold shower after working out on a
hot day. Subjects were given an overview of the entire experimental procedure. The
cold-pressor DEMO was said to provide the necessary ‘‘change in temperature,’’ pulse-
readings to provide the measures of ‘‘heart rate,’’ and pedalling an exercycle DEMO pro-
vide the ‘‘exercise.’’ Subjects understood that they would undergo two trials of the
cold-pressor task, each followed by a pulse-reading, and separated DEMO each other
by a minute of exercycling. Thus the ﬁrst trial would provide a baseline measure of
heart rate in response to temperature change, which could then be compared to
heart rate in response to temperature DEMO following exercise. After subjects
understood the procedure and were forewarned of the discomfort associated with the
cold-pressor task, they were asked to express their informed consent. All subjects
consented.
The baseline trial of the cold-pressor was DEMO after subjects had given
their consent. The apparatus consisted of a picnic chest, partitioned in the middle
and ﬁlled with water. Ice cubes were placed in one side of the partition, and a motor
circulated the water to maintain its temperature at about 35  F. Subjects immersed
DEMO bare hands and forearms into the water. After every ﬁve seconds they reported
a number from one to ten to express their discomfort. The DEMO ten was taken to
mean that point at which subjects would rather not tolerate the cold any longer.
When subjects reached ten, they were asked to remove their arm from the chest.
Subjects reported their numbers DEMO response to a letter called out by the experi-
menter. Subjects heard ‘‘A’’ after ﬁve seconds, ‘‘B’’ after ten seconds, ‘‘C’’ after ﬁf-
DEMO seconds and so on. This procedure was used to help subjects to recall how long
they tolerated the water on the baseline trial thus DEMO them with a target for
the experimental trial. Subjects then had their pulse taken and pedalled an exercycle
vigorously for one minute.
A brief DEMO period’’ was inserted between the exercycling and the experimental
cold-pressor trial. This interval gave the experimenter the opportunity to present the
correlational structure discussed DEMO To prevent subjects from discovering the
true purpose of the study, DEMO crucial information was embedded in a mini-lecture on
psychophysics. Subjects learned that the cold-pressor was used to study the psycho-
physics of pain. Psychophysics DEMO deﬁned as the attempt to relate mathematically
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 833
the perception of a stimulus to DEMO physical properties of a stimulus. Subjects were
shown a curve on a blackboard that related time of immersion in cold water to sub-
jective DEMO (i.e., numbers from one to ten). The curve depicted the typical
relationship and it was said to be based on data averaged DEMO many people. Indi-
vidual di¤erences were said to exist, illustrated by DEMO two curves that reached
ten at di¤erent rates. Skin type was said to be one factor that distinguished between
people with high or low DEMO to cold water. Heart type was said to be another
factor. Subjects learned that people could be characterized as having either one of
two DEMO complexes, referred to as type 1 and type 2 hearts. Subjects
DEMO a histogram, on a glossy photograph, which showed that longer life expec-
tancies were associated with increasing degrees of type 2 hearts and DEMO shorter life
expectancies were associated with increasing degrees of type 1 hearts. Allegedly,
some investigators had suggested that type 1 subjects do not DEMO from type 2 sub-
jects in tolerance on the pre-exercise trial. However, exercise supposedly may create a
di¤erence between the two types. Subjects were then randomly assigned to either the
decrease or increase described earlier. The DEMO was conveyed verbally and
displayed in a histogram.
A second female experimenter administered the experimental cold-pressor trial. To
guard against experimenter bias, she was blind to subjects’ condition and perfor-
mance on the baseline trial. We DEMO tried to reduce the likelihood that subjects
would show self-presentational shifts in tolerance to impress the experimenter that
they were healthy. First, it was made clear to subjects that there was a lot of vari-
ability DEMO types 1 and 2 on both trials. Thus, the second experimenter DEMO not
infer from the length of the second trial subjects’ likely type. Only shifts between
trials would be telling. Second, subjects were assured that the ﬁrst experimenter
would be kept ignorant of their performance on the DEMO trial and that the second
experimenter would be kept ignorant of their performance on the baseline trial.
Thus, neither experimenter would have the data required to infer subjects’ likely
type. Finally, the experimenter who administered the post-experimental trial was
presented as a secretary, wearing ordinary clothing, employed DEMO simply to admin-
ister the trial. Thus her appearance and behaviour were designed to make it seem as
though she knew nothing of the DEMO hypotheses, description or rationale. After
the second cold-pressor trial, subjects completed a brief questionnaire. They were
asked to infer whether they were type DEMO or 2, and they checked either ‘‘Yes’’ or ‘‘No’’
to the DEMO, ‘‘Did you purposefully try to alter the amount of time you DEMO your
hand in the water after exercise?’’ Finally, subjects were DEMO debriefed of all
deception and sworn to secrecy. Prior to the debrieﬁng, no subject could articulate
the hypotheses when probed.
834 Quattrone and Tversky
Table 33.1
Mean Time of Immersion in Seconds
DEMO
Condition Baseline Experimental Change
Decrease 44.74 37.11
Increase 34.21 46.05
7.63
þ11.84
Table 33.2
Mean Time in Tolerance
Subjects’ self-reported group
Condition Non-Deniers Deniers
DEMO 5.00 8.13
Increase þ19.11 þ8.08
Di¤erence 24.17 16.21
Fð1; 34Þ 11.54 DEMO
p .005 .001
Results
The number of seconds during which subjects kept their arms in the cold water was
recorded after each of the DEMO trials. The cell means are shown in table 33.1. In line
with our ﬁrst hypothesis, subjects in the decrease condition showed signiﬁcantly less
tolerance on the experimental trial than on the baseline trial, Fð1; 36Þ¼ DEMO:41,
p <:005, whereas subjects in the increase condition DEMO signiﬁcantly more toler-
ance, Fð1; 36Þ¼ 23:25, p <:DEMO:
Of the 38 subjects tested, 27 showed the predicted shift (13 of 19 in the decrease
condition and 14 of 19 in DEMO increase condition), and 11 did not, p <:01 by DEMO
sign test. Five subjects in each condition showed no shift, whereas DEMO subject in the
decrease condition, a ‘‘suicidal type,’’ showed a DEMO opposite from prediction.
Only 9 of our 38 subjects indicated on the anonymous questionnaire that they had
purposefully tried to change the amount of DEMO they held their hand in the water
after exercise. In line with our second hypothesis, this number was smaller than the
number (i.e., 29) who indicated no attempt to shift, p <:005 by DEMO test. The ten-
dency to deny or to admit an attempt to shift could not be attributed to actual dif-
ferences in behaviour. That DEMO, the percentage of subjects who did shift as predicted
was no DEMO among subjects who indicated that they tried to shift (67%) than it
was among subjects who indicated that they did not try to DEMO (72%). Table 33.2
shows the mean changes in tolerance in DEMO decrease and increase conditions both for
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 835
the group of subjects who indicated DEMO they did try to shift (‘‘non-deniers’’) and for
the group who indicated that they did not try to shift (‘‘deniers’’). The predicted dif-
ference between conditions was signiﬁcant within each group of subjects, and no
interaction between condition and subjects’ group was observed, Fð1; 34Þ < 1.
We have shown that a majority of subjects show the hypothesized shift and that a
majority deny that they attempted to shift. Moreover, the deniers did not di¤er from
the non-deniers in the degree to DEMO their behaviour was diagnostic of having a
type 2 heart. In line with our third hypothesis, however, the two groups of subjects
did DEMO in their acceptance of the diagnosis implied by their behaviour. Only two of
the nine non-deniers (or 22%) inferred having a type 2 DEMO, whereas 20 of the 29
deniers (or 69%) inferred a DEMO 2 heart, p <:05.
To summarize, the preceding experiment employed a procedure that resembles a
medical examination. Subjects believed that a directional DEMO in tolerance to cold
water correlated with their state of health and expected lifespan. It should have been
clear to subjects that shifts in DEMO would have no causal impact on their life
expectancy. Shifts would be merely diagnostic of their life expectancy in that both
shifts and life DEMO were a¤ected by an individual’s heart type. As predicted,
subjects ‘‘cheated’’ on this medical examination in a direction that correlated with
having a DEMO heart and long expected life. Subjects who believed that longevity
was associated with an exercise-induced decrease in tolerance removed their arm
from near-freezing water DEMO after exercise than before exercise. Subjects who
believed that longevity was associated with an exercise-induced increase in tolerance
removed their arm from the water DEMO after exercise than before exercise. The latter
result indicated that people are willing to bear painful behavioural consequences so
long as the behaviour is DEMO sign, though not a cause, of good health and long life.
As hypothesized, a majority of subjects indicated that they had not purposefully
tried to alter the amount of time they kept their hand in DEMO cold. Moreover, the few
subjects who indicated that they did try DEMO shift were no more likely to show the
predicted shift than were the many subjects who indicated no attempt to shift. In the
post-experimental DEMO, the ﬁrst experimenter asked subjects who shifted why
they had done DEMO Subjects in the decrease condition would typically say something
like, ‘‘The DEMO felt a lot colder,’’ whereas subjects in the increase condition would
say something like, ‘‘The water just didn’t feel so cold anymore.’’ By themselves,
these data may signify only that subjects were reluctant to DEMO to the experimenter
that they had ‘‘falsiﬁed’’ their scores. The self-presentational account appears less
plausible, however, when we consider these data in conjunction DEMO subjects’ private
inferences as to whether they were type 1 or type 2. A majority of the subjects who
indicated on the anonymous questionnaire DEMO they tried to shift inferred that they
836 Quattrone and Tversky
were type 1, fated to a life of illness. But the majority of subjects who indicated no
attempt to shift DEMO that they were type 2. These inferential di¤erences were
obtained despite there being no behavioural di¤erences between the deniers and non-
deniers. The data DEMO suggest that a majority of subjects may have been reluc-
tant to admit to themselves that they acted with a target inference in mind. DEMO
probably sensed the dubious legitimacy of an inference based on behaviour that was
motivated by the desire to make the inference. Denying the ulterior DEMO makes it
easier for subjects to make the comforting diagnosis. Conversely, DEMO di‰culty of
denying one’s intentions may help explain the limited success of behavioural thera-
pies. Clients are trained to act assertively, but they do not feel like assertive people
because they know that the behaviour is DEMO deliberate attempt to create an assertive
image and is thus an invalid indicator.1 To be sure, self-deception and denial are not
matters of all-or-none. Deceptive diagnosis may come in ﬁner gradations than would
be apparent from DEMO reports. Even subjects who indicated no attempt to
shift may have harboured a lingering doubt to the contrary.
The Voter’s Illusion
The idea that DEMO may select an action to make a favourable self-diagnosis is not
new. The ﬁrst experiment went beyond earlier treatments of the problem by demon-
DEMO that self-deception may contribute to accepting the diagnosis implied by
behaviour. The second experiment extends our analysis of the problem further by
testing the DEMO that people would select actions correlated with auspicious
outcomes, even if DEMO actions do not directly involve inferences about oneself. For
example, an DEMO may regard his or her own decisions as diagnostic of the
decisions likely to be made by other ‘‘like-minded’’ persons. If the individual recog-
DEMO that beneﬁcial outcomes would ensue if very many like-minded persons select a
particular alternative, then the individual may select that alternative, even if DEMO
choice is costly, not witnessed by others and not likely by DEMO to a¤ect the ﬁnal
outcome. In these circumstances, the choice is DEMO to ‘‘induce’’ others who think
and act like oneself to do the same, rather than to make comforting diagnoses about
one’s own attributes. The following analysis of voting is a case in point.
Political scientists have DEMO noted the paradoxical nature of an individual’s voting
in large national elections. A single vote is highly unlikely to be decisive, and the time
and e¤ort required to register and vote can be considerable. To understand DEMO in
terms of rational choice, political scientists have maintained that an DEMO may
derive from voting other beneﬁts than just the prospect of casting the decisive ballot
(cp. Riker and Ordeshook 1968). These additional beneﬁts may include fulﬁlling
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 837
one’s duty as a citizen, participating in a common social ritual and signalling to
others that voting is DEMO for the survival of democracy. To these rational causal
consequences of voting, we suggest adding a less rational diagnostic aspect. People
may reason that, within the electorate, there are citizens whose political orientation is
similar DEMO theirs (i.e., like-minded persons) as well as citizens whose political DEMO
tion is dissimilar (i.e., unlike-minded persons). The political dichotomy may be based
on a single important issue, like abortion, or on DEMO entire ideology, like liberalism/
conservatism. Two sets of consequences may DEMO from political orientation. First,
like-minded persons would prefer one line of candidates, whereas unlike-minded
persons would prefer the opposing line. Second, political DEMO may also a¤ect
the likelihood of voting. There are three relevant possibilities to consider: like-
minded persons may vote in larger numbers than do unlike-minded persons; unlike-
minded persons may vote in larger numbers than do like-minded persons; or there
may be no relationship between political orientation and likelihood of voting. One
may not know which of these three states DEMO the world will be in e¤ect in the
upcoming election. But one may reason that if one votes, then one’s politically like-
minded peers, who think and act like oneself, will also vote. Conversely, if one
abstains, then one’s like-minded peers will also abstain. Because the preferred candi-
dates could defeat the opposition only if like-minded citizens vote in DEMO numbers
than do unlike-minded citizens, the individual may conclude that he DEMO she had better
vote. That is, an individual may regard his DEMO her single vote as diagnostic of millions
of votes, and hence DEMO a sign that the preferred candidates will emerge victorious.
This analysis of voting can be likened to a Prisoner’s Dilemma game played by
identical DEMO, which is a variant of the well-known Newcomb’s paradox (Nozick
1969). The twins reason that each will eventually select the same option. DEMO,
each twin should select the dominated cooperative response to ‘‘induce’’ the other to
do the same.
To explore the plausibility of ‘‘diagnostic voting,DEMO we created a political scenario
about an imaginary country named Delta, DEMO electorate consisted of 4 million
supporters of Party A, 4 million DEMO of Party B and 4 million non-aligned
voters. Subjects were asked to imagine that they support Party A, and that they
wonder whether it is worthwhile to vote in the upcoming election. They were pre-
sented DEMO one of two theories about who would determine the margin of victory in
the election. Both theories maintained that the victorious party would win DEMO a
margin of 200,000 to 400,000 votes. But according to the ‘‘Non-Aligned Voters
Theory,’’ party supporters will vote in roughly equal DEMO; hence the margin of
victory will be determined by the non-aligned DEMO, who will either swing dis-
proportionately for Party A or for DEMO B depending on which group of political
838 Quattrone and Tversky
Figure 33.2
Voting decisions faced by subjects in DEMO party supporters’ condition.
experts one consulted. In contrast, the Party Supporters DEMO held that non-
aligned voters will split their vote equally between the two parties. The margin of
victory would therefore depend on which of DEMO two parties voted in greater num-
bers. That is, supporters of DEMO party will be more likely to vote than supporters of
the other party, although the political experts did not agree as to which party it
would be.
Note that the Party Supporters Theory holds that there DEMO be a correlation be-
tween political orientation and vote turnout. That is, either the supporters of Party A
will vote in greater numbers than the supporters of Party B (i.e., A > B) or vice-versa
(i.e., A < B ). In contrast, the Non-aligned Voters DEMO holds that there will be no
correlation ðA
¼
BÞ. The correlational structure expected to be generated by subjects
in the Party Supporters condition DEMO shown in ﬁgure 33.2. Thus although the causal
consequences of voting were held constant across the two theories, only subjects who
receive the Party Supporters Theory could regard their decision to vote or to abstain
as DEMO of the decision reached by the other supporters of Party A. Because
one’s decision to vote would be diagnostic of a favourable electoral outcome DEMO for
subjects exposed to the Party Supporters Theory, these subjects should DEMO a
greater willingness to vote than should subjects who receive the Non-aligned Voters
Theory. To test these hypotheses, we asked subjects a number of questions after they
had read the respective theory, four of which assessed conditional probabilities.
Assuming the theory were true, the subjects were asked how likely is it that the sup-
porters of Party A will vote DEMO greater numbers than the supporters of Party B (i.e.,
A > B ) given that the subject votes (i.e., V ) and given that the subject abstains. The
next two questions were similar in DEMO the subject now estimated the probability of
Party A’s defeating Party B conditional on the subject’s voting or abstaining. Finally,
subjects were asked DEMO they would vote, assuming the theory were true and
voting were DEMO We made the following predictions:
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 839
1. The di¤erences in inferred probabilities DEMO on voting and abstaining
will be greater among subjects who receive the Party Supporters Theory than
among those who receive the Non-aligned Voters Theory. DEMO is PðA > B=VÞ
PðA > B=not VÞ will be greater in the former condition than in the latter condition,
and this di¤erence DEMO hold for ‘‘A > B’’ as well as for ‘‘Party A defeats Party B’’.
2. Subjects who receive the Party Supporters Theory will indicate DEMO greater willing-
ness to vote than will subjects who receive the Non-aligned Voters Theory.
3. The greater the di¤erence in inferred probabilities conditional on DEMO and
abstaining, the greater the willingness to vote. That is, the more a subject believes
that his or her voting is diagnostic of DEMO other supporters of Party A would do, the
more willing is DEMO subject to vote.
Procedure
The subjects were 315 Stanford undergraduate volunteers. The diagnostic voting
problem was included in a questionnaire that subjects completed in DEMO dormitories.
It presented the information given in the introduction to this experiment in greater
detail. Subjects were asked to imagine themselves citizens of the DEMO, Delta, which
was said to have two major opposing parties. Party A favours peace and prosperity.
Party B favours o¤ensive warfare. Subjects imagined DEMO were supporters of Party
A , which consists of politically like-minded persons. Delta was about to hold an
election with the presidency and other DEMO o‰ces being contested. A recent
poll showed that 4 million eligible voters supported Party A, 4 million supported
Party B and 4 million were not aligned with either party. Subjects imagined that they
were deciding whether DEMO vote, for registering to vote in Delta is costly in time DEMO
e¤ort. They could not ask others if they would vote, because DEMO is considered impolite
in Delta to inquire into the voting intentions of others. To facilitate the decision, they
were to consult the prevailing theory about the sort of voters that determine the
margin of victory for DEMO winning party. The proponents of the theory were said to
be expert political analysts.
Subjects who received the Party Supporters Theory learned that the DEMO
voters would split their votes equally between the two parties. The outcome of the
election would be due to the fact that the supporters DEMO Party A will di¤er from the
supporters of Party B in how involved they become in the election. Half of the
experts believed that DEMO A supporters would become more involved than Party B
supporters and half believed that Party B supporters would become more involved
than Party A DEMO All experts agreed that the party whose supporters became
more involved would win by a margin of 200,000 to 400,000 votes. The DEMO
840 Quattrone and Tversky
Voters Theory informed the remaining subjects that Party DEMO and Party B supporters
will vote in equal numbers. But the majority of the non-aligned voters will side with
one unspeciﬁed party (the experts were split as to which party it would be), and that
DEMO will win by a margin of 200,000 to 400,000 votes.
Having read the theory, subjects responded to six questions. The ﬁrst four ques-
tions assessed the conditional probabilities hypothesized in part to motivate the DEMO:
(1) if you vote, how likely is it that DEMO other supporters of Party A will vote in larger
numbers than the supporters of Party B ? (2) If you abstain, how likely is it that the
other supporters of Party A will vote in DEMO numbers than the supporters of Party
B ? (3) If you vote, how likely is it that Party A will defeat Party B ? And (4), if you
abstain, how likely is it DEMO Party A will defeat Party B ? Responses were made on
9-point scales labelled in the middle and at the endpoints. On a similar DEMO, subjects
were asked, ‘‘How likely are you to vote if the theory were true and voting in Delta
were costly?’’ and, ﬁnally, subjects checked ‘‘yes’’ or ‘‘no’’ to the question, ‘‘Would
you vote DEMO the theory were true and voting in Delta were costly?’’
Results
Each subject was asked to estimate the likelihood that Party A would DEMO in larger
numbers than Party B if the subject voted and if the subject abstained. The subject
was also asked the likelihood that Party DEMO would defeat Party B conditional on the
subjects’ voting and abstaining. The cell means are shown in table 33.3, and data
relevant to the predictions are found in the row labelled ‘‘di¤erence.’’ As expected,
the DEMO in inferred likelihoods conditional on voting and abstaining were sig-
niﬁcantly greater among subjects in the Party Supporters condition than among
Table 33.3
The DEMO Likelihood of States Given Subject’s Decision
Condition Subject’s decision
Party supporters
theory
Vote
Abstain
States
Party A votes in
greater numbers
than Party B
DEMO
4.13
Party A defeats
Party B
6.06
4.09
Non-aligned
voters theory
Di¤erence 1.68 1.97
Vote 4.20 5.12
Abstain 3.87 4.60
Di¤erence 0.33 0.52
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 841
subjects in the Non-aligned Voters condition, both for the question concerning
whether Party A would vote in greater DEMO than Party B, Fð1; 313Þ¼ 35:79,
p <:001, and for the question concerning whether Party A would defeat Party B,
Fð1; 313Þ¼ 40:18, p <:001.
The di¤erence between DEMO in the assumed diagnostic signiﬁcance of vot-
ing translated into di¤erences between conditions in assumed voting intentions. Sub-
jects in the Non-aligned Voters condition DEMO that they would be less willing to
vote (M ¼ 6: 43) than did subjects in the Party Supporters condition (M ¼ DEMO:17),
Fð1; 313Þ¼ 7:85, p <:05. In DEMO like manner, a greater percentage of subjects in the
former condition (16%) than in the latter (7%) indicated that they would not vote,
p <:05. Evidence for the hypothesized linkage between the DEMO diagnostic sig-
niﬁcance of voting and willingness to vote was most directly demonstrated through
correlational measures. In the Party Supporters condition, subjects were more will-
ing to vote the more they believed that their decision to DEMO or to abstain was diag-
nostic of (a) whether Party A would vote in greater numbers than Party B (i.e.,
PðA > B=VÞ PðA > B=not VÞ), r ¼ :27, p <:DEMO and (b) whether Party A would
defeat Party B (i.e., PðA defeats B=VÞ PðA defeats B=not VÞ), r ¼ :32, DEMO <:001.
In the Non-aligned Voters condition, the correlations were non-signiﬁcantly DEMO,
r ¼ :07, n.s. and r ¼ :17, p <:01, respectively, perhaps because of the smaller vari-
ance in DEMO conditional probability di¤erences.
Discussion
From the perspective of the individual citizen, DEMO is both causal and diagnostic
with respect to a desired electoral outcome. Causally, a single vote may create or
break a tie, and DEMO citizen may communicate with like-minded peers, persuading
them also to vote. DEMO, one’s decision to vote or to abstain is an indicator
that DEMO who think and act like oneself are likely to make the same decision. The
Party Supporters and Non-aligned Voters theories were equivalent in the DEMO sig-
niﬁcance of voting. But subjects perceived the Party Supporters Theory as having
more diagnostic signiﬁcance than the Non-aligned Voters Theory. As a consequence,DEMO
they indicated a greater willingness to vote given the validity of the former theory
than given the validity of the latter. These results obtained DEMO the margin of
victory’s being kept at from 200,000 to 400,000 votes for both theories.
One could identify additional circumstances, analogous to voting, in which collec-
tive action dwarfs the causal signiﬁcance of a single individual’s decision. The out-
comes of most wars would not have DEMO had one fewer draftee been inducted,
842 Quattrone and Tversky
and the success or failure of many telethons DEMO not hinge on the contributions of a
single viewer. The paradox is that if each citizen, draftee or viewer abstains from
making his or her paltry contribution upon acknowledging its relative insigniﬁcance,
then the outcomes DEMO be dramatically a¤ected. Indeed, the moral imperatives to
vote, to ﬁght and to help the disabled draws its strength from the argument, ‘‘If you
believe that your vote/ﬁghting/contribution doesn’t help, then consider what would
happen if everyone felt that way.’’ The argument is compelling. Nonetheless, just
how does an individual’s private decision materially a¤ect the decision reached DEMO
countless other people?
To summarize, actions may be causal or DEMO of outcomes with which they
are correlated. The normative analysis of choice maintains that, in the evaluation of
alternative actions, an outcome ought DEMO be weighted by its probability conditional
on selecting the actions only if the actions have a causal e¤ect on the outcome. We
have hypothesized, however, that people may weigh an outcome by its subjective
conditional probability, even though the alternative actions may be merely diag-
nostic of the outcome. That is, if both action and outcome are believed to be con-
sequences of a common antecedent cause, people may reason that by selecting the
action they have increased the probability of the desirable outcome. DEMO, in the ﬁrst
experiment, subjects selected actions that correlated with longevity despite their rec-
ognition that the actions would not a¤ect their state DEMO health. The actions, which
were directional changes in tolerance to cold DEMO, were mere signs that one pos-
sessed the sort of heart DEMO would endure for longer than the normal span of years.
The experiment further showed that the comforting diagnosis was accepted primarily
by subjects who DEMO that they had purposefully tried to alter their tolerance to the
cold. A certain degree of self-deception was probably involved, for otherwise the
action may not have been attributed to the auspicious antecedent cause but rather DEMO
the motive to infer that cause. The second experiment demonstrated that people may
make decisions diagnostic not only of their own attributes but of DEMO decisions likely
to be made by their like-minded peers. The experiment may shed light on why some
people may vote in spite of the DEMO probability of casting a decisive ballot.
We suspect that the assumed physiological mechanism of pain and heart responses
may have facilitated self-deception in the DEMO experiment. Most people believe that
such responses are not under an individual’s voluntary control. This widespread
belief makes it very easy to deny to DEMO that the action was deliberately enacted
to make a cheerful diagnosis, DEMO how does one intentionally ‘‘pull the strings.’’ That
self-deception may occur more often and be more successful for actions (incorrectly)
believed to be uncontrollable than controllable is an interesting question for further
research. The possibility DEMO a ‘‘motivational placebo e¤ect,’’ in which the desire to
Self-Deception and the Voter’s Illusion 843
have one’s tolerance shifted produces actual DEMO in physiological tolerance
thresholds, seems worth exploring.
We have argued that DEMO often select actions to make favourable diagnoses. But
favourable diagnoses may be reached also by varying the circumstances under which
an action is performed. DEMO subjects in the ﬁrst experiment were required to keep
their arm in the cold as long on the second trial as on the ﬁrst, but they were allowed
to adjust the temperature of the water on DEMO second trial. Then subjects who learned
that longevity was associated with an exercise-induced increase or decrease in toler-
ance may have, respectively, lowered DEMO raised the water’s temperature on the second
trial. That is, by DEMO the water temperature either colder or hotter, they could
still infer DEMO increase or a decrease in tolerance without altering the time of immer-
sion. This point is reminiscent of the self-handicapping strategies discussed by Jones
DEMO Berglas (1978). These authors have argued that people may alter DEMO cir-
cumstances of diagnostic performance to protect the belief that they are basically
competent. For example, by drinking or taking drugs, any level DEMO intellectual per-
formance would not destroy the belief that one is basically bright, for even failure
could be attributed to the debilitating e¤ects of alcohol.
Finally, subsequent research should explicitly manipulate whether people believe
an action to be causal or diagnostic of a favourable outcome. Intuitively, it appears
as though the action would be chosen more often by subjects with DEMO causal theory
than by subjects with a diagnostic theory. But ironically, DEMO intuition may not
always be valid.2 Compare the Catholic to the Calvinist. Both believe that one’s
conduct on earth (virtuous or sinful) is DEMO with one’s post-mortal fate (para-
dise or hell). But the DEMO subscribes to a causal theory in which the location of
one’s soul after death is a direct consequence of how one led one’s life DEMO earth. In
contrast, the Calvinist champions a diagnostic theory in which DEMO conduct and
post-mortal fate are both consequences of the deity’s prior decision. Although Cath-
olics believe they can inﬂuence the location of their life DEMO death, whereas Calvin-
ists believe they cannot, Calvinists may be even more motivated than Catholics to
select the virtuous acts correlated with paradise. DEMO the Calvinist, even a single sinful
deed is evidence enough that DEMO or she is not among the chosen. To the Catholic, it DEMO
more a matter of one’s total good and bad deeds that determines heaven or hell. And
besides, there is always confession.
Notes
This research was supported in part by ONR Grant N00014-79-C-0077. The authors would like DEMO
acknowledge the assistance of Jane Boreta, Doug Passaro, and Nellie Yoshida in serving as experimenters.
844 Quattrone and Tversky
This chapter is adapted from an article that DEMO in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
40.
1. We are indebted to an anonymous reviewer for bringing this point to our DEMO
2. We wish to thank Lee Ross for this idea.
References
Abelson, R. P., Aronson, E., McGuire, W. J., Newcomb, T. M., Rosenberg, M. J., and Tannenbaum,
P. H. (eds.) (1968) Theories of Cognitive Consistency: A Source-book, Chicago: Rand McNally.
Bem, D. J. (1972) ‘‘Self-perception theory,’’ in L. Berkowitz (DEMO), Advances in Experimental Social Psy-
chology, vol. 6, New York: Academic Press.
Festinger, L. (1957) A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Evanston, Ill.: Row, Peterson.
Fisher, R. A. (1959) Smoking, London: Oliver and Boyd.
Gibbard, A., and Harper, W. L. (1978) ‘‘Counterfactuals and two kinds of expected utility,’’ in C. A.
Hooker, J. J. Leach, and E. F. McClennan (eds.), Foundations and Applications of Decision Theory, vol. 1,
Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing Co.
Gur, R. C., and Sackheim, H. A. (DEMO) ‘‘Self-deception: A concept in search of a phenomenon,’’ Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 37, 147–169.
Hilgard, E. R., Ruch, DEMO C., Lange, A. F., Lenox, J. R., Morgan, A. H., and Sachs, L. B. (1974) ‘‘The
psychophysics of cold DEMO pain and its modiﬁcation through hypnotic suggestion,’’ American Journal of
Psychology 87, 17–31.
Je¤rey, R. (1965) The Logic of Decision, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Je¤rey, R. (1981) ‘‘The logic of decision defended,DEMO Synthese 48, 473–492.
Jones, E. E., and Berglas, S. C. (1978) ‘‘Control of attributions about the self through self-handicapping
strategies: the appeal of alcohol and the role of underachievement,’’ Personality and Social DEMO
Bulletin 4, 200–206.
Nozick, R. (1969) ‘‘Newcomb’s problem and two principles of choice,’’ in N. Racher (ed.), Essays in
Honor of Carl G. Hempel. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing Co.
Riker, W. H., and Ordeshook, P. C. (1968) ‘‘A theory of DEMO calculus of voting,’’ American Political
Science Review 62, 25–42.
Skyrms, B. (1980) ‘‘Causal Necessity,’’ New Haven, Conn: Yale University DEMO
34 Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice
Amos Tversky, Shmuel Sattath, DEMO Paul Slovic
The relation of preference between acts or options is the key element of decision
theory that provides the basis for the measurement DEMO utility or value. In axiomatic
treatments of decision theory, the concept DEMO preference appears as an abstract rela-
tion that is given an empirical interpretation through speciﬁc methods of elicitation,
such as choice and matching. DEMO choice the decision maker selects an option from an
o¤ered set of two or more alternatives. In matching the decision maker is required to
DEMO the value of some variable in order to achieve an equivalence between options
(e.g., what chance to win $750 is as attractive as DEMO chance in 10 to win $2,500?).
The standard analysis DEMO choice assumes procedure invariance: Normatively
equivalent procedures for assessing preferences should DEMO rise to the same prefer-
ence order. Indeed, theories of measurement DEMO require the ordering of objects
to be independent of the particular method of assessment. In classical physical mea-
surement, it is commonly assumed that each object possesses a well-deﬁned quantity
of the attribute in question (e.g., length, mass) and that di¤erent measurement pro-
cedures elicit the same ordering of objects with respect to this attribute. Analogously,
the classical DEMO of preference assumes that each individual has a well-deﬁned
preference order (DEMO a utility function) and that di¤erent methods of elicitation pro-
duce DEMO same ordering of options. To determine the heavier of two objects, DEMO
example, we can place them on the two sides of a DEMO balance and observe which
side goes down. Alternatively, we can place DEMO object separately on a sliding scale
and observe the position at which the sliding scale is balanced. Similarly, to deter-
mine the preference order between options we can use either choice or matching.
Note that the DEMO balance is analogous to binary choice, whereas the sliding scale
resembles DEMO
The assumption of procedure invariance is likely to hold when people have well-
articulated preferences and beliefs, as is commonly assumed in the classical theory.
If one likes opera but not ballet, for example, this DEMO is likely to emerge
regardless of whether one compares the two directly or evaluates them indepen-
dently. Procedure invariance may hold even in the DEMO of precomputed prefer-
ences, if people use a consistent algorithm. We DEMO not immediately know the value of
7ð8
þ
9Þ , but we have an algorithm for computing it that yields the same answer
regardless DEMO whether the addition is performed before or after the multiplication.
Similarly, DEMO invariance is likely to be satisﬁed if the value of each option is
computed by a well-deﬁned criterion, such as expected utility.
846 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
Studies of decision and judgment, however, indicate that the foregoing conditions
for procedure invariance are not generally true and that people often do not have
well-deﬁned values and beliefs (e.g., Fischho¤, Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1980; March,
1978; Shafer & Tversky, 1985). In these situations, observed preferences are not
simply DEMO o¤ from some master list; they are actually constructed in the DEMO
process. Furthermore, choice is contingent or context sensitive: It depends on the
framing of the problem and on the method of elicitation (Payne, 1982; Slovic &
Lichtenstein, 1983; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986)DEMO Di¤erent elicitation procedures
highlight di¤erent aspects of options and suggest alternative heuristics, which may
give rise to inconsistent responses. An adequate account of choice, therefore, requires
a psychological analysis of the elicitation process and its DEMO on the observed
response.
What are the di¤erences between choice and matching, and how do they a¤ect
people’s responses? Because our understanding of DEMO mental processes involved is
limited, the analysis is necessarily sketchy and DEMO Nevertheless, there is
reason to expect that choice and matching may DEMO in a predictable manner. Con-
sider the following example. Suppose Joan faces a choice between two job o¤ers that
vary in interest and salary. DEMO a natural ﬁrst step, Joan examines whether one option
dominates the DEMO (i.e., is superior in all respects). If not, she DEMO try to reframe the
problem (e.g., by representing the options in terms of higher order attributes) to
produce a dominant alternative (Montgomery, 1983). If no dominance emerges, she
may examine next whether one option enjoys a decisive advantage: that is, whether
the advantage of DEMO option far outweighs the advantage of the other. If neither
option has a decisive advantage, the decision maker seeks a procedure for resolving
the conﬂict. Because it is often unclear how to trade one attribute against DEMO, a
common procedure for resolving conﬂict in such situations is to DEMO the option that
is superior on the more important attribute. This procedure, which is essentially lexi-
cographic, has two attractive features. First, it does not require the decision maker to
assess the trade-o¤ between the DEMO, thereby reducing mental e¤ort and cogni-
tive strain. Second, it provides a compelling argument for choice that can be used to
justify the DEMO to oneself as well as to others.
Consider next the matching version of the problem. Suppose Joan has to deter-
mine the salary at DEMO the less interesting job would be as attractive as the more
interesting one. The qualitative procedure described earlier cannot be used to
solve the DEMO problem, which requires a quantitative assessment or a matching
of intervals. DEMO perform this task adequately, the decision maker should take into
account DEMO the size of the intervals (deﬁned relative to the natural range DEMO varia-
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 847
tion of the attributes in DEMO) and the relative weights of these attributes. One
method of matching DEMO equates the size of the two intervals, and then adjusts the
DEMO interval according to the relative weight of the attribute. This approach
is particularly compelling when the attributes are expressed in the same units (e.g.,
money, percent, test scores), but it may also be DEMO in other situations where it is
easier to compare ranges than to establish a rate of exchange. Because adjustments
are generally insu‰cient (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974) this procedure is likely to
induce a relatively ﬂat DEMO uniform weighting of attributes.
The preceding discussion is not meant to provide a comprehensive account of
choice or of matching. It merely suggests di¤erent DEMO or computational
schemes that are likely to be used in the two tasks. If people tend to choose according
to the more important dimension, or if they match options by adjusting unweighed
intervals, then the two procedures are likely to yield di¤erent results. In particular,
choice is DEMO to be more lexicographic than matching: That is, the more promi-
nent attribute will weigh more heavily in choice than in matching. This DEMO the promi-
nence hypothesis investigated in the following section.
The discrepancy between choice and matching was ﬁrst observed in a study by
Slovic (1975) that was motivated by the ancient philosophical puzzle of how to
choose between equally attractive alternatives. In this study the respondents ﬁrst
matched di¤erent DEMO of (two-dimensional) options and, in a later session, chose
between the matched options. Slovic found that the subjects did not choose ran-
DEMO but rather tended to select the option that was superior on the more important
dimension. This observation supports the prominence hypothesis, but the evidence is
not conclusive for two reasons. First, the participants always matched the options
prior to the choice hence the data could be explained by DEMO hypothesis that the more
important dimension looms larger in the later trial. Second, and more important,
each participant chose between matched options hence the results could reﬂect a
common tie-breaking procedure rather than a genuine DEMO of preferences. After
all, rationality does not entail a random breaking DEMO ties. A rational person may be
indi¤erent between a cash amount and a gamble but always pick the cash when
forced to take one DEMO the two.
To overcome these di‰culties we develop in the next section a method for testing
the prominence hypothesis that is based entirely on DEMO (between-subjects)
comparisons, and we apply this method to a variety of choice problems. In the fol-
lowing two sections we present a DEMO and mathematical analysis of the elic-
itation process and apply it to several phenomena of judgment and choice. The
theoretical and practical implications of DEMO work are discussed in the ﬁnal section.
848 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
Tests of the Prominence Hypothesis
Interpersonal DEMO
We illustrate the experimental procedure and the logic of the test of the prominence
hypothesis in a problem involving a choice between job candidates. DEMO participants
in the ﬁrst set of studies were young men and women (ages 20–30 years) who were
taking a series of aptitude tests DEMO a vocational testing institute in Tel Aviv, Israel.
The problems were DEMO in writing, and the participants were tested in small
groups. They DEMO agreed to take part in the study, knowing it had no DEMO on their
test scores. Some of the results were replicated with Stanford undergraduates.
Problem 1 (Production Engineer)
Imagine that, as an executive DEMO a company, you have to select between two candidates for
a DEMO of a Production Engineer. The candidates were interviewed by a committee who
scored them on two attributes (technical knowledge and human relations) on DEMO scale from 100
(superb) to 40 (very weak). Both DEMO are important for the position in question, but
technical knowledge is DEMO important than human relations. On the basis of the following
scores, DEMO of the two candidates would you choose?
Candidate X
Candidate Y
Technical Human
knowledge relations ½N ¼ 63
86 76 [65%]
78 91 DEMO
The number of respondents ðNÞ and the percentage who chose each option are
given in brackets on the right side of the table. In DEMO problem, about two thirds of
the respondents selected the candidate who DEMO a higher score on the more important
attribute (technical knowledge).
DEMO group of respondents received the same data except that one of the four
scores was missing. They were asked ‘‘to complete the missing score DEMO that the two
candidates would be equally suitable for the job.’’ Suppose, for example, that the
lower left value (78) were missing DEMO the table. The respondent’s task would then
be to generate a score for Candidate Y in technical knowledge so as to match the
two DEMO The participants were reminded that ‘‘Y has a higher score than X in
human relations, hence, to match the two candidates Y must DEMO a lower score than
X in technical knowledge.’’
Assuming that higher scores are preferable to lower ones, it is possible to infer the
response to the choice task from the response to the matching task. Suppose, for
example, that one produces a value of 80 in the matching task (when the missing
value is 78). This means that X ’s score proﬁle (86; 76) is judged equivalent to the
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 849
proﬁle (80; 91), DEMO in turn dominates Y ’s proﬁle (78; 91). Thus, DEMO matching value
of 80 indicates that X is preferable to Y . More generally, a matching response above
78 implies a preference for X ; a matching response below 78 implies a preference for
Y ; DEMO a matching response of 78 implies indi¤erence between X and Y.
Formally, let ðX1; X2Þ and ðY1; Y2Þ denote the values of options X and Y on
Attributes 1 and 2, respectively. Let V be the value of Y1 for which the options are
matched. We show DEMO, under the standard assumptions, X is preferred to Y if and
only if V > Y1 . Suppose V > Y1 , then DEMO; X2Þ is equivalent to ðV; Y2Þ by matching,
ðV; DEMO is preferred to ðY1; Y2Þ by dominance, hence, X is DEMO to Y by tran-
sitivity. The other cases are similar.
We use the subscript 1 to denote the primary, or the more important dimension,
and the subscript 2 to denote the secondary, or the less important dimension—
whenever they are deﬁned. If neither option dominates the other, X denotes the
option that is superior on the primary dimension and DEMO denotes the option that is
superior on the secondary dimension. Thus, DEMO is better than Y1 and Y2 is better
than X2.
Let C denote the percentage of respondents who chose X over Y , and DEMO M
denote the percentage of people whose matching response favored X over Y . Thus,
C and M measure the tendency to decide DEMO to the more important dimen-
sion in the choice and in the matching tasks, respectively. Assuming random alloca-
tion of subjects, procedure invariance DEMO C ¼ M , whereas the prominence
hypothesis implies C > M . As was shown earlier, the two contrasting predictions can
be tested by using aggregate between-subjects data.
To estimate M , we presented four DEMO groups of about 60 respondents each
with the data of problem 1, each with a di¤erent missing value, and we asked them
to DEMO the two candidates. The following table presents the values of M derived
from the matching data for each of the four missing values, which are given in
parentheses.
Candidate X
Candidate Y
There were no signiﬁcant DEMO among the four matching groups, although M
was greater when the DEMO value was low rather than high ðML ¼ 39 > 29 ¼ MHÞ
and when the missing value referred to the primary rather than DEMO the secondary
attribute ðM1 ¼ 38 > 30 ¼
compared with C
¼
1. Technical Knowledge 2. Human Relations
32% (86) 33% (76)
44% (78) 26% (91)
M2Þ. Overall, the matching DEMO yielded M ¼ 34% as
65% obtained from choice ðp <:01Þ. This result supports the
850 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
hypothesis that the more important attribute (e.g., technical knowledge) looms larger
in choice than in matching.
In DEMO 1, it is reasonable to assume—as stated—that for a production engi-
DEMO, technical knowledge is more important than human relations. Problem 2 had
DEMO same structure as problem 1, except that the primary and secondary DEMO
were manipulated. Problem 2 dealt with the choice between candidates for the posi-
tion of an advertising agent. The candidates were characterized by their DEMO on
two dimensions: creativity and competence. One half of the participants DEMO told
that ‘‘for the position in question, creativity is more important DEMO competence,’’
whereas the other half of the participants were told the opposite. As in problem 1,
most participants (65%, N ¼ DEMO) chose according to the more important attribute
(whether it was creativity or competence) but only 38% ðN ¼ 276Þ of the matching
responses favored X over Y . Again, M was higher for the primary than for the sec-
ondary attribute, but all four values of M were smaller than C . The next two prob-
lems involve policy DEMO concerning safety and the environment.
Problem 3 (Tra‰c Accidents)
About DEMO people are killed each year in Israel in tra‰c accidents. The ministry of transpor-
tation investigates various programs to reduce the number of casualties. DEMO the follow-
ing two programs, described in terms of yearly costs (in millions of dollars) and the number of
casualties per year that is expected following the implementation of each program.
Program X
Program Y
DEMO number
of casualties Cost ½N ¼ 96
500 $55M [67%]
570 $12M [33%]
Which program do you favor?
The data on the right DEMO of the table indicate that two thirds of the respon-
dents chose Program X , which saves more lives at a higher cost per DEMO saved. Two
other groups matched the cost of either Program X or Program Y so as to make
the two programs equally attractive. The DEMO majority of matching re-
sponses in both groups ð96%; N
¼
DEMO favored the more economical Program Y
that saves fewer lives. Problem 3 yields a dramatic violation of invariance: C ¼ 68%
but M ¼ 4%. This pattern follows from the prominence hypothesis, assuming the
number of casualties is more important than cost. There was no di¤erence between
the DEMO that matched the high ($55M) or the low ($12M) values.
A similar pattern of responses was observed in problem 4, which involves an
environmental issue. The participants were asked to compare two programs for DEMO
control of a polluted beach:
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 851
Program X : A comprehensive DEMO for a complete clean-up of the beach at a yearly cost of
$750,000 to the taxpayers.
Program Y : A limited program for DEMO partial clean-up of the beach (that will not make it suit-
DEMO for swimming) at a yearly cost of $250,000 to the DEMO
Assuming the control of pollution is the primary dimension and the cost is sec-
ondary, we expect that the comprehensive program will be more popular in choice
than in matching. This prediction was conﬁrmed: C ¼ 48% ðN ¼ 104Þ and M ¼ 12%
ðN ¼ 170Þ . DEMO matching data were obtained from two groups of respondents who
assessed the cost of each program so as to match the other. As in DEMO 3, these
groups gave rise to practically identical values of M.
DEMO the choice and the matching procedures are strategically equivalent, the
rational DEMO of choice implies C ¼ M . The two procedures, however, are not
informationally equivalent because the missing value in the matching task DEMO avail-
able in the choice task. To create an informationally equivalent task we modiﬁed the
matching task by asking respondents, prior to the assessment of the missing value,
(a) to consider the value used DEMO the choice problem and indicate ﬁrst whether it is
too high or too low, and (b) to write down the value that they consider appropriate.
In problem 3, for example, the modiﬁed procedure read DEMO follows:
Expected number
of casualties Cost
Program X 500 ?
DEMO Y 570 $12M
You are asked to determine the cost of Program X that would make it equivalent to Pro-
gram Y . (a) Is the value of $55M too high or too low? (b)What is the value you consider
appropriate?
The modiﬁed matching procedure DEMO equivalent to choice not only strategically
but also informationally. Let C be the proportion of responses to question (a) that
lead to the DEMO of X (e.g., ‘‘too low’’ in the preceding example). Let M be
the proportion of (matching) responses to question (b) DEMO favor option X (e.g., a
value that exceeds $55M in the preceding example). Thus, we may view C as
choice in a matching context and M as matching in a choice context. The values DEMO
C and M for problems 1–4 are presented in table 34.1, DEMO yields the ordering
C > C > M > M . The ﬁnding C > C shows that merely framing the question in
a DEMO context reduces the relative weight of the primary dimension. Conversely,
M > M indicates that placing the matching task after a choice-like task DEMO
the relative weight of the primary dimension. Finally, C > M DEMO a within-
subject and within-problem violation of invariance in which the response to Question
852 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
Table 34.1
Percentages of Responses Favoring DEMO Primary Dimension under Di¤erent Elicitation Procedures
Dimensions
Problem Primary Secondary
Choice
(DEMO)
Information
control
C

M

Matching
(M)
y
DEMO Engineer Technical Human 65 57 47 34 .82
N knowledge relations 63 156 151 267
2. Agent Competence Creativity 65 52 41 38 .72
DEMO 60 155 152 276
3. Accidents Casualities Cost 68 50 18 4 .19
N 105 96 82 146
4. Pollution Health Cost 48 32 DEMO 12 .45
N 104 103 94 170
5. Beneﬁts 1 year 4 years 59 46 .86
N 56 46
6. Coupons Books Travel 66 DEMO .57
N 58 193
Unweighted
mean 62 48 30 24
Note: DEMO
ing responses favored X over Y; C
M

¼
percentage DEMO respondents who chose X over Y; M

percentage of matching DEMO to Question b that favor option X.
¼
¼
percentage of respondents whose match-
percentage of responses to Question a that lead to the DEMO of X;
¼
a favors X and the response to Question b favors Y . This pattern of responses indi-
cates a failure, on the part of some subjects, to appreciate the logical connection
between Questions a and b. It is noteworthy, however, that 86% of DEMO incon-
sistencies follow the pattern implied by the prominence hypothesis.
In the previous problems, the primary and the secondary attributes were controlled
by the instructions, as in problems 1 and 2, or by the intrinsic DEMO of the attributes,
as in problems 3 and 4. (People DEMO agree that saving lives and eliminating
pollution are more important goals than cutting public expenditures.) The next two
problems involved beneﬁt plans in which the primary and the secondary dimensions
were determined by economic considerations.
Problem DEMO (Beneﬁt Plans)
Imagine that, as a part of a proﬁt-sharing program, your employer o¤ers you a choice between
the following plans. Each plan o¤ers two payments, in one year and in four years.
Plan X
Plan Y
Payment in Payment in
1 year 4 years ½N DEMO 36
$2,000 $2,000 [59%]
$1,000 $4,000 [41%]
Which plan do you prefer?
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 853
Table 34.2
Percentages of Respondents DEMO
¼
101Þ Who Chose Between-Matched Alternatives ðM
to the Primary Dimension (DEMO Slovic, 1975)
¼
50%Þ According
Dimensions
Alternatives Primary Secondary Choice DEMO
C
1. Baseball players Batting average Home runs Value to team 62
2. College applicants Motivation English Potential success 69
3. Gifts Cash Coupons DEMO 85
4. Typists Accuracy Speed Typing ability 84
5. Athletes Chin-ups Push-ups Fitness 68
6. Routes to work Time Distance Attractiveness 75
7. Auto DEMO Quality Price Attractiveness 67
8. TV commercials Number Time Annoyance 83
9. Readers Comprehension Speed Reading ability 79
10. Baseball teams % of games DEMO % of games won Standing 86
against ﬁrst place against last place
team team
Unweighted mean 76
Note: C
¼
percentage of respondents who chose X over Y.
Because people surely prefer to receive a payment DEMO rather than later, we
assume that the earlier payment (in 1 year) acts as the primary attribute, and the
later payment (in 4 years) acts as the secondary attribute. The results support the
hypothesis: C ¼ 59% ðN ¼ 56Þ whereas M ¼ 46% ðN ¼ 46Þ.
Problem 6 resembled problem 5 except that the employee was o¤ered DEMO choice
between two bonus plans consisting of a di¤erent combination of coupons for books
and for travel. Because the former could be used in DEMO large chain of bookstores,
whereas the latter were limited to organized tours with a particular travel agency,
we assumed that the book DEMO would serve as the primary dimension. Under
this interpretation, the prominence DEMO emerged again: C ¼ 66% ðN ¼ 58Þ and
M ¼ DEMO ðN ¼ 193Þ. As in previous problems, M was greater when DEMO missing
value was low rather than high ðML ¼ 17 > 3 ¼ MHÞ and when the missing value
referred to the primary rather DEMO the secondary attribute ðM1 ¼ 19 > 4 ¼ M2Þ. All
values of M , however, were substantially smaller than C.
Intrapersonal Tests
Slovic’s (1975) original demonstration of the choice-matching discrepancy was based
entirely on DEMO intrapersonal analysis. In his design, the participants ﬁrst matched the
relevant DEMO and then selected between the matched options at a later date. They
were also asked afterward to indicate the more important attribute in each DEMO The
854 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
main results are summarized in table DEMO, which presents for each choice problem
the options, the primary and the secondary attributes, and the resulting values of C.
In every case, the value of M is 50% by construction.
The results indicate that, in all problems, the majority of participants broke the tie
between DEMO matched options in the direction of the more important dimension as
implied by the prominence hypothesis. This conclusion held regardless of whether the
estimated DEMO value belonged to the primary or the secondary dimension, or
whether DEMO was the high value or the low value on the dimension. Note that the
results of table 34.2 alone could be explained by a DEMO in weight following the
matching procedure (because the matching always preceded DEMO choice) or by
the application of a common tie-breaking procedure (because for each participant
the two options were matched). These explanations, however, do not apply to the
interpersonal data of table 34.1.
On the other hand, table 34.2 demonstrates the prominence e¤ect within the data
of each subject. The value of C was only slightly higher (unweighted mean: 78) when
computed relative to each subject’s ordering of the importance DEMO the dimensions
(as was done in the original analysis), presumably DEMO of the general agreement
among the respondents about which dimension was primary.
Theoretical Analysis
The data described in the previous section show that the DEMO dimension looms
larger in choice than in matching. This e¤ect gives rise to a marked discrepancy
between choice and matching, which violates the principle of procedure invariance
assumed in the rational theory of choice. The prominence DEMO raises three general
questions. First, what are the psychological mechanisms that DEMO the choice-
matching discrepancy and other failures of procedure invariance? Second, what
changes in the traditional theory are required in order to accommodate DEMO e¤ects?
Third, what are the implications of the present results DEMO the analysis of choice in
general, and the elicitation of preference DEMO particular? The remainder of this article is
devoted to these questions.
DEMO Compatibility Principle
One possible explanation of the prominence e¤ect, introduced earlier DEMO this article, is
the tendency to select the option that is DEMO on the primary dimension, in sit-
uations where the other option DEMO not have a decisive advantage on the secondary
dimension. This procedure is easy to apply and justify because it resolves conﬂict on
the basis DEMO qualitative arguments (i.e., the prominence ordering of the dimensions)
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 855
without establishing a rate of DEMO The matching task, on the other hand, can-
not be resolved in the same manner. The decision maker must resort to quantitative
comparisons DEMO determine what interval on one dimension matches a given interval
on the second dimension. This requires the setting of a common metric in which DEMO
attributes are likely to be weighted more equally, particularly when it DEMO natural to
match their ranges or to compute cost per unit (DEMO, the amount of money spent to
save a single life).
DEMO is instructive to distinguish between qualitative and quantitative arguments for
choice. Qualitative, or ordinal, arguments are based on the ordering of the levels
DEMO each dimension, or on the prominence ordering of the dimensions. Quantita-
DEMO, or cardinal, arguments are based on the comparison of value di¤erences along
the primary and the secondary dimensions. Thus, dominance and a lexicographic
ordering are purely qualitative decision rules, whereas most other models of multi-
attribute choice make essential use of quantitative considerations. The prominence
e¤ect indicates DEMO qualitative considerations loom larger in the ordinal procedure
of choice than in the cardinal procedure of matching, or equivalently, that quantita-
tive considerations DEMO larger in matching than in choice. The prominence hypoth-
esis, therefore, may be construed as an example of a more general principle of
DEMO
The choice-matching discrepancy, like other violations of procedure invariance,
indicates DEMO the weighting of the attributes is inﬂuenced by the method of elicita-
tion. Alternative procedures appear to highlight di¤erent aspects of the options and
DEMO induce di¤erent weights. To interpret and predict such e¤ects, we seek
DEMO principles that relate task characteristics to the weighting of attributes
and the evaluation of options. One such explanation is the compatibility principle.
According to DEMO principle, the weight of any input component is enhanced by its
DEMO with the output. The rationale for this principle is that the character-
istics of the task and the response scale prime the most compatible DEMO of the
stimulus. For example, the pricing of gambles is likely DEMO emphasize payo¤s more
than probability because both the response and the payo¤s are expressed in dollars.
Furthermore, noncompatibility (in content, scale, or DEMO) between the input and
the output requires additional mental transformations, which increase e¤ort and
error, and reduce conﬁdence and impact (Fitts & DEMO, 1953; Wickens, 1984). We
shall next illustrate the compatibility DEMO in studies of prediction and similarity
and then develop a formal theory that encompasses a variety of compatibility e¤ects,
including the choice-matching discrepancy DEMO the preference reversal phenomenon.
A simple demonstration of scale compatibility was obtained in a study by Slovic,
Gri‰n, and Tversky (1988). DEMO subjects ðN
¼
234Þ were asked to predict the judg-
856 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
ments of an admission committee of DEMO small, selective college. For each of 10 appli-
cants the subjects DEMO two items of information: a rank on the verbal section of
DEMO Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) and the presence or absence of strong extracur-
ricular activities. The subjects were told that the admission committee ranks DEMO 500
applicants and accepts about the top fourth. Half of the subjects predicted the rank
assigned to each applicant, whereas the other half predicted whether each applicant
was accepted or rejected.
The compatibility principle implies that DEMO numerical data (i.e., SAT rank) will
loom larger in the DEMO prediction task, whereas the categorical data (i.e., the
presence or DEMO of extracurricular activities) will loom larger in the categotical
prediction of DEMO or rejection. The results conﬁrmed the hypothesis. For each
pair of applicants, in which neither one dominates the other, the percentage of
responses DEMO favored the applicant with the higher SAT was recorded. Summing
across all pairs, this value was 61.4% in the numerical prediction task and 44.6%
in the categorical prediction task. The di¤erence between the groups is highly DEMO
niﬁcant. Evidently, the numerical data had more impact in the numerical DEMO,
whereas the categorical data had more impact in the categorical task. This result
demonstrates the compatibility principle and reinforces the proposed interpretation
of DEMO choice-matching discrepancy in which the relative weight of qualitative argu-
ments is larger in the qualitative method of choice than in the quantitative matching
DEMO
In the previous example, compatibility was induced by the formal correspondence
DEMO the scales of the dependent and the independent variables. Compatibility
e¤ects can also be induced by semantic correspondence, as illustrated in the follow-
ing example, taken from the study of similarity. In general, the similarity DEMO objects
(e.g., faces, people, letters) increases with the salience DEMO the features they share and
decreases with the salience of the features that distinguish between them. More spe-
ciﬁcally, the contrast model (Tversky, 1977) represents the similarity of objects as a
linear combination of the measures of their common and their distinctive features.
Thus, the similarity of a and b is monotonically related to
yf ðA V BÞ gðADBÞ;DEMO
is the set of features that belongs to one object and not to the other. The scaleswhere A V B is the set of DEMO shared by a and b, and ADB ¼ðA BÞ U ðBfandAÞ
DEMO are the measures of the respective feature sets.
The compatibility hypothesis suggests that common features loom larger in judg-
ments of similarity than in DEMO of dissimilarity, whereas distinctive features
loom larger in judgments of dissimilarity DEMO in judgments of similarity. As a con-
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 857
sequence, the two judgments are not mirror images. A pair of objects with many
common and many DEMO features could be judged as more similar, as well as
more DEMO, than another pair of objects with fewer common and fewer distinc-
DEMO features. Tversky and Gati (1978) observed this pattern in the comparison of
pairs of well-known countries with pairs of countries that were less DEMO to the
respondents. For example, most subjects in the similarity condition DEMO East
Germany and West Germany as more similar to each other than Sri Lanka and
Nepal, whereas most subjects in the dissimilarity condition selected East Germany
and West Germany as more di¤erent from each other than DEMO Lanka and Nepal.
These observations were explained by the contrast model with the added assumption
that the relative weight of the common features is DEMO in similarity than in dis-
imilarity judgments (Tversky, 1977).
Contingent Trade-O¤ Models
To accommodate the compatibility e¤ects observed in studies of preference, predic-
tion and judgment, we need models in which the trade-o¤s among inputs depend
on the nature of the output. In the present section DEMO develop a hierarchy of models
of this type, called contingent trade-o¤ DEMO For simplicity, we investigate the
two-dimensional case and follow the choice-matching DEMO Extensions
and applications are discussed later. It is convenient to use A ¼fa; b; c; ...g and
Zwhenever they are properly deﬁned. The object set¼fz; y; x; ...g to denote the primary and the secondary attributes, respectively,S is given by the product set
A Z , with typical elements az, by, and so on. Let bc DEMO the preference relation
obtained by choice, and let bm be the DEMO relation derived from matching.
As in the standard analysis of indi¤erence curves (e.g., Varian, 1984, chap. 3), we
assume that each DEMO, i ¼ c; m, is a weak order, that is, reﬂexive, connected, and
transitive. We also assume that the levels of each attribute are consistently ordered,
independent of the (ﬁxed) level DEMO the other attribute. That is,
¼
az bi bz i¤ ay bi by and az bi ay i¤ bz bi by; i c; m:
Under these assumptions, in conjunction with the appropriate structural DEMO
(see, e.g., Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky, 1971, chap. 7), there exist functions Fi,
Gi , and Ui , deﬁned on A, Z, and Re  Re, respectively, such that
az bi by i¤ Ui½FiðaÞ; GiðzÞ bUi½FiðbÞ; GiðyÞ; ð1Þ
where Ui, i ¼ c; m is monotonically increasing in each of DEMO arguments.
Equation 1 imposes no constraints on the relation between choice and matching.
Although our data show that the two orders do not generally DEMO, it seems reason-
858 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
Figure 34.1
A dual indi¤erence map DEMO by the general model (equations 1 and 2).
able to DEMO that they do coincide in unidimensional comparisons. Thus, we assume
az DEMO bz i¤ az bm bz and az bc ay i¤ az bm ay:
It is easy to see that this condition is both DEMO and su‰cient for the monoto-
nicity of the respective scales. That is,
FcðbÞ bFcðaÞ
GcðzÞ bGcðyÞ
i¤
i¤
FmðbÞ bFmðaÞ
GmðzÞ bGmðyÞ:
DEMO
ð2Þ
Equations 1 and 2 deﬁne the general contingent trade-o¤ model that is assumed
throughout. The other models discussed in this section are obtained DEMO imposing
further restrictions on the relation between choice and matching. The general model
corresponds to a dual indi¤erence map, that is, two families DEMO indi¤erence curves,
one induced by choice and one induced by matching. A graphical illustration of a
dual map is presented in ﬁgure 34.1.
DEMO next consider a more restrictive model that constrains the relation between the
rates of substitution of the two attributes obtained by the two elicitation DEMO
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 859
Suppose the indi¤erence curves are DEMO, and let RSi denote the rate of
substitution between the two DEMO (A and Z ) according to procedure i ¼ c; m.
Thus, RSi ¼ F 0i=G0i , where F 0i and G0i , respectively, are the partial derivatives of Ui
with respect to Fi and Gi . Hence, RSiðazÞ is the negative of the slope of the indi¤er-
ence curve at the point az. Note that RSi is a DEMO quantity even though Fi, Gi
and Ui are only ordinal scales.
DEMO contingent trade-o¤ model is proportional if the ratio of RSc to RSm is the same
at each point. That is,
RScðazÞ=RSmðazÞ¼ constant:
DEMO
Recall that in the standard economic model, the foregoing ratio equals DEMO The
proportional model assumes that this ratio is a constant, but DEMO necessarily one. The
indi¤erence maps induced by choice and by matching, DEMO, can be mapped into
each other by multiplying the RS value DEMO every point by the same constant.
Both the general and the proportional model impose few constraints on the utility
functions Ui . In many DEMO, preferences between multiattribute options can be
represented additively. That is, there exist functions Fi and Gi deﬁned on A and Z,
respectively, such that
az bi by i¤
FiðaÞþ GiðzÞ bFiðbÞþ GiðyÞ;
i
DEMO
c; m;
ð4Þ
where Fi and Gi are interval scales DEMO a common unit. The existence of such an
additive representation is tantamount to the existence of a monotone transformation
of the axes that maps DEMO indi¤erence curves into parallel straight lines.
Assuming the contingent trade-o¤ model, DEMO the appropriate structural con-
ditions, the following cancellation condition is both DEMO and su‰cient for
additivity (equation 4), see Krantz et al. (1971, chap. 6):
ay bi bx and bz bi cy DEMO az bi cx;
i
¼
c; m:
If both DEMO and additivity are assumed, we obtain a particularly simple
form, called the contingent weighting model, in which the utility scales Fc, Fm DEMO
Gc, Gm are linearly related. In other words, there is a monotone transformation of
the axes that simultaneously linearizes both sets of indi¤erence DEMO Thus, if both
equations 3 and 4 hold, there exist functions F and G deﬁned on A and Z , respec-
tively, and constants aibi, i ¼ c; m, such that
az bi by i¤ aiFðaÞþ biGðzÞ baiFðbÞþ biGðyÞ
i¤ FðaÞþ yiGðzÞ bFðbÞþ yiGðyÞ;
ð5Þ
860 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
Figure 34.2
A dual indi¤erence map DEMO by the additive model (equation 4).
where yi ¼ bi=ai DEMO In this model, therefore, the indi¤erence maps induced by choice
and by matching are represented as two sets of parallel straight lines that DEMO only
in slope yi, i ¼ c; m (see ﬁgure DEMO). We are primarily interested in the ratio
y ¼ yc=ym of these slopes.
Because the rate of substitution in the additive model is DEMO, it is possible to
test proportionality (equation 3) without assessing DEMO RSi . In particular, the con-
tingent weighting model (equation 5) implies the following interlocking condition;
ax bc bw; dwbc cx;DEMO
and by bm az imply dy bm cz;
and the same holds when the attributes (A and Z ) and the orders (DEMO and bm ) are
interchanged. Figure 34.3 presents a graphic illustration of this condition. The inter-
locking condition is closely related to triple cancellation, or the Reidemeister condi-
tion (see Krantz et al., 1971, 6.2.1), tested by Coombs, Bezembinder, and Goode
(1967). The major di¤erence between the assumptions is that the present interlocking
condition involves two DEMO rather than one. This condition says, in e¤ect, that the
intradimensional ordering of A-intervals or Z -intervals is independent of the method
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 861
Figure 34.3
A graphic illustration DEMO the interlocking condition where arrows denote preferences.
of elicitation. This can be seen most clearly by deriving the interlocking condition
from the contingent weighting DEMO From the hypotheses of the condition, in con-
junction with the DEMO, we obtain
FðaÞþ ycGðxÞ bFðbÞþ ycGðwÞ
FðdÞþ ycGðwÞ FðcÞþ ycGðxÞ
FðbÞþ DEMO bFðaÞþ ymGðzÞ
The right-hand inequalities yield
or
or
or
yc½GðxÞ GðwÞ bFðbÞ FðaÞ
FðdÞ FðcÞ byc½GðxÞ GðwÞ
FðbÞ FðaÞ bym½GðzÞ GðyÞ:
FðdÞ FðcÞ DEMO GðyÞ
or
FðdÞþ ymGðyÞ bFðcÞþ ymGðzÞ;
hence dy bm cz as required.
The interlocking condition is not only necessary but also su‰cient, because it
implies that the inequalities
FiðdÞ FiðcÞ bFiðbÞ FiðaÞ
and
GiðzÞ GiðyÞ DEMO GiðwÞ
862 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
Figure 34.4
A hierarchy of contingent DEMO models. (Implications are denoted by arrows.)
are independent of i DEMO c; m, that is, the two procedures yield the same DEMO of
intradimensional intervals. But because Fc and Fm (as well as DEMO and Gm ) are interval
scales, they must be linearly related. DEMO, there exist functions F and G and con-
stants ai, bi such that
az bi by i¤
aiFðaÞþ biGðzÞ baiFðbÞþ biGðyÞ:
Thus, we have established the following result.
theorem: Assuming additivity (equation 4), the contingent weighting model (equa-
tion 5) holds i¤ the interlocking condition is satisﬁed.
Perhaps the simplest, and most restrictive, instance of DEMO 5 is the case where
A and Z are sets of real numbers and both F and G are linear. In this case, the model
reduces to
az bi by i¤
i¤
aia
þ
biz baib
DEMO
bi y
a
þ
yiz bb
þ
yi y;
yi
¼
bi=ai;
i
¼
c; m:
ð6Þ
The hierarchy of contingent trade-o¤ models is presented in ﬁgure 34.4, where
implications are denoted by arrows.
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 863
In the following section we DEMO the contingent weighting model to several sets of
data and estimate the relative weights of the two attributes under di¤erent elicitation
procedures. Naturally, all the models of ﬁgure 34.4 are consistent with the compati-
bility hypothesis. DEMO use the linear model (equation 6) because it is highly parsimo-
nious and reduces the estimation to a single parameter y ¼ yc=ym DEMO If linearity of
scales or additivity of attributes is seriously violated in the data, higher models in the
hierarchy should be used. The contingent weighting model can be readily extended to
deal with more than two DEMO and methods of elicitation.
The same formal model can be applied when the di¤erent preference orders bi are
generated by di¤erent individuals rather than DEMO di¤erent procedures. Indeed, the
interlocking condition is both necessary and su‰cient DEMO representing the (additive)
preference orders of di¤erent individuals as variations DEMO the weighting of attributes.
(This notion underlies the indscal approach to DEMO scaling, Carroll,
1972). The two representations can be naturally DEMO to accommodate both
individual di¤erences and procedural variations. The following analyses focus on the
latter problem.
Applications
The Choice-Matching Discrepancy
We ﬁrst compute y DEMO yc=ym from the choice and matching data, summarized in table
34.1. DEMO Cðaz; byÞ be the percentage of respondents who chose az over DEMO, and let
Mðaz; byÞ be the percentage of respondents whose matching response favored az
over by. Consider the respondents who matched the options DEMO adjusting the second
component of the second option. Because di¤erent respondents produced di¤erent
values of the missing component ðyÞ, we can view Mðaz; DEMO:Þ as a (decreasing) func-
tion of the missing component. Let y be the value of the second attribute for which
Mðax; byÞ¼ Cðaz; byÞ.
If the choice and the matching agree, y should DEMO equal to y, whereas the promi-
nence hypothesis implies that y DEMO between y and z (i.e., jz

yj > jz

yj). To esti-
mate y from these data, we introduce an additional assumption, in the spirit of
probabilistic conjoint measurement (Falmagne, 1985, chap. 11), which relates the
linear model (6) to the observed percentage of responses.
Mðaz; byÞ¼ Cðaz; byÞ
i¤
i¤
ða DEMO þymyÞ¼ða
ymðz  yÞ¼ ycðz  yÞ:
Under this assumption we can compute
þ
yczÞðb
þ
yc yÞ
ð7Þ
864 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
¼ yc=ym ¼ðz  yÞ=ðz  DEMO;
y
and the same analysis applies to the other three components (i.e., a, b, and z).
We applied this method DEMO the aggregate data from problems 1 to 6. The average
values of y, across subjects and components, are displayed in table 34.1 for DEMO
of the six problems. The values of y ¼ yc=ym are all less than unity, as implied by
the prominence hypothesis. Note that y provides an altemative index of the choice-
matching discrepancy that is based DEMO equations 6 and 7—unlike the di¤erence
between C and M that does not presuppose any measurement structure.
Prediction of Performance
We next use the DEMO weighting model to analyze the e¤ect of scale compati-
bility observed in a study of the prediction of students’ performance, conducted by
Slovic et al. (1988). The subjects ðN ¼ 234Þ in this study were asked to predict the
performance of 10 students in a course (e.g., History) on the basis of their perfor-
mance in two other DEMO (e.g., Philosophy and English). For each of the 10 stu-
dents, the subjects received a grade in one course (from A DEMO D), and a class rank
(from 1 to 100) in the other course. One half of the respondents were asked to predict
DEMO grade, and the other half were asked to predict class rank. DEMO courses were
counterbalanced across respondents. The compatibility principle implies that a given
predictor (e.g., grade in Philosophy) will be given more weight when the predicted
variable is expressed on the same scale (e.g., grade DEMO History) than when it is
expressed on a di¤erent scale (e.g., class rank in History). The relative weight of
grades to ranks, therefore, will be higher in the group that predicts grades than DEMO the
group that predicts ranks.
Let ðri; gjÞ be a student DEMO with rank i in the ﬁrst course and grade j in the
second. Let rij and gij denote, respectively, the predicted rank and DEMO of that stu-
dent. The ranks range from 1 to 100, DEMO the grades were scored as Aþ¼ 10,
A ¼ 9; DEMO ; D ¼ 1. Under the linear model (Equation 6), DEMO have
rij ¼ arri þbrgj and gij ¼ agri þbggj
By regressing the 10 predictions of each respondent against the predictors, ri and gj,
we obtained for each subject in the rank condition an estimate DEMO yr ¼ br=ar , and for
each subject in the grade condition an estimate of yg ¼ bg=ag . These values reﬂect the
relative DEMO of grades to ranks in the two prediction tasks. As implied by the
compatibility hypothesis, the values of y, were signiﬁcantly higher than DEMO values of
yr, p <:001 by a Mann-Whitney test.
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 865
Figure 34.5
Contingent weighting representation DEMO predicted ranks and grades. (The dots characterize the input
information for DEMO of the 10 students. The slopes of the two lines correspond to the relative weight of
grades to ranks in the two prediction tasks.)DEMO
Figure 34.5 represents each of the 10 students as a point in the rank  grade plane.
The slopes of the two lines, yr and yg , correspond to the relative weights of grade to
rank DEMO from the average predictions of ranks and grades, respectively. The
multiple DEMO between the inputs ðri; gjÞ and the average predicted scores was
DEMO for ranks and .98 for grades, indicating that the linear model DEMO a good
description of the aggregate data. Recall that in the contingent weighting model, the
predicted scores are given by the perpendicular projections of the points onto the re-
spective lines, indicated by notches. The two lines, then, are orthogonal to the equal-
value sets deﬁned by DEMO two tasks. The ﬁgure shows that grades and ranks were
roughly equally weighted in the prediction of grades ðyg ¼ 1:06Þ, but grades were
given much less weight than ranks in the prediction of ranksquence, the two groups generated di¤erent ordering of the students. For example, theðyr ¼ :58Þ. As a conse-
866 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
predicted rank of Student 9 was DEMO than that of Student 8, but the order of the
predicted DEMO was reversed. Note that the numbered points in ﬁgure 34.5 represent
the design, not the data. The discrepancy between the two orderings is determined
jointly by the angle between the lines that is estimated from subjects’ DEMO, and
by the correlation between the two dimensions that is determined DEMO the design.
These data suggest a more detailed account based on a process of anchoring and
adjustment (Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1971; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). According
to this heuristic, the subject uses the DEMO on the compatible attribute (either rank
or grade) as an anchor, and adjusts it upward or downward on the basis of the
other score. Because adjustments are generally insu‰cient, the compatible attribute
is overweighted. Although the use of anchoring and adjustment probably contribute
to the phenomenon in DEMO, Slovic et al. (1988) found a signiﬁcant compatibility
e¤ect even DEMO the subject only predicted which of the two students would obtain a
higher grade (or rank), without making any numerical prediction that calls for
anchoring and adjustment.
Preference Reversals
The contingent weighting model (equation 5) and the compatibility principle can also
be used to explain the well-known preference reversals discovered by Lichtenstein
and Slovic (1971; see also Slovic DEMO Lichtenstein, 1968, 1983). These investigators
compared two types of bets with comparable expected values—an H bet that o¤ers
a high probability of DEMO a relatively small amount of money (e.g., 32/36
chance to win $4) and an L bet that o¤ers a low probability of winning a moderate
amount of money (e.g., 9/36 chance to DEMO $40). The results show that people gen-
erally choose the H bet over the L bet (i.e., H >c L) but DEMO a higher cash equiv-
alent to the L bet than to the H bet (i.e., CL > CH , where CL and CH DEMO the
amounts of money that are as desirable as L and H respectively). This pattern of
preferences, which is inconsistent with the theory of rational choice, has been
observed in numerous experiments, including a DEMO conducted on the ﬂoor of a Las
Vegas casino (Lichtenstein & DEMO, 1973), and it persists even in the presence of
monetary DEMO designed to promote consistent responses (Grether & Plott,
1979).
DEMO the basic phenomenon has been replicated in many studies, the determi-
DEMO of preference reversals and their causes have remained elusive heretofore. It is
easy to show that the reversal of preferences implies either intransitive choices DEMO a
choice-pricing discrepancy (i.e., a failure of invariance), or both. In order to under-
stand this phenomenon, it is necessary to assess the relative contribution of these
factors because they imply di¤erent explanations. To DEMO this goal, however,
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 867
one must extend the traditional DEMO and include, in addition to the bets H and L,
DEMO cash amount X that is compared with both. If procedure invariance holds and
preference reversals are due to intransitive choices, then we should obtain the cycle
L >c X >c H >c L. If, DEMO the other hand, transitivity holds and preference reversals
are due to DEMO inconsistency between choice and pricing, then we should obtain either
X >c L and CL > X ,or H >c X and DEMO > CH . The ﬁrst pattern indicates that L is
overpriced relative to choice, and the second pattern indicates that H is underpriced
relative to choice. Recall that H >c X refers to the choice between the bet H and the
sure thing X , while X > DEMO refers to the ordering of cash amounts.
Following this analysis, Tversky, Slovic, and Kahneman (1988) conducted an
extensive study of preference reversals, using 18 triples ðH; L; XÞ that cover a wide
range of probabilities and payo¤s. A detailed analysis of response patterns showed
that, by far, the most important determinant of preference reversals is the overpricing
of L. Intransitive choices and the underpricing of H play a relatively DEMO role, each
accounting for less than 10% of the total number DEMO reversals. Evidently, preference
reversals represent a choice-pricing discrepancy induced by the DEMO princi-
ple: Because pricing is expressed in monetary units, the payo¤s loom larger in pricing
than in choice.
We next apply the contingent DEMO model to a study reported by Tversky
et al. (1988) in which 179 participants (a) chose between 6 pairs consisting of an DEMO
bet and an L bet, (b) rated the attractiveness of DEMO 12 bets, and (c) determined the
cash equivalent of each DEMO In order to provide monetary incentives and assure the
strategic equivalence of the three methods, the participants were informed that a pair
of bets would be selected at random, and that they would play the member of the
pair that they had chosen, or the bet that they had priced or rated higher. The pres-
ent discussion focuses on the DEMO between pricing and rating, which can be
readily analyzed using multiple DEMO In general, rating resembles choice in
favoring the H bets, in contrast to pricing that favors the L bets. Note that in rating
DEMO pricing each gamble is evaluated separately, whereas choice (and matching)
involve a comparison between gambles. Because the discrepancy between rating and
pricing DEMO even more pronounced than that between choice and pricing, the reversal
DEMO preferences cannot be explained by the fact that choice is comparative whereas
pricing is singular. For further discussions of the relation between rating, choice, and
pricing, see Goldstein and Einhom (1987), and Schkade and Johnson (1987).
We assume that the value of a simple prospect ðq; yÞ is approximated by a multi-
plicative function of the probability q and the payo¤ y. Thus, the logarithms of the
pricing and the rating can be expressed by
yi log y
þ
log q;DEMO
i
¼
r; p;
ð8Þ
868 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
Figure 34.6
Contingent weighting representation of DEMO and pricing. (The dots characterize the six H bets and six DEMO
bets denoted by odd and even numbers, respectively, in logarithmic coordinates. The slopes of the two lines
correspond to the weight of money DEMO to probability in rating and pricing.)
where yr and yp denote the relative weight of the payo¤ in the rating and in the
DEMO tasks, respectively. Note that this model implies a power utility function DEMO
an exponent yi . The average transformed rating and pricing responses for each of the
12 bets were regressed, separately, against log q DEMO log y. The multiple correlations
were .96 and .98 for the ratings and the pricing, respectively, indicating that the
relation between rating and DEMO can be captured, at least in the aggregate data, by
a very simple model with a single parameter.
Figure 34.6 represents each of DEMO 12 bets as a (numbered) point in the plane
whose coordinates are probability and money, plotted on a logarithmic scale. The
rating and pricing lines in the ﬁgure are perpendicular to the respective sets of DEMO
indi¤erence curves (see ﬁgure 34.2). Hence, the projections of each bet on the two
lines (denoted by notches) correspond to their DEMO derived from rating and pricing,
respectively. The angle between these lines equals the (smaller) angle between the
intersecting families of indi¤erence curves. DEMO 34.6 reveals a dramatic di¤erence
between the slopes: yr ¼ 2:DEMO, yp ¼ :75, hence y ¼ yp=yr ¼ : 28. DEMO, these data give
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 869
rise to a negative correlation DEMO ¼:30Þ between the rating and the pricing, yielding
numerous reversals DEMO the ordering of the projections on the two lines. For example,
the most extreme L bet (No. 8) has the lowest rating DEMO the highest cash equivalent
in the set.
The preceding analysis shows that the compatibility principle, incorporated into
the contingent weighting model, provides a DEMO account of the well-known pref-
erence reversals. It also yields new predictions, which have been conﬁrmed in a recent
study. Note that if preference reversals are caused primarily by the overweighting of
payo¤s in the pricing DEMO, then the e¤ect should be much smaller for nonmonetary
payo¤s. Indeed, Slovic et al. (1988) found that the use of nonmonetary payo¤s (e.g.,
a dinner for two at a very good restaurant or DEMO free weekend at a coastal resort)
greatly reduced the incidents of preference reversals. Furthermore, according to the
present analysis, preference reversals are DEMO limited to risky prospects. Tversky et al.
(1988) constructed riskless options of the form ð$x; tÞ that o¤ers a payment of $x at
some future time, t (e.g., 3 years from now). Subjects chose between such options,
and evaluated their cash equivalents. The cash DEMO (or the price) of the option
ð$x; tÞ is the DEMO of cash, paid immediately, that is as attractive as receiving $x at
time t . Because both the price and the payment are DEMO in dollars, compatibil-
ity implies that the payment will loom larger DEMO pricing than in choice. This predic-
tion was conﬁrmed. Subjects generally chose the option that paid sooner, and
assigned a higher price to the option that o¤ered the larger payment. For example,
85% of the DEMO ðN
¼
169Þ preferred $2,500 in 5 years over $3,550 in 10 years,
but 71% assigned a higher price to the DEMO option. Thus, the replacement of risk
by time gives rise to DEMO new type of reversals. Evidently, preference reversals are
determined primarily by DEMO compatibility between the price and the payo¤, regard-
less of the DEMO or absence of risk.
We conclude this section with a brief discussion of alternative accounts of pref-
erence reversals proposed in the literature. One DEMO of comparative theories,
developed by Fishburn (1984, 1985) and DEMO and Sugden (1982, 1983), treat
preference reversals as intransitive choices. As was noted earlier, however, the
intransitivity of choice accounts for DEMO a small part of the phenomenon in question,
hence these theories do not provide a fully satisfactory explanation of preference
reversals. A di¤erent DEMO, called expression theory, has been developed by Gold-
stein and Einhorn (1987). This model is a special case of the contingent model
deﬁned by Equation 1. It di¤ers from the present treatment in that DEMO focuses on the
expression of preferences rather than on the evaluation of prospects. Thus, it attrib-
utes preference reversals to the mapping of subjective value onto the appropriate
response scale, not to the compatibility between the input and the output. As a con-
870 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
sequence, this model does not imply many of the compatibility e¤ects described
in this article, such as the contingent weighting of grades and ranks in the prediction
of students’ performance, the marked reduction in preference reversals with non-
monetary payo¤s, and the di¤erential weighting of common and of distinctive fea-
tures in judgments of DEMO and dissimilarity.
A highly pertinent analysis of preference reversals based on attention and anchor-
ing data was proposed by Schkade and Johnson (1987). Using a computer-controlled
experiment in which the subject can see only one DEMO of each bet at a time,
these investigators measured the amount of time spent by each subject looking at
probabilities and at payo¤s. DEMO results showed that in the pricing task, the percent-
age of DEMO spent on the payo¤s was signiﬁcantly greater than that spent on proba-
bilities, whereas in the rating task, the pattern was reversed. This DEMO
supports the hypothesis, suggested by the compatibility principle, that subjects
attended to payo¤s more in the pricing task than in the rating task.
DEMO relation between preference reversals and the choice-matching discrepancy
was explored in a study by Slovic et al. (1988). Subjects matched twelve pairs of H
and L bets by completing the missing probability or payo¤. The DEMO percentage
of responses that favored H over L was 73% for probability matches and 49% for
payo¤ matches. (For comparison, 76% preferred H DEMO L in a direct choice.) This
result follows from scale compatibility: The adjusted attribute, either probability or
money, looms larger than the DEMO attribute. However, the pattern di¤ers
from the prominence e¤ect described earlier, which produced relatively small di¤er-
ences between the matches on the primary DEMO the secondary attributes and large
di¤erences between choice and matching (see, e.g., problem 1). This contrasts with
the present ﬁnding of large di¤erences between probability and payo¤ matches, and
no di¤erence between probability matches and choice. Evidently, preference reversals
are induced primarily by scale compatibility, DEMO by the di¤erential prominence of
attributes that underlies the choice-matching discrepancy. Indeed, there is no obvious
reason to suppose that probability is more prominent than money or vice versa. For
further examples and discussions of elicitation DEMO in risky choice, see Fischer,
Damodaran, Laskey, and Lincoln (1987), and Hershey and Schoemaker (1985).
Discussion
The extensive use of rational theories of choice (e.g., the expected utility model or DEMO
theory of revealed preference) as descriptive models (e.g., in economics, manage-
ment, and political science) has stimulated the experimental investigation of DEMO
descriptive validity of the assumptions that underlie these models. Perhaps the most
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 871
basic assumption of the rational DEMO of choice is the principle of invariance
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1984) or extensionality (Arrow, 1982), which states that
the relation of preference should not depend on the description of the options
(description invariance) or on the method of elicitation (procedure in variance).
Empirical DEMO of description invariance have shown that alternative framing of the
same options can lead to di¤erent choices (Tversky and Kahneman, 1986). The
DEMO studies provide evidence against the assumption of procedure invariance by
demonstrating a systematic discrepancy between choice and matching, as well as
between rating and pricing. In this section we discuss the main ﬁndings and explore
their DEMO and practical implications.
In the ﬁrst part of the article we showed that the more important dimension of a
decision problem looms larger in DEMO than in matching. We addressed this phe-
nomenon at three levels of analysis. First, we presented a heuristic account of choice
and matching that led to the prominence hypothesis; second, we related this account
to DEMO general notion of input-output compatibility; and third, we developed the for-
mal theory of contingent weighting that represents the prominence e¤ect as well DEMO
other elicitation phenomena, such as preference reversals. The informal analysis,
DEMO on compatibility, provides a psychological explanation for the di¤erential
weighting induced DEMO the various procedures.
Although the prominence e¤ect was observed in a variety of settings using both
intrapersonal and interpersonal comparisons, its boundaries are left to be explored.
How does it extend to options that vary on DEMO larger number of attributes? The pres-
ent analysis implies that the DEMO weights of any pair of attributes will be less
extreme (i.e., closer to unity) in matching than in choice. With three or more attrib-
utes, however, additional considerations may come into play. For example, people
may select the option that is superior on most attributes (Tversky, 1969, experiment
2). In this case, the prominence hypothesis does not always result in a lexicographic
bias. Another question is whether the DEMO discrepancy applies to other
judgmental or perceptual tasks. The data on the prediction of students’ performance
indicate that the prominence e¤ect is not limited DEMO preferential choice, but it is not
clear whether it applies to DEMO Perceived loudness, for example, depends
primarily on intensity and to a lesser degree on frequency. It could be interesting to
test the prominence DEMO in such a context.
The ﬁnding that the qualitative information about the ordering of the dimensions
looms larger in the ordinal method of choice DEMO in the cardinal method of matching
has been construed as an instance of the compatibility principle. This principle states
that stimulus components that are DEMO with the response are weighted more
heavily than those that are not presumably because (a) the former are accentuated,
and (b) DEMO latter require additional mental transformations that produce error and
872 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
reduce the diagnosticity of the information. DEMO e¤ect may be induced by the nature
of the information (e.g., ordinal vs. cardinal), by the response scale (e.g., grades vs.
DEMO), or by the a‰nity between inputs and outputs (e.g., common features loom
larger in similarity than in dissimilarity judgments). Compatibility, therefore, appears
to provide a common explanation to many phenomena of judgment and choice.
The preceding discussion raises the intriguing normative question as to which
DEMO, choice or matching, better reﬂects people’s ‘‘true’’ preferences. Put di¤er-
ently, do people overweigh the primary dimension in choice or do they underweigh
it in matching? Without knowing the ‘‘correct’’ weighting, it is unclear DEMO to answer
this question, but the following study provides some relevant DEMO The participants
in a decision-making seminar performed both choice and matching in the tra‰c-
accident problem described earlier (problem 3). The two critical (choice and match-
ing) questions were embedded in a questionnaire that DEMO similar questions with
di¤erent numerical values. The majority of the respondents (DEMO out of 32) gave
inconsistent responses that conformed to the prominence DEMO After the ses-
sion, each participant was interviewed and confronted with DEMO or her answers. The
subjects were surprised to discover that their responses were inconsistent and they
o¤ered a variety of explanations, some of which resemble the prominence hypothesis.
One participant said, ‘‘When I have to choose between programs I go for the one
that saves more lives because DEMO is no price for human life. But when I match the
programs I have to pay attention to money.’’ When asked to reconsider their
DEMO, all respondents modiﬁed the matching in the direction of the choice, and a
few reversed the original choice in the direction of the DEMO This observation
suggests that choice and matching are both biased in opposite directions, but it may
reﬂect a routine compromise rather than the result of a critical reassessment.
Real-world decisions can sometimes be framed either as DEMO direct choice (e.g.,
should I buy the used car at DEMO price?) or as a pricing decision (e.g., what is the most
I should pay for that used car?). Our ﬁndings suggest that the answers to the
two questions are likely to diverge. Consider, for example, a medical decision prob-
lem where the primary dimension is the probability of survival and the secondary
dimension is the cost associated DEMO treatment or diagnosis. According to the pres-
ent analysis, people are DEMO to choose the option that o¤ers the higher probability
of survival with relatively little concern for cost. When asked to price a marginal
increase DEMO the probability of survival, however, people are expected to appear less
generous. The choice-matching discrepancy may also arise in resource allocation and
budgeting DEMO The prominence hypothesis suggests that the most important
item in the budget (e.g., health) will tend to dominate a less important item (DEMO,
culture) in a direct choice between two allocations, but the less important item is
expected to fare better in a matching procedure.
Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice 873
The lability of preferences implied DEMO the demonstrations of framing and elicita-
tion e¤ects raises di‰cult questions concerning the assessment of preferences and
values. In the classical analysis, the relation of preference is inferred from observed
responses (e.g., choice, matching) DEMO is assumed to reﬂect the decision maker’s
underlying utility or value. But if di¤erent elicitation procedures produce di¤erent
ordeaings of options, how can preferences and values be deﬁned? And in what sense
do they exist? DEMO be sure, people make choices, set prices, rate options and DEMO
explain their decisions to others. Preferences, therefore, exist as observed data.
However, if these data do not satisfy the elementary requirements of invariance, it is
unclear how to deﬁne a relation of preference that can serve as a basis for the mea-
surement of value. In the DEMO of well-deﬁned preferences, the foundations of
choice theory and decision analysis DEMO called into question.
Notes
This work was supported by Contract N00014-84-K-0615 from the O‰ce of Naval Research to Stanford
University and by National Science DEMO Grant 5ES-8712-145 to Decision Research.
The article has beneﬁted from discussions with Greg Fischer, Dale Gri‰n, Eric Johnson, Daniel Kah-
neman, and DEMO Sjo¨ berg.
References
Arrow, K. J. (1982). Risk perception in psychology and economics. Economic Inquiry, 20, 1–9.
Carroll, J. D. (DEMO). Individual di¤erences and multidimensional scaling. In R. N. Shepard, A. DEMO Rom-
ney, & S. Neriove (Eds.), Multidimensional scaling: Theory DEMO applications in the behavioral sciences: Vol.
1. Theory (pp. 105–155). New York: Seminar Press.
Coombs, C. H., Bezembinder, T. C. DEMO, & Goode, F. M. (1967). Testing expectation theories of DEMO
making without measuring utility and subjective probability. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, DEMO,
72–103.
Falmagne, J.-C. (1985). Elements of psychophysical theory. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fischer, G. W., Damodaran, N., Laskey, K. B., & Lincoln, D. (1987). Preferences for proxy DEMO
Management Science, 33, 198–214.
Fischho¤, B., Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1980). Knowing what you want: Measuring labile values. In T.
Wallstein (Ed.), Cognitive processes in choice and decision behavior (pp. 117–141). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fishburn, P. C. (1984). SSB utility theory: An economic perspective. Mathematical Social Sciences, 8,DEMO
63–94.
Fishburn, P. C. (1985). Nontransitive preference theory and the preference reversal phenomenon. Rivista
Internazionale di Scienze Economiche e Commerciali, 32, DEMO
Fitts, P. M., & Seeger, C. M. (1953). S-R compatibility: Spatial characteristics of stimulus and response
codes. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46, 199–210.
Goldstein, W. M., & Einhom, H. J. (DEMO). Expression theory and the preference reversal phenomena.
Psychological Review, 94, 236–254.
Grether, D. M., & Plott, C. R. (1979). DEMO theory of choice and the preference reversal phenome-
non. American Economic Review, 69, 623–638.
874 Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
Hershey, J., & Schoemaker, P. J. (1985). Probability vs. certainty equivalence methods in utility measure-
ment: Are they equivalent? Management Science, 31, 1213–1231.
Kahneman, D., DEMO Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values and frames. American Psychologist, 39, 341–350.
Krantz, D. H., Luce, R. D., Suppes, DEMO, & Tversky, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement (vol. 1). New
York: Academic Press.
Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. (1971). Reversals of preference between bids and choices in gambling deci-
DEMO Journal of Experimental Psychology, 89, 46–55.
Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. (1973). Response-induced reversals of preference in gambling: An extended
replication in Las Vegas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 101, 16–20.
Loomes, G., & Sugden, R. (1982). Regret theory: An alternative DEMO of rational choice under uncer-
tainty. Economic Journal, 92, 805–824.
Loomes, G., & Sugden, R. (1983). A rationale for preference DEMO American Economic Review, 73,
428–432.
March, J. G. (1978)DEMO Bounded rationality, ambiguity, and the engineering of choice. The Bell Journal of
Economics, 9, 587–608.
Montgomery, H. (1983). Decision rules DEMO the search for a dominance structure: Towards a process
model of DEMO making. In P. C. Humphreys, O. Svenson, & A. Vari (DEMO), Analyzing and aiding deci-
sion processes (pp. 343–369). Amsterdam/DEMO: North-Holland and Hungarian Academic Press.
Payne, J. W. (1982). DEMO decision behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 92, 382–401.
Schkade, D. A., & Johnson, E. J. (1988). Cognitive processes in preference reversals. Working DEMO,
Department of Management, University of Texas.
Shafer, G., & DEMO, A. (1985). Languages and designs for probability judgment. Cognitive Science, 9,
309–339.
Slovic, P. (1975). Choice between equally valued alternatives. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 1, 280–287.
Slovic, P., Gri‰n, D. P., & Tversky, A. (1988)DEMO Compatibility e¤ects in judgment and choice. Unpublished
manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1968). The relative importance of probabilities and payo¤s in risk-taking.
Journal of Experimental Psychology Monograph DEMO, 78(3, pt. 2).
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, DEMO (1971). Comparison of Bayesian and regression approaches to the study DEMO
information processing in judgment. Organizational Behavioral and Human Performance, 6, 649–744.
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1983). Preference reversals: A broader perspective. American Economic
Review, 73, 596–605.
Tversky, A. (1969)DEMO The intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review, 76, 31–48.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327–352.
Tversky, A., & Gati, L. (1978). Studies of similarity. In E. Rosch & B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and cate-
gorization (pp. 79–98)DEMO Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185,
1124–1131.
DEMO, A., & Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice and the framing of decisions. The Journal of Busi-
ness, 59(4), pt. 2, 251–278.
Tversky, A., Slovic, P., & Kahneman, D. (1988). The determinants of preference reversals. Unpublished
manuscript, Stanford University, DEMO, CA.
Varian, H. R. (1984). Macroeconomic analysis. New York: Norton & Co.
Wickens, C. D. (1984). Engineering psychology and DEMO performance. Columbus, OH: Merrill.
35 Anomalies: Preference Reversals
Amos Tversky and Richard H. Thaler
Introduction
Imagine, if you will, that you have been asked to advise the DEMO of Transporta-
tion for a small Middle Eastern country regarding the choice of a highway safety
program. At the current time, about 600 people per year are killed in tra‰c accidents
in that country. Two programs DEMO to reduce the number of casualties are under
consideration. Program A is expected to reduce the yearly number of casualities to
570; its annual cost is estimated at $12 million. Program B is expected to reduce DEMO
yearly number of casualities to 500; its annual cost is estimated DEMO $55 million. The
Minister tells you to ﬁnd out which program would make the electorate happier.
You hire two polling organizations. The ﬁrst ﬁrm DEMO a group of citizens which
program they like better. It ﬁnds that about two-thirds of the respondents prefer
Program B which saves more lives, though at a higher cost per life saved. The other
ﬁrm uses DEMO ‘‘matching’’ procedure. It presents respondents with the same informa-
tion about the two programs except that the cost of Program B is not speciﬁed.
DEMO citizens are asked to state the cost that would make the two programs equally
attractive. The polling ﬁrm reasons that respondents’ preferences for the DEMO pro-
grams can be inferred from their responses to this question. That is, a respondent
who is indi¤erent between the two programs at a cost of less than $55 million should
prefer A to B. On DEMO other hand, someone who would be willing to spend over $55
DEMO should prefer Program B. This survey ﬁnds, however, that more than 90
percent of the respondents provided values smaller than $55 million indicating, in
e¤ect, that they prefer Program A over Program B.
This pattern is deﬁnitely puzzling. When people are asked to choose between a
pair DEMO options, a clear majority favors B over A. When asked to DEMO these options,
however, the overwhelming majority give values implying a DEMO for A over B.
Indeed, the implicit value of human life DEMO from the simple choice presented by
the ﬁrst ﬁrm is more than twice that derived from the matching procedure used by
the other ﬁrm.
DEMO are you going to tell the Minister? You decide to call DEMO sta¤ meeting where
various explanations for the results are o¤ered. Perhaps one of the pollsters has made
a mistake. Perhaps people cannot think straight DEMO problems involving the value
of a human life, especially in the DEMO East. However, one sta¤ member points out
that there is a DEMO reason to trust both surveys, since recent research by some psy-
DEMO has produced exactly the same pattern using a wide range of problems
876 Tversky and Thaler
such as selecting job applicants, consumer products, DEMO saving plans. The psychol-
ogists conclude that the notion of preference that underlies modern decision theory is
more problematic than economists normally assume because DEMO methods of
elicitation often give rise to systematically di¤erent orderings. Well? DEMO Minister is
waiting.
For almost two decades, economists and psychologists have DEMO intrigued by a
similar inconsistency involving risky prospects. Subjects are ﬁrst asked to choose
between two gambles with nearly the same expected values. One DEMO, called the
H bet (for high chance of winning) has DEMO high chance of winning a relatively small
prize (say, 8/9 chance to win $4), while the other gamble, the L bet, o¤ers a lower
chance to win a larger prize (say, a 1/9 chance to win $40). Most subjects choose the
H DEMO Subjects are then asked to price each of the gambles. Speciﬁcally, DEMO are
asked to state the lowest price at which they would be willing to sell each gamble
if they owned it. Surprisingly, most subjects put a higher price on the L bet. (In a
recent study that used this particular pair of bets, for example, 71 percent DEMO the
subjects chose the H bet, while 67 percent priced L DEMO H.) This pattern is called a
preference reversal. Sarah Lichtenstein and DEMO Slovic (1971, 1973) ﬁrst demon-
strated such reversals in a DEMO of studies, one of which was conducted for real
money with DEMO on the ﬂoor of the Four Queens Casino in Las Vegas.
Lichtenstein and Slovic did not come upon this result by chance. In an DEMO
study (Slovic and Lichtenstein, 1968), they observed that both buying and selling
prices of gambles were more highly correlated with payo¤s than DEMO chances of
winning, whereas choices between gambles (and ratings of their attractiveness) were
more highly correlated with the probabilities of winning and losing than with the
payo¤s. The authors reasoned that if the method used DEMO elicit preferences a¤ected
the weighting of the gamble’s components, it should DEMO possible to construct pairs of
gambles such that the same individual would choose one member of the pair but set
a higher price for DEMO other. Experimental tests supported this conjecture.
The preference reversal phenomenon raises an issue rarely discussed in economics:
How is the notion of preference DEMO be operationalized? We say that option A is pre-
ferred to DEMO B if A is selected when B is available or if A has a higher reservation
price than B. The standard analysis of choice DEMO that these procedures give
rise to the same ordering. This requirement—called procedure invariance—seldom
appears as an explicit axiom, but it is needed to ensure that the preference relation is
well deﬁned. The assumption of procedure invariance DEMO not unique to the study of
preference. When measuring mass, for DEMO, we can use either a pan balance or a
spring to DEMO which of the objects is heavier, and we expect the two DEMO
ment procedures to yield the same ordering. Unlike the measurement of physical
Anomalies
877
attributes such as mass or length, however, di¤erent methods DEMO eliciting preference
often give rise to systematically di¤erent orderings. This column summarizes the
evidence regarding this puzzling result, and discusses its implications for economics.
Economists were introduced to the preference reversal phenomenon by David
Grether and DEMO Plott (1979) who designed a series of experiments ‘‘to discredit
the psychologists’ work as applied to economics’’ (p. 623). These authors began by
generating a list of 13 objections and potential artifacts that would DEMO the
preference reversal phenomenon irrelevant to economic theory. Their list included
poor motivation, income e¤ects, strategic responding, and the fact that the experi-
menters were psychologists (thereby creating suspicions leading to peculiar behav-
ior). Grether and Plott attempted to eliminate preference reversals by various means
(like o¤ering a special incentive system), but to no avail. Indeed, preference reversals
were somewhat more common among subjects responding under ﬁnancial incentives
than DEMO a control group facing purely hypothetical questions. Subsequent studies by
both psychologists and economists, using a wide range of procedural variations, led
to DEMO conclusions. (See Slovic and Lichtenstein (1983) for a review of DEMO early
literature and Tversky, Slovic and Kahneman (1990) for later DEMO)
Although these experimental studies have established the validity and the robust-
ness of the preference reversal phenomenon, its interpretation and explanation has
remained unclear. To formulate the problem, we must introduce some notation. Let
CH and CL denote the cash equivalents (or minimum selling price) of DEMO and L (the
gambles with high and low chances of winning, respectively). Let  and A denote
strict preference and indi¤erence, respectively. Recall that a preference reversal
occurs when H is preferred to L DEMO L is priced higher than H; that is, H  L and
CL > CH . Note that  refers to preference between DEMO, whereas > refers to the
ordering of cash amounts.2 It is DEMO di‰cult to see that a preference reversal implies
either the intransitivity of the preference relation, , or a failure of procedure invari-
ance, or both. Now, recall that if procedure invariance holds, a decision DEMO
will be indi¤erent when choosing between a bet B and some cash amount X, if and
only if the cash equivalent for B is equal to X, that is CB ¼ X . So, if DEMO
invariance holds, then a preference reversal implies the following intransitive pattern
DEMO preferences:
CH AH

LACL

CH
where the two inequalities are implied by the assumed preference reversal and the
two equivalences follow DEMO procedure invariance.
Because procedure invariance is commonly taken for granted, many DEMO have
interpreted preference reversals as intransitivities, and some have proposed non-
878 Tversky and Thaler
transitive choice models to account for this phenomenon (Loomes and Sugden, 1983;
Fishburn, 1985). A preference reversal, however, does not imply cyclic choice; it
can be consistent with DEMO if procedure invariance does not hold. Two types
of discrepancies between choice and pricing could produce the standard pattern of
preference reversal,3 that DEMO, preferring H but assigning a higher value to L: either
overpricing of L or underpricing of H. Overpricing of L is evident if DEMO decision
maker prefers her reservation price for the bet over the bet itself when o¤ered a
choice between them on another occasion (i.e., DEMO  L). Underpricing of H is evi-
dent if the decision maker prefers the bet over its price in a direct choice on DEMO
occasion (i.e., H  CH ). (The terms overpricing and underpricing merely identify the
sign of the discrepancy between pricing and choice; the labels are not meant to imply
that the choice represents one’s DEMO preference and the bias resides in pricing.)
The third possible explanation of the preference reversal implicates the payo¤
scheme used to elicit cash DEMO To encourage subjects to produce careful and
truthful responses, several investigators DEMO employed the following payo¤ scheme
called the BDM procedure after its originators Becker, DeGroot, and Marschak
(1964). After the subject states a selling price for a gamble, an o¤er is generated by
some random process. The subject receives the o¤er if it exceeds the stated selling
DEMO, and plays the gamble if the stated price exceeds the o¤er. DEMO price stated by
the subject, therefore, serves only to determine whether the subject will play the bet
or receive the cash, but it does not determine the actual amount. As long as the
subject is DEMO expected utility maximizer, this procedure is incentive compatible: the
decision maker has no incentive to state a selling price that departs from his DEMO her
actual cash equivalent. However, as noted by Holt (1986), Karni, and Safra (1987),
and Segal (1988), if DEMO decision maker does not obey the independence (or reduc-
tion) axiom of expected utility theory, the BDM procedure no longer ensures that
the stated price will correspond to the cash equivalent of the gamble. Indeed, Karni,
and Safra have shown that preference reversals observed under the DEMO scheme
are consistent with a generalized version of expected utility theory with nonlinear
probabilities.
So we now have three alternative interpretations of preference reversals. DEMO
can arise from violations of transitivity, procedure invariance, or the independence
axiom. To determine which interpretation is correct we need to solve two DEMO
lems. First, we need an experimental procedure that can distinguish between DEMO
of transitivity and failures of procedure invariance. Second, we need an DEMO
compatible payo¤ scheme that does not rely on the expectation principle. Both
requirements have been met in a recent study by Tversky, Slovic, DEMO Kahneman
(1990).
Anomalies
879
To discriminate between the intransitivity and procedure invariance explanations,
DEMO investigators extended the original design to include, in addition to the DEMO
dard H and L bets, a cash amount X that was DEMO to both of them. That is,
subjects indicated their preferences between each of the pairs in the triple fH; L; Xg.
Subjects DEMO produced cash equivalents, CL and CH , (using a method described
below) for both of the bets. By focusing on standard preference reversal patterns in
which the pre-speciﬁed cash amount X happened to lie between DEMO values of CL and
CH generated by this subject (that is, H  L and CL > X > CH ), it is possible to
diagnose each preference reversal pattern according to whether it was DEMO by
an intransitivity, by an overpricing of L, by an underpricing of H, or by both. For
example, if subjects indicated that DEMO  X , and that X  H , then their preferences are
intransitive since we are conﬁning our attention to those cases in DEMO H  L.
Alternatively, if subjects overprice the L bet, then their pattern of responses will be
X  L and X  DEMO . (The subjects produce a price for L that is greater DEMO X, but
when o¤ered a choice between X and L, they choose X.) This pattern is transitive,
though it is a preference reversal.
The results of this study were very clear. Using 18 triples DEMO the form fH; L; X
g
that cover a wide range of payo¤s, the experiment yielded the usual rate of prefer-
ence reversal (between 40 and 50 percent), but only 10 percent of preference reversal
patterns were intransitive, and the remaining 90 percent violated procedure invari-
ance. By far, the major source of preference reversal was the overpricing of the L bet,
which accounted for nearly two-thirds of the DEMO patterns. (Note that if subjects
were choosing at random, the expected rate of the standard preference reversal is 25
percent.)
Having eliminated DEMO as the major cause of preference reversal, let us
turn now DEMO the e¤ect of the payo¤ scheme. Karni and Safra (1987) have shown that
it is exceedingly di‰cult, if not impossible, to devise DEMO incentive compatible pay-
o¤ scheme for the elicitation of cash equivalence that does not rely on expected
utility theory. Fortunately, to demonstrate preference reversal, it is not necessary to
elicit the actual selling prices; it DEMO su‰cient to establish their order—which can be
obtained under much weaker conditions. Suppose the subject is presented with two
tasks: pricing each bet separately and choosing between pairs of bets. The subjects
are told that one DEMO these pairs will be selected at random at the end of the ses-
sion, and that they will play one of these bets. To determine which bet they will
play, ﬁrst a random device will be used to select either choices or pricing as the cri-
teria for DEMO If the choice data are used, then the subject plays the DEMO chosen. If
the pricing data are used, then the subject will DEMO whichever gamble was priced
higher.
880 Tversky and Thaler
In this latter procedure, called the ordinal payo¤ scheme, the prices o¤ered by the
subjects are only used to order the bets within each pair. Consistency, therefore,
requires that the price orderings and choice orderings should agree, whether or not
the subjects are expected utility maximizers. Thus, if the previously observed rever-
sals were caused by a failure of expected utility theory, then they should not occur
under the ordinal payo¤ scheme. This prediction was clearly refuted. The incidence
DEMO reversals was roughly the same (40 percent to 50 percent) whether the experiment
employed the BDM scheme, the above ordinal scheme, or DEMO no payo¤ scheme at
all. This ﬁnding shows that preference reversal is not caused by the BDM procedure,
hence it cannot be explained DEMO a violation of the independence or reduction axioms
of expected utility theory.
The conclusions of the Tversky, Slovic, and Kahneman study may be DEMO
as follows. First, intransitivity alone accounts for only a small portion DEMO preference
reversal patterns. Second, preference reversal is hardly a¤ected by the DEMO scheme,
hence, it is not attributable to the failure of DEMO utility theory. Third, the major
cause of preference reversal is the DEMO of procedure invariance and, more speciﬁ-
cally, the overpricing of the L bets. That is, the minimum selling prices associated
with L bets (but not with H bets) are too high in comparison to DEMO choices between
the bets and cash amounts. These conclusions are further supported by a recent study
of Bostic, Herrnstein and Luce (1990) using a somewhat di¤erent design.
This analysis raises a new question: Why do people overprice the low-probability
high-payo¤ bets? Why do people who prefer, DEMO, $10 for sure over a 1/3 chance to
win $40, assign to this bet a cash equivalent that exceeds $10? Research suggests that
this counterintuitive ﬁnding is a consequence of a general principle of DEMO
that appears to play an important role in human judgment and choice.
The Compatibility Hypothesis
The concept of stimulus-response compatibility has been introduced by DEMO
of human factors who studied perceptual and motor performance. For example, DEMO
square array of four burners on a stove is easier to control with a matching square
array of knobs than with a linear array. DEMO, Gri‰n, and Tversky (1990) have
extended this concept and proposed that the weight of a stimulus attribute in judg-
ment or in DEMO is enhanced by its compatibility with the response scale. The
rationale for this scale compatibility hypothesis is two-fold. First, if the stimulus and
the response do not match, additional mental operations are needed to map one into
the other. This increases e¤ort and error and may reduce the DEMO of the stimulus.
Anomalies
881
Second, a response mode tends to focus attention on the compatible features of the
stimulus. Because there is neither a formal deﬁnition DEMO compatibility nor an inde-
pendent measurement procedure, the analysis is both DEMO and incomplete. Nev-
ertheless, in many contexts the compatibility order is DEMO clear so that it can
be investigated experimentally.
A simple study by Slovic, Gri‰n, and Tversky illustrates a case in which the
compatibility DEMO makes a clear prediction. Subjects were given two pieces of
information about each of 12 large companies taken from Business Week’s Top 100:
DEMO company’s 1986 market value (in billions of dollars), and the DEMO rank
(among the Top 100) with respect to 1987 proﬁts. Half of the subjects were then
asked to predict the 1987 market value DEMO billions of dollars, whereas the other half
were asked to predict DEMO company’s rank with respect to its 1987 market value. Thus
each subject has one predictor measured on the same scale (that is, money DEMO rank)
as the dependent variable, and one predictor measured on DEMO di¤erent scale. As
implied by compatibility, each predictor was given more DEMO when the predicted
variable was expressed on the same scale. As a consequence, the relative weight of
the 1986 market value was twice as high for those who predicted in dollars than for
those who predicted DEMO corresponding rank. This e¤ect produced many reversals in
which one company was ranked above another but the order of their predicted values
was reversed.
DEMO the cash equivalence of a bet is expressed in dollars, compatibility DEMO
that the payo¤s, which are expressed in the same units, will be weighted more heavily
in pricing bets than in chosing between bets. DEMO, since the payo¤s of L
bets are much larger than the DEMO of H bets, the major consequence of a com-
patibility bias DEMO the overpricing of the L bet. The compatibility hypothesis, therefore,
DEMO the major source of preference reversal, namely the overpricing of the DEMO
probability high-payo¤ bets. This account has been supported by several additional
ﬁndings. Slovic, Gri‰n, and Tversky presented subjects with H and L bets DEMO
nonmonetary outcomes, such as a one-week pass for all movie theaters DEMO town, or a
dinner for two at a good restaurant. If DEMO reversals are due primarily to the
compatibility of prices and payo¤s, DEMO are both expressed in dollars, their inci-
dence should be substantially DEMO by the use of nonmonetary outcomes. This is
precisely what happened. The prevalence of preference reversals was reduced by
nearly 50 percent. Schkade and DEMO (1989) found additional support for the role
of compatibility in preference reversals in a computer-controlled experiment which
allowed subjects to see only one DEMO of each bet at a time. The percentage of
time spent looking at the payo¤ was signiﬁcantly greater in a pricing task than in DEMO
882 Tversky and Thaler
choice task. This pattern was pronounced when the DEMO produced a preference
reversal, but not when the subject produced consistent DEMO The ﬁnding that
subjects attend to the payo¤s more in pricing than in choice supports the hypothesis
that people focus their attention on the DEMO components that are most compati-
ble with the response mode.
Although the compatibility hypothesis can explain preference reversals between
pairs of bets, the explanation does not depend on the presence of risk. Indeed, this
hypothesis implies a similar discrepancy between choice and pricing for riskless
options with a DEMO component, such as delayed payments. Let ðX; TÞ be a
prospect that o¤ers a payment of $X; T years from now. Consider a lone-term pros-
pect L ($2500, 5 years from now) and a short-term prospect S ($1600, 11 years from
2
now). Suppose DEMO subjects (i) choose between L and S, and (ii) DEMO both prospects
by stating the smallest immediate cash payment for which they would be willing to
exchange the delayed payment. According to the compatibility DEMO, the mon-
etary component X would loom larger in pricing than DEMO choice. As a consequence,
subjects should produce preference reversals in which the short-term option is pre-
ferred over the long-term option in a DEMO choice, but the latter is priced higher than
the former (that is, S  L and CL > CS ). This was DEMO the pattern observed by
Tversky, Slovic and Kahneman (1990). These investigators presented a large group
of subjects with pairs of S and DEMO options with comparable present values. The sub-
jects chose between pairs of options, and also priced each option separately. Subjects
exhibited the predicted pattern of preference. Overall, subjects chose the short-term
option 74 percent of the time but priced the long-term option above the short-term
option 75 percent DEMO the time, and the rate of reversals exceeded 50 percent. The
DEMO of the non-predicted reversals was less than 10 percent. Further analysis
revealed that—as in the risky case—the major source of preference reversal was
the DEMO of the long-term option, as entailed by compatibility. These ﬁndings
indicate DEMO the preference reversal phenomenon is an example of a general pattern,
rather than a peculiar characteristic of choice between bets.
Indeed, the preference reversal phenomenon is not the only example of a failure
of procedure DEMO As illustrated by the life-saving example discussed in the
introduction to this article, Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic (1988) have demonstrated a
related discrepancy between choice and matching. These investigators observed that
the more prominent DEMO looms larger in choice than in matching. In the high-
way safety problem, for example, human lives are valued much higher in a DEMO
choice than in the price matching procedure. Recall that in this study subjects
selected the program that saved more lives when making a direct DEMO, but their
stated prices favored the less expensive program. As a DEMO, choice is more
Anomalies
883
lexicographic than matching—the most important dimension is weighted more
heavily DEMO choice. Other violations of procedure invariance in the context of risky
choice have been documented by Hershey and Schoemaker (1985). They ﬁrst ask
subjects to provide a certainty equivalent for some gamble, such as a 50 percent
chance to win $100. Suppose the subject says $40. Later DEMO subject is asked to indi-
cate what probability of winning $100 would make the gamble just as attractive as a
sure $40. If procedural DEMO holds, then subjects should respond with .5. How-
ever, subjects do not reproduce the probability they started with, and their departures
are systematic rather than random. Other violations of procedure invariance involv-
ing choice and DEMO of gambles are presented by Goldstein and Einhorn (1987).
Commentary
DEMO at face value the data [showing preference reversals] are simply inconsistent with pref-
erence theory and have broad implications about research priorities within economics. DEMO
inconsistency is deeper than the mere lack of transitivity or even stochastic transitivity. It sug-
gests that no optimization principles of any sort lie DEMO the simplest of human choices and
that the uniformities in human choice behavior which lie behind market behavior may result
from principles which are DEMO a completely di¤erent sort from those generally accepted (Grether
and Plott, 1979, p. 623).
The preference reversal phenomenon has been established in numerous studies dur-
ing the last two decades, but its causes have only recently been uncovered. It appears
that preference reversals cannot be attributed DEMO an intransitivity or to a violation of
the independence axiom of expected utility theory. Rather, they seem to be driven
primarily by the discrepancy between choice and pricing, which in turn is induced by
scale compatibility. This account is supported by several new experiments, and it
gives rise to a new type of reversal in the domain of time preference. DEMO are the
implications of preference reversals to economics and decision theory? DEMO phe-
nomenon, or cluster of phenomena, challenges the traditional assumption that the
decision maker has a ﬁxed preference order that is captured accurately DEMO any reli-
able elicitation procedure. If option A is priced higher than option B, we cannot
always assume that A is preferred to B in a direct comparison. The evidence shows
that di¤erent methods of elicitation DEMO change the relative weighting of the
attributes and give rise to di¤erent orderings.
The ﬁndings are in contrast to the standard economic formulation of DEMO which
assumes that, in the presence of complete information, people act as if they could
look up their preferences in a book, and respond to situations accordingly: choose
the item most preferred; pay up DEMO the value of an item to obtain it; sell an item DEMO
884 Tversky and Thaler
o¤ered more than its value; and so on. The principle of procedure invariance is likely
to hold under two conditions. DEMO, people could have preestablished preferences.
If you prefer football to opera, then this preference will emerge whether you are
choosing between activities or DEMO for tickets. However, procedure invariance
could also hold even if people DEMO not have preestablished preferences. We do not
immediately know the value of 7ð8
þ
9Þ, but we have an algorithm for computing it
that yields the same answer whether we do the addition before or after DEMO multipli-
cation. The results of the experiments reported here indicate that neither condition
holds. First, people do not possess a set of pre-deﬁned preferences for every contin-
gency. Rather, preferences are constructed in the process of making a choice or
judgment. Second, the context and procedures involved in making choices or judg-
ments inﬂuence the preferences that are implied by DEMO elicited responses. In practical
terms, this implies that behavior is likely DEMO vary across situations that economists
consider identical. For example, alternative auction DEMO which are equiva-
lent in theory might produce di¤erent outcomes if the auction procedures themselves
inﬂuence bidding behavior.
The discussion of the meaning of DEMO and the status of value may be illu-
minated by the well-known exchange among three baseball umpires. ‘‘I call them
as I see them,DEMO said the ﬁrst. ‘‘I call them as they are,’’ claimed the second. The
third disagreed, ‘‘They ain’t nothing till I call them.’’ Analogously, we can describe
three di¤erent views regarding the nature of values. First, values exist—like body
temperature—and people perceive and report them as best they can, possibly with
bias (I call them as I see them)DEMO Second, people know their values and preferences
directly—as they know the DEMO table (I call them as they are). Third,
values DEMO preferences are commonly constructed in the process of elicitation (they
ain’t DEMO till I call them). The research reviewed in this article is most compatible
with the third view of preference as a constructive, context-dependent process.
Notes
Amos Tversky’s research is supported, in part, by Grant DEMO from the Air Force O‰ce of Scientiﬁc
Research. Richard H. Thaler’s research is supported, in part, by Concord Capital Management and the
Russell DEMO Foundation. The authors thank Barach Fischho¤ and Paul Slovic for helpful comments.
1. See Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic (1988). The data regarding the two highway safety programs are taken
from this paper.
2. We DEMO that for sure outcomes measured in dollars X > Y implies X  Y ; that is, more money is
preferred to less.
3. This is the standard preference reversal pattern. The other possible preference reversal, choosing L but
assigning a higher value to H is rarely observed. DEMO use the term ‘‘preference reversal’’ to refer to this
standard pattern.
Anomalies
885
References
Becker, Gordon M., Morris H. DeGroot, and Jacob Marschak, ‘‘Measuring Utility by a Single-Response
Sequential Method,’’ Behavioral Science, DEMO 1964, 9, 226–232.
Bostic, Raphael, Richard J. Herrnstein, and DEMO Duncan Luce, ‘‘The E¤ect on the Preference-Reversal
Phenomenon of Using Choice DEMO,’’ Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 1990, in
press.
Fishburn, Peter C. ‘‘Nontransitive Preference Theory and the Preference Reversal Phenomenon,’’ Rivista
Internazionale di Scienze Economiche e Commerciali, January 1985, 32, 39–50.
Goldstein, William M., and Hillel J. Einhorn, ‘‘Expression Theory and the Preference Reversal Phenom-
ena,’’ Psychological Review, April 1987, 94, 236–254.
Grether, David M., and Charles R. Plott, ‘‘Economic Theory of Choice and the Preference Reversal Phe-
nomenon,’’ American Economic Review, September 1979, DEMO, 623–638.
Hershey, John C., and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, ‘‘Probability Versus Certainty Equivalence Methods in
Utility Measurement: Are they Equivalent?’’ Management Science, October 1985, 31, 1213–1231.
Holt, Charles A., ‘‘Preference Reversals and the Independence Axiom,’’ The American Economic Review,
June 1986, 76, 508–515.
Karni, Edi, and Zvi Safra, ‘‘ ‘Preference Reversal’ DEMO the Observability of Preferences by Experimental
Methods,’’ Econometrica, May 1987, 55, 675–685.
Lichtenstein, Sarah, and Paul Slovic, ‘‘Reversals of Preference DEMO Bids and Choices in Gambling
Decisions,’’ Journal of Experimental Psychology, DEMO 1971, 89, 46–55.
Lichtenstein, Sarah, and Paul Slovic, ‘‘Response-induced DEMO of Preference in Gambling: An
Extended Replication in Las Vegas,’’ DEMO of Experimental Psychology, November 1973, 101, 16–20.
Loomes, Graham, DEMO Robert Sugden, ‘‘A Rationale for Preference Reversal,’’ American Economic
Review, June 1983, 73, 428–432.
Schkade, David A., and Eric J. DEMO, ‘‘Cognitive Processes in Preference Reversals,’’ Organization
Behavior and Human Performance, June 1989, 44, 203–231.
Segal, Uzi, ‘‘Does the Preference Reversal DEMO Necessarily Contradict the Independence Axiom?’’
The American Economic Review, March DEMO, 78, 233–236.
Slovic, Paul, Dale Gri‰n, and Amos Tversky, ‘‘Compatibility E¤ects in Judgment and Choice.’’ In
Hogarth, Robin M., ed., Insights in Decision Making: Theory and Applications. Chicago: The University of
DEMO Press, 1990.
Slovic, Paul, and Sarah Lichtenstein, ‘‘The Relative Importance of Probabilities and Payo¤s in Risk-
Taking,’’ Journal of Experimental Psychology DEMO Supplement, November 1968, Part 2, 78, 1–18.
Slovic, Paul, and Sarah Lichtenstein, ‘‘Preference Reversals: A Broader Perspective,’’ American Economic
DEMO, September 1983, 73, 596–605.
Tversky, Amos, Shmuel Sattath, and Paul Slovic, ‘‘Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice,’’ Psy-
chological Review, July 1988, 95, 371–384.
Tversky, Amos, Paul Slovic, and DEMO Kahneman, ‘‘The Causes of Preference Reversal,’’ American
Economic Review, March 1990, 80, in press.

Discrepancy between Medical Decisions for Individual Patients and
36 for Groups
Donald DEMO Redelmeier and Amos Tversky
Tension between health policy and medical practice exists in many situations. For
example, regional variations in practice patterns persist despite extensive shared
information,1–3 there are substantial deviations from accepted guidelines daily DEMO the
care of patients,4–7 and disproportionate amounts of care are given to selected indi-
viduals.8–10 These observations indicate that decisions in the clinical DEMO, which
focus on the individual patient, may be at variance with general medical policies,
which are based on wider considerations. Our study DEMO this discrepancy.
Imagine a patient presenting to a physician with a speciﬁc problem. Normally the
physician treats each patient as a unique case and DEMO the treatment that seems
best for that person. Over time, however, the physician may encounter many similar
patients. Does the physician make a DEMO judgment when a case is viewed as
unique rather than as one of a group of comparable cases? There is evidence that
people make di¤erent choices between ﬁnancial gambles when they face single rather
than repeated DEMO Furthermore, studies of both economic and medical
decisions show that looking DEMO a problem from di¤erent perspectives can change the
relative weight given to its attributes and lead to di¤erent choices.14–16
We hypothesized that physicians give DEMO weight to a patient’s personal concerns
when they consider the patient as an individual and more weight to general criteria
of e¤ectiveness when they DEMO the patient as part of a group. More speciﬁcally,
we suggested that in viewing a patient as an individual rather than as a DEMO of a
group, physicians are more likely to do the following: recommend an additional test
with a low cost and a possible beneﬁt, examine a patient directly rather than follow
progress by telephone, avoid troubling problems such as discussing organ donation,
and recommend a therapy with DEMO high probability of success but the chance of an
adverse outcome. In this study we explored these issues to address the question: Do
physicians make di¤erent judgments in evaluating an individual patient as compared
with considering DEMO group of similar patients? Our data suggest that they do, that the
discrepancy is recognized by physicians trained in health-services research, and that
lay people also make this distinction.
Methods
In our ﬁrst experiment we DEMO practicing physicians to participate in a study of
medical decision making. The questionnaire we used contained clinical scenarios
describing problems in patient management about DEMO reasonable physicians could
disagree. Each physician was asked to select the most appropriate treatment.
888 Redelmeier and Tversky
We presented the problems in two versions, each from a di¤erent perspective. The
individual version concerned the treatment of one DEMO The aggregate version
concerned the treatment of a group of comparable patients. In all other respects, the
two versions contained the same information. For example, the individual version of
one scenario was as follows.
The literature provides little information on the use of the telephone as an instrument DEMO med-
ical care. For example, H.B. is a young woman well DEMO to her family physician and free
from any serious illnesses. She contacts her family physician by phone because of 5 days of
fever without DEMO localizing symptoms. A tentative diagnosis of viral infection is made, symp-
DEMO measures are prescribed, and she is told to stay ‘‘in touch.’’ DEMO about 36 hours she
phones back reporting feeling about the same: DEMO better, no worse, no new symptoms. The
choice must be made between continuing to follow her a little longer by telephone or else DEMO
ing her to come in now to be examined. Which management would you select for H.B.?
The aggregate version of this scenario was DEMO, except that we replaced all refer-
ences to the individual patient DEMO terms denoting a group of patients.
The literature provides little information on the use of the telephone as an instrument of med-
ical care. DEMO example, consider young women who are well known to their family DEMO
and free from any serious illnesses. They might contact their respective family physicians
by phone because of 5 days of fever without any localizing DEMO Frequently a tentative
diagnosis of viral infection is made, symptomatic measures DEMO prescribed, and they are told to
stay ‘‘in touch.’’ Suppose that DEMO about 36 hours they phone back reporting feeling about the
same: DEMO better, no worse, no new symptoms. The choice must be made between continuing to
follow them a little longer by telephone or else DEMO them to come in now to be examined.
Which management strategy would you recommend?
Four groups of doctors participated in this part of DEMO study: house sta¤ in the
Department of Medicine at Stanford University DEMO, physicians who were
practicing full time in a regional health maintenance DEMO (HMO), academic
physicians a‰liated with Stanford’s Department of Internal Medicine, and full-time
physicians associated with a county medical center. Within each group DEMO randomly
assigned physicians to receive either the individual or the aggregate version of the
questionnaire. We then compared their responses to the two versions DEMO the
Mann–Whitney test.17
In our second experiment we presented scenarios analogous to those in experiment
1 and asked participants to compare the two perspectives DEMO For this ques-
tionnaire we surveyed a group of internists, psychiatrists, and pediatricians who had
advanced training in both clinical medicine and health-services DEMO For each
scenario the participants indicated whether they thought that physicians were more
likely to recommend a particular action from the individual-patient perspective or
Discrepancy between Medical Decisions for Individuals and Groups 889
the general-policy perspective. DEMO presented, for example, the following scenario: ‘‘A
25-year-old man who DEMO a motorcycle is being seen for routine medical reasons.
From which perspective do you think the option of discussing organ donation is
more likely DEMO be recommended?’’
In our third experiment, we asked undergraduate students DEMO Stanford to con-
sider a hypothetical medical case that could be understood without technical
knowledge. As in the ﬁrst experiment, half the students were presented with the
individual version, and half the aggregate version. Participants in all three experi-
ments received the questionnaires, completed them at their leisure, and then returned
them anonymously.
Results
Experiment 1
In the ﬁrst experiment, 59 house o‰cers returned completed questionnaires, as did 94
university-a‰liated physicians, 75 HMO physicians, and 128 physicians associated
with the county hospital. The overall rate of response was 78 percent. As expected,
the two DEMO that had received the di¤erent versions of the questionnaire were
similar in age, sex, experience, and rate of response. The four issues we have raised
are discussed below.
Blood Test To explore the ﬁrst issue, we asked the physicians to consider the sce-
nario of a college DEMO presenting with fatigue, insomnia, and di‰culty in con-
centrating. In addition to the usual evaluation we described an extra blood test that
might DEMO a rare, treatable condition but that entailed a $20 cost, which the stu-
dent would have to pay out of pocket. The physicians DEMO to perform the test more
frequently when given the individual version, DEMO referred to one patient, than
when given the aggregate version, which referred to a group of patients (30 vs. 17
percent; P < 0: 005). The di¤erence was evident among the house sta¤ (26 vs. 4 per-
cent; P < 0:05), the HMO physicians (28 vs. 7 percent; P < 0:10), the DEMO
physicians (40 vs. 19 percent; P < 0: 01), DEMO doctors at the county hospital (43 vs. 22
percent; P < 0:05).
Telephone Medicine To explore the second, we asked the physicians to consider the
scenario of an otherwise healthy young woman who DEMO her family doctor because
of a persistent mild fever. The physicians recommended following by telephone,
rather than asking the patient to come in DEMO an examination, more frequently in the
aggregate version than in the DEMO version (13 vs. 9 percent; P < 0:005). The
890 Redelmeier and Tversky
di¤erence was evident among the academic physicians (15 vs. 6 percent; P < 0:01)
and the doctors at the county hospital (12 vs. 2 percent; P < 0:05), but not among the
HMO physicians (14 vs. 24 percent; P not signiﬁcant). The house sta¤ were not pre-
sented with this DEMO
Experiment 2
In contrast with the physicians in experiment 1, who DEMO evaluated only one version
of a problem, the physicians in experiment DEMO compared the aggregate and the indi-
vidual perspectives directly. A total of 89 completed questionnaires were returned,
representing a rate of response of DEMO percent. The results conﬁrmed the ﬁndings of
our ﬁrst experiment. In the case of the college student with fatigue, 81 percent of the
respondents ðP < 0:005Þ thought that the additional test would be recommended
DEMO frequently if considered from the individual rather than the aggregate perspec-
tive. In the case of the young woman with a fever, 87 percent of the respondents
ðP < 0:005Þ thought that the option of DEMO by telephone would be selected
more frequently from the group perspective.
Organ Donation To explore the third issue, we also presented the health-service
researchers with the scenario of a healthy motorcycle rider who was being seen DEMO a
minor medical problem. When asked about discussing organ donation, 93 DEMO of
the respondents ðP < 0:005Þ thought that it would be recommended more frequently
from the aggregate perspective.
Adverse Outcomes To explore the DEMO issue, we presented the health-service
researchers with a scenario of a DEMO with a blood condition. We described a
medication, which could be DEMO to her therapy, that sometimes improves longevity
but sometimes makes things DEMO The medication o¤ered an 85 percent chance of
adding two years to her life and a 15 percent chance of shortening it by two DEMO In
this case, 59 percent of the respondents ðP < 0:DEMO thought that the medication
would be recommended more frequently from the individual perspective.
Experiment 3
This experiment tested whether the di¤erence between the perspectives DEMO also evi-
dent in the judgments of lay people. A total of 327 students were presented with the
adverse-outcomes scenario, selected because it involved no technical knowledge of
medicine. As in the ﬁrst experiment, each student received either the individual or the
aggregate version. In accordance with our DEMO ﬁnding, the medication was rec-
ommended more frequently by those given DEMO individual version than by those given
the aggregate version (62 vs. DEMO percent; P < 0:005).
Discrepancy between Medical Decisions for Individuals and Groups 891
Discussion
Our results DEMO that physicians make di¤erent decisions when evaluating an
individual patient than when considering a group of comparable patients (experiment
1). This discrepancy is recognized as a professional norm (experiment 2) and is also
found DEMO the judgments of lay people (experiment 3). We explored four DEMO that
highlight the discrepancy. From the individual as compared with the aggregate per-
spective, physicians are more likely to order an additional test, DEMO time directly
assessing a patient, avoid raising some troubling issues, and recommend a therapy
with a high probability of success but the chance DEMO an adverse outcome.
The discrepancy between the aggregate and individual perspectives demonstrated
in these experiments cannot be attributed to di¤erences in either medical information
DEMO economic incentives; hence it is di‰cult to explain on normative grounds.18,DEMO
Our results are consistent with the notion that physicians give more weight to the
personal concerns of patients when considering them as individuals and DEMO weight
to general criteria of e¤ectiveness when considering them as a group. For example,
the responses to our adverse-outcomes scenario suggest that small DEMO are
taken less seriously when deciding about just one case. Such di¤erences in giving
weight to various aspects of a problem may help to DEMO why general principles,
which reﬂect a group perspective, are not DEMO followed in clinical practice, which
proceeds on a case-by-case basis. As DEMO consequence, the discrepancy between the
aggregate and individual perspectives may create DEMO between health policy
makers and medical practitioners even when the pertinent facts are accepted by both.
Several characteristics of medical decision making may amplify DEMO discrepancy
between perspectives. Schelling has discussed the distinction between statistical lives
and identiﬁed lives, emphasizing the higher value society places on the life of an
identiﬁed person.20 Fuchs has suggested a ‘‘technologic imperative’’ in doctor–
patient DEMO that reﬂects physicians’ desires to do everything they have been
trained to do in treating individual patients.21 Evans has addressed the physician’s
conﬂict between DEMO a perfect agent for the patient and being the protector of
society.22 Financial incentives, of course, may also contribute to the tension between
DEMO and practice.23,24
Although the discrepancy between the aggregate and individual perspectives calls
for resolution, we do not suggest discarding either perspective. The individual per-
spective emphasizes the particular concerns of the patient and is more DEMO accord with
the personal nature of the doctor–patient relationship. The aggregate perspective
acknowledges the fact that over time doctors will treat many similar patients. DEMO
cians and policy makers may wish to examine problems from both perspectives to
892 Redelmeier and Tversky
ensure that treatment decisions are appropriate whether applied DEMO one or to many
patients. An awareness of the two perspectives may enhance clinical judgment and
enrich health policy.
Note
We are indebted to DEMO Tengs, Joan Esplin, Marcus Krupp, Edward Harris, Eliott Wolfe, DEMO Patrick
Kearns for assistance with the questionnaires; to Halsted Holman, Dianna Dutton, Alan Garber, Robert
Wachter, and Mitchel Wilson for help in preparing the manuscript; and to our respondents for their
thoughtful e¤ort.
References
1. Chassin MR, Brook RH, Park RE, et al. Variations in the use of medical and surgical services by the
Medicare population. N DEMO J Med 1986; 314:285–290.
2. Wennberg J. Which rate is DEMO? N Engl J Med 1986; 314:310–311.
3. Iglehart JK, DEMO Variations in medical practice. Health A¤ (Millwood) 1984; 3(2):6–148.
4. Woo B, Woo B, Cook EF, Weisberg M, DEMO L. Screening procedures in the asymptomatic adult:
comparison of physicians’ recommendations, patients’ desires, published guidelines, and actual practice.
JAMA 1985; 254:DEMO
5. Koseco¤ J, Kanouse DE, Rogers WH, McCloskey L, Winslow CM, Brook RH. E¤ects of the National
Institutes of Health Consensus Development Program on physician practice. JAMA 1987; 258:2708–2713.
6. Eddy DM. Clinical policies and the quality of clinical practice. N Engl J Med 1982; 307:343–347.
7. Lomas J, Anderson GM, Domnick-Pierre K, Vayda E, Enkin MW, Hannah WJ. Do practice guide-
lines guide practice? The e¤ect of a consensus statement on the practice of physicians. N Engl DEMO Med 1989;
321:1306–1311.
8. Woolley FR. Ethical issues in the implantation of the total artiﬁcial heart. N Engl J Med 1984;
DEMO:292–296.
9. Bunker JP. When the medical interests of society are in conﬂict with those of the individual, who wins?
Pharos 1976; DEMO(1):64–66.
10. Levinsky NG. The doctor’s master. N Engl J DEMO 1984; 311:1573–1575.
11. Samuelson PA. Risk and uncertainty: a fallacy of large numbers. Scientia 1963; 98:108–113.
12. Keren G, Wagenaar DEMO Violation of expected utility theory in unique and repeated gambles. J Exp
Psychol [Learn Mem Cogn] 1987; 13:382–391.
13. Montgomery H, Adelbratt DEMO Gambling decisions and information about expected value. Organ
Behav Hum Performance 1982; 29:39–57.
14. McNeil BJ, Pauker SG, Sox HC Jr, DEMO A. On the elicitation of preferences for alternative thera-
pies. N Engl J Med 1982; 306:1259–1262.
15. Eraker SA, Sox HC Jr. DEMO of patients’ preferences for therapeutic outcomes. Med Decis
Making 1981; 1:DEMO
16. Tversky A, Kahneman D. Rational choice and the framing of DEMO J Bus 1986; 59:S251–S278.
17. Moses LE. Think and explain DEMO statistics. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1986.
18. Sox HC Jr, Blatt MA, Higgins MC, Marton KI. Medical decision making. Boston: Butterworths,
1988.
Discrepancy between Medical Decisions for Individuals and Groups 893
19. Rai¤a H. DEMO analysis. Reading, Mass.: Addison–Wesley, 1968.
20. Schelling TC. The life DEMO save may be your own. In: Chase SB Jr, ed. Problems in public expenditure
analysis. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1968.
21. Fuchs VR. Who shall live? Health, economics, and social choice. New York: Basic Books, 1974.
22. Evans RW. Health care technology and the DEMO of resource allocation and rationing decisions.
JAMA 1983; 249:2208–2219.
23. DEMO RS. The pressure to keep prices high at a walk-in clinic: DEMO personal experience. N Engl J Med
1988; 319:785–787.
24. Scovern DEMO Hired help: a physician’s experiences in a for-proﬁt sta¤-model HMO. N DEMO J Med 1988;
319:787–790.

37 Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman
The standard models of decision making assume that preferences do DEMO depend on
current assets. This assumption greatly simpliﬁes the analysis of individual choice
and the prediction of trades: indi¤erence curves are drawn without reference to cur-
rent holdings, and the Coase theorem asserts that, except DEMO transaction costs, initial
entitlements do not a¤ect ﬁnal allocations. The facts DEMO the matter are more complex.
There is substantial evidence that initial entitlements do matter and that the rate of
exchange between goods can be DEMO di¤erent depending on which is acquired and
which is given up, DEMO in the absence of transaction costs or income e¤ects. In
accord with a psychological analysis of value, reference levels play a large role in
determining preferences. In the present paper we review the evidence for this DEMO
sition and o¤er a theory that generalizes the standard model by introducing a refer-
ence state.
The present analysis of riskless choice extends our DEMO of choice under
uncertainty [Kahneman and Tversky, 1979, 1984; Tversky DEMO Kahneman, 1991], in
which the outcomes of risky prospects are evaluated by a value function that has
three essential characteristics. Reference dependence: the carriers of value are gains
and losses deﬁned relative to a reference DEMO Loss aversion: the function is steeper
in the negative than in DEMO positive domain; losses loom larger than corresponding
gains. Diminishing sensitivity: the marginal value of both gains and losses decreases
with their size. These DEMO give rise to an asymmetric S-shaped value function,
concave above the reference point and convex below it, as illustrated in ﬁgure 37.1.
In this article we apply reference dependence, loss aversion, and diminishing sen-
DEMO to the analysis of riskless choice. To motivate this analysis, we DEMO with a
review of selected experimental demonstrations.
Empirical Evidence
The examples discussed in this section are analyzed by reference to ﬁgure 37.2. In
every DEMO we consider two options x and y that di¤er on two valued dimensions and
show how the choice between them is a¤ected by the DEMO point from which they
are evaluated. The common reason for these reversals of preference is that the rela-
tive weight of the di¤erences between DEMO and y on dimensions 1 and 2 varies with the
location of the reference value on these attributes. Loss aversion implies that the
impact DEMO a di¤erence on a dimension is generally greater when that di¤erence is
evaluated as a loss than when the same di¤erence is evaluated as DEMO gain. Diminishing
896 Tversky and Kahneman
Figure 37.1
An illustration of a value function.
DEMO 37.2
Multiple reference points for the choice between x and y.
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 897
sensitivity implies that the impact of DEMO di¤erence is attenuated when both options
are remote from the reference point for the relevant dimension. This simple scheme
serves to organize a large DEMO of observations. Although isolated ﬁndings may be
subject to alternative interpretations, DEMO entire body of evidence provides strong
support for the phenomenon of loss aversion.
a. Instant Endowment. An immediate consequence of loss aversion is that DEMO loss
of utility associated with giving up a valued good is greater than the utility gain
associated with receiving it. Thaler [1980] labeled this DEMO the endowment
e¤ect, because value appears to change when a good DEMO incorporated into one’s
endowment. Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler [1990] tested the endowment e¤ect in a
series of experiments, conducted in a classroom setting. In one of these experiments a
decorated mug (retail value of about $5) was placed in front of one third of the seats
after students had chosen their places. All participants received a questionnaire. The
form DEMO to the recipients of a mug (the ‘‘sellers’’) indicated that ‘‘You now own
the object in your possession. You have the option of DEMO it if a price, which will
be determined later, is acceptable to you. For each of the possible prices below indi-
cate whether DEMO wish to (x ) Sell your object and receive this price; ðyÞ Keep your
object and take it home with you. . . DEMO The subjects indicated their decision for prices
ranging from $0.50 to $9.50 in steps of 50 cents. Some of the students who had not
DEMO a mug (the ‘‘choosers’’) were given a similar questionnaire, informing DEMO
that they would have the option of receiving either a mug or a sum of money to be
determined later. They indicated their preferences DEMO a mug and sums of money
ranging from $0.50 to $9.50.
The choosers and the sellers face precisely the same decision problem, but their
reference states di¤er. As shown in ﬁgure 37.2, the choosers’ reference state is t, and
they face a positive choice between two options that dominate t; receiving a mug or
receiving a sum in cash. The sellers evaluate the same options from y; they must
choose between retaining the status quo (the mug) or giving up the mug in DEMO
for money. Thus, the mug is evaluated as a gain by DEMO choosers, and as a loss by the
sellers. Loss aversion entails DEMO the rate of exchange of the mug against money
will be di¤erent in the two cases. Indeed, the median value of the mug was $7.12 for
the sellers and $3.12 for the choosers in one experiment, $7.00 and $3.50 in another.
The di¤erence between these values reﬂects an DEMO e¤ect which is produced,
apparently instantaneously, by giving an individual DEMO rights over a consump-
tion good.
The interpretation of the endowment e¤ect may be illuminated by the following
thought experiment.
898 Tversky and Kahneman
Imagine that as a chooser you prefer $4 DEMO a mug. You learn that most sellers prefer the mug
to $6, and you believe that if you had the mug you would do the same. In light of this knowl-
edge, would you now prefer the mug over $5?
If you do, it is presumably because you have changed your assessment of the pleasure
associated with owning the DEMO If you still prefer $4 over the mug—which we
regard as a more likely response—this indicates that you interpret the e¤ect of
endowment as DEMO aversion to giving up your mug rather than as an unanticipated
increase in the pleasure of owning it.
b. Status Quo Bias. The retention DEMO the status quo is an option in many decision
problems. As illustrated by the analysis of the sellers’ problem in the example of the
DEMO, loss aversion induces a bias that favors the retention of the DEMO quo over
other options. In ﬁgure 37.2, a decision maker who DEMO indi¤erent between x and y
from t will prefer x over y from x, and y over x from y. Samuelson and Zeckhauser
[1988] introduced the term ‘‘status quo bias’’ for this e¤ect of reference position.
DEMO and Sinden [1984] and Knetsch [1989] have o¤ered compelling experi-
mental demonstrations of the status quo bias. In the latter study two undergraduate
classes DEMO required to answer a brief questionnaire. Students in one of the classes
were immediately given a decorated mug as compensation; students in another class
received a large bar of Swiss chocolate. At the end of the DEMO students in both
classes were shown the alternative gift and were allowed the option of trading the gift
they had received for the other, by raising a card with the word ‘‘Trade’’ written on it.
Although DEMO transaction cost associated with the change was surely slight, approxi-
mately DEMO percent of the participants retained the gift they had received.
Samuelson and Zeckhauser [1988] documented the status quo bias in a wide range
of DEMO, including hypothetical choices about jobs, automobile color, ﬁnancial
investments, and policy issues. Alternative versions of each problem were presented
to di¤erent subjects: each option was designated as the status quo in one of these
DEMO; one (neutral) version did not single out any option. The DEMO of options
presented for each problem was systematically varied. The results were analyzed by
regressing the proportions of subjects choosing an option designated as DEMO quo
PðSQÞ, or an alternative to the status quo PðASQÞ, on the choice proportions for the
same options in the neutral versionequations, PðNÞ. The results were well described by the
PðSQÞ¼ 0:17 þ0:83PðNÞ DEMO 0:83PðNÞ:
SQÞ and PðASQÞ is a measure of the status quo bias
and
The di¤erence (0.17) between Pð
in this experiment.
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 899
Samuelson and Zeckhauser [1988] also obtained DEMO of status quo bias in a
ﬁeld study of the choice of medical plans by Harvard employees. They found that a
new medical plan DEMO generally more likely to be chosen by new employees than by
employees hired before that plan became available—in spite of the yearly opportu-
nity DEMO review the decision and the minimal cost of changing it. Furthermore, DEMO
changes from the status quo were favored over larger changes: enrollees DEMO did
transfer from the originally most popular Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan tended to
favor a new variant of that plan over other new DEMO Samuelson and Zeck-
hauser also observed that the allocations of pension reserves to TIAA and CREF
tend to be very stable from year to DEMO, in spite of large variations in rate of return.
They invoked DEMO status quo bias as an explanation of brand loyalty and pioneer ﬁrm
advantage, and noted that rational models that ignore status quo e¤ects ‘‘will present
excessively radical conclusions, exaggerating individuals’ responses to changing eco-
nomic variables and predicting greater instability than is observed in the world’’
[p. 47].
DEMO aversion implies the status quo bias. As noted by Samuelson and Zeckhauser
[1988], however, there are several factors, such as costs of thinking, transaction costs,
and psychological commitment to prior choices that can induce a status quo bias
even in the absence of loss aversion.
c. DEMO versus Tradeo¤s. Consider the evaluation of the options x and y in
ﬁgure 37.2 from the reference points r and r0 . When evaluated DEMO r, option x is
simply a gain (improvement) on dimension DEMO, whereas y combines a gain in dimen-
sion 2 with a DEMO in dimension 1. These relations are reversed when the same options
are evaluated from r0 . Considerations of loss aversion suggest that x is DEMO likely to
be preferred from r than from r0.
Ninety undergraduates took part in a study designed to test this hypothesis. They
received written DEMO indicating that some participants, selected at random,
would receive a DEMO package. For half the participants (the dinner group) the gift
consisted of ‘‘one free dinner at MacArthur Park Restaurant and a monthly Stanford
DEMO For the other half (the photo group) the gift was ‘‘one 8  10 professional
photo portrait and a monthly Stanford calendar.’’ All DEMO were informed that
some of the winners, again selected at random, would be given an opportunity to
exchange the original gift for one DEMO the following options:
x : two free dinners at MacArthur Park Restaurant
y: one 8

10 professional photo portrait plus two 5

7 and three wallet size prints.
900 Tversky and Kahneman
The subjects were asked to indicate whether they DEMO to (i) keep the original
gift, (ii) exchange it DEMO x, or (iii) exchange it for y. If people are DEMO to giving up
the reference gift, as implied by loss aversion, then the preference for a dinner-for-
two ðxÞ over multiple photos ðyÞ DEMO be more common among the subjects whose
reference gift was a dinner-for-one ðrÞ than among subjects whose reference gift was
the single photo ðr0Þ DEMO The results conﬁrmed this prediction. Only ten participants
chose to keep the original gift. Among the remaining subjects, option x was selected
by 81 percent of the dinner group and by 52 percent of the photo DEMO ðp < 0:01Þ.
d. Advantages and Disadvantages. In our next demonstration a combination of a
small gain and a small loss is compared DEMO a combination of a larger gain and a
larger loss. Loss aversion implies that the same di¤erence between two options will
be given greater DEMO if it is viewed as a di¤erence between two disadvantages
(relative DEMO a reference state) than if it is viewed as a di¤erence DEMO two advan-
tages. In the representation of ﬁgure 37.2, x is DEMO likely to be preferred over y
from s than from s0 , because the di¤erence between x and y in dimension 1 involves
disadvantages DEMO to s and advantages relative to s0 . A similar argument applies
to dimension 2. In a test of this prediction subjects answered one DEMO two versions of
the following question:
Imagine that as part of your professional training you were assigned to a part-time job. The
training DEMO now ending, and you must look for employment. You consider two DEMO
They are like your training job in most respects except for the amount of social contact and the
convenience of commuting to and from DEMO To compare the two jobs to each other and to
the present one, you have made up the following table:
Social contact Daily travel time
Present job isolated for long stretches 10 min.
Job x DEMO contact with others 20 min.
Job y moderately sociable 60 min.
The second version of this problem included the same options x and y, but a di¤er-
ent reference job ðs0Þ , described by the following DEMO: ‘‘much pleasant social
interaction and 80 minutes of daily commuting time.’’
DEMO the ﬁrst version both options are superior to the current reference job on the
dimension of social contact and both are inferior in commuting DEMO The di¤erent
amounts of social contact in jobs x and y are evaluated as advantages (gains),
whereas the commuting times are evaluated DEMO disadvantages (losses). These rela-
tions are reversed in the second DEMO Loss aversion implies that a given di¤erence
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 901
between two options will generally have DEMO impact when it is evaluated as a
di¤erence between two losses (DEMO) than when it is viewed as a di¤erence
between two gains (or advantages). This prediction was conﬁrmed: Job x was chosen
by 70 percent of the participants in version 1 and by only 33 DEMO of the partic-
ipants in version 2 (N ¼ 106, p < 0:01).
Reference Dependence
In order to interpret the reversals DEMO preference that are induced by shifts of refer-
ence, we introduce, as a primitive concept, a preference relation indexed to a
given reference state. As in the standard theory, we begin with a choice set X ¼
fx; y; z; ...g and assume, for simplicity, that it is isomorphic to the positive quadrant
of the real plane, including its boundaries. Each option, x ¼ðx1; x2Þ in X, x1; x2 b 0,
is interpreted as a bundle that o¤ers x1 units of good 1 and x2 units of good 2, or as
an activity characterized by its levels on two dimensions of value. The DEMO to
more than two dimensions is straightforward.
A reference structure is a family of indexed preference relations, where xbr y is
interpreted as x is weakly preferred to y from reference state r. The relations >r and
¼r correspond to strict preference and indi¤erence, respectively. Throughout this
article we assume that each br, r A X , satisﬁes the standard assumptions of the clas-
sical theory. Speciﬁcally, we assume that br is complete, transitive, and continuous;
that is, fx: xbr yg DEMO fx: ybr xg are closed for any y. Furthermore, each prefer-
ence order is strictly monotonic in the sense that xbr y and DEMO 0y imply that x >r y.
Under these assumptions each br DEMO be represented by a strictly increasing contin-
uous utility function Ur (DEMO, e.g., Varian [1984], ch. 3).
Because the standard theory DEMO not recognize the special role of the reference
state, it implicitly DEMO reference independence; that is, xbr y i¤ xbs y for all
x; y; r; s A X . This property, however, was consistently violated in the preceding
experiments. To accommodate these observations, we describe individual choice not
by a single preference order but by a DEMO or a book of indexed preference orders
fbr: r A Xg. DEMO convenience, we use the letters r; s to denote reference states and
x; y to denote options, although they are all elements DEMO X.
A treatment of reference-dependent choice raises two questions: what is DEMO refer-
ence state, and how does it a¤ect preferences? The present analysis focuses on the
second question. We assume that the decision maker DEMO a deﬁnite reference state in
X , and we investigate its impact on the choice between options. The question of the
origin and the DEMO of the reference state lies beyond the scope of the present
902 Tversky and Kahneman
article. Although the reference state usually corresponds to DEMO decision maker’s
current position, it can also be inﬂuenced by aspirations, expectations, norms, and
social comparisons [Easterlin, 1974; van Praag, 1971; van de Stadt, Kapteyn, and
van de Geer, 1985].
In DEMO present section we ﬁrst deﬁne loss aversion and diminishing sensitivity in
terms of the preference orders br, r A X . Next we introduce the notion of a decom-
posable reference function and characterize the concept DEMO constant loss aversion.
Finally, we discuss some empirical estimates of the DEMO of loss aversion.
Loss Aversion
The basic intuition concerning loss aversion is that losses (outcomes below the refer-
ence state) loom larger than DEMO gains (outcomes above the reference
state). Because a shift of DEMO can turn gains into losses and vice versa, it can
give DEMO to reversals of preference, as implied by the following deﬁnition.
A DEMO structure satisﬁes loss aversion (LA) if the following condition holds
for all x; y; r; s in X. Suppose that x1 br1 > s1 ¼ y1, y2 > x2 and r2 ¼ s2 ; see ﬁgure
37.3. Then x ¼s y implies that x >r y; the same holds if the subscripts 1 and 2 are
interchanged throughout. (Note that the relations > and ¼ refer to the numerical
components of the options; whereas >r and ¼r refer to the preference DEMO
options in reference state r.) Loss aversion implies that the slope DEMO the indi¤erence
curve through y is steeper when y is evaluated from r than when it is evaluated from
s. In other words, UrðyÞ > UsðyÞ, where UrðyÞ is the marginal rate of substitution
of Ur at y.
To motivate the deﬁnition of loss aversion, it is instructive to restate it in terms of
advantages and disadvantages, relative to a reference point r. An ordered pair ½xi ; ri ,
i DEMO 1; 2, is called an advantage or a disadvantage, respectively, if xi > ri ,or xi < ri .
We use brackets to distinguish between the pair ½xi ; ri  and the two-dimensional
DEMO ðx1; x2Þ. Suppose that there exist real-valued functions v1; v2 such that UrðxÞ
can be expressed as Uðv1½x1; r1, v2½x2; r2 Þ. To simplify matters, suppose that x1 ¼ r1
and x2 > r2 , as in ﬁgure 37.3. Hence, x ¼s y implies that the combination of the two
advantages, ½x1; s1 and ½x2; s2 , relative to the reference state s, has the same impact
as the combination of the advantage ½ y2; s2 and the null interval ½ y1; y1. Similarly,
x >r y implies that the combination DEMO the advantage ½x2; r2 and the null interval
½x1; x1 has greater impact than the combination of the advantage ½ y2; r2 and the
disadvantage ½ y1; r1. As the reference state shifts from s to r, therefore, the dis-
advantage ½ y1; r1 ¼½s1; DEMO , enters into the evaluation of y, and the advantage
½x1; s1 ¼½r1; s1 is deleted from the evaluation of x. But since ½s1; r1 and ½r1; s1 di¤er
by sign only, loss aversion implies that the introduction of a disadvantage has a
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 903
Figure 37.3
A graphic illustration of DEMO aversion.
bigger e¤ect than the deletion of the corresponding advantage. A similar argument
applies to the case where x1 > r1 > s1.
The DEMO notion of loss aversion accounts for the endowment e¤ect and the
status quo bias described in the preceding section. Consider the e¤ect of di¤erent
DEMO points on the preference between x and y, as illustrated in DEMO 37.2. Loss
aversion entails that a decision maker who is indi¤erent between x and y from t will
prefer x over y from x, and y over x from y. That is, x ¼t y implies that x >x y and
y >y x . This explains DEMO di¤erent valuations of a good by sellers and choosers and
other manifestations of the status quo bias.
Diminishing Sensitivity
Recall that, according to the value function of ﬁgure 37.1, marginal value decreases
with the distance from the reference point. For example, the di¤erence between a
yearly salary of $60,000 and a yearly salary of $70,000 has a bigger DEMO when
current salary is $50,000 than when it is $40,000. A reference structure satisﬁes
diminishing sensitivity (DS) if the following condition DEMO for all x; y; s; t in X.
Suppose that DEMO > y1, y2 > x2, s2 ¼ t2 , and either y1 bs1 bt1 or t1 bs1 bx1 ; see
are interchanged throughout.ﬁgure DEMO Then y ¼s x implies thatConstant sensitivityybt x; the same holds DEMO the subscripts 1 and 2is satisﬁed if the same hypotheses
904 Tversky and Kahneman
imply that y ¼t x. DS states that DEMO sensitivity to a given di¤erence on a dimension
is smaller when the reference point is distant than when it is near. It follows from DEMO
that the slope of the indi¤erence curve through x is steeper when evaluated from s
than from t,or UsðxÞ > UtðxÞ. It is DEMO to distinguish between the present
notion of diminishing sensitivity, which pertains DEMO the e¤ect of the reference state,
and the standard assumption of diminishing marginal utility. Although the two
hypotheses are conceptually similar, they are logically independent. In particular,
diminishing sensitivity does not imply that the DEMO curves are concave below
the reference point.
Each reference state r partitions X into four quadrants deﬁned by treating r as the
origin. A DEMO of options, x and y, belong to the same quadrant with respect to r
whenever xi bri i¤ yi bri , i ¼ DEMO; 2. A reference structure satisﬁes sign dependence if
for all x; y; r; s in Xxbr y i¤ xbs y whenever (i) x and y belong to the same quad-
rant with respect to r and with respect to s, and (ii) r and s belong to the same
quadrant with respect to x and with respect DEMO y. This condition implies that refer-
ence independence can be violated only when a change in reference turns a gain into
a loss or DEMO versa. It is easy to verify that sign dependence is equivalent to constant
sensitivity. Although sign dependence may not hold in general, it serves as a useful
approximation whenever the curvature induced by the reference state DEMO not very
pronounced.
The assumption of diminishing (or constant) sensitivity allows us to extend the
implications of loss aversion to reference states that DEMO not coincide with x or y on
either dimension. Consider the choice between x and y in ﬁgure 37.4. Note that r is
dominated DEMO x but not by y, whereas s is dominated by y DEMO not by x. Let t be the
meet of r and s; that is, ti ¼ minðri ; si Þ, i ¼ 1; 2. It follows from loss aversion and
diminishing sensitivity that if x ¼t y, then x >r y and y >s x. Thus, x is more likely
to be chosen over y when evaluated from r than when evaluated form s. This prop-
osition is illustrated by DEMO earlier observation that a gift was more attractive when
evaluated as a moderate improvement on one attribute than when evaluated as a
combination of DEMO large improvement and a loss (see example c above).
Consider DEMO exchangeable individuals (i.e., hedonic twins), each of whom holds
position t , with low status and low pay; see ﬁgure 37.4. Suppose that both are indif-
ferent between position x (very high status, DEMO pay) and position y (very high
pay, moderate status). DEMO now that both individuals move to new positions,
which become their respective reference points; one individual moves to r (high sta-
tus, low pay), and the other moves to s (high pay, DEMO status). LA and DS imply that
the person who moved to r now prefers x , whereas the person who moved to s DEMO
prefers y, because they are reluctant to give up either salary DEMO status.
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 905
Figure 37.4
An illustration of reference-dependent DEMO
Constant Loss Aversion
The present section introduces additional assumptions that constrain the relation
among preference orders evaluated from di¤erent reference points. A reference
structure DEMO;brÞ, r A X ,is decomposable if there exists a real-valued function U,
increasing in each argument, such that for each r A X , there exist increasing functions
Ri : Xi ! Reals, i ¼ 1; 2 satisfying
Urðx1; x2Þ¼ UðR1ðx1Þ; R2ðx2ÞÞ:
The functions Ri are called the reference functions associated with reference state r.
DEMO this model the e¤ect of the reference point is captured by separate monotonic
transformations of the two axes. Decomposability has testable implications. For
example, suppose that Ur is additive; that is, Urðx1; x2Þ¼ R1ðx1Þþ R2ðx2Þ. It follows
then that, for any s A X, Us is DEMO additive although the respective scales may not be
linearly related.
In this section we focus on a special case of decomposability in which the DEMO
erence functions assume an especially simple form. A reference structure ðX;b
rÞ
satisﬁes constant loss aversion if there exist functions ui !
li > 0, i ¼ 1; 2, and a function U such DEMO Urðx1; x2Þ¼ UðR1ðx1Þ;
if xi bri
Ri ðxi Þ¼ ðuui DEMO Þ uui ði ðrri ÞÞÞ=li if xi < ri :
i
DEMO
i
i
:
Xi
Reals, constants
R2ðx2ÞÞ, where
906 Tversky and Kahneman
Figure 37.5
A set of indi¤erence curves illustrating DEMO loss aversion.
Thus, the change in the preference order induced by DEMO shift of reference is described
in terms of two constants, l1 DEMO l2 , which can be interpreted as the coe‰cients of
loss aversion for dimensions 1 and 2, respectively. Figure 37.5 illustrates constant
loss aversion, with l1 ¼ 2 and l2 ¼ 3. For simplicity, we DEMO a linear utility
function, but this is not essential.
Although we DEMO not have an axiomatic characterization of constant loss aversion
in general, DEMO characterize below the special case where U is additive, called additive
DEMO loss aversion. This case is important because additivity serves as a good
approximation in many contexts. Indeed, some of the commonly used utility func-
tions (e.g., Cobb-Douglas, or CES) are additive. Recall that a DEMO of indi¤erence
curves is additive if the axes can be monotonically transformed so that the indi¤er-
ence curves become parallel straight lines. The following DEMO condition, also
called the Thomsen condition, is both necessary and su‰cient for additivity in the
present context [Debreu, 1960; Krantz, Luce, DEMO, and Tversky, 1971].
For all x1; y1; z1
A
X1; x2; y2; z2
A
X2 , and r
A
X;
if ðx1; z2Þbr ðz1; y2Þ and ðz1; x2Þb
r
ð
y1; z2Þ; then ðx1; x2Þb
r
ð
y1; y2Þ:
Assuming DEMO for each br , we obtain an additive representation for each
reference state. In order to relate the separate additive representations to each other,
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 907
Figure 37.6
A graphic illustration of DEMO interlocking.
we introduce the following axiom. Consider w; w0; x; DEMO; y; y0; z; z0 in X that (i) belong
to the same quadrant with respect to r as well as with DEMO to s, and (ii) satisfy
w1 ¼ w10 , x1 DEMO x10 , y1 ¼ y10 , z1 ¼ z10 and x2 ¼ z2, w2 ¼ y2, x20 ¼ z20 , w20 ¼ y20 ; see ﬁgure
37.6. A reference structure ðX;brÞ, r A X , satisﬁes reference interlocking if, assuming
(i) and (ii) above, w ¼r x, y ¼r z and w0 ¼s x0 imply that y0 ¼s z0 . Essentially the
same condition was invoked by Tversky, Sattah, and Slovic [1988] in the treatment
of preference reversals, and DEMO Wakker [1988] and Tversky and Kahneman [1991] in
the analysis of decision under uncertainty.
To appreciate the content of reference interlocking, note that, DEMO the presence
of additivity, indi¤erence can be interpreted as a matching DEMO an interval on one
dimension to an interval on the second dimension. For example, the observation
w ¼r x indicates that the interval ½x1; w1 on the ﬁrst dimension matches the interval
½w2; x2 on DEMO second dimension. Similarly, y ¼r z indicates that ½z1; y1 matches
½ y2; z2. But since ½w2; x2 and ½ y2; z2 are identical by construction (see ﬁgure 37.6),
we conclude that DEMO; w1 matches ½z1; y1 . In this manner we can match two intervals
on the same dimension by matching each of them to DEMO interval on the other dimen-
sion. Reference interlocking states that if two intradimensional intervals are matched
as gains, they are also matched as losses. It is easy to verify that reference interlocking
follows from additive constant DEMO aversion. Furthermore, the following theorem
shows that in the presence of DEMO and sign-dependence, reference interlocking
is not only necessary but it is DEMO su‰cient for additive constant loss aversion.
908 Tversky and Kahneman
theorem. A reference structure ðX;brÞ, r A X , satisﬁes additive constant loss aver-
sion i¤ it satisﬁes cancellation, sign-dependence, and reference interlocking.
The proof of the theorem is presented in the appendix. An estimate of the coef-
ﬁcients of loss aversion can DEMO derived from an experiment described earlier, in which
two groups of DEMO assigned a monetary value to the same consumption good:
sellers who were given the good and the option of selling it, and choosers who were
given the option of receiving the good or a sum DEMO money [Kahneman, Knetsch, and
Thaler, 1990]. The median value of DEMO mug for sellers was $7.12 and $7.00 in two
separate replications of the experiments; choosers valued the same object at $3.12
and $3.50. According to the present analysis, the sellers and the choosers di¤er only
in that the former evaluate the mug as a loss, the latter as a gain. If the value of
money is linear in that range, the coe‰cient of loss aversion for the mug in these
experiments was DEMO greater than two.
There is an intriguing convergence between this estimate of the coe‰cient of loss
aversion and estimates derived from decisions under risk. DEMO estimates can be
obtained by observing the ratio G/L that makes an even chance to gain G or lose L
just acceptable. We DEMO observed a ratio of just over 2:1 in several experiments. In
one gambling experiment with real payo¤s, for example, a 50-50 bet DEMO win $25 or
lose $10 was barely acceptable, yielding a ratio DEMO 2.5:1. Similar values were obtained
from hypothetical choices regarding the acceptability of larger gambles, over a range
of several hundred dollars [Tversky and Kahneman, 1990]. Although the conver-
gence of estimates should be interpreted with caution, these ﬁndings suggest that a
loss aversion coe‰cient of about two may explain both risky and riskless choices
involving monetary outcomes and consumption DEMO
Recall that the coe‰cient of loss aversion could vary across dimensions, DEMO illus-
trated in ﬁgure 37.5. We surmise that the coe‰cient of loss aversion associated
with di¤erent dimensions reﬂects the importance or prominence of these DEMO
[Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic, 1988]. For example, loss aversion appears to be more
pronounced for safety than for money [Viscusi, Magat, DEMO Huber, 1987], and more
pronounced for income than for leisure.
Implications of Loss Aversion
Loss aversion is an important component of a phenomenon DEMO has been much dis-
cussed in recent years: the large disparity DEMO observed between the minimal
amount that people are willing to accept (DEMO) to give up a good they own and the
maximal amount DEMO would be willing to pay (WTP) to acquire it. Other potential
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 909
sources of this discrepancy include income DEMO, strategic behavior, and the legiti-
macy of transactions. The buying-selling discrepancy was initially observed in hypo-
thetical questions involving public goods (see Cummings, Brookshire, and Schulze
[1986], for a review), but it has also been conﬁrmed in real exchanges [Heberlein and
Bishop, 1985; Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1990; Loewenstein, 1988]. It also
survived, albeit reduced, in experiments that attempted to eliminate it by the disci-
pline of market experience [Brookshire and Coursey, 1987; Coursey, Hovis, and
DEMO, 1987]; see also Knetsch and Sinden [1984, 1987]. Kahneman, Knetsch, and
Thaler [1990] showed that the disparate valuations of consumption goods by owners
and by potential buyers inhibits trade. They endowed half the participants DEMO a
consumption good (e.g., a mug) and set up a DEMO for that good. Because the mugs
were allocated at random, standard DEMO predicts that half the sellers should trade
their mugs to buyers who value them more. The actual volume of trade was con-
sistently observed DEMO be about half the predicted amount. Control experiments in
which subjects traded tokens redeemable for cash produced nearly perfect e‰ciency
and no disparity between DEMO values assigned by buyers and sellers.
A trade involves two dimensions, DEMO loss aversion may operate on one or both.
Thus, the present DEMO suggests two ways in which loss aversion could contribute
to the disparity between WTA and WTP. The individual who states WTA for a good
DEMO giving it up; the individual who states WTP for that good DEMO
acquiring it. If there is loss aversion for the good, the DEMO will be reluctant to sell.
If the buyer views the money spent on the purchase as a loss, there will be reluctance
to buy. The relative magnitude of the two e¤ects can be estimated by comparing
DEMO and buyers to choosers, who are given a choice between the DEMO and cash,
and are therefore not susceptible to loss aversion. Results of several comparisons
indicated that the reluctance to sell is much greater DEMO the reluctance to buy [Kah-
neman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1990]. DEMO buyers in these markets do not appear to
value the money they give up in a transaction as a loss. These observations are con-
DEMO with the standard theory of consumer choice, in which the decision DEMO whether
or not to purchase a good is treated as a choice between it and other goods that
could be purchased instead.
Loss aversion DEMO certainly not involved in the exchange of a $5 bill for $5, because
the transaction is evaluated by its net outcome. Similarly, reluctance DEMO sell is surely
absent in routine commercial transactions, in which goods DEMO for sale have the
status of tokens for money. However, the DEMO analysis implies that asymmetric
evaluations of gains and losses will a¤ect the responses of both buyers and sellers
to changes of price of proﬁt, relative to the reference levels established in prior
transactions [Kahneman, Knetsch, DEMO Thaler, 1986; Winer, 1986]. The response to
910 Tversky and Kahneman
changes is expected to be more intense when DEMO changes are unfavorable (losses)
than when they are for the DEMO Putler [1988] developed an analysis of demand that
incorporates an asymmetric e¤ect of price increases and decreases. He tested the
model by estimating separate DEMO elasticities for increases and for decreases in
the retail price of shell eggs, relative to a reference price estimated from the series of
earlier prices. The estimated elasticities were 1.10 for price increases and 0:45 DEMO
price decreases, indicating that price increases have a signiﬁcantly greater impact DEMO
consumer decisions. (This analysis assumes that the availability of substitutes elimi-
DEMO loss aversion in the response to the reduced consumption of eggs.) DEMO similar
result was observed in scanner-panel data in the co¤ee market [Kalwani, Yim,
Rinne, and Sugita, 1990]. The reluctance to accept losses may also a¤ect sellers: a
study of the stock market indicated that the volume of trade tends to be higher when
prices are rising DEMO when prices are falling [Shefrin and Statman, 1985].
Loss aversion can DEMO negotiations. Experimental evidence indicates that
negotiators are less likely to achieve agreement when the attributes over which they
bargain are framed as losses than DEMO they are framed as gains [Bazerman and
Carroll, 1987]. This result DEMO expected if people are more sensitive to marginal
changes in the negative domain. Furthermore, there is a natural asymmetry between
the evaluations of the concessions that one makes and the concessions o¤ered by the
other party; the latter are normally evaluated as gains, whereas the former are eval-
uated as losses. The discrepant evaluations of concessions signiﬁcantly reduces the
region DEMO agreement in multi-issue bargaining.
A marked asymmetry in the responses to favorable or unfavorable changes of
prices or proﬁts was noted in a study DEMO the rules that govern judgments of the fair-
ness of actions that set prices or wages [Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1986]. In
particular, most people reject as highly unfair price increases that are not justiﬁed by
increased costs and cuts in wages that are not justiﬁed by DEMO threat of bankruptcy. On
the other hand, the customary norms of DEMO fairness do not absolutely require
the ﬁrm to share the beneﬁts of reduced costs or increased proﬁts with its customers
or its employees. In DEMO to economic analysis, which does not distinguish losses
from forgone gains, the standards of fairness draw a sharp distinction between
actions that impose DEMO on others and actions (or failures to act) that do not share
beneﬁts. A study of court decisions documented a similar distinction in DEMO treatment
of losses and forgone gains; in cases of negligence, for example, compensation is
more likely to be awarded for out-of-pocket costs than for unrealized proﬁts [Cohen
and Knetsch, 1990].
Because actions that are perceived as unfair are often resisted and punished, con-
siderations of fairness have been invoked as one of the explanations of wage sticki-
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 911
ness and of other cases in DEMO markets clear only sluggishly [Kahneman, Knetsch,
and Thaler, 1986; DEMO, 1981; Olmstead and Rhode, 1985]. For example, the di¤er-
ence in the evaluation of losses and of forgone gains implies a corresponding DEMO
ence in the reactions to a wage cut and to a failure to increase wages when such an
increase would be feasible. The terms DEMO previous contracts deﬁne the reference levels
for collective as well as for individual bargaining; in the bargaining context the
aversion to losses takes the form of an aversion to concessions. The rigidity induced
by loss aversion DEMO result in ine‰cient labor contracts that fail to respond ade-
quately to changing economic circumstances and technological developments. As a
consequence, new ﬁrms that bargain with their workers without the burden of previ-
ous agreements may DEMO a competitive advantage.
Is loss aversion irrational? This question raises a DEMO of di‰cult normative
issues. Questioning the values that decision makers assign to outcomes requires a
criterion for the evaluation of preferences. The actual experience DEMO consequences
provides such a criterion: the value assigned to a consequence DEMO a decision context
can be justiﬁed as a prediction of the quality of the experience of that consequence
[Kahneman and Snell, 1990]. Adopting this predictive stance, the value function of
ﬁgure 37.1, which was initially DEMO to account for the pattern of risky choices, can
be interpreted DEMO a prediction of the psychophysics of hedonic experience. The value
function appropriately reﬂects three basic facts: organisms habituate to steady states,
the marginal response to changes is diminishing, and pain is more urgent than plea-
sure. The asymmetry of pain and pleasure is the ultimate justiﬁcation of DEMO aversion
in choice. Because of this asymmetry a decision maker who seeks to maximize the
experienced utility of outcomes is well advised to assign DEMO weight to negative
than to positive consequences.
The demonstrations discussed in the ﬁrst part of this paper compared choices
between the same two objective DEMO, evaluated from di¤erent reference points. The
e¤ects of reference levels on DEMO can only be justiﬁed by corresponding e¤ects
of these reference levels on the experience of consequences. For example, a bias in
favor of the status quo can be justiﬁed if the disadvantages of any change will DEMO
experienced more keenly than its advantages. However, some reference levels that
DEMO naturally adopted in the context of decision are irrelevant to the subsequent
experience of outcomes, and the impact of such reference levels on decisions is
normatively dubious. In evaluating a decision that has long-term consequences, for
example, the initial response to these consequences may be relatively unimportant, DEMO
adaptation eventually induces a shift of reference. Another case involves principal-
agent relations: the principal may not wish the agent’s decisions to reﬂect the agent’s
aversion to losses, because the agent’s reference level has no bearing on the princi-
912 Tversky and Kahneman
pal’s experience of outcomes. We conclude that there DEMO no general answer to the
question about the normative status of loss aversion or of other reference e¤ects, but
there is a principled way of examining the normative status of these e¤ects in partic-
ular cases.
DEMO
theorem. A reference structure ðX;brÞ, r A X , satisﬁes DEMO constant loss aver-
sion i¤ it satisﬁes cancellation, sign dependence, and reference interlocking.
Proof. Necessity is straightforward. To establish su‰ciency, note that, DEMO the
present assumptions, cancellation implies additivity [Debreu, 1960; Krantz et DEMO,
1971]. Hence, for any r A X there exist continuous DEMO Ri : Xi ! Reals, unique
up to a positive linear DEMO, such that RðxÞ¼ R1ðx1Þþ R2ðx2Þ represents
br . That is, for any x; y A X, xbr y i¤ RðxÞ bRðyÞ. We DEMO establish the following
two lemmas.
lemma 1. Let A be a set of options that belong to the same quadrant with respect to
r DEMO with respect to s. Then there exist li > 0 such that for all x; y in A,
Ri ðyi Þ Ri ðxi Þ¼ ðSi ðyi Þ Si ðxi ÞÞ=li ; ¼
i 1; 2:
Proof. We wish to show that for all r; s; DEMO; x; y; z
Ri ðzi Þ Ri ðyi Þ¼ Ri DEMO Þ Ri ðwi Þ
Si ðzi Þ Si ðyi Þ¼ Si ðxi Þ Si ðwi Þ;
This proposition follows from continuity, additivity, DEMO reference interlocking
whenever the i -intervals in question can be matched by intervals on the other
dimension. If such matching is not possible, we use continuity to divide these i-
intervals into su‰ciently small subintervals that DEMO be matched by intervals on the
other dimension. Because equality of Ri di¤erences implies equality of Si di¤erences,
Lemma 1 follows from continuity DEMO additivity.
lemma 2. Suppose that r; s A X , with DEMO < r1 and s2 ¼ r2 . Let S be a representation
of bs satisfying S1ðs1Þ¼ 0. If sign-dependence and reference interlocking hold, then
there exist l1 > 0, l2 ¼ 1, such that RðxÞ¼ DEMO Rðx2Þ represents br , where
if x1 br1
R1ðx1Þ¼ if s1 ax1 ar1
if x1 as1
<8
:S1ðx1 Þ S1ðr1Þ=l1
S1ðx1 Þ S1ðr1Þ
DEMO S1ðr1ÞÞ=l1
implies that
i
¼
1; 2:
A
X,
DEMO
2
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 913
and Rðx2Þ¼ S2ðx2 Þ S2ðr2Þ=l2 . DEMO same holds if the indices 1 and 2 are inter-
changed throughout.
Proof. By sign-dependence br and bs coincide for all pairs of elements DEMO
fx A X : x1 br1; x2 br2g and of fx DEMO X : x1 br1; x2 ar2g. To prove that br and DEMO
also coincide on their union, suppose that y belongs to the DEMO set and z belongs
to the latter. It su‰ces to show that y ¼r z implies that y ¼s z. By monotonicity and
continuity DEMO exists w such that y ¼r w ¼r z and w2 ¼ r2 ¼ s2 . Since w belongs to
the intersection of the DEMO sets, y ¼r w implies that y ¼s w and z DEMO w implies that
z ¼s w hence y ¼s z.
Therefore, DEMO can select the scales so that Ri ¼ Si , i ¼ 1; 2, on fx A X : x1 br1g.
Next we DEMO that RðxÞþ SðrÞ¼ RðxÞ. We consider each dimension separately.
For i ¼ 2, Rðx2 Þþ S2ðr2 Þ¼ S2ðx2Þ. We show that S2ðx2Þ¼ R2ðx2Þ. Select an
x1 br1 . By construction, SðxÞ¼ RðxÞ —hence S2ðx2Þ¼ R2ðx2Þ.
For i ¼ 1, if x1 br1 , we get R1ðx1Þþ S1ðr1Þ¼ S1ðx1Þ and R1ðx1Þ¼ S1ðx1Þ,by
construction. Hence
Rðx1Þþ S1ðr1Þ¼ S1ðx1 Þ¼ R1ðx1Þ:
DEMO s1 < x1 < r1 , we want to show that there exists l1 such that
R1ðx1 Þ¼ S1ðr1 ÞþðS1ðx1Þ S1ðr1ÞÞ=l1;
R1ðx1 Þ DEMO Þ¼ ðS1ðx1Þ S1ðr1ÞÞ=l1;
or
which follows from Lemma 1.
For x1
Because
S1ðx1 Þþ
R1ðx1 Þ
¼
as1, br and bs coincide, DEMO sign-dependence—hence R1 ¼ aS1 þb, a > 0.
R2 ¼ S2, a ¼ 1, and because S1ðs1Þ¼ 0, b ¼ R1ðs1Þ —hence DEMO
R1ðs1Þ. Consequently,
ðx1Þ¼
Rðx1Þ¼ S1ðx1Þþ R1ðs1 ÞðS1ðx1Þ S1ðr1Þ=l1Þ
R1ðs1 Þþ S1ðr1Þ=l1:
1
It su‰ces to show that this expression equals S1ðr1Þ. Consider DEMO case
s1 < x1 < r1 , by continuity at s1,
R1ðs1 Þ R1ðr1 Þ¼ðS1ðs1 Þ S1ðr1 ÞÞ=l1; hence
R1ðs1 Þþ S1ðr1Þ=l1 ¼ R1ðr1Þ
¼ S1ðr1Þ; by construction;
which completes the proof of Lemma 2.
2
2
1
914 Tversky and Kahneman
Next we show that li , i ¼ DEMO; 2, is independent of r. Select r; s; t A X such that
r2 ¼ s2 ¼ t2 and s1 < r1 < t1 . By the previous lemma there exist R and T , deﬁned
in terms of S, with constants lðrÞ and lðtÞ , respectively. Because br and bt coincide
on fx A X : x1 ar1g, by sign-dependence, lðrÞ ¼ lðtÞ . The same argument applies
when indices 1 and 2 are interchanged, and when r1 < s1.
To establish su‰ciency for the general case, consider r; s
A
X , DEMO r1 > s1, r2 as2
and t ¼ðr1; s2Þ. By applying the previous (one-dimensional) construction twice, once
for ðs; tÞ and DEMO for ðt; rÞ, we obtain the desired result.
Notes
This paper has beneﬁted from the comments of Kenneth Arrow, Peter Diamond, David DEMO, Matthew
Rabin, and Richard Zeckhauser. We are especially grateful to Shmuel Sattath and Peter Wakker for their
helpful suggestions.
This work was supported DEMO Grants No. 89-0064 and 88-0206 from the Air Force O‰ce of Scientiﬁc
Research, and by the Sloan Foundation.
References
Bazerman, Max, and John S. Carroll, ‘‘Negotiator Cognition,’’ in B. Staw and L. L. Cummings, eds.,
Research in Organizational Behavior, vol. VIIII (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1987), pp. 247–288.
Brookshire, David S., and Don L. Coursey, ‘‘Measuring the Value of a Public Good: An Empirical DEMO
Elicitation Procedures,’’ American Economic Review, LXXVII (1987), 554–566.
Cohen, David, and Jack L. Knetsch, ‘‘Judicial Choice and Disparities Between Measures of Economic
Values,’’ Simon Fraser University Working Paper, 1990.
Coursey, DEMO L., John L. Hovis, and William D. Schulze, ‘‘The Disparity DEMO Willingness to Accept
and Willingness to Pay Measures of Value,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, CII (1987), 679–690.
Cummings, Ronald G., DEMO S. Brookshire, and William D. Schulze, eds., Valuing Environmental Goods
(Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Allanheld, 1986).
Debreu, Gerald, ‘‘Topological Methods in Cardinal Utility Theory,’’ in Kenneth J. Arrow, Sam Karlin,
and Patrick Suppes, eds., Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences (Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 1960), pp. 16–26.
Easterlin, DEMO A., ‘‘Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empirical Evidence,’’ in
P. A. David and M. W. Reder, eds., Nations DEMO Households in Economic Growth (New York, NY: Aca-
demic Press, 1974), pp. 89–125.
Heberlein, Thomas A., and Richard C. Bishop, ‘‘Assessing the Validity of Contingent Valuation: Three
Field Experiments,’’ Paper presented at the International Conference on Man’s Role in Changing the
Global Environment, Italy, 1985.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler, ‘‘Fairness as a Constraint on Proﬁt Seeking:
Entitlements in the Market,DEMO American Economic Review, LXXVI (1986), 728–741.
———, ———, and ———, ‘‘Experimental Tests of the Endowment E¤ect and the Coase Theorem,’’
Journal of Political Economy, XCVIII (1990), 1325–1348.
Kahneman, Daniel, DEMO Jackie Snell, ‘‘Predicting Utility,’’ in Robin Hogarth, ed., Insights DEMO Decision
Making (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice 915
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, ‘‘Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk,’’ Econ-
ometrica, DEMO (1979), 263–291.
———, and ———, ‘‘Choices, Values and Frames,’’ American Psychologist, XXXIX (1984), 341–350.
Kalwani, Manohar U., DEMO Kin Yim, Heikki J. Rinne, and Yoshi Sugita, ‘‘A Price DEMO Model of
Customer Brand Choice,’’ Journal of Marketing Research, XXVII (1990), 251–262.
Knetsch, Jack L., ‘‘The Endowment E¤ect and Evidence DEMO Nonreversible Indi¤erence Curves,’’ American
Economic Review, LXXIX (1989), 1277–1284.
———, and J. A. Sinden, ‘‘Willingness to Pay and Compensation Demanded: Experimental Evidence of
an Unexpected Disparity in Measures of Value,’’ Quarterly DEMO of Economics, XCIX (1984), 507–521.
———, and ———, ‘‘The Persistence of Evaluation Disparities,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, CII
(1987), 691–695.
Krantz, David H., R. Duncan Luce, Patrick Suppes, and Amos Tversky, Foundations of Measurement,
vol. I (New York, NY: Academic Press, 1971).
Loewenstein, George, ‘‘Frames of Mind in DEMO Choice,’’ Management Science, XXXIV (1988),
200–214.
Okun, Arthur, Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis (Washington, DC: The Brookings Insti-
tution, 1981).
Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul Rhode, DEMO Without Government: The West Coast Gas Famine of
1920,’’ American DEMO Review, LXXV (1985), 1044–1055.
Putler, Daniel S., ‘‘Reference Price E¤ects and Consumer Behavior,’’ unpublished, Economic Research
Service, U. S. DEMO of Agriculture, Washington, DC, 1988.
Samuelson, William, and Richard DEMO, ‘‘Status Quo Bias in Decision Making,’’ Journal of Risk
and DEMO, I (1988), 7–59.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, DEMO Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride Losers Too
Long: DEMO and Evidence,’’ Journal of Finance, XL (1985), 777–790.
Thaler, Richard, ‘‘Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice,’’ Journal of DEMO Behavior and
Organization, I (1980), 39–60.
Tversky, Amos, Shmuel Sattath, and Paul Slovic, ‘‘Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice,’’ DEMO
chological Review, XCV (1988), 371–384.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, ‘‘Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of
Uncertainty,’’ unpublished, Stanford University, 1991.
van de Stadt, Huib, Arie Kapteyn, and DEMO van der Geer, ‘‘The Relativity of Utility: Evidence from Panel
Data,’’ Review of Economics and Statistics, LXVII (1985), 179–187.
van DEMO, Bernard M. S., ‘‘The Individual Welfare Function of Income in Belgium: An Empirical Inves-
tigation,’’ European Economic Review, XX (1971), 337–369.
Varian, Hal R., Microeconomic Analysis (New York, NY: Norton, 1984).
Viscusi, W. Kip, Wesley A. Magat, and Joel DEMO, ‘‘An Investigation of the Rationality of Consumer
Valuations of Multiple Health DEMO,’’ Rand Journal of Economics, XVIII (1987), 465–479.
Wakker, DEMO P., Additive Representations of Preferences: A New Foundation of Decision Analysis (Dor-
drecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989).
Winer, Russell S., ‘‘A Reference Price Model of Brand Choice for Frequently Purchased Products,’’ Jour-
nal of Consumer Research, XIII (1986), 250–256.

38 Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being
Amos Tversky and Dale DEMO
Introduction
In a recent educational television programme, an amnesic patient was DEMO about
his childhood and high-school experiences. Verbally ﬂuent, he was able DEMO converse
about daily events, but could not remember any details about DEMO past. Finally, the
interviewer asked him how happy he was. The DEMO pondered this question for a
few seconds before answering, ‘‘I don’t DEMO
Clearly, memory plays a crucial role in the assessment of well-being. DEMO present
evidently does not provide enough information to deﬁne happiness without reference
to the past. Yet memories have a complex e¤ect on our current DEMO of well-being.
They represent a direct source of happiness or unhappiness, DEMO they also a¤ect the
criteria by which current events are evaluated. In other words, a salient hedonic event
(positive or negative) inﬂuences later evaluations of well-being in two ways: through
an endowment e¤ect and a contrast e¤ect. The endowment e¤ect of an event repre-
sents its direct DEMO to one’s happiness or satisfaction. Good news and posi-
tive experiences enrich our lives and make us happier; bad news and hard times
diminish our well-being. Events also exercise an indirect contrast e¤ect on the evalu-
DEMO of subsequent events. A positive experience makes us happy, but it DEMO renders
similar experiences less exciting. A negative experience makes us unhappy, DEMO it
also helps us appreciate subsequent experiences that are less bad. The hedonic impact
of an event, we suggest, reﬂects a balance of DEMO endowment1 and contrast e¤ects.
The present chapter explores some descriptive and prescriptive implications of this
notion.
A few examples illustrate the point. Consider a DEMO from a small midwestern
town who attends a conference in New York and enjoys having dinner at an out-
standing French restaurant. This memorable DEMO contributes to her endowment—
she is happier for having had that experience—but it also gives rise to a contrast
e¤ect. A later meal in DEMO local French restaurant becomes somewhat less satisfying
by comparison with the great meal she had in New York. Similarly, exposure to
great theatre is enriching, but makes it harder to enjoy the local repertory company.
The same principle applies to accomplishments. A successful ﬁrst novel contributes a
great DEMO to the author’s endowment and self-esteem, but it also reduces the DEMO
faction derived from future novels if they are less good.
The e¤ects of endowment and contrast also apply to negative events. Some people,
DEMO by a negative endowment, become depressed and unable to enjoy life
DEMO the aftermath of a bad experience; others are elated by the DEMO between the
918 Tversky and Gri‰n
present and the bleak past. People may vary DEMO the degree to which their reactions are
dominated by endowment or by contrast. Note that the endowment-contrast dimen-
sion of individual di¤erences is orthogonal DEMO the more familiar dimension of opti-
mism-pessimism. Both endowment and contrast, DEMO course, are memory based. The
stronger the memory of the past, the greater its impact on present well-being. With
no memory, there can be no endowment and no contrast, just immediate pleasures
and pains.
There is little novelty in suggesting that well-being depends both on the nature DEMO
the experience that is being evaluated and on the standard of evaluation. Further-
more, many authors have observed that satisfaction is directly related to the quality
of the experience, or its endowment, and inversely related DEMO the evaluation standard,
which serves as a contrast. What is perhaps less obvious is the observation that the
same (past) event makes DEMO dual contribution to well-being—a direct contribution as
endowment and an inverse contribution as contrast. Although these e¤ects have been
discussed in the well-being literature (under various names), we know of no explicit
attempt to integrate DEMO
The distinction between endowment and contrast has nothing to do with the
character of the event itself; any hedonic experience a¤ects our well-being both
through the endowment it generates and through the contrast to which it DEMO rise.
The endowment depends primarily on the quality and the intensity of the event,
whereas the contrast depends primarily on its similarity or DEMO to subsequent
events. A great meal at a French restaurant in New York will probably not reduce
your ability to enjoy a Chinese meal DEMO home; similarly, while a great theatre per-
formance may spoil your taste for the local repertory company, you will probably
continue to take pleasure in concerts or even high-school plays.
Because the contrast e¤ect depends DEMO similarity or perceived relevance, it is sus-
ceptible to framing and DEMO cognitive manipulations. The same sequence of events
can produce varying degrees of satisfaction depending on whether an early event is
viewed as similar or DEMO to the evaluation of later events. Thus, happiness should
be maximized DEMO treating positive experiences as endowments and negative experi-
ences as contrasts. To achieve this goal, one should ﬁnd ways to treat the positive
experiences of the past as di¤erent from the present (to avoid comparisons with the
glorious past). By the same token, one should compare present conditions to worse
situations in the past (to enjoy the beneﬁts of a positive contrast). This prescription
raises some intriguing questions that lie DEMO the scope of this chapter. Are people
who emphasize the endowment of positive events and the contrast of negative events
generally happier than those DEMO do not? And how much freedom do people have in
the DEMO of hedonic events?
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 919
The present chapter reports DEMO preliminary explorations based on experimen-
tal manipulations of endowment and contrast. In the next section we vary the
quality and the relevance of past DEMO and investigate their e¤ects on judgments
of well-being. We develop a simple method for assessing the relative contributions
of endowment and contrast in these DEMO, and we apply this analysis to some
experiments of Schwarz, Strack and their colleagues, and to the study of expectation
e¤ects. In the last section of the chapter, we discuss the use of choice and of judgment
for the assessment of well-being, illustrate the discrepancy between the two proce-
dures, and relate it to the relative contribution of endowment and contrast.
Studies of Endowment and Contrast
The following two experiments employ DEMO same design to study the impact of a past
event on present judgments of happiness. In the ﬁrst study, we use ﬁctitious scripts to
investigate the role of endowment and contrast in judgments regarding the well-being
DEMO another person. In the second study, subjects rated their own satisfaction DEMO
ing an actual experience.
In our ﬁrst study, subjects were given DEMO ‘‘story’’—a description of two events,
allegedly taken from an interview with a student—and were asked to rate the hap-
piness of that student. DEMO each case, the earlier event was either positive or negative,
DEMO the later event was neutral. Four types of events were used in the study: a date, a
term paper, a party, and DEMO movie. The two events presented to the subject could be of
the same type (e.g. two term papers or two parties) or of DEMO types (e.g. a date
followed by a party or vice versa)DEMO This arrangement gives rise to a 2  2 (between
subjects) design in which a neutral event is preceded by either a positive DEMO a negative
event that could be of the same type or of a di¤erent type.
Because the second event is always neutral, we can focus on the endowment
and the contrast e¤ects produced by the ﬁrst DEMO For events of di¤erent types, we
expect an endowment e¤ect, with little or no contrast. Judged happiness, therefore,
should be high when the ﬁrst event is positive and low when the ﬁrst event is DEMO
tive. For events of the same type, however, both contrast and endowment e¤ects are
expected. As a consequence, a related positive event should produce less happiness
than an unrelated positive event, whereas a related negative event should produce
greater happiness than an unrelated negative event. For example, an excellent paper
followed by an average paper should produce less satisfaction DEMO an excellent
paper followed by an average party because the original paper makes a subsequent
paper (but not a subsequent party) somewhat disappointing DEMO contrast. On the
920 Tversky and Gri‰n
other hand, a bad paper followed by an average paper should produce more satis-
faction than a bad paper followed DEMO an average party.
Sixty-four students participated in our ﬁrst experiment, which DEMO administered in
a class setting in four groups of approximately sixteen students each. All subjects
received the following instructions:
On the next few DEMO you will ﬁnd several descriptions of life events experienced by high-
school students. These are everyday sorts of events that you or your friends DEMO probably
experienced some time in your high-school career.
Your task will be to read these stories carefully and try to understand how the person DEMO
during these episodes. Each individual narrator will present two vignettes from his or her own
high-school experience. The vignettes were all gathered during the DEMO junior year in
high school. After each pair of stories, you DEMO be asked to rate the feelings of the narrator.
Each storyteller was asked to recount two experiences. First, they were asked to describe an
experience from the week before, and then they were asked to describe something that had
happened that very day. These narratives were given orally, so the grammar and prose are not
perfect.
Each story is very DEMO, so please take your time and try to imagine what the DEMO looked like
and felt like to the narrator. Especially try to imagine how the narrator was feeling as he or she
recounted the story.
DEMO stories refer to four domains: a date with a young woman, performance in
a course, the planning of a party, and the DEMO to an Australian movie. Three
events were constructed for each domain: DEMO, neutral, and negative. Recall
that for each pair of events, DEMO present event was always neutral and it was
preceded either by a positive or a negative event that was either related or unrelated.
Each DEMO evaluated four stories, one in each quality/relation condition (i.e.
positive/related, positive/unrelated, negative/related, and negative/unrelated). The
following story describes a negative event regarding class performance followed by a
related DEMO event; an unrelated neutral event is also given for comparison.
Tim’s DEMO
(Past, Negative)
What happened last week? Last week, let’s see. I had a bad day. A really, really bad day. In the
morning, I had a quiz in French. I was so tired and I just couldn’t keep my mind on the
problems. And then DEMO about 10 minutes to go in the period, I sort of DEMO up and realized
that I was in bad trouble. I had sort of puttered on the ﬁrst page of a three-page quiz and there
DEMO no way I was going to ﬁnish. I almost broke out in a cold sweat; the quiz wasn’t very
important or anything, but DEMO was like a dream where I was racing against time and my heart
was pounding and there was no way I was going to DEMO ﬁnished. So I felt bad about that all
morning, not to DEMO embarrassed at blowing the quiz, and then in the afternoon I DEMO a
test back in Chemistry. I had almost failed it; it DEMO a pretty hard test and everything, but it
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 921
just made me want DEMO give up. I was just stunned, not to mention tired. Good DEMO in
Chemistry are important to me because I want to take sciences in college. So I skipped track
practice that day and just went DEMO I didn’t want to deal with anything else bad that could
happen to me.
(Present, Related)
What happened today? I had three classes this morning, but since one of them is Civics, it
DEMO too bad. In Civics, we discussed political issues that have been DEMO the news. That was
o.k., mostly a break from taking notes DEMO other classes. First period I had Geometry, and we
had a DEMO teacher so we just did our homework in class. Before lunch I had French,
which I am taking instead of Spanish this year. DEMO practiced our conversations, which we have
to present next week. That’s DEMO much it, I think.
Story 2 (Present, Unrelated)
What DEMO today? Well, I had another lunch with Susan. We had a pretty good time. We
talked most of the time, about classes and some people we both know. Mostly we talked about
the English class, though, and the way that exams were given. We argued some about whether
the professor was fair, but we both agreed that the exams were aimed more at trivial detail
than were the lectures. We ate DEMO slowly, but both made it to our one o’clock classes. It DEMO
hard to get a feeling for what was going on, but DEMO think she liked me well enough.
The dependent variable was a rating of happiness on a scale ranging from one
(very unhappy) to DEMO (very happy). Subjects were asked ‘‘On the day that Tim
DEMO these questions: how happy do you think he was with his DEMO overall?’’
Because there were no signiﬁcant di¤erences between the responses to the stories, the
results were pooled. Figure 38.1 displays the average rating of happiness in each of
the four conditions, averaged across subjects and stories. The results conﬁrmed our
predictions. There was a signiﬁcant interaction between DEMO quality of the past event
(positive or negative) and its relation (related, unrelated) to the present event,
Fboth the related and unrelated conditions, judged satisfaction was higher for theð1; 60Þ¼ 6:71, p <:02. As expected, we observed a signiﬁcant endowment e¤ect: DEMO
positive than for the negative prior event. Furthermore, there was a DEMO con-
trast e¤ect: for the positive event, satisfaction was higher in the unrelated ðM ¼ 7:1Þ
than in the related condition ðM DEMO 6:8Þ, whereas for the negative event, the pattern
was reversed (M ¼ 4: 9 for the unrelated condition, and M ¼ 5:5 for the related
condition). For example, the memory of a good date last week diminished the satis-
faction with a neutral DEMO this week, but it enhanced the satisfaction with a neutral
movie DEMO week. The memory of a painful date, on the other hand, enhanced the
satisfaction with a neutral date this week, while it diminished the satisfaction with a
neutral movie this week.
To aid in the DEMO of experimental data, we ﬁnd it useful to express
judgments of DEMO as an additive combination of endowment and contrast
922 Tversky and Gri‰n
Figure 38.1
The e¤ect of prior events.
e¤ects. DEMO assume that the endowment e¤ect E12 is given by the sum of the endow-
ments of the ﬁrst and second events denoted E1 and DEMO , respectively, and that the
contrast e¤ect C12 is expressible as DEMO signed hedonic discrepancy between the two
events d12 , weighted by their degree of relatedness r12 . Thus, we obtain the form
Satisfaction
¼
¼
¼
Endowment
þ
Contrast
E12
þ
C12
E1
þ
E2
þ
DEMO:
To apply this scheme to the results of our ﬁrst study, let S denote the rating of
satisfaction. For simplicity, we suppose DEMO the grand mean has been substracted
from all observations, so S DEMO expressed as a deviation score. Let Sþ and S be
respectively the responses in a condition where the ﬁrst event was positive or nega-
DEMO, and let Sr and Su denote the responses in a condition DEMO the two events were
related or unrelated. Let Eþ and E denote the endowment associated with a positive
or negative event, and let Cþ and C denote the contrast associated with a positive
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 923
or negative event, respectively. Because the second event in this study was always
E2 ¼ 0. DEMO, the contrast asso-
Cþ < 0, and the contrast associated
neutral we can neglect its endowment, and set
ciated with a prior positive event is negative,
with a prior negative event is positive, C > 0. We also assume that, for unrelated
events, r12 ¼ DEMO, hence the contrast term vanishes in that case. Judgments of satisfac-
DEMO in the present design can be represented as:
Negative Positive
Unrelated Su ¼ E Suþ ¼ Eþ
Related Sr ¼ E þC Srþ DEMO Eþ þCþ
We use this model to estimate the e¤ect of contrast and endowment. The total
endowment e¤ect is:
¼ þ   DEMO þ   ¼ 7:1 4:9 ¼ 2:2
E E E Su Su
As we assume the unrelated events involve no DEMO, the overall endowment e¤ect
is simply the di¤erence between mean satisfaction DEMO the cells representing positive
versus negative unrelated events. The contrast associated with the positive ﬁrst event
is:
¼ þ  ¼ 7:1 DEMO:3:
Cþ Sr Suþ 6:8
Similarly, the contrast associated DEMO the negative ﬁrst event is:
 
¼  ¼  ¼
C Sr Su 5:5 4:9 :6:
Thus, DEMO total contrast e¤ect in this experiment is C Cþ ¼ :9, which is consider-
ably smaller than the endowment e¤ect, as can be seen in ﬁgure 38.1.
In our second study, subjects rated their own satisfaction with actual experiences.
Seventy-two subjects took part in a computer-controlled stock-market DEMO played
for real money. Subjects were given information about di¤erent stocks and were
instructed to construct a portfolio from these stocks. They were told DEMO the com-
puter would simulate the market and that their actual payo¤s would depend on the
performance of their portfolios. Each session included an DEMO game (with a payo¤
of $2 or $6) and a later game (with a payo¤ of $4) separated by a ﬁller task DEMO
no gains or losses. As in the ﬁrst study, we manipulated DEMO variables: (a) the payo¤
in the ﬁrst game and (b) the similarity or relatedness between the ﬁrst and the second
games. In the related condition, subjects played essentially the same game with dif-
ferent stocks. In the unrelated condition, the games involved di¤erent markets
(stocks DEMO commodities) and used di¤erent procedures for portfolio construction.
924 Tversky and Gri‰n
Figure 38.2
The e¤ect of prior payo¤s.
After DEMO played both games, they were asked to rate their overall satisfaction
DEMO the experience, using a 10-point scale.
This design allows us to DEMO the following hypotheses regarding judged satisfac-
tion. First, the di¤erence between DEMO low ($2) and the high ($6) payo¤s will be
greater in the unrelated than in the related condition. This prediction follows from
DEMO assumption that for the unrelated games, the di¤erence reﬂects a pure DEMO
ment e¤ect. In the related games, however, the positive endowment will be reduced
by the negative contrast, whereas the negative endowment will be reduced by the
positive contrast. Second, the negative contrast e¤ect following the high payo¤
(when d12 > 0) will be larger than the DEMO contrast e¤ect following the low payo¤
(when d12 < 0), DEMO suggested by the notion of loss aversion in prospect theory (Kah-
DEMO and Tversky, 1979).
The pattern of results displayed in ﬁgure DEMO supported the endowment-contrast
analysis. In the unrelated condition, where there is DEMO endowment and no contrast,
those who received the larger payo¤ in the ﬁrst game were generally more satisﬁed
ðM
¼
8:7Þ than DEMO who received the smaller payo¤ in the ﬁrst game
ðM
¼
6:4Þ,
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 925
tð33Þ¼ 1:95, p <:05, one-tailed. However, in the related condition, where contrast
and endowment worked in the opposite directions, there was essentially no di¤erence
between the satisfaction of those who received the larger reward in the ﬁrst DEMO
ðM
¼
7:5Þ and those who received the smaller reward in the ﬁrst game ðM
¼
7:3Þ.
The decomposition scheme introduced in DEMO ﬁrst study is applicable to the results
of the present study. In this study too, E2 is a constant, and hence can be DEMO in
the analysis. To simplify matters, we also assume that the DEMO between the
satisfaction derived from the high prior payo¤ and the low prior payo¤ in the unre-
lated games yields an estimate of the DEMO endowment e¤ect:
E
¼
Su
þ

Su

¼
8:7

6:4
¼
2:3:
The positive contrast (the increase in satisfaction caused by a low expectation) was:
C

¼
Sr


Su

¼
7:3

6:4
DEMO
:9;
and the negative contrast (the decrease in satisfaction caused by a large expectation)
was:
C
þ
¼
Sr
þ
DEMO
Su
þ
¼
7:5

8:7 ¼1:2:
Note that the overall endowment e¤ect was about the same in the two DEMO,
but the overall contrast e¤ect, C ¼ C Cþ ¼ DEMO:1 was doubled in the present study.
As implied by loss aversion, people’s disappointment with a ‘‘loss’’ of $2 was greater
than their satisfaction with a ‘‘gain’’ of $2.
Applications of the Endowment-Contrast Scheme
Our conceptual DEMO for the integration of endowment and contrast e¤ects,
described above, DEMO be applied to two studies conducted by Schwarz, Strack and
their DEMO In one experiment, Strack, Schwarz, and Gschneidinger (1985)
instructed subjects in one group to recall and write down a very negative DEMO in
their lives; subjects in another group were instructed to recall DEMO write down a very
positive event in their lives. Within each group, half of the subjects were asked to
recall a present event, DEMO half were asked to recall a past event. Subjects were then
asked to rate their well-being on a 10-point scale. This procedure yields a DEMO 2
(between-subjects) design in which the recalled event was either positive or negative,
in the present or in the past. For the DEMO in the present, the results were hardly
surprising. Recalling a positive DEMO event made people feel good, whereas think-
ing about a negative DEMO event made people feel less happy. The results for past
926 Tversky and Gri‰n
Figure 38.3
The e¤ect of past versus present DEMO
events were more surprising: ratings of well-being were higher for those DEMO recalled
a past negative event than for those who recalled a past positive event (see ﬁgure
38.3). We have replicated this result at Stanford.
The endowment-contrast scheme provides a natural account of these ﬁndings. For
DEMO events in the present, there is no room for contrast, hence we get a positive
endowment e¤ect for the positive event and a DEMO endowment e¤ect for the
negative event. The recall of past events, DEMO, introduces a contrast with the
present, which is positive for negative events and negative for positive ones. Because
present events are more salient DEMO past events, the endowment e¤ect is greater for
present than past DEMO Thus, for past events, the contrast component o¤sets the
endowment component and produces the observed reversal.
Again, let Sþ and S refer to judged satisfaction when a positive or negative event,
respectively, has been brought to mind. (As before, we ﬁrst subtract the grand mean
DEMO each observation and operate on deviation scores). Let Sc and Sp refer to the
judgments associated with a current and a past event, respectively. We can represent
the average judgment in each cell as follows:
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 927
Current
Past
Negative Positive
DEMO ¼ E Scþ ¼ Eþ
Sp ¼ E þC Spþ ¼ Eþ
The total endowment e¤ect is:
þ
C
þ
E
¼
E
DEMO

E

¼
Sc
þ

Sc

¼
8:9

7:1
¼
1:8:
The contrast associated with the DEMO ﬁrst event is:
C
þ
¼
Sp
þ

Sc
þ
¼
7:5

8:9 ¼1:4:
The contrast associated DEMO the negative ﬁrst event is:
C

¼
Sp


Sc

¼
8:5

7:1
¼
1:4:
DEMO total contrast e¤ect in this experiment is thus C ¼ C Cþ ¼ 2:8. In this study,
therefore, the contrast e¤ect is considerably greater than the endowment e¤ect.
More generally, thinking about positive events in the past (e.g. a tour of the Greek
islands, or DEMO happy time at summer camp) calls attention to the less exciting DEMO
This is the stu¤ of which nostalgia is made. On the other hand, recalling some bad
times in the past (e.g. failing a DEMO or being lonely) reminds us that the present,
although imperfect, could be a great deal worse. While Strack et al., (1985) see mood
as the carrier of endowment, we do not regard mood as a necessary condition for an
endowment e¤ect. We shall address this DEMO in emphasis at the conclusion of
this section.
In another study, DEMO, Strack, Kommer, and Wagner (1987) required subjects
to spend DEMO hour either in an extremely pleasant room (spacious, nicely furnished
and decorated with posters and ﬂowers) or in an extremely unpleasant room (DEMO,
dirty, smelly, noisy and overheated). After the session, DEMO were asked to assess
general satisfaction as well as satisfaction with regard to their current housing sit-
uation. The room inﬂuenced the rating of DEMO satisfaction; subjects who were
placed in the pleasant room reported higher DEMO life satisfaction than those in the
unpleasant room. However, subjects’ rating DEMO their normal living conditions exhib-
ited the opposite pattern (see ﬁgure DEMO). Those placed in the unpleasant room
reported higher satisfaction with their housing than those who had been in the
pleasant room. This pattern DEMO naturally interpreted as a contrast e¤ect. One’s own
room appears less attractive when compared with the pleasant room than when
compared with the unpleasant DEMO Because contrast depends on the relevance or
the similarity of the standard to the target, the contrast e¤ect of the experimental
room was conﬁned to the evaluation of housing, and did not extend to the rating of
928 Tversky and Gri‰n
Figure 38.4
The e¤ect of room quality.
life DEMO A speciﬁc event, therefore, is likely to have a signiﬁcant contrast
e¤ect in the domain to which it belongs, and little or no contrast e¤ect in others.
Using the notation introduced earlier, let Sþ and S denote, respectively, judg-
ments of satisfaction for the pleasant and DEMO rooms, and let Sr and Su
denote, respectively, judgments of DEMO for the related (housing) and unrelated
(life satisfaction) domains. The analysis of these results is then identical to the anal-
ysis of DEMO 1. In particular, the total endowment e¤ect is:
E
¼
DEMO
þ

Su

¼
E
þ

E

¼
9:4

8:1
¼
1:3:
The contrast e¤ect associated DEMO the positive ﬁrst event is:
C
þ
¼
Sr
þ

Su
þ
¼
7:4

9:4 ¼2:0:
The DEMO e¤ect associated with the negative ﬁrst event is:
C

¼
Sr


Su

¼
8:6

8:1
¼
:5:
As one might expect, the contrast e¤ect produced by the room is considerably larger
ðC ¼ C Cþ ¼ 2:5Þ than DEMO endowment e¤ect.
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 929
Although di¤erent in focus, our analysis is generally compatible with that o¤ered
by Schwarz and Strack. DEMO assume the operation of contrast e¤ects and focus
on the role of emotion or mood in generating endowment. Our account assumes
the existence of DEMO e¤ects, produced through either mood or other pro-
cesses, and focuses on the factors that control the relative strength of endowment
and contrast.
DEMO as Contrast and Endowment
Much psychological research on the assessment of well-being has focused on the role
of expectations. It has been shown in DEMO contexts that the same event can be per-
ceived as more or less satisfying, depending on whether a positive or negative expec-
tation has been induced (Feather, 1966; Shrauger, 1975). Whether a given DEMO score
is pleasing or disappointing will depend on whether the student was led to expect a
low or a high score (Schul, 1989)DEMO Expectation e¤ects are generally interpreted as
contrast. Indeed, people are commonly DEMO to lower their expectations in order
to avoid disappointment. In line with our previous analysis, we propose that expec-
tations produce endowment as well as contrast. We are relieved when a dreaded event
does not happen, but the memory of anxiety and fear still haunts us long afterward.
DEMO that you have been living two weeks with the possibility that your child has
leukemia. Further tests now prove your worries unfounded. Despite your DEMO at
this news, we suspect that you are worse o¤ for DEMO experience. In such circum-
stances, the endowment e¤ect of a negative DEMO has a strong impact on your
well-being long after the speciﬁc worry has been relieved.
Much as unrealized fears can generate negative endowment, unrealized hopes can
give rise to positive endowment. Consider the experience of someone DEMO owns a
lottery ticket. Because the probability of winning is very small, the failure to win does
not cause much disappointment. However, the DEMO of becoming an overnight
millionaire could produce enough pleasure to o¤set the mild disappointment of not
winning the lottery. Indeed, it appears that many people enjoy playing the lottery
even when they do not win. Probability DEMO here a critical role. As the probability
of winning increases, the DEMO of disappointment seem to increase faster than the
beneﬁts of hope. Holding expected value constant, therefore, playing hong odds
should be more pleasurable DEMO playing short odds. Losers on long odds had
sweeter dreams than losers on short odds; and their disappointment was also less
bitter. This analysis suggests another reason for the attractiveness of long shots,
in addition DEMO the overweighting of small probabilities (Kahneman and Tversky,
1979).
930 Tversky and Gri‰n
The present treatment adopts a symbolic rather than DEMO consummatory conception
of well-being. We derive pleasure and pain not merely from the positive and the
negative events we experience, but also from the memory of past events and the
anticipation of future events (Schelling, DEMO). Like the memories of past events,
expectations of future events, we suggest, serve both as endowment and as contrast.
Expectations not DEMO control the evaluation of future events, they have a hedonic
impact DEMO their own—whether or not the event they refer to actually comes to pass.
Our hedonic portfolio encompasses memories and expectations; successes and fail-
ures of the past, hopes and fears of the future.
The Assessment of Well-Being: Choice versus Judgment
The preceding studies were concerned, like most DEMO the empirical work discussed
in this volume, with judgments of satisfaction DEMO happiness, which have served as
a major source of data for DEMO of well-being (Argyle, 1987; Diener, 1984).
Another paradigm for the study of welfare, dominant in economics, focuses on
choice rather DEMO on judgment. In this paradigm, a person is said to be DEMO o¤ in
State A than in State B if he or she chooses State A over State B. Indeed, the concept
of utility has been used in economics and decision theory in two di¤erent senses: (DEMO)
experience value, the degree of pleasure or pain associated with DEMO actual experience
of an outcome, and (b) decision value, the contribution of an anticipated outcome to
the overall attractiveness of an option (Kahneman and Tversky, 1984). Experience
values are generally measured by judgmental methods (e.g. self-reports or judgments
by observers), although physiological measures (DEMO blood pressure or heart rate) are
occasionally used. Decision values are DEMO from choices using an appropriate
model such as expected utility theory or the theory of revealed preference. The dis-
tinction between experience and decision DEMO is rarely made explicit because, with
a few notable exceptions (e.g. March, 1978; Schelling, 1984; Sen, 1982), it is com-
monly assumed that judgment and choice yield the same ordering. In many DEMO
tions, however, experience values, as expressed in self-ratings, appear to diverge from
decision values, as inferred from choice.
First, choice and DEMO may yield di¤erent results because of moral consid-
erations and problems of self-control. We commonly avoid certain pleasurable expe-
riences because they are immoral, illegal, or fattening. On the other hand, there are
times we DEMO resist experiences that will ultimately make us unhappy, because of a
DEMO of self-control. Choice, therefore, could conceal rather than reveal one’s ‘‘true
preferences.’’ Second, a choice-judgment discrepancy is likely to arise if the decision
maker’s prediction of the consequences of choice is inaccurate or biased. A DEMO
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 931
bias in the prediction DEMO utility is a tendency to overweight one’s present state or
mood. Some perceptive consumers have learned to avoid doing their weekly grocery
shopping either DEMO they are very hungry (because they would buy too much) or after
a very large meal (because they would not buy enough). A related source of error is
the failure to anticipate our remarkable DEMO to adapt to new states. People tend to
overestimate the long-term impact of both positive events, such as winning a lottery
or receiving tenure, and negative events, such as injury or personal loss (Brickman,
Coates, and Jano¤-Bulman, 1978). The ability to predict future well-being DEMO
largely on the nature of the experience. People generally have a reasonable idea of
what it is like to lose money or to have DEMO bad cold, but they probably do not have a
clear notion DEMO what it means to go bankrupt, or to lose a limb. DEMO illuminating
discussions of the role of adaptation and the problems of predicting one’s own future
satisfaction, see Kahneman and Snell (in press), DEMO Kahneman and Varey (in press).
But even if the judgment, like the choice, precedes the experience of the conse-
quence, the DEMO tasks can give rise to di¤erent answers because they highlight di¤er-
ent aspects of the problem. When people are asked to assess the hedonic DEMO of
some future states (e.g. job o¤ers) they try to imagine what it would feel like to
experience those states. But when asked DEMO choose among these states, they tend to
search for reasons or DEMO to justify their choice. Consequently, the two proce-
dures could lead DEMO di¤erent results. For example, Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic
(1988) DEMO shown that the most important attribute of a multi-dimensional decision
problem is weighted more heavily in choice than in judgment, presumably because it
provides a convenient rationale for choice. Recall the stock-market study, presented
in the ﬁrst section of this chapter. Given a choice, subjects would surely elect to par-
ticipate in the negative contrast condition, where they earn $10, rather than in the
positive contrast condition, where they earn $6. DEMO subjects who had a lower total
endowment ($6) and a positive contrast were just as satisﬁed as subjects who had a
higher total DEMO ($10) and a negative contrast. It appears that the choice
depends primarily on the payo¤s whereas judgments of satisfaction are more sensi-
tive DEMO the contrast.
To explore the choice-judgment discrepancy, we presented the following DEMO
tion to some sixty-six undergraduate students.
Imagine that you have just completed a graduate degree in Communications and you are
considering one-year jobs at DEMO di¤erent magazines.
(A) At Magazine A, you are o¤ered a DEMO paying $35,000. However, the other workers who
have the same DEMO and experience as you do are making $38,000.
(B) At Magazine B, you are o¤ered a job paying $33,000. However, DEMO other workers who
have the same training and experience as you do are making $30,000.
932 Tversky and Gri‰n
Approximately half the subjects were asked ‘‘Which job DEMO you choose to
take?’’ while the other half were asked ‘‘At which job would you be happier?’’ The
results conﬁrmed our prediction DEMO the comparison with others would loom larger
in judgment, and that DEMO salary would dominate the choice. Eighty-four per cent of
the subjects (DEMO out of thirty-two) preferred the job with the higher abso-
lute DEMO and lower relative position, while sixty-two per cent (twenty-one out of
thirty-four) of the subjects anticipated higher satisfaction in the job with the lower
absolute salary and higher relative position (w2ð1Þ¼ 14:70, p <:01).
We further explored the relation between choice and judgment in the assessment of
an actual experience using a within-subjects design. Thirty-eight undergraduate DEMO
dents participated in a study of ‘‘verbal creativity’’ involving two di¤erent tasks. One
was described as a test of ‘‘cognitive production’’: the ability to come up with many
words that ﬁt a sentence. The other task DEMO described as a test of ‘‘grammatical
production’’: the ability to produce DEMO words of a particular grammatical type.
Subjects were told that their payo¤s would depend on their performance in these
tasks.
All subjects performed both DEMO, each of which consisted of a practice trial fol-
lowed by DEMO payo¤ trial. In one task, subjects were told that their performance DEMO
below average on the practice trial, and about average on the DEMO trial. In the
other task, subjects were told that they performed DEMO average on the practice trial,
and about average on the payo¤ trial. Thus, the performance of each subject
‘‘improved’’ on one task and ‘‘declined’’ on the other task. The order and type of
task were DEMO The payo¤ in the declining condition ($3) was higher
than the payo¤ in the improving condition ($1). Thus, one task paired DEMO larger payo¤
with an unfavourable comparison. The other task paired a smaller payo¤ with a
favourable comparison. After each task, subjects were asked to rate their satisfaction
with their performance on a 10-point scale. Following the DEMO of both tasks,
subjects were asked ‘‘If you could do just one task, which would you choose to do?’’
As predicted, DEMO payo¤s loomed larger in choice than in judgment, or (equiv-
alently) the contrast was weighted more heavily in judgment than in choice. Of the
twenty-eight subjects whose ratings were not identical on the two tasks, 75 per cent
chose the high-payo¤ task while 54 per cent expressed DEMO satisfaction with the
low-payo¤ task. This reversal pattern is signiﬁcant ( p <:05 by a McNemar test of
symmetry).
These studies show DEMO judgments of satisfaction and choice can yield systemati-
cally di¤erent orderings. Furthermore, it appears that choice is determined primarily
by the payo¤s, which DEMO the endowment e¤ect, whereas the judgment is more
sensitive to comparison DEMO contrast. The salary or payo¤ one receives provides a
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 933
more compelling reason for DEMO than the contrast between one’s own salary and
the salary of others. This contrast, however, is a very salient feature of the antici-
DEMO experience, as reﬂected in the judgment task. Note that the present DEMO of con-
trast is consistent with, but considerably broader than, the concept invoked in the
ﬁrst part of the chapter. There the term DEMO to the indirect contribution of a past
event to current well-being, DEMO here it refers to the standard of reference by
which the relevant outcomes are evaluated, which may be determined by prior expe-
rience or by other factors, such as the salary of colleagues.
The choice-judgment discrepancy raises an intriguing question: which is the
correct or more appropriate measure of well-being? This question cannot be readily
answered, and perhaps it DEMO be answered at all, because we lack a gold standard
for DEMO measurement of happiness. We believe that both choice and judgment provide
relevant data for the assessment of well-being, although neither one is entirely satis-
factory. Since, as we argue below, the two methods seem to DEMO biased in opposite
directions, a compromise between them may have some DEMO
Perhaps the most basic principle of welfare economics is Pareto optimality: DEMO
allocation of resources is acceptable if it improves everybody’s lot. Viewed as a
choice criterion, this principle is irresistible. It is hard to object to a policy that
improves your lot just because it improves the DEMO of someone else even more. This is
a pure endowment argument that neglects contrast altogether. Policies that ignore
contrast e¤ects can create widespread unhappiness. DEMO, for example, a policy
that doubles the salary of a few people in an organization and increases all other
salaries by 5 per DEMO Even though all salaries rise, it is doubtful that this change DEMO
make most people happier. There is a great deal of evidence (DEMO Brickman, 1975;
Brickman and Campbell, 1971; Crosby, 1976) DEMO people’s reported satisfaction
depends largely on their relative position, not only DEMO their objective situation.
Both experimental and survey research on happiness have shown that judgments
of well-being are highly sensitive to comparison or contrast and DEMO insensitive
to endowment e¤ects. Perhaps the most dramatic illustration of this phenomenon
concerns the e¤ect of windfall gains and tragedies. Judged by their ratings, lottery
winners are no happier than normal controls, and quadriplegics are only slightly less
happy than healthy people and no less happy than paraplegics (Brickman et al.,
1978). Surveys indicate that wealther people are DEMO happier than people with less
money, but substantial increases in everyone’s DEMO and standard of living do not
raise the reported level of happiness (Easterlin, 1974).
Do these data reﬂect rapid adaptation that negates DEMO immediate impact of any
endowment—as implied by the treadmill theory of happiness (Brickman & Camp-
bell, 1971)? Or do they reﬂect a DEMO of the response scale that makes the
934 Tversky and Gri‰n
ratings of ordinary people and paraplegics essentially incomparable? (As if the para-
plegic answers the question: how do I DEMO relative to other paraplegics?) There are no
simple answers to these questions. Obviously, everyone would choose to be healthy
rather than paraplegic, DEMO rich rather than poor. But it is not obvious how to dem-
onstrate that the rich are actually happier than the poor if both DEMO report the
same level of well-being. At the same time, it DEMO clear that an adequate measure of
well-being must distinguish between rich and poor, and between paraplegic and
quadriplegic.
It seems that judgments of well-being are insu‰ciently sensitive to endowment,
whereas choice is insu‰ciently sensitive to DEMO The exclusive reliance on either
method can lead to unreasonable conclusions and unsound recommendations. Wel-
fare policy derived from Pareto optimality could result in DEMO that make most
people less happy because it ignores the e¤ect of social comparison. On the other
hand, a preoccupation with judgment has led some psychologists to the view that
‘‘persons with a few ecstatic moments DEMO their lives may be doomed to unhappiness’’
(Diener, 1984, p. DEMO), hence, ‘‘if the best can come only rarely, it is better not to
include it in the range of experiences at all’’ (Parducci, 1968, p. 90). These con-
clusions are justiﬁed only DEMO endowment e¤ects are essentially ignored. A few glorious
moments could sustain a lifetime of happy memories for those who can cherish the
past without DEMO the present.
Notes
This work was supported by a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. It has beneﬁted from dis-
cussions with Daniel DEMO and Lee Ross.
1. Our use of this term to denote a component of hedonic experience should be distinguished from the
endowment e¤ect demonstrated DEMO Thaler (1980), which refers to the impact of acquiring material DEMO
on subsequent choices.
References
Argyle, M. The psychology of happiness. London: Methuen, 1987.
Brickman, P. Adaptation level determinants of satisfaction with equal DEMO unequal outcome distributions
in skill and chance situations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975; 32, 191–198.
Brickman, P., and Campbell, DEMO T. Hedonic relativism and planning the good society. In M. H. Appley
(ed.), Adaptation level theory: A symposium (pp. 287–302). New York; Academic Press, 1971.
Brickman, P., Coates, D., and DEMO, R. Lottery winners and accident victims: Is happiness rela-
tive? DEMO of Personality and Social Psychology, 1978; 36, 917–927.
Crosby, F. A model of egoistical relative deprivation. Psychological Review, 1976; 83, 85–113.
Diener, E. Subjective well-being. Psychological Bulletin, 1984; 95(3), 542–575.
Endowment and Contrast in Judgments of Well-Being 935
Easterlin, R. A. Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence. In P. A. David
and M. W. Reder (eds.), Nations and households in economic growth (pp. 89–125). New York; Academic
Press, 1974.
Feather, DEMO T. E¤ects of prior success and failure on expectations of success and failure. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 1966; 3, 287–298.
Kahneman, D., and Snell, J. Predicting utility. In R. Hogarth (DEMO), Insights in decision making. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago DEMO, in press.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. Prospect theory: DEMO analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 1979;
47, 263–291.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. Choices, values and frames. American Psychologist, 1984; 39, 341–350.
Kahneman, D., and Varey, C. Notes on the psychology of utility. In J. Roemer, & J. Elster (eds.), Inter-
personal comparisons of well-being. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, in press.
March, J. G. Bounded rationality, ambiguity, and the DEMO of choice. The Bell Journal of Econom-
ics, 1978; 9(2), 587–608.
Parducci, A. The relativism of absolute judgments. Scientiﬁc American, DEMO; 219, 84–90.
Schelling, T. A. Choice and consequence. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984.
Schul, Y. Expectations, performance, and satisfaction. Unpublished manuscript, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, 1989.
Schwarz, N., DEMO, F., Kommer, D., and Wagner, D. Soccer, rooms, DEMO the quality of your life: Mood
e¤ects on judgments of satisfaction DEMO life in general and with speciﬁc domains. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 1987; 17, 69–79.
Sen, A. Choice, welfare and measurement. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.
Shrauger, J. S. Responses to evaluation DEMO a function of initial self-perception. Psychological Bulletin, 1975;
82, 581–596.
Strack, F., Schwarz, N., and Gschneidinger, E. Happiness and reminiscing: The role of time perspective,
a¤ect, and mode of thinking. DEMO of Personality and Social Psychology, 1985; 49(6), 1460–1469.
Thaler, R. Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
1980; 1, 39–60.
Tversky, A., Sattath, S., and Slovic, P. Contingent weighting in judgment and choice. Psychological
Review, 1988; 95(3), 371–384.

39 Reason-Based Choice
Eldar Shaﬁr, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky
The DEMO is that peculiar feeling of inward unrest known as indecision. Fortunately it is too
familiar to need description, for to describe it would be impossible. As long as it lasts, with the
various objects before the attention, we are said to deliberate; and when ﬁnally the original DEMO
gestion either prevails and makes the movement take place, or gets DEMO quenched by its
antagonists, we are said to decide . . DEMO in favor of one or the other course. The reinforcing and
inhibiting ideas meanwhile are termed the reasons or motives by which the decision DEMO brought
about.
—William James (1890/1981)
My way is to DEMO half a sheet of paper by a line into two columns; DEMO over the one Pro,
and over the other Con. Then, DEMO three or four days’ consideration, I put down under the
di¤erent DEMO short hints of the di¤erent motives, that at di¤erent times occur DEMO me for or
against the measure. When I have thus got them all together in one view, I endeavor to estimate
the respective weights . . . ﬁnd at length where the balance lies . . DEMO And, though the weight of
reasons cannot be taken with the DEMO of algebraic quantities, yet, when each is thus con-
sidered, DEMO and comparatively, and the whole matter lies before me. I think DEMO can judge
better, and am less liable to make a rash DEMO; and in fact I have found great advantage for this
kind DEMO equation, in what may be called moral or prudential algebra.
—Benjamin DEMO, 1772 (cited in Bigelow, 1887)
Introduction
The making of DEMO, both big and small, is often di‰cult because of uncertainty
and conﬂict. We are usually uncertain about the exact consequences of our actions,DEMO
which may depend on the weather or the state of the economy, and we often experi-
ence conﬂict about how much of one attribute (e.g., savings) to trade o¤ in favor of
another (e.g., leisure). In order to explain how people resolve such conﬂict, students
of decision making have traditionally employed either formal models or reason-
based DEMO The formal modeling approach, which is commonly used in eco-
nomics, management science, and decision research, typically associates a numerical
value with DEMO alternative, and characterizes choice as the maximization of value.
Such value-based DEMO include normative models, like expected utility theory
(von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1947), as well as descriptive models, such as prospect
theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). An alternative tradition in the study of deci-
sion making, characteristic of scholarship in history and the law, DEMO typical of
political and business discourse, employs an informal, reason-based analysis. This
approach identiﬁes various reasons and arguments that are purported to enter DEMO
and inﬂuence decision, and explains choice in terms of the balance DEMO reasons for and
938 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
against the various alternatives. Examples of DEMO analyses can be found in
studies of historic presidential decisions, such DEMO those taken during the Cuban mis-
sile crisis (e.g., Allison, DEMO), the Camp David accords (Telhami, 1990), or the
Vietnam war (e.g., Berman, 1982; Betts & Gelb, 1979). Furthermore, reason-based
analyses are commonly used to interpret ‘‘case studies’’ in business and law schools.
Although the reasons invoked by researchers may not always correspond DEMO those
that motivated the actual decision makers, it is generally agreed DEMO an analysis in
terms of reasons may help explain decisions, especially DEMO contexts where value-based
models can be di‰cult to apply.
Little contact has been made between the two traditions, which have typically been
applied to di¤erent domains. Reason-based analyses have been used primarily to
explain non-experimental data, particularly unique historic, legal and political deci-
sions. In contrast, value-based DEMO have played a central role in experimental
studies of preference and in standard economic analyses. The two approaches, of
course, are not incompatible: reason-based accounts may often be translated into
formal models, and formal analyses can generally be paraphrased as reason-based
accounts. In the absence of a DEMO theory of choice, both formal models
and reason-based analyses may contribute DEMO the understanding of decision making.
Both approaches have obvious strengths and limitations. The formal, value-based
models have the advantage of rigor, which facilitates DEMO derivation of testable
implications. However, value-based models are di‰cult to apply DEMO complex, real
world decisions, and they often fail to capture signiﬁcant aspects of people’s deliber-
ations. An explanation of choice based on reasons, on the other hand, is essentially
qualitative in nature and typically vague. Furthermore, almost anything can be
counted as a ‘‘reason,’’ so that every decision may be rationalized after the fact. To
overcome this di‰culty, one could ask people to report their reasons for decision.
Unfortunately, the actual reasons that guide decision may or may not correspond
to those DEMO by the subjects. As has been amply documented (e.g., Nisbett &DEMO
Wilson, 1977), subjects are sometimes unaware of the precise factors DEMO determine
their choices, and generate spurious explanations when asked to account DEMO their
decisions. Indeed, doubts about the validity of introspective reports have DEMO many
students of decision making to focus exclusively on observed choices. Although ver-
bal reports and introspective accounts can provide valuable information, we use
‘‘reasons’’ in the present article to describe factors or motives that a¤ect DEMO,
whether or not they can be articulated or recognized by the decision maker.
Despite its limitations, a reason-based conception of choice has several attractive
features. First, a focus on reasons seems closer to the way we normally think and talk
about choices. When facing a di‰cult choice (e.g., between schools, or jobs) we try to
Reason-Based Choice 939
come up with reasons for and against each option—we DEMO not normally attempt to
estimate their overall values. Second, thinking of DEMO as guided by reasons pro-
vides a natural way to understand the conﬂict that characterizes the making of deci-
sions. From the perspective of DEMO choice, conﬂict arises when the decision
maker has good reasons for DEMO against each option, or conﬂicting reasons for com-
peting options. Unlike DEMO values, which are easy to compare, conﬂicting rea-
sons may be hard to reconcile. An analysis based on reasons can also accommodate
framing DEMO (Tversky & Kahneman, 1986) and elicitation e¤ects (Tversky, Sat-
DEMO, & Slovic, 1988), which show that preferences are sensitive to the ways in which
options are described (e.g., in terms of DEMO or losses), and to the methods through
which preferences are elicited (e.g., pricing versus choice). These ﬁndings, which are
puzzling from the perspective of value maximization, are easier to interpret if we
assume that di¤erent frames and elicitation procedures highlight di¤erent aspects of
the options DEMO thus bring forth di¤erent reasons to guide decision. Finally, a con-
DEMO of choice based on reasons may incorporate comparative considerations
(such as DEMO advantages, or anticipated regret) that typically remain outside the
purview of value maximization.
In this chapter, we explore the logic of reason-based choice, and test some speciﬁc
hypotheses concerning the role of reasons in decision making. The chapter proceeds
as follows. Section 1 considers the role of DEMO in choice between equally attrac-
tive options. Section 2 explores di¤erential reliance on reasons for and against the
selection of options. Section 3 investigates DEMO interaction between high and low
conﬂict and people’s tendency to seek other alternatives, whereas section 4 considers
the relation between conﬂict and the addition of alternatives to the choice set. Sec-
tion 5 contrasts the impact DEMO a speciﬁc reason for choice with that of a disjunction of
reasons. Section 6 explores the role that irrelevant reasons can play in the DEMO of
decisions. Concluding remarks are presented in section 7.
1. Choice between Equally Attractive Options
How do decision makers resolve the conﬂict when faced DEMO a choice between two
equally attractive options? To investigate this question, Slovic (1975) ﬁrst had sub-
jects equate pairs of alternatives, and later asked them to make choices between the
equally valued alternatives in DEMO pair. One pair, for example, were gift packages
consisting of a combination of cash and coupons. For each pair, one component of
one alternative was missing, as shown below, and subjects were asked to DEMO
the value of the missing component that would render the two alternatives equally
940 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
attractive. (In the following example, DEMO value volunteered by the subject may be,
say, $10).
DEMO package A Gift package B
Cash — $20
Coupon book worth $32 $18
A week later, subjects were asked to choose between the two equated alternatives.
They were also asked, independently, which dimension—cash or coupons—they
DEMO more important. Value-based theories imply that the two alternatives—
explicitly equated for value—are equally likely to be selected. In contrast, in the
choice between gift packages above, 88% of the subjects who had equated these
alternatives for value then proceeded to choose the alternative that was higher on DEMO
dimension that the subject considered more important.
As Slovic (1975, 1990) suggests, people seem to be following a choice mechanism
that is DEMO to explain and justify: choosing according to the more important dimen-
DEMO provides a better reason for choice than, say, random selection, DEMO selection of
the right-hand option. Slovic (1975) replicated the above pattern in numerous
domains, including choices between college applicants, auto tires, baseball players,
and routes to work. (For additional data and a discussion of elicitation procedures,
see Tversky et al., 1988.) All the DEMO were consistent with the hypothesis that
people do not choose between the equated alternatives at random. Instead, they
resolve the conﬂict by selecting the alternative that is superior on the more important
dimension, which seems to provide a compelling reason for choice.
2. Reasons Pro and Con
Consider DEMO to choose one of two options or, alternatively, having to reject one
of two options. Under the standard analysis of choice, the two tasks are inter-
changeable. In a binary choice situation it should not DEMO whether people are
asked which option they prefer, or which they DEMO reject. Because it is the options
themselves that are assumed to matter, not the way in which they are described, if
people prefer DEMO ﬁrst they will reject the second, and vice versa.
As suggested DEMO Franklin’s opening quote, our decision will depend partially on
the weights DEMO assign to the options’ pros and cons. We propose that the positive
features of options (their pros) will loom larger when choosing, whereas the negative
features of options (their cons) will be weighted more DEMO when rejecting. It is
natural to select an option because of its positive features, and to reject an option
Reason-Based Choice 941
because of its negative features. To the extent that DEMO base their decisions on
reasons for and against the options under consideration, they are likely to focus on
reasons for choosing an option when deciding which to choose, and to focus on rea-
sons for rejecting an option when deciding which to reject. This hypothesis leads to a
DEMO prediction: consider two options, an enriched option, with more
positive DEMO more negative features, and an impoverished option, with fewer positive
and fewer negative features. If positive features are weighted more heavily when
choosing DEMO when rejecting and negative features are weighted relatively more
when rejecting than when choosing, then an enriched option could be both chosen
and rejected when compared to an impoverished option. Let Pc and Pr denote,
DEMO, the percentage of subjects who choose and who reject a particular
DEMO If choosing and rejecting are complementary, then the sum Pc þPr DEMO
equal 100. On the other hand, according to the above hypothesis, Pc þPr should
be greater than 100 for the enriched option and DEMO than 100 for the impoverished
option. This pattern was observed by Shaﬁr (1993). Consider, for example, the fol-
lowing problem which was presented to subjects in two versions that di¤ered only in
the bracketed DEMO One half of the subjects received one version, the other half
DEMO the other. The enriched option appears last, although the order presented DEMO
subjects was counterbalanced.
Problem 1 ðn ¼ 170Þ:
Imagine that you serve on the jury of an only-child sole-custody case following a relatively
DEMO divorce. The facts of the case are complicated by ambiguous economic, DEMO, and
emotional considerations, and you decide to base your decision entirely on the following few
observations. [To which parent would you award sole DEMO of the child?/Which parent
would you deny sole custody of DEMO child?]
Award Deny
Parent A: average income
average health
average DEMO hours
reasonable rapport with the child
relatively stable social life 36% 45%
Parent B: above-average income
very close relationship with the child
extremely active social life
lots of work-related travel
minor health problems 64% 55%
Parent DEMO, the impoverished option, is quite plain—with no striking positive or
negative features. There are no particularly compelling reasons to award or deny this
942 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
parent custody of the child. Parent DEMO, the enriched option, on the other hand, has
good reasons DEMO be awarded custody (a very close relationship with the child and DEMO
good income), but also good reasons to be denied sole custody (health problems and
extensive absences due to travel). To the right of the options are the percentages of
subjects who chose to award DEMO to deny custody to each of the parents. Parent B is
the majority choice both for being awarded custody of the child and for DEMO denied
it. As predicted, Pc þPr for parent B ð64 þ DEMO ¼ 119Þ is signiﬁcantly greater than
100, the value expected if DEMO and rejecting were complementary (z ¼ 2:48,
p <:DEMO). This pattern is explained by the observation that the enriched parent
(parent B) provides more compelling reasons to be awarded as well DEMO denied child
custody.
The above pattern has been replicated in hypothetical choices between monetary
gambles, college courses, and political candidates (Shaﬁr, 1993)DEMO For another exam-
ple, consider the following problem, presented to half the subjects in the ‘‘prefer’’ and
to the other half in the DEMO version.
Problem 2 ðn ¼ 172Þ:
Prefer:
Imagine that you are planning a week vacation in a warm spot over spring break. DEMO cur-
rently have two options that are reasonably priced. The travel brochure gives only a limited
amount of information about the two options. Given DEMO information available, which vaca-
tion spot would you prefer?
Cancel:DEMO
Imagine that you are planning a week vacation in a warm spot over spring break. You cur-
rently have two options that are reasonably DEMO, but you can no longer retain your reser-
vation in both. DEMO travel brochure gives only a limited amount of information about the two
options. Given the information available, which reservation do you decide to cancel?
Prefer Cancel
Spot A: average weather
average beaches
medium-quality hotel
medium-temperature water
average nightlife 33% 52%
Spot B: lots of sunshine
gorgeous beaches and coral reefs
ultra-modern hotel
very cold water
very strong winds
no DEMO 67% 48%
The information about the two spots is typical of the kind of information we have
available when deciding where to take our DEMO vacation. Because it is di‰cult to
Reason-Based Choice 943
estimate the overall value of each spot, we are likely to seek reasons on which to base
our decision. Spot A, the impoverished option, seems unremarkable yet unob-
jectionable on all counts. On the other hand, there are obvious reasons—gorgeous
beaches, an abundance of DEMO, and an ultra-modern hotel—for choosing spot B.
Of course, there are also compelling reasons—cold water, winds, and a lack of
nightlife—why spot DEMO should be rejected. We suggest that the gorgeous beaches are
likely to provide a more compelling reason when we choose than when we reject, and
the lack of nightlife is likely to play a more central DEMO when we reject than when we
choose. Indeed, spot B’s share DEMO being preferred and rejected exceeds that of spot A
(Pc þPr DEMO 67 þ 48 ¼ 115, p <:05). These results DEMO that options are not
simply ordered according to value, with the DEMO attractive selected and the less
attractive rejected. Instead, it appears that DEMO relative importance of options’
strengths and weaknesses varies with the nature of the task. As a result, we are sig-
niﬁcantly more likely to end up in spot B when we ask ourselves which we prefer
DEMO when we contemplate which to cancel (67% vs. 52%, z ¼ 2:83, p <:001).
One of the most basic assumptions of the rational theory of choice is the principle
of procedure invariance, which requires strategically equivalent methods of elication
to yield identical preferences (see Tversky et al., 1988, for discussion). The choose–
reject discrepancy DEMO a predictable failure of procedure invariance. This phe-
nomenon is at variance with value maximization, but is easily understood from the
point of view of reason-based choice: reasons for choosing are more compelling when
we choose than when we reject, and reasons for rejecting matter more when we reject
than when we choose.
3. Choice under Conﬂict: Seeking Options
The need to choose often creates conﬂict: we are not sure how to trade o¤ one attri-
bute relative to another or, for that matter, which attributes matter to us most. It is
a commonplace that we often attempt to resolve such conﬂict by seeking reasons
for choosing one DEMO over another. At times, the conﬂict between available alter-
natives is DEMO to resolve, which may lead us to seek additional options, or to main-
tain the status quo. Other times, the context is such that a comparison between
alternatives generates compelling reasons to choose one option DEMO another. Using
reasons to resolve conﬂict has some non-obvious implications, which DEMO addressed
below. The present section focuses on people’s decision to seek other alternatives; the
next section explores some e¤ects of adding options to the set under consideration.
In many contexts, we need to decide whether to opt for an available option or
search for additional alternatives. Thus, a person who wishes to buy a used car may
944 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
settle for a car that is DEMO available or continue searching for additional models.
Seeking new alternatives usually requires additional time and e¤ort, and may involve
the risk of losing the previously available options. Conﬂict plays no role in the clas-
sical theory DEMO choice. In this theory, each option x has a value vðxÞ DEMO that, for
any o¤ered set, the decision maker selects the option with the highest value. In par-
ticular, a person is expected to search for additional alternatives only if the expected
value of searching exceeds DEMO of the best option currently available. A reliance on
reasons, on DEMO other hand, entails that we should be more likely to opt DEMO an
available option when we have a convincing reason for its selection, and that we
should be more likely to search further when a compelling reason for choice is not
readily available.
To investigate this hypothesis, Tversky and Shaﬁr (1992b) presented subjects with
pairs of options, such as bets varying in probability and payo¤, or student apart-
ments varying in monthly rent and distance from campus, and had subjects choose
one of the two options or, instead, request an additional option, at some cost. Sub-
jects ﬁrst reviewed the entire set of 12 options (gambles or apartments) to familiarize
themselves with the available alternatives. In the study of choice between bets some
subjects then received the following problem.
DEMO:
Imagine that you are o¤ered a choice between the following two gambles:
(x) 65% chance to win $15
( y) 30% chance to win $35
You can either select one of these gambles DEMO you can pay $1 to add one more gamble to the
choice set. The added gamble will be selected at random from the list DEMO reviewed.
Other subjects received a similar problem except that option y was replaced by
option x0 , to yield a choice between the following.
DEMO:
(x) 65% chance to win $15
(x0 ) 65% DEMO to win $14
Subjects were asked to indicate whether they wanted to add another gamble or select
between the available alternatives. They then chose DEMO preferred gamble from
the resulting set (with or without the added DEMO). Subjects were instructed that
the gambles they chose would be played out and that their payo¤ would be propor-
tional to the amount DEMO money they earned minus the fee they paid for the added
gambles.
Reason-Based Choice 945
A parallel design presented choices between hypothetical student apartments.
DEMO subjects received the following problem.
Conﬂict:
Imagine that you face a choice between two apartments with the following characteristics:
(x) $290 DEMO month, 25 minutes from campus
( y) $350 a month, DEMO minutes from campus
Both have one bedroom and a kitchenette. You can choose now between the two apartments
or you can continue to search DEMO apartments (to be selected at random from the list you
reviewed)DEMO In that case, there is some risk of losing one or DEMO of the apartments you have
found.
Other subjects received a similar problem except that option y was replaced by
option x0 , to yield DEMO choice between the following.
Dominance:
(x) $290 a month, DEMO minutes from campus
(x0 ) $330 a month, 25 minutes from campus
Note that in both pairs of problems the choice between x DEMO y —the conﬂict
condition—is non-trivial because the xs are better on one dimension and the ys
are better on the other. In contrast, the choice between x and x0 —the dominance
condition—involves no conﬂict because the DEMO strictly dominates the latter.
Thus, while there is no obvious reason DEMO choose one option over the other in the
conﬂict condition, there DEMO a decisive argument for preferring one of the two alter-
natives in the dominance condition.
On average, subjects requested an additional alternative 64% of the time in the
conﬂict condition, and only 40% of the time in the dominance condition ðp <:05Þ.
Subjects’ tendency to search for DEMO options, in other words, was greater when
the choice among alternatives was harder to rationalize, than when there was a
compelling reason and the decision was easy.
These data are inconsistent with the principle of DEMO maximization. According to
value maximization, a subject should search for additional DEMO if and only if
the expected (subjective) value of searching exceeds that of the best alternative cur-
rently available. Because the best alternative DEMO in the dominance condition is
also available in the conﬂict condition, DEMO maximization implies that the percent-
age of subjects who seek an additional alternative cannot be greater in the conﬂict
than in the dominance condition, contrary to the observed data.
It appears that the search for additional DEMO depends not only on the value
of the best available option, DEMO implied by value maximization, but also on the di‰-
946 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
culty of choosing among the options DEMO consideration. In situations of domi-
nance, for example, there are clear and indisputable reasons for choosing one option
over another (e.g., ‘‘This DEMO is equally distant and I save $40!’’). Having a
compelling argument for choosing one of the options over the rest reduces the
temptation DEMO look for additional alternatives. When the choice involves conﬂict, on
the DEMO hand, reasons for choosing any one of the options are less DEMO
available and the decision is more di‰cult to justify (e.g., ‘‘Should I save $60 a
month, or reside 18 minutes closer to campus?’’). In the absence of compelling rea-
sons for choice, there is a greater tendency to search for other alternatives.
4. Choice under DEMO: Adding Options
An analysis in terms of reasons can help explain DEMO violations of the principle
of independence of irrelevant alternatives, according to DEMO the preference order-
ing between two options should not be altered by the introduction of additional
alternatives. This principle follows from the standard assumption DEMO value maxi-
mization, and has been routinely assumed in the analysis DEMO consumer choice.
Despite its intuitive appeal, there is a growing body DEMO evidence that people’s prefer-
ences depend on the context of choice, DEMO by the set of options under consider-
ation. In particular, the DEMO and removal of options from the o¤ered set can
inﬂuence people’s preferences among options that were available all along. Whereas
in the previous section DEMO considered people’s tendency to seek alternatives in the
context of a given set of options, in this section we illustrate phenomena that arise
through the addition of options, and interpret them in terms of reasons for choice.
A major testable implication of value maximization is that a non-preferred DEMO
cannot become preferred when new options are added to the o¤ered set. In particu-
lar, a decision maker who prefers y over the option to defer the choice should not
prefer to defer the choice when DEMO y and x are available. That the ‘‘market share’’
of an option cannot be increased by enlarging the o¤ered set is known as the DEMO
larity condition (see Tversky & Simonson, in press). Contrary to regularity, numerous
experimental results indicate that the tendency to defer choice can increase with the
addition of alternatives. Consider, for instance, the degree DEMO conﬂict that arises when
a person is presented with one attractive option (which he or she prefers to deferring
the choice), compared to two competing alternatives. Choosing one out of two com-
peting alternatives can DEMO di‰cult: the mere fact that an alternative is attractive may
not DEMO itself provide a compelling reason for its selection, because the other DEMO
may be equally attractive. The addition of an alternative may thus make the decision
harder to justify, and increase the tendency to defer the decision.
Reason-Based Choice 947
A related phenomenon was aptly described by Thomas Schelling, who tells of an
occasion in which he had decided to buy DEMO encyclopedia for his children. At the
bookstore, he was presented with DEMO attractive encyclopedias and, ﬁnding it di‰cult
to choose between the two, ended up buying neither—this, despite the fact that had
only one encyclopedia been available he would have happily bought it. More gener-
ally, there are situations in which people prefer each of the available alternatives over
DEMO status quo but do not have a compelling reason for choosing among the alter-
natives and, as a result, defer the decision, perhaps indeﬁnitely.
The phenomenon described by Schelling was demonstrated by Tversky and Shaﬁr
(1992b) in the following pair of problems, which were presented to DEMO groups of
students (n ¼ 124 and 121, respectively).
High conﬂict:
Suppose you are considering buying a compact disk (CD) DEMO, and have not yet decided
what model to buy. You pass DEMO a store that is having a 1-day clearance sale. They o¤er a
popular SONY player for just $99, and a top-of-the-line AIWA player for just $169, both well
below the list price. Do you?:
(x) buy the AIWA player. 27%
( y) buy the SONY DEMO 27%
(z) wait until you learn more about the various models. 46%
Low conﬂict:
Suppose you are considering buying a CD player, and have not yet decided what model to
buy. You pass by DEMO store that is having a 1-day clearance sale. They o¤er a popular SONY
player for just $99, well below the list price. Do you?:
( y) buy the SONY player. 66%
(z) wait DEMO you learn more about the various models. 34%
The results indicate that people are more likely to buy a CD player in the latter,DEMO
low-conﬂict, condition than in the former, high-conﬂict, situation (p <:05). Both
models—the AIWA and the SONY—seem attractive, both are well priced, and both
are on sale. The decision maker needs to determine whether she is better o¤ with a
cheaper, popular model, or DEMO a more expensive and sophisticated one. This con-
ﬂict is apparently not easy to resolve, and compels many subjects to put o¤ the pur-
chase until they learn more about the various options. On the other DEMO, when the
SONY alone is available, there are compelling arguments for its purchase: it is a
popular player, it is very well DEMO, and it is on sale for 1 day only. In this DEMO,
having good reasons to choose the o¤ered option, a greater DEMO of subjects
decide to opt for the CD player rather than delay the purchase.
948 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
The addition of a competing alternative DEMO the preceding example increased the
tendency to delay decision. Clearly, the DEMO of conﬂict and its ease of resolution
depend not only on the number of options available, but on how the options com-
pare. Consider, for example, the following problem, in which the original AIWA
player was replaced by an inferior model ðn ¼ 62Þ.
Dominance:
Suppose DEMO are considering buying a CD player, and have not yet decided DEMO model to
buy. You pass by a store that is having a 1-day clearance sale. They o¤er a popular SONY
player for just $99, well below the list price, and an inferior AIWA player for the regular list
price of $105. Do you?:
(x0 ) buy DEMO AIWA player. 3%
( y) buy the SONY player. 73%
(z) wait until you learn more about the various models. 24%
In this version, contrary to the previous high-conﬂict version, the AIWA player is
DEMO by the SONY: it is inferior in quality and costs more. DEMO, the presence
of the AIWA does not detract from the reasons DEMO buying the SONY, it actually
supplements them: the SONY is well priced, it is on sale for 1 day only, and it DEMO
clearly better than its competitor. As a result, the SONY is DEMO more often than
before the inferior AIWA was added. The ability of an asymmetrically dominated or
relatively inferior alternative, when added to a set, to increase the attractiveness and
choice probability of the dominating option is known as the asymmetric dominance
e¤ect (Huber, Payne, & Puto, DEMO). Note that in both the high-conﬂict and the
dominance problems subjects were presented with two CD players and an option to
delay choice. DEMO tendency to delay, however, is much greater when they lack
clear reasons for buying either player, than when they have compelling reasons to
buy one player and not the other ðp <:005Þ.
The above DEMO violate the regularity condition, which is assumed to hold so
long DEMO the added alternatives do not provide new and relevant information. In
the above scenario, one could argue that the added options (the superior DEMO in
one case and the inferior player in the other) conveyed DEMO about the con-
sumer’s chances of ﬁnding a better deal. Recall that information considerations could
not explain the search experiments of the previous section DEMO there subjects
reviewed all the potentially available options. Nevertheless, to test DEMO interpretation
further, Tversky and Shaﬁr (1992b) devised a similar problem, involving real payo¤s,
in which the option to defer is not DEMO Studentsbrief questionnaire for $1.50. Following the questionnaire, one half of the DEMO ¼ 80Þ agreed to ﬁll out a
were o¤ered the opportunity to exchange the $1.50 (the default) for one of two
Reason-Based Choice 949
prizes: a metal Zebra pen (henceforth, Zebra), or a pair of plastic Pilot pens (hence-
forth, Pilot). DEMO other half of the subjects were only o¤ered the opportunity to
exchange the $1.50 for the Zebra. The prizes were shown to the subjects, who were
also informed that each prize regularly costs a little over DEMO Upon indicating
their preference, subjects received their chosen option. The results DEMO as follows.
Seventy-ﬁve per cent of the subjects chose the Zebra over the payment when the
Zebra was the only alternative, but only 47% chose the Zebra or the Pilot when both
were available ðp <:DEMO . Faced with a tempting alternative, subjects had a compel-
ling DEMO to forego the payment: the majority took advantage of the opportunity DEMO
obtain an attractive prize of greater value. The availability of competing alternatives
of comparable value, on the other hand, did not present an DEMO reason for
choosing either alternative over the other, thus increasing the DEMO to retain the
default option. Similar e¤ects in hypothetical medical decisions made by expert
physicians are documented in Redelmeier and Shaﬁr (1993).
In the above study the addition of a competing alternative was shown to DEMO
the popularity of the default option. Recall that the popularity of an option may
also be enhanced by the addition of an inferior alternative. DEMO, in accord with the
asymmetric dominance e¤ect, the tendency to prefer x over y can be increased by
adding a third alternative z DEMO is clearly inferior to x but not to y (see ﬁgure DEMO).
The phenomenon of asymmetric dominance was ﬁrst demonstrated, by Huber,DEMO
Payne, and Puto (1982), in choices between hypothetical options. Wedell (1991)
reports similar ﬁndings using monetary gambles. The following example involving
real choices is taken from Simonson and Tversky (1992). One group ðn
¼
106Þ was
o¤ered a choice between $6 and an elegant DEMO pen. The pen was selected by 36%
of the subjects, and DEMO remaining 64% chose the cash. A second group ðn
¼
115Þ
was given a choice among three options: $6 in cash, the same DEMO pen, and a sec-
Figure 39.1
A schematic representation of asymmetric DEMO The tendency to prefer x over y can be increased by
adding an alternative, z, that is clearly inferior to x but not DEMO y.
950 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
ond pen that was distinctly less DEMO Only 2% of the subjects chose the less
attractive pen, but DEMO presence increased the percentage of subjects who chose the
Cross pen from 36% to 46% ðp <:10Þ. This pattern again violates the regularity
DEMO discussed earlier. Similar violations of regularity were observed in choices
among other consumer goods. In one study, subjects received descriptions and pic-
tures of microwave ovens taken from a ‘‘Best’’ catalogue. One group ðn
¼
60Þ DEMO
then asked to choose between an Emerson priced at $110, and DEMO Panasonic priced at
$180. Both items were on sale, one third DEMO the regular price. Here, 57% chose the
Emerson and 43% chose DEMO Panasonic. A second group ðn
¼
60Þ was presented with
these options along with a $200 Panasonic at a 10% discount. Only 13% of DEMO sub-
jects chose the more expensive Panasonic, but its presence increased DEMO percentage
of subjects who chose the less expensive Panasonic from 43% to 60% ðp <:05Þ.1
Simonson and Tversky (1992) have interpreted these DEMO in terms of
‘‘tradeo¤ contrast.’’ They proposed that the tendency to prefer an alternative is
enhanced or hindered depending on whether the tradeo¤s within DEMO set under con-
sideration are favorable or unfavorable to that alternative. A second cluster of con-
text e¤ects, called extremeness aversion, which refers DEMO the ﬁnding that, within an
o¤ered set, options with extreme values are relatively less attractive than options
with intermediate values (Simonson, 1989)DEMO For example, consider two-dimensional
options x, y, and z, such that y lies between x and z (see ﬁgure 39.2). Considerations
of value maximization imply that the middle alternative, y, should be DEMO less
popular in the trinary choice than in either one of the binary comparisons (y com-
pared to x,or y compared to z). Extremeness aversion, on the other hand, yields the
opposite prediction DEMO y has small advantages and disadvantages with respect
to x and to z, whereas both x and z have more extreme advantages and disadvan-
tages with respect to each other. This pattern was observed in several DEMO
For example, subjects were shown ﬁve 35 mm cameras varying in DEMO and price.
Figure 39.2
A schematic representation of extremeness aversion. Option y is relatively more popular in the trinary
choice, when both x and z are available, than in either one of the binary comparisons, DEMO either x or z
are removed.
Reason-Based Choice 951
One group ðn ¼ 106Þ was then given a DEMO between two cameras: a Minolta X-370
priced at $170 and a DEMO 3000i priced at $240. A second group ðn ¼ 115Þ was
given an additional option, the Minolta 7000i priced at $470. Subjects in the ﬁrst
group were split evenly between the two options, yet 57% of the subjects in the sec-
ond group chose the middle option (Minolta 3000i), with the remaining divided
about equally between the two extreme DEMO Thus, the introduction of an extreme
option reduced the ‘‘market share’’ DEMO the other extreme option, but not of the mid-
dle option. DEMO that this e¤ect cannot be attributed to information conveyed by the
o¤ered set because respondents had reviewed the relevant options prior to making
their DEMO
We suggest that both tradeo¤ contrast and extremeness aversion can be under-
stood in terms of reasons. Suppose a decision maker faces a choice DEMO two
alternatives, x and y, and suppose x is of higher quality whereas y is better priced.
This produces conﬂict if the decision DEMO ﬁnds it di‰cult to determine whether the
quality di¤erence outweighs the price di¤erence. Suppose now that the choice set also
includes a third alternative, z, that is clearly inferior to y but not to x. The presence
of z, we suggest, provides an argument for choosing y DEMO x. To the extent that the
initial choice between x and y is di‰cult, the presence of z may help the decision
maker break the tie. In the pen study, for example, the addition of DEMO relatively
unattractive pen, whose monetary value is unclear but whose inferiority DEMO the ele-
gant Cross pen is apparent, provides a reason for DEMO the Cross pen over the
cash. Similarly, in the presence of DEMO with extreme values on the relevant
dimensions, the middle option can DEMO seen as a compromise choice that is easier to
defend than either extremes. Indeed, verbal protocols show that the accounts gen-
erated by subjects while making these choices involve considerations of asymmetric
advantage and compromise; furthermore, asymmetric dominance is enhanced when
subjects anticipate having to justify their decisions to others (Simonson, 1989). It is
noteworthy that the arguments DEMO to tradeo¤ contrast and extremeness aversion
are comparative in nature; they DEMO based on the positions of the options in the
choice set, DEMO they cannot be readily translated into the values associated with
single alternatives.
Tversky and Simonson (in press) have proposed a formal model that DEMO
the above ﬁndings in terms of a tournament-like process in which each option is
compared against other available options in terms of their relative DEMO
and disadvantages. This model can be viewed as a formal analog of the preceding
qualitative account based on reasons for choice. Which analysis—the formal DEMO the
qualitative—proves more useful is likely to depend, among other things, on the
nature of the problem and on the purpose of the DEMO
952 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
5. Deﬁnite versus Disjunctive Reasons
People DEMO encounter situations of uncertainty in which they eventually opt
for the same course of action, but for very di¤erent reasons, depending on how DEMO
uncertainty is resolved. Thus, a student who has taken an exam DEMO decide to take
a vacation, either to reward herself in case DEMO passes or to console herself in case
she fails. However, as DEMO below, the student may be reluctant to commit to a
vacation DEMO the outcome of the exam is pending. The following problem was pre-
sented by Tversky and Shaﬁr (1992a) to 66 undergraduate students.
Disjunctive DEMO:
Imagine that you have just taken a tough qualifying examination. It is the end of the fall
quarter, you feel tired and run-down, and you are not sure that you passed the exam. In case
you failed you have to take the exam again in a couple DEMO months—after the Christmas holi-
days. You now have an opportunity to buy a very attractive 5-day Christmas vacation pack-
age in Hawaii at an DEMO low price. The special o¤er expires tomorrow, while the
exam grade DEMO not be available until the following day. Would you?:
(a) buy the vacation package. 32%
(b) not buy the vacation package. 7%
(c) pay a $5 non-refundable fee in order to retain DEMO rights to
buy the vacation package at the same exceptional price the
day after tomorrow—after you ﬁnd out whether or not you
passed the DEMO
61%
The percentage of subjects who chose each option appears on the right. Two addi-
tional versions, called pass and fail, were presented DEMO two di¤erent groups of 67
students each. These two versions di¤ered only in the expression in brackets.
Pass/fail versions:
Imagine that you DEMO just taken a tough qualifying examination. It is the end of the fall
quarter, you feel tired and run-down, and you ﬁnd out DEMO you [passed the exam./failed the
exam. You will have to take it again in a couple of months—after the Christmas holidays.]
You now DEMO an opportunity to buy a very attractive 5-day Christmas vacation package in
Hawaii at an exceptionally low price. The special o¤er expires tomorrow. Would DEMO?:
Pass Fail
(a) buy the vacation package. 54% 57%
(b) not buy the vacation package. 16% 12%
(c) pay a $5 non-refundable fee in order to retain the rights to
buy the DEMO package at the same exceptional price the
day after tomorrow.
30% 31%
Reason-Based Choice 953
The data show that more than half of the DEMO chose the vacation package
when they knew that they passed the exam and an even larger percentage chose
the vacation when they knew that DEMO failed. However, when they did not know
whether they had passed DEMO failed, less than one third of the students chose the
vacation DEMO 61% were willing to pay $5 to postpone the decision until the following
day, when the results of the exam would be known.2 Once the outcome of the exam
is known, the student has good—albeit di¤erent—reasons for taking the trip: having
passed the exam, the vacation is DEMO seen as a reward following a hard but
successful semester; having DEMO the exam, the vacation becomes a consolation and
time to recuperate DEMO a re-examination. Not knowing the outcome of the exam,
however, DEMO student lacks a deﬁnite reason for going to Hawaii. Notice that the
outcome of the exam will be known long before the vacation begins. DEMO, the
uncertainty characterizes the actual moment of decision, not the eventual vacation.
The indeterminacy of reasons for going to Hawaii discourages many students
DEMO buying the vacation, even when both outcomes—passing or failing the exam—
DEMO favor this course of action. Tversky and Shaﬁr (1992a) call the above
pattern of decisions a disjunction e¤ect. Evidently, a disjunction of di¤erent reasons
(reward in case of success or consolation in case of failure) is often less compelling
than either deﬁnite reason alone. A signiﬁcant proportion of the students above were
willing to pay, in e¤ect, for DEMO that was ultimately not going to a¤ect their
decision—they would choose to go to Hawaii in either case—but that promised to
leave them with DEMO more deﬁnite reason for making that choice. The willingness to
pay for non-instrumental information is at variance with the classical model, in
which the worth of information is determined only by its potential to inﬂuence
decision.
DEMO preference for deﬁnite as opposed to disjunctive reasons has signiﬁ-
cant implications in cases where the option to defer decision is not available. Con-
DEMO the following series of problems presented by Tversky and Shaﬁr (1992a) to 98
students.
Win/lose version:
Imagine that you have just DEMO a game of chance that gave you a 50% chance to win $200
and a 50% chance to lose $100. The coin was tossed DEMO you have [won $200/lost $100]. You
are now o¤ered a second identical gamble: 50% chance to win $200 and 50% chance to lose
$100. Would you?:
Won Lost
(a) accept the second gamble. 69% 59%
(b) reject the second gamble. 31% 41%
954 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
The students were presented with the DEMO version of the problem above, followed a
week later by the DEMO version, and 10 days after that by the following version that DEMO
a disjunction of the previous two. The problems were embedded among other, simi-
lar problems so that the relation between the various versions was not transparent.
Subjects were instructed to treat each decision separately.
Disjunctive version:DEMO
Imagine that you have just played a game of chance that gave you a 50% chance to win $200
and a 50% chance to DEMO $100. Imagine that the coin has already been tossed, but that DEMO
will not know whether you have won $200 or lost $100 until you make your decision con-
cerning a second, identical gamble: 50% DEMO to win $200 and 50% chance to lose $100.
Would you?:DEMO
(a) accept the second gamble. 36%
(b) reject the second gamble. 64%
The data show that a majority of subjects accepted the DEMO gamble after having
won the ﬁrst gamble and a majority also accepted the second gamble after having
lost the ﬁrst gamble. However, the majority of subjects rejected the second gamble
when the outcome of the ﬁrst DEMO not known. An examination of individual choices
reveals that approximately 40% of the subjects accepted the second gamble both after
a gain in the DEMO and after a loss. Among these, however, 65% rejected the second
gamble in the disjunctive condition, when the outcome of the ﬁrst gamble was not
known. Indeed, this response pattern (accepting in both conditions DEMO rejecting in
the disjunction) was the single most frequent pattern, exhibited by 27% of all sub-
jects. This pattern, which violates Savage’s (DEMO) sure-thing principle, cannot be
attributed to unreliability (Tversky & Shaﬁr, 1992a).
The students above were o¤ered a gamble with a positive DEMO value, and an
even chance of a non-trivial loss. Di¤erent reasons DEMO likely to arise for accepting
the second gamble depending on the outcome of the ﬁrst. In the win condition, the
decision maker is already up $200, so even a loss on the second gamble leaves him or
her ahead overall, which makes this option quite attractive. In the lose condition, on
the other hand, the decision maker is down DEMO Playing the second gamble o¤ers a
chance to ‘‘get out of the red’’, which for many is more attractive than accepting a
sure $100 loss. In the disjunctive condition, however, the decision maker does not
DEMO whether she is up $200 or down $100; she does not DEMO, in other words,
whether her reason for playing the second DEMO is that it is a no-loss proposition
or, instead, that it provides a chance to escape a sure loss. In the absence of DEMO deﬁnite
reason, fewer subjects accept the second gamble.
Reason-Based Choice 955
This interpretation is further supported by the following modiﬁcation DEMO the above
problem, in which both outcomes of the ﬁrst gamble DEMO increased by $400 so that
the decision maker could not lose in either case.
Imagine that you have just played a game of chance DEMO gave you a 50% chance to win $600
and a 50% chance to win $300. Imagine that the coin has already been tossed, but that you will
not know whether you have won $600 or $300 DEMO you make your decision concerning a
second gamble: 50% chance to DEMO $200 and 50% chance to lose $100.
A total of 171 subjects were presented with this problem, equally divided into three
groups. One group was told that they had won $300 on the ﬁrst gamble, a second
group was told that they had won $600 on the ﬁrst DEMO, and the third group was
told that the outcome of the DEMO gamble—$300 or $600—was not known (the dis-
junctive version). In DEMO cases, subjects had to decide whether to accept or to reject DEMO
second gamble which, as in the previous problem, consisted of an even chance to win
$200 or lose $100. The percentage of subjects DEMO accepted the second gamble in the
$300, $600, and disjunctive versions, were 69%, 75%, and 73%, respectively. (Recall
that the corresponding ﬁgures for the original problem were 59%, 69%, and 36%;
DEMO identical ﬁgures were obtained in a between-subjects replication of that
problem.) DEMO contrast to the original problem, the second gamble in this modiﬁed
DEMO was equally popular in the disjunctive as in the non-disjunctive versions.
Whereas in the original scenario the second gamble amounted to either a no-loss
DEMO or a chance to avoid a sure loss, in the modiﬁed DEMO the second
gamble amounts to a no-loss proposition regardless of the outcome of the ﬁrst
gamble. The increased popularity of the second gamble in DEMO modiﬁed problem
shows that it is not the disjunctive situation itself that discourages people from play-
ing. Rather, it is the lack of a speciﬁc reason that seems to drive the e¤ect: when the
same reason applies regardless of outcome, the disjunction no longer reduces the
tendency to accept the gamble.
As illustrated above, changes in the context of decision are likely to alter the rea-
sons that subjects bring to mind DEMO, consequently, their choices. Elsewhere (Shaﬁr
& Tversky, 1992) we DEMO a disjunction e¤ect in the context of a one-shot pris-
oner’s dilemma game, played on a computer for real payo¤s. Subjects ðn ¼ 80Þ
played a series of prisoner’s dilemma games, without feedback, each against DEMO dif-
ferent unknown player. In this setup, the rate of cooperation DEMO 3% when subjects
knew that the other player had defected, and DEMO when they knew that the other had
cooperated. However, when subjects DEMO not know whether the other player had
cooperated or defected (the DEMO version of the prisoner’s dilemma game) the
956 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
rate of cooperation rose to 37%. DEMO, many subjects defected when they knew
the other’s choice—be it cooperation DEMO defection—but cooperated when the other
player’s choice was not known. Shaﬁr and Tversky (1992) attribute this pattern to
the di¤erent perspectives that underlie DEMO behavior under uncertainty as
opposed to when the uncertainty is resolved. In particular, we suggest that the rea-
sons for competing are more compelling when the other player’s decision is known
and the payo¤ depends on DEMO subject alone, than when the other’s chosen strategy is
uncertain, and the outcome of the game depends on the choices of both players.
DEMO above ‘‘disjunctive’’ manipulation—which has no direct bearing from the
point of view of value maximization—appears to inﬂuence the reasons for decision
that people bring DEMO mind. Another kind of manipulation that seems to alter people’s
reasons without bearing directly on options’ values is described in what follows.
6. Non-Valued DEMO
Reasons for choice or rejection often refer to speciﬁc features of the options under
consideration. The positive features of an option typically provide reasons DEMO
choosing that option and its negative features typically provide reasons for rejection.
What happens when we add features that are neither attractive nor aversive? Can
choice be inﬂuenced by features that have little or no value?DEMO
Simonson and his colleagues have conducted a number of studies on the e¤ects of
non-valued features, and tested the hypothesis that people are reluctant to choose
alternatives that are supported by reasons that they do not DEMO appealing. In one
study, for example, Simonson, Nowlis, and Simonson (in press) predicted that people
would be less likely to choose DEMO alternative that was chosen by another person for a
reason that does not apply to them. UC Berkeley business students ðn
¼
113Þ were
DEMO that, because of budget cuts and in order to save paper DEMO duplicating costs, a
questionnaire that they will receive was designed for DEMO by two respondents. Thus,
when subjects had to enter a choice, they could see the choice made by the previous
‘‘respondent’’ and the reason given for it. The choices and reasons of the previous
respondents DEMO systematically manipulated. One problem, for example, o¤ered a
choice between attending the MBA programs at Northwestern and UCLA. In one
version of the DEMO, the previous respondent had selected Northwestern,
and provided the (handwritten) reason, ‘‘I have many relatives in the Chicago area.’’
Because this DEMO does not apply to most subjects, it was expected to reduce DEMO
likelihood of choosing Northwestern. In a second version, no reason was DEMO for
the choice of Northwestern. As expected, those exposed to an DEMO reason were
Reason-Based Choice 957
less likely to choose Northwestern than subjects who saw DEMO other respondent’s
choice but not his or her reason (23% vs. DEMO, p <:05). It should be noted that both
Northwestern DEMO UCLA are well known to most subjects (Northwestern currently
has the DEMO ranked MBA program; the UCLA program is ranked high and
belongs DEMO the same UC system as Berkeley). Thus, it is unlikely DEMO subjects made
inferences about the quality of Northwestern based on the fact that another respon-
dent chose it because he or she had relatives DEMO Chicago.
In a related study, Simonson, Carmon, and O’Curry (in press) showed that
endowing an option with a feature that was intended to be positive but, in fact, has
no value for the DEMO maker can reduce the tendency to choose that option, even
when DEMO realize that they are not paying for the added feature. For example, an
o¤er to purchase a collector’s plate—that most did not want—if one buys a partic-
ular brand of cake mix was shown to lower DEMO tendency to buy that particular brand
relative to a second, comparable DEMO mix brand (from 31% to 14%, p <:05).
Choosing brands that o¤er worthless bonuses was judged (in a related study) DEMO more
di‰cult to justify and as more susceptible to criticism. An analysis of verbal pro-
tocols showed that a majority of those who failed DEMO select the endowed option
explicitly mentioned not needing the added feature. It should be noted that sale pro-
motions, such as the one involving the collector’s plate o¤er above, are currently
employed by a wide range of companies and there is no evidence that they lead to
any DEMO about the quality of the promoted product (e.g., Blattberg & Neslin,
1990).
The above manipulations all added ‘‘positive,’’ albeit weak DEMO irrelevant, features,
which should not diminish an option’s value; yet, they apparently provide a reason
against choosing the option, especially when DEMO options are otherwise equally
attractive. Evidently, the addition of a potentially DEMO feature that proves use-
less can provide a reason to reject the option in favor of a competing alternative that
has no ‘‘wasted’’ features.
DEMO Concluding Remarks
People’s choices may occasionally stem from a¤ective judgments that preclude a
thorough evaluation of the options (cf. Zajonc, 1980). In DEMO cases, an analysis of
the reasons for choice may prove unwarranted DEMO, when attempted by the decision
maker, may actually result in a di¤erent, and possibly inferior, decision (Wilson &
Schooler, 1991). Other choices, furthermore, may follow standard operating proce-
dures that involve DEMO reﬂective e¤ort. Many decisions, nonetheless, result from
958 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
a careful evaluation of options, in which people attempt to arrive at what they
believe is the best DEMO Having discarded the less attractive options and faced with
a choice that is hard to resolve, people often search for a compelling rationale for
choosing one alternative over another. In this chapter, we presented an analysis of
the role of reasons in decision making, and considered ways in which an analysis
based on reasons may contribute to the standard quantitative DEMO based on the
maximization of value. A number of hypotheses that derive from this perspective
were investigated in experimental settings.
The reasons that enter DEMO the making of decisions are likely to be intricate
and diverse. In the preceding sections we have attempted to identify a few general
principles DEMO govern the role of reasons in decision making, and thus some DEMO
the fundamental ways in which thinking about reasons is likely to contribute to
our understanding of the making of decisions. A reliance on the DEMO important
dimensions—those likely to provide more compelling reasons for choice—was
shown in section 1 to predict preferences between previously equated options. The
notions of DEMO and salience were summoned in section 2 to account for
the di¤erential weighting of reasons in a choice versus rejection task. Reasons, it
appears, lend themselves to certain framing manipulations that are harder to explain
from the perspective of value maximization. In section 3, manipulating the precise
relationships between competing alternatives was shown to enhance or reduce con-
ﬂict, yielding decisions that were easier or more di‰cult to rationalize and justify.
Providing DEMO context that presents compelling reasons for choosing an option appar-
ently increases people’s tendency to opt for that option, whereas comparing alter-
natives that render the aforementioned reasons less compelling tends to increase
people’s tendency to DEMO the status quo or search for other alternatives. The
ability of the context of decision to generate reasons that a¤ect choice was further
discussed DEMO section 4, where the addition and removal of competing alternatives was
DEMO as generating arguments for choice based on comparative considerations
of relative advantages and compromise. The relative weakness of disjunctive reasons
was discussed in section DEMO There, a number of studies contrasted people’s willingness
to reach a DEMO based on a deﬁnite reason for choice, with their reluctance to
DEMO at a decision in the presence of uncertainty about which reason is actually rel-
evant to the case at hand. Section 6 brieﬂy reviewed DEMO situations in which the
addition of purported reasons for choosing an option, which subjects did not ﬁnd
compelling, was seen to diminish their DEMO to opt for that option, even though
its value had not DEMO
The nature of the reasons that guide decision, and the ways DEMO which they interact,
await further investigation. There is evidence to suggest that a wide variety of argu-
Reason-Based Choice 959
ments play a role in decision making. We often DEMO for a convincing rationale
for the decisions that we make, whether DEMO inter-personal purposes, so that we can
explain to others the reasons DEMO our decision, or for intra-personal motives, so that
we may feel conﬁdent of having made the ‘‘right’’ choice. Attitudes toward risk and
loss DEMO sometimes be rationalized on the basis of common myths or cliche´ s, and
choices are sometimes made on the basis of moral or prudential principles that are
used to override speciﬁc cost–beneﬁt calculations (cf. Prelec & Herrnstein, 1991).
Formal decision rules, moreover, may sometimes act as arguments in people’s
deliberations. Thus, when choosing between options x and z, we may realize that,
sometime earlier, we had preferred x DEMO y and y over z and that, therefore, by
transitivity, DEMO should now choose x over z. Montgomery (1983) has argued that
people look for dominance structures in decision problems because they provide a
DEMO reason for choice. Similarly, Tversky, and Shaﬁr (1992a) have shown
that detecting the applicability of the sure-thing principle to a decision situation
DEMO people to act in accord with this principle’s compelling rationale. Indeed, DEMO has
been repeatedly observed that the axioms of rational choice which are often violated
in non-transparent situations are generally satisﬁed when their application is DEMO
parent (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1986). These results suggest DEMO the axioms of
rational choice act as compelling arguments, or reasons, for making a particular
decision when their applicability has been detected, not as universal laws that con-
strain people’s choices.
In contrast to the DEMO theory that assumes stable values and preferences, it
appears that people DEMO do not have well-established values, and that preferences
are actually constructed—not DEMO revealed—during their elicitation (cf. Payne,
Bettman, & Johnson, 1992)DEMO A reason-based approach lends itself well to such a
constructive interpretation. Decisions, according to this analysis, are often reached
by focusing on reasons DEMO justify the selection of one option over another. Di¤erent
frames, contexts, and elicitation procedures highlight di¤erent aspects of the options
and bring forth DEMO reasons and considerations that inﬂuence decision.
The reliance on reasons to explain experimental ﬁndings has been the hallmark of
social psychological analyses. Accounts of DEMO (Wicklund & Brehm, 1976)
and self-perception (Bem, 1972), for example, focus on the reasons that people
muster in an attempt to explain their counter-attitudinal behaviors. Similarly,
attribution theory (Heider, 1980) centers around the reasons that people attribute to
others’ behavior. These studies, however, have primarily focused on postdecisional
rationalization rather than predecisional conﬂict. Although the two processes are
closely related, there are nevertheless some important di¤erences. Much of the work
in social psychology has investigated how people’s decisions DEMO the way they
960 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
think. The present paper, in contrast, has considered how the reasons that enter into
people’s thinking about a problem inﬂuence their decision. A number of researchers
have recently begun to DEMO related issues. Billig (1987), for example, has adopted
a rhetorical approach to understanding social psychological issues, according to
which ‘‘our inner deliberations are silent arguments conducted within a single self ’’
(p. 5). Related ‘‘explanation-based’’ models of decision making have been applied
by Pennington and DEMO (1988, 1992) to account for judicial decisions, and the
importance of social accountability in choice has been addressed by Tetlock (1992).
From a philosophical perspective, a recent essay by Schick (1991) analyzes various
decisions from the point of view of practical reason. An inﬂuential DEMO work is
Toulmin’s (1950) study of the role of arguments in ethical reasoning.
In this chapter, we have attempted to explore some of the ways in which reasons
and arguments enter into people’s decisions. A DEMO analysis may come
closer to capturing part of the psychology that underlies decision and thus may help
shed light on a number of phenomena DEMO remain counterintuitive from the per-
spective of the classical theory. It is instructive to note that many of the experimental
studies described in this DEMO were motivated by intuitions stemming from a
qualitative analysis based on reasons, not from a value-based perspective, even if
they can later be DEMO in that fashion. We do not propose that accounts based
on reasons replace value-based models of choice. Rather, we suggest that an anal-
ysis of reasons may illuminate some aspects of reﬂective choice, and generate new
hypotheses for further study.
Notes
This research was supported by US Public DEMO Service Grant No. 1-R29-MH46885 from the National
Institute of Mental Health, DEMO Grant No. 89-0064 from the Air Force O‰ce of Scientiﬁc Research and by
Grant No. SES-9109535 from the National Science Foundation. The chapter was DEMO prepared while
the ﬁrst author participated in a Summer Institute on Negotiation and Dispute Resolution at the Center
for Advanced Study in the Behavioral DEMO, and while the second author was at the University of
California, Berkeley. Funds for support of the Summer Institute were provided by the DEMO W. Mellon
Foundation. We thank Robyn Dawes for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
1. These e¤ects of context on choice can naturally be DEMO in sales tactics. For example, Williams-Sonoma,
a mail-order business located DEMO San Francisco, used to o¤er a bread-baking appliance priced at $279.
DEMO later added a second bread-baking appliance, similar to the ﬁrst but DEMO larger, and priced at
$429—more than 50% higher than the original DEMO Not surprisingly, Williams-Sonoma did not sell
many units of the new DEMO However, the sales of the less expensive appliance almost doubled. (To the
best of our knowledge, Williams-Sonoma did not anticipate this e¤ect.)
2. An additional group of subjects ðn
¼
123Þ were presented with DEMO the fail and the pass versions, and
asked whether or not DEMO would buy the vacation package in each case. Two thirds of the subjects made
the same choice in the two conditions, indicating that the data for the disjunctive version cannot be
explained by the hypothesis that DEMO who like the vacation in case they pass the exam do not like it in
Reason-Based Choice 961
case they fail, and vice versa. Note that while only one third of the subjects made di¤erent decisions
depending on the DEMO of the exam, more than 60% of the subjects chose to DEMO when the outcome
was not known.
References
Allison, G. T. (1971). Essence of decision: explaining the Cuban missile crisis. Boston: Little DEMO
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (DEMO), Advances in experimental social psychol-
ogy (vol. 6). New DEMO: Academic Press.
Berman, L. (1982). Planning a tragedy. New DEMO: Norton.
Betts, R., & Gelb, L. (1979). The DEMO of Vietnam: the system worked. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution.
Bigelow, J. (Ed.) (1887). The complete works of Benjamin Franklin (DEMO 4). New York: Putnam.
Billig, M. (1987). Arguing DEMO thinking: a rhetorical approach to social psychology. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Blattberg, R. C., & Neslin, S. A. (1990). DEMO promotion: concepts, methods, and strategies. Englewood
Cli¤s, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
DEMO, F. (1980). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: DEMO
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., and Puto, C. (1982). Adding asymmetrically dominated alternatives: violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of Consumer Research, 9, 90–98.
James, W. (1981). DEMO principles of psychology (vol. 2). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University DEMO
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: DEMO analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica,
47, 263–291.
Montgomery, H. (1983). Decision rules and the search for a dominance structure: DEMO a process model
of decision making. In P. Humphreys, O. Svenson, & A. Vari (Eds.), Analyzing and aiding decision pro-
cesses. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: verbal reports on mental pro-
cesses. Psychological Review, 84, 231–259.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1992). Behavioral decision research: a DEMO process
perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 87–131.
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1988). Explanation-based decision making: e¤ects of memory structure on
judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 521–533.
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1992). DEMO the evidence: tests of the story model for juror decision
making. DEMO of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 189–206.
Prelec, D., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1991). Preferences or principles: alternative guidelines for choice. In R. J.
Zeckhauser (Ed.), Strategy and choice. Cambridge, DEMO: MIT Press.
Redelmeter, D., & Shaﬁr, E. (1993). DEMO decisions over multiple alternatives. Working paper, Uni-
versity of Toronto.
Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. New York: Wiley.
DEMO, F. (1991). Understanding action: an essay on reasons. New DEMO: Cambridge University Press.
Shater, G. (1986). Savage revisited. Statistical DEMO, 1, 463–485.
Shaﬁr, E. (1993). Choosing versus rejecting: DEMO some options are both better and worse than others.
Memory & Cognition, 21, 546–556.
Shaﬁr, E., & Tversky, A. (1992). DEMO through uncertainty: nonconsequential reasoning and choice.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 449–474.
962 Shaﬁr, Simonson, and Tversky
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice DEMO on reasons: the case of attraction and compromise e¤ects. Journal of
DEMO Research, 16, 158–174.
Simonson, I., Carmon, Z., & O’Curry, S. (in press). Experimental evidence on the negative e¤ect of DEMO
product features and sales promotions on brand choice. Marketing Science.
Simonson, DEMO, Nowlis, S., & Simonson, Y. (in press). The DEMO of irrelevant preference arguments on con-
sumer choice. Journal of Consumer Psychology.
Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in context: tradeo¤ contrast and extremeness aversion. Journal
of Marketing Research, 29, 281–295.
DEMO, P. (1975). Choice between equally valued alternatives. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 1, 280–287.
Slovic, P. (1990). Choice. In D. Osherson & E. Smith (Eds.), An invitation to cognitive science (vol. 3).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Telhami, S. (1990). Power and leadership in international bargaining: the path to the Camp David accords.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Tetlock, DEMO E. (1992). The impact of accountability on judgment and choice: toward a social contingency
model. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (vol. 25). New York: Academic
Press.
DEMO, S. (1950). The place of reason in ethics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice and the framing of decisions. Journal of Business,
59, 251–278.
Tversky, A., Sattath, S., & Slovic, P. (1988)DEMO Contingent weighting in judgment and choice. Psychological
Review, 95, 371–384.
Tversky, A., & Shaﬁr, E. (1992a). The disjunction e¤ect in DEMO under uncertainty. Psychological
Science, 3, 305–309.
Tversky, A., & Shaﬁr, E. (1992b). Choice under conﬂict: the dynamics of deferred decision. Psychological
Science, 3, 358–361.
Tversky, A., & Simonson, I. (DEMO press). Context-dependent preferences. Management Science.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1947). Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Wedell, D. H. (1991). Distinguishing among DEMO of contextually induced preference reversals. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 767–778.
Wicklund, R. A., & Brehm, DEMO W. (1976). Perspectives on cognitive dissonance. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
DEMO, T. D., & Schooler, J. W. (1991). Thinking too much: introspection can reduce the quality of pref-
erences and decisions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 181–192.
Zajonc, B. (1980)DEMO Preferences without inferences. American Psychologist, 35, 151–175.
40 Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making
Mark Kelman, Yuval Rottenstreich, and DEMO Tversky
Introduction
Normative analyses of choice commonly assume value maximization: a DEMO
value or utility is associated with each option such that, given DEMO set of options, the
decision maker chooses the one with the DEMO value. An immediate consequence of
value maximization, called context-independence, is that the relative ranking of any
two options should not vary with the DEMO or deletion of other options.1 A person
who prefers chicken over pasta should not change this preference on learning that
ﬁsh is also available.2 DEMO its intuitive appeal, there is evidence3 that decision
makers do not DEMO satisfy this condition. In this article, we test the descrip-
tive DEMO of context-independence in legal settings and discuss its prescriptive
implications.
Two types of violations of context-independence—compromise e¤ects and contrast
e¤ects —have recently been demonstrated. DEMO e¤ect’’ refers to the ﬁnding
that the same option is evaluated more favorably when it is seen as intermediate in
the set of options DEMO consideration than when it is extreme. Consequently, com-
promise implies that DEMO relative ranking of two options depends on the presence or
absence of other options. Salespeople sometimes exploit this tendency by showing
both bare bones DEMO fancy products in order to induce customers to buy an inter-
mediate product. Several experiments have demonstrated compromise e¤ects. In one
experiment subjects ﬁrst DEMO several available Minolta cameras in a catalog.
One group chose between a mid-level Minolta camera and a low-end camera; 50
percent chose each camera. Another group could also choose a third, high-end cam-
era. In this group, of those choosing either the mid-level or low-end camera, 72 DEMO
cent chose the mid-level camera.4
‘‘Trade-o¤ contrast,’’ or simply ‘‘contrast,’’ refers to the observation that the same
option is evaluated more favorably DEMO the presence of similar options clearly inferior
to it than in the absence of such options. Contrast e¤ects, more generally, are ubiq-
uitous DEMO perception and judgment. The same circle appears larger when surrounded
by small circles and smaller when surrounded by large ones. Similarly, the same
product may appear attractive on the background of less attractive alternatives and
unattractive DEMO the background of more attractive ones.5 Real estate agents inter-
ested in selling a particular home sometimes show customers a similar home that is
DEMO less attractive. Experimental studies also demonstrate contrast e¤ects. Given
the choice between $6 and a Cross pen, only 36 percent of subjects chose the Cross
pen. However, when given the choice between $6, the Cross DEMO, and a less attractive
964 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
pen, the percentage choosing the Cross pen rose to 46 percent (only 2 percent of
subjects chose the other pen, conﬁrming its inferiority).6
Our goal was to test compromise and contrast in two types of legal decisions.
First, we investigated the degree to which decision makers made contested legal
judgments (grading or sentencing decisions in the criminal law) independently of the
set of available judgments. Second, we investigated the degree to which consumers
of heavily legalized products (plainti¤s or their lawyers facing distinct settlement
o¤ers) chose between such DEMO bundles independently of the set of options
available.
We report ﬁve experiments. Two tested for compromise and one for contrast in
legal judgments, two for contrast in choices between heavily legalized products. The
experimental methodology was DEMO follows. Subjects read case summaries and made
decisions. Each subject read one or two cases. The case summaries (reprinted in the
appendix) contained (1) a presentation of established facts, (2) a list of DEMO
options (verdicts for experimental jurors, sentences for experimental judges, settle-
DEMO o¤ers for experimental lawyers acting as client advisors), and (3) legal deﬁ-
nitions where relevant (for example, deﬁnitions of o¤enses for DEMO selecting an
appropriate verdict). Subjects read individually, spent about 10 DEMO on each case,
and did not discuss the cases with others. Subjects reading the ﬁrst two cases were
students in ‘‘Introductory Psychology’’ at DEMO University and San Jose State
University, as well as random persons DEMO in two public places (White Plaza at
Stanford and downtown Palo DEMO) to participate in exchange for a lottery ticket.
Cases 3 and DEMO were read only by students in Stanford’s ‘‘Introductory Psychology’’
class. Case 4 was read only by students enrolled in a ‘‘Psychology of Gender’’ class DEMO
Stanford. Subjects in the classroom settings participated for course credit and were
recruited by methods normally used at the two schools. Since the responses DEMO the
distinct settings were extremely similar, we report aggregated data. The DEMO
results were inconsistent with the context-independence condition implied by value
maximization. We present the experiments, detail limitations of the data, and discuss
implications DEMO the results.
Experimental Tests of Compromise
Case 1
Subjects ﬁrst read the following summary of facts:7
On January 1, 1993, at 9:DEMO a.m., the Defendant gave her second husband a cup of co¤ee DEMO
which she poured twenty crushed sleeping pills. He died within hours of drinking it. You
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 965
should take it as given that DEMO su¤ered a great deal of physical pain in the last several hours of
his life. The Defendant concedes that after she gave him the DEMO, she typed a suicide note on
his computer screen in the DEMO and that she did so hoping that the police would believe
she had nothing to do with his death. She concedes, too, that DEMO gave him the co¤ee and
ground up pills hoping that he would die. The prosecution concedes that at 8:05 a.m. the
Defendant had DEMO her seventeen year old daughter from her ﬁrst marriage sobbing on
the phone. The daughter was telling her best friend that her stepfather (the deceased) had
‘‘once again’’ attempted to molest her sexually the previous evening. At the same time, the
prosecutor argues, and the Defendant concedes, that she stood to inherit a large amount of
money from the DEMO, and that she had been involved with another man for more DEMO six
months prior to her husband’s death.
One group of subjects was told the incident occurred in the District of Columbia;
members of DEMO group were told to choose either murder or manslaughter as the
verdict since there is no category of special circumstances murder in the jurisdiction.
DEMO second group of subjects was told the incident occurred in California; DEMO
of this group were given the additional option of choosing the verdict of special
circumstances murder and told that potentially relevant special circumstances were
(a) that the defendant killed for ﬁnancial gain; (b) that DEMO killed in an exception-
ally heinous fashion, manifesting exceptional depravity (and that that ﬁnding was
appropriate if the crime were conscienceless or pitiless DEMO was unnecessarily tortur-
ous to the victim); and (c) that the defendant killed by the administration of poison.8
Jurors should choose the DEMO verdict if they believe the defendant was
acting under the inﬂuence of extreme emotional disturbance for which there is
a reasonable explanation and an DEMO murder verdict otherwise. The choice
between manslaughter and the other verdicts should not be sensitive to whether,
if the defendant were acting deliberately, she killed for ﬁnancial gain, or in a
heinous fashion, or DEMO something that would be considered poison. Thus, context-
independence requires a DEMO who prefers manslaughter over murder in the two-
option condition to prefer manslaughter over both murder and special circumstances
murder in the three-option condition;DEMO implying, in the aggregate, that manslaughter
will be chosen by as many jurors facing a two-option choice set as jurors facing a
three-option DEMO set. Compromise, however, predicts that a smaller proportion of
jurors will select manslaughter in the three-option choice set than in the two-option
choice DEMO The logic follows directly from the deﬁnition of compromise. If each per-
son is more likely to choose murder than manslaughter when a third DEMO, involv-
ing still more serious penalties than murder, is present, DEMO tendency should be
revealed in the aggregate.
The data show that 47 percent of 167 subjects chose manslaughter when given
only murder and manslaughter DEMO options; when special circumstances murder
966 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
Table 40.1
Choices of Subjects Reading DEMO 1
% choosing
murder with
% choosing % choosing special
manslaughter murder circumstances N
Group 1 (D.C.) 47 53 . . . 167
DEMO 2 (California) 19 39 42 183
Group 3 52 48 . . . 151
Note: See text for explanation.
was also present, DEMO 19 percent of 183 subjects chose manslaughter (w2 ¼ 32:96,DEMO
p <:0001).10
It is possible that the presence of the special circumstances option communicated
relevant information about the appropriateness of choosing murder DEMO than
manslaughter. A fact ﬁnder forced to focus (by the presence DEMO the special circum-
stances instruction) on the fact that the defendant DEMO particular means to kill (poi-
son) and may have had a particular motive (greed) may be more likely to adopt
the view DEMO the murder was premeditated and planned, rather than committed
‘‘in the DEMO of passion.’’ To respond to this concern, a third group of DEMO read
about special circumstances murder, so that they received the information DEMO
describing the defendant’s form of killing but were told that special circumstances
murder was not an available option in their jurisdiction. The hypothesis that DEMO
above ﬁnding is attributable to relevant information available to one, but DEMO
both, experimental groups was not borne out by the data; 52 percent of the 151 sub-
jects in the third group chose manslaughter, a rate comparable to that of the two-
option group and substantially DEMO than that of the initial three-option group
(w2 ¼ 40:61, p <:0001). See table 40.1.
Case 2
Subjects were told DEMO take the following as proven:
Donald Dewey, the defendant, who is an African-American, is walking in the inner courtyard
of a shopping mall well after all the shops have closed. However, the mall is still open. Fifteen
minutes earlier, one of the jewelry shops in the mall was burglarized, but not by Dewey.
Nonetheless, a security guard, an o¤-duty policeman hired by the owners of the mall,
approaches DEMO and asks whether he would mind if he patted him down, DEMO him that
there had been a burglary. The guard intended to check both for burglar’s tools and for some
of the cash and the DEMO jewelry. The guard realized he had no probable cause to detain
Dewey. Nonetheless, when Dewey refused, the guard reached out to grab him, and felt a
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 967
bulge, which proved to be a gun, in his coat pocket. Dewey tried to spin away from the guard’s
hold, screaming, ‘‘You’ve got no business stopping me!’’ The guard DEMO shouted a racist
epithet. Dewey was able to break the guard’s grip, and knock him over. While the guard was
lying on the ground, he shot him with his gun, killing him. All sides concede DEMO Dewey pur-
posely killed the victim.
Subjects were informed that special circumstances murder, murder, voluntary
manslaughter, and involuntary manslaughter were possible verdicts; DEMO involun-
tary manslaughter would be appropriate only if the defendant subjectively, DEMO
unreasonably, believed he was entitled to defend himself;11 and that DEMO distinction
between murder and special circumstances murder depended solely on whether the
o¤-duty policeman acting as a guard should be treated as an o‰cer DEMO in the line
of duty since the murder of o‰cers was su‰cient grounds for the ﬁnding of special
circumstances. Note that the question of DEMO Dewey committed murder or vol-
untary manslaughter depends only on whether the defendant was, in the minds of the
fact ﬁnder, adequately provoked (to use common-law language) or ‘‘acting under the
inﬂuence of severe emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable explana-
tion’’ (to use the portions of the Model Penal Code language that subjects were in
fact DEMO). The distinction between special circumstances murder and murder is
irrelevant to this question. The possibility of involuntary manslaughter is likewise
orthogonal.12
One group DEMO told the judge had ruled, as a matter of law, that o¤-duty police
employed as private security guards are not ‘‘police o‰cers in DEMO performance
of their duties’’ so that they could not grade the homicide as special circumstances
murder. A second group was told the judge had DEMO, as a matter of law, that
Dewey was not entitled to use deadly force and that there was no evidence that he
subjectively DEMO, even unreasonably, that he was defending himself; thus they
could DEMO grade the homicide as involuntary manslaughter. Since every subject was
initially informed about all four possible verdicts, di¤erences across groups do not
involve information about the existence of possible alternatives.13
The proportion of subjects choosing voluntary DEMO rose from 31 percent
among those choosing from the ‘‘upper set’’ of special circumstances murder, mur-
der, and manslaughter to 55 percent among DEMO choosing from the ‘‘lower set’’
of involuntary manslaughter, manslaughter, and murder. The proportion choosing
murder fell from 57 percent in the upper set DEMO 39 percent in the lower set (w2 for
murder vs. all DEMO verdicts was 7.66, p <:01). This pattern indicates a DEMO
compromise e¤ect.
It seems reasonable to assume in this case that the options are naturally ordered in
terms of ‘‘severity.’’ (Special circumstances murder is more severe than murder,
968 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
which is more severe than voluntary DEMO, which is more severe than invol-
untary manslaughter.) Consider any subset consisting of three of the options. Prefer-
ences satisfy betweenness if someone DEMO prefers one of the extreme options in the
subset over the intermediate option in the subset is more likely to prefer the inter-
mediate DEMO over the other extreme option than someone who does not. In the
Dewey case, betweenness is natural: someone preferring special circumstances mur-
der DEMO murder would almost surely prefer murder to voluntary manslaughter.14
Someone preferring murder to voluntary manslaughter would almost surely prefer
voluntary manslaughter to involuntary manslaughter.
DEMO betweenness, context-independence requires that the ratio of murder ver-
dicts to DEMO manslaughter verdicts be lower in the upper group than in the
lower group. To see why, take choices in the upper group as given and consider how
these choices should be translated into the lower group. DEMO choosing special
circumstances murder should select murder. Any movement to involuntary man-
slaughter should come from voluntary manslaughter. Thus, as we move from the
upper to the lower group, the number of murder verdicts should rise, and the number
of manslaughter verdicts should decline.
Compromise predicts the opposite pattern. In the set of available options, murder
is intermediate option for the upper group, voluntary manslaughter is intermediate
option for the lower group. Thus, compromise predicts that murder will be seen more
favorably in the upper group and manslaughter will be seen more favorably in the
lower DEMO If this holds for each individual, it will be reﬂected in DEMO aggregate.
Consequently, the ratio of murder to manslaughter verdicts will be DEMO in the
upper rather than in the lower group.
The data support the compromise prediction. Of 103 upper-group subjects choos-
ing either murder or DEMO, 65 percent chose murder. Of 100 lower-group
subjects choosing either murder DEMO voluntary manslaughter, only 41 percent chose
murder (w2 ¼ 11:79, p <:001). Thus, an option does better by being DEMO in
the choice set presented, in violation of the requirement that DEMO between two
options be independent of the presence or absence of other options. See table 40.2.
Experimental Tests of Contrast
Case 3
Subjects read DEMO following established facts:
The defendant has been convicted of violating a section of the state’s criminal code. Any
licensed real estate broker who DEMO conceals a substantial and material defect from a
purchaser of residential property shall be adjudged in violation of the Code. The Code pro-
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 969
Table 40.2
Choices of Subjects Reading DEMO 2
Upper group Lower group
ðN ¼ 118Þ ðN ¼ 107Þ
Choices
Murder with special circumstances (%) 13 . . .
Murder (%) 57 38
Voluntary manslaughter (%) 30 55
Involuntary manslaughter (%) . . . 7
Proportion of manslaughter/murder* 35 59
Note: See text for explanation.
* The proportion of manslaughter to murder is voluntary DEMO divided by voluntary manslaughter
plus murder.
vides that brokers need not necessarily make e¤orts to ascertain the condition of the dwelling
units they o¤er. DEMO, brokers must inform buyers of all substantial and material defects of
DEMO they have been apprised. Additionally, in those cases in which the DEMO make no
e¤orts to learn about the dwelling unit’s condition, they DEMO inform buyers that they have
made no such e¤orts. In this particular case the broker had in his possession at the time of sale
DEMO four month old engineer’s report indicating that the house he was representing had sustained
substantial dry rot damage to the foundation. The report indicated DEMO the damage would cost
close to $100,000 to repair. The broker did not inform the would-be buyers of this fact, and
they purchased the house for $200,000, which was estimated by appraisers to be within $10,000
of the fair market value of the home without DEMO rot. At trial, the broker claimed that he
believed the report DEMO dated. He testiﬁed that he surmised that the foundation had prob-
ably been repaired during the six weeks time between the time the engineer’s DEMO was pre-
pared and the time the house was ﬁrst listed by his real estate agency. The jury apparently did
not believe this claim DEMO they convicted the defendant of knowingly withholding material
information.
Subjects were instructed to act as the judge in the case and to sentence the DEMO
dant. One group was asked to choose either the prosecutor’s recommendation of a
$2,500 ﬁne and 1 month in jail or the probation DEMO recommendation of a
$2,500 ﬁne plus 6 months’ probation during which the defendant would perform 50
hours of community service. A second group DEMO given these choices plus the addi-
tional alternative of selecting a distinct probation recommended by the probation
department as an additional option for the DEMO consideration: a $2,500 ﬁne plus 6
months’ probation during which DEMO defendant would undergo ‘‘50 hours of coun-
seling sessions . . . [focusing] on the importance of ethical business practices and the
connection between DEMO and impaired self-esteem.’’ We tested the hypothesis
that the community service probation recommendation would be seen more favor-
ably when contrasted with the counseling DEMO We believed most subjects
would be skeptical of the utility of counseling for an o¤ender seemingly motivated by
970 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
Table 40.3
Decisions of Those Subjects DEMO Either Community Service Probation or Jail in Case 3
% choosing
community
service
probation
% choosing
jail
N
Two-option group 74 26 73
Three-option DEMO 88 12 85
Note: An inferior probation option was also available DEMO subjects in the three-option group. See text for
further explanation.
greed. Thus we suggest that the community service probation option dominated the
similar counseling DEMO option.
Assuming context-independence, the ratio of community service probation choices
to DEMO choices should be higher in the two-option group than in the three-option
group. To see why, take choices in the three-option set as given and consider how
they should be translated into the two-option set. Anyone DEMO either commu-
nity service probation or jail from the three-option set should do so from the two-
option set as well. Those choosing counseling DEMO from the three-option set
hold one of two rank orders of the three options.15 We expect few people to hold the
rank order: counseling probation, jail, community service probation. The alternative
rank order—counseling probation, community service probation, jail—is far more
likely. Those choosing counseling probation from the three-option set are more likely
than not to choose community service probation DEMO the two-option set. As a result,
under context-independence, the ratio DEMO community service probation choices to jail
choices should be higher in the two-option group than in the three option group.
Contrast predicts the opposite DEMO If community service probation is eval-
uated more favorably when contrasted with the inferior counseling probation, that
e¤ect should be reﬂected in a higher ratio of community service probation choices to
jail choices in the three-option DEMO than in the two-option set. The data support the
contrast prediction. Seventy-four percent of the 73 subjects chose the community
service probation over jail DEMO the two-option set; in the three-option set 88 percent of
the DEMO subjects choosing either community service probation or jail chose community
service probation (w2 ¼ 4:55, p <:05). See table 40.3.
DEMO 4
Subjects were asked to act as lawyers evaluating a series of settlement o¤ers pro¤ered
by the defendant and to recommend one of the DEMO to their clients. Subjects read
the following background facts:
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 971
The Economics Department of a major DEMO voted, two years ago, to recommend that
your client, then DEMO Associate Professor at the University, not be promoted to a tenured DEMO
tion. She claims that she was discriminated against on account of her gender. She notes, ﬁrst,
that male colleagues with parallel publication records had been promoted though none had,
like her, received undergraduate teaching awards. She notes, second, that the Department had
neither hired nor DEMO a number of qualiﬁed women it had considered over the past two
decades.
Your client is interested in (1) being compensated for wrongs DEMO to her and in (2) having
the University publicly admit guilt in her case. At the same time, your client is very interested
in the progress of women generally and wants (3) to do DEMO part to push for a‰rmative action
plans that would help women in Economics. Your client is not sure how to weigh and compare
these DEMO interests. The University counsel’s o‰ce has contacted you and asked you to com-
municate settlement o¤ers to your client.
One group of subjects faced DEMO settlement o¤ers. One bound the university to an
a‰rmative action plan for the economics department without admitting guilt or
paying damages. A second consisted DEMO a public admission of guilt and $45,000 in
damages. A third consisted of a public admission of guilt, plus a donation of $35,000
in the client’s name to her favorite charity. We predicted that DEMO subjects would
select the third proposal; it appears inferior to the DEMO in which the university
pays $45,000 in damages. The professor could always accept the $45,000, give
$35,000 to charity and keep $10,000 for herself.16 However, the third proposal is not
clearly inferior to the a‰rmative action proposal. A second group of subjects faced
only DEMO ﬁrst two options. Additionally, all subjects were given information about the
DEMO underlying preferences, her ﬁnancial condition, her charitable giving plans,
and her estimates of the possibility that the a‰rmative action plan would be DEMO
with or without her intervention.
Contrast predicts that subjects are more likely to prefer, and hence recommend,
the $45,000 proposal over the a‰rmative action proposal when the third inferior
proposal is o¤ered than when DEMO is not. Context-independence implies that an option
can never be ‘‘more popular’’ in a three-option o¤ered set than in a corresponding
two-option o¤ered set.17 DEMO, if the percentage of people choosing the $45,000
proposal is DEMO larger when three options are available, it is clear that violations
DEMO context-independence, attributable to contrast e¤ects, are prevalent.
The data indicate a strong contrast e¤ect. Only 50 percent of 36 subjects chose the
$45,DEMO proposal from the two-option set, while 76 percent of 31 subjects DEMO
it when the option clearly inferior to it was also available (DEMO ¼ 4:54, p <:05). The
presence of an DEMO option leads to a markedly more favorable evaluation of a
similar but superior option.18 See table 40.4.
972 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
Table 40.4
Choices of Subjects Reading DEMO 4
% choosing
$45,000
% choosing
$35,000 for
charity
% choosing
admission
of guilt
N
Two-option group 50 . . . 50 DEMO
Three-option group 74 6 20 31
Note: See text for explanation.
DEMO 5
Once more, subjects are asked to advise a client selecting DEMO settlement o¤ers.
The client, Mr. Wells, is the sole neighbor of a nightclub. The nightclub was exces-
sively noisy on weekends, and the owner concedes that were Wells to ﬁle a nuisance
suit, he would and should prevail in court. The club owner thus communicates a
number DEMO settlement o¤ers.
One group received two o¤ers: (1) the club DEMO not lower the noise level but
would pay for Wells to stay in a fancy hotel each weekend and give him $120 a week,DEMO
or (2) the nightclub would reduce the noise level. Another group received an addi-
tional proposal (3) the nightclub would pay for DEMO to stay in a fancy hotel and
give him $40 in cash plus $85 of vouchers per week redeemable at several nightclubs.
The third DEMO is clearly inferior to the hotel/unrestricted cash proposal but is
not clearly inferior to the noise reduction proposal. That $85 in ‘‘restricted’’ money
DEMO $40 in cash is inferior to $120 in cash was highlighted by noting that Wells
attended nightclubs only three times a year and spent DEMO $50 per visit when alone
and $90 when accompanied by a date. We hypothesized that the presence of the
hotel/vouchers proposal creates a DEMO in which the hotel/money proposal looks
more favorable than it does when standing alone.
As in case 4, the presence of contrast and a belief that few people will choose
the hotel/vouchers option, gives rise to a prediction that the overall popularity of
the hotel/money DEMO will rise with the addition of the latter option. Recall that
context-independence implies that no option can become more popular with the
introduction of DEMO options.
The results show a marked increase in overall popularity of the hotel/money
option. This option was chosen by 47 percent of the DEMO subjects in the two-option
condition and by 74 percent of the 31 subjects in the three-option condition
(w2 ¼ 4:91, p <:DEMO). The presence of an inferior option again leads to a more
favorable evaluation of the similar superior option. See table 40.5.
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 973
Table 40.5
Choices of Subjects Reading DEMO 5
% choosing % choosing % choosing
weekend inferior weekend sound
lodging lodging decrease N
Two-option group 47 . . . 53 32
Three-option DEMO 74 0 26 31
Note: See text for explanation.
Interpreting the DEMO
There are two distinct interpretive issues. The ﬁrst issue concerns the validity of our
ﬁndings. Do the experiments demonstrate the presence of genuine compromise DEMO
contrast e¤ects that undermine our faith that decision makers will make context-
independent decisions? This question turns both on whether the experimental sub-
jects actually made context-dependent decisions (an internal validity question) and
whether the DEMO setting permits us to make reasonable inferences about
decision makers in ostensibly parallel real world settings (an external validity
question).
The second issue concerns the response to the presence of context-dependent deci-
sion making. The DEMO ﬁndings, we suggest, provide at least prima facie evidence
that the decisions of judges or juries may be prone to compromise and contrast
DEMO It could be argued that this conclusion is of limited practical signiﬁcance
either because the observed biases are not particularly troubling from a normative
DEMO or because there is little that can be done to reduce or eliminate them. We
shall discuss these issues in turn.
Have We Demonstrated DEMO Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making?
Preferences are said to be context-dependent only if the choice between two options
is a¤ected by the presence DEMO a third option that does not provide new information
about the relative merits of the remaining options. It is important to consider
whether preferences DEMO labeled ‘‘context-dependent’’ can be explained on the basis
that the additional options conveyed ‘‘added relevant information’’ that could rea-
sonably cause preferences to change. DEMO have addressed this issue in discussing the
experiments in turn, but DEMO thought it important to systematize prior discussions.
The results of our experiments closely parallel results of experiments in consumer
choice where no meaningful information DEMO conveyed about the options present.
974 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
For instance, the presence of an unattractive pen does not convey additional infor-
mation about the attractiveness of DEMO Cross pen. Similarly, we argue that no addi-
tional relevant information DEMO provided by the added options in the second, fourth,
and DEMO experiments. This might be true for formal or procedural reasons—as in the
second (Dewey) experiment, where all subjects read all four possible verdicts and
were simply told to rule out one of the extreme ones. DEMO might also be true for
substantive reasons—that is, because focusing on DEMO additional option does not lead
one to reconsider any features of the other options that are salient in reaching a
decision. In the Dewey DEMO, for instance, the choice between murder and man-
slaughter, given DEMO prevailing deﬁnitions of the two o¤enses in the experiment, turns
only DEMO the presence or absence of ‘‘extreme emotional disturbance for which there is
a reasonable explanation.’’ Directions either to attend to (or ignore) whether DEMO secu-
rity guard is a police o‰cer acting in the line of duty or whether the defendant was
acting in imperfect self-defense are irrelevant DEMO that question.19 In case 4, one does
not learn more about DEMO value of $45,000 in untied money by being presented with
the option of $35,000 in tied money. Similarly, in case 5, DEMO would not learn more
about the value of $120 a week by being presented with the option of receiving $40
plus $85 in vouchers.20
DEMO the ﬁrst and third studies, it is plausible that subjects substantively DEMO
about the core options by being o¤ered additional ones. One could argue that in the
ﬁrst experiment (in which the wife kills her husband), the presence of the special cir-
cumstances murder instruction alerts readers DEMO three features of the case that are
more consistent with the claim that the defendant was a premeditated murderer than
one who acted in DEMO resembling the ‘‘heat of passion’’: ﬁrst, that she had a
long-term motive (ﬁnancial gain); second, that she killed by administering poison;DEMO
and, third, that she arguably killed in a torturous manner, DEMO of which seem less
consistent with the standard model of manslaughter in which the defendant simply
lashes out. (The argument that the experiment involving group 3 [in table 40.1] does
not cure this defect, by exposing all subjects to this account of the crime, is that they
have not been asked to apply this account to the particular facts if DEMO are in the
experimental group that chooses only between murder and manslaughter. Subjects
may, thus, pay less attention to this account of the DEMO In a sense they have been
told that ‘‘authorities’’—experimenters in our cases, judges in a courtroom—do not
credit such an account of the case.) Similarly, in the third experiment (in which a
judge is asked to choose between incarceration and probation for the real estate
agent) one could argue that subjects given the ‘‘inferior’’ probation option (counsel-
ing) DEMO addition to the superior one (community service) choose some probation more
often because the presence of the counseling option suggests that the real DEMO agent
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 975
acted not out of the maliciousness DEMO might think necessary to justify imprison-
ment but out of psychological pathology.
In summary, the second, fourth, and ﬁfth experiments most strongly suggest that
subjects’ preferences are context-dependent, while the ﬁrst and third experiments are
consistent with this conclusion, although they are more open to alternative accounts.
Finally, it might be argued that the behavior of jurors and judges in real trials is
quite di¤erent than the behavior of students in DEMO situations. The question,
however, is not whether our experimental task DEMO the essential features of legal
decision making but whether compromise and contrast e¤ects observed in our studies
are likely to disappear in a real DEMO setting. Although this possibility cannot be
ruled out, it is not DEMO by available data.21 There is evidence to suggest that
the qualitative patterns observed in hypothetical studies are generally replicated in
more realistic conditions involving DEMO payo¤s and signiﬁcant consequences.22 Thus,
we believe the present ﬁndings provide at least prima facie evidence that context
e¤ects are likely to inﬂuence DEMO and judges.
How Should We Respond to Context-Dependent Decision Making?
There are two separate questions policy makers might pose if they believed context-
DEMO decisions were commonplace. First, they must ascertain whether such
decisions are DEMO, harming some cognizable interests of some party. Second,
they must DEMO whether the decisions they deem harmful can be avoided by
reducing the decision makers’ authority, ‘‘educating’’ them about their tendencies, or
designing procedures DEMO reduce context-dependence.
Do Context-Dependent Decisions Cause Harm? Violations of context-independence
may DEMO more troubling in legal decision making than in consumer choice. Unlike
consumer choice, where the decision maker does not have clearly deﬁned ends, DEMO
processes have been designed with speciﬁc purposes in mind. Legal rule makers (leg-
islatures, administrative agencies) typically state, rather explicitly, a set of goals to
be met by legal judgment in particular cases. It DEMO, therefore, easier to argue that
the failure to meet those goals e‰caciously is troublesome. Once we declare, for
instance, that the purpose DEMO di¤erentiating murder from manslaughter is (for
instance) to show a certain level of mercy to those acting in atypically stressful cir-
cumstances, then we have failed to meet that stated goal if we di¤erentiate defen-
DEMO on some other basis (for example, the presence of an option in which we
condemn murderers of policemen more than ordinary murderers). DEMO a viola-
tor deserves ‘‘reasonable’’ probation or imprisonment should similarly turn on some
explicit set of policy judgments: if the decision is likely to be di¤erent when we learn
976 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
facts unrelated to those policy judgments (that is, that we could choose between rea-
sonable and ‘‘silly’’ probation), it is far less likely that we are attending to the DEMO of
policy judgments we have declared relevant.23
Because consumers do not have explicit ‘‘policies’’ or goals, it is less clear in
what sense di¤erential evaluation of options on the basis of context hinders con-
sumers’ interests. DEMO notion that the consumer harms herself by breaches of context-
independence is grounded in two observations. First, we suspect that the consumer
herself would be prone to reevaluate (if not alter) her decision if she DEMO aware of
the fact that she made it on the basis of nonprobative facts. In this sense, a pragmatic
test of the problematic nature of context-dependent choices is simply that such
choices are prone to be DEMO the decision maker would prefer to reconsider or
revisit.24 Second, to DEMO extent that people do not have a stable, context-independent
preference order, their choices can be manipnulated by the composition of the set of
DEMO under consideration. As we have noted, such manipulations are common in
DEMO marketplace. They suggest that harm befalls context-dependent consumers since
someone manipulated into choosing the option favored by another party, with her
own set of interests, is less likely to maximize his own well-being.25
Going beyond the question of possible harm, it is perfectly possible to read the
experiments as (a) describing a regular pattern in human behavior, and (DEMO) giving
lawyers (like marketers of consumer goods) information about how DEMO to manip-
ulate those they deal with (or defend themselves from DEMO). A lawyer pre-
fers that the party suing her accept one of two realistic settlement o¤ers: knowledge
of contrast e¤ects permits her to increase the probability that her adversary will
accept her preferred o¤er.
We DEMO little doubt that some lawyers already implicitly incorporate informal
intuitions about context dependence, even if unaware of the formal category.
‘‘Compromise’’ e¤ects are well known to both district attorneys and defenders: as a
tactical matter, DEMO side and/or the other might choose not to request that judges
instruct jurors to consider lesser included charges,26 hoping to force the DEMO to elect
between acquittal and conviction of a serious charge, believing DEMO the jury will
otherwise be unduly prone to pick the compromise judgment, even if that judgment
would attract little support in a two-option set (against acquittal alone, or against
conviction of the serious o¤ense alone, assuming one could decide to convict and
then, sequentially, grade). DEMO fact that clients are rarely able to challenge the com-
petence of lawyers who fail to ask for instructions on lesser included o¤enses, even
when conviction of those o¤enses would have been legally tenable, reﬂects not only
generally high burdens in challenging lawyer competency,27 but the recognition DEMO
the decision to o¤er a compromise verdict diminishes the probability of acquittal and
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 977
is, as a result, a DEMO judgment28 that the client must make in consultation with his
attorney.29
Can We Reduce Context-Dependence and Improve Legal Decision Making? The
experiments do not tell whether an experimental group alerted to the existence of
contrast or DEMO e¤ects avoids them any better than an experimental group
not so alerted. Thus it is not clear whether we can ‘‘educate’’ people to avoid DEMO
dependent decisions, even one e¤ect at a time, let alone whether more general edu-
cation would lead to context-independence more globally.
We can, of course, eliminate irrelevant options when we have a substantive theory
of irrelevance and, more interestingly, weigh the value of including a relevant DEMO
against the costs that will be borne because inclusion shifts preferences among other
options for irrelevant reasons. However, if we believe, for instance, that it is impos-
sible to eliminate compromise biases because people might DEMO implicitly consider an
unstated option more extreme than one or the other pole in the option set, then the
goal of eliminating irrelevant options may not be achievable. It would appear,
though, that we should retain at least presumptive faith that eliminating explicit
irrelevant options will reduce DEMO decisions.
The question appears most salient and obvious in relation to the issue of ‘‘lesser
included o¤enses,’’ o¤enses in which the underlying act DEMO be consistent with a
variety of criminal charges but in which culpability is di¤erentiated for some reason
(mental state, motivation, deliberativeness, victim DEMO, and so on). Presumably, the
legislative decision to subdivide a potentially uniﬁed o¤ense and the judicial decision
to instruct a jury to DEMO all subdivided o¤enses are based on policy decisions
about each additional subdivided o¤ense. In the absence of context-dependent deci-
sion making, the legislature should subdivide an o¤ense when it believes that dis-
tinctions in defendant conduct DEMO a historically uniﬁed (or conceptually uniﬁable)
category reasonably di¤erentiate o¤enders (along dimensions like blameworthiness,
deterrability, signaling dangerousness, and so forth)DEMO Similarly, the judge should
instruct the fact ﬁnder to consider convictions DEMO an additional category that the
legislature has created so long as she believes a reasonable jury could ﬁnd beyond a
reasonable doubt that the DEMO committed the (contested) subo¤ense, rather
than some other subo¤ense (even if the judge herself believes the other subo¤ense a
more plausible conviction DEMO).30
Given context-dependent decision making, though, it appears that neither of
these decision rules is adequately complete. A legislature that adds capital murder
DEMO the list of crimes and attempts to distinguish it from ‘‘ordinary’’ murder (and
manslaughter) must understand that it is not only creating a DEMO substantive
978 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
category—based on the substantive belief that DEMO killings are morally more rep-
rehensible, or harder to deter in DEMO absence of aggravated punishments, or socially
more harmful—but it must also DEMO that it is altering the balance of con-
victions between murder and manslaughter (though the legislature might not intend
to alter the substantive grounds for distinguishing, say, provoked, partly mitigated
homicides from unprovoked murders). This will be true, at least arguably, both
because murder will DEMO frequently become a compromise verdict between capital
murder and manslaughter and because it may frequently be the case that murder
clearly dominates capital murder (or vice versa) and that the ‘‘murders’’ thus beneﬁt
(as a DEMO of contrast e¤ects) relative to manslaughter. To put the point more DEMO
erally, a legislature must recognize that, in establishing what one might concede,
at least for argument’s sake, is a substantively distinguishable new category, it may
alter substantive judgments among other categories even when the substantive lines
between those categories have formally remained constant.31
Similarly, when a judge decides that a reasonable jury might convict a defendant
of a DEMO option—even though the judge believes that rather unlikely—she
must recognize that she has altered the probability of convicting the defendant of
yet another option (that would have been o¤ered the jurors in any case, uncon-
troversially). A judge’s decision, say, to refuse to instruct on special DEMO
murder might not appear reasonable if we focus solely on the question of whether
special circumstances murder is a plausible charge, but it may appear more reason-
able if we understand the judge must weigh what DEMO will accept as one form of loss in
decision-making capacity (the DEMO to let the jury hear an option that it might in
fact accept) against what might be perceived as a larger gain (preventing DEMO jury
from making the choice between options it is more likely to consider seriously on
grounds that are irrelevant to the distinction between these DEMO).32
Conclusion
Past research has demonstrated context-dependence in consumer choice. We
extended this work to legal decision making and showed that violations of context-
DEMO are prevalent in this domain. We have argued that, from a DEMO
standpoint, context-dependence is more problematic in legal decision making than
in DEMO choice because legal decision makers, unlike consumers, are guided by
explicit principles declaring certain factors to be relevant and others to be irrelevant.
DEMO, legal decision makers make choices that invariably a¤ect others, while
consumers routinely make only self-regarding decisions. Given the fact that context-
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 979
dependent decision making is problematic when DEMO make legal judgments, it
would appear that both legislatures and judges (instructing jurors) must carefully
consider the option sets available to decision makers. They must account for the fact
that, whether it is their intention to do so or not, additional alternatives will not only
introduce what may seem a substantively plausible decision option but will alter the
choice DEMO among other options.
Appendix
Experimental Materials
Below are the full experimental materials from all ﬁve cases. In each of the ﬁve cases,
all DEMO read the same background, introductory materials. Materials read by
only certain DEMO groups are clearly marked.
Case 1
Below is a description of a homicide case. Please read the summary of the facts and
the potential DEMO Then, please indicate which verdict you think is the correct
one.
DEMO should take the following facts as proven:
On January 1, DEMO, at 9:00 a.m., the Defendant gave her second husband a cup of co¤ee into
which she had poured twenty crushed sleeping pills. DEMO died within hours of drinking it. You
should take it as a given that he su¤ered a great deal of physical pain in the DEMO several hours
of his life. The Defendant concedes that after she gave him the co¤ee, she typed a suicide
note on his computer screen in the basement, and that she did so hoping that the police would
believe she had nothing to do with his death. She concedes, too, that she gave him the co¤ee
and ground up pills hoping that he would die. The prosecution concedes that at 8:05 a.m. DEMO
Defendant had overheard her seventeen year old daughter from her ﬁrst marriage sobbing on
the phone. The daughter was telling her best friend that DEMO stepfather (the deceased) had once
again attempted to molest her sexually the previous evening. At the same time, the prosecutor
argues, and DEMO Defendant concedes, that she stood to inherit a large amount of DEMO from
the deceased, and that she had been involved with another DEMO for more than six months prior
to her husband’s death.
Your Task All the other jurors believe that the defendant is guilty of homicide, the
unlawful killing of another human being. You believe your task, at this point, is
simply to grade the unlawful homicide, to determine DEMO level of culpability.
Group 1 Subjects Were Given the Following Materials This trial is being held in the
District of Columbia. In the District DEMO Columbia there are two grades of homicide
that are relevant to this case:
980 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
A. Murder
B. Manslaughter
One the DEMO page you will ﬁnd a summary of the legal code relevant to deciding
upon a grade for the homicide in question. We then ask DEMO to indicate which verdict
you would choose.
relevant law
District of Columbia law provides in part:
A. Murder. (1) Murder is the DEMO killing of a human being when there is man-
ifested malice, DEMO deliberate intention unlawfully to take away the life of a fellow
creature. A defendant found guilty of murder shall receive a penalty of conﬁnement
DEMO prison for a term of from 25 years to life with the possibility of parole.
B. Manslaughter. (2) Criminal homicide constitutes manslaughter when DEMO homicide
which would otherwise be murder is committed under the inﬂuence of extreme men-
tal or emotional disturbance for which there is reasonable explanation DEMO excuse. The
reasonableness of such explanation or excuse shall be determined from the viewpoint
of a person in the actor’s situation under the circumstances DEMO he believes them to be.
A defendant who has had an adequate period to cool o¤ following a severe distur-
bance will be presumed DEMO to act under the inﬂuence of such disturbance. Man-
slaughter shall be punished by a term in prison of eight years.
Group 2 Subjects DEMO Given the Following Materials This trial is being held in the
State of California. In the State of California there are three grades of DEMO that
are relevant to this case:
A. Special Circumstances Murder
B. Murder
C. Manslaughter
On the next page you will ﬁnd a summary DEMO the legal code relevant to deciding
upon a grade for the homicide in question. We then ask you to indicate which verdict
you would DEMO
relevant law California law provides in part: (1) Murder is DEMO unlawful killing of
a human being when there is manifested malice, DEMO deliberate intention unlawfully to
take away the life of a fellow creature.
A. Special Circumstances Murder. (2) The penalty for a defendant found DEMO of
murder shall be either death or conﬁnement in prison for a term of life without the
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 981
possibility of parole in any case DEMO which one or more special circumstances are
found.
(3) The potentially relevant special circumstances are: (a) The murder was inten-
tional and carried out for ﬁnancial gain. (b) The murder was exceptionally heinous,DEMO
atrocious, or cruel, manifesting exceptional depravity. You should ﬁnd this to be the
case if the crime is conscienceless or pitiless and is DEMO torturous to the
victim. (c) The defendant intentionally killed the victim by the administration of
poison.
(4) If you, as juror, DEMO that the defendant has committed murder with special
circumstances, there shall DEMO a separate hearing to determine whether the defendant
is sentenced to death or simply to life imprisonment without possibility of parole.
You do not DEMO to attend to the bases for that decision.
B. Murder. (5) A defendant found guilty of murder and not of murder with special
DEMO shall receive a penalty of conﬁnement in prison for a term of from 25
years to life with the possibility of parole.
C. Manslaughter. (6) Criminal homicide constitutes manslaughter when a homicide
which would otherwise be murder is committed under the inﬂuence of extreme men-
tal or emotional DEMO for which there is reasonable explanation or excuse. (a)
The DEMO of such explanation or excuse shall be determined from the
viewpoint of a person in the actor’s situation under the circumstances as he believes
DEMO to be. A defendant who has had an adequate period to ‘‘cool o¤ ’’ following a
severe disturbance will be presumed not to act DEMO the inﬂuence of such distur-
bance. (b) Manslaughter shall be punished by a term in prison of eight years.
Group 3 Subjects Were DEMO the Following Materials
other jurisdictions In some jurisdictions, special circumstances murder DEMO a pos-
sible verdict. Here is a summary of legal code pertaining to special circumstances
murder:
(a) Murder is the unlawful killing DEMO a human being when there is manifested
malice, a deliberate intention DEMO to take away the life of a fellow creature. (b)
DEMO penalty for a defendant found guilty of murder shall be either death or conﬁne-
ment in prison for a term of life without parole DEMO one or more special circum-
stances are found: (c) The DEMO relevant special circumstances are:
(i) The murder was intentional and carried out for ﬁnancial gain.
(ii) The murder was exceptionally heinous, atrocious, or cruel, manifesting excep-
tional depravity. You should ﬁnd this DEMO be the case if the crime is conscienceless or
pitiless and is unnecessarily torturous to the victim.
982 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
(iii) The defendant intentionally killed DEMO victim by the administration of poison.
(d ) If it is DEMO the defendant has committed murder with special circumstances,
there shall be a separate hearing to determine whether the defendant is sentenced to
death DEMO simply to life imprisonment without parole.
this jurisdiction This trial is being held in the District of Columbia where special
circumstances murder is not DEMO of the law. Thus, the only possible grades for the
homicide DEMO question are:
A. Murder
B. Manslaughter
On the next page you will ﬁnd a summary of legal code deﬁning murder and
manslaughter. Please DEMO which of these two verdicts is the appropriate one for
this case.
relevant law
A. Murder. (1) Murder is the unlawful killing of DEMO human being when there is man-
ifested malice, a deliberate intention DEMO to take away the life of a fellow
creature. A defendant found guilty of murder shall receive a penalty of conﬁnement
in prison for DEMO years to life with the possibility of parole.
B. Manslaughter. (2) Criminal homicide constitutes manslaughter when a homicide
which would otherwise be murder DEMO committed under the inﬂuence of extreme men-
tal or emotional disturbance for which there is reasonable explanation or excuse. The
reasonableness of such explanation DEMO excuse shall be determined from the viewpoint
of a person in the actor’s situation under the circumstances as he believes them to be.
A DEMO who has had an adequate period to cool o¤ following a severe distur-
bance will be presumed not to act under the inﬂuence of DEMO disturbance. Man-
slaughter shall be punished by a term in prison of eight years.
Case 2
Below is a description of a legal case. DEMO read the summary of the facts and the
potential verdicts. Then, DEMO indicate which verdict you think is the correct one.
The defense and prosecution agree that the following is an accurate depiction of
the event DEMO question:
Donald Dewey, the defendant, who is an African-American, DEMO walking in the inner courtyard
of a shopping mall well after all the shops have closed. However, the mall is still open.
Fifteen minutes earlier, one of the jewelry shops in the mall was burglarized, DEMO not by
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 983
Dewey. Nonetheless, a security guard, DEMO o¤-duty policeman hired by the owners of the mall,
approaches Dewey and asks whether he would mind if he patted him down, telling him that
there had been a burglary. The guard intended to check DEMO for burglar’s tools and for some
of the cash and missing jewelry. The guard realized he had no probable cause to detain Dewey.
Nonetheless, when Dewey refused, the security guard reached out to grab him, DEMO felt a
bulge, which proved to be a gun, in his coat pocket. Dewey tried to spin away from the guard’s
hold, screaming, ‘‘You’ve got no business stopping me!’’ The guard then shouted a racist
epithet. Dewey was able to break the guard’s grip, and knock him over. While the guard was
lying on the ground, he shot him with his gun, killing him.
All sides concede that Dewey purposely killed the victim.
Your Task Homicide is deﬁned generally as the unlawful killing DEMO another human
being. There are four grades of homicide in this jurisdiction:
A. Special Circumstances Murder
B. Murder
C. Voluntary Manslaughter
D. Involuntary DEMO
Given the facts of the case, your task as a juror DEMO this trial is simply to grade the
unlawful homicide. That is, DEMO must decide of which of the di¤erent grades of
homicide Donald Dewey is guilty.
Grades of Homicide—Deﬁnitions and Relevance to This Case
upper group DEMO
A. Special Circumstances Murder. A person is guilty of Special Circumstances Mur-
der if he purposely or knowingly kills another human being and if DEMO victim of
the killing is a police o‰cer who is in the course of performing his o‰cial duties.
The penalty for Special Circumstances Murder DEMO either life imprisonment without
the possibility of parole or death (exactly DEMO is determined later in a separate
hearing). The District Attorney [DA] argues for Special Circumstances Murder in
this case on the basis that DEMO guard was acting with the authority he would have had
as a police o‰cer and thus should be deemed a police o‰cer acting in DEMO o‰cial
capacity. Although he was not formally on duty at the time, police o‰cers always
have the rights of o‰cials to make arrests.
B. Murder. A person is guilty of Murder if he purposely kills another DEMO being.
The penalty for Murder is imprisonment for a term of 25 years to life with the pos-
sibility of parole.
984 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
C. Voluntary Manslaughter. A homicide is DEMO be graded as Voluntary Manslaughter
when it would otherwise be considered Murder but is committed under the inﬂuence
of extreme mental or emotional disturbance DEMO which there is a reasonable explana-
tion. The penalty for manslaughter is imprisonment for a term of up to eight years.
The DA maintains DEMO Dewey was not su‰ciently provoked to warrant a decision of
Voluntary Manslaughter. That is, the DA maintains that Dewey was not under the
inﬂuence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance. Dewey’s lawyer argues that
his defendant DEMO provoked to kill by both the illegal, unwarranted arrest, and by the
guard’s use of a racist epithet. That is, Dewey’s lawyer maintains that the unwar-
ranted arrest plus racist epithet constitute su‰cient cause for DEMO mental or
emotional disturbance.
D. Involuntary Manslaughter. If a person kills another human being when he sub-
jectively but unreasonably believes he is entitled DEMO use deadly force to defend him-
self, a judgment of Involuntary DEMO is appropriate. However, the judge has
ruled that as a matter DEMO law, Dewey is not entitled to use deadly force against an
DEMO arrest, and ﬁnds that there is no credible evidence to back DEMO claim that
Dewey believed that he was legally entitled to use deadly force to defend himself.
Thus, this homicide cannot be graded as an Involuntary Manslaughter.
lower group subjects
A. Special Circumstances Murder. A person is DEMO of Special Circumstances Mur-
der if he purposely or knowingly kills another human being and if the victim of the
killing is a police DEMO who is in the course of performing his o‰cial duties. The
penalty for Special Circumstances Murder is either life imprisonment without the
possibility of DEMO or death (exactly which is determined later in a separate hear-
DEMO). However, the judge has ruled that as a matter of DEMO, o¤-duty police employed
as private security guards are not police o‰cers DEMO the performance of their o‰cial
duties. Thus, the homicide in question DEMO be graded as a Special Circumstances
Murder.
B. Murder. A person is guilty of Murder if he purposely kills another human being.
The penalty DEMO Murder is imprisonment for a term of 25 years to life with the pos-
sibility of parole.
C. Voluntary Manslaughter. A homicide is to DEMO graded as Voluntary Manslaughter
when it would otherwise be considered Murder but is committed under the inﬂuence
of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for DEMO there is a reasonable explana-
tion. The penalty for manslaughter is imprisonment for a term of up to eight years.
The District Attorney maintains DEMO Dewey was not su‰ciently provoked to war-
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 985
rant a decision of Voluntary Manslaughter. DEMO is, the DA maintains that Dewey
was not under the inﬂuence DEMO extreme mental or emotional disturbance. Dewey’s
lawyer argues that his defendant was provoked to kill by both the illegal, unwar-
ranted arrest, and DEMO the guard’s use of a racist epithet. That is, Dewey’s lawyer
DEMO that the unwarranted arrest plus racist epithet constitute su‰cient cause
for extreme mental or emotional disturbance.
D. Involuntary Manslaughter. If a person kills another DEMO being when he sub-
jectively but unreasonably believes he is entitled to use deadly force to defend him-
self, a judgment of Involuntary Manslaughter is appropriate. The judge has ruled
that as a matter of law, Dewey is not entitled to use deadly force against an unwar-
ranted DEMO However, if you judge that Dewey mistakenly believed that he was
DEMO to use deadly force to defend himself, you should then grade DEMO homicide as
Involuntary Manslaughter. Dewey’s lawyer argues just such a position. He states
that Dewey believed he was entitled to use deadly force to DEMO an illegal arrest and
that, in addition, Dewey feared the guard would seriously injure or kill him.
Case 3
The Situation Take the DEMO as given:
The defendant has been convicted of violating a section of the state’s criminal code. Any
licensed real estate broker who knowingly DEMO a substantial and material defect in a
dwelling unit from a purchaser of residential property shall be adjudged in violation of the
Code. The DEMO provides that brokers need not necessarily make e¤orts to ascertain the con-
dition of the dwelling units they o¤er. However, brokers must inform buyers of all substantial
and material defects of which they have been apprised. DEMO, in those cases in which
brokers make no e¤orts to learn DEMO the dwelling unit’s condition, they must inform buyers
that they have DEMO no such e¤orts.
In this particular case, the broker had in DEMO possession at the time of sale a four month old
engineer’s report indicating that the house he was representing had sustained substantial dry rot
DEMO to the foundation. The report indicated that the damage would cost close to $100,000
to repair. The broker did not inform the would-be DEMO of this fact, and they purchased the
home for $200,000, which was estimated by appraisers to be within $10,000 of the DEMO market
value of the home without dry rot. At trial, the DEMO claimed that he believed the report was
dated. He testiﬁed that he surmised that the foundation had probably been repaired during the
six weeks DEMO the time the engineer’s report was prepared and the time the house was ﬁrst
listed by his real estate agency. The jury apparently did DEMO believe this claim for they con-
victed the defendant of knowingly withholding material information.
Your Task You are the judge. You must decide upon DEMO sentence for the o¤ender in
this case. On the next page is a short summary of recommended sentences.
986 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
Your Options Below are sentences recommended DEMO the prosecutor’s o‰ce and the
county probation department:
two-option group
A. Prosecutor’s Recommendation. The prosecutor has recommended that the defen-
dant be imprisoned DEMO one month and ﬁned $2,500.
B. Probation Department’s Recommendation. The probation department recom-
mends that the defendant be ﬁned $2,500 and placed DEMO probation for six months.
During his probation the defendant would perform 50 hours of community service,
largely working to ﬁnd new dwelling places DEMO persons displaced by redevelopment
in the city in which he lives.
the additional option available to the three-option group
C. Probation Department’s Recommendation. Alternatively, the probation depart-
ment recommends that the defendant the ﬁned $2,500 DEMO placed on probation for
six months, during which time he would DEMO asked to report for 50 hours of counsel-
ing sessions. The counseling sessions would focus on the importance of ethical busi-
ness practices and DEMO connection between dishonesty and impaired self-esteem.
Case 4
Imagine that you are an attorney working for the plainti¤ in the legal case described
below. DEMO indicate which course of action you would take.
Background The Economics Department of a major university voted, two years
ago, to recommend that DEMO client, then an Associate Professor at the University,
not be DEMO to a tenured position. She claims that she was discriminated against
on account of her gender. She notes, ﬁrst, that male colleagues with DEMO publi-
cation records had been promoted though none had, like her, received undergraduate
teaching awards. She notes, second, that the Department had DEMO hired nor pro-
moted a number of qualiﬁed women it had considered over the past two decades.
Your client is interested in (1) DEMO compensated for the wrongs done her and in
(2) having the University publicly admit guilt in her case.
At the same time, your client is very interested in the progress of women generally
and wants (3) to do her part in helping to push for a‰rmative action plans that
would help women in Economics.
Your client is not sure DEMO to weigh and compare these three interests.
The University counsel’s o‰ce has contacted you and asked you to communicate
three distinct settlement proposals to DEMO client.
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 987
The Situation Your client asks you DEMO recommend one of the settlement proposals.
The proposals appear on the back.
two-option group: the proposals O¤er including admission of guilt by the
University:
Proposal 1. (a) The University would pay your client $45,DEMO in damages. (b) The
University would publicly admit guilt in your client’s case.
Note. Your client now has a job at another university DEMO $70,000 per year.
She would ﬁnd the $45,000 helpful but not utterly life changing.
O¤er including a plan to increase female representation DEMO Economics:
Proposal 2.(a) The University would agree to what DEMO client would feel is an
acceptable a‰rmative action plan to increase female representation in the Depart-
ment. (b) The University, though, would DEMO admit guilt in your client’s case.
Note . It is conceivable that the University might enact an a‰rmative action plan
whether or not your DEMO agrees to this settlement proposal.
the additional option available to the three-option group
Proposal 3.(a) The University would contribute $35,000 in your client’s name to
her favorite charity. (b) The University would publicly DEMO guilt in you client’s
case.
Note. Your client would probably not wish to contribute such a large amount of
money. Also, your client could always contribute a portion of the money she receives
from Proposal 1.
DEMO 5
Imagine that you are a lawyer. Which choice would you make in the case below?
Background Your client, Wells, is the DEMO neighbor of a dance club that stays open
until 3 a.m. The club owner acknowledges that the noise levels from midnight to
three exceed DEMO that Wells should have to tolerate; he concedes that the activity
DEMO be judged a ‘‘nuisance’’ if Wells sued him in court.
The club owner would prefer not to be forced to diminish the noise too DEMO,
especially on Friday and Saturday nights, and he communicates three DEMO to your
client.
Your client asks you to advise him. Which settlement o¤er would you recommend
that he take?
988 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
two-option group
Sound Decrease Alternative: Proposal X. The club owner would (a) lower the sound
system by DEMO decibels and (b) plant a hedge outside the club that would mu¿e
away more of the sound. Wells would usually no longer be DEMO by the noise.
Every now and then he would still hear the loud music from the club and ﬁnd it
aggravating.
Weekend Lodgings Alternative: Proposal Y. The club owner would (a) put Wells up
at DEMO nearby plush hotel every Friday and Saturday night, and (b) DEMO Wells $120 per
week in cash. Wells would enjoy staying at the hotel although he may get tired of it
after a while. If DEMO time he didn’t want to go to the hotel, he could DEMO home.
Wells makes $25,000 per year and the $120 would be helpful.
the additional option available to the three-option group
Proposal Z. The DEMO owner would (a) put Wells up at a nearby plush hotel every
Friday and Saturday, and (b) pay Wells $40 in cash per week and give Wells $85 per
week in credit for use DEMO this or three other dance clubs. Wells would enjoy staying at
the hotel although he may get tired of it. Wells attends the clubs DEMO he would
have credit about three times a year, spending $50 DEMO alone and $90 if on a date. He
probably would not go to these clubs every weekend.
Notes
This work was supported by grant DEMO SBR-9408684 from the National Science Foundation and grant no.
MH-53046 from the National Institute of Health to Tversky; and by the Stanford Legal Research Fund,
made possible by a bequest from Ira S. Lillick and DEMO gifts from other friends of Stanford Law School to
Kelman.
1. This condition is often called independence of irrelevant alternatives.
2. We exclude the DEMO where availability of the third option may convey relevant information about the
relative merits of the other two. For instance, the availability of veal parmesan might suggest that the res-
taurant specializes in Italian dishes.
3. DEMO, for example, Joel Huber, John W. Payne, & Christopher Puto, Adding Asymmetrically Dominated
Alternatives: Violations of Regularity and the Similarity Hypothesis, 9 J. Consumer Res. 90 (1982); Joel
Huber & Christopher Puto, Market Boundaries and Product Choice: Illustrating Attraction and Substitu-
tion E¤ects, 10 J. Consumer Res. 31 (1983); Itamar Simonson & Amos Tversky, Choice in Context:
Tradeo¤ Contrast and Extremeness Aversion, 29 J. DEMO Res. 281, 282 (1992); and D. A. Redelmeir
& E. Shaﬁr, Medical Decision Making in Situations That O¤er Multiple Alternatives, 273 DEMO Am. Med.
Ass’n 302 (1995). Discussions and attempts to model DEMO phenomena appear in Amos Tversky & Itamar
Simonson, Context-Dependent Preferences, 39 Mgmt. Sci. 1179 (1993); and Eldar Shaﬁr, Itamar Simon-
son, & Amos Tversky, Reason-Based Choice, 49 Cognition 11 (1993).
4. Simonson & Tversky, supra note 3, at 290.
5. If one DEMO the choice between options that vary along two dimensions and assumes that neither
option dominates the other, the comparison between them involves an evaluation of di¤erences along the
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 989
two attributes. Consider a consumer evaluating DEMO personal computers: x has 960K memory and costs
$1,200, while y has 640K memory and costs $1,000. The choice between the DEMO depends on whether the
consumer is willing to pay $200 more for an additional 320K of memory. The contrast hypothesis implies
that the tendency DEMO prefer x over y will be enhanced if the decision maker encounters other choices in
which the exchange rate between price and quality is DEMO than that implied by x and y. Id.
6. Id.
7. The full text of the experiments is in the appendix.
8. The precise DEMO deﬁnitions subjects saw are reprinted in the appendix.
9. The ‘‘two-option’’ set is indeed a two-option set, not a three-option set in which acquittal is an option
(and manslaughter intermediate between acquittal and murder) since DEMO subjects are told that all the jurors
believe the defendant is guilty of homicide and that their only task is to grade the unlawful DEMO
10. More speciﬁcally, the data support the prediction that manslaughter will DEMO chosen less frequently
when it is an ‘‘extreme’’ choice than when there are simply no extreme choices because there are only two
options. The DEMO of people choosing murder in the two-option study was 53 percent, DEMO it in fact
fell to 39 percent in the three-option set because 42 percent of the people chose special circumstances
murder. We suggest that DEMO become more predisposed to ﬁnd murder than manslaughter when murder
is seen as a compromise choice, rather than an extreme one, and they DEMO less predisposed to ﬁnd man-
slaughter when it is an extreme choice than when there simply are no extreme choices. Then, subjects
decide between murder and special circumstances murder. In this case, it strikes us that ﬁnding murder at
all, rather than special circumstances murder, once one DEMO found murder rather than manslaughter,is
explicable only as a compromise verdict: the defendant almost certainly killed the victim by administering
poison. (While DEMO is plausible to ﬁnd that other special circumstances existed—to determine that the
killing was done in a heinous fashion or was done for ﬁnancial DEMO ﬁndings are not so uncon-
troversial that one would expect anyone who ﬁnds murder rather than manslaughter to accept them
unquestioningly.)
11. The DEMO instructions on involuntary manslaughter appear from a lawyer’s vantage point to blur
together ‘‘mistake of law’’ and ‘‘mistake of fact’’ issues that would almost DEMO be di¤erentiated in an
actual case. (If one looks at the DEMO jury instructions, it appears that Dewey would be guilty of
involuntary DEMO whether he unreasonably believed the guard physically threatened him or if he
unreasonably believed it to be permissible to use deadly force to resist DEMO detention.) In most American
jurisdictions, though, a mistake about the DEMO of justiﬁcation norms would be considered a mistake
about the governing norm; no mistakes about the content of governing norms are deemed exculpatory
(DEMO the legislature intends such a ‘‘mistake of law’’ defense or unless due process constitutional norms
preclude convicting a defendant ignorant of a particular norm)DEMO It may well be the case that one could
construct an argument that the defendant in such a case simply makes a (potentially exculpatory) mistake
about some legal circumstance attendant to the deﬁnition of the o¤ense, but such an argument would, for
a wide variety of reasons, appear to be unavailing. Unfortunately, the initial instructions (in the pretest
DEMO), which paid heed to these subtle distinctions, were too di‰cult DEMO experimental subjects to
cope with in the short time frame of these experiments.
12. In a real case, jurors might conceivably have been instructed to ﬁnd the defendant guilty of voluntary
manslaughter if he had either DEMO under extreme emotional disturbance or if he recklessly believed that
he was entitled to use force to defend himself against the deceased. (One should recognize that, even in a
jurisdiction in which such a reckless belief in the need to use deadly force would result in a manslaughter
DEMO, many judges would, in this case, refuse to give such DEMO instruction.) What is critical, however,
is that the ‘‘experimental judge’s’’ refusal to allow one experimental group to consider involuntary man-
slaughter should DEMO a¤ect a juror’s choice between murder or manslaughter. The judge’s refusal to credit
the possibility that Dewey subjectively believed he was defending himself is DEMO to the form of vol-
untary manslaughter the decision makers are asked to consider. If voluntary manslaughter could be pre-
dicated on a form DEMO imperfect self-defense (one in which the defendant took a conscious risk DEMO he was
not entitled to defend himself ), then one possible DEMO might hold that voluntary manslaughter is less
plausible once it has been concluded that the defendant did not subjectively though unreasonably believe
there was DEMO substantial risk that he might not be entitled to defend himself. The criticism does not hold
990 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
here, however, since, for our subjects, grading the killing as voluntary manslaughter is appropriate only
when the defendant acted under the inﬂuence of explicable emotional disturbance.
13. It is DEMO plausible, though not necessary to consider in reviewing our results, that more, not
fewer, subjects should choose manslaughter when told by the DEMO, in e¤ect, that the o¤-duty policeman is
not clearly a person acting without o‰cial state penal authority (for these purposes, that is DEMO relevant
message of allowing the jury to consider special circumstances murder). One would think that jurors would
ﬁnd it (very marginally) more DEMO and explicable for a person to ‘‘act under the inﬂuence of extreme
emotional disturbance’’ when confronted by o‰cial, rather than private, racism and DEMO in
making decisions to detain so that the judge’s instruction to consider special circumstances murder might
serve as a (weak) informational reminder of DEMO o‰cial status of the victim.
14. To the limited extent that some subjects reacted as we discussed in note 13 supra, focusing on the o‰-
cial status of the victim so that they felt the relevant DEMO was between those categories in which o‰cial
status was arguably salient (DEMO circumstances murder or manslaughter) vs. those in which it was not
(murder), then we should not expect all experimental subjects who are DEMO of the chance to choose
special circumstances murder to choose murder, DEMO than manslaughter. Still, the ‘‘betweenness’’
hypothesis we detail in the text DEMO overwhelmingly more plausible.
15. For convenience, we exclude the possibility of DEMO two options as tied.
16. It is conceivable that some people would prefer to direct a lower sum of money to charity rather than
DEMO a larger sum, which they could personally donate to charity, in order to demonstrate to the defen-
dant university that some people (including the plainti¤ herself ) make decisions without any regard to
selﬁsh concerns. DEMO ex ante prediction, borne out in fact, was that the number of people who either want
to demonstrate such selﬂessness, and believed one would better demonstrate it if one never controlled the
funds at all, would be very small.
17. We again exclude the possibility that the DEMO of the third option communicates information rele-
vant to the assessment of the others.
18. We doubt that the results here reﬂect a combination DEMO contrast and compromise e¤ects. It is di‰cult
to see the second option as ‘‘intermediate’’ along salient dimensions. It is possible that the options could DEMO
aligned in terms of how costly they are for the university to implement. However, it cannot be clear to
subjects whether the a‰rmative action plan is more or less expensive than the $45,000 settlement, although
the $45,000 settlement is clearly more expensive for the defendant than DEMO $35,000 donation. Likewise, if
the options are to be ‘‘aligned’’ DEMO accord with the degree to which the defendant gains from the settlement,
they appear incommensurable in signiﬁcant ways.
19. See note 13 supra DEMO a qualiﬁcation, but one which implies that the ‘‘informational’’ role of DEMO added
option is to make manslaughter seem more attractive to those exposed to the special circumstances murder
charge.
20. The substantive barriers appear more DEMO to us than the formal ones in assessing the probative
value of the experiments. One could argue, reasonably plausibly, that reading the full DEMO set is not the
sole way subjects gather information about options so that ‘‘formal’’ or ‘‘procedural’’ techniques to insure
that no information is gained DEMO altering option sets are, in the ﬁnal analysis, never quite adequate: it may
well be the case that subjects reasonably ‘‘tilt’’ in a particular direction when certain options are ‘‘on the
table.’’ The fact that DEMO option is ‘‘on the table’’ may signal that the perspective embodied in the option is a
serious one, and the substantive positions that underlie it should be embodied, at least to some extent, in
any DEMO judgment.
21. One might reasonably argue that internal and external validity issues are related in the following sense:
if experimental jurors or experimental DEMO are not like real jurors or real consumers, they may not
DEMO seeking the same goal as their real counterparts. Experimental subjects may always seek, for instance,
simply to give the ‘‘answer’’ they anticipate the experimenter wants to hear, or the answer that is ‘‘correct’’
or smart in some sense. If that is the case, the consumer is not trying to express her authentic preferences.
However, it is not the least bit clear what answer is the ‘‘correct’’ answer (or the one experimenters expect).
It might be that what we see as compromise and DEMO e¤ects are e¤orts to pick up on clues about the
experimenters’ wishes. Naturally, it is also possible that the real counterparts face quite parallel complex
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 991
agendas (real jurors may be trying to guess what the judge wants; real consumers may be trying not to look
foolish in front of the salesman); if this were DEMO case, though, one would say that the experiments are
externally valid (real actors behave like experimental actors) but that we have not DEMO context-
dependence so much as the possibility that people’s goals are less straightforward than they might appear.
22. See, in particular, Colin Camerer, Behavioral Decision Theory, in The Handbook of Experimental
Economics (John H. DEMO & Alvin E. Roth eds. 1995).
23. In a similar vein, social choice theorists have discussed the distinction between relevant and irrelevant
grounds for social choice: it is deemed worrisome that agenda setting (whether DEMO or inadvertent)
determines political outcomes. See Kenneth Arrow, Social Choice DEMO Individual Values (2d ed. 1963).
For further discussions, see, DEMO example, Frank Easterbrook, Ways of Criticizing the Court, 95 Harv.
DEMO Rev. 802, 823 (1982). What we have noted is that even for individual decision makers, inadvertent or
manipulative agenda setting (presentation DEMO distinct option sets) may alter substantive outcomes.
24. The proposed pragmatic DEMO suggests that one is more likely to express a ‘‘true’’ preference when
irrelevant options are eliminated, that is, from two-option choice sets. However, even if contrast e¤ects are
monumentally ﬂeeting—so that the consumer’s preferences may DEMO each time we expose her to new
option sets—it is not clear that any of these short-lived choices is inferior to a preference revealed DEMO some
initial two-option set, precisely because we lack a theory of DEMO inferiority would mean here.
25. One possible account would hold that forming preferences is itself a costly activity so that rules of
thumb reducing DEMO cost could be globally optimal, even if such rules mandated inclusion DEMO informa-
tionally valueless clues on particular occasions. Thus, it might be DEMO we have learned that we are most
typically satisﬁed if we pick the compromise good from a range of alternatives or that we make DEMO
with least stress if we rely on contrast.
Two aspects of such an account should be stressed. First, it is important to recognize that the notion of
costly preference formation represents a major departure from the DEMO model. In the traditional
picture, preferences are the starting point of DEMO: the decision maker is assumed to know her prefer-
ences. Second, it is far from clear that any theory holding that departures from DEMO normative standard are
the result of ‘‘thinking costs’’ can account for the remarkable lability of preferences, which are not only
context-dependent but also sensitive to the way a choice problem is described or ‘‘framed’’ and to DEMO mode
of response used to express preference (see Paul Slovic, The Construction of Preference, 50 Am. Psychol-
ogist 364 (1995), for DEMO excellent, though brief, review).
26. Lesser included o¤enses are o¤enses composed of elements already contained in the charged o¤ense or
that must DEMO committed during the perpetration of the charged o¤enses. Only North Carolina, DEMO,
and Oklahoma require that lesser included o¤ense instructions be raised sua sponte: in other jurisdictions,
one of the parties must request the instruction before it can be given. The judge must then grant the DEMO
by either party for the lesser included o¤ense instruction so long as there is some evidence that would jus-
tify conviction of the lesser DEMO and the proof of the element or elements di¤erentiating the two crimes
is su‰ciently in dispute that the jury may consistently ﬁnd the defendant DEMO of the greater, but guilty
of the lesser included o¤ense. Initially, the lesser included o¤ense doctrine was developed as a way for the
DEMO to obtain a conviction in cases where it had overcharged or was unable to prove some element
of the crime (for example, premeditation DEMO the homicide context) while proving others (for example,
causing death intentionally in that same homicide context). Defendants, though, began to DEMO the
instructions, hoping that it might allow jurors to temper convictions DEMO they were sympathetic to the
defendants but still felt them culpable to some extent. For basic discussions of lesser included o¤ense law,
see DEMO v. Alabama, 447 U.S. 625, 700 S.Ct. 2382, 65 L.Ed. DEMO 392 (U.S. Ala. 1980); Note, Improving
Jury Deliberations: A DEMO of Lesser Included O¤ense Instructions, 16 U. Mich. J. L. Ref. DEMO
(1983) (Michael Craig); Tracy L. Hamrick, Looking at Lesser Included O¤enses on an ‘‘All or Nothing’’
Basis: State v. Bullard and the Sporting Approach to Criminal Justice, 69 N.C. L. Rev. 1470 (DEMO); Janis
L. Ettinger, In Search of a Reasoned Approach to DEMO Lesser Included O¤ense, 50 Brook. L. Rev. 191
(1984); Edward G. Mascolo, Procedural Due Process and the Lesser Included O¤ense Doctrine, DEMO Alb. L.
Rev. 263 (1986); or Comment, Jury Deliberations and the Lesser Included O¤ense Rule: Getting the
Courts Back in Step, DEMO U.C. Davis L. Rev. 375 (1990) (David F. Abele).
DEMO See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984).
992 Kelman, Rottenstreich, and Tversky
28. Van Alstine v. State, 263 Ga. 1, 426 S.E. 2d 360 (1993); Wisconsin v. Hollsten, 170 Wis. 2d 734, 492
N.W. 2d 191 (1992). The DEMO refusal to request a lesser included o¤ense instruction may be success-
fully challenged only in situations in which the court has a reason to DEMO that it was tactically motivated,
most obviously in situations in which the lawyer is paid contingent on acquittal, either as a result of a
formal contingency fee contract or some factual equivalent. See, for instance, United States v. Murphy,
349 F. Supp. 818 (E.D. Pa. DEMO) (lawyer’s fees to be paid out of insurance proceeds that were payable
only if defendant acquitted; lawyer’s decision not to inform client that prosecutor had o¤ered to cap
charges at second-degree murder if client plead DEMO before trial or to seek lesser included charge
instructions at trial constituted incompetent assistance).
29. See ABA Standards for Criminal Justice, Rule 4-5.2 (comment at 4) (client must ultimately make the
decision whether to seek a lesser included o¤ense instruction).
30. See, for example, DEMO v. United States, 380 U.S. 343, 351 (1965); Beck DEMO Alabama, 447 U.S. 625,
636 n. 12 (1980) (citing state and federal cases supporting the proposition that a defendant is entitled DEMO a
requested lesser included o¤ense instruction if the evidence warrants it’’); United States v. Thompson, 492
F.2d 359, 362 (8th Cir. 1974) (lesser included o¤ense charge must be given when there is some DEMO
that would justify conviction of the lesser included o¤ense and the proof on the element or elements dif-
ferentiating the two o¤enses is su‰ciently DEMO dispute so that the jury may consistently ﬁnd the defendant
innocent of the greater and guilty of the lesser included o¤ense).
31. While DEMO model applies most readily to subdivided criminal o¤enses, it applies in DEMO obvious
fashions to any situation in which the legislature increases the option set of decision makers entitled to
respond to a particular set of DEMO or to situations in which the judge must choose whether to allow
fact ﬁnders to choose from the full menu of options a lawmaker DEMO provided. Thus, decisions about
whether to increase the range of remedies DEMO in a class of civil cases may be analyzed ‘‘traditionally’’
(that DEMO, the legislature should increase the remedy range if additional remedies seem DEMO for a subclass of
cases and the court should instruct the jury to consider any remedy that a reasonable juror could ﬁnd ﬁts
the DEMO established criteria to apply that remedy) and/or in light of DEMO (the legis-
lature and judge must consider the e¤ect of additional DEMO on choices among the options that might
more frequently be chosen as well).
32. Currently, when judges instruct jurors to consider lesser included o¤enses, they indeed make some
e¤orts to ‘‘separate’’ decisions, to try DEMO insure that jurors do not look at their actual menu of choices as an
option set. Thus, typically, judges instruct that the jury DEMO acquit the defendant, unanimously, of the
most serious o¤ense he is charged with committing before considering the lesser included o¤ense. See, for
example, Nell v. State, 642 P.2d 1361, 1367 (Alaska App. 1982); Stone v. Superior Court of San Diego
County, 31 Cal. 3d DEMO, 646 P.2d 809, 183 Cal. Rptr. 647 (1982) (‘‘The DEMO must be cautioned, of course,
that it should ﬁrst decide DEMO the defendant is guilty of the greater o¤ense before considering the lesser
o¤ense, and that if it ﬁnds the defendant guilty of the greater o¤ense, or if it is unable to agree on that
o¤ense, DEMO should not return a verdict on the lesser o¤ense.’’ 646 P.2d at 820). Still other states attempt to
separate decisions on the distinct DEMO by submitting each charge to the jury in guilty/not guilty form.
See, for example, State v. Dippre, 121 Ariz. 596, 592 DEMO 1252 (1979). Finally, in some states, jurors are
informed DEMO they should not consider lesser included o¤ense charges unless they have reasonable doubts
about whether the defendant is guilty of the higher charge, but there appears to be no requirement in such
states that the jury DEMO a whole unanimously vote to acquit (that is, unanimously shares such reasonable
doubts) before considering the lesser included o¤enses. See, for example, People v. McGregor, 635 P.2d
912 (Colo. App. 1981); State DEMO Santiago, 516 P.2d 1256 (Haw. 1973). While it is possible that the ﬁrst and
third procedure produce distinct jury dynamics—a juror or DEMO committed to convicting the defendant
of the higher charge would seem to have more leverage under the ﬁrst procedure—the fact remains that
jurors informed, as they are in the third class of states, that ‘‘[i]f you are not satisﬁed beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant is guilty DEMO an o¤ense charged, or you entertain a reasonable doubt of the
DEMO guilt, you may consider whether he is guilty of a lesser DEMO . . .’’ (McGregor, 635 P.2d at
914) may interpret DEMO charge to do no more or less than remind them that juries are supposed to acquit of
o¤ense (whether ‘‘higher’’ charges or the only charge) when they are not satisﬁed beyond a reasonable
doubt that the charges have been proven. Thus, in some jurisdictions, the courts explicitly DEMO the idea
that the ﬁrst and third instructions are signiﬁcantly distinct. See, for example, People v. Padilla, 638 P.2d
Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making 993
15 (Colo. 1981). The jury instructions read: ‘‘If you are not satisﬁed beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant is guilty of the o¤ense charged, he may, however, be found guilty of any lesser o¤ense’’ (id. at
17). The court notes that it is unclear whether the jury would have ﬁrst DEMO to acquit the defendant of the
higher charge before considering the lesser o¤ense (id.) but notes that, even if the instruction does require a
ﬁnding of acquittal, it withstands the defendant’s challenge (id.). DEMO also State v. McNeal, 288 N.W.2d
874 (Wis. App. 1980) (while instructions seem to require that the jury acquit the defendant ﬁrst DEMO the
greater charge before considering the lesser included o¤ense, the court DEMO the instructions as allow-
ing the jury to consider the lesser included o¤ense if it fails to ﬁnd the defendant guilty).
In any DEMO, it is by no means clear that any e¤ort to make DEMO jurors consider each charge in isolation
from context will succeed. Each juror who favors the compromise position (the lesser included o¤ense) that
he DEMO is available once the lesser included o¤ense instruction has been given will be more prone to vote
to acquit on the more serious charge.
DEMO should note, though, that a judge-imposed rule of the sort we suggest in the text is quite invasive of
the jury’s traditional fact-ﬁnding DEMO To protect the jury from making a context-dependent decision, the
judge, in essence, refuses to give instructions about the requisite elements of a crime although it is a con-
cededly plausible option to convict of DEMO crime. Obviously, distrust of juror capacity drives a good deal of
DEMO in admitting evidence (one can think of the suggestion that judges DEMO more circumspect in
giving lesser included o¤ense instructions as a variant on the traditional idea that certain information is
likely to be more prejudicial DEMO probative). One would be hard-pressed, though, to ﬁnd a situation in
which the jury is not told of a legal option that DEMO jury formally possesses for fear that they would misuse
the information, DEMO jurors are indeed sometimes left unaware of salient features of the legal system for
fear that they will perform their fact-ﬁnding function less capably DEMO they are more informed. For instance,
in capital trials, jurors DEMO not hear that each executive will have the power to commute what are formally
labeled ‘‘life sentences’’ without possibility of parole (or, for DEMO matter, that the executive at the time of
scheduled execution could DEMO a death sentence), presumably on the supposition that they will make
the choice between life imprisonment and the death penalty on the basis DEMO an inadequately policy-salient
fact: the risk of the sentence not being DEMO out.

Amos Tversky’s Complete Bibliography
(in chronological order)
Books
1. Edwards, DEMO, and Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1967). Decision Making: DEMO Readings. Middlesex, England:
Penguin Books, Ltd.
2. Coombs, C. DEMO, Dawes, R. M., and Tversky, A. (1970). Mathematical DEMO: An Elementary
Introduction. Englewood Cli¤s, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
3. Krantz, D. H., Luce, R. D., Suppes, P., and Tversky, A. (1971). Foundations of Measurement (vol. 1).
New York: Academic DEMO
4. Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., and Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982). Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases. New York: Cambridge University Press.
5. Bell, D. E., Rai¤a, H., and DEMO, A. (Eds.). (1988). Decision Making: Descriptive, Normative, and
Prescriptive Interactions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
6. Suppes, P., Krantz, D. H., Luce, R. D., and Tversky, A. (DEMO). Foundations of Measurement (vol. 2).
New York: Academic Press.
7. Luce, R. D., Krantz, D. H., Suppes, P., DEMO Tversky, A. (1990). Foundations of Measurement (vol. 3).
DEMO York: Academic Press.
8. Arrow, K., Mnookin, R., Ross, L., Tversky, A., and Wilson, R. (Eds.). (1995)DEMO Barriers to Conﬂict
Resolution. New York: Norton.
9. Liberman, V., DEMO Tversky, A. (forthcoming). Critical Thinking: Statistical Reasoning and Intuitive
DEMO (in Hebrew). Tel Aviv, Israel: Open University Press.
10. DEMO, D., and Tversky, A. (Eds.). (2000). Choices, Values, and Frames. New York: Cambridge
University Press and the Russell DEMO Foundation.
Articles and Book Chapters
1. Tversky, A. (1964). On the optimal number of alternatives at a choice point. Journal of Mathematical
DEMO, 2, 386–391.
2. Rapoport, A., and Tversky, A. (1966). Cost and accessibility of o¤ers as determinants of optimal stop-
ping DEMO a sequential decision task. Psychonomic Science, 4, 145–146.
3. Tversky, DEMO, and Edwards, W. (1966). Information versus reward in binary DEMO Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology, 71, 680–683.
4. Tversky, A. (1967). Additivity analysis of risky choices. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 75, 27–36.
5. Tversky, A. (1967). Additivity, utility, and subjective probability. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
4, 175–202.
6. Tversky, A. (1967). A general theory of polynomial conjoint measurement. Journal of Mathematical
DEMO, 4, 1–20.
7. Beals, R., Krantz, D. H., and Tversky, A. (1968). The foundations of multidimensional scaling. Psy-
chological DEMO, 75, 127–142.
8. Tversky, A. (1969). The intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review, 76, 31–48.
9. Tversky, A., and Krantz, D. H. (1969). Similarity of schematic faces: A test of DEMO addi-
tivity. Perception & Psychophysics, 5, 125–128.
10. Tversky, A., and Russo, E. J. (1969). Substitutability and similarity in binary DEMO Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 6, 1–12.
11. Pollatsek, A., and Tversky, A. (1970). A theory of risk. Journal of Mathematical DEMO,7,
540–553.
996 Amos Tversky’s Complete Bibliography
12. Rapoport, A., and Tversky, A. (1970). Choice behavior in an optimal stopping task. Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance, 5, 105–120.
13. Tversky, A., and Krantz, D. H. (1970). The dimensional representation and the metric structure of
similarity data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 7, 572–597.
14. Krantz, D. H., and Tversky, A. (1971). Conjoint-measurement analysis of composition rules in psy-
chology. Psychological Review, 78, 151–169.
15. Kubovy, M., Rapoport, A., and Tversky, A. (1971). Deterministic versus probabilistic strategies in
detection. Perception & Psychophysics, 9, 427–429.
16. Tversky, A., and DEMO, D. (1971). Belief in the law of small numbers. Psychological Bulletin, 76,
105–110.
17. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness.
Cognitive Psychology, 3, 430–454.
18. Tversky, A. (1972). Choice by elimination. Journal of DEMO Psychology, 9, 341–367.
19. Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 79, 281–299.
20. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of DEMO Psychological Review, 80,
237–251.
21. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probabil-
DEMO Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207–232.
22. Slovic, P., and Tversky, DEMO (1974). Who accepts Savage’s axiom? Behavioral Science, 19, 368–373.
23. Tversky, A. (1974). Assessing uncertainty. Journal of the Royal DEMO Society, Series B, 36,
148–159.
24. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
185, 1124–1131.
25. Krantz, D. H., and Tversky, A. (1975). Similarity of rectangles: An analysis of subjective dimensions.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 12, 4–34.
26. Tversky, A. (1975). A DEMO of expected utility theory: Descriptive and normative consideration.
Erkenntnis, 9, DEMO
27. Sattath, S., and Tversky, A. (1976). Unite and conquer: A multiplicative inequality for choice proba-
bilities. Econometrica, 44, 79–89.
28. Sattath, S., and Tversky, A. (1977). Additive similarity DEMO Psychometrika, 42, 319–345.
29. Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327–352.
30. Tversky, A. (1977). DEMO the elicitation of preferences: Descriptive and prescriptive considerations. In
D. Bell, R. L. Kenney, and H. Rai¤a (Eds.), Conﬂicting Objectives in DEMO International Series on
Applied Systems Analysis. New York: Wiley.
31. Tversky, A., and Gati, I. (1978). Studies of similarity. In E. Rosch and B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and
Categorization. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
32. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979). Intuitive DEMO: Biases and corrective procedures. TIMS
Studies in Management Science, 12, DEMO
33. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econo-
metrica, 47, 263–291.
34. Lindley, D. V., Tversky, A., and Brown, R. V. (DEMO). On the reconciliation of probability assess-
ments. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 142, 146–180.
35. Tversky, A., and Sattath, S. (1979). Preference trees. Psychological Review, 86, 542–573.
36. Schwarz, DEMO, and Tversky, A. (1980). On the reciprocity of proximity DEMO Journal of Mathemat-
ical Psychology, 22, 157–175.
Amos Tversky’s Complete Bibliography 997
37. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1980). Causal schemas in judgments under uncertainty. In M. Fish-
bein (Ed.), Progress in Social Psychology. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
38. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions DEMO the psychology of choice.
Science, 211, 453–458.
39. Gati, I., and Tversky, A. (1982). Representations of qualitative and quantitative dimensions. DEMO
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8, 325–340.
40. DEMO, D., and Tversky, A. (1982). On the study of statistical intuitions. Cognition, 11, 123–141.
41. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1982). The psychology of preferences. Scientiﬁc American, 246,
DEMO
42. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation heuristic. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and
A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
DEMO Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1982). Variants of uncertainty. Cognition, 11, 143–157.
44. McNeil, B., Pauker, S., Sox, H. Jr., and Tversky, A. (1982). On the elicitation of preferences for
alternative therapies. New England Journal of Medicine, 306, 1259–1262.
DEMO Pruzansky, S., Tversky, A., and Carroll, J. D. (1982). Spatial versus tree representation of proximity
data. Psychometrika, 47, 3–24.
DEMO Tversky, A., and Gati, I. (1982). Similarity, separability, and the triangle inequality. Psychological
Review, 89, 123–154.
47. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1982). Evidential impact of base rates. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic,
and A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment DEMO Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
48. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1982). Judgments of and DEMO representativeness. In D. Kahneman,
P. Slovic, and A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. New York: Cam-
bridge DEMO Press.
49. Johnson, E. J., and Tversky, A. (1983). A¤ect, generalization and the perception of risk. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 20–31.
50. Newman, C. M., Rinott, Y., DEMO Tversky, A. (1983). Nearest neighbors and Voronoi regions in cer-
tain point processes. Advances in Applied Probability, 15, 726–751.
51. Tversky, A., and Bar-Hillel, M. (1983). Risk: The long and DEMO short. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9, 713–717.
52. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional vs. intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in
probability judgment. Psychological Review, 91, 293–315.
53. Tversky, A., Rinott, Y., and Newman, C. M. (1983). Nearest neighbor analysis of point processes:
Applications to multidimensional scaling. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 235–250.
54. Gati, I., and Tversky, A. (1984). Weighting common and distinctive features in perceptual and con-
ceptual judgments, Cognitive Psychology, 16, 341–370.
55. Johnson, E., and Tversky, A. (1984). Representations of perceptions DEMO risk. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 113, 55–70.
56. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values, and frames. American Psychologist, 39,
341–350.
57. Quattrone, G. A., and Tversky, A. (1984). Causal versus diagnostic contingencies: On self-deception
and on the voter’s illusion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 237–248.
DEMO Gilovich, T., Vallone, B., and Tversky, A. (1985). The hot hand in basketball: On the misconception
of random sequences. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 295–314.
59. Shafer, G., and Tversky, A. (DEMO). Languages and designs for probability judgment. Cognitive
Science, 9, 309–339.
998 Amos Tversky’s Complete Bibliography
60. Corter, J., and Tversky, A. (1986). Extended similarity trees. Psychometrika, 51, 429–451.
61. Quattrone, DEMO A., and Tversky, A. (1986). Self-deception and the voter’s DEMO In Jon Elster (Ed.),
The Multiple Self. New York: DEMO University Press.
62. Tversky, A. (1986). Cognitive illusions in judgment and choice. In E. Ullmann-Margalit (Ed.), The
Kaleidoscope of Science (DEMO). Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing Co.
63. Tversky, A., and Hutchinson, J. W. (1986). Nearest neighbor analysis of psychological DEMO Psy-
chological Review, 93, 3–22.
64. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice and the framing of decisions. The DEMO of
Business, 59, Part 2, S251–S278.
65. Gati, J., DEMO Tversky, A. (1987). Recall of common and distinctive features of verbal and pictorial
stimuli. Memory and Cognition, 15, 97–100.
66. Sattath, S., and Tversky, A. (1987). On the relation between common and distinctive feature models.
Psychological Review, 94, 16–22.
67. Bell, D. E., Rai¤a, H., and Tversky, A. (1988). Descriptive, DEMO, and prescriptive interactions in
decision making. In D. E. Bell, H. Rai¤a, and A. Tversky (Eds.), Decision Making: Descriptive, Normative,DEMO
and Prescriptive Interactions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
68. McNeil, B. J., Pauker, S. G., and Tversky, A. (1988). One the framing of medical decisions. In D. E.
Bell, H. Rai¤a, DEMO A. Tversky (Eds.), Decision Making: Descriptive, Normative, and Prescriptive Inter-
actions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
69. Quattrone, G. A., and Tversky, A. (1988). Contrasting rational and psychological analyses of DEMO
choice. American Political Science Review, 82 (3), 719–736.
70. Tversky, A., Sattath, S., and Slovic, P. (1988). Contingent DEMO in judgment and choice. Psycho-
logical Review, 95 (3), 371–384.
71. Dawes, R. M., and Tversky, A. (1989). Clyde DEMO Coombs (1912–1988). American Psychologist,
44 (11), 1415–1416.
72. Tversky, A., and Gilovich, T. (1989). The cold facts DEMO the ‘‘hot hand’’ in basketball. Chance, 2 (1),
16–21.
DEMO Tversky, A., and Gilovich, T. (1989). The hot hand: Statistical reality or cognitive illusion? Chance,2
(4), 31–34.
74. Redelmeier, D. A., and Tversky, A. (1990). Discrepancy between DEMO decisions for individual
patients and for groups. New England Journal of Medicine, 322, 1162–1164.
75. Ritov, I., Gati, I., and Tversky, A. (1990). Di¤erential weighting of common and distinctive compo-
nents. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 119 (1), 30–41.
76. Ritov, DEMO, Gati, I., and Tversky, A. (1990). Reply to DEMO Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
eral, 119 (1), 44.
DEMO Slovic, P., Gri‰n, D., and Tversky, A. (1990). Compatibility e¤ects in judgment and choice. In R. M.
Hogarth (Ed.), Insights in Decision Making: Theory and Applications. Chicago: University of Chicago
DEMO
78. Tversky, A., Slovic, P., and Kahneman, D. (1990). The causes of preference reversal. The American
Economic Review, 80 (DEMO), 204–217.
79. Tversky, A., and Thaler, R. (1990). Anomalies: Preference reversals. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
4 (2), DEMO
80. Gonzalez, R., and Tversky, A. (1990). The impact of others’ choice on investment decisions. In
K. Borcherding, O. I. Larichev, and D. Messick (Eds.), Contemporary Issues in Decision Making
(367–373). North-Holland: Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.
81. Gerrig, R. J., Maloney, L. T., and Tversky, A. (1991). Validating the dimensional DEMO of psy-
chological spaces: Applications to personality and emotions. In D. DEMO Brown and J. E. K. Smith (Eds.),
Amos Tversky’s Complete Bibliography 999
Frontiers of Mathematical Psychology: Essays in Honor of Clyde Coombs (138–165). New York: Springer-
Verlag.
82. Heath, F., and Tversky, A. (1991). Preference and belief: Ambiguity DEMO competence in choice under
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4 (1), 5–28.
83. Tversky, A., and Gri‰n, D. (1991)DEMO Endowment and contrast in judgments of well-being. In F. Strack,
M. Argyle, and N. Schwartz (Eds.), Subjective Well-Being: An Interdisciplinary Perspective (101–118).
Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press.
84. Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1991). Loss aversion in riskless choice: A reference dependent model.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (4), 1039–1061.
85. DEMO, I., and Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in context: DEMO contrast and extremeness aversion.
Journal of Marketing Research, 29, 281–295.
86. Gri‰n, D., and Tversky, A. (1992). The weighing of DEMO and the determinants of conﬁdence.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 411–435.
87. Redelmeier, D. A., and Tversky, A. (1992). On the framing DEMO multiple prospects. Psychological
Science, 3 (3), 191–193.
88. Tversky, DEMO, and Shaﬁr, E. (1992). The disjunction e¤ect in choice DEMO uncertainty. Psychological
Science, 3 (5), 305–309.
89. Shaﬁr, E., and Tversky, A. (1992). Thinking through uncertainty: Nonconsequential reasoning and
choice. Cognitive Psychology, 24 (4), 449–474.
90. Tversky, A. (DEMO). Clyde Hamilton Coombs 1912–1988. In Biographical Memoirs, vol. 61 (59–77).
Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
91. Tversky, A., DEMO Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation DEMO
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–323.
92. Tversky, DEMO, and Shaﬁr, E. (1992). Choice under conﬂict: The dynamics of deferred decision. Psycho-
logical Science, 3 (6), 358–361.
93. DEMO, V., and Tversky, A. (1993). On the evaluation of probability judgments: Calibration, reso-
lution, and monotonicity. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 162–173.
94. Gidron, D., Koehler, D., and Tversky, A. (DEMO). Implicit quantiﬁcation of personality traits. Person-
ality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 594–604.
95. Wakker, P., and Tversky, A. (1993)DEMO An axiomatization of cumulative prospect theory. Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, DEMO, 147–176.
96. Tversky, A., and Simonson, I. (1993). DEMO preferences. Management Science, 39,
1178–1189.
97. Shaﬁr, E., Simonson, I., and Tversky, A. (1993). Reason-based choice. Cognition, 49, 11–36.
98. Tversky, A. (1994). Contingent preferences: Loss Aversion and tradeo¤ contrast in decision making.
Japanese Psychological Research, 36, 3–9.
99. DEMO, A., and Koehler, D. J. (1994). Support theory: DEMO nonextensional representation of subjective
probability. Psychological Review, 101, 547–567.
100. Shaﬁr, E., and Tversky, A. (1995). Decision making. In D. DEMO Osherson and E. E. Smith (Eds.),
Invitation to Cognitive Science, volume 3: Thinking (77–100). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
101. Tversky, A., and Fox, C. R. (1995). Weighing risk DEMO uncertainty. Psychological Review, 102 (2),
269–283.
102. Redelmeier, D. A., Koehler, D. J., Liberman, V., and Tversky, A. (1995). Probability judgment in
medicine: Discounting unspeciﬁed possibilities. Medical Decision Making, 15, 227–230.
103. Fox, C. R., and Tversky, A. (DEMO). Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 110, 585–603.
1000 Amos Tversky’s Complete Bibliography
104. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1995). Conﬂict resolution: A cognitive perspective. In K. Arrow,
DEMO Mnookin, L. Ross, A. Tversky, and R. Wilson (Eds.), Barriers to the Negotiated Resolution of Conﬂict
(49–67). New York: DEMO
105. Tversky, A., and Wakker, P. (1995). Risk attitudes and decision weights. Econometrica, 63 (6),
1255–1280.
106. Tversky, DEMO (1995). Rational theory and constructive choice. In K. J. Arrow DEMO al. (Eds.), The Ratio-
nal Foundations of Economics Behavior. United DEMO: Macmillan.
107. Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1996). DEMO the reality of cognitive illusion: A reply to Gigerenzer’s
critique. Psychological DEMO, 103, 582–591.
108. Kelman, M., Rottenstreich, Y., and Tversky, A. (1996). Context-dependence in legal decision mak-
ing. The Journal DEMO Legal Studies, 25, 287–318.
109. Tversky, A. (1996). Contrasting rational and psychological principles of choice. In R. J. Zeckhauser,
R. DEMO Keeney, and J. K. Sebenius (Eds.), Wise Choices: Games, Decisions, and Negotiations (5–21). Bos-
ton: Harvard Business School Press.
110. Redelmeier, D. A., and Tversky, A. (1996). On DEMO belief that arthritis pain is related to the weather.
Procedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93, 2895–2896.
111. Brenner, L. A., DEMO, D. J., and Tversky, A. (1996). On the evaluation of one-sided evidence.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 9, 1–12.
112. DEMO, D. J., Brenner, L. A., Liberman, V., and Tversky, A. (1996). Conﬁdence and accuracy in
trait inference: Judgment by similarity. Acta Psychologica, 475, 1–24.
113. Brenner, L. A., Koehler, D. J., Liberman, V., and Tversky, A. (1996). Overconﬁdence in probability
and frequency judgments: A critical examination. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
65, 212–219.
114. Fox, C. F., Rogers, DEMO A., and Tversky, A. (1996). Option traders exhibit subadditive DEMO
weights. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 13, 5–17.
115. Rubinstien, DEMO, Tversky, A., and Heller, D. (1996). Naive strategies DEMO Zero-sum games. In W. Guth
et al. (Eds.), Understanding Strategic DEMO: Essays in Honor of Reinhard Selten. Springer-Verlag,
394–402.
116. Wakker, P., Thaler, R., and Tversky, A. (1997). Probabilistic Insurance. Journal of Risk and Uncer-
tainty, 15, 7–28.
117. Shaﬁr, E., Diamond, P., and Tversky, A. (1997). On money illusion. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, CXII, 2, 341–374.
118. Rottenstreich, Y., and Tversky, A. (1997). Unpacking, repacking, and DEMO: Advances in sup-
port theory. Psychological Review, 104, 2, 406–415.
119. Thaler, R. H., Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., and DEMO, A. (1997). The e¤ect of myopia and loss
aversion on risk taking: An experimental test. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 647–661.
120. Koehler, D. J., Brenner, L. A., and Tversky, A. (1997). The enhancement e¤ect in probability judg-
ment. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 10, 293–313.
121. Fox, C. R., and Tversky, A. (1998). A belief-based account of decision under uncertainty. Manage-
ment Science, 44, 7, 879–895.
122. Drolet, A., Simonson, I., and Tversky, A. (2000). Indi¤erence curves that travel with the DEMO set.
Marketing Letters, 11 (3), 199–209.
Index
Additive measures
common features model, 173–183
di¤erence model, 449–454, 458–461
distinctive features model, 173–183
random-aspect model, 504–505
ADDTREE, 53–54. See also Trees
academic choice and, 519
algorithm comparison and, 56–57
applications of, 57–66
centrality and, 135
estimation and, 55–56
HCS averaging and, 57
horizontal arcs and, 58, 60
matrices and, 56
nodal data of, 57–65
political choice and, 516
reciprocity and, 135
robustness of, DEMO
scaling and, 151
smallest space analysis and, 57–66, 69
Adjacent DEMO, 437
Adjustment, 214–217
Advertisements, 488–489
Agenda e¤ects
analysis of, 524–527
compatability theorem and, 525–527
constrained choice and, 523–533
Aggregate probability, 509–513
Aggregation theorem, 511–513
medical choice and, 887–893
Allais, Maurice, 610, 666
certainty e¤ect and, 734–735
prospect theory and, 551–552, 569, DEMO,
673–674, 696
regret theory and, 681
Alternating shooting, 258–259
DEMO See also Preference
additive di¤erence model and, 449–454
agenda e¤ects and, 523–533
aggregate probability and, 509–513
decision making theory and, 593–619
elicitation DEMO, 583–591
elimination-by-aspects and, 463–492
extremeness aversion and, 950–951
harm to, 464–465
independence of irrelevant alternatives and,
988n1
isolation e¤ect and, 557–561
multidimensional, 448–454
preference trees and, 493–503 (see also Preference
trees)
prospect theory and, 549–581 (see also Prospect
theory)
reason-based choice DEMO, 937–962 (see also
Choice)
regularity and, 946–951
Savage on, 466
substitutability and, 419–431
transitivity and, 419–422, 433–448 (see also
DEMO)
unitary, 484
Ambiguity
aversion to, 408, 645–647, 777–793, DEMO
belief and, 645–647, 666–670, 818
competence hypothesis and, 647–665
Ellsberg and, 778, 790
gambles and, 777–793
Heath and, 778–779
ignorance DEMO, 777–793
incompetence and, 779
Keynes and, 777–778
manipulation of, 666–670
market experiments and, 788–789
natural events and, 784–785
real money and, 780–782
states of knowledge and, 787–788
three-color problem and, 782–784
American DEMO Association, 199
Amnesia, 917
Anchoring, 214–217, 395–396
Animals, 58–60
DEMO intelligence (AI), 722–723
Assessment. See Judgment
Asset integration, 549–550
Association, 313
Asymmetry. See also Symmetry
conﬂict resolution and, 729–746
reason-based choice DEMO, 946–951
Attitude proﬁle, 413
Auditory stimuli. See Stimuli
Autoinstructional items, DEMO
Availability, 210–214
conjunction fallacy and, 221–224
letter study and, 223–224
DEMO e¤ect, 284
Bayesian model, 195, 205
ambiguity and, 669–670
conﬁdence analysis and, 278–281
discriminability and, 284–285
enhancement and, 356–365
political choice and, 621
support theory and, 329–330, 335, 338, 397
uncertainty and, 666, 669–670
BDM scheme, 693
Becker, Gordon M., 878, 880
1002
Index
Belief, 820–822. See also Conﬁdence; Support
theory
ambiguity and, 645–647, 666–670, 818
binary complimentarity and, 798–799
certainty and, 797, 800–815
chance and, 798
competency hypothesis and, 647–665, 818
economic indicators and, 808–815
enforced dominance and, 800
judged probability and, 815–817
mathematical psychology and, 797–799, 802
possibility e¤ect and, 797
response bias and, 817
Shafer and, 397–398
source preference and, 817–819
sports studies and, 800–808
subadditivity and, 797–799
subjective probability and, 666
two-stage model for, 797–821
uncertainty and, 645–647 (see also Uncertainty)
unpacking and, DEMO
value function and, 799
weighting function and, 766–770
Bell-curve. See Probability
Bias, 218–220. See also Judgment
adjustment and, 214–217
anchoring and, 214–217
availability and, 210–214
background data and, 281–284
Bayesian model and, 205
conﬁdence and, 276–277 (see also Conﬁdence)
conjunction and, 215–216
deceptive diagnosis and, 830–836
disjunction and, 215–216
economic forecasting and, 316–322
framing e¤ect and, 407
gambler’s fallacy and, 193–194
illusory correlation and, 213–214
imaginability and, 212–213
insensitivity and, 204–208
instance retrievability and, 211
law of small numbers and, 193–201
loss aversion and, 898–899
overconﬁdence and, 729–734
regression misconceptions and, 209–210
representativeness and, 203–210
search set e¤ectiveness DEMO, 211–212
self-deception and, 825–843
support theory and, 352 (see also Support theory)
validity illusion and, 208–209
Binary choice, 345, 431
elimination-by-aspects and, 463–492
enchancement e¤ect and, 356–365
frequency and, 427–430
independence condition and, 420–421
scalability and, 419–422
stimulus study of, 422–430
strong stochastic transitivity and, 419–422
uniqueness and, 543–544
Binary complimentarity
belief and, 798–799
solvability condition and, 366–367
staircase method and, 367–369
subjective probability DEMO, 334, 351–352, 375–
376, 399n1, 401–402
Brier’s loss function, 303
Calibration, 189–190
association and, 313
base rate and, 281–284, DEMO
conﬁdence and, 275, 310–311
designated form and, 302
di‰culty e¤ect DEMO, 289–291
economic forecasting and, 316–322
inclusive form and, 302
indices, 303–310
information and, 301
multiple designation and, 307
observed hit rates DEMO, 304
reduced form and, 302
resolution and, 301–310
uncertainty and, 654
Calvinists, 716–717, 827–828, 830
Cancellation, 561, 594
Categorical ratings
conjunction and, 362
enhancement e¤ect and, 361–362
nearest neighbor analysis and, 146–148, 159,
168–170
ordinal analysis and, 311–315
prediction and, 322–323
Causal outcomes
conjunctions and, 239–245
contingencies and, 639–642 (see also
Contingencies)
illusion and, 825–826, 836–843
unpacking, 388–391
Celebrity choice, 514–516
DEMO, 136–137
ADDTREE and, 135
diagnosticity principle and, 131
distribution statistics DEMO, 130–135
GS model and, 139–143, 150, 152, 156–157
hierarchical DEMO and, 131, 133
index, 131
KYST method and, 133, DEMO, 140
outliers and, 156
quaternary comparison and, 130
Index
reciprocity and, 135, 138–139
scaling and, 142–152
trees and, DEMO, 138
Certainty e¤ect, 551–554. See also Uncertainty
belief and, 797, 800
conﬂict resolution and, 734–737
contingent, 735–737
decicison making theory and, 606–611
pseudocertainty and, 606–611, 637–639
weighting function and, 606–611, 747–775
DEMO See also Probability
belief and, 798
certainty and, 637–639
competency hypothesis and, 647–665
conﬁdence and, 275–285
framing of, 604–611
‘‘hot hand’’ analysis and, 257–265, 267, 269–273
isolation e¤ect and, 557–561
law of DEMO numbers and, 193–201
misconceptions of, 207
prediction and, 234–236
risk DEMO, 236–238
Russian roulette and, 635–637
shooting, 258–259
weighting function and, 604–611, 635–642, 747–
775
Chandler, J. P., 483, 516
Chapman, L. J. and J. P., 213
Chi-square test, 520
Choice, DEMO See also Preference
academic disciplines and, 519–520
additive di¤erence model and, 458–461
advertisements and, 488–489
agenda e¤ects and, 523–533
aggregate probabilities and, 509–513
ambiguity aversion and, 777–793
applicants and, 527–533
belief and, 795–822
binary, 345, 356–365, 419–431, 463–492, 543–
544
causal outcomes and, 639–642, 825–826, 836–843
celebrities study and, 514–516
chance and, 635–642
citizen’s duty and, 640
competency hypothesis and, 647–665
conﬂict and, 729–746, 943–951
constant-ratio model and, 513–523
constrained, 523–533
contingencies and, 825–874 (see also
Contingencies)
contrast e¤ect and, 930–934
decision framing and, DEMO, 631–635
diagnostic outcomes and, 639–642, 825–826,
836–843
1003
elimination-by-aspects DEMO, 463–492
endowment and, 930–934
equal options and, 939–940
framing e¤ects DEMO, 673
frequency and, 427–430
hierarchical elimination and, 493–503
invariance and, 631–635
judgment discrepancy and, 650 (see also
Judgment)
legal decisions DEMO, 963–993
loss aversion and, 628–631, 674, 895–915 (see
also DEMO aversion)
LS model and, 434–448, 452–454
matching discrepancies and, DEMO, 871
medical, 887–893
Newcomb’s Problem and, 712–717
nonaligned voter’s theory DEMO, 640–641
nonconsequential reasoning and, 703–727
nonlinear preferences and, 673–674
party DEMO theory and, 640–641
patient preference and, 583–591
political, 516–519, 621–644, 654–659
preference reversal and, 875–885
preference trees and, 493–503 (see DEMO Preference
trees)
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, 723–
724
prospect theory and, 549–581
ratio-di¤erence principle and, 631–635
reason-based, 937–962
reference dependence and, 901–908
regularity and, 946–951
risk and, 622–631, DEMO (see also Reason-based
choice)
scalability and, 419–422
shades of gray and, 520–522
source dependence and, 674
stimulus study of, 422–430
substitutability in, 419–431
transitivity and, 419–422, 433–461 (see also
Transitivity)
DEMO and, 645 (see also Uncertainty)
uniqueness and, 543–544
utility DEMO and, 549–560, 622–631
value function and, 564–567
Wason’s selection task DEMO, 718–721
weighting function and, 567–572, 635–642, 747–
775 (see DEMO Weighting function)
Citizen’s duty, 640
Clusters, 34–37
context and, DEMO
diagnosticity principle and, 28–32, 88–93
focus and, 152–156
loose, 52–53
1004
Clusters (cont.)
outliers and, 152–156
tight, 52–53
trees and, 48–49, 52–53 (see also Trees)
Coding, 561
Cognition. See DEMO
Cohen, J., 195–196, 200
Combination, 561
Common features model
additive measure and, 173–183
complementary feature and, 172
dissimilarity orders and, 173–174
equations for, 171, 184–186
equivalence and, 175–177
matrices and, 173–179
DEMO of, 178
translation and, 175–177
trees and, 180–182
unit weight DEMO, 172–173
Comonotonic independence, 696
Comonotonic tradeo¤ consistency, 697
Comparative ignorance DEMO, 777, 793
Ellsberg and, 778, 790
gambles studies in, DEMO
market experiments and, 788–789
natural events and, 784–785
real money and, 780–782
states of knowledge and, 787–788
three-color problem and, 782–784
Comparison tasks. See Similarity
Compatibility e¤ects, 240
matching and, 854–857
preference reversal DEMO, 880–883
theorem of, 525–527, 544–545
Competency hypothesis, 647
belief and, 818
binary correlation and, 653
choice-judgment discrepancy and, 650
complementary bets and, 662–665
contingencies and, 850
illusion and, 648–649
knowledge betting and, 650–654
political choice and, 654–658
prediction and, 659–662
sports studies and, 654–659
Competition
Newcomb’s Problem and, 712–717
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, DEMO, 719, 723–
724
Component independence, 102–105
Compromise e¤ect, 963
jurisdiction and, 980–982
relevant law and, 980, 982
testing of, 964–968, 979–985
Concession aversion, 739–741
Index
Conditioning, 337–338
Conﬁdence, 296–299
ambiguity and, 645–647, 666–670, 777–793 (see
also Ambiguity)
Barnum e¤ect and, 284
base rate and, 281–284
Bayesian model and, 278–281
business failures DEMO, 275
calibration and, 275, 310–311
conﬂict resolution and, 729–734
The Corporate Jungle and, 287–288
determinants and, 275–277
di‰culty e¤ects and, 289–291
discriminability and, 284–285
frequency and, 294–295
generic overconﬁdence and, 301, DEMO
in knowledge, 285–295
optimistic overconﬁdence and, 729–734
sample size and, DEMO
speciﬁc overconﬁdence and, 301, 310–311
statistical evaluation of, 277–285
subjectivity DEMO, 286–288
validity illusion and, 291–294
variance and, 277
Conﬂict resolution, 407, 744–746
certainty and, 734–737
concession and, 739–741
fairness and, DEMO
loss aversion and, 738–743
optimistic overconﬁdence and, 729–734
prediction and, DEMO
principle of dual entitlement and, 741–742
pseudocertainty and, 734–737
reason-based choice and, 943–951
statistics and, 731–732
Conjunction, 255–256
availability and, 221–224
DEMO and, 215–216
causal, 239–245
compatibility e¤ects and, 240
direct/indirect DEMO and, 227–229
enhancement and, 361–362
error and, 229
extensionality principle DEMO, 221–222, 245–
247
fallacy and, 189–190, 229, 231, 238–239, 247
illusion and, 252–254
information storage and, 224
logic and, DEMO
motives and, 242–243
prediction and, 234–236, 243–245
pseudocertainty and, 606–611
representative, 224–239
risk and, 236–238
sequence and, 245
Index
support theory and, 361–362
transparency and, 227–232
unpacking and, 361–362
Consequentialist reasoning
economics and, 719–721
Expected Utility Theory and, 703
Newcomb’s DEMO and, 712–717
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 705–712, 719, 723–724
sure-thing principle and, 703–705, 710–711, 714,
721
Wason’s selection task and, DEMO
Constant-ratio model (CRM)
aggregate probabilities and, 509–513
applications of, DEMO
elimination-by-aspects and, 480–484
preference trees and, 497, 504, 507, DEMO, 513–522,
525, 533–534
Constant sensitivity, 903–904
Context
clusters and, 88–93
diagnosticity principle and, 28–32
extension e¤ect and, 32–33, 86–88
legal decisions and, 963–978
preference and, 405
Contingencies, 874. See also Preference
attribute quality and, 845–846
cardinal arguments and, 854–857
causal outcomes and, 825–830, 836–843
competence and, 850
decision logic and, 825–826
diagnostic outcomes and, 639–642, 825–843
dissonance theory and, 828–830
elicitation and, 846
DEMO and, 917–935
extremeness aversion and, 950–951
framing and, 846–847, 872–873
invariance and, 845–846
legal decisions and, 963–993 (see also Legal
decisions)
loss aversion and, 895–915
matching and, 845–864, 871
medical choice and, 887–893
ordinal analysis and, 871–872
performance prediction and, 864–866
preference reversal and, 866–870, 875–885
prominence hypothesis and, 847–863
psychology of choice and, 827–830
reason-based choice and, 937–962
self-deception and, 825–844
subadditivity and, 857–863
trade-o¤ models and, 857–863
voter’s illusion and, 836–841
weighting function and, 845–874 (see also
Weighting function)
Contingent certainty, 735–737
1005
Contrast model, 3–4, 935
applications of, 925–929
choice and, 930–934
DEMO and, 929–930
feature matching and, 97–128 (see also Features)
DEMO and, 917, 921
index parameters for, 76
legal decisions and, 963–993
memorable events and, 917–919
reality and, 81
relative weight judgment DEMO, 77–78
representation theorem and, 14–16, 45
satisfaction and, 922–925
scaling and, 75–76
studies of, 919–925
symmetry and, 80–86
Coombs, Clyde DEMO, 421–422, 520–522
‘‘Corporate Jungle, The’’ (test), 287–288
Countries, DEMO, 82–84
Crime, 242–243, 354–356
Cunningham, J. P., 56–57
Decision DEMO theory, 218, 617–619
ambiguity and, 645–647, 666–670, 777–793
belief DEMO, 795–822
cancellation and, 594
causal outcomes and, 825, 836–843
competency hypothesis and, 647–665
contingent weighting model and, 845–874
cumulative prospect theory DEMO, 673–700 (see
also Prospect theory)
dominance and, 594
economics DEMO, 596–609, 613–616
framing and, 598–611
invariance and, 594–598
legal decisions and, 963–993
loss aversion and, 599–604
Newcomb’s Problem and, 712–717
nonconsequential reasoning and, 703–727
normative rules and, 593–595, 611–613
outcome evaluation and, 598–604
politics and, 621–644
preference reversal and, 875–885
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, 723–
724
ratio-di¤erence principle and, 631–635
reason-based choice and, 937–962 (see also
Choice)
rule hierarchy for, 593–595
transitivity and, 594
value function and, 599–600
weighting function and, 604–611, 747–775, 845–
874
Decomposition models, 535
DeGroot, Morris H., 878, 880
1006
Dempster, A. P., 329
Designated form, 302
Diagnosticity principle, DEMO, 87. See also
Contingencies
centrality and, 131
clusters and, 88–93
DEMO and, 830–836
nearest neighbor analysis and, 156–158
political choice and, DEMO
voter’s illusion and, 408, 825–826, 836–843
Di¤erence
degree assessment and, 83–84
similarity and, 26–27, 77–80
Di‰culty e¤ect, 289–291
Diminishing sensitivity, DEMO, 903–904
Directionality, 21–22
Direct-subtle tests, 227–229
Direct-transparent tests, 227–232
Discounts, 602–604
Discrimination function, 284–285, 405, 414–415
Disjunction, 190–191. See also Conjunction
AI and, 722–723
bias and, 215–216
consequentialist reasoning and, 703–727
economics and, 719–721
engineering of, 386
ﬁnancial markets and, 719–721
implicit, 331
morality studies and, 339–343
Newcomb’s Problem and, 712–717
nonconsequential reasoning and, 703–727
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, 723–
724
reason-based choice and, 952–956
subadditivity and, 332–333, 384–388
support theory and, 331–333, 336 (see also
Support theory)
unpacking and, 383–396
DEMO selection task and, 718–721
Dissimilarity, 50–52, 121
centrality and, 130–142
CF and DF model comparison and, 171–186
feature matrices and, 173–179
DEMO and, 130–142
unpacking and, 391–395
Dissonance theory, 828–830
Distinctive features DEMO
additive measure and, 173–183
complementary feature and, 172
dissimilarity orders and, 173–174
equations for, 172, 184–186
equivalence and, 175–177
matrices and, 173–179
reduction of, 178
Index
translation and, 175–177
trees and, 180–182
unit weight and, 172–173
Dominance, 594, 800
detection of, 562
DEMO, 604–606
reason-based choice and, 943–951, 959
pseudodominance, 737
stochastic, DEMO
Double matching, 696
Dow-Jones, 216–217, 346, 720, 757
Dunning, D., 283–284
Economics, 406
ambiguity aversion and, 777–793
belief e¤ects and, 797–799
competency hypothesis and, 647–650
consequentialist reasoning and, 719–721
contingencies and, 867–869 (see also
Contingencies)
decision making theory and, 596–609, DEMO
discounts and, 602–604
disjunction in, 719–721
Dow-Jones, 216–217, 346, DEMO, 757
extremeness aversion and, 950–951
forecasting and, 316–322
inﬂation and, 603–604, 811–812
insurance and, 555–557, 573–574
isolation e¤ect and, 557–561
DEMO decisions and, 963–978
loss aversion and, 895–915
medical choice and, DEMO
monetary incentives and, 692–693
money illusion and, 603
money-pump and, DEMO
non-valued features and, 956–957
overconﬁdence and, 731–732
Pareto optimality and, DEMO
preference reversal and, 875–885
principle of dual entitlement and, 741–742
prospect theory and, 553 (see also Prospect
theory)
rationality and, 613–616
reason-based choice and, 941–960
reference shifts and, 574–576
regularity condition and, 946
Russian roulette and, 571
surcharges and, 602–604
transitivity and, 433, 455–456
uncertainty and, 686–693, 755–766
utility theory and, 550–551
value DEMO and, 564–567, 599–600
weighting function and, 755–766
Edwards, W., DEMO, 280–281
Index
Einhorn, Hillel, 666–669
Elections, 307–308
Elicitation, 24–25
contingencies and, 846, 857–863
preference and, 583–591
Elimination, hierarchical, 493–494, 499–502, DEMO
compatibility theorem and, 544–545
elimination by tree and, 540
equivalence theorem and, 503, 538–540
Elimination-by-aspects, 405–406. See also
Preference trees
advertisements and, 488–489
aggregate probability and, 509–513
consequences and, 475–477
constant-ratio model and, 480–484
decision rule and, 467–468
group data and, 477–478
lexicographic model and, 467–468
likelihood function and, 482–483
logic and, 488–489
Luce theory and, 464, 467, 471, 479–480, 484
mapping and, 468
DEMO stochastic transitivity and, 475–476
multiplicative inequality and, 476
notation for, DEMO
psychology of, 486–488
recursion and, 470–471
regularity and, 475–476
representation DEMO and, 508–509
Savage on, 466, 474
scaling and, 464–467, DEMO
STEPIT program and, 483
strategic implications of, 485–486
tests of, DEMO
theory of, 467–477
Elimination by tree (EBT) model
equivalence theorem DEMO, 503, 539
free access and, 502
hierarchical elimination and, 540
properties of, 505
structure theorem and, 499, 537–538
Ellsberg, Daniel, 645–646
ambiguity aversion and, 778, 790
competence hypothesis and, 647–665
Emotion. See also Judgment; Psychology
advertisements and, 488–489
ambiguity aversion and, 777–793
arthritis fallacies and, 377–381
Barnum e¤ect and, 284
belief and, 795–822
bias and, 203–220
competence hypothesis and, 647–665
conﬁdence and, 275–299
conﬂict resolution and, 729–746
1007
The Corporate Jungle and, 287–288
deceptive diagnosis DEMO, 830–836
decision framing and, 593–619
dissonance theory and, 828–830
elimination-by-aspects DEMO, 489
endowment and contrast, 917–935
extremeness aversion and, 950–951
gambler’s DEMO and, 193–194
‘‘hot hand’’ analysis and, 257–265, 267, 269–273
imaginability and, 212–213
insensitivity and, 204–208
loss aversion and, 599–604
LS model and, 442–448
magical thinking and, 716–717
Newcomb’s Problem and, 712–717
nonconsequential reasoning and, 703–727
optimistic overconﬁdence and, 729–734
patient preference and, 583–591
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, 723–
724
reference shifts DEMO, 574–576
regret theory and, 681
satisfaction, 922–925
self-deception and, 825–844
subjectivity and, 286–288, 333
suggestibility and, 343–344
support theory and, DEMO, 352 (see also Support
theory)
uncertainty and, 645–647 (see also Uncertainty)
Endowment, 897–898, 935
applications of, 925–929
choice and, 930–934
expectations and, 929–930
happiness and, 917, 921
memorable events DEMO, 917–919
satisfaction and, 922–925
studies of, 919–925
Enhancement, 338, DEMO
conjunction e¤ect and, 361–362
evaluation and, 357–359
evidence replacement and, DEMO
hypothesis generation and, 362–363
loss aversion and, 743
support theory and, 356–365
uncertainty and, 363–365
Entrepreneurs, 275
Equal Rights Amendment, 621–622, 630–631
Equations. See Mathematical psychology
Equivalence theorem, 503, 538–540
Error
illusion DEMO, 208–209, 213–214, 252–254
uncertainty and, 208–209 (see also Uncertainty)DEMO
Ethnic issues, 621–622, 630–631
Euclidean space, 75, 133–134, 158
1008
Evaluation
additive di¤erence model and, 449–454
framing and, 331–332
intradimensional, 451–452
Evidence. See Conﬁdence
Expected Utility Theory, 406, 549, 703
Extensionality principle, 32–33, 190–191, 255–256
causal conjunctions and, 239–245
cues of, 245–247
illusion and, 252–254
memory and, 330
ordinal analysis and, 366–367
prescriptive implications and, 369–371
probability and, 221–222
relative salience and, 330
representative conjunctions and, 224–239
solvability condition and, 366–367
staircase method and, 367–369
support theory and, 329–330, 365–371
upper/lower indicators and, 367–369
violations of, 330–331
Extremeness aversion, 950–951
Fairness, 741–743
Fallacy, 247
DEMO and weather, 377–381
gambler’s, 193–194
information and, 229, 231, DEMO
conjunction and, 189–190, 229, 231, 238–239,
247
Family resemblance, 38–40
Fans, 138
Features, 10, 97–98. See also Similarity
additive DEMO and, 108–112
axiomatic theory of, 43–45
baseline similarity and, 124–125
DEMO and DF model comparison, 171–186
clusters and, 34–37
complementary, 172
DEMO independence and, 102–105
context and, 28–34
elicitation and, 24–25
estimation DEMO, 98–102
exchangeability and, 104, 117–120
extension e¤ect and, 32–33
food and, 110–111
independence and, 12–14
interpretation and, 126
matching function and, 12
matrices for, 173–179
medical symptoms and, 112
modality and, DEMO
monotonicity and, 11–12
pictorial stimuli and, 113–117
Index
processing and, DEMO
professional stereotypes and, 105–108
relative weight and, 39–40
representation theorem and, 14–16
subadditivity and, 121–123
substitutive components and, 105–111
symmetry and, DEMO
task e¤ect and, 125–126
travel and, 112–113
trees and, 34–37, 67 (see also Trees)
verbal stimuli and, 109–110, 117–120
weighting studies and, 105–128
Ficks, L., 417–418
Figures, 18–19
Fischho¤, B., 329–330
Fishburn, Peter C., 677–678, 681
Focus, 77–78
countries and, 17–18
ﬁgures and, 18–19
KYST method and, 153
letters and, DEMO
nearest neighbor analysis and, 152–156
outliers and, 152–156
Rosch and, DEMO
signals and, 21–22
symmetry and, 16–24
Food, 110–111, 147, DEMO
Forecasting. See Prediction
Fox, Craig R., 407
ambiguity aversion and, DEMO
belief-based decisions and, 795–822
weighting function and, 747–775
Framing e¤ect, DEMO
contingencies and, 846–847, 872–873
decision making and, 593–619
evaluation and, 331–332
Franklin, Benjamin, 937
Free classiﬁcation, 97
Freedman, David, 260
Frequency. See Probability
Gambles
adjacent, 437
ambiguity aversion and, 777–793
comparative DEMO and, 777–793
competence hypothesis and, 647–665
disjunction and, 952–956 (see also Disjunction)
elimination-by-aspects and, 478–484, 490n4
fallacy and, 193–194
lexicographic semiorder (LS) model and, 435–442
market experiments and, 788–789
natural DEMO and, 784–785
prospect theory and, 549–581 (see also Prospect
theory)
Index
reason-based choice and, 937–962
states of knowledge and, 787–788
three-color DEMO and, 782–784
uncertainty and, 645–665
Game theory
Newcomb’s Problem and, DEMO
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, 723–
724
Russian roulette, 571, 635–637
Gardner, Martin, 713–715
Garner, W. R., 23
DEMO, Itamar, 3, 75–95, 97–128
Generalization gradient, 97
Generalized extreme DEMO models, 535
Generic overconﬁdence, 301, 310–311
Geometry, 3–4. See also Mathematical
psychology; Models
Euclidean, 75, 133–134, 158
similarity and, 7–8
statistical model and, 139–143, 150, 152, 156–157
Gestalt psychology, 14
Gigerenzer, G., 291
Gilovich, Thomas, 257–265, 267, 269–273
Global DEMO, 336
Grade point average (GPA), 527
Grether, David M., 282–283, 877, 883
Gri‰n, Dale, 190, 409–410, 880–881
conﬁdence DEMO, 275–299
endowment and contrast, 917–935
Gustatory studies, 143, 145, DEMO, 166
Harvard University, 233
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs), 888–
DEMO
Heath, Chip, 645–672, 778–779
Helmholtz, H. von, 252
Hendry DEMO, 534
Henley, N. M., 47, 58
Heuristics, 255–256. See DEMO Bias
availability and, 210–214
causal conjunctions and, 239–245
deﬁned, 222–223
DEMO cues and, 245–247
illusion and, 252–254
representativeness and, 203–210, 224–239
verbal expression and, 250–252
Hierarchical clustering scheme (HCS), 47, 57
Hierarchical elimination model (HEM), 493–494,
499–502, 535
compatibility theorem DEMO, 544–545
elimination by tree and, 540
equivalence theorem and, 503, 538–540
Ho¤rage, U., 291
Hogarth, Robin, 666–669
1009
‘‘hot hand’’ DEMO, 257–263, 267
illusion and, 264–265, 269–273
locality hypothesis and, DEMO
time analysis of, 269–270
Hutchinson, J. Wesley, 129–170
Identiﬁcation errors, 97
Illusion, 213–214
arthritis fallacies and, 377–381
competency hypothesis and, 648–649
conﬁdence and, 291–294
conjunctions and, 252–254
deceptive diagnosis and, 830–836
‘‘hot hand’’ analysis and, 264–265, 269–273
money and, 603
Mu¨ ller-Lyer, DEMO, 615
self-deception and, 825–844
validity and, 208–209, 291–294
voter’s illusion and, 836–841
Imaginability, 212–213
Implicit disjunction, 331
Inclusive form, 302
DEMO, 12–14, 44, 405
binary choice and, 419–431
comonotonic, 696
DEMO irrelevant alternatives, 988n1
Indirect tests, 227–229
Inductive reasoning, 234–236
Inﬂation. DEMO Economics
Information
ambiguity aversion and, 408, 777–793
background data and, DEMO
Barnum e¤ect and, 284
base rate and, 281–284, 308–309
belief DEMO, 795–822
calibration and, 301–311
comparitive ignorance and, 777–793
competency hypothesis DEMO, 647–665
conﬁdence and, 275–299
conjunctions and, 224
di‰culty e¤ect and, 289–291
endowment and contrast, 917–935
fallacy and, 229, 231, 238–239
DEMO reasoning and, 234–236
limited, 276–277
logic and, 248–250
motives and, 242–243
Newcomb’s Problem and, 712–717
prediction and, 234–236, 243–245, 322–323 (see
also Prediction)
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, DEMO
724
prominence hypothesis and, 848–863
reason-based choice and, 937–962
1010
Information (cont.)
sampling and, 278–281 (see also Sampling)
subjectivity and, 286–288
transparency and, 227–232
Insensitivity, 204–208
Instant endowment, DEMO
Insurance, 555–557, 667, 899
Intelligence quotient (IQ), 194
Interpretation, 126
Intuition, 255–256. See also Emotion
ambiguity aversion and, 777–793
belief and, 795–822
bias and, 203–220
causal conjunctions and, 239–245
conﬁdence and, 275–299
extensional cues and, 245–247
fallacy and, 229, 231, 238–239
gambler’s fallacy and, 193–194
‘‘hot hand’’ analysis and, 257–265, 267, DEMO
illusion and, 252–254
logic and, 248–250
Newcomb’s Problem and, 712–717
DEMO Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, 723–
724
representative conjunctions and, 224–239
self-deception and, 825–844
support theory and, 335, 383–402 (see also
Support theory)
verbal expression and, 250–252
Invariance, 44
conﬁdence DEMO, 277
contingencies and, 845–846
decision making theory and, 594–598
preference DEMO and, 875–885
ratio-di¤erence principle and, 631–635
representativeness and, 224–225
utility DEMO and, 631–635
Isolation e¤ect, 557–560, 561
Jacobian transformations, 72
James, William, 9, 937
Johnson, Eric J., 881–882
Johnson-Laird, P. DEMO, 718
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 195
Judgment, x–xi, 3
additive components and, 108–112
adjustment and, 214–217
advertisements and, 488–489
aggregate probabilities and, 509–513
arthritis fallacies and, 377–381
availability and, 210–214, 221–224
background data and, 281–284
baseline similarity and, 124–125
belief and, 795–822
Index
bias and, 189, 203–220 (see also Bias)
DEMO, 345, 356–365, 419–431, 463–492, 543–
544
calibration and, 189–190, 302–311
categorical prediction and, 322–323
causal conjunctions and, 239–245
choice discrepancy and, 650
competence hypothesis and, 647–665
component independence and, 102–105
conditioning and, 337–338
conﬁdence and, 275–299
conjunction fallacy and, 189–190, 221–256
DEMO and, 825–844 (see also
Contingencies)
contrast model and, 14–16, 45, 917–935
The Corporate Jungle and, 287–288
diagnosticity principle and, 28–32
di¤erence and, 26–27
di‰culty e¤ect and, 289–291
directionality and, 21–22
dissimilarity and, 121
economic forecasting and, 316–322
elementary, 345
endowment and, DEMO
enhancement e¤ect and, 356–365
estimation and, 98–102
evaluation and, 301–323, 598–604
extensionality principle and, 32–33, 190–191,
245–247
extremeness aversion and, 950–951
fallacy and, 189–190, 193–194, 229, 231, 238–
239, DEMO, 377–381
features and, 97 (see also Features)
heuristics and, 222–223
hierarchical elimination and, 493–503
‘‘hot hand’’ analysis and, 257–265, 267, 269–273
illusion and, 208–209, 213–214, 252–254 (see also
Illusion)
imaginability and, 212–213
inductive reasoning and, 234–236
instance retrievability and, 211
interpretation and, 126
intuition and, 221 (see also Intuition)
law of small numbers and, 189, 193–201
legal decisions and, 963–978
logic and, 248–250
loss aversion and, 599–604, 895–915
medical, 112, 232–234, 583–591
modality and, 127–128
Morse Code study and, 21–22
motives and, 242–243
nonconsequential reasoning and, 703–727
numerical, 315–322
optimistic overconﬁdence and, DEMO
Index
order of presentation and, 24–25
ordinal analysis and, 311–315
pictorial DEMO and, 113–117
political choice and, 621–644
prediction and, 234–236, 243–245
preference reversal and, 875–885
preference trees and, 493–503
principle of dual DEMO and, 741–742
probability and, 191 (see also Probability)
processing DEMO, 126
prospect theory and, 549–581
ratio-di¤erence principle and, 631–635
reason-based DEMO and, 937–962
reference dependence and, 901–908
reference shifts and, 574–576
DEMO misconceptions and, 209–210
relative weight and, 77–78
representativeness and, 203–210, 224–239
risk and, 236–238
Russian roulette and, 571
satisfaction and, 922–925
scenarios and, 243–245
search set e¤ectiveness and, 211–212
similarity and, 8, 10–16 (see also Similarity)
speciﬁcity and, 329–330
stereotypes, 105–108, 222, 225–226
subadditivity and, 121–123
subjectivity and, 286–288
substitutive components and, 105–111
support theory and, 329 (see also Support theory)
task e¤ect and, 125–126
transitivity and, 433–461
transparency and, 227–232
travel and, 112–113
upper/lower indicators and, 367–369
utility theory and, 549–560
validity and, 208–209, 291–294
value function and, 564–567
verbal, 109–110, 117–120, 250–252, 315–322
weighting function and, 105–128, 567–572
Kachelmeier, Steven J., 692–693
Kadane, J. B., 267, 269, 269–273
Kahneman, Daniel, x, 189, 406–407
bias and, 203–220
conﬁdence and, 280–281
conﬂict DEMO and, 729–746
decision framing and, 593–619
frequency judgment and, 330
DEMO of small numbers, 193–201
loss aversion and, 895–915
preference reversal and, 880, 882
prospect theory and, 549–581, 673–702
Kelman, Mark, DEMO, 963–993
1011
Kendall’s tau correlation, 425, 427
Keynes, John Maynard, 397, 777–778
Kleinbolting, H., 291
Knight, Frank H., 777–778
DEMO See Information
Koehler, Derek J., 190, 329–376
Krantz, D. H., 422
Krumhansl, C. L., 158
Kruskal’s stress, 57
Kunreuther, Howard, 666–667, 669
KYST (Kruskal, Young, and Seery) method, 133,
135, 140, 142, 151–155
Larkey, P., 267, 269–273
DEMO of small numbers, 189, 193–201
Least-squares method, 56, 158
Legal decisions, 979
compromise and, 964–968
context and, 963–978
contrast model and, 968–973, 985–988
heavily legalized products and, 964
improvement of, 977–978
DEMO of irrelevant alternatives and,
988n1
jurisdiction and, 980–982, 989–993
juror instructions and, 989–993
relevant law and, 980, 982
Letters, 19–21, 60–63
availability heuristic and, 223–224
logic and, 250
nearest neighbor analysis DEMO, 164
scaling and, 144
support theory and, 330
Lexicographic semiorder (LS) model, 434, 467–468
additive di¤erence model and, 452–454
gambles DEMO, 435–442
intransitive choice studies and, 435–448
memory and, 438
two-outcome DEMO and, 436
WST and, 436
Liberman, Varda, 190, 301–328
DEMO, S., 329–330, 572
Likelihood function, 482–483
Likert-type items, 413
DEMO, Dennis, 252
Litigation. See Conﬂict resolution
Locality hypothesis, 271–273
Logic, 825–827
conﬂict resolution and, 729–746
consequentialist reasoning and, 703–727
The Corporate DEMO and, 287–288
decision framing and, 593–619
elimination-by-aspects and, 488–489
intuition DEMO, 248–250
1012
Logic (cont.)
Newcomb’s Problem and, 712–717
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, 723–
724
reason-based choice and, 937–962
Wason’s DEMO task and, 718–721
Loose clusters, 52–53
Loss aversion, 409
advantages DEMO, 900–901
concession and, 739–741
conﬂict resolution and, 738–743
constant, 905–908
di¤erences and, 738–739
diminishing sensitivity and, 895
enhanced, 743
fairness and, 741–743
implications of, 908–912
improvements and, 899–900
instant endowment and, DEMO
political choice and, 628–631
principle of dual entitlement and, 741–742
prospect theory and, 674 (see also Prospect
theory)
reference dependence and, 895, 901–908
riskless choice and, 895–915
status quo bias and, 898–899
theorems for, 912–914
tradeo¤s and, 899–900
utility theory and, 628–631
value function and, 599–604
Luce, R. D.
constant-ratio model and, 513–523
elimination-by-aspects and, 464, 467, 471, 479–
480, 484
Fishburn and, DEMO, 681
preference trees and, 496–497
prospect theory and, 677–678
McFadden, D., 534–535
Machina, M. J., 611–613
McNeil, Barbara J., 407, 583–591
Magical thinking, 716–717
Mann-Whitney test, 888
Markowitz, H., 563–564, 599
Marschak, Jacob, 878, 880
Matching, 12. See also Features
arthritis fallacies and, 377–381
compatibility principle and, 854–857
contingencies and, 845–864, 871
prominence hypothesis and, 848–863
ratio model and, 15–16
Mathematical psychology
additive di¤erence model and, 449–451, 458–461
additive/substitutive features and, 98–123
Index
ADDTREE and, 53–69
aggregate probability and, 509–513
alternatives at choice DEMO, 413–418
axiomatic theory of, 43–45
Bayes’ Rule, 278
belief and, 797–799, 802
Brier’s loss function, 303
calibration and, 301–311
centrality and, 131, 139
certainty and, 637–639
CF and DF model comparison, DEMO, 184–
186
chance and, 207
chi-square test and, 520
choice-matching DEMO and, 863–864
clusters and, 34–37, 52–53
compatibility principle and, 525–527, 544–545,
854–857
conﬁdence and, 277–285
contingencies and, 845–874 (see DEMO
Contingencies)
contrast model and, 75–76, 97
decision making theory and, 593–619
diagnosticity principle and, 88–93
di¤erence and, 26–27, 77–80
directionality DEMO, 80–86
discrimination function and, 414–415
dissimilarity and, 50–52
elimination-by-aspects, 463–492
elimination by tree, 499, 502–503, 537–545
endowment and, 922–929
enhancement DEMO and, 356–365
equivalence theorem and, 503, 538–540
extensionality principle and, 221–222
family resemblance and, 38–40
feature matching and, 10–16, 25 (DEMO also
Features)
geometric models, 3–4
global weight, 336
‘‘hot hand’’ analysis and, 257–265
independence and, 12–14, 44
interval similarity scale, DEMO
invariance and, 44
Kruskal’s stress and, 57
law of small numbers and, 193–201
least-squares method and, 56
logic and, 248–250
loss aversion and, 628–631, 898, 901–908, 912–
914
matrices and, 56
minimality, 7
monotonicity, 11–12, 43
multinomial logit model, 534–535
nonadditive set DEMO, 329
Index
ordinal analysis and, 311–315
power model and, 353–356
preference reversal, 875–885
preference trees and, 34–37, 50–52, 494–513,
518–522, 525–534, 537–545
probability and, 189–191, 203–204 (see also
Probability)
proportionality and, 374–376
prospect theory and, 406–407, 560–579, 676–677,
695–700
prototypicality DEMO, 38–40
quarternary condition, 507–508
random walk sequences, 378
ratio model DEMO, 15–16
reason-based choice and, 949–954
reciprocity and, 135, 139
relative feature weight, 39–40
representation theorem, 10–16, 45, 508–509,
540–543
DEMO aversion and, 622–628
skewness theorem, 70–73
solvability, 44, 366–367
staircase method, 367–369
strong stochastic transitivity and, 419–422
structure theorem and, 499, 537–538
substitutability and, 419–420, 424, 426–430
support theory and, 331–333 (see also Support
theory)
symmetry and, 16–24 (see also Symmetry)
transitivity and, 433–461
triangle inequality, 7, 9
trinary condition, DEMO, 515–516
uncertainty and, 645–647 (see also Uncertainty)
uniqueness and, 543–544
upper/lower indicators and, 367–369
utility theory and, 549–560
value DEMO and, 679–693
weighting function and, 635–637, 679–693, 749–
766
Matrices, 56
feature, 173–179
ordinal analysis and, 314–315
payo¤, 287
Mean DEMO di¤erence (MAD), 810
Median, 800, 810, 815–816
Medical choice, 112, 232–234, 733
deceptive diagnosis and, 830–836
economics and, 891
individual/group contingencies and, 887–893
preference and, 583–591
Memory, 330
alternatives at choice point and, 418
amnesia, 917
arthritis fallacies and, 379–380
1013
endowment and, 917–935
LS gambles and, 438
Merging, 287
Mervis, C. B., 38–39, 124, 131
Metaphors, 8–9, 40–41
Metric DEMO See Trees
Metric axioms. See Mathematical psychology
Milojkovic, J., 283–284
Minimality, 7
Modality, 127–128
Models
additive di¤erence, 449–454, 458–461
additive-random-aspect, 504–505
additive tree, 4 (see also ADDTREE)
advertisements and, 489
Bayesian, 195, 205, 278–279, (see also Bayesian
model)
belief, DEMO
comparative ignorance, 777–793
constant-ratio, 480–484, 497, 504, 507, 509, 513–
522, 525, 533–534
contingent trade-o¤, 857–863
contrast, 3–4, DEMO (see also Contrast model)
decomposition, 535
elimination-by-aspects, 405–406, 463–492
elimination by tree (EBT), 499, 502–503, 505,
537–540
features and, 171–186 (see also Features)
generalized extreme value, 535
geometric, 3–4, 139–143, 150, 152, 156–157
Hendry, 534
hierarchical elimination (HEM), 493–494, 499–
503, 535
‘‘hot hand’’, 257–265, 267, 269–273
lexicographic, 434–448, 467–468
loss aversion, 895–915
LSK, 267, 269–273
Luce, 464, 467, 471, 479–480, 484
multinomial logit, 534–535
DEMO logit, 535
power, 353–356
prominence hypothesis and, 847–863
prospect theory DEMO, 560–579
ratio, 15–16
reason-based choice, 937–962
Shafer, 397–398
similarity, DEMO (see also Similarity)
spatial, 47, 158
SSA, 57–66, DEMO, 681
support theory, 331–333, 400–402
trees and, 4, 34–37, 49–53, 493–503 (see also
Trees)
utility, 549–560 (see also DEMO model)
Moderate stochastic transitivity, 475–476
1014
Money-pump, 455–456
Monotonicity, 11–12, 43
alternatives at choice point and, 414
ordinal analysis and, 315
power model and, 353–356
scaling and, 353
support theory and, 353
Morse Code, 21–22
Mortality studies, DEMO
unpacking and, 388–389
Motives, 242–243
Mu¨ ller-Lyer illusion, 607, 615
Multidimensional scaling. See Scaling
Multinomial logit (MNL) model, 534–535
Multiple designation, 307
Multiplicative inequality, 476, 505
Natural assessment. See Judgment
Nearest neighbor analysis, 4
applications of, 142–156
auditory studies and, 165
categorical ratings and, 168–170
centrality and, 130–142
color and, 163–164
diagnostic functions of, 156–158
geometric and statistical model, 139–142, 156–
157
gustatory studies and, 166
KYST method and, 135, 140, 142, 151, 153–155
DEMO and, 164
MDS and, 142
multiple foci and, 152–156
olfactory DEMO and, 166
outliers and, 152–156
proximity data and, 129–130, 158–159
reciprocity and, 130–142
scaling and, 129–152
Negotiation. See Conﬂict resolution
Nested DEMO model, 535
Network models. See Trees
Newcomb’s Problem, 712–717, 825
DEMO England Medical Center, 233
Nonadditive set function, 329
Nonaligned voter’s theory, 640–641, 837–841
Nonlinear preferences, 673–674
Non-valued features, 956–957
Normative rules, 593–595, 611–613
Null hypothesis, 195
Numerical judgment, 315–322
Objects. See Stimuli
Observed hit rate, 304
Olfactory studies, 143, 145, 148–149, 166
Optimistic overconﬁdence, 729–734
Index
Options. See Alternatives; Choice
Ordinal analysis, 311–315
contingencies and, 871–872
economic forecasting and, 316–322
extensionality principle and, 366–367
payo¤ scheme and, 880
solvability condition and, 366
subadditivity and, 763–766
support theory and, 366–367
weighting function and, 763–766
Outliers, 152–156
Overconﬁdence, 729–734
Pareto optimality, 410, 604, 933
Party supporter’s theory, 640–641, 838–841
Patient rights, 583–591
Pauker, Stephen G., 407, 583–591
Payo¤
contingencies and, 867–868 (see also
Contingencies)
contrast e¤ect and, 917–935
endowment and, 917–935
legal decisions and, 963–978
LS gambles and, 435–442
matrices, 287, 434
ordinal scheme of, 880
preference reversal and, DEMO
Prisoner’s Dilemma and, 287, 705–712, 719, 723–
724
weighting function and, 747–775
Piagetian experiments, 232
Plott, Charles R., 877, 883
Political choice, 516–519
competency hypothesis and, 654–658
consequentialist reasoning and, 719–721
elections and, 307–308
Equal Rights Amendment and, 621–622, 630–
631
invariance and, 631–635
nonaligned voter’s theory and, 640–641
party supporter’s theory and, 640–641
psychological analyses of, 621–644
ratio-di¤erence principle and, 631–635
uncertainty and, 654–658
voter’s illusion and, 836–841
Pollack, I., 417–418
Possibility theory, DEMO, 551–554, 797
Power model, 353–356
Prediction, 207–208, 301. See DEMO Chance;
Probability
binary complimentarity and, 351–352
categorical, 322–323
competency hypothesis and, 647–665
conﬁdence and, 275
Index
conﬂict resolution and, 731–732
contingencies and, 864–866
The Corporate Jungle DEMO, 287–288
economic, 316–322
expert, 659–662
intuition and, 234–236, 243–245
DEMO shots and, 658–659
support theory and, 351–352 (see also Support
DEMO)
uncertainty and, 659–662 (see also Uncertainty)
Preference, 405–410
DEMO di¤erence model and, 458–461
alternatives at choice point and, 413–418
ambiguity aversion and, 777–793
belief and, 795–822
bias and, 203–220
binary choice and, 419–431
comparative ignorance and, 777–793
compatibility hypothesis and, 880–883
conﬂict resolution and, 729–746
consequentialist reasoning and, 703–727
contingencies and, 825–844 (DEMO also
Contingencies)
decision framing and, 593–619
discrimination function and, 414–415
elicitation of, 583–591
elimination-by-aspects and, 463–492
extremeness aversion and, 950–951
intransitivity of, 433–461
legal decisions and, 963–993
loss aversion and, 895–915
nonconsequential reasoning and, 703–727
nonlinear, 673–674
of patients, 583–591
political choice and, 621–644
prospect theory and, 560–579 (see also Prospect
theory)
reason-based choice and, 937–962
reversals and, 408–409, 866–870, 875–885
strong stochastic DEMO and, 419–422
uncertainty and, 645–672 (see also Uncertainty)
utility DEMO and, 549–560
weighting function and, 567–572, 747–775
Preference trees, 536
additive-random-aspect model and, 504–505
agenda e¤ects and, 523–533
aggregate probability and, 509–513
applicant choice and, 527–533
applications of, 513–523
compatibility theorem and, 525–527, 544–545
consequences of, 503–509
constant-ratio model and, 497, 504, 507, 509,
513–522, 525, 533–534
constrained choice and, 523–533
DEMO
elimination by tree model (EBT) and, 499, 502–
503, DEMO, 537–545
equivalence theorem and, 503, 538–540
Hendry model and, 534
hierarchical elimination model (HEM) and, 493–
494, 499–503
Luce and, 496–497
moderate stochastic transitivity and, 505
multinomial logit model and, 534–535
DEMO inequality and, 505
quarternary condition and, 507–508
random utility model and, 504–505
recursion and, 495–496
regularity and, 505
representation theorem and, DEMO
similarity and, 503–505, 508–509
structure theorem and, 499, 537–538
theory of, 494–513
trinary condition and, 506–508, 515–516, 527,
531
DEMO and, 543–544
Prescriptive functions, 369–371
Principle of dual entitlement, 741–742
DEMO Dilemma, 287
consequentialist reasoning and, 705–712, 719,
723–724
voter’s DEMO and, 837
Probabilistic insurance, 555–557
Probability, 189–191, 301
additive di¤erence model and, 453–454
additive measure and, 329
aggregate, 509–513
ambiguity aversion and, 777–793
availability and, 210–214, 220–224
background data and, 281–284
DEMO rate and, 281–284, 308–309
Bayesian model and, 278–281 (see also Bayesian
model)
belief and, 795–822
binary choice and, 419–431
Brier’s DEMO function, 303
calibration and, 302–311
causal conjunctions and, 239–245
comparative DEMO and, 777–793
competency hypothesis and, 647–665
conﬁdence and, 275–285
conjunction DEMO, 215–216, 221–256
constant-ratio model and, 480–484, 504, 507,
DEMO, 533–534
contingencies and, 825–843 (see also
Contingencies)
The Corporate DEMO and, 287–288
decision theory and, 218, 593–619
Dempster-Shafer theory and, 329
1016
Probability (cont.)
discriminability and, 284–285
disjunction and, 215–216
Dow-Jones and, 216–217
economic forecasting and, 316–322
elimination-by-aspects and, 463–492
endowment and, 929–930
enhancement e¤ect and, 356–365
equal-support lines and, 278–280
extensionality principle and, 221–222, 245–247
fallacy and, 193–194, 229, 231, 238–239
DEMO elimination and, 494–503
‘‘hot hand’’ analysis and, 257–265, 267, 269–
273
illusion and, 252–254
insensitivity and, 204–208
instance retrievability and, 211
insurance and, 555–557, 573–574
intuition and, 248–250 (see also Intuition)DEMO
judged, 802
law of small numbers and, 193–201
logic and, DEMO
mean absolute di¤erence and, 810
median and, 800, 810, 815–816
misconceptions of chance and, 207
multiple designation and, 307
multiplicative function DEMO, 867
observed hit rate, 304
optimistic overconﬁdence and, 729–734
ordinal DEMO and, 311–315
patient preference and, 583–591
possibility theory and, 329
DEMO model and, 353–356
prediction and, 207, 234–236, 243–245
preference trees and, 493–503
prior outcomes and, 204–205
prospect theory and, 549–581 (DEMO also Prospect
theory)
quaternary, 466
random walk sequences, 378
regression misconceptions and, 209–210
representativeness and, 224–239
revisionist school and, 329
risk and, 236–238
sample size and, 205–207, 277–281 (see also
Sampling)DEMO
search set e¤ectiveness and, 211–212
staircase method and, 367–369
subjective, DEMO, 329, 666
substitutability and, 419–431
support theory and, 329 (DEMO also Support theory)
targeting and, 283–284
transitivity and, 419–420, DEMO
uniqueness and, 543–544
Index
upper/lower indicators and, 367–369
utility theory and, 504–505, 549–560
validity illusion and, 208–209
weighting function and, DEMO
Product rule, 334
Prominence hypothesis
compatibility principle and, 854–857
interpersonal tests and, 848–853
intrapersonal tests and, 853–854
trade-o¤ models and, 857–863
Proportionality, 334
Prospect theory, 406, 580–581, 701–702
asset integration and, 549–550
axiomatic analysis of, 577–579, 695–700
belief and, 795–822
cancellation and, DEMO
certainty e¤ect and, 551–554
coding and, 561
combination and, 561
DEMO independence and, 696
computer studies in, 682–693
consequences and, 686–692, 694
cumulative, 675–682
decision making theory and, 596 (see also
Decision making theory)
dominance detection and, 562
double matching and, 696
DEMO operations and, 561–564
expectation and, 549
extensions and, 577
framing DEMO, 407, 673–675
incentives and, 692–693
insurance and, 555–557, 573–574
DEMO e¤ect and, 557–561
nonlinear preferences and, 679–682
normative rules and, DEMO
possibility and, 551–554
prospect evaluation and, 562–564
reference shifts and, DEMO
reﬂection e¤ect and, 554–555
risk and, 550, 572–574
Russian roulette DEMO, 571
scaling and, 562–564, 686–692
simpliﬁcation and, 562
stochastic dominance and, 678–679
tradeo¤ consistency and, 697–700
value function and, 564–567, DEMO
weighting function and, 567–572, 679–694, 747–
775
Prototypicality, 38–40
Proximity data
categorical ratings and, 168–170
centrality and, 130–142
identiﬁcation error and, 97
Index
1017
nearest neighbor analysis and, 129–130, 158–159
(see also Nearest neighbor analysis)
quaternary comparison and, 130
reciprocity and, 130–142
recognition DEMO and, 97
scaling and, 47, 130–152
trees and, 47 (DEMO also Trees)
Pseudocertainty
conﬂict resolution and, 734–737
rational choice and, 606–611, 637–639
Pseudodominance e¤ect, 737
Psychology
advertisements and, 488–489
arthritis fallacies and, 377–381
belief and, 795–822
bias and, 203–220
of choice, DEMO (see also Choice)
conﬁdence and, 275–299
conﬂict resolution and, DEMO
contrast e¤ect and, 917–935
decision framing and, 593–619
decision theory and, 218
dissonance theory and, 828–830
elimination-by-aspects and, 486–488
endowment and, DEMO
fallacy and, 229, 231, 238–239
Gestalt, 14
‘‘hot hand’’ analysis and, 257–265, 267, 269–
273
judgment and, 203–220 (see also Judgment)
law of small numbers and, 193–201
loss aversion and, DEMO
magical thinking and, 716–717
mathematical, 3 (see also Mathematical
psychology)DEMO
political choice and, 621–644
preference reversal and, 875–885
psychophysics and, DEMO
reason-based choice, 937–962
reference dependence and, 901–908
self-deception and, 825–844
DEMO and, 43–45 (see also Similarity)
subadditivity and, 397–399
transitivity DEMO, 433
validity and, 208–209, 291–294
Psychophysics, 632–633
Quantitative matching, DEMO
Quasi-magical thinking, 716–717
Quaternary condition, 130, 466, 507–508
Quattrone, DEMO A., 407–408
magical thinking and, 716–717
political choice and, 621–644
DEMO, 284–285
Rai¤a, H., 744
Ramsey-Savage approach, 567, 645
Randomness. DEMO Probability
Ratio-di¤erence principle, 631–635
Ratio model. See Constant-ratio model (CRM)
Reason-based choice, 961–962
asymmetry and, 946–951
conﬂict and, 943–951
disjunction and, 952–956
dissonance and, 959–960
dominance structures and, 943–951, 959
equal DEMO and, 939–940
extremeness aversion and, 950–951
non-valued features and, 956–957
DEMO/con analysis and, 940–943
regularity condition and, 946
traditional approaches to, 937–939
Reciprocity, 131–134, 136–137
ADDTREE and, 135
asymptotic value analysis DEMO, 141
centrality and, 135, 138–139
geometry and, 139–142
KYST method and, 135, 140
outliers and, 156
quaternary comparison and, 130
DEMO mean for, 135
scaling and, 142–152
Recognition speed, 97
Redelmeier, Donald A., 377–381, 409, 887–893
Reduced form, 302
Reference dependence, 895
diminishing sensitivity and, 903–904
loss aversion and, 901–908
Reﬂection e¤ect, 554–555
Regression analysis
Bayes’ Rule and, 278–279
equal-support lines and, 278–280
DEMO of, 209–210
Regret theory, 681
Regularity, 475–476, 505
reason-based choice and, 946–951
Relative feature weight, 39–40
Religion, 716–717, 827–828, 830
Replication samples, 197–199
Representativeness. See also Models
bias and, 203–210
conﬁdence DEMO, 275–299
conjunctions and, 224–239
cumulative prospect theory and, 673–700
decision DEMO theory and, 593–619
direct/indirect tests and, 227–229
EBA model and, 478–484
fallacy and, 238–239
frequency and, 225–226
1018
Representativeness (cont.)
medical judgment and, 232–234
prediction and, 234–236
risk and, 236–238
similarity and, 224–225
theorems for, 14–16, 45, 508–509, 540–543
transparency and, 229–232
trees and, 47–74 (see also DEMO)
variance and, 224–225
Restle, F., 471, 496
Retrievability, DEMO
Revisionists, 329
Risk, 236–238
ambiguity aversion and, 777–793
aversion, 550
belief and, 795–822
certainty e¤ect and, 551–554
comparative ignorance and, 777–793
computer studies in, 682–693
decision framing and, 593–619
insurance and, 555–557
isolation e¤ect and, 557–560
loss aversion and, 599–604, 895–915
patient preference and, 583–591
political choice and, 622–628
possibility and, 551–554
prospect theory and, 560–579 (see also Prospect
theory)
reference shifts and, 574–576
reﬂection e¤ect and, 554–555
Russian roulette and, 571
utility theory and, 549–560, 622–631
value function and, 564–567
weighting function and, 567–572, DEMO
Rosch, E., 22–23, 38–40, 85, 124, 131
Ross, DEMO, 283–284
Rothbart, Myron, 648–649
Rothkopf, E. Z., 21–22
Rottenstreich, Yuval, 191, 383–402, 409, 963–993
Russian roulette, 571, 635–637
DEMO, J. Edward, 405, 419–431
Salience, 15, 330
Sampling, 189
Bayesian model and, 278–281
bias and, 203–220
conﬁdence and, 277–281
error in, 199–200
illusory correlation and, 213–214
insensitivity and, 204–208
law of small numbers and, 193–201
retrievability and, 211
search set e¤ectiveness and, 211–212
size and, 213–214, 277–281
Index
validity illusion and, 291–294
variation errors and, 199
Samuelson, William, 898–899
Satisfaction, 922–925
Sattath, Shmuel, 3–4, 406, 409
contingencies and, 845–874
feature models and, 171–186
preference trees and, 493–545
similarity trees and, 47–74
Savage, L. J., 466, 474
sure-thing principle and, 703–705, 710–711, 714,
721
Scaling, 94–95, 97
binary choice and, 419–431
categorical ratings and, DEMO, 159, 168–170
centrality and, 130–152
degeneracy and, 142
elimination-by-aspects and, 464–484
HCS and, 47
independence condition and, 420–421
KYST method and, 133, 135, 140, 142
monotonicity and, 353
multidimensional, 47, 142–152
nearest neighbor analysis and, 129–152
ordinal, 311–315
preference and, 405
prospect theory and, 562–564, 686–692, 694
reciprocity and, 130–152
simple, 419–422, 464–467
smallest space analysis and, 57–66, 69
strong stochastic transitivity and, 419–422
substitutability and, 419–431
support theory and, 353–356
tradeo¤ consistency and, 697–700
transitivity and, 433
weighting function and, 750
Scenarios, DEMO
Schelling, Thomas, 603, 947
Schkade, David A., 881–882
Scholastic DEMO Test (SAT), 527–528, 530, 856
Scientiﬁc American, 713–715
Search sets, 211–212
Second International Congress on Forecasting, 244
Security analysis, 275
Self-deception
causal outcomes and, 825–826, 836–843
decision logic and, 825–827
diagnostic outcomes and, 825–826, 830–843
dissonance theory and, 828–830
psychology of choice and, 827–830
voter’s illusion and, 836–841
Semiorders, 434–435
Sensitivity, 895, 903–904
Shafer, G., 329, 334–335, 338
Index
1019
belief functions and, 397–398
enhancement e¤ect and, 356–365
Shaﬁr, Eldar, 408, 410
nonconsequential reasoning and, 703–727
reason-based choice and, DEMO
Shehata, Mohamed, 692–693
Short, Purvis, 257
Signals, 21–22
Sign-comonotonic DEMO consistency, 697–700
Similarity, ix–x
ADDTREE and, 47, 53–69
of animals, 58–60
axiomatic theory of, 43–45
baseline, 124–125
bias and, 203–220
DEMO choice and, 419–431
CF and DF model comparison and, 171–186
clusters and, 34–37, 88–93
context and, 28–34, 86–93
contrast model and, 3, 75–76
of countries, 17–18, 82–84
diagnosticity principle and, 28–32, 88–93
di¤erence and, 26–27, 77–80
directionality and, 80–86
elicitation and, DEMO
extension e¤ect and, 32–33
family resemblance and, 38–40
feature matching and, 10–16
of ﬁgures, 18–19, 84–86
focus and, 16–24
geometric approach DEMO, 7–8
index parameters for, 76
of letters, 19–21, 60–63
mathematical psychology and, 3 (see also
Mathematical psychology)
metaphors and, 8–9, 40–41
nearest neighbor analysis and, 129–170 (see also
Nearest neighbor analysis)
of occupations, 63–65
order of presentation and, 24–25
preference trees DEMO, 503–505, 508–509
prototypicality and, 38–40
ratio model and, 15–16
relative weight judgment and, 77–78
representativeness and, 3–4, 224–225
Rosch and, DEMO
scaling and, 75–76, 94–95
of signals, 21–22
similes and, 8–9, 40–41
skewness theorem and, 70–73
support theory and, 391–395
symmetry and, 8–9, 16–24, 80–86
trees and, 34–37, 47–74 (see also DEMO)
two faces of, 33–34
Similes, 8–9, 40–41
Simon, Herbert, 621
Simonson, Itamar, 937–962
Simple scalability, 419–422
elimination-by-aspects and, 464–467
Simpliﬁcation, 562
Skewness theorem, 70–73
Slovic, Paul, 329–330, 409, DEMO
conﬁdence and, 280–281
contingencies and, 845–874
preference reversal and, 880–882
DEMO choice and, 940
Smallest space analysis (SSA), 57–66, 69, 681
Smith, R., 267, 269, 269–273
Snyder, Mark, 648–649
DEMO condition, 44, 366–367
Source dependence, 674
Sox, Harold C. Jr., 407, 583–591
Spatial density model, 158
Spatial representation, 47
additive/DEMO features and, 98–123
feature exchangeability and, 104, 117–120
geometric models DEMO, 75 (see also Models)
higher-dimension, 133
pictorial stimuli and, 113–117
scaling and, 143–152
subadditivity and, 121–123
task e¤ects and, 125–126
trees and, 66 (see also Trees)
Speciﬁcity, 301, 310–311, 329–330
Sports studies
basketball, 257–265, 269–273, 354, 800–808
belief model DEMO, 800–808
cumulative uncertainty and, 680–682
overconﬁdence and, 733
power model DEMO, 354
staircase method and, 367–369
support theory and, 346–347
uncertainty DEMO, 654–659
weighting function and, 755–766
Staircase method, 367–369
Stars, 138
Statistics. See also Probability
base rate and, 281–284
bias and, 203–220
DEMO and, 130–135
conﬁdence and, 275–285
conﬂict resolution and, 731–732
discriminability DEMO, 284–285
geometric model and, 139–143, 150, 152, 156–
157
DEMO and, 139–142
law of small numbers and, 193–201
sample size and, 277–281
1020
STEPIT program, 483, 516, 519
Stereotypes, 222, 225–226
Stimuli
additive/substitutive features and, 98–123
alternatives at choice point and, 413–418
DEMO semantic, 166–168
auditory, 143–152
binary choice and, 419–431
color and, 163–164
compound verbal, 109–110
constant-ratio model and, 480–484
country similarity and, 17–18
diagnosticity principle and, 28–32
EBA model and, 478–484
extension e¤ect DEMO, 32–33
features and, 10–16, 104, 117–120
ﬁgures and, 18–19
DEMO and, 110–111
gustatory, 143, 145, 148–149, 166
independence condition DEMO, 420–421
interpretation and, 126
letters and, 19–21, 164
nearest neighbor analysis and, 129–130
olfactory, 143, 145, 148–149, 166
pictorial, DEMO
preference and, 413–418 (see also Preference)
relative weight judgment and, 77–78
representational models for, 3–5 (see also
Models)
Rosch study and, 22–23
salience and, 15
scaling and, 130–152
signals and, DEMO
strong stochastic transitivity and, 419–422
substitutability and, 419–431
symmetry and, DEMO, 16–24
validity illusion and, 291–294
verbal, 117–120 (see also Verbal expression)
visual, 143–152
Stochastic dominance, 678–679
Streak shooting, 257–265
Strong stochastic transitivity (SST), 419–422
Structure theorem, 499, 537–538
Subadditivity, DEMO, 332–333, 335–336
belief and, 797–799
binary complimentarity and, 351–352
bounded, 797, 800–816
conditioning and, 337–338
contingencies and, 857–863
cumulative uncertainty DEMO, 680–682
expert judgment and, 344–345
explicit/implicit, 384–396
insurance and, 573–574
nontransparent dominance and, 604–606
Index
ordinal analysis and, 763–766
prospect DEMO and, 572–574 (see also Prospect
theory)
psychological basis for, DEMO
representativeness and, 751, 755–758, 772–773
staircase method and, 367–369
support theory and, 348–351 (see also Support
theory)
unpacking and, 339–345, 383–396
weighting function and, 604–606, 751–753, 760–
769
Subjectivity, 286–288. See also Preference
belief and, 797–822
conﬁdence and, 286–288
conﬂict resolution DEMO, 729–746
deceptive diagnosis and, 830–836
elimination-by-aspects and, 463–492
extensionality principle DEMO, 365–371
fairness and, 741–743
magical thinking and, 716–717
nonconsequential reasoning DEMO, 703–727
patient preference and, 583–591
prescriptive function and, 369–371
probability DEMO, 666
self-deception and, 825–844
support theory and, 333
uncertainty and, 645–647 (see also Uncertainty)
weighting function and, 567–572
Substitutability, 405
binary choice and, 419–431
independence condition and, 420–421
strong stochastic transitivity DEMO, 419–420
utility model and, 749
Suggestibility, 343–344
Suppes, P., DEMO
Support theory, 372
advances in, 383–402
anchoring and, 395–396
Bayesian DEMO and, 329–330, 335, 397
belief and, 798, 806–808
binary DEMO and, 334, 351–352, 367–
369, 376, 401–402
component number DEMO, 351
conditioning and, 337–338
consequences and, 334–335
data and, 338–356
description of, 331–333, 400–402
economic indicators and, 808–815
elementary condition and, 331
enhancement and, 338, 356–365
evaluation frame and, 331–332
exclusive DEMO and, 331
extensionality principle and, 329–330, 365–371
frequency and, 352–353
Index
global weight and, 336
hypotheses and, 331, 383, 798
DEMO disjunction and, 331
memory and, 333
monotonicity and, 353
mortality DEMO and, 339–343
null condition and, 331
ordinal analysis and, 366–367
DEMO model and, 353–356
prescriptive implications and, 369–371
product rule, 334
DEMO and, 334, 374–376
scaling and, 353–356
similarity and, 391–395
solvability condition and, 366–367
sports studies and, 800–808
staircase method and, 367–369
subadditivity and, 332–333, 335–336, 343–353,
367–369
subjectivity and, 336
DEMO and, 343–344
theorems for, 373–376
unpacking and, 334, 339, DEMO, 806–808
upper/lower indicators and, 367–369
Surcharges, 602–604
Sure-thing principle, 703–705, 710–711, 714,
721
Symmetry, 4, 7
centrality and, 130–142
CF and DR model comparison and, 171–176
choice and, 81
DEMO resolution and, 729–746
contrast model and, 80–86
countries and, 17–18
DEMO and, 80–86
ﬁgures and, 18–19
focus and, 16–24
letters and, 19–21
nearest neighbor analysis and, 130–142
reason-based choice and, 946–951
reciprocity DEMO, 130–142
representation theorem and, 14–16, 45
Rosch and, 22–23
signals and, 21–22
similarity and, 8–9
symmetric di¤erence and, 172
Task e¤ects, 125–126
Tau values, 425, 427
Telephone medicine, 889–890
Temporal unpacking, 388–391
Thaler, Richard H., 602–603, 875–885
Three color problem, 782–784
DEMO clusters, 52–53
1021
Tradeo¤s
consistency and, 697–700
contrast and, 963–964 (see also Contrast model)
legal decisions and, 963–993
loss aversion and, 899–900
models of, 857–863
reason-based choice and, 937–962
regularity and, DEMO
Transitivity, 405, 457
additive di¤erence model and, 449–454
alternatives and, 433–454
decision framing and, 594
diabolical intransitive value and, 454–455
economics DEMO, 433, 455–456
importance of, 433
independence condition and, 420–421
intransitive choice studies and, 435–448, 454–
455
LS model and, 434–448, DEMO
moderate stochastic, 475–476, 505
money-pump and, 455–456
payo¤ matrix and, 434
preference reversal and, 875–885
preference trees and, 505
psychology and, 433
rational behavior and, 455–456
scaling and, 433
strong stochastic, 419–422
theorems for, 458–461
violation of, 435
weak stochastic, 434–448, 453–454, 458–461
Transparency, 227–232
Trees, 7, 34–37
additive, 4, 48, DEMO
ADDTREE and, 47, 53–69
centrality and, 134, 138
CF and DF model comparison and, 171–186
clusters and, 47–49, 52–60
compatibility and, 68
decomposition of, 67–69
deﬁned, 50
dissimilarity representation and, 50–52
DEMO distribution and, 69–71
estimation and, 55–56
fans and, 138
features DEMO, 67, 173–179
HCS averaging and, 57
preference, 493–503 (see DEMO Preference trees)
reciprocity and, 138
skewness theorem and, 70–73
spatial representations and, 66
stars and, 138
ultrametric inequality and, 47–51, DEMO
unpacking and, 339–345
1022
Triangle inequality, 7, 9, 130
Trinary conditions, 506–508, 515–516, 527, 531
Tversky, Amos
accomplishments of, ix–xii
complete bibliography of, 995–1000
deliberative studies of, xi
insights of, x–xi
mathematical psychology and, 3
nearest neighbor analysis and, 4
papers of, xi–xii
similarity model DEMO, ix–x
Ultrametric inequality, 47–51, 67–69
Uncertainty, 671–672. See also Judgment
alternatives at choice point and, 413–418
ambiguity aversion and, 645–647, 777–793
ambiguity manipulations and, 666–670
Bayesian model and, 666, 669–670
belief and, 795–822
choice-judgment discrepancy and, 650
comonotonic independence and, 696
comparative ignorance and, 777–793
competency hypothesis and, 647–665
complementary bets and, 662–665
computer studies in, 682–693
conﬂict resolution and, 729–746
data calibration and, 654
diminishing sensitivity and, 679
double matching and, 696
economics and, 755–766
elimination-by-aspects and, 463–492
Ellsberg and, 645–646
gambles and, 645–665
illusion and, 648–649
incentives and, 692–693
information and, 662–665
knowledge betting and, DEMO
nonconsequential reasoning and, 703–727
nonlinear preferences and, 679–682
political choice and, 654–659
prediction and, 659–662
preference and, 408
prospect theory and, DEMO
quantifying of, 645
Ramsey approach and, 645
reason-based choice and, DEMO
sports studies and, 654–659, 755–766
stochastic dominance and, 678–679
subjective DEMO and, 666
tradeo¤ consistency and, 697–700
unpacking and, 363–365
weighting DEMO and, 747–776
Uniqueness, 543–544
Index
Unitary alternatives, 484
Unpacking, 190–191, 334, 339. See also Support
theory
anchoring and, 395–396
belief and, 806–808
categorical, 362
causal vs. temporal, 388–391
conjunctive, 362
disjunction DEMO and, 386
enhancement e¤ect and, 356–365
expert judgment and, 344–345
DEMO and, 385–386
mortality studies and, 339–343
similarity and, 391–395
subadditivity DEMO, 343–344, 383, 387–391
suggestibility and, 343–344
synthetic distributions and, DEMO
uncertainty and, 363–365
Upper/lower indicators, 367–369
Utility model
asset integration and, 549–550
causal contingencies and, 639–642
certainty e¤ect and, 551–554
citizen’s duty and, 640
comonotonic independence and, 696
computer studies in, 682–693
consequentialist reasoning and, 703–727
contingencies and, 845–846 (see also
Contingencies)
cumulative, 673–700
diminishing sensitivity and, 679
double matching and, 696
expectation and, 549
gambles and, 549–551
insurance and, 555–557
isolation e¤ect and, 557–560
loss aversion and, 628–631
nonaligned voter’s theory and, 640–641
nonlinear preferences and, 679–682
party supporter’s theory and, 640–641
political choice and, 621–644
possibility and, 551–554
prospect theory and, 549–581
pseudocertainty and, 606–611, 637–639, 734–737
reﬂection e¤ect and, 554–555
reference e¤ects and, 622–631
DEMO and, 550, 622–628
stochastic dominance and, 678–679
subadditivity and, 751–753 (see also
Subadditivity)
substitution and, 749
tradeo¤ consistency and, 697–700
weighting function and, 747–750
Index
1023
Validity, 208–209
conﬁdence and, 275–299
illusion and, 291–294
Value function, 564–567
belief and, 799
computer experiments in, 682–693
consequences and, 686–692, 694
cumulative prospect theory and, 679–693
decision making theory and, 599–600
diminished sensitivity and, 895, 903–904
loss aversion, 599–600
robustness DEMO, 762–763
scaling and, 686–692
weighting function and, 747–750, 759
Variance. See Invariance
Verbal expression, 244
ambiguity and, 646–647
of faces, 117–118
feature exchangeability and, 117–120
holistic, 126
interpretation and, 126
judgment and, 117–120, 315–322
metaphors and, 8–9, 40–41
nearest neighbor analysis and, 165
processing and, 126
of scenery, 119–120
similes and, 8–9, DEMO
subadditivity and, 121–123
task e¤ects and, 125–126
uncertainty and, 250–252, 329
Visual stimuli, 143–152
von Winterfeldt, D., 280–281
Voter’s illusion, DEMO
Wason’s selection task, 718–721
Weak stochastic transitivity (WST), 434
additive di¤erence model and, 453–454, 458–461
lexicographic semiorder (LS) model and, 435–448
violation of, 435
Weighting function, 774–775
belief and, 766–770, DEMO, 819–820
certainty and, 606–611
chance events and, 635–642
computer experiments DEMO, 682–693
consequences and, 686–692, 694
cumulative prospect theory and, 679–694
decision making theory and, 604–611
events and, 750
experimental trials on, 755–766
gap interpretation and, 761
insurance and, 555–557, 573–574
invariance and, 845–846
matching and, 846–847, 863–864, 871
nontransparent dominance and, 604–606
ordinal analysis and, 763–766, 871–872
performance prediction and, 864–866
preference reversals and, 866–870
preference trees and, 495–496
prominence hypothesis and, 847–863
prospect theory and, 567–572, 747–750
pseudocertainty and, 606–611
Ramsey-Savage approach and, DEMO
relative sensitivity and, 754
robustness and, 762–763
Russian roulette and, DEMO
scaling and, 686–692, 750
source preference and, 770–772
S-shaped, 749, 751–752
subadditivity and, 751, 752–769, 772–773
Wish, M., 21–22
DEMO, Richard, 898–899
{1g42fwefx}