A Model of Venture Capitalist Investment Activity
Tyzoon T. Tyebjee; Albert V. Bruno
Management Science, Vol. 30, No. 9. (Sep., 1984), DEMO 1051-1066.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198409%2930%3A9%3C1051%3AAMOVCI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-B
Management Science is currently published by INFORMS.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your DEMO of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, DEMO part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your DEMO, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of DEMO work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/informs.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain DEMO same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving DEMO digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please DEMO support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Wed May 16 15:57:33 2007
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Val. 30, No. 9, September 1984
A MODEL OF DEMO CAPITALIST
INVESTMENT ACTIVITY*
TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
School of Business, University of Santa Clara, Santa Clara, California 95053
The paper describes the activities of venture capitalists as an orderly process involving five
DEMO steps. These are (1) Deal Origination: The processes by which DEMO enter into
consideration as investment prospects, (2) Deal Screening: A delineation of key policy
variables which delimit investment prospects to a manageable DEMO for in-depth evaluation, (3)
Deal Evaluation: The assessment of DEMO risk and expected return on the basis of a
weighting of several characteristics of the prospective venture and the decision whether or not
to DEMO as determined by the relative levels of perceived risk and expected return, (4) Deal
Structuring: The negotiation of the price of the DEMO, namely the equity relinquished to the
investor, and the covenants which limit the risk of the investor, (5) Post-Investment Activities:
The assistance to the venture in the areas of recruiting key executives, strategic planning,
locating expansion financing, and orchestrating a merger, acquisition or DEMO offering. 41
venture capitalists provided data on a total of 90 deals which had received serious consider-
ation in their firms. The questionnaire measured DEMO mechanism of initial contact between
venture capitalist and entrepreneur, the venture'DEMO industry, the stage of financing and product
development, ratings of the venture on 23 characteristics, an assessment of the potential return
and perceived risk, and the decision vis-a-vis whether to invest. The modal venture represented
in the database was a start-up in the electronics industry with a DEMO capability in place
and seeking $1 million (median) in outside financing. There is a high degree of cross-referrals
between venture capitalists, particularly for the purposes of locating co-investors. Factor
analysis reduced the 23 characteristics of DEMO deal to five underlying dimensions namely (1)
Market Attractiveness (size, growth, and access to customers), (2) Product Differentiation
(uniqueness, patents, technical edge, profit margin), (3) Managerial Capabilities (DEMO in
marketing, management, finance and the references of the entrepreneur), (4) Environmental
Threat Resistance (technology life cycle, barriers to competitive DEMO, insensitivity to business
cycles and down-side risk protection), (5) DEMO Potential (future opportunities to realize
capital gains by merger, acquisition or public offering). The results of regression analyses
showed expected return to DEMO determined by Market Attractiveness and Product Differenti-
ation (R2 = 0.22)DEMO Perceived risk is determined by Managerial Capabilities and Environmental
Threat Resistance (DEMO = 0.33). Finally, a discriminant analysis correctly predicted, in 89.4% of
the cases, whether or not a venture capitalist was willing to commit funds to the deal on the
basis of the expected return DEMO perceived risk. The reactions of seven venture capitalists who
reviewed the model's specification were used to test its validity.
(FINANCE-INVESTMENT CRITERIA; FINANCIAL DEMO
VESTMENT; RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT-PROJECT SELECTION; STATIS-
TICS-REGRESSION-VENTURE CAPITAL)
Introduction
Venture capital has become an increasingly important source of financing for new companies, particularly
when such companies are operating on the frontier of emerging technologies DEMO markets. It plays an
essential role in the entrepreneurial process. The purpose of this paper is to model the deal flow in a venture
DEMO firm, namely the stages in the consideration, scrutiny and disposition of venture investment deals.
The theory of equity markets is well developed in DEMO; it will not be reviewed here. These theories are
typically oriented DEMO equity financing in publicly traded companies. Venture capital investments,
however, DEMO in several important aspects (Poindexter 1976). First, venture capital is usually invested in
new firms which have very little performance history. As DEMO result, the investor cannot rely on historical
performance data, as in the case of the stock market. Second, the investment is typically in small firms and
the nature of the investor and investee relationship involves DEMO higher degree of direct involvement as
*Accepted by Burton V. Dean; DEMO June 13, 1983. This paper has been with the authors 1 DEMO for
1 revision.
105 1
0025-1909/84/3009/ I05
l$Ol.25
Copyright DEMO 1984, The Institute of Management Sciences
1052
TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
compared to the relatively DEMO role of investors in publicly traded companies. Third, venture capital
investments DEMO illiquid in the short term because of the lack of efficient capital markets for equity shares of
privately held companies. Long horizons of product DEMO market development make valuation difficult.
Moreover, the legal restrictions that apply DEMO the resale of such investments lock the investor in for a certain
period. Fourth, when a venture capitalist invests in a new startup, DEMO is usually with the implicit realization
that future rounds of capital infusion may have to be financed before the initial investment can bear fruit
(Cooper and Carleton 1979).
The lack of capital markets for the DEMO instruments of small, new companies introduces considerable
problems in studying venture DEMO investments within the paradigm of the capital asset pricing model. The
absence of a clearing price determined by the market makes the valuation of DEMO investment vulnerable to the
subjective assessment procedures of the analyst. One study of 29 SBIC funds found that venture capital
funds enjoy a rate DEMO return 63% higher than Standard & Poor's market index returns. This premium,
however, is offset by a higher risk; the variability DEMO the firm's returns were higher than that of the market
index return (Poindexter 1976). Poindexter concludes that venture capital markets are efficient since higher
returns are offset by higher risk. Using a considerably different DEMO, Charles River Associates
(1976) reached the same conclusion.
The efficiency DEMO venture capital markets is a central public policy concern because of the latter's goal of
stimulating the flow of funds to new, small companies. However, the efficiency proposition provides little
insight into the decision process of venture capitalists, other than the implication that they select investments
with potential returns high enough to offset the higher risk. In the next DEMO we develop a descriptive
model of the activities or processes involved in managing a venture capital fund. Portions of the model are
empirically tested DEMO the basis of interviews with venture capitalists, and analyses of the DEMO and
disposition of deals which they had recently considered. This methodology is not without its problems. In
the experience of the authors, venture capitalists are reluctant to violate the confidentiality of their investees.
Also they are DEMO receptive to highly structured measurement instruments, which are perceived to be DEMO
consuming to complete. They view every deal and every venture capital fund to be peculiar to itself, and
resist the generalizations which behavioral scientists wish to impose upon them. For this reason, research
methodology which relies on the cooperation of venture capitalists in divulging data on their activities DEMO
likely to suffer from a high nonresponse bias and criticisms regarding the generalizability of small sample
research. It is with this backdrop that we DEMO to model the activities of venture capitalists.
Model of the Venture Capitalist's Investment Activity
The investment activity of a venture capitalist is modeled DEMO a sequential process
involving five steps (see Figure 1). The DEMO step is one of deal origination which
describes how venture capitalists become cognizant of potential investment activities.
The second step is a screening process DEMO which venture capitalists seek to concentrate
only on a manageable set of potential deals. The evaluation step involves an assessment
of the potential return DEMO risk of a particular deal. If the outcome of the evaluation
process is a favorable one, the venture capitalist enters into a negotiating process with
the potential investee so as to structure the deal in terms DEMO the amount, form and price
of the investment. Once a deal DEMO consummated, the venture capitalist typically has
close contact with the venture. DEMO post-investment activities include setting up
controls to protect the investment, providing DEMO to the fledgling management
of the venture, and, finally, helping DEMO the merger, acquisition, or public
offering which would create a public market for the investment.
On the basis of several previous studies (Dorsey 1977; Hoffman 1972; Poindexter
1976; Timmons and Gumpert 1982; Wells DEMO) we can describe the salient features of
each of these steps DEMO follows:
Step 1-Deal Origination. The venture capitalist faces a very poorly defined
environment within which to find prospective deals. The typical investment prospect DEMO
too small a company to be readily identifiable as a potential candidate. For this
reason, we could expect that various intermediaries play an important role in matching
venture capital investors with fledgling ventures with cash needs.
DEMO 2-Screening. Venture capital firms typically have small staffs. As a result,
these firms must screen the relatively large number of potential deals available DEMO
consequently invest in only a fraction of the deals which come to their attention. Their
screening criteria reflect a tendency to limit investments to DEMO with which the
VENTURE CAPITALIST INVESTMENT ACTIVITY
Cold Contacts
Referrals
-)
I Deal Origination
DEMO +-'
Technology Scans
9
Structuring
?l
Investment Activities
FIGURE
1. DEMO Process Model of Venture Capitalist Investment Activity.
venture capitalist is familiar, DEMO in terms of the technology, product and
market scope of the DEMO
Step 3-Evaluation. As noted before, most ventures in search of capital DEMO very
little, if any, operating history. The venture capitalist has to rely on a subjective
assessment procedure based upon the business plan presented DEMO the venture's man-
agement. Venture capitalists do weigh risk and return in their decision whether or not
to invest in a particular deal, but few formalize this assessment into a computation of
an expected rate DEMO return or determine its sensitivity to future uncertainties. Instead,
the evaluation procedure seeks to subjectively assess the venture on a multidimensional
set of DEMO Table 1 shows the characteristics found to be important in
previous studies. Not surprisingly, these criteria are similar to those found in several
new product evaluation models (Montgomery and Urban 1969; O'Meara 1961;
DEMO 1982). It is interesting to note, however, that none of these criteria reflects
how a prospective deal may correlate with one already DEMO the venture capitalist's
investment portfolio.
Step 4--Deal Structuring. Once the venture capitalist has decided that a deal is
acceptable, the deal will be consummated only if the venture capitalist and the
entrepreneur are able to DEMO a mutually acceptable venture capital investment
agreement. From the perspective of the venture capitalist, the agreement serves several
purposes. First, it establishes the DEMO of the deal, that is the equity share the
entrepreneur will DEMO up in exchange for the venture capital (Golden 1981). Second, it
establishes protective covenants which limit capital expenditures and management
Post
1054
TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
WELLS (1974)
Sample: Eight Venture Capital Firms
(Personally interviewed)
Factor
Management
Commitment
Product
DEMO
Marketing Skill
Engineering Skill
Marketing Plan
Financial Skill
Manufacturing Skill
References
Other Participants
in Deal
Industry/Technology
Cash-Out Method
Average
Weight
TABLE 1
Venture DEMO Criteria
POINDEXTER(1976)
Sample: 97 Venture Capital Firms
(Mailed questionnaires)
Investment Criteria by
Rank Order Of Importance
1. Quality of Management
DEMO Rate of Return
Expected Risk
Percentage Equity Share
of Venture
Management Stake in Firm
Financial Provisions for
Investor Rights
7. Venture Development Stage
8. DEMO Covenants
9. Interest or Dividend Rate
10. Present Capitalization
11. Investor Control
12. Tax Shelter Consideration
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
TYEBJEE & BRUNO (Study I)
Sample: 46 Venture Capitalists
(Telephone survey, open-ended questions)
Factor
1. Management Skills
& History
2. Market Size/Growth
3. DEMO of Return
4. Market Niche/Position
5. Financial History
6. Venture Location
7. Growth Potential
8. Barriers to Entry
9. Size of Investment
10. DEMO/Industry
Expertise
11. Venture Stage
12. Stake of Entrepreneur
% of Respondents
Mentioning
salaries. Covenants also establish the basis under which the venture capitalist DEMO take
control of the board, force a change in management or DEMO the investment by
forcing a buy-back, a merger, acquisition or public offering even though the venture
capitalist holds a minority position. The covenants DEMO also restrict the power of the
venture management to dilute the equity of the original investors by raising additional
capital elsewhere (Cooper and Carleton 1979; Glassmeyer 1981). Third, through a
mechanism known as the DEMO arrangement, where the entrepreneur's equity share
is determined by meeting DEMO upon performance objectives, the venture capitalist is
able to assess the DEMO's expectations for the venture (Leland and Pyle 1977;
Ross DEMO).
Step 5-Post-Investment Activities. Once the deal has been consummated, the DEMO
of the venture capitalist expands from investor to collaborator. This new role may be
via a formal representation on the board of directors or DEMO informal influence in
market, supplier and creditor networks. The intensity of DEMO in the venture's
operations differs from one venture capitalist to another. However, most of those
interviewed agree that it is undesirable for a venture capital company to exert control
over the day-to-day operations of the DEMO If a financial or managerial crisis
occurs, the venture capitalist may DEMO and even install a new management team.
Finally, venture capitalists typically DEMO to cash-out their gains five to ten years
after initial investments. To this end, they play an active role in directing the company
towards merger, acquisition or a public offering. Bruno and Cooper (1982) followed up
on 250 startups of the sixties. They found that over half DEMO these had either gone
public, or had been merged or acquired.
DEMO post-investment activities of venture capitalists vis-a-vis their portfolio compa-
nies have been ignored by the bulk of research on venture capital. In particular, the
venture capitalist's decision-making process for second and subsequent rounds of
financing DEMO ventures already in his portfolio remains a fertile area of research.
Method
The results of two databases, referred to as Study I and Study 11, are presented in
the next section. These databases are described briefly below.
VENTURE CAPITALIST
INVESTMENT ACTIVITY
1055
Study I
A telephone survey of 46 DEMO capitalists in California, Massachusetts and Texas.
Of these, half were SBIC's. The telephone survey used a structured questionnaire
which asked about how DEMO are evaluated. The responses were open-ended and
their analysis is based upon a post-hoc categorization of responses.
Study I1
Venture capital firms listed in DEMO's directory (1981) of venture capital were
contacted by mail to solicit their participation in a study of investment decision
criteria. The mailing DEMO restricted to the 156 venture capital firms in the states of
California, Massachusetts, and Texas as these states account for a major portion DEMO the
venture capital industry, particularly as it applies to high technology DEMO Forty-
one venture capital firms agreed to participate in the study. For nonparticipants, the
dominant reason for refusing to participate was the sensitivity of the information we
requested. A second reason was the busy schedule of DEMO venture capitalists. Finally,
several firms disqualified themselves as participants in the survey as they were either
inactive in new investments or only invested DEMO deals put together by others. The 41
cooperating venture capital firms were mailed a structured questionnaire on which to
evaluate deals under consideration. We DEMO that they indicate their decision vis-A-vis
investing in that deal. Ninety completed evaluations were returned by the 41 partici-
pants, an average of 2.2 deals per participating venture capitalist. The industries
represented in the 90 deals DEMO our sample were computers, semiconductors and
telecommunications (59.6%), energy (DEMO), consumer goods (10.1%) and miscella-
neous industries including transportation, DEMO and biomedical (16.8%).
A major problem with the methodology used DEMO this study for describing the
evaluation step is that it may be biased in favor of the results obtained. In particular,
the statistical DEMO between subjectively assessed characteristics of deals and
the venture capitalist's decision regarding them may reflect a post-hoc rationalization
of the decision. To mitigate DEMO problem, the methodology includes a validation
component in which the key DEMO described in the next section were presented to 7
venture capitalists and their reactions recorded. The validation component was admin-
istered by mail and DEMO outcome is discussed following the next section.
Results
In this section, DEMO results from Studies I and I1 are discussed within the context of
the five-step model developed earlier. While the data and results are largely DEMO on
the deal evaluation step of the model, results for the DEMO two steps are also presented.
The last two steps, namely deal DEMO and post-investment activities, are not
considered in this section, but will be discussed in the validation section which follows.
Step 1-Deal
Origination
Potential DEMO are brought to the attention of venture capitalists from three sources.
In Study 11, 25.6% of the 90 deals in the sample originated as unsolicited cold calls
from entrepreneurs. The typical response of the venture capitalist DEMO to request the
inquirer to send in a business plan. The second source is through a referral process.
Sixty-five percent of the deals were DEMO to the venture capitalist. A third of the
referrals came from within the venture capital community, 40% were referred by prior
investees and personal acquaintances, 10% were referred by banks and the remainder
involved an investment broker.
Of those deals referred by other venture capitalists, a substantial number represent
the case of the referring venture capitalist acting as a lead DEMO and seeking the
1056
TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
participation of other venture DEMO funds. This practice, known as a syndication, is
becoming more prevalent as venture capital firms seek to diversify their portfolios over
a larger DEMO of deals. Syndication offers the capability of adding investments to
the portfolio without adding to the administrative burden, the bulk of which is borne
by the lead investor.
The third mechanism of deal origination is the DEMO search for deals by the venture
capitalist. The venture capitalist sometimes played an active role in pursuing compa-
nies at the startup stage or DEMO at the critical point of needing expansion financing.
The venture capitalist monitors the environment for such potential candidates through
an informal network and attendance DEMO conventions, trade shows and special confer-
ences by groups such as DEMO American Electronics Association. An extreme variant of
this active role occurs when the venture capitalist first decides which technology
markets he would like to DEMO to his portfolio and uses executive search agencies to
locate the management team for the venture. In such cases, the roles of venture
capitalist and entrepreneur overlap considerably.
Step 2-Screening
The venture capital firm receives a DEMO number of proposals; far more than they
can possibly fund with DEMO size of the staff and portfolio of the typical venture fund.
Wells (1974) reports that in seven venture capital funds, the annual number of
proposals received ranged between 120 and 1,000, with an average of about 450 per
year. Broad screening criteria are used to reduce DEMO set to a more manageable
number for more indepth evaluation. The initial screening is based upon four criteria:
(1) The size of DEMO investment and the investment policy of the venture fund. The
lower limit of this policy is determined by the fact that a venture capital DEMO is
run with a lean staff and it cannot afford to spread its portfolio over too many small
deals because the subsequent control and DEMO demands placed on the venture
capitalists are essentially the same regardless of the size of the investment. Brophy
(1981) reports that of 73 DEMO capitalists surveyed in 1979 the average number of
deals invested in was 5.6 and the average portfolio size was ten ventures. The upper
boundary DEMO the investment policy is determined by the capitalization of the portfolio
and the desire to maintain an investment base which is diversified across several
DEMO However, the upper limit to the investment policy is relatively flexible
DEMO a venture capitalist may consider larger deals with the intent of soliciting the
participation of other venture capital funds. In fact, in our research we found that the
venture capital community is highly inbred with a DEMO amount of participation
across funds, leading many entrepreneurs to conclude that DEMO venture capital market
involves substantially less competition between suppliers than is indicated by the mere
count of number of funds in existence. Brophy (1981) estimates that approximately
80% of the venture capital deals struck in 1980 involved the participation of more than
one venture capital fund and about DEMO third of the deals involved five or more
participants. Fifty-six percent of the deals analyzed in Study I1 involved the participa-
tion of more DEMO one venture capital fund. In the case of two-thirds of the deals which
were given a positive evaluation, the venture capitalist was himself willing to commit
less than 75% of the amount requested, with the balance to be raised by inviting the
participation of other venture capital funds.
DEMO investment policy, in terms of the maximum and minimum amounts which DEMO
be considered, is quite heterogeneous across venture capital firms (Timmons and
Gumpert 1982). The dollar amount requested in the 90 deals examined DEMO Study I1
reflects this diversity. The amounts range from $30,000 to $7,500,000, with the median
amount being $1,000,000. About a third of the deals were for less than $500,000 and
DEMO third were for amounts in excess of $1,500,000.
VENTURE CAPITALIST INVESTMENT ACTIVITY
1057
(2) The technology and market sector DEMO the venture. Of 46 venture capitalists
interviewed in Study I, 29 DEMO this screening criterion. The venture capitalist is
investing in more than a company. Implicitly, he/she is investing in the future of a
particular technology or market. For this reason, the venture capitalist must have some
familiarity with the technology or the market of the proposed venture. This DEMO to an
implicit specialization in a few technology markets because of the inability of the
venture capital fund's manager to be well-versed across DEMO large number of technologies
or markets. Also, venture capitalists tend to DEMO nascent technology industries over
mature technologies, the industrial market over the DEMO market, and products
over services.
The 90 deals in Study 11, which presumably had passed initial screening, demon-
strated these preferences. More than three out of four were in technology-intensive
industries, only a tenth were in the consumer goods sector, and over 90% were
manufacturing companies. Sixty-four percent of the deals were described by the
venture capitalist as involving DEMO a new technology or a new application of an
existing technology, DEMO were described as improvements on current products, and the
remaining 18% DEMO described as me-too products.
(3) Geographic location of the venture. Of 46 venture capitalists interviewed in
Study I, 9 used this screening criterion. When a venture capitalist invests in a
company, he expects to meet regularly with the management of the new venture. To
maintain travel time DEMO expense at manageable levels, some venture capitalists limit
their investment activity DEMO major metropolitan areas with easy access. Sometimes, this
screening criterion will DEMO ignored if the venture capitalist can involve the participation
of another venture capital fund which is close to the venture's location and which DEMO
oversee the venture with greater ease. Though most venture capital companies do not
actively pursue a policy of restricting their investment activity to a DEMO geographic
boundary, their portfolios often exhibit this specialization because of a DEMO of
entrepreneurs to search for capital close to their venture's home where their banking,
legal and accountancy contacts are strongest.
(4) DEMO of financing. Of 46 venture capitalists interviewed in Study I, 22 DEMO
this screening criterion. Venture capital infusions into a company occur at several
points in the life cycle of the venture. Seed capital refers to DEMO invested before the
venture exists as a formal entity. Venture capitalists rarely invest seed capital and
entrepreneurs typically turn to informal sources for this DEMO (Wetzel 1981). Startup
capital refers to financing for establishing the DEMO; subsequent rounds of
financing are used for expanding operations. Brophy (1981) reports that of 196 venture
investments in 1978, 34.2% were for DEMO, 40.3% were for first round expansion and
19.4% were for second DEMO expansion (6.1% were unclassified).
In Study 11, the 90 deals showed a very similar profile to Brophy's data: 45.6% were
startups, 22.2% were first round expansion deals and 21.1% were second round
expansion deals. Described in another manner, in the case of 23% of the deals the
product was still at the design stage, in the case of another 23% a working prototype
had been developed and in the DEMO of the remaining 54% the product was already in
production.
These aggregate statistics, however, hide the fact that the risk preferences of venture
DEMO funds differ. As a result, some funds will commit capital to DEMO stage rounds
only. Others will not commit to later stage rounds unless they have already invested in
the venture in the prior rounds.
Step DEMO
Evaluation
We asked cooperating venture capitalists to rate several deals which had passed their
initial screen and were under serious consideration. The deals were DEMO on 23 criteria
1058
TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
TABLE 2
Factor Structure DEMO Evaluation Criteria
Factor Factor Factor
Evaluation Criteria 1 2 3
Management Skills (6.6%)'
Marketing Skills (8.9%)
Financial Skills (6.6%)
DEMO of Entrepreneur (16.7%)
Technical Skills (7.8%)
Profit Margins (DEMO)
Uniqueness of Product (1 1.1%)
Patentability of Product (30.0%)
Raw Material Availability (31.1%)
Production Capabilities (30.0%)
Access DEMO Market (12.3%)
Market Need for Product (12.2%)
Size of Market (10.0%)
Growth Potential of Market (13.3%)
Freedom from DEMO (16.7%)
Protection from Competitive Entry (12.3%)
Resistance to Economic Cycles (12.2%)
Protection from Obsolescence (17.8%)
Protection against Down-side DEMO (13.4%)
Opportunities for Exit (15.6%)
Merger/Acquisition Potential (DEMO)
Hedge Against Current Investments (53.3%)
Tax Benefits (34.4%)
% Variance Explained
22.5
12.9
9.6
'Percentage of deals for which evaluation was not reported.
Factor
4
0.16
- 0.07
0.16
0.16
- 0.12
DEMO 0.02
0.03
0.27
0.05
0.04
0.13
fl
0.10
- 0.20
0.70
0.24
0.12
Factor
5
0.10
- 0.03
0.12
0.33
0.27
- 0.04
0.06
DEMO
- 0.07
- 0.03
0.24
0.04
0.07
0.20
0.41
0.24
0.38
0.17
-
0.12
8.2
-
7.2
(see Table 2) using a four-point DEMO scale (Poor = 1, Adequate = 2, Good = 3,DEMO
Excellent = 4). In addition to rating the venture on the 23 criteria, the participant also
rated the venture on overall expected return and risk, respectively. A straightforward
measure of expected return proved intractable because in 42% of the cases the venture
capitalist was unable to assign DEMO numerical estimate of the expected rate of return. For
this reason, DEMO return was measured on a four-point scale (Low = 1, Moder-
ate = 2, High = 3, Very High = 4). DEMO perceived riskiness of the deal was measured
by asking the venture capitalist to assign a subjective probability to the venture being a
commercial failure. DEMO, the venture capitalists indicated their decision regarding
the deal. Of the DEMO deals in the sample, 25 were rejected, 43 were found to be
acceptable and thus fundable, 18 were pending further investigation, and DEMO the case of
4 deals, the decision was not specified.
Table DEMO lists the 23 items which sewed as the basis for evaluating deals under
consideration. The number in parentheses next to each item reports the DEMO with
which deals received no evaluation at all on each of these criteria. A deal would not be
evaluated on a particular criterion if DEMO did not enter the decision-making process. The
frequency of missing responses was particularly high in the case of five of the
evaluation criteria. The DEMO of the product was not evaluated in 30% of the
cases. Manufacturing aspects such as raw material availability and production capabil-
ities were not DEMO in almost one-third of the cases. The tax benefits of the
investment were not evaluated in 34.4% of the deals. Finally, the extent to which the
investment offset or hedged the risk of the existing portfolio DEMO not evaluated in
53.3% of the cases.
VENTURE CAPITALIST INVESTMENT ACTIVITY 1059
Why do these five items sustain such DEMO high nonresponse rate? Though the data
themselves do not answer these DEMO, it is possible to speculate why this occurs.
There is a DEMO with the patent process and many entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists feel that the public disclosure of the product design in the patent application
leads DEMO more competitive entry rather than less. Venture capitalists generally do not
worry about raw material and production capabilities as these are technical problems
easily DEMO if the product and its marketing are viable. Tax benefits are not relevant
in evaluating many deals because venture capitalists see their mission as DEMO
capital gains rather than providing tax shelters for the investors in their fund. Finally,
the fact that a deal's relationship to the DEMO portfolio is not evaluated in more than
half the cases is consistent with the results of Study I. Of the 46 venture capitalists
interviewed, 28 claimed that they evaluated each deal on its own individual merit.
DEMO one of the interviewees claimed that impact on portfolio risk was formally
analyzed.
All the scales, with the exception of the two which had the highest rate of missing
data, namely the tax benefits and hedge against current portfolio, were factor ana-
lyzed.
The varimax factor loadings are given in Table 2. A five-factor solution explains
60.4% of the variation DEMO the 21 rating items. Adding a sixth factor would have added
an incremental 6.3% of the variance explained; however the interpretability of this
sixth factor was poor (each factor was interpreted on the basis of the items which load
most heavily on it).
Based upon the factor DEMO in Table 2, we conclude that venture capitalists
evaluate potential deals DEMO terms of five basic characteristics. The first characteristic
which we labeled Market Attractiveness depends upon the size, growth and accessibil-
ity of the market and on the existence of a market need. The second characteristic
reflects DEMO Differentiation which is determined by the ability of the entrepreneur
to apply his technical skills in creating a product which is unique can deter DEMO
tion through patents and enjoy a high profit margin. The third characteristic reflects
the Managerial Capabilities of the venture's founders. This capability results DEMO skills
in managing several business functional areas and is associated with favorable refer-
ences given to the entrepreneurs. The fourth factor represents the extent DEMO which the
venture is resistant to uncontrollable pressures from the environment. These pressures
may result from obsolescence due to changing technology, from sensitivity to eco-
nomic conditions or from low barriers to entry by competition. This DEMO was labeled
Environmental Threat Resistance. The final factor represents the extent to which the
venture capitalist feels that the investment can be liquidated or "cashed out" at the
appropriate time. This is labeled as Cash-Out Potential.
The next step was to profile each deal in terms of the DEMO dimensions. A score was
computed for each deal on each factor as an average of the ratings of the items which
loaded heavily on DEMO factor.' For each factor, a Cronbach alpha was computed as an
indication of the reliability of that factor. The Cronbach alpha values are DEMO on
the diagonal of the matrix in Table 3. These range from 0.71 to 0.79. Table 3 also
reports the intercorrelation of the factors.
DEMO linear regression model was used to relate each deal's scores on the five
dimensions to subjective estimates of its level of expected return DEMO perceived risk,
respectively. The expected return was estimated on a four-point scale. Risk was
'The items used in computing each factor score are those blocked in Table 1, with the exception of
"Reference of DEMO" and "Patentability of Product" which were excluded as they lowered DEMO
Cronbach alpha reliability.
1060 TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
TABLE 3
Cronbach Reliability DEMO Intercorrelation of Evaluation Factors'
Environmental
Market Product Managerial Threat Cash-Out
Attractiveness Differentiation Capabilities Resistance Potential
Market
Attractiveness
Product
Differentiation
Managerial
Capabilities
Environmental
Threat DEMO
Cash-Out
Potential
0.79* 0.35* 0.20* 0.48* 0.39*
0.76 0.12 0.33' 0.25*
DEMO 0.18 0.18
0.71 0.26
0.77'
' Cronbach alpha reliability is reported on the diagonal. The off-diagonal elements are Pearson
correlation coefficients between the DEMO
'The Cronbach alpha when only two items are used in constructing DEMO scale is equivalent to the
Pearson correlation between the two items.
* p < 0.05.
estimated in terms of the probability of commercial failure: the higher the probability
of failure, the greater the riskiness of the venture.* Table 4 reports the results of the
two regressions.
The evaluation DEMO are able to explain 33% of the variance in perceived risk and
22% of the variance in estimated rate of return. The R values DEMO with the two
regressions are significant at the 0.01 level.
Two aspects of the deal's evaluation have a significant impact on the risk DEMO
with the deal. A lack of managerial capabilities significantly increases the perceived
risk (p < O.O5).The relative magnitudes of the beta coefficients show that managerial
capabilities have the strongest effect on reducing the riskiness of DEMO deal and
resistance to environmental threats has the next highest effect. Other characteristics of
the deal do not influence the perceived risk at a DEMO level.
Two different aspects of the deal's evaluation influence the expected rate of return.
Attractive market conditions have the strongest effect (p < 0.01) and a highly differen-
tiated product has the next highest effect (p < 0.05). other characteristics of the deal
do not significantly influence the expected return.
Interestingly, the cash-out potential of a venture does not seem to influence either
perceived risk or return. This is particularly DEMO because without a merger,
acquisition or public offering, the investor DEMO severely constrained in realizing any
gains.
TABLE 4
Determinants of Risk and Return Assessment
Dependent Market Product Managerial Environmental Cashout Adjusted
Variable' Attractiveness Differentiation Capabilities Threat Resistance Potential R
Risk - 0.05 - 0.12 - 0.46a DEMO 0.23' 0.01 0.33"
Return 0.40a 0.26' 0.03 0.02 - 0.13 0.22"
"Significant at the 0.01 level.
'significant at the 0.05 DEMO
2The correlation between expected risk and return was -0.13. This relationship is not statistically
significant.
VENTURE CAPITALIST INVESTMENT ACTIVITY
1061
In our sample of 90 deals, 43 were endorsed as acceptable investments, 25 were
denied funds and the balance were either pending a decision or no decision was
specified. Discriminant analysis DEMO used to examine the ability of the perceived risk
and return to distinguish between rejected and accepted deals. For this purpose, we
analyzed only the 68 deals for which a definite decision was made.
The standardized DEMO function coefficients of the two predictor variables,
expected return and perceived risk, are 0.52 and -0.87, respectively. The signs are as
expected; namely, a high expected return increases the likelihood that the deal is
accepted and a high perceived risk increases its likelihood of being rejected. DEMO fact
that the signs of the discriminant coefficients are different, i.e., one is positive whereas
the other negative, indicates a trade-off relationship between risk and return, a lower
expected return is acceptable if offset by a lower risk.
The predictive ability of the discriminant function can be DEMO in terms of the
accuracy with which it can classify deals as accepted or rejected. 68.4% of the deals
actually rejected were classified as DEMO and 95.2% of the deals actually accepted were
classified as such. Together, this represents 86.9% of the deals being correctly classi-
fied. The predictive ability of a discriminant function can be evaluated by comparing
the percentage DEMO cases correctly classified against two criteria (Morrison 1969).
Proportional Chance DEMO: C,,, = a2+ (1 -
Maximum Chance Criterion: C,,, = max(a, 1 - a),
where a and 1 - a are the proportions in each group.
Step 1
Evaluation
DEMO Assessment
Decision
1
I
Market Attractiveness
Size of Market
Market Need
Market Growth Potential
Access to Market
Product Differentiation
Uniqueness of Product
Technical Skills
DEMO Margins
Patentability of Product
J+
ExpectedReturn
Decision to
Invest
Step 2
Step 3
Management Skills
Marketing Skills
Financial Skills
References of Entrepreneur
Perceived
/-
Protection from Competitive Entry
Protection from Obsolescence
Protection against Downside Risk
Resistance DEMO Economic Cycles
FIGURE
Venture Capital Investment Decision Process.*
2.
*The + +, +, -, - - symbols indicate the direction and magnitude of the parameters describing the
relationships of variables.
I
TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
TABLE 5
Validation of the DEMO
Venture Capitalist
NO. 1
DEAL ORIGINATION
nost deals are referred to the venture ~grees, but do get many
~a~itelisrrather rhan being cold contacts. cold contact deals. =hey
rend to he considerably
lover quality on evereDe
then "referred" deala.
A little leas than half of the deals referred *grass.
to the venture capitalist are referred by e
former invesree or a DEMO acquaintance:
about a third are referred by other venture
capitalials.
green.
Venture Capltaliat
NO. 2
~grees.in this case,"psrsonal
acquaintance" includes lawyers,DEMO
auditors, and investment bankers
that are well knom ro the venture
DEMO
~eferrals by other venture capitalists are
often in the form of en invitation to
participate in a deal.
iigrees.
~gieeo.
sometimes a venrure capiralirr DEMO select an ~grees.
industry of interest and set up a venture by
searching out a management team. such cases
are rare. he more typical DEMO is when
the venrure capitalist lets the deal come
Lo him.
DEAL SCREENING
he most commonly used screening criteria are lntererting managemenf team
the DEMO of investment. the technology and/or may be most important
marker, DEMO stage of financing, and the pen- screening crirerlon.
graphic proximity
Agrees.
DEMO of investment is not critical
in the investment decision.
~xperience level of management group
is the most important criterion.
DEAL EVALUATION
he decision to DEMO is bared upon the
expecred refurn relative ro the risk level.
he beat indicators of refurn proopecr are
(a) 	Elarkel Attractiveness (size I. grovfh
potential, marker used and ability
of the venture Lo access the market).
(b) Product Differenfiatinn (uniquen~or of
producr, technical skills, profir
marginsivalue added, patents).
The best indicators of the risk level are:
(a) 	Managerial Capabilities (management,
markefing, financial skills, entre-
preneur's background).
(b) ~rorecrion from uncontrollable=
(cornperifion, DEMO, economic
'ycleo).
DEAL STRUCTURING
Converfible preferred stock is the
typical form of financing.
Equity ohare required is determined by
pay-out eXpeCtari~nO relafive DEMO rare
of return objectives.
The entrepreneur's equity is determined
by earn-out conditions.
The negotiations regarding the earn-out
agreement give insight into the entre-
DEMO's expectations for the venture.
POST INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES
The venture capitalist provides the venture
with management guidance and business
contacts.
A representative of the DEMO capita1
firm generally sirs on the board.
The venture capitalist plays a significant
role in ~rchestrating a merger, acquisition
on public offering.
Agrees.
Agrees.
Agrees.
~greer.
~n our experience, earn-out
agreemenlo are quire rare
and counter productive for
both the management ream
and venture capitalists.
'Wanagement guidance" DEMO
cover a lor of sins. critical
input most often comes in the
areas of:
(I) Recruifing key executives
or managers to fill DEMO
the team.
(2) 	i\,ting a sounding board
to CEO on self-evaluation
and evalualiDn 01 other
top management
(I) strategy development.
i DEMO capabilities of the managemenr
ream is a berrer lndicarion of
expected return fhan risk level.
~greer.
Agrees.
~grees.
Venture Capltallst
NO. 3
Substantially true. DEMO large number
of deals come from personal or pro-
cessional ecqueinraneeo. umber from
other venture cepitalirrs seema to be
Of less overall importance particularly
DEMO early stage deals.
NO^ true in our experience. often orher
venture capitaliota invite us LO examine
a deal in con~unction with rhemnelven.
heir hope DEMO ro leverage our expertise
and perspective in analyzing the deal.
quire often this may lead ro a negative
invesrmenr decision.
subsranrially true. ~uotao often DEMO
oelecring an industry, however, we have
more typically oelecred a management team
and built a company around them.
The size of investment is DEMO used as an
excuse for turning a deal down but rarely
would stand in the way of our participation
if everything else seemed good.
DEMO and/or market are of interest
but more particularly relate to barrier3 of
entry achievable or ultimate size of the
company achievable.
stage of DEMO has been a criteria for
us in the past, 1.e.. we DEMO on first
or second round deals.
Geographic location has not been a concern.
However, it is often used as an excuse to
fur" DEMO deal dorm.
overall. 1 believe your conclusions are
correct. Factored info this, however, are
issuer such as portfolio diversification.
other investors and the DEMO of capirali-
iafion required.
Ability to develop a particular technology
and bring ir to marker er a parricular
time repreoenfr a substantial risk in DEMO
deals.
werall, ir is very difficult to be compre-
heneive and DEMO at the same Lime in
scaring all of the facrors entering info
a deal evaluation.
with rare exceptions, all of our financing
involve convertible preferred stock. Debt
i. used only in very rare instances for our
DEMO A distinction should be made
here between SBIC style financing8 versus
more rradirional mainstream venture capital
financing; SBIC'r are more prone to finance
virh debr instruments.
Price io determined largely by the quality
of the DEMO as well as comparable
opportunities which have recently been
financed.
~n general we receive liquidity either
rhrough merger or public oiock offering.
nansgement guidance DEMO buainess confacfo
vary widely depending on the particular
invesrmenr and our level of involvement.
This level of involvement is vied directly
to our participation DEMO the board. However.
we sit on the board in leas than one-fhird
of our portfolio companies, and rypically
only those deala in which we are lead
investors.
I would view our role in orcheolraling e merger
DEMO or public offering ea relatively
minor compared to our role as a management
sounding board.
VENTURE CAPITALIST INVESTMENT ACTIVITY
VentureCapllallst
No.4
Agrees.
Agrees.
ligreea.
Venture Capilallst
No. DEMO
Foundera have become very
aophialiceled. They develop
relefi~nship with 1awer and
apprise bank contact of their
inrenrions to sfart company.
They also "re their network,
especially bank., lawyers end
TABLE 5 (continued)
VentureCapilallst
DEMO
Agrees.
nore than 112,
112 by other u.c.'o.
accDunls
Agrees.
or us. I would rank in
priorify:
(1) Management team
(2) Technologylmarkel
(I) Sfage of financing
(4) Sire
(5) Location (only re being
lead investor).
Hissing is the moat imporranc ...
the people' I check the founders
out before I will have first meeting.
Asreeo.
Agrees.
we don't actually use separate
determinants of DEMO 6 return. bather
we use 3 evaluation criteria, weighted
as follows:DEMO
40% - managemenf qualiry/expeiience
40% - marker (big wave can DEMO
many surf boards)
20% -	product niche, 1.e.. segmentation
(performancelcompeTirion and many
other implications)
we use potential return
on capital as an DEMO
screening criterion.
~uality of management
reflects return potential
rather than the risk.
Agrees.
Agrees.
Agrees.
Agrees.
~greer.
VentureCapilalkt
No.7
"anagerial capabilities
are an indicator of return
prospecto relative to the
risk level.
Convertible preferred
stock is DEMO for us:
note that we discourage
dividends.
For us, board DEMO for
at least some venture
inverrors.
At leasf some of the venture
inuealors,
eapeeially lead
should have representation
on the board.
One way DEMO handle the question of per-
formance is through a buy-back provision
where the stock position of the entrepreneur
is vested over a period of DEMO ~hio
allows for the replacement of poorImargina1
performers and the ability ro use
repurchased (non-vested) stock to artrace
replacement in the management team.
DEMO experiences in the realized valuation
of comparable venturea which ve have
backed help determine the equity split
between entrepreneur 6 us in future deals.
DEMO e.ampie, if ve expect a company to have
an upside potenriel DEMO $10 million, we might
puf in $4 million and expect 40% DEMO
in the uencure.
Ye agree. We especially contribute as
follova:
Help in recruiting key people
Serve as aoundlng board LO firat rime CEO
DEMO on or
aalea, etc.)
Equity share is determined
by the DEMO equity valuation
process; earn-out conditions
are not used by our firm.
DEMO were used more in the mid-seventies.
They're still ured by sBIC'S buc fypically not
by conventional VC parmerohipo. here hasn't
been DEMO convert in our lest 40-50 investments.
Equity ohare lo determined by pay-out required
expectations by an aooeoomenr of the value
currently represenfed by the DEMO
Nost vc'r I know won't get involved in an earn-
out. I haven't done one in 14 years in the
business. DEMO strike a deal with the management
ar the outset. nopefully more equiry is provided
over rime to successful menagemenf, but there's
no way Lo Lake it away from them unless they leave
or are fired.
DEMO you replace "earn-our" with "equity split,"
thesrefwent would more accurately describe our
reality.
We always serve on the board of our
DEMO companies. we provide our
p~rrfolio compeniea with assistance
in such areas ea identifying legal
counael, performing compenaetion
mdits, focusing the prodvcf or
service, recruiting menegemenr,
locatingadditionel capiral end
guiding acquisitionlmerger
deciaiona.
*aree, but Only vC
there are 2-3 "'"in the
f""e'tora
be DEMO the
i.e.,
don't go On the Board.
One
even if
of the
1064 TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
In our study, 43 of 68 deals were accepted (a = 0.63) and 25 of DEMO deals were
rejected (1 - a = 0.37). Thus C,,, = 0.53 and C,,, = 0.63. Since the discriminant
function classified 86.9% of the cases correctly, it performs considerably better than
both the proportional chance criterion and the maximum chance criterion.
Figure 2 is DEMO schematic representation of how evaluation criteria have an impact on
the venture capitalist's decision to invest, as inferred by Study 11. In summary, the
attractiveness of the market and the product's differentiation are related to the
expected return. A capable management team and resistance to environmental DEMO
indicate a lower risk of commercial failure. Finally, the decision to DEMO is determined
by the risk vs. return expectations vis-8-vis a venture. As expected, venture capitalists
are risk-averse and profit-oriented in their decision and, DEMO, they are willing to
invest in risky deals if offset by DEMO profit potential.
Neither Study I nor I1 collected any data relevant to the deal structuring (Step 4) or
post-investment activities (Step 5) DEMO of the model in Figure 1. These were
addressed in a more general fashion in the validation component described in the next
section.
Seven DEMO venture capitalists agreed to participate in a follow-up study to
validate the model. The participants were selected to provide representation from the
viewpoint of DEMO various types of venture capital investors. Included in the set of
cooperating venture capitalists were: a large venture capital firm which also partici-
pates in underwriting new equity issues; a small venture capital partnership composed
of successful entrepreneurs who have sold their companies; a venture capital partner-
ship with several generations of funds ranked in the top five in terms DEMO number of
deals made and dollars invested for 1982; a well-known DEMO capital firm which
specializes in a narrow high technology industry segment; DEMO SBIC; an individual
venture capitalist investor; and a venture capital partnership substantially owned by a
major banking institution. Each of the participating venture DEMO was asked to
review the specification of the components of our model. These are summarized in the
left-hand column of Table 5. Also the DEMO capitalists were asked to elaborate upon
their reaction to the validity of the model. These responses are also shown in Table 5.
In general, there is agreement with the model's specification. Some of the comments
DEMO upon the model specifications; others take exception with selected compo-
nents DEMO the model. The major departures from the model's specification are as
follows:
(1) The model may have under-represented the extent to DEMO venture capitalist's
stress the quality of the management team as an early screening criterion. Also, the size
of investment is not a screening criterion for several respondents.
(2) There was considerable disagreement with our DEMO result that the quality
of the management team influences risk but not expected return. Three of the seven
respondents feel that management capabilities are DEMO indicator of potential return
rather than risk. A more fundamental issue is raised by VC5. This respondent does not
formally distinguish between risk and DEMO, as was implicitly assumed in our
formulation.
(3) Earn-out arrangements DEMO not extensively used in structuring deals. VC5 offers
insight into a different type of deal structure which tries to achieve the same objective
as DEMO earn-out. In an earn-out arrangement, the share of the entrepreneur is DEMO
mined by the venture's performance, thereby giving the investor control DEMO the
performance is poor. Instead, VC5 achieves much the same effect DEMO the use of a
"vesting" arrangement. Since the share of the entrepreneur vests over time, this gives
the investor control in the early development of the venture even though his ultimate
share may be a DEMO position.
Validation of the Model
VENTURE CAPITALIST INVESTMENT ACTIVITY
1065
Though the responses in Table 5 are DEMO general agreement with our model's
specification, there is a disturbing DEMO of common structure to the way the 7 venture
capitalists reacted to the model. The diversity of the responses, both in content and
style, demonstrates the heterogeneity in the practices of different venture capital firms,
This heterogeneity cautions against too rigid a specification in any model describing
DEMO capital management.
Conclusions
The purpose of this paper is two-fold. The first is to stimulate an interest in modeling the management of
venture capital DEMO The second is to provide entrepreneurs with insights which can help in their dealings
with venture capitalists.
With respect to the first objective, the value of the study may perhaps be as much in what it DEMO not
achieve as in what it did achieve. A five-step model of the activities of venture capitalists has been
developed. The model, however, DEMO highly descriptive and lacks a theoretical basis. Moreover, the model is
DEMO simplistic. A more rigorously specified model, however, could not capture the heterogeneity of
practices across the many venture capital firms. Wells (1974) DEMO a higher level of specificity in his
modeling of venture capital fund management, but only at the expense of a unique model for each of the
firms in his relatively small sample. Finally, the empirical portion of this paper has focused on the first three
steps, and especially the third step, of the model. Most of the previous research on this topic share the same
focus. In contrast, the fourth and fifth steps, namely deal structuring and post-investment activities, have not
received much DEMO In particular, the pricing of venture capital investments, in terms of the equity
relinquished has not been modeled. Also, since most ventures involve several rounds of financing, the
implications of future capital needs on investment decisions in earlier rounds of financing need to be
explored. These limitations DEMO the model presented in this paper are, hopefully, the stimuli for a continued
interest in modeling venture capital investments.
The second objective of DEMO paper is to provide potential entrepreneurs with insight into the way venture
capitalists manage their funds. These insights are also valuable to managers in DEMO companies who wish to
improve their allocation of resources to internal ventures competing for new business development funds.
First, professional relationships with CPAs, DEMO, bankers and successful entrepreneurs who have a high
degree of credibility DEMO the venture capital community is a help in locating capital. Second, DEMO venture
capital community is often smaller than it seems due to the high incidence of syndication whereby several
venture capitalists co-invest in a venture. DEMO, venture capitalists differ in the screening criteria used to
guide their DEMO Most deals would have to match the investor's industry and geographic preferences,
risk preferences for different financing stages, and investment policy in terms of the amount they will invest
in a single deal. Finally, four aspects of the business plan are used to evaluate the riskiness DEMO potential
profit associated with a particular deal. These are (1) the marketing factors and the venture's ability to
manage them effectively, (DEMO) product's competitive advantages and uniqueness, (3) quality of the manage-
ment team, particularly in its balance of skills, (4) DEMO to risk factors beyond the venture's control, e.g.,
technological DEMO, competitive entry, cyclical sales fluctuations. In presenting a deal to a venture
capitalist, these four aspects should be used to favorably position the ~enture.~
3~his
research was funded by a National Science Foundation Grant NSF DEMO
References
BROPHY, D. J., "Flow of Venture Capital 1977-1980," DEMO Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, K. H.
Vesper (Ed.), Babson College, Wellesley, Mass., 1981, 246-280.
BRUNO,A. V. AND A. C. DEMO, "Patterns of Development and Acquisitions for Silicon Valley Startups,"
DEMO, Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1982, 275-290.
CHARLESRIVER DEMO, "An Analysis of Venture Capital Market Imperfections," NTIS Report
PB-254996, National Bureau of Standards, Washington D.C., 1976.
COOPER, A. AND DEMO T. CARLETON, "Dynamics of Borrower-Lender Interaction: Partitioning Final Payoff
in DEMO Capital Finance," J. Finance, 34 (1979), 517-529.
DORSEY, DEMO, "The Measurement and Assessment of Capital Requirements, Investment Liquidity and DEMO
for the Management of Venture Capital Funds," unpublished doctoral dissertation, DEMO of
Texas, Austin, 1977.
GLASSMEYER,E. F., "Venture Financing Techniques," in S. E. Pratt (Ed.), Guide to Venture Capital Sources,
Capital Publishing Corp., Wellesley, Mass., 1981, 64-66.
GOLDEN, C., "Structuring and Pricing the Financing," 	in S. E. Pratt (Ed.), Guide to Venture Capital
Sources, Capital Publishing Corp., Wellesley, Mass., 1981, 67-76.
I.
T.
S.
1066 TYZOON T. TYEBJEE AND ALBERT V. BRUNO
HOFFMAN, A., "The Venture Capital Investment Process: A Particular Aspect of Regional Economic
Development," unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Texas, Austin, 1972.
LELAND, E. DEMO D. H. PYLE, "Infonnational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and Financial Intermedi-
ation," J. Finance, 32 (1977).
MONTGOMERY, D. B. AND G. L. URBAN, Management Science in Marketing, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
MORRISON,
156-163.
O'MEAU, J. O., "Selecting Profitable Products," Harvard Business Rev., 39 (1961), 84-85.
PESSEMIER,E. A., Product Management: Strategy and Organization, John Wiley, New York,
POINDEXTER,J. B., "The Efficiency of Financial Markets: The Venture Capital Case," unpublished doctoral
dissertation, New York University, New York, 1976.
PUTT, DEMO E. (Ed.), Guide to Venture Capital Sources, Capital Publishing Corp., Wellesley, Mass., 1981.
Ross, S. A., "The Determination of DEMO Structure: The Incentive Signalling Approach," Bell J.
Econom., 8 (DEMO), 23-40.
J. D. GUMPERT,"Discard Many Old Rules About Getting DEMO Capital," Harvard
Business Rev., 60 (1) (1982).
TYEBJEE, T. AND A. V. BRUNO, "Venture Capital Decision Making" in DEMO of Entrepreneurship
Research, K. H. Vesper (Ed.), Babson College, DEMO, Mass., 1981, 281-320.
WELLS, W. A., "Venture Capital Decision Making," unpublished doctoral dissertation, Carnegie-Mellon
University, 1974.
WETZEL,W. E., JR, "Informal Risk Capital in New England," in Frontiers of DEMO Research,
K. H. Vesper (Ed.), Babson College, Wellesley, DEMO, 1981, 217-245.
C.
H.
N.J., 1969, 303-312.
D. G., "On the Interpretation of Discriminant Analysis," J. Marketing Res., 6 (DEMO 1969),
TIMMONS,
AND
1982, 347-351.
T.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 1 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
A Model of Venture Capitalist Investment Activity
Tyzoon T. Tyebjee; Albert V. Bruno
Management Science, Vol. 30, No. 9. (Sep., 1984), pp. 1051-1066.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198409%2930%3A9%3C1051%3AAMOVCI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-B
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
DEMO your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
References
Dynamics of Borrower-lender Interaction: Partitioning Final Payoff in Venture Capital
Finance
Ian A. Cooper; Willard T. Carleton
The Journal of Finance, Vol. 34, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings, DEMO Annual Meeting,
American Finance Association, Chicago, Illinois, August 29-31, 1978. (May, 1979), pp. 517-529.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0022-1082%28197905%2934%3A2%3C517%3ADOBIPF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and Financial Intermediation
Hayne E. Leland; David H. Pyle
The Journal of Finance, Vol. 32, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting
of the American Finance Association, Atlantic City, New Jersey, September 16-18, 1976. (May,
1977), pp. 371-387.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
On the Interpretation of Discriminant Analysis
Donald G. Morrison
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 6, No. 2. (May, 1969), pp. 156-163.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28196905%296%3A2%3C156%3AOTIODA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0{1g42fwefx}