Strategic Management Journal
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
THE EFFECTS OF EXECUTIVES’ EXPERIENCES AND
PERCEPTIONS ON THEIR ASSESSMENT OF
POTENTIAL TECHNOLOGICAL DEMO
BEVERLY B. TYLER1* and H. KEVIN STEENSMA2
1College of Management, North DEMO State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina, U.S.A.
2College of Business Administration, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
Researchers have only DEMO to provide explanations of how top executives’ experiences and
perceptions inﬂuence organizational decisions. Drawing from a broad theoretical base, this
study tests the contention that top executives’ personal experiences (age, educational background,
and work DEMO), their perceptions of their ﬁrms’ attitudes toward technology and risk,
and their perceptions regarding their ﬁrms’ past success with collaborative technological
development DEMO their cognitive assessments of potential technological alliances. Results
from the study suggest that top executives with a technical education place more weight on
the DEMO provided by the alliance than those with other types of education. Moreover,
executives from ﬁrms that are perceived to emphasize technology and to DEMO had success with
technological alliances in the past tend to focus more on the opportunities provided by the
alliance and less on the riskiness DEMO the venture.  1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
As competition DEMO more global and the
costs and complexity of technological develop-
ment increase, ﬁrms are establishing networks of
strategic alliances (Hagedoorn, 1993; Pennings
DEMO Harianto, 1992). As the ﬁrm’s primary strate-
gists, top executives (i.e., CEO, COO, vice presi-
dents reporting directly to the DEMO) as a group
are ultimately responsible for the ﬁrm’s coopera-
tive DEMO and for selecting alliance partners.
The top executives of a ﬁrm can be expected to
enact or construct a shared understanding of the
situation DEMO is used to determine which alliances
are most beneﬁcial to the ﬁrm (Daft and Weick,
Key words: alliances; executive effects; technology
DEMO Correspondence to: Beverly B. Tyler, College of Manage-
ment, North DEMO State University, Campus Box 7229,
Raleigh, NC 27695-7229, U.S.A.
DEMO 0143–2095/98/100939–27 $17.50
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
DEMO; Walsh, 1995). Research suggests that the
result of this enactment process is dependent on
the cognitive orientations or mental understand-
ings established DEMO the minds of the individual
executives involved (Hambrick and Mason, 1984;
Melone, 1994; Miller, Kets de Vries, and Tou-
louse, 1982).
Unlike much of the strategic alliance research
reported to date, this study does not focus on the
underlying motivation for establishing alliances,DEMO
on how they are structured (e.g., equity vs.
nonequity) or DEMO their success (e.g., Contractor
and Lorange, 1988; Gulati, 1995; Harrigan, 1986;
Hennart, 1988; Kogut, 1988). Nor does DEMO con-
sider the enactment process which takes place
between executives in a ﬁrm as they evaluate
cooperative partners or between ﬁrms as coopera-
tive DEMO emerge, evolve, and dissolve
Received 18 October 1996
Final revision received 13 November 1997
940
B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
(e.g., Ring and DEMO de Ven, 1994). Rather, the
theory presented and tested in this paper considers
the cognitive orientations executives use when
they individually assess DEMO alliance
opportunities and bring with them when they
talk with other executives about technological
partnering. It considers how top executives’
experiences and perceptions inﬂuence DEMO atti-
tudes toward technological alliance formation and
the kinds of information they attend to when
individually assessing potential technological
alliance opportunities.
More speciﬁcally, behavioral decision theory is
used to suggest that executives’ cognitive orien-
tations are DEMO in (1) their age, educational
background, and work experience; (2) their per-
ceptions of their companies’ emphasis on tech-
nology and risk; and (3) their perceptions of
their companies’ success in past technological
collaborative efforts. Hypotheses are proposed
which suggest that these executive experiences
DEMO perceptions directly and indirectly inﬂuence
top executives’ assessments of potential techno-
logical alliances (see Figure 1). Before
developing and testing the theoretical arguments
supporting this line of reasoning, the theoretical
perspective adopted in the study will be noted and
the deﬁnitions of a few terms will be DEMO
STATEMENT OF THEORETICAL
PERSPECTIVE AND DEFINITIONAL
CLARIFICATION
By adopting a cognitive processing perspective,
this study seeks to provide insight on how top
executives’ DEMO orientations, as reﬂected in
their experiences and perceptions, affect their per-
sonal assessments of technological alliance oppor-
tunities. It emphasizes the fact that DEMO
executives may try to assess potential technologi-
cal alliances rationally, their DEMO to consider
all the information they have is limited (Simon,
DEMO). Furthermore, how they interpret the infor-
mation they notice is DEMO by the cognitive
understandings they have established in their
minds (Starbuck DEMO Milliken, 1988; Walsh,
1988). Thus, the individual top DEMO, as
a complex information-processing system, is the
study’s focus (March DEMO Simon, 1958). The
limited amount of research on alliances incorpo-
DEMO a cognitive perspective has not gone
unnoticed. Indeed, Auster (1994), in her review
of strategic perspectives on interorganizational
linkages, called for research that incorporates cog-
nitive and learning perspectives. The goal of this
study DEMO to respond to this gap in the literature.
Technology has been deﬁned previously in
Figure 1. The effects of executives’ experience and perceptions on DEMO assessments of technological alliance
opportunities
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
941
many ways (e.g., Cutler, 1989; Harris, Shaw,
and Sommers, 1984). The deﬁnition proposed by
Abetti (1989) has been used in this study. He
deﬁnes DEMO as ‘a body of knowledge,
tools, and techniques, derived from both science
and practical experience, that is used in the devel-
opment, design, production, and application of
products, processes, systems, and DEMO
(Abetti, 1989: 37). Thus, technology not only
entails new product innovations and new proc-
esses by which outputs are generated, but also
includes scientiﬁc and practical know-how that
comes with experience.
For this DEMO, technological alliance is deﬁned
as any activity where two or more DEMO con-
tribute differential resources and technological
know-how to agreed complementary aims
(DEMO, 1993). This deﬁnition does not include
one-way transfers of know-how, such as licens-
ing, marketing agreements, or simple one-time
only contracts. DEMO, technological alliances, as
deﬁned here, are continuing arrangements where
partners DEMO their expertise and output. These
alliances represent a spectrum of interorgani-
zational cooperative arrangements with a variety
of governance mechanisms (Borys and Jemison,
1989; Hagedoorn, 1990, 1993; Oliver, 1990; Ring
and Van DEMO Ven, 1992). Firms may or may not
have legal contracts, and may or may not have
provided equity funding for a separate DEMO (e.g.,
joint venture). What is common to all of DEMO
relationships is the commitment of two or more
companies to develop technology cooperatively,
thus strengthening their ability to keep pace with
technological advancements DEMO the marketplace.
When top executives decide to investigate
potential technological alliances, DEMO must collect
information that will allow them to evaluate and
compare various options. The important alliance
attributes for which information is sought may
be DEMO to the technology around which the
alliance is to be structured, DEMO partner
characteristics, characteristics of the ﬁrm con-
sidering an alliance, and attributes of the proposed
relationship (Lambe and Spekman, 1997; Mohr
and Spekman, 1994; Tyler and Steensma, 1995).
The information obtained can then be assessed
by executives individually and incorporated into
the management team’s DEMO process.
Some of the information processed by execu-
tives as they individually assess potential techno-
logical alliances can be categorized as information
 1998 DEMO Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
related to organizational opportunities and infor-
mation DEMO to organizational threats (Dutton
and Jackson, 1987). Moreover, research DEMO
that there is a threat bias; that is, executives are
more sensitive to information that is associated
with threats than to information associated DEMO
opportunities (Jackson and Dutton, 1988). In
addition, an organization’s DEMO and identity
guide and activate its executives’ interpretations
of information and their motivations for action
(Dutton and Dukerich, 1991). It will be DEMO
here that executives’ personal experiences and
perceptions of their ﬁrms inﬂuence the extent to
which they focus on both opportunity and threat-
based information DEMO assessing potential tech-
nological alliances. More speciﬁcally, it will be
proposed DEMO the concepts of strategic intent and
organizational stretch are related to opportunity-
based information executives attend to when eval-
uating alliances, while two types of perceived
risk represent threat-based information (Das and
Teng, 1996; Hamel and Prahalad, 1989).
According to Hamel and Prahalad (1989: 67)
traditional strategy ‘focuses on the degree of ﬁt
between existing resources DEMO current opportuni-
ties’ while ‘strategic intent creates an extreme
misﬁt between resources and [organizational]
ambitions,’ and ‘challenges the organization to
close the gap DEMO systematically building new
advantages’ aligned with tomorrow’s opportuni-
ties. Thus, strategic DEMO implies a sizable
‘stretch’ for an organization seeking to attain
clear ambitious goals. Efforts of ﬁrms to ‘stretch’
and take advantage of future opportunities DEMO
reﬂected in their commitment to a technology
policy that supports ﬁrm strategy (Zahra and
Covin, 1993), their commitment to learn from
alliance DEMO (Hamel, 1991; Kogut, 1988),
and their sensitivity to DEMO possibility of broad
corporate applications of technology and its
potential to expose the ﬁrm to related markets
(Prahalad and Hamel, 1990; Tyler and Steensma,
1995; see Table 1).
Two types of perceived risk associated with
interﬁrm alliances may be considered threatening
to executives assessing technological DEMO
opportunities: relational risk and performance risk
(Das and Teng, 1996, 1997; Ring and Van de
Ven, 1994). According to a DEMO deal of research,
alliances as a structural form are inherently risky
and unstable due to the dual control nature of
the relationship, the intrinsic incentive to cheat,
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
942 B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
Table 1. Examples of DEMO and threat-based
information related to assessment of potential techno-
logical alliances
Opportunity-based information related to strategic
intent
Signiﬁcance of this technology to current strategy
DEMO for broad corporate application of the
technology
Potential to learn from the cooperative relationship
Potential for increased exposure to related markets
Threat-based information related DEMO relational risk
Number of potential partners with similar joint
development capabilities
Favorability of potential partner’s cooperative
history
Compatibility of operating and management styles
Your DEMO information regarding the
technology relative to the potential partner
Threat-based information related to performance
risk
Total expected cost to develop the technology
Ability to DEMO protect the technology
Potential for decreasing development risk
Availability of technological substitutes
and the uncertainty about the partner and its
changing goals (Parkhe, DEMO; Inkpen and Beam-
ish, 1997). Therefore, some of the DEMO perceived
by executives assessing potential technological
partners is associated with the risk of partnering
or relational risk (Das and Teng, 1996, 1997).
A second type of risk is associated with the
technology itself and DEMO commercial success. This
risk may result from the unpredictable nature of
R&D activities, the high costs associated with
development, questionable market acceptance, and
the uncertain appropriability of the technology
(Chakravarthy, 1985; Pisano, DEMO). This type of
risk has been labeled performance risk because
these risks exist even if alliance partners cooper-
ate fully. Performance risk embraces DEMO kinds of
hazards except those related to cooperation (Das
and Teng, 1996).
Examples of alliance attributes that top execu-
tives may associate DEMO relational risk are the
compatibility of management styles (i.e., can we
work together?), the number of potential cooper-
ative partners (i.e., what are my alternatives if
this partner acts opportunistically?), and the fav-
orability of a potential partner’s cooperative his-
tory (Dodgson, 1993; Kogut, 1988, Pisano, 1990).
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Factors that executives may associate with per-
formance risk are the potential for decreasing
development risk by cooperating, the total
expected cost for developing the technology, the
ability to patent protect the technology once
developed, and the availability of technological
substitutes (Barney, 1991; Reed and DEMO,
1990; Tyler and Steensma, 1995).
BEHAVIORAL DECISION THEORY
According to behavioral decision theory, execu-
tives develop their own cognitive representations
of reality called schema or mental understandings
which are stored and then used DEMO templates to
explain and interpret events (Hastie, 1981; March
and DEMO, 1958). These mental structures con-
trol the encoding and reconstruction DEMO infor-
mation stored in memory. They also allow execu-
tives to select the information that is most
relevant in a given situation and process DEMO
information quickly and efﬁciently (Oldﬁeld and
Zangwill, 1942; Starbuck and DEMO, 1988).
This ability to attend to information selectively
is important DEMO more information is typically
available for processing than individuals are cog-
nitively capable of considering. Due to these
‘bounds’ or limitations of the human DEMO,
individuals must learn to amplify relevant infor-
mation and attenuate irrelevant information in
order to create understanding (Simon, 1957).
While ﬁltering DEMO a necessary part of the human
perceptual process, it can lead DEMO differences in
perception between people, and sometimes within
the same person DEMO different points in time
(Schoemaker, 1990). Starbuck and Milliken
(DEMO) have delineated two types of perceptual
ﬁltering that may vary the DEMO of
decision-makers: noticing and sensemaking. Dif-
ferences in noticing may lead DEMO perceptual differ-
ences as the decision-maker focuses less attention
on certain stimuli while other stimuli dominate
his or her attention. Perceptual differences due to
DEMO occur as the decision-maker frames
the context of the decision, predicts DEMO out-
comes, and forms causal attributions. Thus, during
the perceptual process, the potential exists for the
executive’s cognitive models or understandings to
inﬂuence not only what information is noticed,
but also the meaning attributed DEMO that infor-
mation.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
In order to ‘come to conclusions’ regarding the
attractiveness of technological alliance DEMO
ties, executives must evaluate the available infor-
mation and draw conclusions DEMO their potential
(Russo and Schoemaker, 1989). According to
behavioral decision theory and cognitive research,
the information that executives attend to and DEMO
weightings they give to various pieces of infor-
mation will be inﬂuenced by the cognitive or
mental understandings they have developed over
time.
EFFECTS DEMO EXECUTIVES’
EXPERIENCES ON THEIR
ASSESSMENTS
Building on the premises of cognitive and
behavioral research, strategy researchers argue
that observable executive characteristics serve as
indicators of the mental models executives use
during strategic decision making (e.g., DEMO
and Mason, 1984). Furthermore, research suggests
that these observable executive characteristics are
signiﬁcantly related to what information is noticed
and how it DEMO weighted when top executives
evaluate the desirability of strategic alternatives
(Hitt DEMO Tyler, 1991; Melone, 1994).
Age
Child (1974) proposed DEMO older executives are
more committed to the status quo than are
younger executives. It appears that, over time,
the mental models executives use during strategic
decision making become solidiﬁed through use
(Hambrick, Geletkanycz, and Fredrickson, 1993).
Age is highly correlated with total work experi-
ence, organizational tenure, and industry tenure.
This correlation makes it extremely difﬁcult DEMO
determine whether the relationship between age
and the strategic choices of executives is due to
cohort history, organizational experiences, indus-
try-speciﬁc experiences, or seasonal phases, which
are distinct patterns of executive attention and
behavior that emerge over time. All of these
factors may affect the cognitive development DEMO
mental understandings (Hambrick and Fukutomi,
1991; Hambrick et al., DEMO; Hitt and Tyler,
1991; MacCrimmon and Wehrung, 1990). DEMO any
event, executive experience, as represented by
age, can be DEMO to inﬂuence the mental under-
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
standings executives use to process information
during strategic decision making.
Hambrick and Mason (1984) maintained that
ﬁrms DEMO younger managers would be more
inclined to pursue risky strategies than would ﬁrms
with older managers. These authors also suggested
that younger managers are DEMO likely than older
managers to seek growth through more novel and
innovative strategies in an effort to seize perceived
opportunities. Support for their beliefs DEMO found
in a study of more than 500 top executives by
MacCrimmon and Wehrung (1990). In their study,
the most mature executives were also the most
risk averse (maturity was a combination of age,
seniority, and number of dependents). In addition,
Grimm and Smith (1991) found that top executives
from ﬁrms that changed their DEMO were
younger than top executives from ﬁrms that did
not change their strategies.
Technological alliances provide ﬁrms with a
relatively novel and innovative strategy DEMO
growth in an effort to seize perceived opportuni-
ties. They are also inherently risky and unstable,
due to the control nature of the DEMO, the
incentive to cheat, and the uncertainty regarding
partners’ goals (DEMO, high relational risk) (Parkhe,
1993; Inkpen and Beamish, DEMO). Although
alliances may help to limit performance risk
associated with technology development such as
the sharing of costs and development risk, techno-
logical development in general is typically con-
sidered risky since there is no DEMO the
technology will be developed or that a market
for the technology will materialize. Because tech-
nological strategic alliances are typically con-
sidered a DEMO and innovative route to ﬁrm growth
and are perceived as risky relative to other
methods of growth, such as acquiring technology
already developed, DEMO is argued that older execu-
tives will be more conservative in their assess-
ments of potential technological alliances than
younger executives.
Hypothesis 1: The older an executive is, the
less attractive potential technological alliances
will be to the executive.
Education
Education may be considered indicative of one’s
knowledge DEMO skill base (Hambrick and Mason,
1984). As noted by DEMO and Tyler (1991), an
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
943
944
B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
executive who has one DEMO of formal education
can be expected to have developed different prob-
lem-solving skills and mental models with which
to evaluate situations than an executive DEMO a
different type of formal education. For example,
Heilmeier (1993), CEO of Bellcore and the
Industrial Research Medalist for 1993, noted DEMO
importance attributed to the technical training of
CEOs in the 1990s. He argued that the role of
top executives has changed from that of DEMO
to that of ‘designer’ and emphasized the need for
executives to understand not only the technology
that drives their business today, but also the
technology that will change their business in the
future. His arguments suggest DEMO top executives
with a more complete understanding of the tech-
nological base of a company will be better able
to position the ﬁrm proactively DEMO compete more
effectively in the future than executives without
an understanding of the ﬁrm’s technology.
It can be argued that executives with formal
educational DEMO in science and engineering
will have a more complete understanding of the
technological base of the company, will be better
able to envision how technology might be
developed through cooperation, and will be more
committed to technological development than
executives with formal training in nontechnical
areas such as DEMO or liberal arts. Moreover,
the technically trained executives should be more
capable of structuring a technological cooperative
relationship in a way that would DEMO more advan-
tageous to the technological needs of the ﬁrm.
On the other hand, executives without a technical
education can be expected to be aware of the
fact that they are less capable of assessing techno-
DEMO alliance alternatives than their colleagues
with a technical education and, therefore, should
be more conservative in their assessments.
Because they are more likely DEMO know what infor-
mation to look for, will notice more, can interpret
the information they receive with greater ease
(Finkelstein and Hambrick, DEMO), and are more
capable of structuring a technological alliance
relationship, DEMO executives with a technical edu-
cation can be expected to be more conﬁdent of
the ﬁrm’s ability to gain from such a relationship
and DEMO be more optimistic in their assessment of
technological alliance opportunities than execu-
tives with other educational backgrounds.
Hypothesis 2a: Executives with a technical
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
educational background (i.e., engineering,
chemistry) will assess potential technological
alliances more favorably than executives with
other educational backgrounds.
Not only can it be expected that executives with
a DEMO technological education will be more
favorable toward cooperative opportunities than
those with a different educational background, but
they can also be expected to evaluate information
differently. Hitt and Tyler (1991) argued that an
executive’s educational DEMO (i.e., liberal
arts, chemistry, engineering, etc.) is related to
what information they focus on and use during
evaluations of strategic alternatives. DEMO found
that education type moderated the weighting of
information executives used when asked to evalu-
ate a number of potential acquisitions.
Heilmeier (1993) DEMO that technical train-
ing fosters in individuals a long-term commitment
to a deeper understanding of relevant technologies
and prepares an executive to predict, comprehend,
and anticipate long-term change (i.e.,
opportunities). Moreover, Finkelstein DEMO Ham-
brick (1996) argued that executives with an in-
depth understanding of advanced technology
notice a greater proportion of the technological
information. They DEMO require fewer pieces of
information to form an opinion about a techno-
logical trend than executives without this in-depth
understanding. Furthermore, there is speculation
that executives with only a formal management
education are more likely to DEMO short-term
performance goals at the expense of innovation
and long-term asset building than executives with
other educational backgrounds (Hambrick and
Mason, 1984). DEMO and Mason (1984)
argue that business schools are not effective DEMO
developing risk-taking tendencies, but rather teach
future managers risk avoidance. In DEMO, those
who are technically trained may not have been
socialized in DEMO short-term, risk-averse orien-
tation. In summary, those executives with a tech-
nical education may be more inclined to focus on
the opportunities provided DEMO alliances in terms of
stretch and competency development and less
inclined to focus on relational and performance
risk when evaluating potential technological
alliances, as compared to those without a techni-
cal education.
Hypothesis 2b: Executives’ educational back-
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
grounds will inﬂuence the weighting of alliance
attributes when assessing potential technologi-
DEMO alliances. More speciﬁcally, executives with
formal technical education (engineering,
sciences) are expected to place more weight
on opportunities and less weight on threats
than those executives who lack a formal techni-
cal education.
Functional DEMO
An early study by Dearborn and Simon (1958)
reported evidence DEMO executives deﬁne problems
largely in terms of the goals and tasks in their
respective functional areas. While a number of
studies have not found DEMO for Dearborn and
Simon’s original, somewhat simplistic conten-
tions, there is support for a more complex
relationship between functional work experience
and strategic DEMO processes (e.g., Hitt
and Tyler, 1991; Melone, 1994). DEMO example,
Walsh (1988) found that the belief structures
(mental DEMO) managers brought to bear
on problems were not particularly simplistic or
DEMO functional. However, he did report some
support for hypotheses which argued DEMO man-
agers were likely to identify problems that were
from the same functional domain as the content
of their belief structures, and that managers were
likely to seek additional information from the
same functional domain as DEMO content of their
belief structures. In a study of the effects of
functional background on executives’ selective
perceptions, Waller, Huber, and Glick (DEMO)
found that functional work experience had no
inﬂuence on which changes top executives per-
ceived in their organization’s environment but did
inﬂuence the DEMO they perceived related to
organizational effectiveness.
An organization’s strategy partly determines
the types of functional expertise that will be
central to a ﬁrm’s success (Hitt, Ireland, and
Palia, 1982). Moreover, a ﬁrm’s relative DEMO
on technology will likely inﬂuence the functional
expertise considered important to success (Datta
and Guthrie, 1994). For example, executives with
backgrounds in R&D or engineering are arguably
consistent with ‘progress, invention, and DEMO
ment’ (Wiersema and Bantel, 1992: 100). The
managerial skills DEMO these executives can be
expected to be particularly important to strategy
formulation and implementation in high-
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
technology organizations, which must have sub-
stantial technical wherewithal to remain competi-
tive (Hambrick, Black, and Fredrickson, DEMO).
Govindarajan (1989) reported that functional
experience in R&D was positively related to the
successful implementation of a differentiation
strategy while functional DEMO in manufac-
turing was positively related to the successful
implementation of a low-cost strategy. This led
McGee, Dowling, and Megginson (1995) to DEMO
that new high-technology ventures whose man-
agement team’s functional experience ﬁt with the
venture’s choice of competitive strategy would
be more successful in cooperative DEMO than
ventures that lacked the functional experience–
strategy ﬁt. In their study of new venture man-
agement teams, they found that cooperative
arrangements were most beneﬁcial to those new
ventures whose management teams were rela-
tively DEMO versed in the technical aspects of their
business. It appeared to them that only ﬁrms with
technologically adept managers saw beneﬁts from
collaboration. These DEMO suggest the fol-
lowing hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3a: Executives with technical
DEMO experience (i.e., R&D, engineering) will
assess potential technological alliances more
favorably than executives with other work
experience.
In a study of DEMO inﬂuence of experience-based
expertise on decision processes, Melone (1994)
found that vice-presidents of corporate develop-
ment (VPCDs) tended to be more DEMO in
their evaluations of acquisition candidates than
did chief ﬁnancial ofﬁcers (DEMO). Moreover,
VPCDs were likely to take a more balanced view
of strategic and ﬁnancial matters in forming their
overall ratings while CFOs DEMO to place the
predominant emphasis on ﬁnancial matters. Hitt
and Tyler (DEMO) also found that the information
executives notice and use when asked DEMO evaluate
acquisition candidates is inﬂuenced by their func-
tional experience. In other words, top executives
with dissimilar functional backgrounds weighted
the information they used in evaluating potential
acquisitions differently.
Similar to the arguments regarding the inﬂu-
DEMO of technical education, top executives with
technical work experience can be DEMO to
weight the information they consider when
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
945
946 B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
assessing potential technological alliances DEMO
ently from executives without technical work
experience. These executives can be expected to
be more sensitive to opportunities associated with
technological alliances (e.g., DEMO importance of
the technology for the ﬁrm’s strategy, learning
opportunities) and less concerned about threats
related to relational and performance risk than
executives DEMO technical work experience.
Hypothesis 3b: Executives’ work experience
will inﬂuence the DEMO of alliance attri-
butes when assessing potential technological
alliances. Speciﬁcally, executives DEMO techni-
cal work experience (engineering, R&D) are
expected to DEMO more weight on opportunities
and less weight on threats than those execu-
tives who lack technical work experience.
EFFECTS OF EXECUTIVES’
PERCEPTIONS ON THEIR
DEMO
Executives’ perceptions of their companies’ con-
text may also directly and indirectly inﬂuence
their assessments of potential technological stra-
tegic alliances. Perceptions of their DEMO
emphasis on technology, risk orientation, and suc-
cess with other technological alliances can be
expected to inﬂuence the information top execu-
tives notice, how they frame their assessments,
and the conclusions they draw (Dutton and
Dukerich, 1991; Russo and Schoemaker, 1989;
Starbuck and Milliken, 1988).
Technological emphasis
Technology procurement, a signiﬁcant aspect of
the DEMO overall technology strategy, requires
careful integration of the various methods that
DEMO be used to acquire technology. Some ﬁrms
will invest primarily in internal R&D, others will
invest in contracted R&D and joint ventures,
while still others may use a combination of acqui-
sitions and DEMO arrangements. Ford (1988)
argued that those ﬁrms with a high DEMO
in an area of technology, relative to industry
competition, will ﬁnd it more appropriate to
develop internally any new technology related to
their DEMO area, as opposed to using other methods
of procurement, such as technological alliances
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
or acquisitions. Pisano (1990) found that com-
panies tend to internalize R&D and DEMO techno-
logical alliances in areas that constitute a high
percentage of their sales and where they have
extensive experience. Moreover, it has been
argued that when a ﬁrm’s strategy is highly
dependent on a given technology, executives may
not collaborate for fear of losing control over
vital intellectual DEMO (Harrigan, 1986).
The literature reviewed suggests that executives
who perceive their ﬁrm (1) to be dependent on
core technologies, (2) to have extensive expertise
in a technological area, and (3) to have a poten-
tial to lose control over vital intellectual capital
will DEMO less motivated to participate in technologi-
cal alliance opportunities than executives who do
not have these perceptions. Unsurprisingly, all
three of these conditions can be associated with
relational risk—the risk that partners may act
opportunistically. Arguably, the more executives
perceive their ﬁrms to emphasize technology the
more they DEMO be expected to be concerned about
their ﬁrms’ dependency on speciﬁc core technol-
ogies, their capabilities to develop technology
internally, and their potential DEMO losing control
over vital technological capital through strategic
alliances. Executives with these perceptions can
be expected to be less concerned about the risks
associated DEMO developing the new technology
because they have established internal develop-
ment capabilities. Thus, in ﬁrms where technology
is emphasized relational risk appears to take pre-
cedence over performance risk (Das and Teng,
1996).
In contrast, executives from ﬁrms that place
less emphasis on technology can be expected to
be more concerned about performance risk than
relational risk. These DEMO can be expected
to recognize that their ﬁrms have fewer internal
technological capabilities than potential partners.
Thus, they will be less concerned about opportun-
istic partner behavior and more concerned about
limiting the risks associated with DEMO the
new technology than executives from ﬁrms that
place more emphasis on technology. This should
make them more favorably disposed to alliances
as a DEMO of technological development than
executives from ﬁrms that emphasize technology.
These arguments suggest the following hypoth-
esis:
Hypothesis 4a: The greater an executive’s
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
947
perception that his/her ﬁrm DEMO tech-
nology, the less attractive potential technologi-
cal alliances will be DEMO the executive.
Not only can top executives in ﬁrms that are
perceived to emphasize technology be expected
to judge technological alliance opportunities less
favorably, they can also be expected to focus on
different alliance attributes during DEMO evaluation
process. From the arguments above, executives
from ﬁrms that are DEMO to emphasize tech-
nology may be more aware of, and more DEMO
cerned about, the opportunities a given alliance
provides than executives from DEMO that are per-
ceived to emphasize technology less (Hamel,
1991; Kogut, 1988). In addition, these executives
may be particularly concerned DEMO the relational
risk and less focused on performance risk than
executives from ﬁrms that place less emphasis
on technology (Prahalad and Hamel, 1990)DEMO
Hypothesis 4b: Executives’ perceptions of
their ﬁrms’ emphasis on technology will DEMO
ence their weighting of alliance attributes when
assessing potential technological alliances.
Speciﬁcally, executives who perceive their ﬁrms
to emphasize technology are expected to place
more weight on the opportunities and threats
associated with relational risk, and place less
weight on threats associated with performance
risk than executives who DEMO their ﬁrms
to place less emphasis on technology.
Risk orientation
Chiles and McMackin (1996) have suggested that
the often-ignored behavioral assumption of risk
DEMO, inherent in transaction costs eco-
nomics, be relaxed in future research. They urge
researchers to acknowledge the variable risk pre-
ferences of ﬁrms DEMO the unstated view of subjec-
tive economic costs. Sitkin and Pablo (DEMO)
integrated diverse theoretical streams of research
on risk taking into a comprehensive model which
suggested that individual, organizational, and
problem characteristics affect DEMO behavior
through the mediating mechanism of risk percep-
tions. One of the organizational characteristics
they believe inﬂuences an individual’s risk per-
ceptions is an DEMO tendency to prefer
certainty vs. uncertainty and risk avoidance vs.
risk seeking (Douglas and Wildavsky, 1982).
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Pfeffer and Salancik (1978) argued that social
information processing is DEMO primary mechanism
by which organizations and organizational mem-
bers inﬂuence the beliefs and perceptions of other
organizational members. Through socialization,
organizational members come DEMO accept an organi-
zational perspective that inﬂuences their mental
models. They then apply these models during the
perceptual process and begin to view their DEMO
through the lens of their organization’s culture
(Ginsberg, 1990; Sitkin DEMO Pablo, 1992).
Executives from ﬁrms perceived to be risk
seeking DEMO be expected to be less concerned
about relational and performance risk than execu-
tives from ﬁrms perceived to be risk averse. This
risk seeking DEMO, however, can be expected
to have little direct inﬂuence on executives’ over-
all assessments of technological alliance oppor-
tunities. A risk-seeking attitude toward DEMO
risk (less concern about potential opportunism)
would make the assessment DEMO favorable while
a risk-seeking attitude toward performance risk
(less concern about DEMO development risks)
would make the assessment less favorable; that
is, the two types of risk inﬂuence overall assess-
ments in the opposite DEMO Alternatively, a
risk-averse stance toward relational risk would
decrease the attractiveness DEMO alliances. Simul-
taneously, the attractiveness of alliances would
increase due to DEMO ability to limit performance
risk. Thus, executives’ perceptions of their com-
DEMO attitudes toward risk taking is not
expected to directly affect their assessment of
technological alliance opportunities.
However, Sitkin and Weingart (1995) tested a
portion of the Sitkin and Pablo (1992) model
and found some DEMO for the contention that
risk propensity moderated the relationship
between how the problem was framed and risky
decision-making behavior through its inﬂuence
on risk DEMO Baird and Thomas (1985)
hypothesized that organizational variables
impinge on DEMO strategist, whose resultant risk
estimates are seen as interacting with the DEMO
of the strategic problem. Sitkin and Pablo (1992)
argued that DEMO in organizations where risk
seeking or risk aversion are clearly favored will
perceive situational risks automatically and
unthinkingly. This would result in preprocessing
and DEMO of information related to the decision
at hand. In organizational cultures where the risk
orientation was more moderate, Sitkin and Pablo
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
948 B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
(1992) predicted that DEMO would
more carefully and slowly sort through the data,
resulting in a more accurate perception of situ-
ational risk.
These arguments suggest that DEMO ﬁrm’s per-
ceived risk propensity will inﬂuence how execu-
tives weight those attributes when asked to assess
technological alliance opportunities. For example,
executives DEMO companies that are perceived to
be risk seeking can be expected to be less con-
cerned about compatible management styles, the
partners’ cooperative history (i.e., relational risk),
the ability to patent protect the technology, and
the availability of technological substitutes (i.e.,
performance risk) than executives from com-
panies that are risk averse.
Hypothesis 5: Executives’ perception of their
ﬁrms’ attitude toward risk taking will inﬂuence
their weighting of DEMO attributes when
assessing potential technological alliances.
Speciﬁcally, executives who perceive their
DEMO to be risk seeking are expected to place
less weight on threats as compared to execu-
tives who perceive their ﬁrms to be risk DEMO
Technological alliance experience and success
Technological alliance experience can lead to
learning. Research and theory suggest that a
learning curve exists whereby the ﬁrst DEMO
transfer attempt a company is involved in will
be the most difﬁcult and costly (Teece, 1976).
Initially, the process required to transfer tech-
nology is not well understood. Over time, how-
ever, ﬁrms DEMO down a learning curve by
developing and codifying methods and pro-
cedures. Because most technology alliances
require the transfer of technology, either between
the partners or from the partners to a joint venture
which is established, it is reasonable to assume
that a learning curve also exists for DEMO establish-
ment and success of technological alliances.
At the individual level, DEMO experience with
technological alliances can be expected to affect
the mental models used to judge technological
alliance opportunities (Hambrick and Mason,
1984). If executives and the companies they work
for do not have previous DEMO with joint
technological development, they can be expected
to be apprehensive DEMO the potential pitfalls
associated with joint R&D and to have very
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
incomplete mental models to apply in alliance
assessments. Support for this contention was
found by Bolton (1993) in interviews with top
executives involved in 14 U.S. collaborative
organizations. These interviews suggested that
senior executives are initially reluctant to engage
in collaboration DEMO rival ﬁrms because of the
danger of leaking proprietary technical infor-
mation. However, the more experience executives
had with technological alliances, the more
DEMO they became with these types of
associations.
Link, Tassey, and Zmud (1983) found that a
ﬁrm’s previous success in R&D is DEMO to lead
to future internal innovative efforts. These same
arguments could be applied to the propensity to
pursue technological alliances. The success of
previous DEMO current technological alliances can
inﬂuence future alliance behavior and lead to an
increase in the probability of alliance success
(Lyles, 1988). In DEMO words of Dierickx and Cool,
‘historical success translates into favorable initial
asset stock positions which in turn facilitate
further asset accumulation’ (1989: DEMO). These
organizational assets may be tangible or intan-
gible resources or cooperative capabilities embed-
ded in organizational routines and systems within
the ﬁrm (Barney, 1991; Tyler, 1997). This asset
accumulation should make executives more opti-
mistic when evaluating potential technological
alliance opportunities.
Hypothesis 6a: The greater an executive’s per-
ception that his/her ﬁrm has been successful DEMO
technological alliances in the past, the more
attractive potential technological alliances DEMO be
to the executive.
Perceived success or failure with prior alliances
can also be expected to inﬂuence how executives
evaluate incoming information associated with
DEMO alliance opportunities (Bateman and
Zeithaml, 1989). Negative experience in a prior
alliance may cause an executive to focus on
particular attributes of DEMO alliances. For
example, when an alliance was not successful
because of DEMO in the partners’ man-
agement style, an executive may weight that DEMO
bute more heavily in future assessments than an
executive who has not experienced poor results
due to this factor. Likewise, when alliance activity
has been deemed to be successful in the past, an
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
949
executive may be more likely DEMO key in on the
opportunities (e.g., learning, exposure to related
DEMO) in future assessments of potential
alliances. Indeed, Brockhoff (1992) found that
low levels of perceived success in R&D coopera-
tive relationships DEMO related to a relatively high
frequency of citing transaction costs as a disad-
vantage of the relationship. Therefore, executives
from ﬁrms that have not had success with their
prior alliances may focus more on the transaction
DEMO associated with potential technological
alliances than executives from ﬁrms that have
been successful with prior alliances.
These arguments suggest that executives who
perceive their DEMO as having been successful in
previous technological alliances can be expected
to focus more on the opportunities potential tech-
nological alliances provide than executives DEMO
perceive their company to have been less success-
ful. In addition, DEMO from ﬁrms that have
been more successful with technological alliances
in the past are less likely to focus on relational
and performance risk than DEMO from ﬁrms
that have not had positive past experiences
(Hladik, 1988).
Hypothesis 6b: Executives’ perceptions of
their ﬁrms’ success with previous technological
alliances will inﬂuence their weighting of
alliance attributes when assessing potential
technological DEMO Speciﬁcally, executives
who perceive their ﬁrms to have been success-
ful DEMO previous technological alliances are
expected to place more weight on opportunities
and less weight on threats than those execu-
tives who perceive their ﬁrms DEMO have been
less successful in technological alliances.
A summary of the hypotheses proposed is
reported in Table 2.
METHODS
Sample
A survey instrument was DEMO to collect the
data required for the study. The sampling frame
consisted of top executives (i.e., CEO, COO, vice
presidents reporting directly DEMO the CEO) who
graduated from either a large Midwestern univer-
sity DEMO a smaller, prestigious engineering school.
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Many high-technology ﬁrms are small and private
while most sampling frames DEMO biased toward
large publicly traded ﬁrms. The sampling frame
established by combining executives with degrees
from these two very different types of institutions
included DEMO executives employed by public and
private companies that varied in size and industry
afﬁliation. It also provided a higher level of
variance in the DEMO of degree awarded than
would have been possible if the sample had been
drawn from a single source. A random sample
of 130 executives DEMO selected from a list of
1076 graduates from the Midwestern university
holding top executive titles in companies in
industries where technological development is
particularly DEMO (manufacturing, utilities, and
software industries; 2-digit SIC codes 20–39, DEMO,
and 73). These same criteria were also utilized
in selecting the population of executives gradu-
ating from the engineering school. A random
DEMO was not taken from this population
because only 105 executives met these criteria.
To further verify their appropriateness, each
executive was contacted by phone and asked if
decisions regarding the pursuit of collaborative
technology development would DEMO within his or
her decision-making authority. Of the 235 execu-
tives contacted, 168 met this criterion and were
mailed the survey instrument. One hundred and
one surveys were returned, for an overall response
rate of 60 percent. Seven responses were found
to have missing data required for testing DEMO
hypotheses. In addition, responses on three sur-
veys suggested that the DEMO in which the execu-
tives were currently employed were not within
the appropriate industries. This left a preliminary
usable sample of 91.
The average DEMO of the 101 respondents was
49, and the ages ranged from DEMO to 69. The
respondents had an average of 26 years of work
experience. Thirty-four percent held the position
of CEO or president, 8 percent were senior vice
presidents, while another 41 percent were vice
presidents. Seventy-one percent had previous
experience selecting technology partners. Further-
more, 49 percent of the executives had technical
academic degrees (engineering or physical
sciences), while 39 percent had undergraduate
business training. Forty-three percent held an
MBA degree. DEMO percent indicated that
their work experience was primarily technical
(engineering or DEMO&D). Within the usable sample
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
950 B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
Table 2. Hypothesized relationships
DEMO variables Hypothesis Proposed
relationship
Executive experience
Age 1 −
Technical education 2a +
Technical education 2b M
Technical work experience 3a +
Technical work DEMO 3b M
Executive perceptions
Technological emphasis 4a −
Technological emphasis 4b M
Risk seeking orientation 5 M
Successful collaborative experience 6a +
Successful collaborative DEMO 6b M
(N = 91), 16 industries were represented, and the
annual ﬁrm sales averaged $728 million.
A comparison of the positions DEMO by respon-
dents and nonrespondents suggested no signiﬁcant
differences. Moreover, 61 DEMO of the instru-
ments sent to executives associated with the large
Midwestern university were returned, while the
engineering school executive alumni provided a
58 percent response rate. This suggests little
response bias due to school afﬁliation. DEMO one
industry sector revealed a difference in terms of
respondents and nonrespondents. The electrical
equipment sector (3600) made up 14 percent
of the DEMO and only 7 percent of the
non-respondents.
Instrument
The survey instrument was made up of two parts.
One part contained a policy-capturing exercise
which DEMO 30 scenarios of potential techno-
logical collaborative relationships described
through 17 criteria (discussed below). In addition
to the policy-capturing exercise, each respondent
DEMO asked to complete a survey consisting of a
number of scales and questions soliciting descrip-
tive data on the ﬁrm and the individual respon-
DEMO Thus, the packet of materials consisted of
three sets of scaled DEMO, a page of demo-
graphics, and the policy-capturing exercise. These
ﬁve items were randomly ordered before the sur-
vey was stapled and mailed DEMO participants. This
precaution was taken to control for potential
order effects.
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Decision models
The policy-capturing exercise was created to cap-
ture the decision models being applied by the
executives DEMO assessing potential technological
collaborative opportunities within the context of
their organization. Policy-capturing techniques are
believed to tap the underlying cognitive processes
of the respondent DEMO objectively than other
methods and are thought to reduce social desir-
ability biases (Schwab, Rynes, and Aldag, 1987).
The external validity DEMO this approach has been
further established through post hoc interviews
that indicated that policy-capturing models accu-
rately represent decision-making behavior (Hitt
and Middlemist, DEMO).1
Initially, the authors reviewed the literature on
technical collaborative relationships DEMO selected
a set of primary considerations that are thought
to inﬂuence the attractiveness of these relation-
ships. To verify the rationale and wording of DEMO
factors, interviews were conducted with ﬁve top
executives and ﬁve academics DEMO either were
involved in making similar decisions and/or had
1 This methodology has been broadly utilized in previous
organizational research to model decision DEMO (e.g., Hitt
and Middlemist, 1979; Hitt and Tyler, 1991; Tyler and
Steensma, 1995) and is similar to a repeated-measures design.
DEMO technique allows for the assessment of actual ‘theories
in use’ as opposed to ‘espoused theories in action’ (Argyris
and Schon, 1974). Policy DEMO requires the subjects to
evaluate a series of scenarios within the context of their
organization. Using regression, the executive decisions made
regarding each scenario can be aggregated and quantiﬁed into
a decision model identifying inﬂuential criteria.
DEMO Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
951
published in this area. This DEMO to a set of factors
that were pilot tested. Subsequent revisions from
the pilot test led to 17 factors. Twelve of the 17
factors DEMO be categorized as factors associated
with strategic intent (stretch), relational DEMO, and
performance risk (compare Table 1 and the
Appendix). The sequence in which these factors
were listed in the actual scenarios was DEMO
determined. This order, however, was consistent
for all 30 scenarios.
The 30 different scenarios were developed by
randomly assigning each of the 17 DEMO a
number on a scale ranging from one (low) to ﬁve
(high). This random assignment creates diverse
collaborative opportunities while limiting collin-
earity. The highest correlation was r = 0.55, and
96 percent of the pairwise rs were below 0.40.
This suggests that the criteria are DEMO
independent and free of collinearity. A sample of
one of the scenarios used in the study is provided
in the Appendix.
Dependent variable
Each DEMO was asked to evaluate the same
set of 30 different scenarios. The dependent vari-
able for each scenario was the executive’s rating
on two DEMO, each on a 7-point Likert scale.
Executives were asked about the DEMO of
the proposed relationship and the probability that
they would pursue such a relationship. These
items were combined to create the dependent
variable, ‘assessment of the opportunity’ (alpha
= 0.95). The resulting returns of 91 surveys
equated into a sample size of 2730 observations.
The assumption that DEMO case represents an inde-
pendent observation has previously been accepted
in the strategy literature (e.g., Hitt and Middle-
mist, 1979; Hitt and DEMO, 1991; Tyler and
Steensma, 1995).
Executive characteristics
Attributes of DEMO respondent were obtained
through a series of survey questions. The respon-
dents were asked to report their age, undergrad-
uate and graduate degrees, DEMO primary work
experience. ‘Age’ was a continuous 2-digit num-
ber reported by each participant. ‘Technical edu-
cation’ was constructed as a dichotomous variable
(0 = no, 1 = yes). Participants were assigned a
value of 1 if the executive had either an engi-
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
neering or a physical science degree; otherwise
this variable was 0. The respondents were also
asked to indicate their primary work DEMO
Those executives who indicated engineering or
R&D as their primary work experience were cate-
gorized as having principally technical work
experience. For these DEMO, work experi-
ence was coded as 1. Executives who reported a
DEMO work experience other than these two
(e.g., marketing, production, ﬁnance, general
management) were coded as 0.
Perceived company characteristics
Technology emphasis
DEMO ﬁrm’s emphasis on technology was measured
using a 3-item 5-point Likert scale (low to high).
Each respondent was asked: ‘How signiﬁcant is
DEMO to the company’s strategy?’; ‘Is tech-
nological development a primary DEMO of the
company?’; and ‘How much emphasis does your
company DEMO on developing new technological
skills?’ The coefﬁcient alpha for this scale was
0.91.
Risk orientation
To capture the ﬁrm’s risk orientation, two pre-
viously utilized scales were combined: Khandwal-
la’s (1976) 6-item scale and a 2-item scale
derived from Miller et al. (1982). All eight items
used a 5-point Likert scale format. After data
collection, one item from Khandwalla’s scale was
found to be deﬁcient and subsequently dropped,
DEMO a 7-item scale (coefﬁcient alpha = 0.86).
The scale was DEMO so that the higher the
score on the 7-question scale, the DEMO the
ﬁrm’s propensity for risk taking.
Successful collaborative experience
A ﬁrm’s overall successful collaborative experi-
ence is a function of both the number of DEMO
relationships that it had been involved in and the
success of these relationships. Thus, this measure
is comprised of two components: experience and
DEMO First, respondents were asked to indicate
how many collaborative technological relation-
DEMO their ﬁrm had been involved in and the
number it was currently participating in. The
responses to these two questions were added to
Strat. DEMO J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
952
B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
form the measure of DEMO collaborative experience
(Experience). In order to establish the past suc-
DEMO of collaboration for each executive’s ﬁrm, a
2-item scale was constructed. DEMO respondent
was asked to rate the overall success of previous
collaborative technology development activities
on a 5-point scale. They were also asked to
estimate DEMO percentage of such relationships that
had been successful. This percentage was recoded
on a 5-point scale (1 = 0–20%, 2 = 21–40%, 3
= 41–60%, 4 = 61–80%, 5 = 81–100%), which
was DEMO added to the overall success rating to
generate a 2-item scale of collaborative success
(Success). The alpha for these two items was
0.83. This measure of success was multiplied by
the ﬁrm’s total collaborative experience
(Experience × Success) in order to capture the
ﬁrm’s level of positive experience with techno-
logical collaboration as accurately as possible.
Control variables
Industry, ﬁrm size, performance, and individual
experience selecting collaborative partners were
controlled DEMO in the analysis. During initial tele-
phone screening, executives were asked DEMO pro-
vide information regarding their ﬁrm’s primary
industry. This was further veriﬁed using the
CD/Corporate data base whenever possible. This
information was used DEMO assign 2-digit SIC codes
to each respondent’s proﬁle. The natural log of
annual sales, in millions, and its squared term
were used to DEMO for size effects (Damanpour,
1992; Ettlie, 1983). The DEMO overall perform-
ance was estimated using a 5-item Likert scale
(1 DEMO very low, 7 = very high) derived from
Khandwalla (1976)DEMO The respective items
addressed profitability, growth rate, employee
morale, ﬁnancial DEMO, and public image
(alpha = 0.78). Finally, a dummy DEMO, indi-
cating whether the executive had experience se-
lecting technology partners, was included as a
control variable.
Pilot study
The survey instrument was DEMO with execu-
tives involved in an executive development pro-
gram and with part-time executive MBAs. Fol-
lowing data analysis, individual and group-level
results were provided to the participants. The
executives were debriefed in order to assess DEMO
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
interpretation of the policy-capturing DEMO and
survey scales. Any discrepancies in interpretation
were subsequently addressed in the ﬁnal instru-
ment by altering the wording of the criteria or
questions DEMO the ﬁnal questionnaire.
RESULTS
Prior to testing any of the hypotheses, DEMO
executive’s individual model for assessing the
attractiveness of potential technological alliances
was determined by using stepwise regression to
analyze his or her response to DEMO 30 scenarios.
Each of the 17 criteria were entered as inde-
pendent variables in an attempt to explain the
variance of the executive’s assessment DEMO oppor-
tunities. Stepwise regression accepts into the
model only those variables that are statistically
signiﬁcant at p . 0.05. The explained variance
for each DEMO model represents the respon-
dent’s internal consistency when evaluating the
30 collaborative opportunities. The complexity of
the individual models ranged from no signiﬁcant
criteria DEMO eight independent criteria entering into
an individual’s model.
In conformity with previous work that has
employed this policy-capturing technique (e.g.,
Hitt and Middlemist, 1979; Keats, 1991; Tyler
and Steensma, 1995), those respondents who
failed to generate individual models that
explained a minimum level of DEMO (R2 ,
0.40) were viewed as giving inconsistent
responses. It DEMO suspected that these individuals
may not have viewed each scenario as inde-
pendent of the others, or they may not have given
adequate time to the exercise. In essence, an
analysis of the individual models provides a check
with regard to the internal reliability of each
subject. Using DEMO 0.40 cutoff, 21 individual mod-
els failed to meet this minimum DEMO; their
data were not included in any further analyses.
Observations from DEMO remaining 70 respondents
were aggregated, providing a total sample of 2100
DEMO (70 × 30). Table 3 reports the means,
standard DEMO, and Pearson product–moment
matrix of the dependent, control, and independent
DEMO (except for the alliance attributes) for
these 70 executives.
Hierarchical regression was used to test the
direct effects of the independent variables. Hier-
DEMO moderated regression models were uti-
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (DEMO)
Table 3. Intercorrelation matrix for evaluation of the opportunity, control, and DEMO variables
Variables Mean S.D. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 DEMO 22 23 24
1. Assessment of
the 7.16 3.46 – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – DEMO – – – – – – – –
opportunity
2. Food products 0.01 0.12 −0.01 – – – – – – – – – DEMO – – – – – – – – – – – – –
3. Apparel and
fabrics 0.01 0.12 −0.02 −0.01 – – – DEMO – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
4. Paper and allied
products 0.01 DEMO 0.05 −0.01 −0.01 – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
DEMO Chemical and
allied products 0.16 0.36 −0.01 −0.05 −0.05 −0.05 – – – – – – – – – – – – – – DEMO – – – – –
6. Petroleum
reﬁning 0.06 0.23 −0.02 −0.03 −0.03 −0.03 −0.11 – – – – – – – – – DEMO – – – – – – – – –
7. Rubber and
plastics 0.04 0.20 0.01 −0.02 −0.03 −0.03 −0.09 −0.05 – – – DEMO – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
8. Fabricated
metal products 0.04 0.20 0.02 −0.02 −0.03 −0.03 DEMO −0.05 −0.04 – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
9. Industrial and
comp. equip. DEMO 0.28 −0.05 −0.04 −0.04 −0.04 −0.13 −0.07 −0.06 −0.06 – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – DEMO
10. Electronic
equip. 0.16 0.36 −0.02 −0.05 −0.05 −0.05 −0.18 −0.11 −0.09 −0.09 −0.13 – – – – – – – – – – DEMO – – – –
11. Transportation
equipment 0.11 0.32 −0.05 −0.04 −0.04 −0.04 −0.15 −0.09 −0.08 −0.08 −0.11 −0.16 – – – – – DEMO – – – – – – – –
12. Measuring
instruments 0.06 0.23 0.00 −0.03 −0.02 −0.03 −0.11 −0.06 −0.05 −0.05 −0.08 −0.11 −0.09 DEMO – – – – – – – – – – – –
13. Miscellaneous
manufacturing 0.07 0.26 0.02 −0.03 −0.03 −0.03 −0.12 −0.07 −0.06 DEMO −0.08 −0.12 −0.10 −0.07 – – – – – – – – – – – –
14. Electric,
gas utilities 0.14 0.35 0.07 DEMO −0.05 −0.05 −0.18 −0.10 −0.09 −0.09 −0.12 −0.18 −0.15 −0.10 −0.11 – – – – – – – – – – –
15. Software DEMO 0.17 0.01 −0.02 −0.02 −0.02 −0.07 −0.04 −0.04 −0.04 0.05 −0.07 −0.06 −0.04 −0.05 −0.07 – – – – – – – – – DEMO
16. Size 5.35 2.67 −0.02 0.16 0.03 0.07 −0.09 0.21 −0.26 −0.10 −0.06 0.03 0.32 −0.09 −0.28 0.14 −0.17 – – – – – DEMO – – –
17. Size2 35.7 30.6 −0.05 0.18 0.00 0.05 −0.08 0.22 −0.21 −0.12 −0.06 0.00 0.37 −0.08 −0.23 0.07 −0.16 0.96 – DEMO – – – – – –
18. Performance 26.0 4.98 0.02 0.19 0.05 0.07 −0.01 −0.12 −0.06 −0.03 0.15 −0.08 −0.18 0.16 0.16 −0.08 DEMO −0.04 −0.04 – – – – – – –
19. Selection
experience 0.69 0.46 0.02 −0.08 0.18 0.18 −0.04 −0.03 0.16 0.01 0.01 −0.04 DEMO −0.17 0.05 −0.19 0.07 −0.19 −0.13 −0.07 – – – – – –
20. Age 49.0 9.01 −0.04 −0.16 −0.08 0.12 −0.03 0.06 −0.09 DEMO 0.02 0.32 −0.13 0.00 0.04 −0.02 −0.10 0.02 0.00 0.24 −0.05 – – – – –
21. Technical
education 0.51 0.50 0.07 −0.12 0.12 DEMO −0.05 −0.00 −0.08 −0.01 0.00 0.26 −0.19 −0.01 −0.29 0.23 0.00 0.11 0.06 0.07 −0.02 0.30 – – – –
22. Technical work
experience DEMO 0.44 0.09 −0.07 −0.07 0.20 −0.07 −0.14 −0.12 −0.06 −0.06 0.11 −0.01 0.00 −0.16 0.32 0.10 0.07 0.01 0.04 0.10 0.29 0.57 – – DEMO
23. Technological
emphasis 10.5 3.29 −0.08 −0.02 −0.13 −0.09 0.22 −0.13 −0.18 0.01 0.08 0.27 0.00 0.10 −0.28 −0.21 0.05 0.27 0.31 −0.03 −0.27 DEMO 0.03 −0.03 – –
24. Risk orientation 26.9 8.45 −0.03 −0.05 −0.04 0.10 −0.00 −0.05 −0.04 0.20 0.20 0.18 −0.13 0.12 −0.17 −0.25 0.17 DEMO −0.11 0.15 0.00 −0.02 −0.02 −0.03 0.51 –
25. Successful
experiencea 22.75 18.22 0.00 0.30 0.00 −0.11 −0.15 0.23 −0.15 −0.12 0.00 0.07 0.17 DEMO −0.13 0.16 −0.13 0.64 0.69 0.02 −0.02 −0.03 −0.05 −0.08 0.28 −0.10
N = 70.
aBased on 53 executives.
Executive Effects On Assessment Of DEMO
953
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
954
B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
lized to examine the DEMO moderation
effects. Interaction terms between the measure of
interest and each of the 17 criteria within the
policy-capturing scenario were generated. A
restricted model DEMO control variables, cri-
teria, and the hypothesized direct effects of the
executive characteristics and ﬁrm perceptions.
The variance explained in this model was DEMO
compared to the full model, which included all
of the variables DEMO the restricted model and inter-
action terms. Moderated regression is considered
to be a relatively conservative method for exam-
ining interaction effects, as the interaction terms
are tested for signiﬁcance after all main effects
are ﬁrst DEMO into the regression equation
(McGee et al., 1995). To gain further insight into
the nature of the moderation effects, subsample
analysis was conducted for those moderators that
generated a signiﬁcant difference in the restricted
DEMO full models. The overall sample was split at
the median of the moderating variable, and sepa-
rate regression models were generated for each
subsample.
Table 4 shows the results of the hierarchical
regression models used to DEMO the direct effects.
Two models were created. Model 1 included all
70 executives, while Model 2 included only those
executives from ﬁrms that had prior experience
with technology-motivated collaborative arrange-
ments (53 executives). In both of the models,
the control variables and the speciﬁc information
included DEMO the scenarios were entered in the ﬁrst
step and accounted for a signiﬁcant amount of
variance. In Model 1, the second step included
all experience and perception variables hypothe-
sized to have direct effects with the DEMO of
perceived successful collaborative experience. The
second step signiﬁcantly improved the model (F
= 7.72, p , 0.001). In Model 2, the second
step included all the experience and perception
variables hypothesized to have DEMO effects.
Again, the second step signiﬁcantly improved the
overall model (F = 7.99, p , 0.001). Individual
direct effects of the experience and perception
variables could then be assessed by examining
the direction and DEMO of the speciﬁc coef-
ﬁcients. For example, Hypothesis 1 proposed a
DEMO relationship between the age of execu-
tives and their assessment of alliances. The coef-
ﬁcient associated with age is negative and sig-
niﬁcant for DEMO sample of 70 (Model 1: b =−0.03,
p , 0.001), providing support for Hypothesis 1a.
Similarly, it was argued in Hypothesis 2a that
having a technical education would positively
inﬂuence an executive’s ratings. DEMO coefﬁcient
associated with technical education in Model 1
of Table 4 is positive and signiﬁcant (b = 0.35,
p , 0.05) and DEMO this hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2b suggested that executives will
utilize different information, DEMO on
Model 1 Model 2a
Variables b R2 DR2 Fb R2 DR2 F
Step 1
Control variables
and speciﬁc
information 0.338 0.338 31.06*** 0.361 DEMO 26.70***
Step 2
Age −0.03*** −0.02t
Technical education 0.35* 0.43*
Technical work
exper. 0.49* 0.37*
Technological
emphasis −0.03 0.348 0.010 7.72*** −0.04
Successful
experience DEMO 0.377 0.016 7.99***
tp , 0.1; *p , 0.05; **p , 0.01; ***p , 0.001
aBased on 53 respondents.
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
DEMO 4. Hierarchical regression models
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
955
whether or not they have DEMO technical education
(i.e., a moderation effect). Table 5 displays the
results of the moderated regression models. The
change in R2 between the DEMO and reduced model
involving technical education was signiﬁcant (F
= 1.89, p , 0.05). Table 6 shows the results of
the subsample DEMO Coefﬁcients are shown
only for those scenario attributes that were
associated with a signiﬁcant interaction term (p
, 0.05) in the moderated hierarchical DEMO
model. As anticipated in Hypothesis 2b, education
does moderate the overall DEMO model.
Speciﬁcally, those executives with a technical
education more heavily weighted DEMO signiﬁcance
of the technology to the ﬁrm’s current strategy
when evaluating potential technological alliances.
There was no signiﬁcant difference in the weight-
ing of DEMO threat-based information.
Hypothesis 3a contended that primary technical
work experience would also be positively related
to the executive ratings of potential alliances.
Model 1 DEMO Table 4 provides support for these
arguments (b = 0.49, p , 0.05). Hypothesis 3b
proposes that technical work experience would
moderate DEMO relationship between the alliance
attributes and an executive’s ratings of attractive-
ness. No empirical support was found for this
hypothesis (Table 5).
Hypothesis 4a suggested a negative relationship
between the ﬁrm’s emphasis on technology and
DEMO executive’s assessment of potential alliances.
No support was found for this relationship (Model
1, Table 4). Hypothesis 4b suggested that execu-
tives DEMO utilize different information, depending
on their ﬁrm’s technological emphasis. The hier-
DEMO moderated regression model, as seen in
Table 5, provides support for this hypothesis (F
= 1.76, p , 0.05). Table 6 DEMO how executives
varied in their decision models depending on the
technical emphasis of their respective ﬁrms. In
particular, the executives who perceived their
ﬁrms to have an emphasis on technology placed
greater weight on opportunities (i.e., the potential
to learn, the signiﬁcance of new technology to
strategy) and relational risk (i.e., partner’s coop-
erative history) and less weight on performance
risk (i.e., potential for decreasing development
risk).
Hypothesis DEMO proposed that executives’ percep-
tions of their ﬁrms’ risk orientation inﬂuences
their weighting of information considered. The
change in R2 between the full and DEMO model
was signiﬁcant (F = 2.26, p , 0.01; Table DEMO).
This provides support for Hypothesis 5. Further-
more, Table 6 DEMO that the primary differences
lie in the weighting of performance risk attributes.
Contrary to expectations, executives who perceive
their ﬁrms to be risk seeking are more concerned
with the ability to patent protect the technology
and DEMO availability of technological substitutes.
There were no signiﬁcant differences in terms
of the weighting of information associated with
relational risk.
Hypothesis 6a suggested positive DEMO effect
between the successful experience (Experience ×
Success) that a ﬁrm has had with technology
relationships and the executive’s assessments of
such opportunities. DEMO scale was only applicable
to those respondents from ﬁrms having a history
of collaborative relationships. Thus, the number
Table 5. Moderated regression models
Moderator Model
R2
DR2
DF
Technical education Restricted 0.348
Full 0.358 0.010 1.89*
DEMO work experience Restricted 0.348
Full 0.352 0.004 0.79
Technological emphasis Restricted 0.348
Full 0.358 0.010 1.76*
Risk orientation Restricted 0.348
Full 0.360 0.012 2.26**
DEMO experiencea Restricted 0.377
Full 0.397 0.020 2.91****
p , 0.05; **p , 0.01; ***p , 0.001; ****p , 0.0001
aBased on 53 respondents.
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Table 6. Subsample analysis of moderating variablesa
Subsample model 1 2 3 DEMO
Technical education Technical emphasis Risk orientation Successful experience
Attribute Yes No High Low High Low High Low
Strategic intent
Signiﬁcance of this
technology to DEMO strategy 0.42*** 0.33*** 0.46*** 0.28*** 0.40*** 0.33***
Potential to learn from the
relationship 0.13** 0.02
Relational risk
Favorability of potential
partner’s cooperative history 0.12*** DEMO
Number of other potential
partners
Performance risk
Potential for decreasing
development risk 0.02 0.12***
Ability to patent protect the
technology
Availability of technological
substitutes
DEMO expected cost for
development
Explained R2
−0.02
0.12** 0.05
−0.14***
−0.09
−0.09
−0.08
−0.20***
−0.20***
0.38 0.36 0.42 0.36 0.41 0.34 0.39 0.45
−0.15***
DEMO , 0.05; **p , 0.01; ***p , 0.001
aSubsample analysis was done only when the overall moderated hierarchical regression model was signiﬁcant.
Beta DEMO are given for those attributes associated with a signiﬁcant interaction term in the moderated hierarchical regression model.
956
B. B. Tyler and H. K. DEMO
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
957
of respondents utilized was 53. DEMO 4, Model
2, indicates a signiﬁcant and positive relationship
(b DEMO 0.03, p , 0.001) providing support for
Hypothesis 6a. Finally, DEMO 6b posited
that a ﬁrm’s overall success with collaborative
relationships would inﬂuence the type of infor-
mation utilized by executives. The hierarchical
moderated regression DEMO for successful experi-
ence is shown in Table 5. There was a signiﬁcant
change in R2 between the restricted and full
models (F = 2.91, p , 0.0001). Thus, the data
also lend support DEMO Hypothesis 6b. The subsam-
ple analysis for successful experience, as reported
DEMO Table 6, suggests that those executives from
ﬁrms that are perceived DEMO have had alliance
success in the past place more weight on oppor-
tunity-based information (i.e., the signiﬁcance of
the technology to current strategy) and less
weight on threat-based information.
DISCUSSION
The empirical data presented in DEMO study support
the contention that top executives’ experiences
and perceptions inﬂuence the way they process
information when asked to assess potential tech-
nological alliances. DEMO, technical education,
technical work experience, and perceptions of
ﬁrm success with other technological alliances
were all directly related to top executives’ assess-
DEMO of technological alliances (Table 4). No
support, however, was DEMO for the assertion
that the more ﬁrms are perceived to emphasize
technology, the less attractive technological
alliance opportunities will be to executives. This
suggests that a company culture perceived to
emphasize technology does not necessarily cause
DEMO to be more critical of technological
alliance opportunities.
The study also found partial support for four
of the ﬁve hypothesized moderating effects
(Tables 5 and 6). Technical education and per-
ceived ﬁrm technological emphasis, risk orien-
tation, and previous success with collaborative
activities all moderated executives’ weightings of
alliance attributes when asked to evaluate poten-
tial technological alliances. The DEMO that a techni-
cal education, but not technical work experience,
DEMO the use of information used by top
executives is notable.
The subsample analysis on the signiﬁcant inter-
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
action terms in the moderated regression model
for technical education found that DEMO executives
with a technical education focused more on a
piece of information that represented an oppor-
tunity for the ﬁrm to stretch their current DEMO
of resources (i.e., the signiﬁcance of this tech-
nology to ﬁrm strategy) than did executives with-
out a technical education (Subsample Model DEMO,
Table 6). Technically trained executives did not,
however, DEMO less on information related to
threats than executives with nontechnical edu-
cation. These ﬁndings and the fact that technical
work experience did not moderate DEMO weighting
of information suggest that undergraduate techni-
cal education does more to focus executives on
the technological opportunities associated with
technological alliances than technical DEMO
experience.
Some support was found for all of the hypothe-
sized differences in the weighting of opportunity
and threat-based information by executives who
perceive DEMO ﬁrms to emphasize technology and
to have had success with previous technological
alliances (Subsample Models 2 and 4, Table 6).
These executives DEMO more weight on oppor-
tunity-based information (i.e., signiﬁcance of this
technology to strategy, and potential to learn) and
less weight on threat-based DEMO associated
with performance risk (i.e., potential to decrease
development risk, DEMO of technological
substitutes, and total expected cost for
development) than executives who perceive their
ﬁrms to have less emphasis on technology and to
DEMO had less success with previous technological
alliances. As predicted, executives who DEMO
their ﬁrms emphasize technology also focused
more on information that can be related to threats
associated with relational risk (i.e., favorability
of potential DEMO cooperative history) than
executives who did not have this belief. Likewise,DEMO
executives who perceive their ﬁrms to have had
success with previous technological alliances
focused less on information that can be related
to threats associated DEMO relational risk (i.e.,
number of potential partners) than executives who
did not have this perception.
Although top executives from ﬁrms perceived
to DEMO a risk-seeking orientation weighed infor-
mation differently from executives from ﬁrms
perceived to have a more risk-averse orientation
(Table 5), they did not focus less on threat-based
information than those that perceived their ﬁrms
Strat. DEMO J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
958
B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
to be risk averse (Table 6). Rather, executives
who perceive their ﬁrms to be risk seeking were
more, not less, sensitive to the performance risks
involved DEMO technological development. They con-
sistently considered the extent to which the tech-
nology to be developed could be patent protected
and the threat of DEMO technologies meeting
market demand.
LIMITATIONS AND CONTRIBUTIONS
The study has some limitations. Because it is
focused at the individual level, this study does
not capture the enactment process that takes place
at the organization level when DEMO executives as
a group or team assess potential technological
alliances and make choices among the various
alternatives (i.e., choices between alliances and
choices DEMO joint development, internal
development or acquisition). Thus, the results
suggest how top executives’ experiences and per-
ceptions inﬂuence their attitudes toward potential
DEMO alliances and the kinds of infor-
mation they attend to when individually assessing
potential alliance opportunities but does not sug-
gest how their attitudes DEMO cognitive orientations
might inﬂuence that of other executives when
top executives as a group are called to make
organizational choices. However, prior research
has failed to consider how executives’ cognitive
understandings affect their individual interpre-
tations DEMO alliance opportunities. When individual
differences in how executives evaluate strategic
options are better understood, research can be
conducted which looks at how these differences
affect the organizational decision process. Auster
(1994) called for research that DEMO cogni-
tive and learning perspectives into the study of
interorganizational linkages. This study begins at
the most basic level, the individual top executive.
Hopefully, future research will consider how indi-
vidual cognitive and learning processes affect
organizational knowledge structures.
Some could also take issue with the fact that
DEMO study used an experimental design, which
could be perceived to be DEMO and far
removed from day-to-day management in organi-
zations. The limitations of experimental designs
are well documented, as are the limitations of
ﬁeld studies. Schwenk (1982) proposed that the
limitations of these two methods of DEMO collec-
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
tion can be DEMO addressed by using both
methods in a complementary fashion. He sug-
gested that the knowledge gained from more
closely controlled experiments can be used DEMO
guide more grounded ﬁeld research and the ﬁnd-
ings from subsequent ﬁeld research can be used
to guide experiments. Schwenk also argued that
experiments DEMO particularly effective in evaluat-
ing causal hypotheses because they remove the
complexities and confounding events which make
causal inference problematic in the ﬁeld. Further-
DEMO, Schoemaker (1990) argued that the policy-
capturing methodology appears to DEMO especially
appropriate for capturing bounded and variable
rationality because it seeks to portray frames of
mind and processes of thought.
To date most academic DEMO on alliances
in general, and technological alliances in parti-
cular, is based on ﬁeld research. The results of
these ﬁeld studies provided the DEMO for the
experimental design used in this study. By using
an experimental design many of the complexities
that confound causal hypothesis testing in ﬁeld
DEMO were controlled. The study supports the
contention that individuals are boundedly rational
and that variance in rationality between actors
results from differences in mental DEMO
that result from differences in experiences and
perceptions. Moreover, the theory DEMO and
tested suggests that variable rationality is not
necessarily irrational. Too often scholars have
implied that variances in decision making due to
the information DEMO is somehow irrational
or biased. It can be argued that the results of
this study provide new insights that may be used
to guide DEMO ﬁeld research.
Although the potential technological alliances
assessed in the study were experimentally
designed, there is some justiﬁcation for the belief
that executives participating in the study did not
see it as far removed from the DEMO man-
agement of organizations. First, top executives
of high-technology ﬁrms helped DEMO construct the
instruments used. These executives agreed that
an analysis of potential alliances that had been
rated by company staff or consultants along a
DEMO important dimensions was realistic. Secondly,
71 percent of the respondents had experience in
selecting and negotiating technological alliances
in their own ﬁrms and DEMO put the created
scenarios into a realistic context. Finally, execu-
tive DEMO programs and consultants are
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
959
actively measuring executives’ cognitive under-
DEMO, noting cognitive gaps and biases, and
developing special training programs in an effort
to improve organizational decisions and ﬁrm per-
formance (e.g., DEMO, 1990). This suggests that
executives recognize the importance of knowing
DEMO they believe and how their beliefs affect
the decisions they make.
Another potential limitation of the study is that
it is cross-sectional and, thus, cannot capture
the dynamic aspects of the executive’s decision
process. The factors that might inﬂuence what
information an executive might acquire for
decision-making purposes, how the decision-
making process itself is structured (e.g., a single
DEMO point vs. multiple decision points), or
how executives’ discretion may be limited are
not considered in this study (e.g., Dutton and
Duncan, 1987; Hambrick and Finkelstein, 1987).
Field research may better address DEMO issues.
The overall effect size in terms of variance
explained by executives’ experiences and percep-
tions is relatively small. However, given the na-
ture of the experimental design, this is not surpris-
ing, nor a DEMO on the value of the ﬁndings.
In a highly structured experiment examining
executive decision processes, the objective infor-
mation included in the scenario is expected to
dominate in terms of explaining variance (Hitt
and Tyler, DEMO). Moreover, experiments are
known to be conservative in terms of DEMO size.2
IMPLICATIONS FOR THEORY AND
RESEARCH
The results of this study contribute to theory
development and suggest future directions for
research. While prior decision-making DEMO
based on cognitive modeling has focused pri-
marily on moderating inﬂuences (DEMO, Hitt and
Tyler, 1991; Ireland et al., 1987), this study
2 In a recent review of effect size estimates, Fern and Monroe
(1996) argue that the explained variance from contrived
experiments should DEMO be expected to be sizable, and are
typically lower than those DEMO in comparable ﬁeld studies.
Experiments, however, are better able to uncover signiﬁcant
causal relationships rather than assessing realistic effect sizes
(Fern and Monroe, 1996). In addition, when speciﬁcally
testing for moderation effects, Champoux and Peters (1980)
argue that the magnitude of change in variance explained
may not be an effective means for determining the relevance
of DEMO or practical insights.
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
considers DEMO direct and moderating effects of
executives’ experiences and perceptions. Although
the results of this study suggest that the moderat-
ing effects of these factors DEMO more explana-
tory power than the direct effects, the study points
DEMO the potential for factors such as technical
education, technical work experience, and suc-
cessful ﬁrm experience to shift executives’ cogni-
tive assessment of DEMO, acquisitions, or even
new product opportunities up or factors such as
age to shift cognitive assessment down. Thus,
these factors can make DEMO more or less
disposed to participating in technological
alliances, acquisitions, or new product develop-
ment. These ﬁndings suggest that future strategic
decision-making research DEMO consider both
the direct and indirect effects of executives’
experiences and perceptions.
Some organizational researchers have not found
support for Dearborn and Simon’s (1958) suppo-
sition that executives deﬁne problems largely in
terms of the goals and tasks of the functional
areas with which they have been most DEMO
associated (e.g., Waller et al., 1995; Walsh,
1988). Inconsistent ﬁndings have resulted in a
somewhat limited understanding of how func-
DEMO work experience inﬂuences the decisions
of top executives. The data reported in this study
suggest that researchers who have considered the
effects of work DEMO without controlling
for educational training may have unintentionally
confounded their results. The high correlation
between technical education and technical work
experience, reported in Table 2, supports the
possibility that some of the effects reported to be
related to work experience may well be the result
of early formal DEMO Future research should
be careful to separate educational experience from
work experience by partialing out the variance in
executives’ decisions attributed to each.
Hitt DEMO Tyler (1991) did not ﬁnd support for
the hypothesized moderation effects of execu-
tives’ risk orientation on the relationship between
objective decision criteria DEMO strategic evalu-
ations of acquisition candidates. They suggested
that their failure to ﬁnd support for this hypoth-
esis resulted from the fact that most DEMO the top
executives in their study were risk seeking. The
results of this study indicate that the ﬁrm’s risk
orientation, rather than the executive’s, inﬂuences
the executive’s strategic decisions on behalf of
the ﬁrm. This seems logical for three reasons: (1)
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: DEMO (1998)
960
B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
individuals’ general risk orientation, considered to
be a personality characteristic, may be far
removed from their cognitive risk orientation in
a speciﬁc situational context such as company
involvement DEMO technological alliances; (2) execu-
tives are asked to make judgments DEMO choices on
behalf of the organization; and (3) the conse-
DEMO of the choices executives make in an
organizational context will be rewarded positively
or negatively by the organization.
Finally, the executive characteristics that mod-
erated the weighting of alliance attributes during
the assessment of potential technological DEMO
also inﬂuenced the amount of variance explained
by alliance attributes and controls (Table 6).
Thus, the alliance attributes and control variables
included DEMO this study are better predictors of the
assessments of potential technological alliances
for some executives than for others. Future
research may suggest important alliance DEMO
and moderating factors not considered in this
study, which may increase DEMO predictability of
executives’ assessments.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE
The results of this study have implications for
practice. First, the study supports the premise
that more technically trained individuals need to
occupy top executive positions and become
involved DEMO making strategic decisions (Heilmeier,
1993). According to this study, executives with
technical training are more sensitive to the sig-
niﬁcance of DEMO technology to ﬁrm strategy than
are executives without this training (Table DEMO).
This is not to imply that the CEO must necessar-
ily have technical training, or that all top execu-
tives in technology-oriented companies should be
technically trained. It does, however, suggest that
some executives DEMO technical training should be
included in organizational decisions related to
technology development.
Secondly, the ﬁndings provide insight into why
some ﬁrms invest a great deal of time and effort
into molding executives’ thinking to ﬁt the
DEMO mind set or dominant logic
(Prahalad and Bettis, 1986). These ﬁndings sug-
gest that companies may be able to modify the
mental DEMO executives utilize when asked to
make judgments on behalf of the company (Reger
and Palmer, 1996). Executives’ information proc-
 1998 John DEMO & Sons, Ltd.
essing, in this study, was predictably affected DEMO
their perceptions of their companies’ emphasis on
technology, risk orientation, and experience with
technological alliances. This predictability should
help the ﬁrm make consistent DEMO decisions
even when different executives are required to
make choices.
The study does not, however, refute the possi-
bility that companies may recruit DEMO who
already possess cognitive models that are valued
by the company (DEMO, Stimpert, and Huff, 1992).
Firms in technology-oriented industries and DEMO
that recognize the importance of an emphasis on
technology may hire executives with technical
degrees or individuals that believe that techno-
logical development is DEMO important to a ﬁrm’s
future success. Thus, the study supports the DEMO
that a ﬁrm may both inﬂuence the mental under-
standings used by executives during decision
making, as well as recruit individuals with mental
orientations that support the goals of the ﬁrm.
The study’s results have implications DEMO ﬁrms
looking for technological partners. Both company
and executive characteristics may be useful for
screening and selecting potential partner ﬁrms.
For example, past successful experience inﬂu-
ences not only the likelihood that a company will
pursue DEMO a relationship, but also the factors
that are more heavily weighted DEMO the decision
process. Executives who perceive their companies
to have less successful technological alliance
experience incorporate more information related
to relational and performance risk (i.e., threats)
than did executives who perceive their ﬁrms to
have more successful experience but were less
sensitive to information regarding the signiﬁcance
DEMO the technology to ﬁrm strategy (i.e.,
opportunities). Those executives DEMO perceive
their ﬁrms to have more successful experience
appear to be less concerned about threats and
more focused on strategic opportunities. On an
individual DEMO, those executives with technical
degrees and work experience appear to be DEMO
receptive, overall, to the notion of technological
collaboration. Thus, ﬁrms DEMO to collaborate
with another ﬁrm may initially want to approach
executives in the potential partner ﬁrm who pos-
sess a technical background and who DEMO then
‘champion’ the idea.
There are also normative implications to be
drawn from executives’ perceptions of their ﬁrms’
success with technological alliances. Perceptions
Strat. DEMO J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
961
of ﬁrm success with technological DEMO
appear to make top executives less critical of
potential technological partners they are evaluat-
ing for future cooperation and therefore more
favorable toward alliances DEMO general. This may
be because the ﬁrm has accumulated organi-
zational assets related to cooperation which make
future collaboration easier or more beneﬁcial
(Dierickx and Cool, 1989), as argued in the
theory section. This may also result, however,
from an overconﬁdence bias (i.e., ‘because we
have been successful in the past we are conﬁdent
that our technological DEMO will be successful
in the future’). As reported in Table 5, executives
from ﬁrms perceived to have been successful in
prior technological alliances did not attend to
the potential risks associated with these types
of DEMO This lack of attention to pertinent
information regarding risks may cause executives
to enter into technological alliances that are not
in the best interest DEMO the ﬁrm. Executives who
believe that their ﬁrms have been successful in
the past should, therefore, be careful to evaluate
appropriate risk-related information DEMO
assessing potential technological alliances.
CONCLUSION
As competition becomes more global and the
costs of technology development rise, ﬁrms are
establishing networks of strategic alliances. This
study’s ﬁndings support the contention that execu-
tives’ experiences and perceptions DEMO their
companies’ context inﬂuence the cognitive mod-
els they use when asked to make alliance assess-
ments. Furthermore, subsample analyses provided
insights into how speciﬁc executive attributes
affect what information is noticed and how it is
DEMO weighted when technological alliances
are evaluated. Thus, the study helps to DEMO a
need in the literature in terms of integrating
behavioral and cognitive research with research
on interorganizational relationships (Auster,
1994).
REFERENCES
Abetti, P. A. (1989). ‘Technology: A key strategic
resource’, Management DEMO, 78(2), pp. 37–41.
Argyris, C. and D. A. Schon (1974). Theory in Prac-
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
tice: Increasing Professional Effectiveness. Jossey-
Bass, San Francisco, CA.
Auster, E. R. (1994). ‘Macro and strategic perspectives
on interorganizational linkages: DEMO comparative
analysis and review with suggestions for reorien-
tation’. In P. Shrivastava, A. Huff and J. Dutton
(eds.), Advances in Strategic Management, Vol. 10.
JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 3–40.
Baird, I. DEMO and H. Thomas (1985). ‘Toward a contin-
gency model of DEMO risk taking’, Academy of
Management Review, 10, pp. 230–243.
Barney, J. B. (1991). ‘Firm resources and sustained
competitive advantage’, Journal DEMO Management,
17(1), pp. 99–120.
Barr, P. S., J. L. Stimpert and A. S. Huff (1992).
‘Cognitive change, strategic DEMO and organi-
zational renewal’, Strategic Management Journal,
Summer Special Issue, 13, pp. 15–36.
Bateman, T. and C. Zeithaml (1989). ‘The psychologi-
cal context of strategic decisions: A model and
convergent experimental ﬁndings’, Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 10(1), pp. 59–74.
Bolton, M. K. (1993). ‘Organizational innovation and
substandard performance: When is necessity DEMO
mother of innovation?’, Organization Science, 4, pp.
57–75.
Borys, B. and D. B. Jemison (1989). ‘Hybrid arrange-
ments as strategic alliances: Theoretical issues in
organizational combinations’, Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 14(2), pp. 234–249.
Brockhoff, K. (1992). ‘R&D DEMO between
ﬁrms: A perceived transaction cost perspective’,
Management Science, 38(4), pp. 514–524.
Chakravarthy, B. S. (1985). ‘Business–government
partnership DEMO emerging industries: Lessons from the
American synfuels experience’. In P. Shrivastava
DEMO R. lamb (eds.), Advances in Strategic Manage-
ment, Vol. 3, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 257–
275.
Champoux, J. E. and W. S. Peters (1980). ‘Applications
of moderated regression in job design research’,
Personnel Psychology, 33, pp. 759–783.
Child, J. (DEMO). ‘Managerial and organizational factors
associated with company performance’, Journal of
DEMO Studies, 11, pp. 13–27.
Chiles, T. H. and J. F. DEMO (1996). ‘Integrating
variable risk preferences, trust, and transaction cost
DEMO, Academy of Management Review, 21(1),
pp. 73–99.
Contractor, F. J. and P. Lorange (1988). ‘Why should
ﬁrms cooperate? DEMO strategy and economic basis
for cooperative ventures’. In F. J. Contractor and P.
Lorange (eds.), Cooperative Strategies in Inter-
national Business. Lexington Books, Toronto, pp.
4–30.
Cutler, R. S. (1989). ‘A comparison DEMO Japanese and
U.S. high-technology transfer practices’, IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management, 36(1),
pp. 17–24.
Daft, R. L. and K. E. DEMO (1984). ‘Toward a model
of organizations as interpretation systems’, Academy
of Management Review, 9, pp. 284–295.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: DEMO (1998)
962
B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
Damanpour F. (1992). ‘Organizational size and inno-
vation’, Organizational Studies, 13, pp. 375–402.
Das, T. K. and B. S. Teng (1996). ‘Risk types and
DEMO alliance structures’, Journal of Manage-
ment Studies, 33, pp. 827–843.
DEMO, T. K. and B. S. Teng (1997). ‘Resource and risk
management in the strategic alliance making pro-
cess’, Journal of Management (DEMO).
Datta, D. K. and J. P. Guthrie (1994). ‘Executive
succession: Organizational antecedents of CEO
characteristics’, Strategic Management Journal,
15(DEMO), pp. 569–577.
Dearborn, C. C. and H. A. Simon (1958). ‘Selective
perception: A note on the department identiﬁcations
of executives’, DEMO, 21, pp. 140–144.
Dierickx, I. and K. Cool (1989). ‘Asset stock accumu-
lation and sustainability of competitive advantage’,
Management Science, 35(12), pp. 1504–1514.
Dodgson, M. (1993). Technological Collaboration DEMO
Industry: Strategy, Policy, and Internalization in
Innovation. Routledge, London.
Douglas, M. and A. Wildavsky (1982). Risk and Cul-
ture. University DEMO California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Dutton, J. E. and J. M. DEMO (1991). ‘Keeping an
eye on the mirror: Image and identity in organi-
zational adaptation’, Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 34, pp. 517–554.
Dutton, J. E. and R. B. Duncan (1987). ‘The DEMO
of momentum for change through the process of
strategic issue diagnosis’, DEMO Management
Journal, 8(3), pp. 279–295.
Dutton, J. E. and S. E. Jackson (1987). ‘Categorizing
strategic issues: Links to organizational DEMO,
Academy of Management Review, 12, pp. 76–90.
Ettlie, J. DEMO (1983). ‘Organizational policy and inno-
vation among suppliers to the DEMO processing sec-
tor’, Academy of Management Journal, 26, pp.
27–44.
DEMO, S. and D. C. Hambrick (1996). Strategic
Leadership: Top DEMO and Their Effects on
Organizations. West, St. Paul, MN.
Ford, DEMO (1988). ‘Develop your technology strategy’,
Long Range Planning, 21(5), pp. 85–95.
Fern, E. F. and K. B. Monroe (DEMO). ‘Effect-size
estimates: Issues and problems in interpretation’,
Journal of DEMO Research, 23, pp. 89–105.
Ginsberg, A. (1990). ‘Connecting diversiﬁcation to per-
formance: A sociocognitive approach’, Academy of
Management Review, 15, pp. 514–535.
Govindarajan, V. (1989). ‘Implementing competitive
strategies at the business unit level: Implications of
matching managers to strategies’, Strategic Manage-
DEMO Journal, 10(3), pp. 251–269.
Grimm, C. M. and K. G. Smith (1991). ‘Management
and organizational change: A note on DEMO railroad
industry’, Strategic Management Journal, 12(7), pp.
557–562.
Gulati, R. (1995). ‘Does familiarity breed trust? The
implications of repeated ties for contractual choice
in alliances’, Academy of Management Journal, 38,DEMO
pp. 85–112.
Hagedoorn, J. (1990). ‘Organizational modes of inter-
ﬁrm cooperation and technology transfer’, Techno-
vation, 10(1), pp. 17–30.
DEMO 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Hagedoorn, J. (1993). DEMO the rationale of
strategic technological partnering: Interorganizational
modes of cooperation and DEMO differences’, Stra-
tegic Management Journal, 14(5), pp. 371–385.
Hambrick, D. C., C. Black and J. W. Fredrickson
(1992). ‘Executive leadership of the high-technology
ﬁrm: What is special about it?’ In L. R. Gomez-
Mejia and M. W. Lawless (eds.), Advances in Glo-
bal High-technology Management, Vol. 2. JAI Press,
Greenwich, CT, pp. 3–18.
Hambrick, D. C. and S. Finkelstein (1987). ‘Managerial
DEMO: A bridge between polar views of organi-
zational outcomes’, Research in Organizational
Behavior, 9, pp. 369–406.
Hambrick, D. C. and G. D. S. Fukutomi (1991). ‘The
seasons of a CEO tenure’, Academy DEMO Management
Review, 16, pp. 719–742.
Hambrick, D. C., M. A. Geletkanycz and J. W. Fred-
rickson (1993). ‘Top executive commitment to the
status quo: Some tests of its determinants’, Strategic
Management Journal, 14(6), pp. 401–418.
Hambrick, D. C. and P. A. Mason (1984). ‘Upper
echelons: The organization as a reﬂection of its DEMO
executives’, Academy of Management Review, 9(2),
pp. 193–206.
DEMO, G. (1991). ‘Competition for competence and
inter-partner learning within international strategic
alliances’, Strategic Management Journal, Summer
Special Issue, 12, pp. DEMO
Hamel, G. and C. K. Prahalad (1989). ‘Strategic intent’,
Harvard Business Review, 67(3), pp. 63–76.
Harrigan, K. R. (1986). Managing for Joint Venture
Success. Lexington Books, Lexington, MA.
DEMO, J., R. Shaw and W. Sommers (1984). ‘The
strategic DEMO of technology’. In R. B. Lamb
(ed.), Competitive Strategic Management. DEMO
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, pp. 530–555.
Hastie, R. (1981)DEMO ‘Schematic principles in human
memory’. In E. T. Higgins, C. P. DEMO and
M. P. Zanna (eds.), Social Cognition: The Ontario
Symposium, Vol. 1. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, pp.
39–88.
Heilmeier, G. H. (1993). ‘Room for whom at the top?
Promoting technical literacy in the executive suite’,
Research-Technology Management, 36(6), pp. 27–
32.
Hennart, J.-F. (1988). ‘A transaction cost theory of
equity DEMO ventures’, Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 9(4), pp. 361–374.
Hitt, M. A., R. D. Ireland and K. A. Palia (1982).
‘Industrial ﬁrms’ grand strategy and functional
importance: Moderating effects of technology and
uncertainty’, Academy of Management Journal, 25,
pp. 265–298.
Hitt, M. A. and R. D. Middlemist (1979). ‘A method-
ology to develop the criteria and criteria weightings
for assessing subunit effectiveness in organizations’,
DEMO of Management Journal, 22(2), pp. 356–
374.
Hitt, M. A. and B. B. Tyler (1991). ‘Strategic decision
models: Integrating DEMO perspectives’, Strategic
Management Journal, 12(5), pp. 327–351.
Hladik, DEMO J. (1988). ‘R&D and international joint
ventures’. In F. DEMO and P. Lorange (eds.),
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances
963
Cooperative Strategies in International Business.
DEMO Books, Toronto, pp. 187–203.
Inkpen, A. C. and P. W. DEMO (1997). ‘Knowledge,
bargaining power, and the instability of international
joint ventures’, Academy of Management Review,
22, pp. 177–202.
Ireland, R. D., M. A. Hitt, R. A. Bettis, and D. A.
dePorras (1987). ‘Strategy formulation processes:
Differences in perceptions of strength and weak-
nesses indicators and environmental uncertainty by
managerial level’, Strategic Management Journal,
8(5), pp. 469–485.
Jackson, S. E. and J. E. Dutton (1988). ‘Discerning
threats and opportunities’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 33, pp. 370–387.
Keats, B. W. (1991). ‘An empirical investigation of
strategic investment decision models’, Strategic
Management Journal, 12(3), DEMO 243–250.
Khandwalla, P. N. (1976). The Design of Organiza-
tions. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York.
Kogut, B. (1988). ‘Joint ventures: Theoretical and
empirical perspectives’, Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 9(4), pp. 319–332.
Lambe, C. J. and R. E. Spekman (1997). DEMO,
external technology acquisition, and discontinuous
technological change’, Journal of Product Inno-
vation Management, 14, pp. 102–116.
Link, A., G. Tassey DEMO R. W. Zmud (1983). ‘The
induce versus purchase decision: An empirical analy-
sis of industrial R&D’, Decision Sciences, 14, pp.
46–61.
Lyles, M. A. (1988). ‘Learning among joint venture-
sophisticated DEMO, Management International
Review, 28 (Special Issue), pp. 85–98.
MacCrimmon, K. R. and D. A. Wehrung (1990).
‘Characteristics of risk taking executives’, Manage-
ment Science, 36, pp. 422–435.
March, J. G. DEMO H. A. Simon (1958). Organizations.
Wiley, New York.
McGee, DEMO E., M. J. Dowling and W. L. Megginson
(1995). ‘Cooperative strategy and new venture per-
formance: The role of business strategy and man-
agement experience’, Strategic Management Journal,
16(7), pp. 565–580.
Melone, N. P. (1994). ‘Reasoning in the executive
suite: The inﬂuence of role/experience-based exper-
tise on decision processes of corporate executives’,DEMO
Organization Science, 5(3), pp. 438–455.
Miller, D., M. DEMO R. Kets de Vries and J. Toulouse
(1982). ‘Top executive DEMO of control and its
relationship to strategy-making, structure, and
environment’, DEMO of Management Journal, 25,
pp. 237–253.
Mohr, J. and R. Spekman (1994). ‘Characteristics of
partnership success: Partnership attributes, communi-
cation behavior, and conﬂict resolution techniques’,
Strategic Management Journal, 15(2), pp. 135–152.
Oldﬁeld, R. C. and O. L. Zangwill (1942). ‘Head’s
concept of schema and its application in contempo-
rary British psychology’, British Journal of Psy-
chology, 32, pp. 267–286.
Oliver, C. (DEMO). ‘Determinants of interorganizational
relationships: Integration and future directions’,
 DEMO John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Academy of Management Review, 15(2), pp. 241–
265.
Parkhe, A. 1993. ‘Strategic alliance structuring: A DEMO
theoretic and transaction cost examination of inter-
ﬁrm cooperation’, Academy of DEMO Journal,
36(4), pp. 794–829.
Pennings, J. M. and DEMO Harianto (1992). ‘Technological
networking and innovation implementation’, Organi-
zation Science, 3, pp. 356–381.
Pfeffer, J. and G. R. Salancik (1978)DEMO The External
Control of Organizations: A Resource Dependence
Perspective. Harper & DEMO, New York.
Pisano, G. P. (1990). ‘The R&D DEMO of the
ﬁrm: An empirical analysis’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 35(DEMO), pp. 153–176.
Prahalad, C. K. and R. A. Bettis (1986). ‘The dominant
logic: A new linkage between diversity and perform-
ance’, Strategic Management Journal, 7(6), pp.
485–501.
Prahalad, C. K. and G. Hamel (1990). ‘The core
competence of the corporation’, DEMO Business
Review, 68(3), pp. 79–91.
Reed R. and R. DEMO DeFillippi (1990). ‘Causal ambiguity,
barriers to imitation, and sustainable competitive
advantage’, Academy of Management Review, 15(1),
pp. 88–102.
Reger, R. K. and T. B. Palmer (1996). ‘Managerial
categorization DEMO competitors: Using old maps to
navigate new environments’, Organization Science,
7, pp. 22–38.
Ring, P. S. and A. H. Van de DEMO (1992). ‘Structuring
cooperative relationships between organizations’,
Strategic Management Journal, 13(7), pp. 483–498.
Ring, P. S. and A. H. Van de Ven (1994). ‘Developing
processes of cooperative interorganizational relation-
ships’, DEMO of Management Review, 19(1), pp.
90–118.
Russo, J. E. and P. J. H. Schoemaker (1989). Decision
Traps: Ten Barriers DEMO Brilliant Decision Making
and How to Overcome Them. Doubleday, New York.
DEMO, P. J. H. (1990). ‘Strategy, complexity and
economic rent’, Management Science, 36(10), pp.
1178–1192.
Schwab, D. P., S. L. Rynes and R. J. Aldag (1987).
‘Theories and research on job search and choice’.
In K. M. Rowland and G. R. Ferris (eds.), Research
in Personnel and Human Resource Management,
Vol. 5. DEMO Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 129–166.
Schwenk, C. R. (1982)DEMO ‘Why sacriﬁce rigor for rel-
evance? A proposal for combining laboratory DEMO
ﬁeld research in strategic management’, Strategic
Management Journal, 3(3), pp. 213–225.
Senge, P. M. (1990). The Fifth Discipline. Doubleday,DEMO
New York.
Simon, H. A. (1957). Models of Man. Wiley, New
York.
Sitkin, S. B. and A. L. Pablo (1992). ‘Re-
conceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior’,
Academy of Management Review, 17, pp. 9–38.
Sitkin, S. B. and L. R. Weingart (1995). ‘Determinants
of risky decision-making behavior: A test of the
mediating role of risk perceptions and propensity’,
Academy of Management Journal, 38, DEMO 1573–
1592.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
964 B. B. Tyler and H. K. Steensma
Starbuck, W. H. and F. J. Milliken (1988). ‘Executives’ tives’ selective perception’, Academy of DEMO
perceptual ﬁlters: What they notice and how they Journal, 38, DEMO 943–974.
make sense’. In D. C. Hambrick (ed.), The Executive DEMO, J. P. (1988). ‘Selectivity and selective percep-
Effect: Concepts DEMO Methods for Studying Top tion: An investigation of managers’ belief structures
DEMO JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 35–66. and information processing’, Academy of Manage-
Teece, D. J. (1976). The Multinational Corporation ment DEMO, 31, pp. 873–896.
and the Resource Cost of International Technology Walsh, J. P. (1995). ‘Managerial and organizational
Transfer. Ballinger, Cambridge, DEMO cognition: Notes from a trip down memory lane’,
Tyler, B. B. (1997). ‘The complementarity of coopera- Organization Science, 3, pp. 280–321.
tive and innovative competencies: A resource-based Wiersma, M. F. and DEMO A. Bantel (1992). ‘Top man-
perspective’, Indiana University working paper. agement team demography and corporate strategic
Tyler, B. B. and H. K. Steensma (1995). ‘Evaluating change’, Academy of Management Journal, 35, DEMO
technological collaborative opportunities: A cogni- 91–121.
tive modeling perspective’, Strategic Management Zahra, S. A. and J. G. Covin (1993). ‘Business strategy,DEMO
Journal, Summer Special Issue, 16, pp. 43–70. technology policy and DEMO performance’, Strategic
Waller, M. J., G. P. Huber and W. DEMO Glick (1995). Management Journal, 14(6), pp. 451–478.
‘Functional background as a determinant of execu-
APPENDIX: EVALUATION REPORT FOR TECHNOLOGY AND POTENTIAL PARTNER FIRM JV
Technology and partner characteristics Low Mod. low Average DEMO high High
1 234 5
1. Signiﬁcance of the technology for your
company’s strategy (x) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
2. Life cycle phase of the technology (e.g., Low
= Introduction, High = Decline) (x) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
3. Existing skill capability your company has to
develop this technology ( ) (x) ( ) ( ) ( )
4. Importance of ‘learning by doing’ associated
with the technology ( ) ( ) (x) ( ) ( )
5. Total expected cost for developing DEMO
technology ( ) ( ) (x) ( ) ( )
DEMO Number of other potential partners with similar
joint development capabilities ( ) ( ) ( ) (x) ( )
7. Extent of asset speciﬁc investments required
(i.e., capital investments that cannot be used for
DEMO purposes) ( ) ( ) ( ) (x) ( )
8. Favorability of potential partner’s cooperative
history ( ) ( ) ( ) (x) ( )
 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998)
Executive Effects On Assessment Of Alliances 965
APPENDIX: EVALUATION REPORT FOR TECHNOLOGY AND POTENTIAL PARTNER FIRM JV
Technology and partner characteristics Low Mod. low DEMO Mod. high High
1 234 5
9. Potential for broad corporate application of the (x) ( ) ( ) ( )
technology ()
10. Extent to which the technology can be patent ( ) ( ) ( ) (x)
protected ()
11. Potential for DEMO development risk ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
through DEMO cooperative relationship (x)
12. Extent to which your company has DEMO (x) ( ) ( ) ( )
regarding this technology, relative to the
potential partner ()
13. Your company’s potential to DEMO from the (x) ( ) ( ) ( )
cooperative DEMO ()
14. Extent of technological substitutes currently ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
available (x)
15. Potential for increased DEMO to related ( ) (x) ( ) ( )
market DEMO ()
16. Compatibility of operating and management ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
styles between your company and partner (x)DEMO
17. Extent to which cost commitments are ( ) ( ) ( ) (x)
contingent on favorable technological outcomes ( )
Based DEMO the information provided above, and your experience and knowledge, please rate the attractiveness of this situation
for a cooperative/partnering relationship. Place an DEMO in the appropriate space.
Very unattractive Very attractive
1 2345 67
What is the probability that you would recommend this cooperative relationship? Place an X in the appropriate space.
Low probability High probability
123 4567
 DEMO John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 939–965 (1998){1g42fwefx}