THE IMPACT OF ENTREPRENEURIAL
EXPERIENCE ON OPPORTUNITY
IDENTIFICATION AND EXPLOITATION:
HABITUAL DEMO NOVICE
ENTREPRENEURS
Deniz Ucbasaran, Mike Wright, Paul Westhead
and Lowell W. Busenitz
ABSTRACT
Evidence suggests habitual entrepreneurs (i.e. those with prior business
ownership experience) are a widespread phenomenon. Appreciation of the
existence of multiple entrepreneurial acts gives rise to the need to examine
differences between habitual and DEMO entrepreneurs (i.e. those with no
prior business experience as a founder, inheritor or purchaser of a business).
This paper synthesizes human capital DEMO cognitive perspectives to highlight
behavioral differences between habitual and novice entrepreneurs. Issues
relating to opportunity identiﬁcation and information search, opportunity
exploitation and learning are discussed. Avenues for future research are
highlighted.
Cognitive Approaches to Entrepreneurship Research
DEMO in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth, Volume 6, 231–263
Copyright©2003byElsevierScienceLtd.
DEMO rights of reproduction in any form reserved
ISSN: 1074-7540/doi:10.1016/DEMO(03)06008-2
231
232 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
INTRODUCTION
Empirical studies in entrepreneurship have generally DEMO the heterogeneity of
entrepreneurs in their samples. In this chapter, we DEMO that there is a need to distin-
guish between entrepreneurs who have had no prior experience in entrepreneurship
(novice entrepreneurs) and those who DEMO been involved in entrepreneurship prior
to their current venture (habitual entrepreneurs)DEMO MacMillan (1986) clearly distin-
guishes novice entrepreneurs from habitual entrepreneurs. He argues that novice
entrepreneurs do not develop an experience curve with respect DEMO the problems and
processes involved in starting a new business. In contrast, habitual entrepreneurs
have established many businesses, analyzed these efforts, and after several attempts
have recognized their mistakes and at least partially corrected them DEMO subsequent
ventures. Ignoring the heterogeneity of entrepreneurs in this respect has led to
an unduly static view of the entrepreneurial process, since evidence suggests
that a signiﬁcant proportion of businesses are owned by habitual entrepreneurs
(Westhead & Wright, 1998). Furthermore, entrepreneurship is not restricted to
the DEMO of new businesses. The exploitation of wealth creating opportunities
may take the form of the purchase or the inheritance of a business (Cooper &DEMO
Dunkelberg, 1986; Davidsson, Low & Wright, 2001; Shane & DEMO,
2000; Wright et al., 2000)1 . Habitual entrepreneurs may therefore be deﬁned to
include individuals who have started, purchased or inherited more than one venture
and novice entrepreneurs as those who have started, purchased or inherited one
venture. The magnitude of habitual entrepreneurship is evident DEMO the U.S. with
ﬁgures ranging from 51% (Schollhammer, 1991) to DEMO (Ronstadt, 1986). Outside
the U.S., Kolvereid and Bullvag (1993)˚ found that 34% of surveyed entrepreneurs
in their Norwegian sample were DEMO entrepreneurs. Westhead and Wright
(1998) reviewing existing studies reported ﬁgures ranging from 11.5 to 45.5%
for the United Kingdom.
Despite the prevalence and DEMO of the phenomenon and a plea over
a decade ago that to really understand entrepreneurship there was a need to
research entrepreneurs who had DEMO more than one venture (MacMillan,
1986), there has been DEMO theoretical development, and systematic empir-
ical examination of the habitual entrepreneurship DEMO In particular,
there is a need to understand the impact of entrepreneurial experience on the
critical entrepreneurial step of opportunity recognition (Hills, DEMO; Shane &
Venkataraman, 2000; Venkataraman, 1997).
To help DEMO this gap, we synthesise two complementary bodies of research,
human DEMO and (entrepreneurial) cognition, and build a model that provides
greater DEMO into the value and contribution of entrepreneurial experience to
the opportunity identiﬁcation and exploitation process. Traditional perspectives
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
233
on human capital DEMO that experienced entrepreneurs would have higher levels
of human capital endowments, DEMO in turn will affect behavior in a positive way.
Entrepreneurial cognition theory, which attempts to explain how entrepreneurs
think, provides a tool for DEMO how human capital may be used in the
entrepreneurial process (Baron, 1998; Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Busenitz & Lau,
1996; DEMO, 1992; Palich & Bagby, 1995; Smith et al., 1988)DEMO Integrating
this body of research, this paper attempts to explain how DEMO and habitual
entrepreneurs may differ in the way they identify opportunities. Further, building
on attribution theories, the paper goes to explain why certain DEMO
will remain novices and why some will continue to exploit entrepreneurial
opportunities and become habitual entrepreneurs.
This paper is structured as follows. The following DEMO outlines the human
capital and cognitive approaches to entrepreneurs. This is followed by the devel-
opment of a model of opportunity identiﬁcation and exploitation. DEMO ﬁnal section
discusses the implications of the analysis, draws some conclusions DEMO identiﬁes
areas for further research.
HUMAN CAPITAL AND THE ENTREPRENEUR
Human capital resources consist of achieved attributes, which are linked to
increased levels of productivity (Becker, 1975). More recently, the term human
capital has been broadened to include the cognitive abilities of entrepreneurs
(Alvarez & Busenitz, 2001) as well as accumulated work and habits that may
have DEMO positive or negative effect on productivity, both in market and non-market
DEMO (Becker, 1993). An entrepreneur’s human capital can impact the extent to
which other resources, such as social and ﬁnancial, can be DEMO and leveraged.
We now address the links between human capital, experience DEMO cognition. First,
we examine the role of entrepreneurial experience in building human capital.
Second, we examine cognition as a component of an entrepreneur’s human
capital.
The Role of Entrepreneurial Experience in Building Human Capital
Education DEMO work experience are the characteristics most often thought of in
reference to human capital (Greene & Brown, 1997). Following Becker (1975)
and Bruderl, Preisendorfer and Zeigler (1992)¨ , Cooper, Gimeno-Gascon and Woo
(1994) focused on four categories of an entrepreneur’s human capital: general
human capital, management know-how; industry speciﬁc know-how and the ability
234 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
to acquire ﬁnancial capital. Prior research highlights DEMO human capital comprises
a broad range of aspects: the owner-founder’s achieved DEMO (Becker,
1975), family background characteristics (Greene & Brown, DEMO), reputation
(Dollinger, 1998), attitudes and motivations (Birley & DEMO, 1990), gender,
ethnic origin, industry speciﬁc know-how (Cooper, Gimeno-Gascon & Woo,
1994), competencies (Chandler & Jansen, 1992), age (Cressy & Storey,
1995), education and management experience (Cooper, 1981, 1985; Greene &
Brown, 1997; Westhead, 1995). Entrepreneurs can develop their human capital
over time which can then DEMO utilized to gain access to a predictable uninterrupted
supply of critical resources (Cooper, Gimeno-Gascon & Woo, 1994; Dahlqvist,
Davidsson & Wiklund, 2000; Greene & Brown, 1997; Hart, Greene & Brush,
DEMO). The experiences, skills and competencies associated with the human capital
DEMO of entrepreneurs are widely regarded as inﬂuencing organizational
survival and development (DEMO, 1998; Chandler & Hanks, 1994; Gimeno,
Folta, Cooper & Woo, 1997; Mosakowski, 1993; Storey, 1994; Westhead,
1995). In general, studies reveal that successful businesses are associated with
owner-founders who possess greater amounts of human capital. Entrepreneurs
with more diverse levels DEMO human capital are purported to have the ability to
develop relevant skills and contacts, and are able to tap into dense information and
resource networks.
Once an initial opportunity has been exploited, an entrepreneur may choose
to engage in a subsequent venture. Managerial work experience is seen as DEMO key
empirical indicator of managerial human capital (Castanias & Helfat, 2001).
Following a similar logic, entrepreneurial experience may be viewed as a signif-
icant contributor to an entrepreneur’s human capital (Chandler & Hanks, DEMO;
Gimeno, Folta, Cooper & Woo, 1997; Stuart & Abetti, 1990). Previous business
ownership experience may provide entrepreneurs with a variety of resources or
assets that can be utilized in identifying and exploiting DEMO ventures, such
as real entrepreneurial experience; additional managerial experience; an DEMO
reputation; better access to ﬁnance institutions; and broader social and business
networks. Indeed, the view that individuals accumulate resources over time has
a long standing tradition in vocational and career theory.2 The development of
subsequent DEMO owned by habitual entrepreneurs can therefore be enhanced
by overcoming the liabilities of newness (Aldrich & Auster, 1986; Stinchcombe,
1965) and DEMO developmental milestones quicker (Starr & Bygrave, 1991).
Prior entrepreneurial experience can be utilized to enhance entrepreneurial skills
and reputations that help to DEMO the reallocation of resources in subsequent
ventures established, purchased or inherited (Shane & Khurana, 2003). Wright,
Robbie and Ennew (1997b) showed that venture capitalists perceived certain
assets of serial entrepreneurs (i.e. those habitual entrepreneurs who choose to
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
235
exit from their DEMO venture(s) before embarking on another one) that gave
them greater credibility and leverage in obtaining ﬁnancial resources for their
subsequent ventures. Entrepreneurs DEMO successful track records are generally
perceived as being more credible. Most notably, some habitual entrepreneurs may
leverage this experience to obtain ﬁnancial resources for their subsequent ventures
from banks, venture capitalists and informal investors. Entrepreneurs with
successful track records in business are more credible and have more experience
DEMO dealing with the technical requirements generally requested by investors.
Habitual entrepreneurs can lever this experience and obtain ﬁnancial resources
for their subsequent ventures from DEMO, venture capitalists and informal
investors.
Habitual entrepreneurs who learn from their DEMO can enrich their en-
trepreneurial skills. Getting through the ambiguity of one or more entrepreneurial
situation gives them the conﬁdence to ﬁnd their way DEMO another en-
trepreneurial experience. Hart, Greene and Brush (1997) found DEMO both the depth
(i.e. measured in years) and breadth (i.e. DEMO in number of ventures founded)
of entrepreneurial experience were important contributors to success in garnering
and maintaining access to resources. Conversely, Chandler and Jansen (1992)
found that the number of ventures previously initiated, DEMO the years spent as an
owner-manager were not signiﬁcantly related to the performance of the surveyed
venture. Similarly, neither Kolvereid and Bullvag (1993), Birley and Westhead
(1993) nor Westhead and Wright (1998, 1999) were able to identify performance
differences between businesses founded by novice entrepreneurs and those
founded by habitual entrepreneurs. This evidence supports the view that DEMO
entrepreneurial experience is associated with assets (e.g. attaining developmental
milestones quicker) and liabilities (e.g. hubris and denial). Nonetheless, prior
entrepreneurial experience DEMO likely to have a signiﬁcant impact on subsequent
ventures owned by the entrepreneur.
The assets and liabilities approach to experience, while useful, provides DEMO
somewhat static view of the contribution of entrepreneurial experience to an
entrepreneur’s human capital and subsequent behavior. This literature highlights
the role of entrepreneurial DEMO ex post, that is as a product rather than
a process. DEMO, it provides limited insight into why certain entrepreneurs
will choose to DEMO in subsequent entrepreneurial activity while others will
choose to stick with a single venture or exit the business. The next section extends
this traditional DEMO of human capital to incorporate entrepreneurial cognition.
The cognitive perspective on human capital suggests that entrepreneurial be-
havior (i.e. the opportunity identiﬁcation process) DEMO signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
by the way entrepreneurs think, perceive, and evaluate their environment and
experiences.
236 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
Cognition as a Component of an Entrepreneur’s DEMO Capital
An individual’s human capital will impact their subsequent activities. Similarly,
individual cognition will inﬂuence decision making and actions (Schwenk, 1986).
DEMO and human capital are linked to the extent that an individual’s mindset
(i.e. cognition) is an important contributor to the development and deployment
DEMO human capital (Castanias & Helfat, 2001). There is a case therefore for taking
a broader view of human capital to encompass both DEMO components (e.g.
skills and education) and cognitive components which in turn will determine how
such skills and education are utilized.
Many researchers in DEMO 1960s and 1970s attempted to better understand the
entrepreneurial difference by examining a host of traits such as risk-taking and
need for achievement, but unfortunately, those ﬁndings were largely disappointing
(see Low & MacMillan, 1988 for a review). Though the adoption of a cognitive
approach to DEMO the entrepreneurial difference is well-established3 (cf.
Jaques, 1976), recently an increasing amount of attention has be channelled
into understanding how entrepreneurs think DEMO make strategic decisions from
a cognitive perspective (Baron, 1998; Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Forbes, 1999).
If entrepreneurs do indeed have DEMO unique mindset or orientation (Lumpkin &
Dess, 1996), then DEMO the strengths and weaknesses of this mindset in various
competitive environments, DEMO may be a potential source of competitive advantage
(Barney, 1991).
Cognitive theory is concerned with how incoming sensory stimulation is
“transformed, reduced, elaborated, recovered, and used” (Neisser, 1966,p.4).
Cognitive theorists view stimuli largely as information. Processed information
is integrated into a “belief” DEMO gives “meaning” to the external environment
(Weiner, 1980). The essence of a cognitive model of behavior can be illustrated as
follows:
DEMO (i.e. information or event) → Mediating Cognitive Event → Behavior
The “mediating cognitive event” (Weiner, 1980) involves a set of cognitive
processes such as information scanning and selection, information combination
and, perception of DEMO If cognitive processes are not carefully considered,
an incorrect understanding of entrepreneurial behavior will be presented (Hitt &
Tyler, 1991). In this study, we focus on two types of such processes. First, DEMO
examine heuristics which are central to the processing of information. Second,
we examine attribution theory which explains individual perceptions of causality.
A discussion DEMO these two cognitive processes and associated biases is presented
before moving on to examine how they can impact entrepreneurial behavior (i.e.
opportunity identiﬁcation and exploitation).
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
237
Cognitive Processes I: Heuristics
The cognition literature suggests there are two broad types of cognitive DEMO
tion. These are a systematic cognitive orientation (also referred to as DEMO
cognitive processing or rational information processing) and heuristic-based
cognitive orientation (also referred to as automatic cognitive processing or limited
capacity processing). Systematic DEMO (rational) models assume that people
thoroughly process all relevant information in order to maximize a relevant
outcome (Lord & Maher, 1990). DEMO, while this type of processing is
optimal (i.e. accurate), it is slow (requiring time) and requires effort (requiring
cognitive resources) (Kullik & Perry, 1994). Heuristic-based processing models
focus on how individuals simplify information processing while still generating
adequate but not optimal behaviors (Lord & Maher, 1990). The latter type of
processing is easier (DEMO less cognitive effort) and is more efﬁcient (requiring
less time) DEMO systematic models.
Individual heuristics (and associated biases) can inﬂuence the strategic
decisions made by individuals. An understanding of strategic decision making is
incomplete DEMO attention to these heuristics (Schwenk, 1986). Limited mental
processing capacity requires people to indulge in strain-reducing activities (i.e.
heuristics) when making DEMO decisions, especially in complex situations
where less complete or uncertain information DEMO available. This has particular
implications for entrepreneurs because they regularly ﬁnd themselves in situations
that tend to maximize the potential impact of various heuristics (Baron, 1998).
Such heuristics and biases may include “anchoring and adjustment,” “availability,”
and “overconﬁdence” which may result from “representativeness” (Bazerman,
1990; Hogarth, 1980; Powell, 1987; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974)DEMO Indeed, Katz
(1992) demonstrates how the heuristics of availability, anchoring and adjustment
and, representativeness can be used to model an individual’s choice to become
self-employed (as opposed to being a salaried employee).
The relevance of these heuristics (and biases) may be particularly strong in DEMO
context of entrepreneurship, as these cognitive processes can be an effective DEMO
efﬁcient guide to strategic decision-making especially in complex situations where
less complete or uncertain information is available. Entrepreneurial cognition is as-
sociated with the DEMO extensive use of heuristics and individual beliefs that impact
decision-making (Wright, Hoskisson, Busenitz & Dial, 2000). A more systematic
decision-making style DEMO typically associated with accountability, compensation
schemes, the structural coordination of business activities across various units,
and future developments are justiﬁed with quantiﬁable DEMO New insights are
usually not obtained from existing data. Rather, they DEMO identiﬁed from experience
and interpreting new combinations of information via unique heuristic-based logic
(Wright, Hoskisson, Busenitz & Dial, 2000).
238 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
In probing these cognitive processes, it is important to ﬁrst understand
the utility of such decision-making. Individuals engaging in DEMO
typically operate under the conditions of decision uncertainty and decision
complexity (DEMO & Crozier, 1985). Given the level of uncertainty they
face, entrepreneurs frequently use heuristics to piece together limited information
to make convincing DEMO in the face of much turbulence (Busenitz &
Barney, 1997)DEMO Without heuristic-based logic, the pursuit of new opportunities
becomes too overwhelming DEMO costly for those decision-makers who seek a more
factual base. Without the elaborate policies, procedural routines and structural
mechanisms common to established organizations, DEMO may have a great
deal of utility in enabling entrepreneurs to make decisions that exploit brief
windows of opportunity (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974)DEMO
Cognition is not homogeneous across individuals and a variety of cogni-
tive styles, strategies and processes exist. The following bipolar continuum
indexes, for DEMO, have been presented to categorize individuals in terms
of their cognitive DEMO (where cognitive styles are enduring differences in
cognitive structure and processes DEMO individuals (Schneider & Angelmar,
1993): Kirton’s (1976) adaptation-innovation DEMO (KAI); Riding’s (1991)
wholist-analytical dimension; Allinson and Hayes’s (1996) analytical-intuitive
cognitive style index; Gavetti and Levinthal’s (2000) looking DEMO
backward approach and; Gaglio and Katz (2001) non-alert and alert DEMO
Groups of individuals at extremes of these continuums tend to be distinguished
on the basis of the extent to which they thoroughly process all DEMO
information.
Recent research on entrepreneurial cognition indicates that entrepreneurs are
more signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by heuristics in their decision-making than managers
(Baron, 1998; Busenitz & Lau, 1996; Forbes, 1999). Entrepreneurial cognition
studies (see DEMO, 1999, for a review) have tended to focus on entrepreneurs
DEMO a single group. However, a number of studies suggest that entrepreneurs DEMO
heterogeneous (Westhead & Wright, 1998; Woo, Cooper & Dunkelberg, DEMO). It
is possible, therefore, that entrepreneurs will differ with regard to their cognitive
processes. As intimated above, cognition can be viewed as lying along a contin-
uum. In this study, we distinguish between entrepreneurs who exhibit a strong
reliance on entrepreneurial cognitive processes (i.e. heuristics and beliefs), and
those that exhibit a weak to more moderate reliance DEMO entrepreneurial cognitive
processes. We refer to these two extremes as strong entrepreneurial cognition
and weak entrepreneurial cognition respectively. The two polar extremes relating
to DEMO entrepreneurial processes continuum describe “different” rather than
“better” thinking processes, though DEMO cognitive processes may be more
appropriate in certain situations.
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation 239
Cognitive processes can DEMO utilized to differentiate novice entrepreneurs from
habitual entrepreneurs. Both novice and habitual entrepreneurs will identify
a business opportunity that is facilitated by their entrepreneurial DEMO
processes. From the outset, habitual entrepreneurs are characterized as relying
heavily DEMO heuristics. Novice entrepreneurs exhibit an entrepreneurial orientation
(i.e. tendency to use DEMO), but it is generally not as pronounced as the
orientation exhibited by habitual entrepreneurs. Novice entrepreneurs embarking
on a venture, possibly based on some innovation may be comfortable with seeing
the business mature over time, as is consistent with their weaker entrepreneurial
cognition4 . On the other DEMO, a habitual entrepreneur will generally become very
restless with an individual DEMO, as it grows into the more mature phases, and
the ambiguity diminishes. Indeed, arousal (activation) theory (Hebb, 1955) posits
that DEMO prefer and seek out “optimal levels” of stimulation, with the
“optimal DEMO varying from individual to individual. A habitual entrepreneur’s
strong entrepreneurial cognition draws them towards more ambiguous and
complex environments and information, in turn facilitating the identiﬁcation of
additional ventures.
The extent to which these two groups DEMO entrepreneurs rely on heuristic-based
cognitive processes may be crucial to the identiﬁcation of opportunities and the
nature of these opportunities. While an entrepreneurial cognitive DEMO may
be important in distinguishing habitual entrepreneurs from novice entrepreneurs,
these two groups may also differ with regard to the way they attribute DEMO
to events and outcomes. Attribution theory is a useful tool for understanding why
certain entrepreneurs will move on to becoming habitual entrepreneurs while others
DEMO remain novice entrepreneurs.
Cognitive Processes II: Causal Attribution
The way previous DEMO experiences are evaluated and interpreted may
impact whether an individual becomes a habitual entrepreneur. If entrepreneurial
experiences are seen as experiments, entrepreneurs should evaluate carefully and
objectively the feedback from these experiences (Nystrom & Starbuck, DEMO).
Attribution theories, ﬁrst developed by Heider (1958), suggest there may be a
number of cognitive processes that inﬂuence how individuals evaluate DEMO learn
from their experiences. These theories assume that people are motivated to seek
meaning in their own behavior and surrounding environment. Heider’s (1958)
model suggested that people attempt to enhance or protect their self-esteem by
DEMO credit for success (internal attribution) and denying responsibility for failure
by attributing this to external factors (external attribution). Weiner (1985) extended
Heider’s single internal-external dimension of causal attribution. He presented
three dimensions of DEMO: causal locus (internal or external cause); stability
240 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
(whether the cause is transient or not); and controllability (whether the cause can
be controlled or inﬂuenced by the individual or not).
Individuals who reﬂexively make stable (the cause is going to last for a long
time), global (it is going to undermine many areas of my life), and internal (it
is my fault) explanations for unfavorable outcomes are more likely to give up
and suffer learned helplessness (Seligman, 1975). The “learned helplessness”
DEMO, which derives its origins from attribution theories states that indi-
viduals DEMO possess the requisite skills and abilities to perform a particular
task. However, some individuals may exhibit sub-optimal performance because
they attribute prior failures to causes which they cannot change, even though
success is possible (Abrahamson, Seligman & Teasdale, 1978; Martinko &
Gardner, 1982). In DEMO, those who seek external attribution view the cause
of the problem DEMO being transitory and narrow in its effects. As a result, such
DEMO will be more likely to see adversity as a challenge, transform DEMO
into opportunities, endeavour to adapt/develop skills, maintain conﬁdence,
rebound quickly from setbacks and persist (Schulman, 1999). The term “learned
DEMO has been used to describe this cognitive orientation. The concept of
learned optimism is similar to the principle of reactance theory, which states
that if one loses control, attempts are made by the individual to restore control
(Brehm, 1966).
Applying the principles of attribution theory, Gatewood et al. (1995) have
explored how the cognitive orientation of potential DEMO will have a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on their willingness to persist in entrepreneurial activity in
the face of difﬁculties. They found that the attributional measures DEMO in their
study were effective in predicting both persistence in activities and persistence
for success in business creation.
Both types of cognitive processes discussed DEMO (i.e. heuristics and causal
attribution) may be useful in understanding how entrepreneurs behave (the
relationship between these cognitive processes and entrepreneurial behavior
will be discussed later). There may, however, be appropriate and inappropriate
DEMO of these cognitive processes (Nisbett & Ross, 1980). The extent to which
these processes induce effective behavior, however, will be determined DEMO
learning.
Cognitive Processes, Bias and Learning
Experience provides a framework for DEMO information and allows informed
and experienced entrepreneurs with diverse skills and competencies (i.e. net-
works, knowledge, etc.) to foresee and to take DEMO of disequilibrium proﬁt
opportunities that they proactively or reactively identify (Kaish & Gilad, 1991).
Based on an earlier learning experience, entrepreneurs can use their acquired
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
241
skills and knowledge DEMO identify a business opportunity or to leverage resources.
For example, they DEMO utilize experience gained from structuring deals to secure
ﬁnance from a venture capitalist (Wright et al., 1997a, b). The value of resources
and skills acquired through prior business ownership experience is, in part,
dependent on the ability of experienced entrepreneurs to learn from their previous
DEMO
Cognitive processes may inﬂuence the extent and nature of learning. Central to
most models of learning is achieving new understanding and interpretations (Daft
& Weick, 1984). Higher-level learning involves the formation and use of heuristics
to generate new insights into solving ambiguous problems (Lei, Hitt & DEMO,
1996). Conversely, lower-level learning tends to be associated with DEMO
observations and routinized learning. Consistent with the notion of single-loop
learning, DEMO learning is associated with few changes in underlying policies
or values (DEMO & Schon, 1978¨ ). Gavetti and Levinthal (2000) characterize
cognitive processes (“off-line” thinking) as being forward-looking and based on
individual beliefs DEMO mental models of how the world works. These mental models
often provide linkages between choices and the potential impact of those choices.
Entrepreneurs who DEMO extensively on heuristics may therefore be more likely to
generate new insights as a result of making such linkages. This in turn can induce
DEMO reinforce the use of higher-level learning.
Cognitive processes are difﬁcult to change, especially if an entrepreneur has
been previously successful (Busenitz & Barney, 1997). Whether or not the initial
venture can be interpreted as DEMO success or a failure may impact on the learning and
subsequent behavior of entrepreneurs. Success is frequently sought, while failure is
avoided (McGrath, 1999). Individuals may be forced to evaluate their thinking and
behavior DEMO faced with failure (Sitkin, 1992). In contrast, there may DEMO minimal
incentive to evaluate or reconsider thinking patterns or behaviors if success is the
outcome (irrespective of the causes of that success). Indeed, attribution theories
(Heider, 1958) suggest that individuals have a tendency DEMO attribute their successes
to themselves (internal attribution) and failure to external factors (external attri-
bution). The ability of entrepreneurs to objectively reﬂect on and evaluate their
experiences (whether they are successes or failures) DEMO be critical in determining
their future performance.
Hence, while cognitive processes DEMO be a source of sustained competi-
tive advantage they may limit the ability of some entrepreneurs to adapt in
response to changing/different market DEMO technological conditions. In some
cases, however, habitual entrepreneurs may effectively reﬂect and evaluate
their experiences and develop expertise. Habitual entrepreneurs may develop
expertise DEMO various stages of the entrepreneurial process, such as opportunity
recognition or DEMO acquisition. On the other hand, heuristics and biases
242 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
may inﬂuence ones perception of uncertainty and DEMO As intimated
earlier, there is an obvious danger that habitual entrepreneurs DEMO in the
same sector as their previous venture may attempt to replicate actions that were
previously successful (i.e. hubris). If experienced entrepreneurs are not aware
of (or fail to respond to) changing external environmental DEMO, there is a
risk that habitual entrepreneurs may make serious mistakes DEMO operating their
subsequent ventures.
Individuals generally adjust their judgment by learning from feedback about past
decisions (Bazerman, 1990). Due to delays or DEMO in this feedback, individuals
may be prone to errors in their DEMO Even experienced decision-makers do
not always know why and how they do what they do. Due to this problem, some
entrepreneurs may exhibit basic judgmental biases that are unlikely to be corrected
in the real world (Tversky & Kahneman, 1986). Nisbett and Ross (1980) argue
that an indiscriminate use of heuristics can lead people into serious judgmental
errors. DEMO, they insist that in many contexts, heuristics can be helpful and
efﬁcient tools of inference. They argue that the normative status of using DEMO,
and the pragmatic utility of using them, will depend on DEMO judgmental domain
and context. Louis and Sutton (1991) argue that individual effectiveness is not
determined by how well an individual functions in a DEMO cognitive mode.
Rather, individuals who are able to “switch cognitive gears” DEMO likely to be more
effective in a given domain.
Northcraft and Neale (1987) found that even experienced decision-makers
tended to be very biased. DEMO, while most “effective decision-makers” are
effective in a speciﬁc domain, experience without expertise can be quite dangerous
when it is transferred to a DEMO context or when the environment changes
(Dawes, 1988). Neale and Northcraft (1989) have argued that the development
of expertise could eliminate DEMO mitigate biased decision making. They view
experience simply as repeated feedback, DEMO expertise requires that the
decision-makers have a conceptual understanding of what constitutes a rational
decision-making process. Developing expertise requires constant monitoring
and awareness of DEMO decision-making processes. Consequently, individuals who
know what they are doing and DEMO, and those who have learnt from previous
events (i.e. failures and successes) generally avoid decision-making biases (e.g.
over-conﬁdence and insufﬁcient adjustments resulting DEMO the repetition of past
errors).
In order to understand the impact cognitive processes have on entrepreneurial
behavior, the following section uses the above dynamic human capital perspective
to developed a model of how opportunities are DEMO by novice and habitual
entrepreneurs and why certain novice entrepreneurs go on to become habitual
entrepreneurs.
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation 243
THE USE OF DEMO CAPITAL IN THE
ENTREPRENEURIAL PROCESS: OPPORTUNITY
IDENTIFICATION AND EXPLOITATION
One of DEMO fundamental reasons for the fascination with entrepreneurs and
the inventions that they develop seems to center around why and how they
see new opportunities. DEMO entrepreneurial opportunity invariably involves the
development of some new idea that most others overlook. In the context of
environmental change, those with an entrepreneurial cognitive orientation (i.e.
extensive use of heuristics) often see new opportunities DEMO most others are
concerned with protecting themselves from emerging threats and changes. Very
few studies have focused upon opportunity recognition and information search
processes DEMO by different types of entrepreneurs (Alsos & Kolvereid,
1999). DEMO stocks of information create mental schemas providing a framework
for recognizing new information, opportunity recognition and information search
by entrepreneurs may be a function of an individual’s capacity to handle complex
information (Venkataraman, 1997). DEMO (1997) draws attention to three
main areas of difference between individuals that may help understanding of
why certain individuals recognize opportunities while others DEMO not: knowledge
(and information) differences; cognitive differences; and behavioral DEMO
“Why,” “when” and “how” certain individuals exploit opportunities appears to
be a function of the joint characteristics of the opportunity and the nature DEMO
the individual (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). This section explains differences
between novice and habitual entrepreneurs with respect to two stages of the
DEMO process: opportunity identiﬁcation and the exploitation of
opportunities.
Opportunity Identiﬁcation
The DEMO of idiosyncratic information allows people to see particular
opportunities that others cannot, even if they are not actively searching for such
opportunities (Shane, 2000). However, simply being in possession of valuable
information is insufﬁcient for entrepreneurship. The ability to make the connection
between speciﬁc knowledge and DEMO commercial opportunity requires a set of
skills, aptitudes, insights, and DEMO that are neither uniformly nor widely
distributed (Venkataraman, 1997). It follows, therefore, that the extent to which
individuals recognize opportunities and DEMO for relevant information to evaluate
the opportunity will depend on the make-up of the various dimensions/aspects of
an individual’s human capital.
244 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
Two broad perspectives relating to opportunity and DEMO behavior have
been identiﬁed (Kaish & Gilad, 1991; Woo, Folta & Cooper, 1992). The ﬁrst
perspective, based on neo-classical economic DEMO, takes a “conscious search
perspective” in which information search is a DEMO of optimizing performance
(Caplan, 1999; Stigler, 1961). Entrepreneurs are assumed to know a priori where
the invention/innovation needs to be DEMO and can accurately weight the cost
and beneﬁts of acquiring new information. Entrepreneurs may invest in speciﬁc
information surrounding a targeted invention enabling them DEMO be in a better
position to discover the new opportunities (Fiet, 1996).
The second perspective, based on Kirzner’s (1973) work relating to “en-
trepreneurial alertness,” suggests that the opportunities cannot be accurately
DEMO as a rational search process, since opportunities are unknown until
discovered (Kaish & Gilad, 1991). The focus therefore should be on the process
side of discovery. Entrepreneurial alertness refers to “ﬂashes of superior insight”
DEMO enable one to recognize an opportunity when it presents itself (Kirzner, 1997).
Entrepreneurial alertness involves a distinctive set of perceptual and cognitive
DEMO skills that direct the opportunity identiﬁcation process (Gaglio
& Katz, 2001).
In assuming that both the search for information and the process DEMO are
important, we argue here that an entrepreneurial cognition perspective enables DEMO
to extend models of opportunity identiﬁcation. Entrepreneurial cognition enables
one to build on speciﬁc information to make new leaps in the development of new
DEMO and inventions. It is apparent that, although all information cannot
be DEMO and explicitly stated, entrepreneurs have a deep sense of the relevant
DEMO between what appears to be superﬁcial and unnecessary in-
formation. Building on these deeper understandings, entrepreneurs often quickly
develop new hunches about how a new variable such as another technological
breakthrough or an environmental change will DEMO a speciﬁc project long before
it can be methodically and rationally explained. These hunches can be viewed in
terms of mental schemas (the cumulative experience, learning and meanings an
individual has encountered and constructed about a speciﬁc domain) that provide
a framework for recognizing and evaluating information relevant to an opportunity
(Gaglio, 1997).
The introduction of several new DEMO and bits of information may indicate
that a change is starting to occur. Combining these bits of information with a
heuristic-based logic may prompt DEMO entrepreneur to conclude that an important
opportunity resides here. To invest in more complete information will require cost
and further delay the development of DEMO discovery process for two reasons. First,
given the very limited resources that entrepreneurs typically possess, investing
in substantial amounts of information is rarely possible. Second, obtaining the
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation 245
critical information will DEMO require considerable amounts of time, further
delaying the discovery process. If DEMO opportunities are not pursued until relatively
complete information is obtained, the DEMO of opportunity for the new invention
is likely to be closed.
Heuristic-based logic also has relevance for entrepreneurial discovery that
goes beyond the practical DEMO of investments in substantial amounts of
information. The decision-making literature has typically approached heuristic
issues as a phenomenon that needs to be corrected (e.g. Schwenk, 1986; Zajac &
Bazerman, 1991). However, as already indicated, there is an emerging thought that
there may be some positive implications to their use (Krabuanrat & Phelps, 1998;
Wright et DEMO, 2000). As intimated in the previous section, habitual entrepreneurs
can be distinguished from novice entrepreneurs with respect to their more
extensive reliance DEMO cognitive processes (i.e. heuristics). This cognitive approach
allows individuals to DEMO inferences and envisage cause-effect relationships
even though they may not be individually experienced (Gavetti & Levinthal,
2000). Applied to the entrepreneurial context, we may expect the strength of
entrepreneurial cognition (i.e. reliance on DEMO) to inﬂuence the opportunity
identiﬁcation process. We examine several aspects of DEMO identiﬁcation:
the search for information, the quantity of opportunities identiﬁed DEMO a given
period and the nature and value of the opportunities identiﬁed.
The Search for Information
The amount and nature of information sought (Kaish & Gilad, 1991) can be inﬂu-
enced by the extent to DEMO an entrepreneur relies on entrepreneurial cognitive
processes (i.e. heuristics). A DEMO reliance on heuristics can enable an individual
to build on speciﬁc information to make new leaps in the identiﬁcation and devel-
opment of opportunities. DEMO strong entrepreneurial cognitive orientation may result
in the individual feeling less need to collect relevant information. This is because
cognitive approaches (Gavetti & Levinthal, 2000) allow the individual to envisage
the outcome of a particular DEMO without actually having to exploit it and
hence bear the associated risks and costs. Habitual entrepreneurs, who we have
argued display a strong reliance on entrepreneurial cognitive processes, might
therefore require less information to identify an opportunity than their novice
counterparts. Indeed, both empirical and conceptual work suggests that this may be
the case. Cooper et al. (1995) found DEMO on average, habitual entrepreneurs sought
less information than novice entrepreneurs. McGrath DEMO MacMillan (2000)
suggest that habitual entrepreneurs avoid “analyzing ideas to DEMO and may
therefore avoid deliberate, time-consuming and analytically correct models. Fiet
DEMO al. (2000) suggest that habitual entrepreneurs may search for less information
because they may be more likely to concentrate on searching within a DEMO
246 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
speciﬁc domain of venture ideas based on DEMO that worked well in the
past. Ronstadt’s (1988) “corridor principle” suggests that the best new venture
opportunities may only be revealed when the DEMO is involved in a venture
since greater information becomes available about relevant networks, resources,
markets and products. Finally, evidence from other ﬁelds DEMO that when faced
with an ill-structured problem, individuals with high levels DEMO knowledge will
attempt to add structure by making inferences and drawing on existing knowledge
(Simon, 1973). On the basis on this discussion, the following proposition
can be derived:
P1. Habitual entrepreneurs will search DEMO less information in the opportunity
identiﬁcation process than their novice counterparts.
The Quantity of Opportunities Identiﬁed
While habitual entrepreneurs may search for less information DEMO to their
novice counterparts, this does not necessarily mean that they DEMO fewer op-
portunities. Indeed, due to their extensive use of heuristics, habitual entrepreneurs
may be able to make more efﬁcient use of information. DEMO and Katz (2001)
propose the possibility of entrepreneurial alertness falling DEMO a continuum.
Due to their cognitive orientation and experientially acquired human capital,
habitual entrepreneurs may be at the alert end of the spectrum.
DEMO (1997) has argued that some people habitually activate a schema5
regardless of its appropriateness to the moment. Such “chronic activators” have an
added DEMO to the features stored in their schema such that they can notice it
in unambiguous situations and notice it in the midst of an DEMO overwhelming
amount of stimuli. Hence, entrepreneurs (or certain groups of entrepreneurs)
may be characterized by their “habitual” schema activation, which would explain
how alertness might be uncontrollable as Kirzner (1973) claims. We would
DEMO habitual entrepreneurs to display a tendency towards habitual schema
activation. Further supporting this tendency is the possibility of some individuals
having a higher “optimal DEMO of stimulation as posited by activation theory
(Hebb, 1955). In addition, some habitual entrepreneurs may have accumulated
ﬁnancial resources which they may want to channel into a subsequent venture.
The availability of these funds DEMO make them more “alert” to opportunities
and increase their tendency to unify and connect what otherwise appear to
be superﬁcially disparate information. This discussion DEMO the following
proposition:
P2. In a given period, habitual entrepreneurs DEMO identify a greater number of
opportunities than their novice counterparts.
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation 247
Quality of Opportunities DEMO
When an individual broadens the domain of their search, s/he DEMO increase the
likelihood of identifying a valuable business opportunity. Habitual entrepreneurs
who have a stronger reliance on entrepreneurial cognitive processes, may be
able to use their heuristics to identify opportunities in domain they have no
prior DEMO Wright et al. (1997a, b) noted, however, that some DEMO
entrepreneurs move into domains in which they have limited knowledge while
trying to replicate successful practices used in a familiar domain. It may be
DEMO, therefore, if the entrepreneur’s previous investments and repertoire
of routines (DEMO history) constrain his/her future behavior. Indeed, Shane (2000)
DEMO that knowledge in a particular market is crucial in identifying opportunities
in that area. Gavetti and Levinthal (2000) posit that intelligent action is DEMO
both by cognitive and experiential inﬂuences. Cognitive search is broad in that
it considers numerous alternatives simultaneously whereas experiential search is
narrow since it DEMO limited by the number of experiences one can have in a given
period. On the other hand, cognitive search can be misspeciﬁed while experiential
search tests the alternatives on the basis of the actual environment rather DEMO a
mere representation of the environment (Gavetti & Levinthal, 2000). Previous en-
trepreneurial experience may reduce the likelihood of an entrepreneur moving DEMO
unfamiliar territory where they may be at a relative disadvantage to incumbents.
Habitual entrepreneurs may have a unique advantage in that they can combine
DEMO search with cognitive search. For habitual entrepreneurs, their human
capital comprising DEMO experientially acquired knowledge and their cognitive
orientation may be critical in identifying and taking advantage of valuable
dis-equilibrium proﬁt opportunities (Kaish & Gilad, DEMO). Novice entrepreneurs
who have a relatively weak reliance on entrepreneurial cognitive processes and
who have had no prior experience in entrepreneurship, may therefore be at a dis-
advantage when it comes to evaluating the quality DEMO an opportunity. We therefore
propose the following:
P3. Habitual entrepreneurs will be more effective in identifying valuable
opportunities than their novice counterparts.
Opportunity DEMO
While existing research on entrepreneurial cognition may explain how en-
trepreneurs identify opportunities and how there may be differences between
habitual and novice entrepreneurs DEMO this respect, minimal attention has been
paid to why opportunities are DEMO once they are identiﬁed. The use of
248 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
heuristic-based thinking may also have implications for DEMO exploitation of
opportunities. Heuristic-based thinking may allow individuals to overcome
barriers more effectively. For example, the representativeness heuristic can enable
decisions to be made without having complete information. Since the execution of
an entrepreneurial idea often DEMO place in an uncertain environment, the repre-
sentativeness heuristic may be DEMO to enable the entrepreneur to move forward.
Similarly, the over-conﬁdence heuristic DEMO also encourage the entrepreneur to
make the transition from opportunity identiﬁcation to opportunity exploitation.
The heuristic dimension of entrepreneurial cognition does not, however, DEMO
explain why certain entrepreneurs may choose to become habitual entrepreneurs.
Building on these theories of attribution and learned helplessness, we develop
a simpliﬁed model that theoretically predicts whether or not an entrepreneur
will remain as a DEMO entrepreneur (or indeed exit from the entrepreneurial
career) or continue entrepreneurial activity to become a habitual entrepreneur.
Once the entrepreneur has exploited his/DEMO initial entrepreneurial opportunity,
he/she will at some point evaluate the venture with respect to its performance.
Based on the entrepreneur’s mode of DEMO attribution we may anticipate the
effects on the individual’s entrepreneurial career. Figure 1 provides an overview
Fig. 1.
The Impact of Attribution on the DEMO to Become a Habitual Entrepreneur.
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation 249
of the model. DEMO model highlights several stages involved in the decision
whether or not to become a habitual entrepreneur. The ﬁrst stage involves
identifying the perceived outcome DEMO the entrepreneurial venture and determining
whether it is a success or a failure. The second stage involves interpretation of
the outcome and identiﬁcation of DEMO causes of the success or failure (causal
attribution). The third DEMO relates to the behavioural response and outcome.
Individuals will persist in an activity if they attribute the reasons for their
success to internal, stable, and intentional factors while attributing their failures
to external, variable, or accidental factors (Gatewood et al., 1995). Having
attributed the outcome DEMO a particular set of causes, however, the entrepreneur
may respond proactively (through further evaluation and learning) or reactively
(subject to bias). Finally, the entrepreneur will make a decision as to whether
he/she will continue entrepreneurial activity to become a habitual entrepreneur
or remain a DEMO (novice) entrepreneur. These various stages are discussed
below.
Stage 1: DEMO Outcome of Entrepreneurial Act
Following exploitation of an initial entrepreneurial opportunity, DEMO entrepreneurs
will at some point evaluate the venture with respect to its performance. This
performance may be evaluated in numerous ways. For those who DEMO the
venture primarily motivated by ﬁnancial reward for example, the venture’s DEMO
may be valued in terms of ﬁnancial performance indicators. Some entrepreneurs
may be motivated by other criteria and hence may, for example, evaluate DEMO venture
in terms of personal satisfaction. McGrath (1999) deﬁnes failure as the termination
of an initiative that has fallen short of its goals. DEMO, Folta, Cooper and Woo
(1997) presented a model in which the decision to terminate a venture depends on an
entrepreneur’s own threshold DEMO performance which is determined by human cap-
ital characteristics such as alternative employment opportunities, psychic income
from entrepreneurship and the switching costs involved in moving to alternative
occupations. Irrespective of how it is measured, however, DEMO entrepreneur will
decide whether the venture is to be deemed a success or a failure. The en-
trepreneur will then attribute this success or DEMO to various internal or external
factors.
Stage 2: Causal Attribution
As DEMO above, individuals may attribute different causes to a particular
outcome, which may in turn inﬂuence their subsequent behavior. The success
or failure of DEMO venture may be attributed to internal causes (e.g. skills and
intelligence) or external causes (e.g. market conditions, regulatory changes)
(Zacharakis et al., 1999). Internal attributions may be associated with individual
250 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
ability or effort, while external attributions are associated with task difﬁculty or
luck (Heider, 1958). Once a DEMO attribution has been sought and identiﬁed, the
entrepreneur may consciously or DEMO respond in a number of ways.
Indeed, the term explanatory style DEMO been used to explain how individuals will
explain success and in particular failure (Abrahamson, Seligman & Teasdale,
1978). These explanatory styles DEMO their impact on subsequent behavior are
discussed below.
Stages 3: Behavioral DEMO and Outcomes
Attribution of Success: If the entrepreneur attributes their success DEMO internal
causes, we propose that there may be two behavioral responses. DEMO, the
entrepreneur may not truly evaluate the causes of the success DEMO may do so due to
self-serving bias or overconﬁdence. In turn, DEMO entrepreneur may not objectively
evaluate the experience and identify lessons to be learned from that experience.
The perception of success may have positive and DEMO elements. Sitkin (1992)
argues that success may be helpful in DEMO number of ways – the rewards of success
may stimulate conﬁdence and persistence, increase the coordinated pursuit of com-
mon goals and enhance efﬁciency. Success is thought to stimulate persistence not
simply because individuals are rewarded DEMO success, but also because it provides
a secure and stable basis DEMO launching future activity (Weick, 1984). Sitkin (1992)
also DEMO, however, that a number of liabilities may be associated with success,
which may take the form of complacency, restricted search and attention, risk-
aversion and homogeneity. If an entrepreneur does not objectively evaluate their
success therefore, he/she may be prone to these liabilities. While they may wish
to replicate their success, they may ﬁnd themselves sticking with their winning
“formula” even though the circumstances may have changed (what Sitkin, 1992,
refers to as “homogeneity”). These liabilities may be particularly apparent when
the entrepreneur relies on and is unable to switch out DEMO heuristic-based thinking.
On the other hand, if the entrepreneur is objective DEMO the experience and
attempts to learn from it, he/she may DEMO evaluate the cause of success. As
discussed earlier, attribution theorists suggest DEMO decisions subsequent to the
causal attribution may be inﬂuenced by additional characteristics of the cause
– such as stability and controllability. If the entrepreneur DEMO the cause
of success as being unstable, he/she may be DEMO to repeat entrepreneurial
activity. Alternatively, if the entrepreneur feels he/she DEMO signiﬁcant control
over the cause, they may choose to continue entrepreneurship. DEMO contrast to
the concept of learned helplessness, individuals susceptible to learned DEMO
(Schulman, 1999) may be more likely to view causes as DEMO and unstable
(this is in contrast to learned helplessness when causes, particularly negative ones,
are seen as stable and uncontrollable).
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation 251
Where causes of DEMO are attributed to external factors, we may expect
differing behavioral responses DEMO on the extent to which the entrepreneur
objectively evaluates the experience. If the success is considered to be due to
an external factor and DEMO entrepreneur displays patterns of behavior resembling
learned helplessness, as highlighted above, they may feel they have no control
over the cause. Faced with DEMO belief of lack of control, the entrepreneur may be
reluctant to DEMO entrepreneurial activity in fear that the external causes may
not be present a second time round. In cases where the entrepreneur displays
learned optimism DEMO conscious learning, however, the response may be different.
If the entrepreneur views the cause as being unstable but controllable, the
entrepreneur may choose to continue entrepreneurial activity. On the other hand,
if the entrepreneur DEMO the cause of success as being due to unstable and
uncontrollable factors, then he/she may choose not to pursue a second venture.
The differing causal attributions of success lead to an array of behavioral out-
DEMO Therefore, the following propositions are derived:
P4. Those novice entrepreneurs DEMO attribute their success to internal factors
will become habitual entrepreneurs.
P5a. Those novice entrepreneurs who attribute their success to external
factors and who are DEMO to learned helplessness will remain novice
entrepreneurs.
P5b. Those novice entrepreneurs who attribute their success to external factors
and who are able to clearly DEMO and learn from their experience will either;
(i) remain a novice entrepreneur if they perceive to have no control over the
cause DEMO;
(ii) become a habitual entrepreneur if they perceive to have control of the
external cause.
Attribution of Failure: Attribution theories have been most commonly applied to
negative outcome situations. Faced with a particular negative DEMO, once again
we may expect entrepreneurs to vary in terms of DEMO explanatory styles. If the
entrepreneur attributes the cause of failure to internal factors and is susceptible to
learned helplessness they are unlikely to engage DEMO a subsequent venture and in
most cases will choose to exit from the initial venture. We may anticipate a similar
response even if the DEMO of the cause is external. If, however, the entrepreneur is
not subject to learned helplessness and is able to objectively evaluate the venture,DEMO
he/she may choose one of two options. In the event that the entrepreneur identiﬁes
the cause as being unstable and controllable (such as lack of skills), he/she may
choose to do something about DEMO cause (e.g. attend training courses, bring in a
252 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
partner). Indeed, Sitkin (1992) argues that failure represents a “clear signal” that
facilitates the recognition and interpretation DEMO otherwise ambiguous outcomes.
Further, with failure, old ways of thinking and acting may be shaken and new ways
may be developed (Louis & Sutton, 1991). In contrast, however, the cause of fail-
ure may be viewed as being stable and uncontrollable, in which case the objective
entrepreneur is unlikely to engage in subsequent entrepreneurial activity. We may
DEMO a similar response if the cause is attributed to external factors. Entrepreneurs
susceptible to learned optimism (Schulman, 1999) and hence persistence that at-
tribute the cause of failure to external factors may hold the view DEMO a change in
the external environment could allow them to succeed the second time round.
The above discussion suggests that:
P6a. Those novice DEMO who attribute their failure to internal
causes and who are susceptible to learned helplessness will remain novice
entrepreneurs.
P6b. Those novice entrepreneurs who attribute DEMO failure to internal factors
and who are able to clearly evaluate and learn from their experience will either;
(i) remain a novice DEMO if they perceive to have no control over the
internal cause or;
(ii) become a habitual entrepreneur if they perceive to have DEMO over the
internal cause.
P7a. Those novice entrepreneurs who attribute their failure to external
causes and who are susceptible to learned helplessness will remain DEMO
entrepreneurs.
P7b. Those novice entrepreneurs who attribute their failure to external factors
and who are able to clearly evaluate and learn from their experience DEMO either;
(i) remain a novice entrepreneur if they perceive to have no control over the
external cause or;
(ii) become DEMO habitual entrepreneur is they perceive to have control of the
external cause.
The above discussion suggests that entrepreneurs, faced with a particular outcome
will behave differently in their decision to pursue an entrepreneurial career. These
differences DEMO be explained by the attribution and learning styles adopted by the
entrepreneur. Those entrepreneurs who decide to subsequently become habitual
entrepreneurs will do so DEMO identifying further entrepreneurial opportunities. To
do so, the entrepreneur may rely DEMO heuristics and their mental schemas discussed
in the previous section. Experience may have a signiﬁcant contributory inﬂuence
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
253
on the identiﬁcation DEMO subsequent venture ideas. This may take various forms
such as broadening the entrepreneur’s mental schema (since this is inﬂuenced by
experience and accumulated knowledge). Further, there is evidence to suggest that
due to their track record, habitual entrepreneurs may also ﬁnd themselves in a
situation where an opportunity is brought to them (Wright et al., 1997a, b).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we have synthesized a human capital and cognition perspective
to explain the emergence of different types of entrepreneurs. DEMO study deﬁnes
human capital in a broad sense to incorporate the cognitive styles utilized by
entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurial experience is often considered an important
component DEMO an entrepreneur’s human capital and hence subsequent activities.
The extent to which entrepreneurs can translate previous ownership experience
into higher subsequent entrepreneurial (and organizational) performance is likely
to depend on a number of intangible considerations such as cognition and learning.
It is suggested that entrepreneurs may adopt different DEMO approaches when
interpreting events and making decisions.
Two broad categories of cognition have been highlighted: heuristic-based
(i.e. automatic) thinking and systematic (i.e. DEMO) thinking. Entrepreneurial
cognition is often associated with heuristic-based thinking. While heuristic DEMO
thinking has its merits, particularly under conditions of uncertainty it may DEMO
to a number of errors and biases in decision-making, such as DEMO
and representativeness. Systematic thinking can overcome some of these biases.
It can, however, often be timely and costly. Further, heuristic-based thinking
can facilitate the identiﬁcation and exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities.
Habitual entrepreneurs, as a result of their strong entrepreneurial cognition may be
particularly effective in the identiﬁcation DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities. Based
on their entrepreneurial cognition, we proposed that habitual DEMO would
search for less information but would identify a greater number of opportunities
in a given period. Further, it was argued that habitual entrepreneurs would be
more likely to identify opportunities of superior quality.
While entrepreneurial DEMO may explain an entrepreneur’s tendency to
identify opportunities, it does not DEMO explain why certain entrepreneurs
embark on subsequent ventures while others do not. The cognitive and learning
strategies utilized to evaluate and learn from experiences DEMO inﬂuence the deci-
sion of an entrepreneur to become a habitual entrepreneur. Drawing on attribution
theory, we explain why certain entrepreneurs will select continued entrepreneur-
ship (i.e. habitual entrepreneurship) while others will choose to remain DEMO
254 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
entrepreneurs. Attribution theory was used to explain DEMO tendency to exploit oppor-
tunities. Our analysis highlights that causal attribution itself is subject to potential
bias. For example, an entrepreneurs who was successful the ﬁrst time round may
attribute this success to his/her own DEMO, when in fact external factors may have
had a crucial role DEMO the success. Failure to acknowledge this may have a negative
effect on subsequent ventures, if the entrepreneur is susceptible to overconﬁdence.
The impact of experience per se on overcoming the problems associated with
biases and heuristics DEMO debatable. Bazerman (1990) suggested that experienced
decision-makers may not explicitly know why and how they do what they do. If
experience is not DEMO evaluated, it becomes simple feedback that is interpreted
with limited awareness. DEMO entrepreneurs may reﬂect and consciously evaluate
their previous business ownership experiences whilst others do not. If experience
is translated into expertise, decision-makers have a conceptual understanding of
what constitutes a rational decision-making process. Most notably, it can be used
to avoid biases. Further, expertise may facilitate the switching of cognitive gears
(Louis & Sutton, 1991) from heuristic-based thinking to systematic thinking where
appropriate.
Our analysis suggests several areas for future research. DEMO entrepreneurs
may be seen as “idiosyncratic” and “path-dependent” units under the human
capital perspective, there is scope for understanding this heterogeneity. Exploring
entrepreneurs as a complex set of resources and capabilities is likely to aid our
DEMO of entrepreneurship. Most notably, the approach is likely to be
of DEMO use in understanding which path entrepreneurs take (i.e. strategies) and
how this will affect their performance. This chapter has attempted to highlight
that DEMO human capital is crucial in determining the viability and nature of the
entrepreneurial act, it may serve as a barrier if the individual experience biases
his/her thinking and learning. Furthermore, depending on the environmental
conditions faced by entrepreneurs, human capital may erode over time or with
changing circumstances. The entrepreneur must, therefore, develop the necessary
skills, resources and capabilities to renew their human capital base in order to
maintain/obtain DEMO sustained competitive advantage. While this may be relevant
for entrepreneurs generally, DEMO terms of venture survival, it may also be important
in the DEMO of habitual entrepreneurship where the entrepreneur may be
carrying out a subsequent entrepreneurial act. Additional entrepreneur-level
as well as ﬁrm-level studies are required to DEMO the relationship between
entrepreneurial human capital (and its development and deployment) and
the competitive strategies pursued by different types of entrepreneurs and
organizations.
DEMO research is also warranted focusing on how entrepreneurs learn and
how they use their experience-based knowledge. In order to take advantage of
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
255
the efﬁciency beneﬁts DEMO heuristic-based thinking can offer, it may be important
to understand how DEMO can (and should) switch from one mode of
thinking to the other. An appreciation of these issues is likely to require in-depth
exploratory DEMO research. Also, there is a need to explore the extent to DEMO
entrepreneurs adopt heuristic based information processing or systematic infor-
mation processing with regard to the entrepreneurial process. There is, therefore,
a need to examine the link between the extent to which entrepreneurs adapt (or
learn) from their previous entrepreneurial experience. Studies suggest that even in
the learning process, entrepreneurs may be prone to biases (e.g. attribution bias).
DEMO is evidence to suggest that individuals can be taught to overcome various
decision-making biases with the potential for improving subsequent performance
(Koriat & Goldsmith, 1996; Strack & Hannover, 1996). High levels of deliberate
practice, associated with informative feedback, opportunities for repetition and
opportunities for correction DEMO errors, may increase an individual’s awareness,
and may induce non-biased DEMO (Ericsson, Krampe & Tesch-Romer, 1993).
Further, there may be broader beneﬁts to society as a result of developing expertise.
Knowledge may DEMO easier to transfer, whereas “mindless” learning from experience
is difﬁcult to DEMO (Bazerman, 1990). Where heuristic-based thinking is
used, such “mindless” DEMO may be commonplace.
An understanding of habitual entrepreneurs compared with novice entrepreneurs
has implications for the investment behavior of ﬁnancial institutions and for policy-
DEMO and practitioners providing support for entrepreneurship and economic
development. From a policy perspective therefore, there may be scope for assisting
entrepreneurs in overcoming detrimental biases and barriers to subsequent success.
To encourage best practice, the resources (such as skills, competencies, networks,
etc.) accumulated and leveraged DEMO successful habitual entrepreneurs need to be
identiﬁed and disseminated. As intimated earlier, unless it is understood how and
why entrepreneurs behave the way they do, the transfer of knowledge is prohibited.
In order to address this research gap, studies conducted in a variety of industrial,
locational, DEMO and cultural settings need to carefully examine the human
capital and cognitive processes of habitual entrepreneurs compared with novice
entrepreneurs and their implications for DEMO recognition, information
search, opportunity exploitation and ultimately entrepreneurial performance.
In order to examine, in particular the cognitive dimension of human capital,
researchers can draw upon existing studies from psychology, management and
entrepreneurship. Measures are already available that operationalize various
aspects of entrepreneurial cognition, in particular in the area of biases and
heuristics (Forbes, 1999). Further, a number of learning inventories have been
developed to distinguish individuals on the DEMO of their learning preferences
and styles (e.g. Kolb, 1984). Entrepreneurial experience should be captured not
256 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
just in terms of whether the entrepreneur DEMO prior entrepreneurial experience
but in terms of the magnitude and nature of the experience. Stuart and Abetti
(1990) detected that their composite measure DEMO entrepreneurial experience
(measured in terms of the number of previous ventures DEMO the role played in
them) was the only factor that signiﬁcantly DEMO variations in the selected
performance indicators. In distinguishing experience from expertise, DEMO
information processing theory can provide insight into how experts think and
behave. In addition, an examination of the literature on meta-cognitive knowledge
(i.e. DEMO about an individual’s cognitive processing, including awareness
of thinking resources and DEMO, culminating in the ability to direct the
learning process (Metcalfe & Shimamura, 1994; Nelson, 1992)) may prove useful
in distinguishing expertise from simple feedback experience provides.
A variety of techniques can be used DEMO measure the dimensions of opportunity
identiﬁcation and exploitation discussed in this study. Numerous measures have
been used to examine the sources and intensity of DEMO search (Cooper, Folta
& Woo, 1995; Kaish & Gilad, DEMO). In evaluating the quality of an opportunity,
a selection of measures may need to be used. Fiet and Migliore (2001) use DEMO panel
to rank ideas using four criteria from the resource and competence literatures that
reﬂect the capacity necessary to generate a sustainable competitive advantage DEMO
above average earnings. Using a panel of experts ranging from academics, DEMO
entrepreneurs and ﬁnanciers, it may be possible to identify a list DEMO attributes
associated with a valuable opportunity. Chandler and Hanks (1994) use a six-item
scale to measure the quality of an opportunity. The nature DEMO amount of resources
utilized to initiate the venture may also be an indicator of its potential value,
particularly in terms of ﬁnancial and DEMO capital. The amount of initial ﬁnance
invested in the business may at least give some indication of the initial scale of the
venture (Cooper, Folta & Woo, 1995). The willingness of external ﬁnanciers may
DEMO be an indicator of potential value.
In this paper we have focused on the simple dichotomy between novice and
habitual entrepreneurs. Research has suggested DEMO there may be important
within-group differences regarding novice and habitual entrepreneurs. Some
habitual entrepreneurs may exhibit serial behavior, exiting one venture before en-
tering subsequent ones, while others may develop a portfolio of contemporaneous
ventures (DEMO & Wright, 1998). Similarly, while some novice entrepreneurs
may only ever exploit one venture, others may go on to become habitual
entrepreneurs. Further research might also usefully examine the extent to which
these within DEMO differences are associated with different types of cognitive
processes and learning.
Further, while we have assumed that entrepreneurship may involve the start-up
of new ventures, or the purchase or inheritance of an existing business, empirical
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
257
evidence suggests that DEMO novice and habitual entrepreneurs may cite different
motivations for business ownership (DEMO & Wright, 1998). These motivations
have been found to range DEMO wealth creation to autonomy and ensuring fam-
ily security. Not all business owners will be wealth creators. Additional research
is required to examine the DEMO to which motivations for business ownership
are inﬂuenced by the entrepreneur’s cognition and how these motivations affect
entrepreneurial behavior.
As becoming a habitual entrepreneur DEMO place over time, there is a need
for research in this DEMO to be conducted on the basis of longitudinal analyses.
Longitudinal samples are subject, in particular, to major problems regarding sample
attrition. However, this may be less of a problem for theory building purposes.
Longitudinal analysis DEMO be especially important for analyzing those novice
entrepreneurs who may or may not go on to become habitual entrepreneurs.
NOTES
1. We acknowledge that DEMO all business ownership will involve wealth creation. This
is evident from the motivational diversity highlighted in a number of empirical studies
(Birley & Westhead, 1990; Westhead & Wright, 1998). In this study, however, we assume
that business ownership involves wealth creation (whether this be in the form of start-
up, purchase or inheritance of a business). This is consistent with Hawley’s (1927) work
where he argued that DEMO rights are crucial for undertaking entrepreneurship, since
they allow the entrepreneur DEMO make decisions about the coordination of resources to gain
entrepreneurial rents, DEMO return for absorbing the uncertainty of owning those resources. We
return to this issue in the conclusion.
2. Osipow (1973) introduced an open DEMO model of careers in the 1960s, while
Ronstadt (1988) independently DEMO his work on the corridor principle in the 1970s.
Katz (1992), integrating the two, developed a psychosocial model of employment status
choice.
DEMO Eliot Jacques developed a model of bureaucracy which incorporated small ﬁrm cre-
ation. This model was based on the cognitive differentiation approach of psychoanalyst
DEMO Klein. His work has been argued to have inﬂuenced other scholars exploring en-
trepreneurship through a cognitive lens such as H. Levinson and A. DEMO and more
recently Kets de Vries and Danny Miller.
4. Some novice entrepreneurs become habitual entrepreneurs. We can reasonably spec-
ulate that these “transient” DEMO entrepreneurs will exhibit a reliance on entrepreneurial
cognitive processes exhibited by habitual rather than one-time novice entrepreneurs (i.e. in-
dividuals who will only ever own one independent business). Over time, “transient” novice
entrepreneurs who beneﬁt from learning will develop a knowledge base similar to a habit-
ual. DEMO cognitive processes will, therefore, enable them to have ownership stakes in more
than one venture.
5. Where schema are deﬁned as “dynamic mental DEMO that represent an individual’s
knowledge and beliefs about how physical and social worlds work” (Gaglio & Katz, 2001,
p. 97).
258 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
REFERENCES
Abrahamson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans: Critique
and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 32–48.
Aldrich, DEMO, & Auster, E. R. (1986). Even dwarfs started small: Liabilities of age and size and their
strategic implications. In: B. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds), ResearchinOrganizationBehavior
(Vol. 8, pp. 165–198). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Allinson, C. W., & Hayes, J. (1996). The cognitive style index: A measure of intuition-analysis DEMO
organizational research. Journal of Management Studies, 33(1), 119–135.
Alsos, G. A., & Kolvereid, L. (1999). The business gestation process of novice, serial and parallel
business founders. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, DEMO(4), 101–114.
Alvarez, S., & Busenitz, L. (2001). The entrepreneurship of resource-based theory. Journal of Man-
agement, 27(6), 755–776.
Argyris, C., & Schon, D. A. (1978).¨ Organizational DEMO Reading, MA: Harvard University.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17,
99–120.
Baron, DEMO A. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs think
differently than other people. Journal of Business Venturing, 13(4), 275–294.
Bates, T. (1998). Survival patterns among newcomers to franchising. DEMO of Business Venturing,
13(2), 113–130.
Bazerman, M. H. (1990). Judgement in managerial decision making (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
Becker, G. S. (1975). Human capital. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Becker, G. S. (1993). Nobel lecture: The economic way of looking at behavior. The Journal of Political
Economy, 101(3), 385–409.
Birley, S., & Westhead, P. (1990). Growth and performance contrasts between ‘types’ of small DEMO
Strategic Management Journal, 11(7), 535–557.
Birley, S., & DEMO, P. (1993). A comparison of new businesses established by ‘novice’ and ‘habitual’
founders in Great Britain. International Small Business Journal, 12, DEMO
Brehm, J. W. (Ed.) (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. New York: Academic Press.
Bruderl, J., Preisendorfer, P., & Zeigler, R. (1992). Survival chances of newly founded business orga-¨
DEMO American Sociological Review, 57(2), 227–242.
Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. B. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large
organisations: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision making. JournalofBusinessVenturing,
12(1), 9–30.
Busenitz, L. W., & Lau, C. (1996)DEMO A cross-cultural cognitive model of new venture creation. En-
trepreneurship Theory and Practice, 20, 25–39.
Caplan, B. (1999). The Austrian search DEMO realistic foundations. Southern Economic Journal, 65(4),
823–838.
Castanias, DEMO P., & Helfat, C. E. (2001). The managerial rents DEMO: Theory and empirical analysis.
Journal of Management, 27(6), 661–678.
Chandler, G. N., & Hanks, S. H. (1994). Market DEMO, resource-based capabilities, venture
strategies, and venture performance. Journal of Business DEMO, 9(4), 331–349.
Chandler, G. N., & Hanks, S. H. (1998). An examination of the substitutability of founders human
and ﬁnancial capital in emerging business ventures. Journal of Business Venturing, 13(5), 353–
369.
Chandler, G. N., & Jansen, E. (1992)DEMO The founder’s self-assessed competence and venture performance.
Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 223–237.
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
259
Cooper, A. C. (1981). Strategic management, new entrants and small business. Long Range DEMO,
14, 39–45.
Cooper, A. C. (1985). The role DEMO incubator organisations in the founding of growth-oriented ﬁrms.
Journal of Business Venturing, 1(1), 75–86.
Cooper, A. C., & Dunkelberg, W. DEMO (1986). Entrepreneurship and paths to business ownership. Strategic
Management Journal, 7(1), 53–68.
Cooper, A. C., Gimeno-Gascon, F. J., & Woo, C. Y. (1994). Initial human and ﬁnancial capital predictors
of new venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 371–395.
Cooper, A. C., Folta, T. B., & Woo, C. (1995). Entrepreneurial information search. Journal of Business
Venturing, 10, 107–120.
Cressy, R., & Storey, D. (1995). New ﬁrms and their bank. London: National Westminster Bank PLC.
Daft, R. L., & Weick, K. DEMO (1984). Toward a model of organizations as interpretation systems. Academy
DEMO Management Review, 9(2), 284–295.
Dahlqvist, J., Davidsson, P., & Wiklund, J. (2000). Initial conditions as predictors of new venture
performance: A replication and extension of the Cooper et al. Study. Enterprise & Innovation
Management Studies, 6, 67–84.
Davidsson, P., Low, M. B., & Wright, M. (2001). Editor’s introduction: Low DEMO MacMillan ten years
on: Achievement and future directions for entrepreneurship research. DEMO Theory
and Practice, 25(4), 5–16.
Dawes, R. M. (DEMO). Rational choice in an uncertain world. New York: Harcourt Brace DEMO
Dollinger, M. J. (1998). Entrepreneurship: Strategies and resources.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Romer, C. (1993). The role of deliberate practice in the
acquisition of expert performance. Psychological DEMO, 100(3), 363–406.
Fiet, J. O. (1996). The DEMO basis for entrepreneurial discovery. Small Business Economics,
8, 419–430.
Fiet, J. O., & Migliore, P. J. (2001). The testing of a model of entrepreneurial discovery by aspiring
entrepreneurs. Paper presented at the DEMO Babson College/Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneur-
ship Research Conference, Jonk¨ oping, Sweden.¨
Fiet, J. O., Piskounov, A., & Gustavsson, V. (2000)DEMO How to decide how to search for entrepreneurial
discoveries. Paper Presented at the Babson Kauffman Entrepreneurship Conference (June),
Boston.
Forbes, D. P. (1999). Cognitive approaches to new venture creation. International Journal of Manage-
ment Reviews, 1, 415–439.
Gaglio, C. M. (1997) Opportunity identiﬁcation: Review, critique and suggested research directions.
In: J. A. Katz (DEMO), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth (Vol. 3, DEMO
119–138). Greenwich, CA: JAI Press.
Gaglio, C. M., & Katz, J. A. (2001). The psychological basis of opportunity identiﬁcation: En-
trepreneurial alertness. Small Business Economics, 16(2), 95–111.
Gatewood, DEMO, Shaver, K. G., & Gartner, W. B. (1995). DEMO longitudinal study of cognitive factors
inﬂuencing start-up behaviors and success at venture creation. Journal of Business Venturing,
10, 371–391.
Gavetti, G., & Levinthal, D. (2000). Looking forward and looking backward: Cognitive and experiential
search. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45, 113–137.
Gimeno, J., Folta, T. B., Cooper, A. C., & Woo, C. Y. (1997). Survival of the ﬁttest? Entrepreneurial
human capital and the persistence of underperforming ﬁrms. AdministrativeScienceQuarterly,
42(4), 750–783.
Greene, P. G., & Brown, T. E. (1997). Resource needs and the dynamic capitalism typology. Journal
of Business Venturing, 12, 161–173.
260 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
Hambrick, D. C., & Crozier, L. (1985). Stumblers and starts in the management of rapid growth. Journal
of Business Venturing, 1, 31–45.
Hart, M. M., Greene, P. G., & Brush, C. G. (1997). Leveraging resources: Building DEMO organisation on
an entrepreneurial resource base. In: P. D. Reynolds, W. D. Carter, P. Davidsson, W. B. Gartner
& P. McDougall (Eds), Frontiers in Entrepreneurship Research 1997 (pp. 347–348). Wellesley,
MA: Babson College.
Hawley, F. (1927). The orientation of economics on enterprise. American Economic Review, 17, 409–
428.
Hebb, D. O. (DEMO). Drives and the conceptual nervous system. Psychological Review, 62, 243–254.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley.
Hills, G. E. (1995). Opportunity recognition by successful entrepreneurs: A pilot study. In: W. D.
Bygrave, B. J. Bird, S. Birley, N. C. Churchill, M. Hay, R. H. Keeley & W. E. Wetzel, Jr. (Eds),
Frontiers in Entrepreneurship Research 1995 (DEMO 105–117). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Hitt, M. A., & Tyler, B. B. (1991). Strategic decision models: Integrating different perspectives. Strategic
Management Journal, 12, 327–352.
Hogarth, R. (1980). Judgement DEMO choice. New York: Wiley.
Jaques, E. (1976). A general DEMO of bureaucracy. New York: Halsted.
Kaish, S., & Gilad, B. (1991). Characteristics of opportunities search of entrepreneurs versus executives:
Sources, interests, general alertness. Journal of Business Venturing, 6(1), 45–61.
Katz, J. A. (1992). A psychosocial cognitive model of employment DEMO choice. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 29–37.
Kirton, M. J. (1976)DEMO A theory of cognitive style. In: M. J. Kirton (Ed.), Adaptors and Innovators:
Styles of Creativity and Problem Solving. London: Routledge.
Kirzner, I. M. (1973). Competition and entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kirzner, I. M. (1997). Entrepreneurial discovery and the DEMO market process: An Austrian
approach. Journal of Economic Literature, 35, DEMO
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as a DEMO of learning and development.
Englewood Cliffs: NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kolvereid, L., & Bullvag, E. (1993). Novices versus experienced founders: An exploratory investiga-˚
tion. In: S. Birley, I. MacMillan & S. Subramony (Eds), Entrepreneurship Research: Global
Perspectives (pp. 275–285). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers.
Koriat, A., & Goldsmith, M. (1996). Monitoring and DEMO processes in the strategic regulation of
memory accuracy. Psychological Review, 103, 490–517.
Krabuanrat, K., & Phelps, R. (1998). Heuristics and DEMO in strategic decision making: An ex-
ploratory study. Journal of Business DEMO, 41, 83–93.
Kullik, C. T., & Perry, E. L. (1994). Heuristic processing in organizational judgments. In: L. Heath,
R. S. Tindale, J. Edwards, E. J. Posavac, F. B. Bryant, DEMO Henderson-King, Y. Suarez-Balcazar
& J. Myers (Eds), Applications and Heuristics and Biases in Social Issues. New York: Plenum
Press.
Lei, D., Hitt, M., & Bettis (1996). Dynamic core competences through meta-learning and strategic
context. Journal of Management, 22(4), 549–570.
Lord, DEMO G., & Maher, K. J. (1990). Alternative information-processing models DEMO their implications
for theory, research, and practice. Academy of Management Review, 15(1), 9–28.
Louis, M. R., & Sutton, R. DEMO (1991). Switching cognitive gears: From habits of mind to active thinking.
Human Relations, 44(1), 55–76.
Low, M. B., & MacMillan, I. C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges. Journal
of Management, 35, 139–161.
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
261
Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and linking
it to performance. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 135–172.
MacMillan, I. C. (1986). To really learn about entrepreneurship, let’s study habitual entrepreneurs.
Journal of Business Venturing, 1(3), 241–243.
Manimala, M. J. (1992). Entrepreneurial heuristics: A comparison between high PI (pioneering-
innovative) and low PI ventures. Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 477–504.
Martinko, M. J., & Gardner, W. L. (1982). Learned helplessness: An alternative explanation for per-
formance deﬁcits. Academy of Management Review, 7, 195–204.
McGrath, R. G. (1999). Falling DEMO: Real options reasoning and entrepreneurial failure. Academy
of Management Review, 24, 13–30.
McGrath, R. G., & MacMillan, I. C. (2000). The entrepreneurial mindset. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Metcalfe, J., & Shimamura, A. P. (Eds) (1994). Metacognition: Knowing DEMO knowing. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Mosakowski, E. (DEMO). A resource-based perspective on the dynamic strategy-performance relation-
ship: An DEMO examination of the focus and differentiation strategies in entrepreneurial
ﬁrms. Journal of Management, 19(4), 819–839.
Neale, M. A., & Northcraft, DEMO B. (1989). Experience, expertise and decision bias in negotiation: DEMO
role of strategic conceptualization. In: B. Sheppard & R. Lewicki (Eds), ResearchonNegotiation
in Organizations (Vol. 2). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Neisser, U. (1966). Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Nelson, DEMO O. (1992). Metacognition: Core readings. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
DEMO, R., & Ross, L. (1980). Human inferences: Strategies DEMO shortcomings of social judgement.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Northcraft, G. DEMO, & Neale, M. A. (1987). Experts, amateurs and real estate: An anchoring and adjust-
ment perspective on property pricing decisions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 39, 84–97.
Nystrom, P., & DEMO, W. (1984). To avoid organisational crises, unlearn. OrganisationalDynamics,
DEMO, 53–65.
Osipow, S. H. (1973). Theories of career development (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Palich, L. E., & Bagby, D. R. (1995). Using cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial risk-taking:
Challenging conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 425–438.
DEMO, P. L. (1987). Human information processing. In: M. Ezzamel & D. Hart (Eds), Advanced
Management Accounting (pp. 113–135). McGraw Hill.
Riding, R. J. (1991). On the nature of cognitive. DEMO Psychology, 17, 29–50.
Ronstadt, R. (1986). Exit, stage DEMO: Why entrepreneurs end their entrepreneurial careers before retire-
ment. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 1(3), 323–338.
Ronstadt, R. (1988). The DEMO principal and entrepreneurial time. Journal of Business Venturing,
1, 295–306.
DEMO, H. (1991). Incidence and determinants of multiple entrepreneurship. In: DEMO C. Churchill,
W. D. Bygrave, J. G. Covin, D. L. Sexton, D. P. Slevin, K. H. Vesper & W. E. Wetzel
(Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1991 (pp. 11–24). Wellesley, DEMO: Babson
College.
Schneider, S. C., & Angelmar, R. (1993)DEMO Cognition in organizational analysis: Who’s minding the
store? Organization Studies, DEMO(3), 347–374.
Schulman, P. (1999). Applying learned optimism to increase sales productivity. Journal of Personal
Selling and Sales Management, 19, DEMO
262 DENIZ UCBASARAN ET AL.
Schwenk, C. R. (1986). Information, cognitive bias and commitment to a course of action. Academy
of Management DEMO, 11, 298–310.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: DEMO depression, development, and death. San Francisco:
Freeman.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization
Science, 11(4), 448–469.
Shane, S., & Khurana, K. (2003)DEMO Career experience and ﬁrm founding. Industrial and Corporate
Change, forthcoming.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research. Academy
of Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Simon, H. A. (1973). The structure of ill-structured problems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, DEMO, 181–201.
Sitkin, S. B. (1992). Learning through failure: The strategy of small losses. ResearchinOrganizational
Behavior, 14, 231–266.
Smith, K., DEMO, M., Grimm, C., & Mitchell, T. (1988). Decision making in smaller entrepreneurial
and larger professionally managed ﬁrms. Journal of Business DEMO, 3, 223–232.
Starr, J., & Bygrave, W. (1991). The assets and liabilities of prior start-up experience: An exploratory
study of multiple venture entrepreneurs. In: N. C. Churchill, W. D. Bygrave, J. G. Covin, D.
L. Sexton, D. P. Slevin, K. H. Vesper & W. E. Wetzel (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research 1991 (DEMO 213–227). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Stigler, G. J. (1961). The economics of information. The Journal of Political Economy, LXIX, DEMO
225.
Stinchcombe, A. L. (1965). Social structure and organizations. In: J. G. March (Ed.), Handbook of
Organizations (pp. 153–193). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Storey, D. J. (1994). Understanding the small business sector. London: Routledge.
Strack, F., & Hannover, B. (1996). Awareness of inﬂuence as precondition for implementing correc-
tional goals. In: P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds), The Psychology of Action: Linking
Motivation and Cognition to Behavior (pp. 579–596). New DEMO: Guilford.
Stuart, R. W., & Abetti, P. A. (1990)DEMO Impact of entrepreneurial and management experience on early
performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 5, 151–162.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974)DEMO Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
185, 1124–1131.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice and the DEMO of decisions. JournalofBusiness,
59, 251–294.
Venkataraman, S. (1997). DEMO distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An editor’s perspective.
In: J. A. Katz (Ed.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth (Vol. 3, pp.
119–138). Greenwich, CA: JAI Press.
Weick, K. DEMO (1984). Small wins: Redeﬁning the scale of social problems. American Psychologist, 39,
40–49.
Weiner, B. (1980). Human motivation. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Weiner, B. (1985). An DEMO theory of achievement-related emotion and motivation. Psycholog-
ical Review, 92, 548–573.
Westhead, P. (1995). Survival and employment growth contrasts between types DEMO owner-managed
high-technology ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 20(1), 5–27.
DEMO, P., & Wright, M. (1998). Novice, portfolio and DEMO founders: Are they different? Journal
of Business Venturing, 13(3), 173–204.
Westhead, P., & Wright, M. (1999). Contributions of novice, portfolio, and serial founders located in
rural and urban areas. DEMO Studies, 33(2), 157–173.
The Impact of Entrepreneurial Experience on Opportunity Identiﬁcation
263
Woo, C. Y., Cooper, A., & Dunkelberg, W. (1991). The development and interpretation of en-
trepreneurial typologies. Journal of Business Venturing, 6, 93–114.
DEMO, C. Y., Folta, T., & Cooper, A. C. (1992). Entrepreneurial search: Alternative theories of behaviour.
In: N. C. Churchill, S. Birley, W. D. Bygrave, D. F. Muzyka, C. Wahlbin & W. E. Wetzel (Eds),
Frontiers in Entrepreneurship Research 1992 (pp. 31–41). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., & Ennew, C. (1997a). Serial entrepreneurs. British Journal of Management,
8(3), 251–268.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., & DEMO, C. (1997b). Venture capitalists and serial entrepreneurs. Journal of
Business Venturing, 12(3), 227–249.
Wright, M., Hoskisson, R., Busenitz, L., & Dial, L. (2000). Entrepreneurial growth through privatiza-
DEMO: The upside of management buyouts. Academy of Management Review, 25(3), 591–601.
Zacharakis, A. L., Meyer, G. D., & DeCastro, J. (1999). Differing perceptions of new venture failure: A
matched DEMO study of venture capitalists and entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Business
Management, DEMO(3), 1–14.
Zajac, E. J., & Bazerman, M. H. (1991). Blind spots in industry and competitor analysis: Implications
of inter-ﬁrm (mis)perceptions for strategic decisions. Academy of Management Review, 16(1),
37–56.{1g42fwefx}