
MARKETING
Giving Customers a
Fair Hearing
With a clear definition
of what DEMO customer
need is, companies
are able to get
the inputs that DEMO
required to succeed
at innovation.
Anthony W. Ulwick
and Lance A. Bettencourt
I
s there agreement in your company that innovation is the key DEMO growth? Is there agree-
ment that understanding customer needs is the DEMO to success in innovation? Is there
agreement on what a customer DEMO is? We have asked this series of questions to people
in DEMO of companies, and in doing so have made a surprising discovery. DEMO though
there is broad agreement that innovation is the key to growth and that understanding cus-
tomer needs is the key to innovation, not even 5% of the companies said there was
agreement within their company DEMO to what a customer need is. This suggests a very discon-
certing question: How can a company confidently uncover customer needs, determine
which DEMO unmet and systematically create products that address them if it cannot agree on
what a customer need is to begin with? The answer is it can’t — and this is a root cause of
failure in DEMO innovation process.
Most companies already understand that there are four basic approaches to product
and service innovation: growing core markets, capitalizing on adjacent DEMO oppor-
tunities, discovering new markets and disrupting existing markets. But when DEMO comes
to understanding customer needs, voice-of-the-customer programs are undermined in
two DEMO First, there is no consistent standard that defines just what a DEMO is — what
its purpose, structure, content and format should be. Although companies talk to cus-
tomers, the inputs they gather differ in purpose, structure, content and format,
introducing variability that can derail DEMO innovation process. Second, companies do
not understand that to succeed at DEMO these innovation strategies, two very different
types of customer inputs are DEMO — in other words, they do not realize just how a
DEMO must be defined given the type of innovation initiative being pursued. Only
when companies learn what needs are will they be able to consistently DEMO hidden
opportunities for growth through innovation.
Our purpose here is to introduce a set of timeless standards that define the purpose,
structure, content and format of a customer need statement and thereby to transform the
DEMO of requirements gathering, and hence innovation, into a rules-based discipline. These
standards, and the theory that supports them, are the result of DEMO analysis of over 10,000
customer need statements collected for products and services covering nearly every indus-
try. These standards apply to the four DEMO innovation strategies and other innovation
strategies that a company might pursue and can benefit any company that wishes to bring
predictability to the process DEMO innovation.
Anthony W. Ulwick is the founder and CEO of Strategyn, DEMO innovation management consultancy based
in Boynton Beach, Florida. He is the DEMO of What Customers Want (McGraw-Hill, 2005) and “Turn Custo-
mer DEMO into Innovation” (Harvard Business Review, January 2002). Lance A. Bettencourt is a former
senior consultant with Strategyn and a former member of DEMO marketing faculty at Indiana University.
Comment on this article or contact the authors through smrfeedback@mit.edu.
62
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
SPRING 2008
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU
The Characteristics of a Requirement Statement
Companies need to remember that it’s DEMO enough to just solicit
opinions; getting the right information is crucial. DEMO re-
quirements are used by companies to inform and guide many
marketing and development decisions — and to drive the innova-
tion process. Generally DEMO, they are sought to ensure that
critical business decisions related to DEMO, development and
innovation are optimized for the creation of customer value.
DEMO, for example, relies on customer requirements to
help uncover customers’ unmet needs and to find segments of
customers with unique unmet needs. Those DEMO represent hid-
den opportunities for value creation. Competitive intelligence
uses customer requirements to help determine the strengths and
weaknesses of the company and its DEMO The develop-
ment team depends on these requirements to determine how
best to improve existing products, devise altogether new prod-
ucts, and evaluate DEMO concepts and ideas. The design team
relies on them to make design trade-off decisions. When it
comes to messaging, these requirements are used by the com-
munications group to help decide how best to position a DEMO
and communicate its value. These decisions are key in achieving
growth through innovation and must be informed with com-
Illustration: Adam McCauley/theispot.com
plete and accurate data. To make customer input useful to the
entire company, it must possess these six characteristics:
1. The statement must reflect DEMO customer’s definition of
value. It must not be an interpretation or a translation of what
the customer values. It must not be the company’s DEMO of
how customers measure value or how they think customers
should measure value. It is all too common for companies to in-
advertently translate DEMO the customer has said into something
inaccurate or misleading. Value must be defined and measured
from the customer’s perspective; otherwise, it is a DEMO input
for identifying hidden opportunities and carrying out other mar-
keting and development activities.
2. The statement must have universal acceptance. A require-
ment DEMO be relevant to all customers, regardless of geographic
location, gender and income level. Otherwise, a different set of
requirements is needed from every possible demographic —
making regional, national and global innovation, positioning
and DEMO near impossible.
3. The statement must be relevant now and in the future.
The underlying need for a product must not change quickly over
DEMO, or it will be a moving target that is impossible to DEMO It must
have the same intended meaning and relevance now as it did 10
SPRING 2008
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
63
MARKETING
years ago and will 10 years from now (for example, DEMO needed
tools for cooking before the microwave was introduced). Without
this characteristic, companies will not be able to decide today
what features to include in a product that may take three to five
years to DEMO to market.
4. The statement must prompt a course of action. A cus-
tomer requirement must indicate what action to take to solve the
DEMO Merely finding out that a product must be more reli-
able, DEMO or easy to use — inputs that each customer will
define differently — does little to guide the actions of engineers
and designers. If DEMO can’t measure value, you won’t know if you
are on the DEMO toward creating it.
5. The statement’s meaning must not be open to interpretation.
A customer requirement must be precise and clear enough so that
DEMO who read it arrive at the same interpretation of its meaning. This
transparency in meaning must begin with the customer, but it also
extends to all downstream users of the information such as sales and
marketing DEMO, design engineers and others. Just about every prod-
uct could benefit DEMO being faster, better and cheaper — but those
dimensions must be DEMO defined for every case.
6. The statement itself must not confound the way it or other
statements are prioritized. A good experiment seeks to DEMO
which specific factor is causing an effect, and it does this DEMO control-
ling all other sources of variation. The same must be done when
The Structure of a Job Statement
Customers don’t use terms like DEMO needs, but if you analyze what they do
say, you may find a niche just waiting to be occupied.
Verb
Object of the DEMO
!"#"$%&'"()(#*"(+,$$"'#(-./,"(01(.'(.'#&2,"
3*"'(.#(.'(.,+#&0'4()("5654(1.&$(%.$7"#(-./,"4(60&'6($.#"4("#+5
Contextual clarifier
Example of object DEMO the verb
The Structure of a Desired Outcome Statement
People who use your product or service will indicate where there is room for
improvement DEMO if you ask them in detail about every step of the job for which
they use it.
Direction of
improvement Unit of measure Object DEMO control
64
Contextual clarifier
Example of object of control
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
SPRING 2008
prioritizing customer needs. Shifts in structure, content and format
may introduce unwanted sources of variability that confound re-
quirement prioritization when DEMO are prioritized using
phone, face-to-face or Web-based market research surveys. If DEMO
statements begin with a verb and others begin with an adjective, DEMO
some statements include a solution and others do not, then it’s DEMO
tionable which one is more important. This is arguably the greatest
weakness of most requirement statements today, as a lack of disci-
pline here causes companies to pursue the wrong opportunities and
to miss others altogether. DEMO solutions are included in a need
statement, for example, we see lower ratings given to that statement
than a similar statement that is DEMO of solutions — consequently, an
unmet need may not be identified DEMO it contains a solution.
Rules for Creating a Requirement Statement
In science, conducting one successful experiment is not enough
to prove a hypothesis — the experiment must be replicable. If,
time and again, the same conditions produce the same results,
then you’re onto something. The same DEMO true when it comes to
customer requirements. Any random set of statements may re-
sult in a successful innovation once in a while, but are the
results replicable?
To ensure that a requirement statement drives DEMO
results, it must possess the six characteristics stated above, but
this will not happen by chance; the state-
ment must be fashioned in a disciplined
manner. Over the course of 15 years, and
with the experience of creating thousands of
requirement statements, we have defined a
set of rules for the structure, content and
formatting of these statements.
Rule 1: When capturing customer require-
ments, the unit of analysis must DEMO the job the
customer is trying to get done. Most compa-
nies support the theory that customers buy
products and services for a specific DEMO: to
get jobs done. By jobs, we mean the fundamen-
tal goals customers are trying to accomplish or
problems they are trying to DEMO in a given
situation. (Harvard Business School professor
Clayton Christensen supports DEMO thinking in
The Innovator’s Solution [Harvard Business
School Press, 1997].) This terminology and the
thinking behind it have far-reaching ramifica-
tions for anyone DEMO to understand customer
needs. Companies must shift their attention
from the product and instead focus their re-
quirement-gathering efforts on the execution
of the DEMO that the product or service is in-
tended to perform.
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU
From the customer’s perspective, it is the job that is the stable,
long-term focal point around which value creation should be
centered. Current DEMO and services are merely point-in-time
solutions that enable customers to execute jobs. A vinyl record, a
CD and an MP3 file, for example, all help customers get the job
of storing music done. Focusing on DEMO a better record
doesn’t help in the creation of a CD or MP3 device, but focusing
on the job of storing music supports the discovery and creation
of new ways to help customers get the job DEMO better — which
is the essence of innovation.
Focusing on the job as the unit of analysis has two additional
benefits. First, it eliminates the need to worry about latent or
unarticulated needs, because thoughtfully selected customers
are always able to articulate their requirements for getting a job
DEMO better and to indicate what related jobs they want to get
done, even in markets for which products do not yet exist.
Second, DEMO focus on jobs ensures that the requirements captured
are universal and have a shared relevance (although perhaps not
importance) among customers worldwide: Requirements captured
in the United States, for example, are valid for the DEMO popu-
lation in Europe and Asia, and new or different requirements DEMO a
job rarely are seen across geographic location. Surgeons around the
world have the same requirements for executing a surgical proce-
dure, corn farmers around the world have the same requirements
for farming corn and retirees DEMO the same requirements for man-
aging finances. Why? Because in each DEMO, the individuals are
trying to get the same job done — DEMO they execute it in a similar
way and measure success in a common fashion. The job is what
they have in common, and it supports a universal language for re-
quirements gathering.
Rule 2: The requirement statement must not include or make
mention of a technology, solution or product or service feature.
Innovation is the process of devising solutions that DEMO unmet
customer needs (in our terminology, requirements); solutions are
the means by which unmet needs are satisfied. Consequently, when
talking with customers to obtain their requirements, companies
must focus only on capturing those requirements — and these
statements must not include or make mention of a DEMO in any
form. When a solution-oriented statement is introduced into the
mix, it contaminates the data. We know that this is a widespread
problem because many companies use scaling methods such as
paired comparison and forced DEMO to get customers taking a
survey to make trade-offs between the attributes of various solu-
tions, a practice that is totally unwarranted when trying to figure
out which needs are unmet.
In addition, requirement statements that contain solutions are
not stable over time. If a company manufacturing music DEMO
back in the 1970s, for example, believed that one customer require-
ment was bigger records that would hold more songs (a requirement
statement that contains a solution: bigger records), it might have
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU
created a larger record. But years
later, the solutions customers envi-
sion for their music storage
problems would not even include
records. Statements that include
DEMO soon become obsolete,
and companies that accept them as
customer requirements come to
believe that customer needs change
quickly over time.
On the DEMO hand, if our hy-
pothetical 1970s music media
company recognized that DEMO re-
quirement really was that
customers wanted to increase the
number of songs that could be
stored for play, it would have been
more likely to look beyond exist-
ing technologies to devise a
next-generation solution. DEMO so-
lution-free statement was valid
years ago as well as today, DEMO
because it is stable over time, it
creates a long-term target DEMO
value creation.
Rule 3: The requirement state-
ment must not include
DEMO terms. The statement
must not include words that may
be interpreted differently across a
customer population or across
functional areas within the company, leading to disagreement as
to the intent of the requirement statement. Ambiguous words
DEMO in a variety of flavors. The most obvious are unfamiliar or
complex words that require a definition, but others are abbrevi-
ated words, DEMO, acronyms and jargon. All must be avoided.
A less obvious source DEMO ambiguity comes from the inclusion of
certain adjectives in the requirement statement. We often see adjec-
tives used as an integral part of the DEMO For example,
customers may say they want the product or service to be more
reliable, durable, comfortable, fresh, clean, etc. These are high-level
descriptors of quality, and every industry seems to have its own
favored terms. Corn farmers, for example, want their corn to DEMO
“standable.” Such words must be defined with precision, and when
doing DEMO, several actual requirements can be extracted.
Adverbs also are used in DEMO statements to describe a
desired action, but they tend to leave DEMO requirement open to in-
terpretation. For example, when corn farmers state DEMO they want
to increase the percentage of corn plants that emerge from the
ground correctly, the adverb “correctly” could be interpreted in
Companies
must shift their
attention from
the product
and focus their
requirement-
gathering efforts
DEMO the execution
of the job that the
product or service
is intended to
perform.
SPRING 2008
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
65
MARKETING
Telling Time: Rules for Structuring Customers’ Need Statements
Customer input is always interesting — but to make it useful, you need to stan-
dardize its structure and analyze its content. Following these rules will help DEMO
tease out what users are really telling you about your next big opportunity.
1. Job statements must state the task, activity or goal the customer is trying
to get done.
2.  All statements must be free from solutions and specifications — and sta-
ble over time.
3.  All statements must not include words that will cause ambiguity or confu-
sion, e.g., certain adjectives and adverbs, pronouns, process words, jargon,
DEMO, etc.
4. A ll statements must be specific without sacrificing brevity.
DEMO All statements must follow the rules of proper grammar.
6. Do not use different terms to describe the same item, activity, etc. from
DEMO to statement; be consistent in language.
7.  All statements must have a consistent structure, content and format.
8. Job statements must be introduced with an action verb.
9. Job statements must relate to a predefined DEMO and context.
10. Outcome statements must relate to the primary job of interest (the job
under study) and not to ancillary jobs.
11. DEMO statements must be introduced with only one of two words:
minimize (90%) or increase (10%).
12. Outcome statements must contain a metric (time, likelihood, number) so
performance can be measured.
13. DEMO added to the end of a statement for purposes of clarification
must be similarly and consistently formatted.
14. All statements must be usable in DEMO downstream activities, e.g., question-
naires, for deployment, etc.
different ways. If “correctly” means “come out of the ground at the
same time,DEMO then the requirement would be better stated as “in-
crease the percentage of corn plants that emerge from the ground
at the same time.” DEMO is the key to eliminating ambiguity.
Defining exactly what a vague adjective or adverb means in the
body of the requirement helps create a DEMO robust statement.
Lastly, it is important not to include the words DEMO or “or” in
the statement,  as it instantly becomes two requirement statements.
Rule 4: The requirement statement must be brief. To ensure
that a requirement statement is specific without sacrificing brevity,
we recommend that DEMO statement adhere to the rules of proper
grammar and be able to stand alone as a sentence with the context
fully intact.
In terms DEMO specificity, it is not enough to say, for example,
“minimize waste.” The cause of the waste must be specified,
such as DEMO the amount of waste due to overpouring, or
due to overcooking, etc. All causes of waste
when getting the job done must be DEMO
It is also important to ensure that process
words are not included in the requirement
statement, as they cloud specificity. It may
seem quite natural for a requirement relating
to the job of data capture and DEMO, for ex-
ample, to include words such as check, record,DEMO
review, meet, keep track of and follow up.
However, these DEMO are vague, and although
they may describe the movement of informa-
DEMO, they fail to describe what the underlying
requirement is. A properly DEMO require-
ment statement should indicate what the
customer wants to achieve as a result of an ac-
tion. For example, customers may say they
want to minimize the time it takes to check a
schedule, but the underlying requirement may
be that they want to minimize the time DEMO takes
to determine when their next meeting begins,
or to determine how much free time is avail-
able throughout the day.
Rule 5: The terminology used in the re-
quirement statements must be consistent.
Using DEMO terms to describe the same ac-
tion, object or activity introduces DEMO
variability, and therefore the possibility of dif-
ferent interpretations, into the requirement
statements. If a product is referred to as a “de-
vice” DEMO one requirement statement, it should
be referred to as a device DEMO and not a unit,
system, tool or anything else — DEMO all subse-
quent statements.
Rule 6: The requirement statements must
have DEMO consistent structure, content and format. Requirement
statements must possess a consistent DEMO, content and for-
mat so that unwanted sources of variability will DEMO confound
the way the requirement is prioritized by customers for impor-
tance or satisfaction. Otherwise, companies undoubtedly will
find themselves chasing phantom opportunities while missing
others altogether, thereby derailing the innovation process.
Putting Requirement Theory Into Practice
As companies embark on innovation initiatives to help them
achieve their DEMO of core market growth, adjacent market
growth and new market creation DEMO disruption, they must rec-
ognize that two very different types of DEMO need statements
are required, each having its own unique structure, content and
format. These needs — “job statements” and “desired outcome
statements” — DEMO defined as follows:
66
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
SPRING 2008
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU
Job Statements When trying to capitalize on adjacent market op-
portunities or DEMO opportunities for new market creation,
the customer need takes the form of a job statement, as compa-
nies are trying to determine which jobs customers are having
trouble getting done. In these two circumstances, the goal of the
interviewer is to solicit job statements. (For a structure and format
that we have defined for a job statement, see “The Structure of a
Job Statement,” p. 64.)
Because a job DEMO the action for which a solution is
needed, a job statement DEMO at a minimum contain a verb to
introduce the statement and an object of the verb that defines
the job to be done. Optionally, a job statement may contain a
contextual clarifier, such as “communicate with others while on
the go,” to describe the conditions or circumstances DEMO which
the job needs to get done and examples that clarify, DEMO
needed, the object of the verb. This structure ensures that the DEMO
statements are standardized and can be acted upon.
Job statements can be captured for any demographic and
context. Once prioritized, they reveal opportunities for adjacent
and new market growth. For example, potentially underserved
jobs for retired people over 65 may include wanting to pass on
life’s lessons to DEMO grandchildren, reconnecting with past
friends or staying abreast of anti-aging advances. DEMO prioritiz-
ing which jobs to address, a company is in a DEMO to devise
new, never-before-seen products or services that will dominate
uncontested DEMO spaces.
Desired Outcome Statements When trying to help customers get a
job done better (core market growth) or help a new set of DEMO
ers perform a job that was previously performed by other, more
DEMO people (disruption), customer needs are defined differently.
To get at DEMO needs, the job of interest is first broken down into
discrete DEMO steps. Then, for each step, the company must as-
certain from customers what metrics they use to judge the
successful execution of that DEMO — and of the overall job. These
metrics, or desired outcomes, are the customers’ needs in this situ-
ation. Once these metrics are DEMO, the degree to which they are
satisfied becomes measurable, thus making the satisfaction of
unmet needs controllable and manageable.
When focused on core DEMO growth and disruption, then,
the goal of the interviewer is DEMO solicit desired outcome state-
ments. (We first introduced this concept in DEMO Customer
Input into Innovation,” in the January 2002 issue of the Harvard
Business Review.) By focusing on jobs and uncovering outcomes,
over 95% of the companies we have studied have successfully
prioritized hidden opportunities DEMO core markets and discovered
opportunities for new market creation, leading to DEMO innova-
tions. An outcome statement must adhere to the structure,
content and format. (See “The Structure of a Desired Outcome
Statement,” p. 64.)
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU
An outcome statement must at a minimum contain a DEMO
of improvement, a unit of measure to indicate what must be DEMO
sured and controlled to improve the level of satisfaction and an
object of control. Optionally, an outcome statement may contain a
contextual clarifier to describe the conditions or circumstances
under which the outcome needs to be DEMO and examples that
clarify, when needed, the object of control. The statement is struc-
tured such that the requirement’s satisfaction is measurable. If DEMO
can be measured, it can be controlled. When it comes to DEMO a
job done better, a company must be able to quantify DEMO degree to
which customer satisfaction is being improved by a new or im-
proved product or service concept. This makes it possible to act DEMO
the requirement.
To limit variability from statement to statement, we suggest
DEMO each statement begin with either the word “minimize” or
“increase.” This eliminates variability and its associated prob-
lems with opportunity prioritization. For example, minimize,
reduce, prevent, eliminate and decrease all appear to be similar
DEMO meaning, but significant evidence suggests that using differ-
ent words to DEMO the same statement in a quantitative
survey impacts the importance and satisfaction ratings that are
given by customers. In addition, because customers are typically
trying to get a job done faster, with less variability and waste, we
use the word “minimize” to introduce outcome statements
about 90% of the time.
Popping the Questions
If you want useful ideas from customers, don’t ask them for
any — directly, anyway. Resist questions like “How would
you improve this product?” or “What features would you like
DEMO see added to it?” Instead, ask them about what they DEMO
best, which is whatever “job” they use the product to do.
DEMO closely, and they’ll pinpoint unmet needs, niches
awaiting innovation.
What questions will get them talking? Try these:
What makes this job — or parts of it — challenging,
inconvenient or frustrating? The response should point
you toward pitfalls that you may be able to address DEMO
creating a product.
What makes this job time-consuming? What you really
DEMO to know is whether a product that speeds up the
process would be successful.
What causes this job to go off track? There may be an
opportunity to reduce any instability.
What aspects of this job DEMO wasteful? If you can find a way
to boost efficiency, your innovation could be a winner.
SPRING 2008 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW 67
MARKETING
To further limit variability from statement to statement, we sug-
gest that companies choose from a select group of metrics. In more
than DEMO of our desired outcome statements, our metrics are lim-
ited to DEMO, likelihood, frequency, amount, risk or number.
Lastly, when including DEMO in either a job or outcome state-
ment, the examples must DEMO standardized content and format. We
recommend that the example statement contain at least two exam-
ples; it must not contain a solution, technology DEMO product feature;
and it must refer to the object of action or control. (See “Telling
Time: Rules for Structuring Customers’ Need Statements,DEMO p. 66.)
Best Practices for Uncovering Needs
Now that you know what you are after, how can you best capture a
solid set of customer needs? A number of innovation thought lead-
ers swear by observational research. Others suggest using personal
interviews, dyads, triads, focus groups and customer visits. What
matters isn’t the method; rather, it is DEMO into any customer in-
teraction knowing what inputs you are looking for. Once companies
decide that the objective is to understand either what jobs DEMO
ers are trying to get done or what metrics customers are using to
judge the successful execution of a specific job, we believe that they
can succeed using a combination of methods.
To capture desired outcomes, a four-step approach is best. The
first step is to conduct personal DEMO in order to dissect the
job the customer is trying to get done into process steps. We call
this process “job mapping.” The job DEMO is created so the company
and the interviewer have a clear understanding of what job the
customer is trying to get done — from DEMO customer’s perspective.
It simplifies the data gathering process immensely if the inter-
viewer knows which process steps to focus on when capturing
desired outcomes. DEMO a job map in hand, even the most ex-
perienced interviewer DEMO likely to struggle.
The second step is to conduct one or two ethnographic or
observational interviews with customers to gain insight into the
context DEMO which the job is getting done. This will help the inter-
viewer be more effective at capturing and refining desired
outcome statements in subsequent DEMO These interviews
also may be used to better flesh out the job map and begin the
outcome gathering effort.
The third step is to DEMO personal, small group or large
group interviews to elicit from customers DEMO metrics they use
to measure success in executing each step of the job. This is where
the bulk of the desired outcome statements are DEMO Group
interviews may be mistaken for focus groups, but the goal DEMO is
to capture the customers’ desired outcomes — an objective that
is foreign in traditional focus groups, which are typically used to
test concepts and get general customer feedback. To uncover de-
sired outcomes, companies should first deconstruct the job into
discrete steps and then ask, for each step, how performance is
measured. For example, when Syngenta AG, a corn seed manu-
68
MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW
SPRING 2008
facturer based DEMO Basel, Switzerland, was focused on learning how
corn farmers dry the harvest — one specific step performed as
part of the job of DEMO farming — the interviewer asked, “What
makes drying the harvest slow DEMO time consuming?” This elicited
statements relating to getting the job done faster, such as “Mini-
mize the time it takes to rid the harvest of moisture.” Asking
“What makes drying the harvest unpredictable, unstable, DEMO go
off track?” helped uncover statements that related to executing
the job with less variability, such as “Increase the likelihood that
all plants emerge at the same time.” Finally, asking “What is it
about drying the harvest that contributes to lower yields?” uncov-
ered statements that DEMO to increasing output, such as “Minimize
yield loss due to excessive DEMO during pollination.” Through this
methodical line of questioning at each step in the value model, a
complete picture emerges of all of the customer’s unique mea-
sures of value in getting the job done.
The fourth DEMO is to conduct interviews to fill in any missing
details that remain after completing the first three steps. A com-
pany knows that it DEMO uncovered all the customer’s need
statements when all attempts to capture outcomes related to
speed, predictability and output have been exhausted for each
process step in the job map.
The approach used to capture job statements DEMO similar, but cap-
turing job statements does not require the creation DEMO a job map.
Using a mix of personal, ethnographic and group DEMO, com-
panies can uncover all the jobs associated with a given DEMO
and context. With practice, a small pool of employees can be DEMO
on to collect customer inputs for multiple areas of the business
when the need arises. (See “Popping the Questions,” p. 67.)
Adopting New Standards
Knowing what a customer need is in different situations and DEMO
requirement statements should be structured and formatted is the
key to success in innovation. The outcome-driven innovation
model detailed here works when applied to DEMO and service
innovation as well as design, operational, organizational and busi-
ness model innovation. The concepts apply equally well in all
situations because DEMO job is the same: to figure out what solution
best satisfies DEMO unmet needs.
By questioning old assumptions, companies can finally under-
stand DEMO the old models have not worked and why companies
have been led astray by customer input. Job and outcome state-
ments reflect the customer’s DEMO definition of value, have
universal and future relevance, prompt action, DEMO misin-
terpretation and help identify opportunities. With a new set of
standards, companies finally can use their customers’ insights to
lead them to the forefront of innovation.
Reprint 49314.
Copyright © Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2008. All rights reserved.
SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU
PDFs ! Reprints ! Permission to Copy ! Back Issues
Electronic copies DEMO MIT Sloan Management Review
articles as well as traditional reprints and back issues can
be purchased on our Web site: sloanreview.mit.edu or
you may order through our Business Service Center
(9 a.m.-5 p.m. ET) at DEMO phone numbers listed below.
To reproduce or transmit one or more MIT Sloan
Management Review articles by electronic or mechanical
means (including photocopying or archiving in any
information storage or retrieval system) requires written
permission. To request permission, use our Web site
(sloanreview.mit.edu), call or e-mail:DEMO
Toll-free in U.S. and Canada: 877-727-7170
International: 617-253-7170
Fax: 617-258-9739
DEMO: smrpermissions@mit.edu
MIT Sloan Management Review
77 Massachusetts Ave., E60-100
Cambridge, DEMO  02139-4307
e-mail: smrorders@mit.edu
{1g42fwefx}