Organizational Research Methods
http://orm.sagepub.com
Using Experience Sampling Methodology to Advance DEMO Theory and
Research
Marilyn A. Uy, Maw-Der Foo and Herman Aguinis
DEMO Research Methods 2010; 13; 31 originally published online Aug 20, DEMO;
DOI: 10.1177/1094428109334977
The online version of this article can DEMO found at:
http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/13/1/31
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
The Research DEMO Division of The Academy of Management
Additional services and information for Organizational Research Methods can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://orm.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/DEMO
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/DEMO/13/1/31
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Using Experience Sampling
Methodology to Advance
Entrepreneurship Theory and
Research
Marilyn A. DEMO
University of Victoria
Maw-Der Foo
University of Colorado, Boulder
Herman Aguinis
DEMO University
The authors propose the use of experience sampling methodology (ESM) as an innovative
methodological approach to address critical questions in entrepreneurship research. DEMO
requires participants to provide reports of their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors at multiple
times across situations as they happen in the natural environment. DEMO, ESM allows
researchers to capture dynamic person-by-situation interactions as well as DEMO and
within-person processes, improve the ecological validity of results, and minimize
retrospective biases. The authors provide a step-by-step description of how to design DEMO
implement ESM studies beginning with research design and ending with data analysis,
and including issues of implementation such as time and resources needed, participant
recruitment and orientation, signaling procedures, and the use of computerized DEMO and
wireless technologies. The authors also describe a cell phone ESM protocol that enables
researchers to monitor and interact with participants in real time, reduces costs, expedites
data entry, and increases convenience. Finally, the authors discuss implications of ESM-
based research for entrepreneurs, business incubators, and DEMO educators.
Keywords: entrepreneurship research; experience sampling methodology; process-oriented
studies; wireless technologies
hane and Venkataraman (2000) defined the field of entrepreneurship as DEMO scholarly
S examination of how, by whom, and with what effects opportunities to create future
goods and services are discovered, evaluated, and DEMO (p. 218; cf. Venkataraman,
1997). In spite of the tremendous volume of empirical research that is generated in the field of
DEMO, there is a clear knowledge gap regarding process-oriented research to unravel
DEMO Note: We would like to thank Chuck Murnieks, Chuck Pierce, DEMO Leon Schjoedt for their constructive
comments on the earlier drafts of this manuscript. This research was conducted in part while Marilyn A. Uy was DEMO
doctoral candidate at the University of Colorado at Boulder, and Herman DEMO held the Mehalchin Term
Professorship in Management at the University of Colorado Denver. Correspondence concerning this article
should be addressed to Marilyn A. Uy, Faculty of Business, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 1700 STN CSC,DEMO
Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 272; e-mail: muy@uvic.ca.
31
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Organizational
Research Methods
Volume 13 Number 1
January 2010 31-54
# 2010 SAGE DEMO
10.1177/1094428109334977
http://orm.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
32 Organizational Research Methods
the ‘‘how’’ in entrepreneurship (Davidsson & Wiklund, DEMO; Low & MacMillan, 1988; Van de
Ven, 1992). Process-oriented studies are critical in moving the field forward because entrepre-
neurship is DEMO process that unfolds over time (Gartner, 1985; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000).
One reason for the dearth of process-oriented research in entrepreneurship DEMO clearly meth-
odological in nature. Notwithstanding the contributions of existing studies, DEMO used
methodological tools are not able to uncover dynamic processes because they investigate vari-
ables and relationships in a static manner. For example, one-time surveys do not fully address
questions about processes unfolding over time such DEMO ‘‘How do entrepreneurs identify, eval-
uate, and implement business opportunities?’’, ‘‘How do entrepreneurs cope with difficulties
in the venture creation process?’’, and ‘‘How do the entrepreneurs’ skills affect the process of
acquiring venture resources?’’ A concrete example of a process-oriented construct that is not
DEMO addressed by existing entrepreneurship research is affect (i.e., feelings and
moods). Baron (2008) suggested that affect influences whether and how entrepreneurs DEMO
nize opportunities and acquire resources for their ventures. This is because affect influences
information individuals attend to, how they process information, and their DEMO
Studying affect requires a methodological approach that can assess an entrepreneur’s affect
at many points in time rather than assume that affect remains constant.
DEMO gap in the entrepreneurship literature is the lack of empirical studies that exam-
ine within-individual relationships. The existing literature has advanced our understanding
of DEMO relationships where comparisons are made among entrepreneurs (cf.
Busenitz et al., 2003; Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001). For example, a fairly typical
between-group comparison involves contrasting groups of successful and less successful
entrepreneurs to DEMO an understanding of factors that differentiate members of one group
versus the other (e.g., Aguinis, Ansari, Jayasingam, & Aafaqi, 2008).
DEMO are at least two reasons why the examination of within-individual processes is crucial
in entrepreneurship. First, no two individuals share exactly the same information at the same
time and information about resources, technology, and changes DEMO the environment is dispersed
according to the idiosyncratic life circumstances of each individual (Venkataraman, 1997).
Hence, the decision to exploit an opportunity is made based on the entrepreneur’s payoffs
relative to that entrepreneur’s alternatives, not on the basis of payoffs to other entrepreneurs.
Second, the metric to evaluate entrepreneurial activity should not be relative to other entrepre-
neurs’ DEMO as in, for example, the field of strategic management, but DEMO comparing
performance assessments of that entrepreneur over time (Shane, 2003; DEMO, 1997).
Within-person variability is meaningful and substantial in the field DEMO entrepreneurship where
various processes and other dynamic constructs of interest such as effort and performance
exhibit changing patterns over time within the individual entrepreneur.
DEMO propose the use of experience sampling methodology (ESM) as a methodological
approach that allows for a longitudinal examination of the nature and causal DEMO
among the constructs investigated (cf. Stone-Romero & Rosopa, 2008). ESM, also known
as ecological momentary assessment, is an innovative methodological approach DEMO allows
research participants to provide reports of their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors at multiple
times across a range of situations as they occur DEMO the participants’ natural environment
(Larson & Csikszentmihalyi, 1983; Stone & DEMO, 1994). In this article, we argue that
entrepreneurship researchers will benefit from using ESM to conduct process-oriented
research and analyze both between- DEMO within-person variability.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 33
The next DEMO provides background information on ESM. We explain how scholars
can capitalize on ESM’s strengths to advance entrepreneurship theory, particularly given
its ability to capture dynamic person-by-situation interactions over time, its ecological
validity, its potential to DEMO both between- and within-person processes, and its ability
to reduce memory (i.e., retrospective) biases. Then, we recommend detailed, step-by-step
actions involved DEMO implementing ESM studies including participant recruitment and orien-
tation and the use of various devices to conduct ESM research. Furthermore, we introduce
an improved ESM protocol, which uses wireless technology capabilities available in cell
phones. This novel cell phone-based ESM allows researchers to interact with and monitor
participants DEMO real time, expedites data entry, reduces costs, and increases convenience. DEMO
short, in this article, we make the case for the need for ESM and the benefits associated with
its use. In addition, we provide a thorough description of how researchers can conduct an
ESM study DEMO suggest ways to make the ESM approach practically feasible, particularly
given DEMO payoff in terms of its ability to address questions of practical significance in
the entrepreneurship field (cf. Aguinis et al., in press).
DEMO
ESM is a methodological approach that allows researchers to gather detailed accounts of
people’s daily experiences over time and capture the ebb and flow DEMO these experiences as
they occur in situ (i.e., in the natural environment; Hormuth, 1986). The three types of ESM
protocols are (a) interval contingent, (b) event contingent, and (c) signal contingent (Reis &
Gable, 2000; Wheeler & Reis, 1991). In the interval-contingent protocol, participants
provide ESM responses at predetermined intervals (DEMO, every hour) or at the same time
daily. An example of this type of protocol is the study by Ilies and Judge (2002) in which
participants reported their mood and job satisfaction four times daily at fixed intervals for
19 working days. In the event-contingent protocol, participants respond only when the event
of interest takes place. For example, Cote and Moskowitz (1998) studied affect and inter-
personal behavior by requiring DEMO to monitor their social interactions and report on
features of their interactions for 20 consecutive days, that is, participants completed ESM
surveys immediately DEMO the occurrence of significant interpersonal interactions (those
lasting for at least DEMO min). In the signal-contingent protocol, participants are prompted to
respond DEMO a signaling device at randomly selected time points in the day. As an illustration,
Williams and Alliger (1994) examined mood spillover among DEMO parents by requiring
participants to complete the experience sampling forms when prompted by the sound of the
alarm watches eight times daily (randomly scheduled) for 7 days.
Researchers can select from the three protocols to conduct ESM studies in entrepreneur-
ship. Event-contingent ESM may be applicable for less DEMO occurring phenomena
such as opportunity discovery and evaluation. For example, researchers DEMO ask entrepre-
neurs to report on independent variables such as their interactions (e.g., frequency and
quality of interactions) and see how features of these encounters predict the types of busi-
ness opportunities they recognize. Either DEMO or signal-contingent ESM may
be used to examine the entrepreneurs’ day-to-day venture efforts and how these efforts
build up and influence their level of DEMO commitment and satisfaction. However, most
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
34 Organizational Research Methods
ESM studies are signal contingent (Hektner, Schmidt, & Csikszentmihalyi, 2007) because
this protocol allows for random sampling of DEMO broad variety of events and avoids the
systematic bias of fixed-time assessments and the expectancy effects associated with prior
knowledge of the sampling period (Alliger & Williams, 1993).
Scollon, Kim-Prieto, and Diener (2003) identified four major strengths of ESM. First,
ESM provides insights into DEMO multiple dynamic changes influence response outcomes;
second, it enhances the DEMO validity of the results; third, it allows researchers to
examine both within- and between-person processes; and, finally, it reduces memory
(i.e., retrospective) biases. Next, we describe each of these general strengths of DEMO and
link them to specific questions, research streams, and theories in entrepreneurship research.
ESM Captures Dynamic Person-by-Situation Interactions Over Time
Interaction effects are DEMO the heart of many scientific disciplines (Aguinis, 2004; Aguinis,
DEMO, Boik, & Pierce, 2005). A methodological strength of ESM DEMO its ability to capture the
dynamic interplay of within-individual and situational variables over time (Scollon et al.,
2003). Shane (2003) argued that ‘‘entrepreneurship can be explained by considering the
nexus of enterprising individuals DEMO valuable opportunities ... and by using that nexus
to understand the processes of discovery and exploitation of opportunities; the acquisition
of resources; entrepreneurial DEMO; and the organizing process’’ (p. 9). Given ESM’s
ability to capture the dynamic person-by-situation interaction, entrepreneurship researchers
can use it to address questions on the individual-opportunity nexus. ESM studies can
address questions including aspects DEMO the physical environment (e.g., venue, time), social
context (e.g., number and descriptions of interactions), thoughts, feelings, actions, and
DEMO self-appraisals (Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989; Fisher, 2000; Hektner
et DEMO, 2007). Key moments of interest such as the ‘‘aha’’ or DEMO experiences in
opportunity discovery can be matched with contextual variables such as the entrepreneur’s
location, time of day, and the people they were DEMO with at that particular moment.
Researchers can investigate whether these situational features interact with individual-level
variables (e.g., thoughts, feelings, actions) in influencing the types of opportunities that
entrepreneurs discover.
Entrepreneurial motivation is another domain DEMO incorporates person and situation
factors and potential interactions between them. Previous studies have asked entrepreneurs
to recall their goals to find out what predicts DEMO behavior (e.g., Kuratko,
Horsnby, & Naffziger, 1997). Such one-time assessment assumes that person-situation
factors that motivate entrepreneurs at the onset DEMO constant and influence all steps in
the entrepreneurial process equally. This assumption may be questionable because the
entrepreneurial process is dynamic and motivating factors DEMO the nascent stage could be dif-
ferent from other venture stages (DEMO, Locke, & Collins, 2003; Stanworth & Curran,
1973). With ESM, these concerns can be significantly reduced, if not circumvented,DEMO
because it allows researchers to track motivational influences at different stages of the
entrepreneurial process and how outcome variables such as changes in their DEMO goals
(dependent variables) are predicted by individual and situational factors, DEMO as their level
of optimism and entrepreneurial self-efficacy (independent variables).
DEMO from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, DEMO
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 35
ESM Enhances DEMO Validity
Ecological validity is the extent to which findings can be generalized to the naturally
occurring situations in which the phenomenon that is investigated DEMO place (Brunswick,
1949). Existing studies on how entrepreneurs make DEMO and evaluate opportunities are
often scenario based where participants evaluate cases or vignettes on the basis of the
information available for each hypothetical situation (e.g., Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Choi
& Shepherd, 2004; Keh, Foo, & Lim, 2002). Although scenarios provide respondents with
standardized stimuli, the stakes are not real and assumptions are often simplified; DEMO
might underestimate the risks involved, and the decisions made might not DEMO how entre-
preneurs actually make such decisions. In a related vein, DEMO studies that probe on investors’
decision-making processes use verbal protocol analysis, DEMO requires participants to ‘‘think
out loud’’ as they carry out a particular task as prompted by a hypothetical stimulus (e.g., Hall
& Hofer, 1993; Mason & Stark, 2004). The verbalizations of participants are DEMO recorded,
transcribed, and content analyzed through a coding scheme generated DEMO particular research
questions (Sarasvathy, Simon, & Lave, 1998). Notwithstanding the benefit of a much richer
understanding of the process of interest, which verbal protocols offer, the effect of artificiality
of the situation persists much like in scenario-based studies.
Researchers can use ESM to circumvent the DEMO of scenario-based studies and
examine entrepreneurs at the moment they discover or evaluate opportunities together with
factors that affected this discovery and evaluation. Furthermore, ESM can also capture
dynamic factors in cognition, which influence how entrepreneurs make decisions and how
they act (Baron, 2008; cf. Mitchell et al., 2002). These include the entrepreneurs’ temporal
focus (i.e., extent to which they think about the past, present, or future), DEMO perceived goal
progress, the degree to which they focus on maximizing DEMO or on avoiding losses, what
they attend to at a particular DEMO (e.g., whether they are thinking about customers’
needs, technological requirements, and new markets), and their emotional states at
that moment (Uy, 2009). All these cognitive factors can be examined as independent vari-
ables that could potentially affect the outcome of opportunity evaluation (whether the entre-
preneur evaluates the business idea favorably or otherwise and the likelihood DEMO the
entrepreneur implements the idea).
ESM Allows for an Examination of Between- and Within-Person Variability
ESM allows researchers to examine within-person variations (Beal & Weiss, 2003;
Scollon et al., 2003). Beal and DEMO (2003) underscored that within-person variability pro-
vides a more in-depth understanding of the processes linking the predictor and criterion
variables as within-person research DEMO rule out spurious third variable explanations and
coincident trends. Spurious variables are relatively stable variables that can be measured
at one point in time, such as personality factors, but they can also be a slice of a coincident
trend, such as satisfaction at one point in time (DEMO & Weiss, 2003).
More importantly, within-person processes provide insights beyond that of a between-
person approach. Relationships analyzed using within- and between-individual DEMO
can vary dramatically in both magnitude and direction (Tennen & Affleck, 1996) because
interindividual (between-person) and intraindividual (within-person) relationships are
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
36 Organizational Research Methods
independent. For example, although momentary exercise increases momentary heart rate
(within-individual), frequent exercises decrease chronic heart rate (across-individual)DEMO In
a study that required participants to engage in an analytic game, Vancouver, Thompson,
Tishner, and Putka (2002) found that across individuals, self-efficacy was positively related
to performance, but within individuals, self-efficacy was negatively related to performance
over time as high self-efficacy can lead DEMO errors because of overconfidence. Although
beyond the findings of Vancouver et al. (2002), there may be nonlinear effects of self-
efficacy on performance such that initial increases of self-efficacy improve performance,
but beyond a DEMO level, self-efficacy hurts performance. Such curvilinear effects can
be modeled using DEMO data.
Practically all empirical studies in entrepreneurship have examined between-person
variability instead of within-individual variability (e.g., Baron & Markman, 2003; Zhao,
DEMO, & Hills, 2005). Notwithstanding the contributions of studies that have focused
on between-person variability, an intraindividual approach is worth pursuing because of the
substantive insights we can obtain beyond those of interindividual studies. For DEMO, we
expect fear of failure (predictor variable) and the level DEMO entrepreneurial activity (outcome
variable) to be negatively related from a between-person analysis. With the high mortality
rate among new ventures, those who are more fearful or have greater fear of failure might be
less likely DEMO engage in entrepreneurial activities compared to the less fearful ones. How-
ever, fear might not reduce efforts if a within-individual approach is used as an entrepreneur
can increase venture efforts for fear of losing the venture. DEMO can also use ESM to
examine the entrepreneur’s emotional stability (a DEMO trait) and how this predicts
their day-to-day stress levels and psychological DEMO Between-person analysis
cannot control for all personality traits that account for the levels of the entrepreneur’s
well-being. ESM accommodates within-individual analysis, and differences in other
personality and attitudinal variables can be ruled out as explanatory factors DEMO they are
constant within each individual.
ESM Mitigates Memory (i.e., Retrospective) Biases
Data collected using traditional one-time surveys and/or interviews are based on people’s
summaries of their experiences and behaviors, which are prone to recall errors (Kraiger &
Aguinis, 2001; Stone, Shiffman, & DEMO, 1999). Traditional surveys that ask participants
to reflect on their DEMO behaviors or report on the nature and frequency of events generate data
whose precision is compromised, as remembering these experiences is a fairly challenging
memory recall task (Robinson & Clore, 2002). It has been DEMO that memory works best in
situations when retrieval happens in the same context (time and place) as when the experience
is being encoded DEMO the memory (Anderson, 1990; Rugg & Wilding, 2000). ESM minimizes the
memory biases found in traditional surveys because ESM allows researchers DEMO assess short-
lived processes, states, and events as they happen in real time (Beal & Weiss, 2003).
Entrepreneurs function in environments DEMO are usually unpredictable and ambiguous
(e.g., Lichtenstein, Dooley, & Lumpkin, 2006), which make it difficult for them to recall
and describe details of what researchers aim to understand from them. For example, Shane
(2000) conducted in-depth interviews and demonstrated that individuals discover opportu-
nities DEMO areas related to their prior knowledge. However, because participants’ responses in
DEMO from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, DEMO
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 37
interviews are DEMO on retrospection, they could have rationalized the discovery process
and fail DEMO include critical information about their experiences at that time the opportunity
was discovered. In yet another study, Baron and Ensley (2006) asked entrepreneurs to
describe the ideas on which their new ventures were based and DEMO these ideas were worth
pursuing. Despite the study’s contributions, because memory DEMO subject to considerable dis-
tortions and changes over time, asking participants DEMO recall events that happened in the past
are indirect evidence at best (Schacter, Norman, & Koutstaal, 1998).
Researchers that probe processes DEMO one-time questionnaires must be wary that entre-
preneurs may not distinguish among the actual event that occurred, from their personal
wishes, and from DEMO expectancies that could influence their reports. Asking entrepre-
neurs to summarize their experiences and behaviors might not accurately reflect the actual
course of events DEMO the entrepreneurial process. ESM can account for factors relevant to this
process before they are altered by self-reflection (Hektner et al., 2007), DEMO ESM achieves
this by assessing experiences as they unfold in situ (DEMO & Weiss, 2003).
Designing and Implementing ESM in Entrepreneurship Research
DEMO previous section explained many benefits that can be accrued by using ESM to
advance entrepreneurship theory and research. However, we candidly acknowledge that
ESM studies can entail a considerable amount of time, energy, and resources DEMO both
researchers and participants compared to more traditional methods (e.g., one-time survey
administered online). On the part of researchers, the high cost to implement these studies
could be seen as a major difficulty. On DEMO side of participants, they have to deal with the
burden of DEMO compliance imposed by this methodology, which can also be a practical
DEMO As is the case with any proposal including innovative and high-involvement
research design approaches (Grant & Wall, in press), implementation is a DEMO issue. We are
fully aware that researchers are not likely to use ESM, or any other innovative
methodological approach, in the absence of DEMO practical guidelines. Accordingly, in
this section, we discuss some of the major issues in designing and implementing ESM in
entrepreneurship research using cell DEMO technology. These include sample size and the
ESM survey, device and DEMO schedules, and participant recruitment and orientation
issues. Finally, we describe the resulting data structure and provide recommendations
regarding data analysis strategies. Figure 1 DEMO a flow chart summarizing the steps
involved in implementing an ESM study.
Our purpose is to stimulate scholars to generate their own research questions DEMO can be
examined using this methodology. We use the research question ‘‘How does the entrepre-
neur’s affect influence effort?’’ as a concrete example DEMO explain the logistics of implement-
ing an ESM study from designing the ESM survey to data analysis. Elaborating on the
theoretical foundations for this DEMO question is beyond the scope or purpose of our
methodological implementation description. It suffices to note that entrepreneurs who
experience negative affect should exert DEMO effort (Carver, 2003) because negative affect
signals that things are DEMO going well at the moment and something needs to be done to cor-
rect the situation. Studying affect requires a methodological approach that can DEMO an
entrepreneur’s state at many points in time rather than assume that affect remains constant.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO December 3, 2009
38 Organizational Research Methods
Figure 1
Steps in Conducting a Cell Phone DEMO Experience Sampling Methodology Study
Step 1
Determination of sample size and design
of the ESM measurement instrument
Step 2
Step 3
Development of the DEMO survey
and installation on cell phones
(cost of about $800 if DEMO programmer is needed)
Participant recruitment and orientation sessions
(about 2 DEMO; can administer
background information surveys)
Step 4
Data collection
Step DEMO
Step 6
Participant debriefing and distribution of
tokens of appreciation (about DEMO to $50 per person)
Data analysis
ESM allows the researcher to capture the impact of affect (independent variable) on the
entrepreneur’s effort (dependent variable).
Sample Size and the ESM Survey
Because of the DEMO of effort involved in the data collection process, most ESM stud-
DEMO have samples of participants that are considered modest in size by social science
research standards (Aguinis & Harden, 2009). Nonetheless, because participants are
required to respond at multiple times during the study, the total sample size (i.e., the total
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 39
number of DEMO points) is usually sufficient in statistical analyses that model within-individual
relationships. DEMO sampling involved in ESM studies pertains to sampling data from cases; DEMO
other words, gathering multiple reports on the experience of the same DEMO of participants over
the course of the study. For example, the DEMO of participants in the study by Ilies and
Judge (2002) was only 27, but they obtained a total of 1,907 ESM ratings of mood and job
satisfaction. Researchers can conduct a multilevel power analysis (Snijders & Bosker,
1999; see Scherbaum & Ferreter, 2009, for a detailed introduction) to determine the number
of participants and the frequency of responses required per participant, while bearing in mind
the level of response burden placed on the participants.
In designing the ESM survey, it is important to take into account the research question
being addressed and DEMO variables being examined. ESM surveys can capture internal and
external dimensions of the phenomenon of interest. For example, in studying the affect and
venture effort relationships over time, the ESM survey should have items that ask entrepre-
neurs to evaluate their affect at that particular moment and the DEMO to which they are
engaged in venture-related tasks. In addition, if DEMO are interested to know how
external factors might impact the affect–effort relationship, the ESM surveys can also ask
participants to provide information on elements of their current situation such as where they
are at that moment DEMO whether they are alone or with other people.
Given the nature of ESM studies, researchers have to strike a balance between obtaining
enough information and not overburdening participants. Typically, ESM surveys that can
be completed in 2 min or less are considered reasonable (Hektner et al., 2007)DEMO In the exam-
ple of affect and venture effort, the main DEMO in the ESM survey are affect and effort
assessments. The shortened Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS; Watson, Clark,
& Tellegen, DEMO) can be used to measure affect. Shortened versions are routinely used
DEMO ESM studies to ease participant burden (e.g., Song, Foo, & Uy, 2008; Zohar, Tzischinski,
& Epstein, 2003). Moreover, although not without controversy (e.g., Wanous & Hudy,
2001; Warren & Landis, 2007), the use of single-item scales is common in experience sam-
pling studies (e.g., Ong, Bergeman, Bisconti, & Wallace, 2006; Williams & Alliger, 1994)
because of the effort required of participants to respond to each survey item at multiple
times. In DEMO venture efforts, researchers can ask participants to report how much
effort DEMO put into venture tasks that are required immediately and how much effort they
put into venture tasks beyond what is immediately required. Both affect DEMO venture efforts
are captured using Likert-type measures (based on a 5-point DEMO), which do not impose
much difficulty for participants to comply and provide sufficient range to minimize detri-
mental effects of scale coarseness (Aguinis, Pierce, & Culpepper, in press). Figure 2 shows
sample screen shots as they appear on participants’ cell phones.
Scheduling and Signaling Devices
DEMO frequency and interval of the signals and the study duration depend on the research
goals. There are no clear-cut rules for setting intervals, and scholars should consider theory-
related and practical issues including the effect of DEMO on the variables measured, partici-
pant burden, and the type of statistical analyses to be used (Hektner et al., 2007). Signaling
DEMO are typically randomized within the day (Larson & Richards, 1994). Researchers
generate the ESM schedule by determining the participants’ waking hours and DEMO
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
40 Organizational Research Methods
Figure 2
Experience Sampling Methodology via Cell Phones: Sample Screenshots
time periods to prompt them to respond without being too DEMO For example, in exam-
ining the affective influences on venture efforts, an ESM schedule between 10 a.m. to
10 p.m. can be adopted DEMO we want to survey entrepreneurs during their typical work
hours. An ESM schedule that includes extremely late hours would be too intrusive even
though DEMO might work erratic hours.
The earliest ESM studies were conducted using paper and pencil in which participants
carry the questionnaire booklet and complete the DEMO questions at random intervals
as prompted by a portable electronic device such as beepers and programmable wrist
watches (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1987; Fisher, 2000, 2002; Marco & Suls,
1993—as a side DEMO, the third author, HA, of this article was one of DEMO participants in the
Marco & Suls, 1993 study, so we understand the burden placed on participants in a very
vivid and personal way)DEMO Such procedures have a number of limitations including the inabil-
ity to assess compliance accurately, difficulty in data management (i.e., encoding data by
hand introduces human error), and failure to rule out sampling bias DEMO there is no fool-
proof way to check the time gap between the random prompts and when the participant
actually responded (Feldman Barrett & Barrett, 2001). With technological advances,
researchers have opted for computerized ESMs such as the use of personal digital assistants
(PDAs) and DEMO computers or palmtops (e.g., Miner, Glomb, & Hulin, 2005) as well
as web-based ESM procedures, which require participants to go online and encode their
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO December 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 41
responses on DEMO researchers’ Web site (e.g., Judge & Ilies, 2004). These DEMO of compu-
terized ESMs have a number of advantages including precisely controlled signal timing,
objective compliance tracking, and reduced human error in data management (Feldman
Barrett & Barrett, 2001; Shiffman, 2000). Computerized DEMO also allow researchers to
obtain ancillary information such as the time gaps between the prompt and response which
could provide additional insights on the DEMO of interest.
Computerized ESM might be better than paper-and-pencil ESM because many entrepre-
neurs, especially those in business incubators, are familiar with portable DEMO gadgets
and the Internet. However, existing computerized ESM employing PDAs and DEMO
procedures have some limitations. Not all entrepreneurs have PDAs and researchers have
to purchase these expensive devices and lend them to the entrepreneurs. The DEMO
could also find it inconvenient to carry an extra device, and DEMO gadget might be left at
home. Web-based procedures where entrepreneurs log on to the researchers’ Web site to
provide their responses could pose some DEMO as entrepreneurs might not have access
to the Internet at all times. Although compliance can be objectively assessed for PDAs and
web-based procedures, researchers cannot perform real-time tracking of responses. More-
over, in both types of computerized ESM, researchers cannot interact with the entrepreneurs
immediately and resolve issues at the moment when they occur, and this could negatively
affect response rates.
ESM and Cell Phones
To overcome some of the limitations associated DEMO the devices described earlier, we
developed a cell phone based ESM. DEMO phones have wireless application protocol (WAP)
features allowing researchers to DEMO survey items (usually as an application programmed
in Java) on the cell phones (Song et al., 2008; Vos & de Klein, DEMO). The use of cell phones
in entrepreneurship ESM studies has all the advantages of computerized ESM mentioned
earlier and addresses the challenges attached DEMO the use of PDAs and web-based procedures.
For one, practically every DEMO owns a cell phone and they rely on their cell phones
as part of their day-to-day functioning. Thus, in terms of familiarity and ease of use, cell
phones clearly prevail over PDAs.
With cell phones, DEMO responses are immediately transmitted, which allow
researchers to track participant compliance DEMO real-time. Moreover, this technology allows
for real-time interactive contact with entrepreneurs. DEMO example, researchers can person-
ally call the participants to get feedback DEMO resolve compliance issues. If the entrepreneur
accidentally deletes the survey application, DEMO participant can inform the researcher imme-
diately, and the latter can DEMO a new application at once (using WAP), which could help
DEMO response rates. Such interactive features may not be available in PDA and web-based
procedures. In addition, the wireless networking feature in cell phones simplifies the
researchers’ task because responses can be directly transmitted into a researcher’s DEMO
puter, unlike in PDAs where entrepreneurs have to bring the gadgets DEMO the researcher’s
office for data transfers (i.e., uploading or ‘‘hot syncing’’ the data; Feldman Barrett &
Barrett, 2001). Table 1 summarizes the advantages of using cell phones in ESM in relation-
ship to DEMO computerized ESMs (PDAs and web-based platforms).
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Table 1
Comparison Among Computerized ESM Devices: PDA, Web-Based Assessment, and Cell Phones
PDAs Web-Based Cell Phones
Accessibility and
convenience
Cost Fair: if researchers have to purchase them and
lend to the entrepreneur, each gadget costs
about US$100
Objective compliance Limited: allows for recording of precise time
tracking when participants responded, but usually
cannot accommodate ‘‘real-time tracking’’ of
responses and ‘‘immediate’’ interaction with
participants
Data management Good: allows direct transfer of data from the
device to the master computer without the
need for DEMO encoding. But gadgets have to
be brought to the researchers’ office for ‘‘hot
syncing’’ or data synchronization
Limited: not all entrepreneurs own PDAs Limited: entrepreneurs do not have access to the
Internet all the time
Superior: most entrepreneurs have computers
and Internet subscriptions
Limited: allows for recording DEMO precise time
when participants responded, but usually
cannot accommodate real-time tracking DEMO
responses and immediate interaction with
participants
Superior: allows direct transfer of DEMO from the
device to the master computer in real time
without human encoding
Superior: practically considered a necessity by
entrepreneurs; part of their DEMO functioning
Superior: most entrepreneurs own cell phones
Superior: accommodate real-time tracking of
responses and immediate interaction with
participants. Participants can call or send DEMO
to the researchers and the researchers can
immediately address the concerns of the
participants; can boost response rates
Superior: allows direct transfer of DEMO from the
device to the master computer in real time
without human encoding
Note: PDAs refer to nonphone PDAs. Smartphones or PDAs with phone features are classified under cell phones rather than PDAs. ESM ¼ experience DEMO methodol-
ogy; PDA ¼ personal digital assistants; SMS ¼ short message service.
42
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 43
In ESM DEMO cell phones, researchers can prompt entrepreneurs to complete the survey by
DEMO a text reminder (these reminders are prescheduled by the researchers; Song et al.,
2008), and entrepreneurs respond by opening the survey DEMO in their cell phones, com-
pleting the survey, and sending the completed survey to a telephone number, which receives
all the responses (DEMO number’’). Their answers are received by the researcher’s com-
puter as a text message or short message service (SMS). Technical details of using cell phones
in ESM are outlined in Appendix. A challenge of DEMO cell phones involves phone compat-
ibility because each phone model has a unique application programming interface (API), and
there can be instances when the survey application cannot be launched on the entrepreneur’s
phone (Chu, DEMO, Wong, Kurakake, & Katagiri, 2004). Fortunately, this problem DEMO be
resolved by adjusting the API to fit a particular phone model, and based on our experience,
this is a relatively simple programming task, which can be handled by a knowledgeable com-
puter programmer. There are other issues such as the cell phone network traffic, which can
cause delays and even loss of information in the course of sending DEMO receiving SMSs, but
these are not within the control of the DEMO Nonetheless, telecommunication compa-
nies have to adhere to strict service quality DEMO, and therefore, the downside of con-
gested network traffics are experienced rather infrequently.
Participant Recruitment and Orientation
Recruiting entrepreneurs to participate in ESM DEMO can be a challenging task because
of the considerable effort required of participants. An ideal situation to conduct ESM stud-
ies is one in DEMO researchers have access to a captive audience. To examine the affective
influences in venture efforts among start-up entrepreneurs, researchers can recruit partici-
pants in business incubators. Because these entrepreneurs are housed in one location, it is
easier for researchers to interact with them and in the process earn DEMO trust, confidence,
and subsequently increase response rates (Uy, 2009)DEMO In our experience, many of the
incubators are high-tech business incubators DEMO accommodate high-tech start-up entrepre-
neurs who are familiar with electronic gadgets (DEMO, cell phones). Although it is not always
possible to get DEMO group of entrepreneurs housed in one location, the key issue is DEMO recruit
entrepreneurs who are motivated to participate in the study. One such example is to recruit
entrepreneurs affiliated with entrepreneurship centers of universities and DEMO institu-
tions, as well as participants of business plan competitions. These DEMO value
entrepreneurship in an academic environment and might be more willing to be research
participants. This approach of recruiting entrepreneurs has its drawbacks as DEMO results may
not be generalized to the population of entrepreneurs. Nonetheless, DEMO entrepreneurs
provide a good starting point to understand process and within-individual issues in entrepre-
neurship. Moreover, our illustration is designed so that a single researcher with limited time
and monetary resources can conduct the research. A DEMO team with greater resources
may be able to conduct ESM on a random sample of entrepreneurs.
Prospective participants might be apprehensive of the inconvenience DEMO ESM proce-
dures inflict and the seemingly intrusive nature of the protocols (Hektner et al., 2007).
Researchers can overcome these potential difficulties DEMO the orientation. Researchers
should clarify the research goals, orient participants about DEMO mechanics and duration of the
study, and teach them how to DEMO the ESM surveys. In addition, researchers should
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
44 Organizational Research Methods
handle the orientation professionally but with a tinge DEMO personal touch to make the entre-
preneurs feel that their participation constitutes an integral part of the research endeavor. It
is also critical for DEMO to be personally available for logistical and technical assis-
tance in the course of the study, and to provide verbal encouragement and support consis-
tently throughout the study (e.g., Alliger & Williams, 1993; Larson & Csikszentmihalyi,
1983). Doing so will motivate participants to remain engaged until the end of the study,
boost response rates, and ensure data quality. Past ESM studies provide evidence that
recruiting busy people such DEMO working parents with children (e.g., Williams & Alliger,
1994) DEMO hospital residents (e.g., Zohar et al., 2003) is possible as long as researchers are
diligent in establishing good relationships with their respective DEMO
Using the cell phone-based ESM to study the affect and venture effort relationship would
require the researcher to assist participants in installing the ESM DEMO in their respective
phones (please refer to Appendix for the installation DEMO). The researcher must
explain every item in the ESM survey to prevent any confusion or misinterpretation. Parti-
cipants are instructed to download and DEMO the ESM survey in their phones and not to
delete it until the end of the study. Moreover, the researcher can also administer background
information surveys in the orientation by asking participants to provide demographic and
DEMO information, which can be incorporated in the data analysis. For example,DEMO
in the entrepreneurial affect–effort study, dispositional factors and venture information can
DEMO measured during the orientation before the start of the ESM study. It is also important to
conduct a debriefing at the end of the DEMO and ask participants about the overall experi-
ence of completing the ESM study—whether they had compliance difficulty or whether
they found the whole procedure DEMO be too disruptive. Pilot tests and well-conducted orienta-
tion sessions can minimize unpleasant participant feedback in the debriefing.
Although the steps listed above may DEMO logistically overwhelming at first glance,
the resources needed in conducting ESM studies are actually reasonable. The researcher
will need to dedicate about 2 DEMO for recruitment and orientation, and the next 2 weeks
will involve DEMO the study and closely monitoring the participants’ compliance. It
is important for the researcher to be constantly available to assist participants and address
their DEMO for the whole 4 weeks to ensure smooth implementation and compliance with
the research protocol. In terms of budget, the main costs include the development of the
ESM survey and the tokens of appreciation for the DEMO We obtained a quote of
US$800 from a company to program the ESM survey in a form that can be installed in the
participants’ DEMO phones. Given the 50–60 participants typical in ESM studies, and an DEMO
age of US$40–50 per participant as a token of appreciation, the DEMO cost including survey
development is about US$3,000–4,000.
Data Structure and Analysis
The process of data collection using cell phone ESM is extremely DEMO because
researchers can automatically transfer the ESM data to the statistical package without the
need for manual encoding. In addition, because all reminders and responses include date
and time stamps, researchers can determine which responses are valid. For example, con-
sistent with other ESM studies (e.g., Judge & Ilies, 2004), a 2-hr window can be a
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 45
Table 2
DEMO Example of Stacked ESM Data and Examples of
Statistical Commands
Participant Reminder Response Social
ID # Date Sent Received Affect1 Affect2 Effort Interactions
1 DEMO 1,
2009
1 August 1,
2009
1 August 2,
2009
1 August 2,
2009
2 August 1,
2009
2 DEMO 1,
2009
2 August 2,
2009
2 August 2,
2009
3 August 1,
2009
3 August 1,
2009
Note: To analyze the influence of affect on effort, the following xtmixed command can be used in Stata 9:
xtmixed effort affect | | DEMO To analyze the moderating effect of prior experience on affect and effort,
the following command can be used: xtmixed effort affect experience affectXexperience | | participantID. For
detailed information on fixed and random options and DEMO mixed model commands available in Stata 9, please
see Rabe-Hesketh and DEMO (2005). ID ¼ identification.
Prior
Experience
10:00 a.m. 10:DEMO a.m. 2 3 4 2 2
7:45 p.m. 7:55 p.m. 3 2 3 1 2
11:15 a.m. 11:30 a.m. 3 DEMO 3 3 2
6:20 p.m. 6:46 p.m. 2 5 3 0 2
10:50 a.m. 11:03 a.m. 4 3 2 2 DEMO
8:03 p.m. 8:24 p.m. 5 5 4 1 1
10:03 a.m. 10:40 a.m. 5 4 5 1 1
4:55 DEMO 5:13 p.m. 4 3 3 0 1
11:07 a.m. 11:38 a.m. 3 3 3 3 0
5:28 p.m. 6:01 DEMO 2 1 4 2 0
reasonable time frame such that responses received beyond 2 hr after the signal or text
prompt has been sent DEMO considered invalid.
For our example on affect predicting venture effort, we DEMO have two sets of data. The
first set is the response-level data (or Level 1 data), which include affect and venture efforts
assessed via cell phone based ESM. The second set consists of person-level data (or Level 2
data) such as gender, ethnicity/race, age, DEMO of business venture, and other disposi-
tional factors obtained from the DEMO information survey administered in the orien-
tation. The two sets can be merged by means of a unique identifier, which in most cases is
the participant’s identification (ID) number. The ESM data structure is stacked DEMO that
multiple observations for each participant are stacked on top of one another. Therefore,
each ESM response occupies one data row, and the number of data rows for each participant
equals to the number of DEMO responses for that participant. Table 2 illustrates how the
stacked data structure might look like.
Given the hierarchical structure of the ESM data with DEMO responses nested within
individuals, multilevel modeling is an appropriate statistical methodology DEMO analyze the
data (Bliese, Chan, & Ployhart, 2007; Klein & Kozlowski, 2000). Multilevel modeling
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
46 Organizational Research Methods
takes into account the correlated structure of the DEMO as multiple reports are obtained from
the same person over the course of the ESM study (Walls & Schafer, 2006). It is DEMO
equipped to handle nested data with unequal number of observations across individuals
as well as irregular intervals between observations (Nezlek, 2001). A DEMO of statistical
programs (e.g., HLM, Mplus, SAS, SPSS, Stata) have multilevel modeling features that can
be used to analyze ESM data. A situational factor that might influence the affect–effort
relationship among entrepreneurs is DEMO experience. Prior experience might weaken the
relationship between affect and effort because the entrepreneur can draw from past experi-
ences to determine the amount DEMO required effort and dilute the informational content of
affect (Forgas, 1995). In Table 2, we include some examples of commands in Stata 9 that
can be used in conducting the analyses. Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal (2005) provide detailed
information regarding these commands and other multilevel modeling procedures in Stata.
Moreover, because ESM accommodates temporal order, researchers can incorporate
DEMO effects to test the directionality of the relationships. Using the example on affect and
venture effort, researchers can test whether affect predicts subsequent venture effort.
Researchers can also test whether venture effort influences the entrepreneur’s affect DEMO
following day. Although ESM data can be used to test temporal effects, researchers must
exercise caution in inferring causality (Beal & Weiss, 2003) because temporal sequencing
is a necessary but not sufficient condition, and DEMO can only be inferred if one can rule
out other possible alternative explanations.
The steps involved in implementing ESM as summarized in Figure 1 DEMO to our specific
example. These steps can be applied more broadly to other questions in entrepreneurship
research. For example, for the question of how the entrepreneurs’ social interaction fre-
quency predicts venture sales, similar steps as shown in Figure 1 can be used, except that
this can be an event-contingent ESM in which entrepreneurs complete the ESM survey
immediately after DEMO significant social interaction occurs (e.g., meeting with investors, sup-
pliers)DEMO Just like our illustrative example, direct and reverse relationships can be DEMO to
ascertain the directionality of the relationships of these dynamic variables, DEMO different
lagged outcomes can be modeled in the analysis to examine the stability of the effects.
Discussion
A large body of literature in entrepreneurship DEMO emphasizes the importance of the
entrepreneur ‘‘in whose mind all of the possibilities come together, who believes that innova-
tion is possible, and DEMO has the motivation to persist until the job is done’’ (Shaver & Scott,
1991, p. 39). The entrepreneurship field needs more DEMO empirical studies that assess
how entrepreneurs discover, evaluate, and implement business ideas (Shane &
Venkataraman, 2000). However, important phenomena in DEMO research cannot
be adequately examined if we continue to use traditional methodologies, particularly cross-
sectional designs including one-time data collection via surveys and/or interviews.
Moreover, important advances in data analytic approaches (Dean, Shook, & Payne, 2007)
cannot overcome design and measurement limitations inherent in DEMO data sets. In fact,
Aguinis, Pierce, Bosco, and Muslin (2009) reported that more than half of the authors of the
25 most frequently cited articles published in Academy of Management Review from 1987 DEMO
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 47
2007 indicated DEMO innovations in research design, rather than data analysis, are needed to
make important theory-based advancements in the organizational sciences.
ESM can address research DEMO that probe into how entrepreneurs think and feel,
and what motivates them as they are experienced in situ. In exploring how entrepreneurs
think, for example, researchers want to know why, when, and how entrepreneurs decide
favorably on the opportunities they discover because not all discovered opportunities DEMO
implemented. To examine this phenomenon, it would be necessary to account DEMO possible
predictors of opportunity discovery such as the content of the entrepreneur’s thought, (i.e.,
their object of focus, which might include information on the technology, the customer),
their temporal focus, how new information is incorporated with prior knowledge, and how
changes in these cognitive factors over time affect venture-relevant decisions. Moreover,
because affect plays a DEMO role in how information is selected and interpreted (Isen
& Labroo, 2003; Mellers, 2000; Wegener & Petty, 1994), entrepreneurial affect DEMO be
critical in venture decisions (Baron, 2008). Affective influences are salient to entrepre-
neurs as they have to cope with stress brought DEMO by the ambiguity and complexity
of the entrepreneurial environment (Aldrich & DEMO, 2001). ESM can track affective
experiences of entrepreneurs as they DEMO, and changes in entrepreneurial affect and
their impact on venture efforts DEMO be modeled using ESM data. Lastly, factors relevant
to entrepreneurial motivation DEMO as passion and drive are not static. These motivational
factors vary at each stage of the venture process and continue to change as the DEMO
neur transitions from the nascent stage to the start-up and on to the growth phase (Shane
et al., 2003). Using ESM, scholars can examine issues such as entrepreneurial passion
(Cardon, Wincent, Singh, & Drnovsek, in press; Cardon, Zietsma, Saparito, Matherne,
& DEMO, 2005) in situ to improve our understanding of these processes and consequently
advance entrepreneurship theory.
ESM can be adopted to explore other important DEMO in entrepreneurship research.
For example, the work-family interface is highly salient DEMO entrepreneurs because achiev-
ing a balance between work and family is one of the factors that motivate individuals to start
their own businesses (Boden, 1999; DeMartino & Barbato, 2003). ESM can be used to test
theoretical frameworks in entrepreneurship that incorporate work and family considerations
(e.g., Jennings & McDougald, 2007). ESM studies can be designed to DEMO independent
variables such as how changes in the entrepreneurs’ work-family experiences and attitudes
(such as work and family satisfaction) influence outcomes such as DEMO strategies and
psychological well-being. These dynamic data can be further analyzed alongside data
collected from one-time initial surveys on their work and family orientation, family
background (e.g., number of children, socioeconomic status), and secondary data on the
financial performance of the venture. ESM can also be DEMO to examine how entrepreneurs
cope with business failures. Researchers can use ESM to track what happens after the entre-
preneur’s business venture folds up, how various emotional reactions predict the way they
cope with business failure, how they bounce back and learn from this experience—whether
they start a DEMO venture immediately or take a hiatus from activities related to new venture
creation.
Importantly, ESM can be used together with other methods (Scollon DEMO al., 2003), such
as one-time and multiple-wave surveys. For example, researchers can examine how stress
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
48 Organizational Research Methods
(a dynamic predictor) together with the entrepreneurs’ DEMO (stable predictors
as they do not change during the ESM study) influences an entrepreneurs’ well-being (a
dynamic outcome variable). Characteristics collected using traditional surveys include the
entrepreneurs’ motives for starting a business, and the extent to which they believe they can
achieve certain milestones in their DEMO ventures, such as attracting customers, hiring
new employees, and enticing DEMO investors (cf. Panel Study of Entrepreneurial
Dynamics or PSED survey, Reynolds, 2000). In this particular example, entrepreneurs who
believe they can DEMO their milestones may cope with stress more effectively and report bet-
ter well-being. Information on the person and situation variables can be gathered not DEMO
from the entrepreneur but also from other people such as members of the entrepreneurial
team, venture capitalists, customers, suppliers, and family members. DEMO can also be used
to augment similar repeated measures studies such as paper-and-pencil diary studies (cf.
Bolger, Davis, & Rafaeli, 2003 for DEMO review of the use of diary studies), repeated interviews
(e.g., Delmar & Wiklund, 2008), as well as experiments and verbal protocols (e.g., Brundin,
Patzelt, & Shepherd, 2008).
ESM has DEMO to contribute to the advancement of entrepreneurship theory and can
also offer insights into entrepreneurship practice. For example, the rich quality of ESM data
can inform us regarding which dynamic elements attributed to the individual and DEMO
matter in the opportunity recognition process. Being aware of this process is important not
just for aspiring entrepreneurs but also for incumbents. For example, if ESM studies reveal
that positive affect facilitates opportunity discovery, entrepreneurs can engage in activities
to experience more positive affect. Knowledge gained from ESM DEMO can also benefit
entrepreneurship educators, directors, and executive teams of entrepreneurship centers, as
well as business incubator heads to design interventions and activities that promote sound
entrepreneurship practice. For instance, we can use ESM to track entrepreneurs in business
incubators to understand the processes that entrepreneurs go DEMO and their needs and
concerns while in the incubation program. Entrepreneurship educators can incorporate find-
ings about how entrepreneurs deal with various issues, such as stress, over time, in their
entrepreneurship classes.
We acknowledge several DEMO issues that make ESM a challenging methodol-
ogy to use, such DEMO the high level of commitment it requires of the participants and the
amount of resources needed by the researchers. Because ESM is a time DEMO resource inten-
sive methodology, we suggest practical steps on how these DEMO can be addressed.
Although acknowledging that ESM is not without drawbacks, DEMO encourage entrepreneur-
ship scholars to expand on their methodological toolkit by considering ESM and to take
advantage of cell phones and wireless network technologies.
DEMO closing, our goals are to demonstrate that ESM can be used DEMO advance entrepreneurship
theory and research by capitalizing on its methodological strengths, DEMO to recommend ways
to overcome the challenges of implementing ESM in entrepreneurship research. As noted by
Brundin, ‘‘The use of real-time process studies represents one way to capture entrepreneurial
activities as they happen and be able DEMO uncover the more intangible, yet very important,
issues in the DEMO life of the entrepreneur’’ (2007, p. 279). Indeed, ESM DEMO such
real-time process studies that allow researchers to gather data that capture processes and
dynamic person-by-situation interactions over time in a unique and valuable DEMO
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 49
Appendix
Technical DEMO on Conducting Cell Phone ESM Studies in
Entrepreneurship
Researchers who are interested in implementing ESM using cell phones may need to hire a knowl-
DEMO computer programmer who can program the survey in Java language and upload it to a Web
site that will serve as the host site DEMO the study. Researchers also need to secure a cell phone sub-
scriber identity module (SIM) card (i.e., the memory chip used to DEMO the cell phone), which will
serve as the ‘‘system number’’ for the study. The system number will be the main contact number of
DEMO researchers which participants can access anytime during the course of the study. The SIM card
will be placed in a modem that will be DEMO to the researchers’ computer where the main soft-
ware is installed. The programmer should be able to develop a program that would send and DEMO
text messages or short message service (SMS), and this program DEMO be linked to the system number
that will be used to interact with the participants and collate all their responses in a master database.
DEMO program should allow researchers to preset the schedules of when participants receive the SMS
alerts for the duration of the study.
To install the DEMO application into the cell phones, participants must first activate the General
DEMO Radio Service (GPRS) feature of their cell phones. Most cell phone models have a GPRS
feature albeit not automatically activated. Activation is free DEMO charge and is usually done through
the mobile service providers. Once the cell phone is GPRS-ready, the researchers can send the sur-
vey application by sending a wireless applicationprotocol(WAP) pushtothe participants’cell
phones. A WAP push is an encoded message that includes a link to the address where DEMO survey
is hosted. When the participants receive the WAP push, they DEMO access the link and download the
survey application into their cell phones. Alternatively, if the participant’s cell phones have the
integrated Bluetooth feature, DEMO will have a much easier way of embedding the survey
application into the participants’ cell phones. To do this, participants must first switch on the Blue-
tooth feature of their cell phones, and then the researcher activates the Bluetooth of the master
computer and identifies the cell phones DEMO the participants as the target destination of the survey
application.
Once the participants have successfully downloaded and saved the survey application into their
respective DEMO phones, the ESM survey can begin. Participants are prompted to complete DEMO cell
phone survey by the SMS reminder sent through the master computer. They open the application and
complete the survey using their cell phones. DEMO the end of the survey, a question will appear on the
DEMO asking if responses are ready to be sent to the system number. Participants must click yes and
their responses will be sent to the DEMO computer in a form of an SMS. The following diagram
(Figure DEMO) displays the architecture of the ESM via cell phone study process:DEMO
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
50 Organizational Research Methods
Figure A1
ESM via Cell Phone WAP Survey DEMO
References
Aguinis, H. (2004). Regression analysis for categorical moderators. New York: Guilford.
Aguinis, H., Ansari, M. A., Jayasingam, S., & Aafaqi, R. (2008). Perceived entrepreneurial success and social
power. DEMO Research, 6, 121-137.
Aguinis, H., Beaty, J. C., Boik, R. J., & Pierce, C. A. (2005). Effect size DEMO power in assessing moderating
effects of categorical variables using multiple regression: DEMO 30-year review. Journal of Applied Psychology,
90, 94-107.
Aguinis, H., & Harden, E. E. (2009). Sample size rules of thumb: Evaluating three common practices. In
C. E. Lance & R. J. Vandenberg (Eds.), Statistical and methodological myths and urban legends: Received
doctrine, verity, and fable in the organizational and social sciences (pp. 269-288)DEMO New York: Routledge.
Aguinis, H., Pierce, C. A., Bosco, F. A., & Muslin, I. S. (2009). First decade of Organizational Research
Methods: Trends in design, measurement, and data analysis-topics. Organizational Research Methods,
12, 69-112.
Aguinis, H., Pierce, C. A., & Culpepper, S. A. (in press). Scale coarseness as a DEMO artifact:
Correcting correlation coefficients attenuated from using coarse scales. Organizational Research Methods.
Aguinis, H., Werner, S., Abbott, J. L., Angert, C., Park, J. H., & Kohlhausen, D. (in press). Customer-centric
science: Reporting research results with rigor, relevance, and practical impact in mind. Organizational
Research Methods.
Aldrich, H. A., & Martinez, M. A. (2001). Many are called, but few are chosen: An evolutionary perspective for
the study of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25, 41-56.
Alliger, G. M., & Williams, K. J. (1993). Using signal-contingent experience sampling methodology to study
work in the field: A discussion and illustration examining task perceptions and mood. Personnel Psychology,
46, 525-549.
Anderson, J. R. (1990). Cognitive psychology and its implications. DEMO York: Freeman.
Baron, R. A. (2008). The role of DEMO in the entrepreneurial process. Academy of Management Review, 33,
328-340.
DEMO, R. A., & Ensley, M. D. (2006). Opportunity recognition as the detection of meaningful patterns: Evi-
dence from comparisons of novice and experienced entrepreneurs. Management Science, 52, 1331-1344.
Baron, R. A., & Markman, G. D. (2003). Beyond social capital: The role DEMO entrepreneurs’ social competence in
their financial success. Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 41-60.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 51
Beal, D. J., & Weiss, H. M. (2003). Methods of ecological momentary assessment in organizational research.
Organizational Research Methods, 6, 440-464.
Bliese, P. D., Chan, D., & Ployhart, R. E. (2007). Multilevel methods: Future directions in measurement, long-
itudinal analyses, and nonnormal outcomes. Organizational Research Methods, 10, 551-563.
Boden, R. J. (1999). DEMO on women business owners: Past trends, a new perspective and future directions.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 16, 5-30.
Bolger, N., Davis, A., & Rafaeli, E. (2003). Diary methods: Capturing life DEMO it is lived. Annual Review of
Psychology, 54, 579-616.
Brundin, DEMO (2007). Catching it as it happens. In H. Neergaard & DEMO P. Ulhoi (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative
research methods in entrepreneurship (pp. 279-307). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Brundin, E., Patzelt, H., & Shepherd, D. A. (2008). Managers’ emotional displays and employees’ willingness to
act entrepreneurially. Journal of Business Venturing, 23, 221-243.
DEMO, E. (1949). Systematic and representative design of psychological experiments. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. DEMO (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organiza-
tions: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, DEMO
Busenitz, L. W., West, G. P., Shepherd, D., Nelson, T., Chandler, G. N., & Zacharakis, A. (2003). DEMO
ship research in emergence: Past trends and future directions. Journal of DEMO, 29, 285-308.
Cardon, M. S., Wincent, J., Singh, DEMO, & Drnovsek, M. (in press). The nature and experience DEMO entrepreneurial
passion. Academy of Management Review.
Cardon, M. S., Zietsma, DEMO, Saparito, P., Matherne, B. P., & Davis, C. (DEMO). A tale of passion: New insights
into entrepreneurship from a DEMO metaphor. Journal of Business Venturing, 20, 23-45.
Carver, C. S. (2003). Pleasure as a sign you can attend to something else: Placing positive feelings within a
general model of affect. Cognition and Emotion, 17, 241-261.
Choi, R. Y., & Shepherd, D. A. (2004). Entrepreneurs’ decision to exploit opportunities. Journal of Manage-
ment, 30, DEMO
Chu, H., Song, H., Wong, C., Kurakake, S., & Katagiri, M. (2004). Roam, a seemless application framework.
Journal of Systems and Software, 69, 209-226.
Cote, S., & Moskowitz, D. S. (1998). On the dynamic covariation between interpersonal behavior and affect:
Prediction from neuroticism, extraversion, and agreeableness. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology,
75, 1032-1046.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. W. (1987). Validity and reliability of the experience sampling method.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 526-536.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & DEMO, J. (1989). Optimal experience in work and leisure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 56, 815-822.
Davidsson, P., & Wiklund, J. (2001). Levels of analysis in entrepreneurship research: Current research DEMO
and suggestions for the future. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25, 81-99.
Dean, M. A., Shook, C. L., & Payne, G. T. (2007). The past, present, and future of entrepreneurship research:
Data analytic trends and training. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 31, 601-618.
DEMO, F., & Wiklund, J. (2008). The effect of small business managers’ growth motivation on firm growth: A
longitudinal study. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32, 437-457.
DeMartino, R., & Barbato, R. (DEMO). Differences between women and men MBA entrepreneurs: Exploring
family flexibility DEMO wealth creation as career motivators. Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 815-832.
Feldman Barrett, L., & Barrett, D. J. (2001). An DEMO to computerized experience sampling in psychol-
ogy. Social Science Computer Review, DEMO, 175-185.
Fisher, C. D. (2000). Mood and emotions while DEMO: missing pieces of job satisfaction? Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 21, 185-202.
Fisher, C. D. (2002). Antecedents and consequences of real-time DEMO reactions at work. Motivation and
Emotion, 26, 3-30.
Forgas, J. DEMO (1995). Mood and judgment: The affect infusion model (AIM)DEMO Psychological Bulletin, 117, 39-66.
Gartner, W. B. (1985). A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture creation.
Academy of DEMO Review, 10, 696-706.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
52 Organizational Research Methods
Grant, A. M., & Wall, T. D. (in press). The neglected science and art of quasi-experimentation: Why-to, when-
to, and how-to advice for organizational researchers. Organizational Research Methods.
Hall, J., & Hofer, C. W. (1993). Venture capitalists’ decision DEMO in new venture evaluation. Journal of
Business Venturing, 8, 25-42.
Hektner, J. M., Schmidt, J. A., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2007)DEMO Experience sampling method: Measuring the
quality of everyday life. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Hormuth, S. E. (1986). The sampling of experiences in situ. Journal of Personality, 54, 262-293.
Ilies, R., & Judge, T. A. (2002). Understanding the dynamic relationships among personality, mood, and job
satisfaction: A field experience sampling study. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
89, 1119-1139.
Isen, A. M., & Labroo, A. A. (2003). Some ways in which positive affect DEMO decision making and judg-
ment. In S. L. Schneider & J. Shanteau (Eds.), Emerging perspectives on judgment and decision research
(pp. 365-393)DEMO New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Jennings, J. E., & McDougald, M. S. (2007). Work-family interface experiences and coping strategies: Impli-
cations for entrepreneurship research and practice. Academy of Management Review, 32, 747-760.
Judge, T. A., & Ilies, R. (2004). Affect and job satisfaction: A study of their relationship at work and at home.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 661-673.
Keh, H. T., DEMO, M. D., & Lim, B. C. (2002). Opportunity evaluation under risky conditions: The cognitive pro-
cesses of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27, 125-148.
Klein, K. J., & Kozlowski, S. W. J. (2000). From micro to meso: Critical steps in conceptualizing DEMO conduct-
ing multilevel research. Organizational Research Methods, 3, 211-236.
Kraiger, DEMO, & Aguinis, H. (2001). Training effectiveness: Assessing training needs, motivation, and accom-
plishments. In M. London (Ed.), How people evaluate others in organizations (pp. 203-220). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence DEMO
Kuratko, D. F., Hornsby, J. S., & Naffziger, D.W. (1997). An examination of owner’s goals in sustaining entre-
preneurship. Journal DEMO Small Business Management, 35, 24-33.
Larson, R. W., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1983). The experience sampling method. In H. Reis (Ed.), New direc-
tions for naturalistic methods in the behavioral sciences (pp. 41-56). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Larson, R. W., & Richards, DEMO H. (1994). Divergent realities: The emotional lives of mothers, DEMO, and ado-
lescents. New York: Basic Books.
Lichtenstein, B., Dooley, K. J., & Lumpkin, G. T. (2006). Measuring emergence DEMO the dynamics of new venture
creation. Journal of Business Venturing, 21, 153-175.
Low, M. B., & MacMillan, I. C. (1988). DEMO: Past research and future challenges. Journal of Man-
agement, 14, DEMO
Marco, C. M., & Suls, J. (1993). Daily stress and the trajectory of mood: Spillover, contrast, and trait negative
affectivity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 1053-1063.
Mason, C., & Stark, M. (2004). What do investors look for in a business plan? A comparison of the investment
criteria of bankers, venture DEMO and business angels. International Small Business Journal, 22, 227-
248.
Mellers, B. A. (2000). Choice and the relative pleasure of consequences. DEMO Bulletin, 126, 910-924.
Miner, A. G., Glomb, T. M., & Hulin, C. (2005). Experience sampling mood and its correlates DEMO work. Journal
of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 78, 171-193.
Mitchell, DEMO K., Busenitz, L. W., Lant, T., McDougall, P. P., Morse, E. A., & Smith, B. (2002). Entrepreneurial
cognition theory: Rethinking the people side of entrepreneurship research. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 27, 93-104.
Nezlek, J. B. (2001). Multilevel random coefficient DEMO of event- and interval-contingent data in social and
personality psychology research. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 771-785.
Ong, A. D., Bergeman, C. S., Bisconti, T. L., & Wallace, K. A. (2006). Psychological resilience, positive emo-
tions, and successful adaptation to stress DEMO later life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 730-
749.
Rabe-Hesketh, S., & Skrondal, A. (2005). Multilevel and longitudinal DEMO using stata. College Station,
TX: Stata Press.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Uy et al. / Experience Sampling Methodology and Entrepreneurship 53
Reis, H. T., & Gable, S. L. (2000). Event-sampling and other methods for studying everyday experience. In
H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology
(pp. 190-222). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Reynolds, P. D. (2000). National panel study of U.S. business start-ups: Background and methodology. Data-
bases for the study of entrepreneurship, 4, 153-227.
Robinson, M. D., & Clore, G. L. (2002). Belief and feeling: Evidence DEMO an accessibility model of emotional
self-report. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 934-960.
Rugg, M. D., & Wilding, E. L. (2000). Retrieval processing DEMO episodic memory. Trends in Cognitive Science,
4, 108-115.
Sarasvathy, D. K., Simon, H. A., & Lave, L. (1998). Perceiving and managing business risks: Differences
between entrepreneurs and bankers. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 33, 207-225.
Schacter, D. L., Norman, K. A., & Koutstaal, W. (1998). The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory.
Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 289-318.
Scherbaum, C. A., & Ferreter, J. M. (2009). Estimating statistical power and required sample sizes for organiza-
tional research using multilevel modeling. Organizational Research Methods, 12, 347-367.
Scollon, C. N., Kim-Prieto, C., & Diener, E. (2003). Experience sampling: Promises and pitfalls, strengths and
weaknesses. Journal DEMO Happiness Studies, 4, 5-34.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization Science, 11,
448-469.
Shane, S. (2003). A general theory of entrepreneurship: The individual-opportunity nexus. Northampton, MA:
Edward Elgar.
Shane, S., Locke, E. A., & Collins, C. J. (2003). Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource Management
DEMO, 13, 257-279.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research. Academy of Man-
DEMO Review, 25, 217-226.
Shaver, K. G., & Scott, L. DEMO (1991). Person, process, choice: The psychology of new venture creation. Entre-
preneurship Theory and Practice, 16, 23-45.
Shiffman, S. (DEMO). Real-time self-report of momentary states in the natural environment: Computerized DEMO
logical momentary assessment. In A. A. Stone, J. S. Turkkan, C. A. Cachrach, J. B. Jobe, H. S. Kurtzman, &
V. DEMO Cain (Eds.), The science of self-report: Implications for research and practice (pp. 277-296). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Song, Z., Foo, M. D., & Uy, M. A. (2008). Mood spillover and crossover among dual-earner couples: A cell
phone event sampling study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 443-452.
Snijders, T. A. B., & Bosker, R. J. (1999). Multilevel analysis: An introduction to DEMO and advanced multilevel
modeling. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Stanworth, DEMO, & Curran, J. (1973). Management motivation in the smaller DEMO Epping, UK: Gower Press.
Stone, A. A., & Shiffman, DEMO (1994). Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) in behavioral medicine. Annals
DEMO Behavioral Medicine, 16, 199-202.
Stone, A. A., Shiffman, S., & DeVries, M. W. (1999). Ecological momentary assessment. In D. DEMO,
E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The DEMO of hedonic psychology (pp. 26-39). New York:
Russell Sage DEMO
Stone-Romero, E. F., & Rosopa, P. J. (2008). The relative validity of inferences about mediation as a function of
research design DEMO Organizational Research Methods, 11, 326-352.
Tennen, H., & Affleck, DEMO (1996). Daily processes in coping with chronic pain: methods and analytic strategies.
In M. Zeidner & N. S. Endler (Eds.), Handbook of coping: Theory, research, applications (pp. 151-177).
Oxford, UK: Wiley & Sons.
Uy, M. A. (2009). The roller coaster ride: Affective influences in entrepreneurial goal efforts. Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, DEMO of Colorado, Boulder.
Vancouver, J. B., Thompson, C. M., DEMO, E. C., & Putka, D. J. (2002). Two studies examining the negative
effect of self-efficacy on performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 506-516.
Van de Ven, A.H. (1992). Suggestions for studying strategy process: A research note. Strategic Management
Journal, 13, 169-188.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
54 Organizational Research Methods
Venkataraman, S. (1997). The distinctive domain DEMO entrepreneurship research: An editor’s perspective. In
J. Katz & R. Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, firm emergence and growth (Vol. 3,DEMO
pp. 119-138). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Vos, I., & de Klein, P. (2002). The essential guide to mobile business. DEMO Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Walls, T., & Schafer, DEMO (2006). Models for intensive longitudinal data. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wanous, J. P., & Hudy, M. J. (2001). DEMO reliability: A replication and extension. Organizational
Research Methods, 4, 361-375.
DEMO, C. R., & Landis, R. S. (2007). One is the loneliest number: A meta-analytic investigation on single-item
measure fidelity. Ergometrika, DEMO, 32-53.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and
negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063-1070.
Wegener, D. T., & Petty, R. E. (1994). DEMO management across affective states: The hedonic contingency
hypothesis. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 66, 1034-1048.
Wheeler, L., & Reis, H. DEMO (1991). Self-recording of everyday life events: Origins, types, and uses. Journal of
Personality, 59, 339-354.
Williams, K. J., & DEMO, G. M. (1994). Role stressors, mood spillover, and perception of work family conflict
in employed parents. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 837-868.
Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. DEMO (2005). The mediating role of self-efficacy in the development of DEMO
preneurial intentions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 1265-1272.
Zohar, D., Tzischinski, O., & Epstein, R. (2003). Effects on energy DEMO on immediate and delayed emo-
tional reactions to work events. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 1082-1093.
Marilyn A. Uy is an assistant professor DEMO entrepreneurship and organizational behavior at University of Vic-
toria’s Faculty of Business. She received her PhD in Management from the Leeds School of Business, Univer-
sity of Colorado, Boulder. Her research interests are in the areas of affect, motivation, and psychological
processes in entrepreneurship.
Maw-Der Foo is DEMO assistant professor of management and entrepreneurship in the Leeds School of Business,
University of Colorado, Boulder. His research focuses on affect in the workplace and he uses organizational
behavioral concepts to understand how entrepreneurs discover, evaluate, and implement business opportunities.
He teaches organizational behavior and entrepreneurship courses.
Herman Aguinis is the dean’s research professor and professor of organizational behavior DEMO human resources
at Indiana University’s Kelley School of Business. He has published five books, about 70 journal articles and 20
book chapters and monographs on a variety of organizational behavior, human resource management, and
research DEMO and analysis topics.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009{1g42fwefx}