Suggestions for Studying Strategy Process: A Research Note
Andrew H. van de Ven
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, Special Issue: Strategy Process: DEMO Corporate
Self-Renewal. (Summer, 1992), pp. 169-191.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28199222%2913%3C169%3ASFSSPA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
Strategic Management Journal is currently published by John DEMO & Sons.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download DEMO entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and DEMO may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, DEMO use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/jwiley.html.
DEMO copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such DEMO
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Sat Apr 28 21:48:47 2007
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, 169-1 88 (1
992)
/DEMO/
\
SUGGESTIONS FOR STUDYING STRATEGY
PROCESS: A RESEARCH NOTE
ANDREW DEMO VAN DE VEN
Curtis L. Carlson School of Management, University of DEMO, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, U.S.A.
This paper makes three suggestions to researchers for studying strategy process. First, define
the meaning of process. Process is often used in three ways in the literature: (I) a logic
used to explain a causal relationship in a variance theory, (2) a category of concepts that
refer to actions of individuals or organizations, and (3) a sequence of events that describe
how things change DEMO time. The second suggestion is to clarify the theory of process. An
interdisciplinary literature review identifies four types of theories of process that can DEMO
drawn upon: life cycle, teleology, dialectics, and evolution. The third suggestion is to design
research to observe strategy process in such a DEMO that is consistent with one's definition
and theory of process.
There is growing scholarly interest in strategy
process research, which is concerned with under-
standing how organizational strategies are formu-
lated and implemented and the DEMO of
strategic change (Chakravarthy and Doz, this
issue). As this special issue of SMJ indicates, the
body of strategy process research is diverse and
cannot be contained within a single paradigm.
Implicitly, scholars tend to adopt very different
views of strategy process, and the views they
adopt influence the questions they ask, the
research methods they employ, DEMO the contri-
butions they make. It is useful to make these
different views explicit. Doing so can help
individual scholars better understand the concep-
DEMO basis of their research, can facilitate com-
munications between scholars pursuing DEMO
views of strategy, and collectively can help us all
better understand DEMO directions and dead
ends in strategy process research. With these
objectives in mind, this paper makes three
Key words: Strategy process, development, DEMO,
research methods
0143-2095192/060169-20$15.00
01992 by John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
interrelated suggestions for studying strategy
process.
1. Define the meaning of process.
2. Clarify the theory of process.
3. Design research to observe process.
DEMO THE MEANING OF PROCESS
A cursory review of the numerous 'process
DEMO' that have been proposed in strategic
management literature indicates that the DEMO
'process' is used in many different ways. My first
suggestion for studying strategy process is to
reduce confusion in the literature by dis-
DEMO between the different usages of this
term. In particular, three meanings DEMO process
are often used: (1) a logic that explains a DEMO
relationship between independent and dependent
variables, (2) a category of DEMO or variables
that refers to actions of individuals or organiza-
tions, DEMO (3) a sequence of events that describes
how things change over time.
170
A. H. Van de Ven
Process as explanation for variance theory
DEMO terms of an input-process-output model, the
first definition uses a process DEMO to explain a
causal relationship between observed inputs
(independent variables) and outcomes
(dependent variables) in a variance theory (Mohr,
1982). In this usage, process is not directly
observed. Instead, a process DEMO or logic is
used to explain why an independent (input)
DEMO exerts a causal influence on a dependent
(outcome) variable. For example, to explain
why an increase in organization size increases
structural differentiation at decreasing rates, Blau
and Schoenherr (1971) invoke a process story
which describes the sequence of events in which
labor is progressively divided as DEMO
personnel are hired with different skills in an
organization.
In general, DEMO explanations are commonly
used to explain causation between independent
and dependent variables. But, as Van de Ven and
Huber (1990) discuss, such DEMO explanations
typicaliy entail highly restrictive and unrealistic
assumptions about the order and sequence
in which events unfold in organizations. One
significant way to improve DEMO robustness of
process explanations in variance theories is to
explicitly observe the process argument that is
assumed to explain why an independent variable
causes DEMO dependent variable. To do so requires
opening the proverbial 'black box' between inputs
and outcomes, and to directly observe process.
Process as category of concepts
The second and most frequently used meaning
of process is DEMO a category of concepts of
individual and organizational actions, such as
DEMO frequency, work flows, decision
making techniques, as well as strategy DEMO
lation, implementation, and corporate venturing.
In this usage, process refers DEMO a category
of concepts that is distinguished from other
categories of concepts, such as organizational
environment, structure, and performance. And,
like these other categories, process concepts are
operationalized as constructs, and measured as
DEMO entities (variables), the attributes of which
can vary along numerical DEMO from low to high.
For example, Priem (this issue) examines DEMO
strategy making processes influence executive
understanding of cause-effect relationships
involving the firm and its environment. Strategy
making processes, such as scanning, analysis, and
planning conceptually imply that a sequence of
activities or events goes on DEMO help make decisions
about the firm's alignment with its environment.
However, activities in scanning, analysis, and
planning are not directly examined (DEMO they are
in the third definition of process, below). Instead,DEMO
these process constructs are operationalized as
variables which, as Abbott (1988) argues, trans-
form the constructs into attributes of fixed entities
that DEMO, in causal or actual time, to create
outcomes, themselves measurable DEMO attributes
of the fixed entities. The variable attributes have
only one causal meaning (one pattern of effects)
in a given study. As a consequence, when
process constructs are represented into this
entitieslattributes model of reality, one can only
measure if, not how, a change occurred in a
variable measured at different points in time. To
understand how a DEMO occurred requires a
story that narrates the sequence of events that
unfolds as a strategy changes over time.
Process as developmental event sequence
The DEMO, and least understood, meaning of
process is a sequence of events or activities that
describes how things change over time, or that
represents an underlying pattern of cognitive
transitions by an entity in dealing with DEMO
issue.' Whereas the second definition of process
examines changes in variables DEMO time, the
third definition of process takes an historical
developmental perspective, and focuses on the
sequences of incidents, activities, and stages that
DEMO over the duration of a central subject's
existence. Table 1 exemplifies this third meaning
of process by outlining a sample of well-known
developmental DEMO models pertaining to
strategic decision making (Mintzberg, Rais-
inghani, and DEMO, 1976; Cohen, March and
Olsen, 1972; Quinn, 1980), strategic planning
(Gluck, Kaufman, and Walleck, 1980; Lorange,
I Some developmental process models, such as Huff's (1990)
maps DEMO strategic thought, are concerned with underlying
processes of unspoken cognitive choices, emotions or moti-
vations, which are not directly observable. To study them
inferences must be drawn by diagnosing patterns in observable
activities, events, DEMO behaviors over time of the subject.
Table 1. Sample of developmental process models in strategic management literature
Authors DEMO Summaries
Strategic decision models
Mintzberg et al. (1976)
-Field study DEMO 25 strategic,
unstructured decision processes
Cohen, March and Olsen (1972)
-Garbage can model of decision
making
Quinn (1980)
--Case studies of nine major
corporations
Strategic planning models
Gluck, Kaufman and Walleck (DEMO)
-Study of formal ,planning systems in
120 companies
Lorange (1980)
-Normative model of corporate
strategic planning
Organization development models
Scott (1971)
-Stages of corporate development
Greiner (1972)
-Stages of organizational growth
through evolution and revolution
Beginning-
Activity phases or stages
End
1. Identification DEMO 2. Developmental phase 3. Selection phase
-Decision recognition Search routine -Screen routine
routine -Design routine -Evaluation-Choice
-Diagnosis routine routine
-Authorization routine
Decisions are probabilistic DEMO of relatively independent streams within
organizations
--choices -problems--------------------------------------------------+ 
.................................................... 

-soIutions --------------------------------------------------*
--energy of participants ------------------------------------------*
Fourteen process stages beginning with need sensing DEMO leading to commitment and
control systems.
Flow is generally in sequence but may not be orderly or discrete. Some of the process
stages are DEMO following:
1. Sense need 2. Develop 3. Develop 4. Increase 5. Build 6. Formal
awareness partial support consensus commitment
& solutions
understanding
1. DEMO financial
planning
-meet budget
1. Objectives
setting
-identify
relevant
strategic
alternatives
2. Forecast-based 3. Externally- 4.
planning oriented planning
-predict the -think
future strategically
DEMO Strategic 3. Budgeting 4. Monitoring
programming --establish -measure
-develop detailed progress
programs for action toward
achieving program for achieving
chosen near-term strategies
objectives
Strategic
DEMO
--create the future
5. Rewards
--establish
incentives to
motivate
goal
achievement
1. Single product, channel 2. Single product, channel 3. Multiple products,
& entrepreneurial & functional structure channels & divis-
structure ionalized structure
1. Growth 	2. Growth 3. Growth 4. Growth 5. Growth
through through through through DEMO
creativity direction delegation coordination collaboration
-Leadership -Autonomy -Control -Red tape -Crisis of ?
crisis crisis crisis crisis
0s3 2:
2
CI
3
of:
172
A. H. Van de Ven
1980), and organization development (Scott,
1971; Greiner, 1972).
While these three sets of process DEMO are
concerned with the development of very different
things, they are DEMO similar in two respects,
and different in another. First, with DEMO exception
of Cohen et al's. (1972) garbage can model of
choice, all the other process models were
developed inductively based on cross-sectional
observations or retrospective case histories in a
variety of companies. The stages DEMO phases of
activities in each model were inferred either from
company historical self-reports or by categorizing
cohorts of companies into the stages or phases.
DEMO no instance was any one company or organi-
zational unit actually observed to go through all
the stages or phases of a model over DEMO Thus,
as discussed in the third section, there is a DEMO
need for systematic longitudinal research to
substantiate and elaborate these process models
of development.
Second, in contrast with the variable entities1
attributes model used in the second meaning of
process, no variables are reflected in the process
models in Table 1. Instead, the central focus of
developmental process models is on progressions
(i.e. the nature, sequence and order) of activities
or events that an organizational entity undergoes
as it changes over DEMO As Table 1 exemplifies,
the most common form of progression in the
strategy literature is a linear sequence of stages or
phases of DEMO For example, a rational
process of decision making is typically viewed
DEMO a sequence of separable stages (e.g. need
recognition, search, screen, and choice activities)
ordered in time and with transition routines to
DEMO adjustments between stages (March and
Simon, 1958). As Poole and Roth (1989) demon-
strated, when researchers use a priori stages or
phases to design their research and collect data,
their results can DEMO become self-fulfilling proph-
esies. The linear sequential model of development
is typically inadequate to deal with the complexities
of many strategy ventures because it DEMO
invariance between and within all organizational
units in following a prescribed order of developmen-
tal phases; one locked after another.
There are many other forms of progression
that are useful for thinking about and observing
developmental DEMO The child development
psychologists, van den Daele (1969; 1974) and
Flavell (1972) for example, propose a typology
of developmental progressions that goes beyond
simple unitary stages and includes multiple,
cumulative, conjunctive, DEMO iterative pro-
gressions of convergent, parallel, and divergent
streams of activities that may unfold as a
strategy develops over time. While many strategic
DEMO scholars may not be familiar with
this vocabulary, it is useful DEMO appreciating
alternative forms of developmental progressions,
which in turn, is DEMO to understanding
the third meaning of process. Moreover, this
vocabulary provides DEMO analytical terms needed
to make clear distinctions between the various
models of strategy development in Table 1.
Based on mathematical set theory, van den
Daele (1969; 1974) and Flavell (1972) introduce
the following progressions2 that may describe
temporal patterns in sequences of events.
Unitary progression
This DEMO a sequence of the form: U +V +W,
where U, V, and W represent qualitatively different
patterns, stages, or phases of activities or behaviors.
This model assumes that each stage may consist
of DEMO number of subsets of activities, but that
these subsets must occur DEMO an ordered progression.
If a developmental progression has no more than
one subset of events over time, it is called a simple
unitary progression, as illustrated in Table 1 by
the two strategic planning models and Scott's
(1971) stage model of corporate development.
Multiple progressions
This DEMO assumes that developmental processes
can follow more than a single possible path.
Three common forms of multiple progressions
among event sequences are the following DEMO,
divergent, and convergent progressions.
In multiple progressions a temporal sequence
DEMO events may reflect more than one pathway at
a given time in the ordered progression. For
' Riegel (1969) considered four formal models DEMO parallel
van den Daele's. He outlined mathematical formulations for:
(DEMO) branching processes, in which elements successively
differentiate; (2) root DEMO, based on progressive combi-
nation of positions; (3) jigsaw models, which show how
patterns emerge from a given set of pieces; DEMO (4) fallout
models, which illustrate progressive acquisitions of parts from
DEMO predetermined store. Such formal treatments may offer
useful distinctions among event progressions in future work.
Strategy Process Suggestions
173
PARALLEL
D l
VERGENT
CONVERGENT
example, in the strategic decision process study
of Mintzberg et al. (1976) in Table DEMO more
than one feasible path (or routine) of decision
diagnosis, DEMO, or evaluation might be pursued
in each respective stage of identification, develop-
ment and selection. These paths diverge from
each other at the DEMO of each stage, proceed
in parallel progressions during each stage, and
converge at the end to complete each stage.
As this example suggests, any developmental
progression that has more than one subset of
parallel paths DEMO a time is called a multiple
progression. A description of how multiple
progressions of events diverge, proceed in paral-
lel, or converge over DEMO provides a useful
vocabulary for making process statements about
specific stages or the overall developmental
pattern of a developing entity over time.
Cumulative progression (in unitary or multiple
models)
This model assumes that more than DEMO stage
may belong to a unit at a time. In set theory
terms: U > a, V > ab, W 3 abc (DEMO model).
For example, a multiple, parallel, partially-
cumulative model DEMO look like this.
If events are cumulative, (as they are assumed
to be in Scott's (1971) and Lorange's (1980)
models in Table 1) then elements found in earlier
events or stages are added to and built upon in
subsequent events or stages. Complete DEMO
lation means that every event from each stage is
carried from its onset until the end of- the
developmental progression. This of course seldom
DEMO, since losses of memory, mistakes and
detours, and terminated pathways DEMO imply
partially cumulative or substitution progressions
(as illustrated in the bottom DEMO tracks above).
Such partial cumulation is reflected in Quinn's
(DEMO) 'logical incremental' model of a long
sequence of 14 stages, and clearly distinguishes
it from the rational model of decision making.
A DEMO progression may take the form
of addition, substitution, or modification (DEMO,
1972). In addition, a later-occurring event sup-
plements an DEMO event. The out-
comes of two events E, and E2 may DEMO and
are both equally available for E,. For example,
in Scott's (1971) model of corporate development,
a multiple products DEMO structure is
largely produced by the addition (with slight
modification) of a stage 1 single product entre-
preneurial structure with a stage 2 DEMO product
functional structure. With substitution the outcomes
of a later event largely replace those of an earlier
one. More precisely, E2 deletes or subtracts the
effects of El, and replaces them by adding those
of E2. For example, in Greiner's (1972) model of
organizational growth, DEMO at the end of each
stage leads the organization to shift (DEMO substitute)
its focus and transition into the next qualitatively
new stage. In modiJication a later event represents
'a differentiation, generalization, or more stable
version of the earlier one' (Flavell, 1972: 345). DEMO
this case the outcome of El is revised or modified
in E2. For example, in the strategic planning model
of Gluck (1980) the planning process and focus of
each prior stage is modified and made DEMO
elaborate in the next stage.
Conjunctive progressions (in unitary, multiple,
or cumulative models)
Conjunctive progressions posit that the elements
of subsets DEMO be related, such that aR.b, or
aR1b. Conjunctive events are causally related
174 A. H. Van de Ven
events, meaning that events in one pathway may
influence events in other pathways of a multiple
progression. Of DEMO what is related at one
time may be viewed as unrelated at another.
Therefore, strict causality among events is difficult
to establish.
Conjunctive progressions may be probabilistic,
inclusive, or mediated. Probabilistic relationships
between events occur when the trajectories of
multiple paths of activities happen to intersect.
Such DEMO the form of conjunction among streams
of choices, problems, solutions, DEMO participants'
energy in the garbage can model of Cohen et al.
(1972). Inclusion occurs when the outcomes of
earlier events become incorporated into the later
one, as often observed with PERT charts. In this
case El, and E,, are logically integrated or
converge to yield E,. For example, Lorange's
strategic programing phase represents the logical
inclusion of alternatives from stage 1 into a
strategic program in stage DEMO In a mediation
relationship an earlier event or element 'rep-
resents DEMO sort of developmental bridge or
stepping stone (mediator) to the later one'
(Flavell, 1972: 345). So E, is required DEMO order
to move from E, to E3, which may also pre-
empt alternative paths. For example, in Greiner's
model crisis events mediate and bridge transitions
between evolutionary stages of organizational
growth.
Recurrent progressions (in unitary, multiple,
cumulative, or conjunctive models)
These are repeating DEMO of events or activities
over time. Although the previous progression
models have been treated as nonrecurrent
sequences, parts or all of them may repeat over
time. For example, what distinguishes Mintzberg's
model of strategic unstructured decision processes
from the others in Table 1 is its attention to
DEMO routines, or iterative progressions,
within each phase of decision making. DEMO
(1990) discusses a variety of techniques for the
colligation and measurement of recurrent and
nonrecurrent event sequence data.
As our examples in Table DEMO indicate, these
alternative models of progression do not occur
independently. Every DEMO process model
makts a commitment (implicitly or explicitly) to
some form of invariant sequential order, between
unit variation (unitary or multiple sequence),
within-unit variance (simple or cumulative
structure), in the relationship of developmental
elements (conjunctive or disjunctive), and
whether event sequences reoccur or net. This
vocabulary of temporal relationships among
events can help scholars articulate DEMO meanings
of their process models in more operational and
discriminating ways than has been the case in
the past. However, as we will now discuss, this
analysis of process as a sequence of events cannot
go far without considering the alternative theories
of process that may explain specific DEMO
tal progressions.
CLARIFY THE THEORY OF PROCESS
Whereas a definition of process indicates one's
meaning of process in relation to other uses in
DEMO literature, a theory of process consists of
statements that explain how DEMO why a process
unfolds over time. Such a theory is needed not
only to ground the conceptual basis of a process
study on strategy DEMO, implementation,
or some other substantive topic, but also to guide
the design and conduct of empirical research.
Thus, the second basic suggestion for studying
strategy process is to clarify the theory of process
underlying DEMO substantive investigation.
Adopting the third meaning of process, Scott
Poole and DEMO conducted a literature review of the
theories available to explain the process of
development, defined as the sequence of change
events that unfolds over the duration of an
entity's existence-its formulation, implemen-
tation, growth, adaptation, and termination (Van
de Ven and Poole, 1991). A selected set of
keywords was used to conduct a computerized
search of DEMO literary data bases in various
disciplines. Table 2 shows the number of times
that the selected keywords appeared in the titles
or abstracts of DEMO in the data bases."
Using factors of 10 to reduce complexity, we
reviewed about 200,000 titles, perused about
20,000 abstracts, which lead us to read 2,000
papers, about 200 of which were found useful to
identify about 20 different theories of develop-
ment DEMO change, which in turn, can be classified
.' It is DEMO that we know so little about development
and change processes after a half-million articles have been
written about this subject in various disciplines!
Table 2. Number of occurrences of keywords in titles and abstracts of DEMO in literary data bases
Basic Discipline -->
Data base -->
Year --> Present
Biology
Biosis
1966 ->
295,868
155,693
6,451
Meteorology Geography
MetIGeo Georef
1970 -> 1785 ->
Sept. 91
39,597
6,579
2
Medicine
Medline
1966 ->
312,DEMO
131,934
5,235
Psychology
Psyclit
1974 ->
1991
73,861
27,440
2,126
Education
Eric
1966 ->
227,191
71,DEMO
5,184
Keywords
Development
Change
Change process
9,839
6,956
0
Sociology
Sociofile
1974 ->
Aug. 91
35,454
20,320
89
DEMO & Econ
ABI Inform
Nov. 86 ->
Oct. 91
44,791
35,227
125
Table 3. Families of theories on development and change processes
Family
Life DEMO
Developmentalism
Biogenesis
Ontogenesis
Stage theories
Nisbet, Piaget
imminence
prefigured program
continuity
DEMO>-->-->
Teleology
Members
Functionalism
Religionslutopias
Goallplanning models
Enactment theories
Rational choice
Weber, Parsons
envisioned end state
social construction
equifinality
Pioneers
Logic:
Event
progression:
Conditions:
unitary sequence of stages
moving to a DEMO
differentiation of entity
regulated by natural or
institutional laws.
programslroutines or rules
prescribed by nature,
logic, or institutions
multiple cumulative
sequence of planning,
implementation, and
adaptation of alternative
means to reach desired
end state
purposeful, adaptive
interactive choice,
collective action and
learning
Dialectic
Conflict
Deconstruction
Pluralism
Bifurcation theories
Polyphonic themes
Marx, Freud
contradictory forces thesis,
antithesis, synthesis
Li(Synthesis)
recurrent convergence of
multiple divergent
progression mediated by
partisan struggle between
contradictory values or
events
pluralistic, diverse
contradictory, colliding
DEMO of events or
values
Evolution
Darwinian evolution
Punctuated equilibrium
Saltationism
Gradualism
Lamarckian evolution
Darwin, Gould, Campbell
natural selection of
organisms and species
Var DEMO +
-Sel-Ret
recurrent, cumulative &
conjunctive sequence of
variation, selection &
retention events
scarcity
commensalism
population dynamics
Source: A. Van de Ven and M. S. Poole (1991), 'In Search of Theories on DEMO and Change processes', Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota,
Strategic Management DEMO Center, Working Paper.
Strategy Process Suggestions
177
into four basic families of theories. The four
DEMO of process theories are outlined in
Table 3, along with their DEMO, pioneering
scholars, logic, event progressions, and conditions
in which they are likely to operate.
Life cycle, teleology, dialectics, and evolution
are viewed as abstract ideal types of theories of
change processes. These ideal DEMO are based
on fundamentally different logics, which represent
the underlying generative DEMO or laws
(Tsoukas, 1989) that explain why observed events
occur DEMO particular sequence progressions when
specific circumstances or conditions exist. In
practice, DEMO course, scholars across disciplines
often combine elements of these ideal types DEMO
theories to explain observed processes of change
and development in the subjects or objects
under investigation. However, in so doing the
conceptual basis of applied theories can easily
become confounded and incoherent. This is
because while DEMO logic for each ideal type is
internally consistent, borrowing elements from
DEMO .types of theories may result in an
incoherent concatenation of different logics.
As Poole and Van de Ven (1989) discuss,
conceptually more DEMO explanations of change
emerge when scholars explicitly address and work
out these logical inconsistencies when they borrow
and combine elements from different types of
DEMO in their applied theories of change
processes.
Life cycle process theory
Life cycle theories include developmentalism
(Nisbet, 1970), biogenesis (Featherman, 1986),
ontogenesis (Baltes, Dittman-Kohli and Dixon,
1986), and a DEMO number of stage theories
of child development (Piaget, 197.5), human
development (Levinson, 1978), moral develop-
ment (Kohlberg, 1969), DEMO develop-
ment (Greiner, 1972; Kimberly and Miles, 1980),
DEMO decision making (Bales and Strodtbeck,
19.51; Poole and Roth, DEMO; Gersick, 1988), and
new venture development (Burgelman and Sayles,DEMO
1986).4 Next to teleology, life cycle is perhaps
The classification DEMO management and organization literature
into the life cycle and other ideal types of theories in this
paper is very loose and done for illustrative DEMO only.
Since very little attention has been given to underlying
theories of change processes in the management and
organization literature, it is difficult to know what specific
theories of change the authors had in mind.
the DEMO used theory of development and change
in the management literature.
Life cycle theory assumes that change is
immanent; that is, the developing entity DEMO
within it an underlying logic, program, or code
that regulates the process of change and moves
it from a given point of departure DEMO a
subsequent end which is already prefigured in
the present state. What lies latent, rudimentary,
or homogeneous in the embryo or primitive state,
becomes progressively more mature, complex,
and differentiated. External environmental events
and processes can influence how the immanent
form expresses itself, but they are always
mediated by the imminent logic, rules, or
programs that DEMO development (Van de Ven
and Poole, 1988: 37).
In DEMO of the vocabulary introduced before,
the typical progression of a life cycle process of
change is a unitary, cumulative, and conjunctive
sequence DEMO stages, because the trajectory to the
final end state is prefigured DEMO requires a specific
historical sequence of events. Each of these
events contributes a certain piece to the final
product, and they must occur in a certain order,
because each piece sets the stage for the DEMO
Each stage of development can be seen as a
necessary precursor of succeeding stages.
Life cycle theory is rooted in the approach of
the DEMO anatomist in biology who observes a
sequence of developing fetuses, concluding DEMO
each successive stage evolved from the previous
one. Hence, Nisbet (1970) claimed that develop-
ment is driven by some genetic code or prefigured
program within the developing entity. Nisbet's
interpretation has been expanded by DEMO
(1982), who discusses a number of historically-
driven processes of DEMO development in
which each stage logically presupposes the next,
as when the development of manipulative skills
precedes writing. There is no reason to DEMO
organizational systems could not have such
processes as well.
A life cycle theory of organizations often
operates on the basis of institutional rules or
DEMO that require developmental activities to
progress in a prescribed sequence. For example,
a legislative bill enacting state educational reform
cannot be passed until DEMO has been drafted and
gone through the necessary House and Senate
committees. So also, Garud and Van de Ven
(this issue) describe the invariant sequence steps
that are institutionally regulated by the U.S.
178 A. H.Van de Ven
Food and Drug Administration which all firms
DEMO follow to develop and commercialize a new
biomedical product in the U.S. Of course, there
are teleological components to this institutional
life cycle. For example, firms may choose not to
engage in legislation or biomedical product
development; but if they do they have no recourse
but to follow the institutionally required sequence
of steps.
Teleology process theory
Another commonly understood DEMO of process
theories is teleology, which underlies many
theories of administrative DEMO, including:
functionalism (Merton, 1968), decision making
(March and Simon, 1958); epigenesis (Etzioni,
1963), enactment (Weick, DEMO), voluntarism
(Parsons, 1951), adaptive learning (March and
Olsen, 1976), and most models of strategic
planning and goal setting (Chakravarthy and
Lorange, 1991). A teleology process theory is
based on the assumption that the developing
entity is purposeful and adaptive; by itself or in
interaction with others. It socially contructs an
envisioned end state and DEMO from alternatives
a course of action to reach it.
Unlike life cycle theory, teleology does not
presume a necessary sequence of events, yet DEMO
does imply standards by which change can be
judged. There is no prefigured rule or logically
necessary direction to a teleological process.
However, we are still able to assess when an
entity is developing; it is growing more complex,
or it is growing more integrated, or it is filling
out a necessary set of functions. We are able
to DEMO this assessment, because teleological
theories posit a standard of what an DEMO
end state for an entity is and we are able to
observe movement toward the end state.
This explanation draws on classical functional
theory, which explains development in terms of
movement toward some final goal or DEMO of
'rest' (however temporary). This goal can be
achieved DEMO a number of paths, all tending
toward the same endpoint. Teleological DEMO
of development incorporate the systems theory
assumption of equifinality; there are DEMO
equally effective ways to achieve a given goal.
There is no assumption about historical necessity.
Rather, these models rely on voluntarism as the
explanatory principle: they posit a set of functions
or goals desired by an organizational unit, which
it has to acquire in order to 'realize' its aspirations.
Development is movement toward attaining a
purpose, goal, function, or desired end state.
That an entity attains this end state does
DEMO mean it stays in permanent equilibrium.
Influences in the external environment or within
the entity itself may create instabilities that push
it to a DEMO developmental path or trajectory.
Theories that rely on a teleological process cannot
specify what trajectory development will follow.
They can at best list a DEMO of possible paths, and
rely on norms of rationality to prescribe DEMO
paths.
Dialectic process theory
A third family of process theories, dialectics,DEMO
begins with the assumption that the developing
entity exists in a pluralistic world of colliding
events, forces, or contradictory values which
compete with DEMO other for domination and
control. These oppositions may be internal to
the entity because it may be prefigured with
contradictory laws or rules of DEMO (i.e.
incompatible life cycle programs), or it has
multiple conflicting DEMO or teleologies. Oppo-
sitions may also arise external to the entity as it
pursues developmental paths that collide with
those of others. For example, Riegel (1975)
proposes a dialectical theory of human develop-
ment in which change in adults is brought
about by contradictions within or between DEMO
interacting progressions of life events: inner
biological, individual-psychological, cultural-
sociological, and outer-physical forces. So also,
Greiner (1972) proposes that tensions DEMO
revolutionary and evolutionary forces propel
organizational growth through each stage of
development shown in Table 1.
Stability and change with a dialectical process
theory DEMO explained by the relative balance of
power between opposing forces. Stability is
produced through partisan struggles and accom-
modations which maintain the status quo DEMO
oppositions. Change occurs when these opposing
values, forces, or events go out of balance. The
relative strength, power, or legitimacy of an
DEMO may emerge or mobilize to a sufficient
degree of force to overthrow the current thesis
or state of affairs and produce a synthesis, which
Strategy Process Suggestions
179
then becomes the new thesis as the dialectical
DEMO recycles and continues.
More specifically, a process theory that focuses
on DEMO intercourse of opposites can explain
organizational changes that move toward: (1)
equilibrium, (2) oscillation, and (3) chaos. First,
DEMO stability and inertia result when
the routines, goals, or values of the status quo
are sufficiently dominant to suppress opposing
minority positions, and thereby produce
incremental adaptations flowing toward equili-
brium. Such movements to equilibrium DEMO
exchange theories of conflict (Blau, 1964), models
of organizational power (Pfeffer, 1981; Astley
and Zajac, 1991), and planned organizational
DEMO (French and Bell, 1978). Second, organi-
zational business cycles, technological regimes,
and political contests occur when opposing forces
alternate and DEMO the organization somewhat
farther from an equilibrium orbit. Such recurrent
cycles are exemplified in models of vicious circles
in organizations (Masuch, 1985), DEMO mutual
adjustment (Lindblom, 1965; Quinn, 1980), and
creative destruction (Schumpeter, 1942). Third,
organizational transformations and anomie are
produced DEMO strong oscillations occur between
opposing forces that push the organization out of
its equilibrium orbit and produce deconstructions
(Martin, 1990), bifurcations (Prigogine and Sten-
gers, 1984), and catastrophes (Zeeman, 1976)
leading to chaos. Thus, different patterns for
resolving dialectical oppositions can push an
organization to flow toward equilibrium, to
oscillate in cycles between opposites, DEMO to
bifurcate far from equilibrium and spontaneously
create revolutionary changes.
Evolution process theory
Although evolution is sometimes equated with
change, as a specific family of process theories
we use evolution in a more restrictive sense to
DEMO on cumulative changes in structural forms
of populations of organizational entities across
communities, industries, or society at large
(Campbell, 1969; Hannan and Freeman, 1977;
Aldrich, 1979). As in biological evolution, change
proceeds in a continuous process of variation,
selection, and retention. Variations, the creation
of novel forms are often viewed to emerge by
random chance; they just happen (Aldrich,
1979). Selection occurs principally DEMO the
competition among forms, and the environment
selects those forms which DEMO or are best
suited to the resource base of an environmental
niche (Hannan and Freeman, 1977: 939). Reten-
tion involves the forces (including inertia and
persistence) that perpetuate and maintain certain
organizational forms. DEMO serves to counter-
act the self-reinforcing loop between variations
and selection. Weick (1979) and Pfeffer (1982)
note that while variations stimulate the selection
of new organizational forms, retention works to
maintain those forms and practices that were
selected in the past. Thus, evolution explains
change as a recurrent, cumulative, and probabilis-
tic progression of variation, selection, DEMO reten-
tion.
In organization and management applications,
evolutionary theory is often used to depict
global changes in organizational populations (e.g.
Carroll and Hannan, 1989), although Burgelman
(1991) and Singh (1990) have adopted the
evolutionary model to explain processes of
strategy making within organizations, and Weick
(1979) and Gersick (1990) have applied evolution
at an DEMO more micro level to explain
social-psychological processes of organizing.
Alternative theories of social evolution can be
distinguished in terms of how traits can be
DEMO, whether change proceeds gradually
and incrementally or rapidly and radically,
DEMO whether the unit of analysis focuses on
populations of organisms or species. Social
Darwinists (such as Hannan and Freeman, 1977;
1989; McKelvey, 1982; Nelson and Winter, 1982)
argue that traits can be inherited only through
intergenerational processes, whereas Lamarkian
and cultural evolutionary theorists (DEMO and
Richerson, 1985; Weick, 1979; Burgelman, 1991;
and DEMO, 1990) argue that traits can be
acquired within a generation through learning and
imitation. A Lamarkian view on the acquisition
of traits appears DEMO appropriate than strict
Darwinism for organization and management
applications of social evolution theory. To date,
strict social Darwinists have developed no
adequate solutions DEMO operationally identify an
organizational generation and an intergener-
ational transmission vehicle.
Social Darwinian theorists emphasize a continu-
ous and gradual process of evolution. In DEMO
Origin of Species, Darwin (1936: 361) wrote, 'as
natural selection acts solely by accumulating
180 A. H.Van de Ven
slight, successive, favourable variations, it can
produce no great or sudden modifications; it can
act only by short and slow steps.' Other
evolutionists posit a saltational theory of evo-
lution, such as punctuated equilibrium (Gould
and Eldrich, 1977; Arnold and DEMO, 1982),
which Tushman and Romanelti (1985) and
Gersick (DEMO) introduced to the management
literature. Whether an evolutionary change pro-
ceeds DEMO gradual vs. saltational rates is an
empirical matter, for the rate DEMO change does not
fundamentally alter the theory of evolution-at
least as it has been adopted thus far by strategy
scholars. However, measurement of the rate of
evolutionary change is a formidable empirical
challenge. The French author DEMO aviator, Saint
Exupery, aptly stated 'the time which adds
something DEMO is by no means the same as the
time which spreads itself out' (quotation in
De Rosney, 1970). The time required for
phylogenesis (the generation of originals through
variation or speciation processes) is DEMO greater
and less predictable than the time required for
ontogenesis (the DEMO of originals through
selection and adaptation processes). Empirically,
the different temporal durations involved in the
generation vs. the reproduction of originals in
DEMO social sciences are very difficult to determine,
because the nature of uncertainty is profoundly
different; in ontogenesis the improbability of
reproduction is given at the beginning, while in
phylogenesis the improbability of origination is
gathered at the end of the process. Thus, the
temporal duration of generating an original can
only be known retrospectively after the fact,
while DEMO temporal duration of reproducing
originals can be determined prospectively before
the fact.
The paleontologist, Gould (1989), has argued
that another basic distinction DEMO Darwinian
evolution and his punctuated equilibrium theory
is hierarchical level. This distinction has not yet
been incorporated in the management literature,
but ought DEMO be. Gould (1989) points out
that classical Darwinism locates the sorting of
evolutionary change at a single level of objects.
This sorting is DEMO selection operating through
the differential births and deaths of organisms,
as exemplified in many recent studies on organi-
zational birth and death rates DEMO population
ecologists (see reviews in Carroll and Hannan,
1989, and Hannan and Freeman, 1989). The
punctuated equilibrium model adds a hierarchical
dimension to evolutionary theory by dis-
tinguishing this sorting (a description of differen-
tial birth and death) from species selection (a
causal claim DEMO the basis of sorting). 'Speci-
ation is a property of DEMO (organisms do
not speciate), while extinction [a sorting process]
is DEMO a simple concatenation of deaths among
organisms' (Gould, 1989: 122). This multilevel
view of evolution is extended by Arnold and
Fristrup (1982), who emphasize that adaptation
and selection can occur at multiple DEMO (both
the species and organism levels). Adaptation is
the class DEMO heritable characters that have a
positive influence on the fitness of an organism
within a constraining situation. Selection focuses
on the evolutionary process of DEMO new
situations (i.e. variations). So selection assumes
variation, while adaptation assumes fitting within
a selected environment (Arnold and Fristrup,
1982: DEMO).
In conclusion, we might think of these alterna-
tive families DEMO process theories as having three
components: a set of starting conditions, a
functional end-point, and an emergent process
of change. Life cycle theory incorporates all three
parts, although it largely directs attention to the
starting input conditions of institutional rules,
customs, or habits that prescribe programs or
routines of action that must be followed in
developing an organization DEMO By describing
in some detail a required stage sequence, a life
DEMO theory implies a final state and a process
of change. Of course, these latter parts are often
left implicit in the description of stages. A
teleological theory has two of the components,
although its central DEMO is on visions of
future goals or final end states of an organizational
entity. At the outset, it does not specify a
required sequence of events or stages, but it does
describe the form of organization which is
the end-point of the development, and, by
implication, the process for getting to the end.
Thus, both life cycle and teleological theories are
predictive. Dialectical and evolutionary theories
center on the means of DEMO themselves; i.e.
the dynamic process of social construction and
transformation of DEMO forms within and
across generations of competing organizational
routines, forms and DEMO Dialectical and
evolutionary theories explain only how change
and development occur, DEMO with indicators to
Strategy Process Suggestions
181
enable us to identify key developmental constructs
(e.g. selection, action loops) at any point in
time. While dialectical and DEMO theories
provide rich explanations of emergent processes
of change, they are DEMO predictive; they are only
explanatory process theories.
DESIGN RESEARCH TO OBSERVE
DEMO
Most studies of strategy process to date have
been retrospective case histories conducted after
the outcomes were known. However, it is widely
recognized that prior knowledge of the success
or failure of a strategic change effort DEMO
biases a study's findings. While historical analysis
is necessary for examining many questions and
concerted efforts can be undertaken to minimize
bias, it is generally better, if possible, to initiate
historical study before the DEMO of a strategic
change process become known. It is even better
to undertake real-time study of strategic change
processes as they unfold in their DEMO field
settings.
Time itself, sets a frame of reference which
directly DEMO our perceptions of change. As
Pettigrew (1985) notes, the more DEMO look at
present-day events, the easier it is to identify
change; the longer we stay with an emergent
process and the further back DEMO go to disentangle
its origins, the more likely we are to DEMO
continuities. Appreciating this dilemma motivates
my third recommendation that investigators
carefully design their studies to observe strategy
process in such a way that is DEMO with their
definition and theory of process.
For example, if the DEMO of a study is to
understand how to manage the formulation or
implementation of an organizational strategy, it
will be necessary for researchers to place them-
selves into the manager's temporal and contextual
frames of DEMO Presumably, this would
initially involve conducting a retrospective case
history to DEMO the context and events
leading up to the present strategy being investi-
gated. However, the major focus of the study
would entail conducting real-time observations of
the events and activities in strategy development
while they occur DEMO time, and without knowing
a priori the outcomes of these events DEMO
activities.
Regularly scheduled and intermittent real-time
observations are necessary to observe if and how
changes occur over time. Repetitive surveys and
interviews provide comparative-static DEMO
vations of the organizational unit or strategy
being tracked over time. Difference scores
between time periods on these dimensions would
determine if and what DEMO occurred in the
organizational unit or strategy. But to understand
how these changes came about, there is a need
to supplement regularly-scheduled data collection
with intermittent real-time data. For example,
this would involve observing key DEMO
meetings, decision or crisis events, and conducting
informal discussions with key organizational
participants. Thus, while difference scores on
dimensions measured through regularly scheduled
surveys and interviews identify if and what
changes occurred, real-time observations are
needed to understand how these changes
occurred.
As Argyris (1968; 1985) has forcefully argued
over the years, significant new methods and skills
of action science are called for to conduct
this ' kind of longitudinal DEMO research.
In addition, it implies significant reseacher
commitment and organizational access, which
few researchers have achieved to date. As a
consequence, very few developmental studies of
strategy formulation and implementation have
been conducted. One reason DEMO gaining organi-
zational access has been problematic is because
researchers seldom place themselves into the
manager's frame of reference to conduct their
studies. DEMO Van de Ven, Angle, and Poole (1989)
discuss, without observing a change process from
a manager's perspective, it becomes difficult (if
not impossible) for an investigator to understand
the dynamics confronting DEMO who are
involved in a strategic change effort, and thereby
generate DEMO knowledge that advances the theory
and practice of strategy process.
Furthermore, DEMO organizational participants do
not understand the relevance of a study, there
DEMO little to motivate their providing access and
information to an investigator. At issue here is not
that strategic management research incorporates
elements of consulting DEMO The issue is one
of formulating and addressing important research
questions that capture the attention and moti-
vation of scholars and practitioners alike in DEMO
merits for studying them. Clearly, the outcomes
182
A. H.Van de Ven
of research on an important question may DEMO
provide immediate pay-offs to practitioners or
academics. Often by definition, truly DEMO
research questions do not have clear solutions
until after the research has been conducted. If
solutions are well known in advance of the
research, the question may be appropriate for
consulting practice or an internal management
DEMO, but clearly not for basic scientific research.
Thus, at the time of designing research and
negotiating access to organizations, prospective
solutions to applied problems are secondary in
comparison with the importance of the research
question. DEMO good indicator of such a research
question is its self-evident capability (DEMO
properly articulated) to motivate attention and
enthusiasm of scholars and practitioners DEMO
In launching our Minnesota Innovation
Research Program (see Van de Ven DEMO, 1989),
we found that a useful way to begin this kind of
longitudinal research is to conduct meetings
(often with a served breakfast or lunch) with
small groups (eight to twelve) managers or
representatives of various organizations which
were about to initiate comparable strategic change
DEMO or ventures in their natural organizational
settings. In these hour-and-a-half meetings we
introduced our research question (e.g. 'How
and why do innovations develop DEMO time?'),
discussed why it is important to advancing theory
DEMO practice, and outlined a longitudinal real-
time research strategy for studying DEMO research
question in comparable field settings over time.
Participants then shared their opinions of the
research question, why it was important or useful
to study, and how the research design might
be modified to make it workable in their
organizational settings. The meetings concluded
by thanking participants for DEMO useful ideas
and indicating that we would contact them
individually to negotiate access to study the
question in their organizational settings. Follow-
ing these DEMO, the research design was
modified as deemed necessary, and negotiations
began with individual organizations. A substantial
subset of those represented at the meetings
DEMO to provide access to conduct the research.
Having negotiated access to a manageable
(small) number of comparable organizational
sites, the longitudinal research can begin by
undertaking the following basic steps. (See Van
de Ven and Poole (1989; 1990) for detailed
procedures in each step.) First, it is often
necessary to obtain baseline information and
develop a retrospective DEMO history of the context
and events leading up to the present venture
being investigated. While the historical baseline
is being developed, real-time study can begin
using a variety of data collection methods, and
by attending and observing regularly scheduled
meetings of the management team, administrative
review meetings, DEMO conferences related to the
venture being investigated as it unfolds over
time.
Researchers could use an event as the datum,
or unit of DEMO, and record all the events
that occur as the venture develops DEMO time.
Events require careful definition, and vary with
the subject and DEMO being investigated. Only
by being clear about the subject and conceptual
categories does the researcher know 'what'
eventslactivities to record, and 'where' to look
for them. If the researcher doesn't look in the
'right' place, then nothing may be recorded, or
if the DEMO category is too broad, it can
include confounding data. For example, in our
study of the internal corporate venturing process,
Garud and DEMO de Ven (this issue) defined
events as instances when changes were observed
to occur in each of the constructs of the
conceptual model: i.e. in the innovation idea and
activities, personnel appointments and roles, DEMO
relationships with others, environmental and
organizational context, and outcomes.
Data on the occurrence of each event could
be entered into a qualitative computer DEMO base
(such as Rbase), and at a minimum should
include DEMO date, actor, action, outcome (if
observable), and data source. A chronological
recording of these events as they occur over time
becomes DEMO 'raw' data base. Each of these
events is then coded on a set of dichotomous
variables, which reflect the presencelabsence or
occurrence1nonoccurrence of indicators selected
to measure key constructs in one's conceptual
model. For DEMO, an indicator of strategy
formulation might be to code each event DEMO terms
of whether actors did or did not articulate a
change in ideas about the strategy.
This coded event sequence data base can then
DEMO analyzed in terms of the vocabulary and
alternative forms of temporal progressions dis-
cussed before. Unfortunately, space limitations
prevent an adequate discussion of the data
Strategy Process Suggestions
183
analysis problems of identifying patterns in event
sequence DEMO and of inferring what they mean.
Obviously, event sequence data do DEMO necessarily
speak for themselves. Van de Ven and Poole
(1989) discuss some of the steps involved in
drawing statistical and conceptual inferences from
DEMO sequence data. Abbott (1990) proposes
methods for identifying temporal sequence pat-
terns among coded events in such a dataset. In
addition, substantive models of strategy process
can be evaluated by using log-linear and logit
analysis DEMO categorical time series data, and
standard time series regression analysis on DEMO
quency counts of coded events computed for
fixed temporal intervals (e.g. DEMO, monthly,
or quarterly intervals). Garud and Van de Ven
(this issue), Van de Ven and Polley (1992), and
Van de Ven and Garud (1992) illustrate this new
methodology of event DEMO analysis to
examine process models of internal corporate
venturing, trial-and-error learning, and the co-
evolution of technological and institutional inno-
vations, respectively.
CONCLUDING EXAMPLE OF
SUGGESTIONS MADE (WITH
REACTIONS FROM LARRY E.
GREINER)
In conclusion, we must touch upon a few basic
normative and teleological questions. Where do
we go with this strategy process research and
search for DEMO models? Where do we want
to end up? While readers may have different
answers, my first suggestion, defines the meaning
of process, implies that we not only want to
assume or describe the occurrence DEMO strategic
change processes, we also want to explain
how and why DEMO occur. Scientifically valid
explanation not only requires systematic pro-
cedures for observing and analyzing events as
they occur over time (along the lines of my third
suggestion), it also requires the development and
evaluation of DEMO of the change process itself
(the second suggestion). Hopefully this DEMO
will yield more robust ways to understand how
and why strategic change develops over time.
Moreover, it may produce more constructive
and penetrating dialogue among scholars and
practitioners about their models of strategy
process.
To illustrate DEMO conclusion, let us reexamine
Greiner's (1972) well-known model of DEMO
zational growth outlined on the bottom of
Table 1. Greiner's model clearly uses the third
meaning of process as a developmental sequence
of DEMO, and proposes that organizational
growth progresses through five stages of evolution
DEMO revolution: (1) creativity and leadership, (2)
direction and DEMO, (3) delegation and
control, (4) coordination and red tape, and (5)
collaboration and revitalization. Readers may
wish to read DEMO 5-9 during this section,
since they represent excerpts from an interesting
and constructive dialogue that I carried on with
Professor Greiner about my DEMO of his
model.5
To evaluate the status of Greiner's applied
theory, it is useful to recognize that he implicitly
borrows conceptual elements from three of the
ideal types of process theories. In so doing,
DEMO's model contains a number of conceptual
anomalies, which in turn DEMO a number of
promising areas for further theory building. In
the main, the model is rooted in a life cycle
theory of change, DEMO which 'historical forces
[organization age, size, growth rate, and stages
of evolution and revolution] shape the future
growth of organizations' (Greiner, 1972: 166).
The quest for growth represents an underdevel-
oped teleological element in the model. Greiner
states his position that 'the future of an organi-
zation may be less determined by outside forces
than it DEMO by the organization's history. . . [Ble-
havior is determined primarily by previous events
and experiences, not by what lies ahead' (p. 166).
Beyond this introductory statement, the 'pull' of
an envisioned end state of growth is largely
I sent a prepublication draft of DEMO paper to Prof. Larry
E. Greiner at the University of Southern California. He
responded with a very useful set of comments, which not
only clarify, amplify and correct my reexamination of his
model, but also DEMO how the meanings, theories, and
vocabulary of process suggested in this paper can facilitate
more penetrating and constructive dialogue among scholars
than in DEMO past. In order to exemplify this constructive level
of dialogue, I DEMO not changed my reassessment of the
model in the text from that which Prof. Greiner reviewed,
and (with his permission) include his DEMO in footnotes
to pertinent statements made in the text.
Greiner: You DEMO give my article a little context in terms
of time and place-since it was written in 1972, one of the
first such models. I might add too that I think the model
was the precursor if DEMO the first 'punctuated equilibrium'
model-at least Tushman has said this DEMO me.
184 A. H. Van de Ven
ignored by Greiner, as are considerations of
alternative paths to achieve the desired end of
growth; instead only one particular sequence of
developmental stages is discussed. The term
'evolu~on' DEMO loosely to describe prolonged
periods of growth where no major upheaval (DEMO
'revolution') occurs in organizational practices.
Thus, Greiner does not borrow conceptual
elements from the ideal type evolutionary theory
(as we have described it). He does, however,
entertain dialectical theory by observing that 'as
a company progresses through developmental
phases, each evolutionary period creates DEMO own
revolution' (p. 166). However, with the exception
of DEMO the life cycle view that crises are
immanent to each evolutionary stage, Greiner
does not explain how these divergent forces
emerge out of unitary progressions within each
stage, and how these antagonistic forces converge
and collide to mediate a synthesis in the next
stage, as a dialectical theory would require.' As
Greiner: ,This [sentence] hurts a bit because I tried very
consciously to use dialectical explanation (without calling it
that to HBR readers) throughout the evolving stages and
crises. I think you will see this logic if you go through each
stage's description, such as at the end of the Phase 2
description where I write, 'although the new directive
techniques channel energy more efficiently into growth
(DEMO), they eventually become inappropriate for controlling
a larger, more diverse DEMO complex organization. Lower level
employees find themselves restricted by a cumbersome and
centralized hierarchy. . . thus a crisis develops from demands
for greater DEMO by lower level managers (antithesis).
The synthesis link I then DEMO (but perhaps not as explicitly
as I should) when I introduce 'Delegation' in stage 3 as lower
levels receive more autonomy-though this DEMO is
different from the kind they were asking for-and this in
turn becomes the new thesis. You or others might not agree
with how DEMO use dialectics or that I don't explain them clearly
enough, DEMO I can say that I was very conscious of it at the
time, and I do think it is more evident in my more concrete
explanations than you note. In fact, I have had past
correspondence with some dialectical sociologists about the
model's use of dialectics, which was quite uncommon at the
time in management literature. I also think DEMO is the dialectics
that added the power struggle reality and made the article
so successful in managerial reaction.
[But in agreement with you] I DEMO say my model is a
reasonably explicit attempt to combine unitary life cycle with
dialectical theories-but not teleological. For me, life cycle
explains the 'form' of the unitary stages, while the dialectics
explain the underlying dynamics of movement. For example,
I put the 'crises' in DEMO model because I could not find data
showing the stages as naturally and automatically evolving
one after the other. Thus, it is not a model where a future
life or end state is assured-(there are DEMO divergent paths
which are not really discussed in the article. such as failing
to solve a crisis or dying if the crisis continues). DEMO reason
for saying it is not teleological is that there is no envisioned
end state that pulls the process-for me it is the current
DEMO overly brief critique suggests, a fruitful way
to evaluate and extend DEMO models of process
is to anchor the analysis in more basic and
general theories of process.
To empirically examine Greiner's model (as
formulated in 1972) from a developmental process
perspective, one would ask the DEMO kind of
question, 'Does organizational growth commonly
progress through the sequence of stages that
Greiner proposes?' A key conceptual move for
addressing DEMO research question is to view
Greiner's stages as categories of events, and not
to assume that these categories of events occur
in any particular sequence of progression over
time. Thus, instead of viewing organizational
growth as a unitary progression of a linear
sequence of stages based on DEMO life cycle theory
of change, one is open to more empirical
DEMO if the process of organizational
growth is viewed in terms of a variety of other
models of event progressions and theories of
change process.
DEMO way to do this is to adopt a research
design as illustrated in Figure 1. In comparison
with Greiner's initial formulation of the DEMO
in Table 1, this research design redefines the five
stages of DEMO evolution and the four
revolutionary crises identified within the stages
into nine conceptual tracks or categories of
events, and shifts time from a vertical to
horizontal axis.' In so doing, one can not only
gain DEMO richer appreciation of how events pertaining
to organizational evolution and revolution unfold
over time, but also how the multiple tracks of
event categories are related and thereby facilitate
and constrain the overall process of organizational
growth.
DEMO by this research design, one could
undertake longitudinal study of a DEMO of
organizations from birth to maturity. One would
gather data on the chronological sequence of
activities or events that occurred in the develop-
ment DEMO each organization. The observed activities
dynamics within the organization that are driving it forward-
convergence around the thesis of each stage and then running
DEMO resistance (antithesis) and requiring reorientation for the
conflict to be resolved. The model in fact has no ending and
concludes with a question DEMO
' Van de Ven: A careful examination of the conceptual
overlap DEMO the nine substantive event categories in
Greiner's model would prune the set to a smaller and more
manageable number of tracks. However, we will not
undertake this needed theory building task in this example.
is
Strategy Process Suggestions
185
Substantive Event Categories
Creativity (business idea)
.............................
Leadership (f~~nder-~anag~r .............................
transitions)
Professional management .............................
direction
Autonomy demands by
employees
Control attempts by top man- .............................
agement
Coordination of decentralized .............................
DEMO
Red tape (resistances to
bureaucracy)
Collaboration (team-building .............................
practices)
.............................
Occurrence of Events
over Time
Figure 1. Research design for studying DEMO's model
of organizational growth.
could then be coded along the nine event tracks
or categories outlined in Figure 1. For example,
the DEMO track would not only include the
occurrence of the initial business idea on which
the organization was founded, it would also
record all events that occurred to further invent,
develop, and adapt the business idea (or strategy)
of the organization. So also, the delegation
track DEMO include all events related to the
decentralization of responsibilities, the establish-
DEMO of profit centers and bonuses, top manage-
ment restraints to managing DEMO exception, and
similar indicators of delegation activities described
by Greiner (1972: 170-171). Clearly, events
pertaining to each substantive event track listed
DEMO Figure 1 can occur repeatedly during the life
of an organization, DEMO often in no necessary
temporal order. Recording events along these
different substantive categories or tracks (rather
than a single track as has been done in the past)
greatly liberates one from the erroneous and
confining DEMO that the life cycle of
an organization proceeds in a simple unitary
sequence of stages.
Event sequence analysis could begin after the
field observations DEMO concluded and events
were coded along the conceptual tracks. This
analysis would consist of identifying the order
and sequence of events for each organization,DEMO
and then comparing the observed sequence with
the proposed sequence of events in Greiner's
model. A strong test of Greiner's model would
DEMO that allX events pertaining to creativity
and leadership occur first, direction DEMO autonomy
second, delegation and control third, coordination
and red tape fourth, and collaboration and
revitalization last.
I doubt if empirical evidence from such a study
will substantiate Greiner's model of organiza-
tional growth because DEMO empirical support has
been found for a unitary sequence of stages in
other studies of innovation development (see
Schroeder et al., 1986). DEMO, this conclusion
is premature because (as stated before) very
few DEMO studies have examined the
development of strategic change processes in
general, DEMO to my knowledge, no studies have
specifically examined organizational growth as DEMO
developmental sequence of events along the lines
suggested here.'
Greiner: DEMO only concern here is with your use of the
word 'allq-at DEMO I would not argue for 'all,' though I
would argue DEMO the 'bulk' of events or the 'median' should
occur during these time periods. While the HBR article
draws a graphic line at DEMO beginning and end of each stage
in its pictorial portrayal to the reader, I have always said
that there is bound to be 'DEMO over' between stages-for
example, 'autonomy' concerns don't suddenly die away with
initial attempts at 'delegation.'
[In the conclusion of his comments, Greiner states]
Probably some of this you were unaware of because I could
not explicitly discuss it in the article. I don't DEMO my
suggestions change your basic points and hopefully they add
a little more clarification. . . Messing with another person's
piece of art DEMO always a little tricky. But I hope you know
my intentions are good, as I know yours are too.
" Greiner: My sample DEMO small, mostly secondary data, and
limited largely to industrialiconsumer goods companies. So
there is a need for a larger more systematic study-and it'DEMO
interesting that none has been conducted over all these years
on my model or any others for that matter. Such a study
might go DEMO determining if in fact there is the linear
order of stages and crises to find out: Are there different
growth stages for different industries? Do companies that fail
to grow pursue a different order of stages, or do they fail to
resolve certain crises?
Future studies don't necessarily have to measure every
aspect of every hypothesized stage to DEMO to check out the
model. For example, each stage contains a DEMO statement
about formal organization structure, which is usually public
information. So DEMO a pass at this issue would tell us a lot.
186
A. H. Van de Ven
Hopefully, this 'call' for research on strategy
process will trigger strategy scholars to engage
in these conceptual DEMO empirical issues. More-
over, in doing so, strategy scholars will also
advance and modify the suggestions made here
to clarify the meanings and DEMO of process,
and methods for observing process.
NOTES AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper is based on a presentation made at
the Minnesota Conference on DEMO, Process
Research, October, 1991, organized by Bala
Chakravarthy and Yves Doz. I particularly
appreciate the helpful comments of Bala Chakra-
varthy and DEMO Greiner in developing this
paper.
REFERENCES
Abbott, A. 'A primer on sequence methods', Organi-
zation Science, 1(4), 1990, pp. DEMO
Abbott, A. 'Transcending general linear reality',
Sociological Theory, 6, 1988, pp. 169-186.
Aldrich, H. Organizations and Environments, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1979.
Argyris, C. 'Some unintended consequences of DEMO
research', Psychological Bulletin, 70(3), 1968,
pp. 185-197.
DEMO, C. Strategy, Change, and Defensive Routines,
Pitman Publishing, Marshfield, MA, 1985.
Arnold, A. J. and K. Fristrup. 'The theory DEMO evolution
by natural selection: A hierarchical expansion',
Paleobiology, 8(DEMO), 1982, pp. 113-129.
Astley, W. G, and E. Zajac. 'Intraorganizational power
and organizational design: Reconciling rational and
coalitional models of organization', Organization
Science, 2(4), 1991, pp. 399-411.
Bales, R. F. and F. L. Strodtbeck. 'Phases in group
problem-solving', Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 46, 1951, pp. 485-495.
Baltes, P. DEMO, F. Dittman-Kohli and R. A. Dixon.'Mul-
tidisciplinary propositions on the DEMO of
intelligence during adulthood and old age'. In A.
B. Sorensen, F. E. Weinert, and L. R. Sherrod
(eds), Human Development and the Life Course:
Multidisciplinary Perspectives, Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, DEMO, 1986, pp. 467-507.
Blau, P. M. Exchange and Power in DEMO Life, Free
Press, New York, 1964.
Blau, P. M. and R. Schoenherr. The Structure of
Organizations, Basic Books, New York, 1971.
Boyd, 	R. and P. J. Richerson. Culture and the
Evolutionary Process, DEMO of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL, 1985.
Burgelman, R. A. 'Intraorganizational ecology of
strategy making and organizational adaptation:
Theory and field DEMO', Organization Science,
2(3), 1991, pp. 239-262.
Burgelman, R. A. and L. R. Sayles. Inside Corporate
Innovation: Strategy, Structure, and Managerial
Skills, Free Press, New York, 1986.
Campbell, D. 'Variation and selective retention in
socio-cultural evolution', General Systems, 16, DEMO,
pp. 69-85.
Carroll, G. and M. T. Hannan. 'Density delay in the
evolution of organizational populations: A model
and five empirical tests', Administrative Science
Quarterly, 34(3), 1989, pp. 411-430.
Chakravarthy, B. S. and Y. Doz. 'Strategy process
research', Strategic Management Journal (this issue).
Chakravarthy, B. S. and P. Lorange. Managing the
DEMO Process, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, 1991.
Cohen, M. D., J. G. March and J. P. Olsen.
'A garbage can DEMO of organizational choice',
Administrative Science Quarterly, 17, 1972,
DEMO 1-25.
Darwin, C. The Origin of Species, Modern Library,
New York, 1936.
De Rosney, E. 'Evolution and times', Main Currents,
27. 1970, 35-47.
Etzioni, A. 'The epigenesis of political communities
at the international level', American Journal of
Sociology, 68, 1963, pp. 407-421.
Featherman, D. L. 'Biography, society, and history:
DEMO development as a population process'.
In A. B. Sorensen, F. DEMO Weinert, and L. R.
Sherrod (eds), Human Development and the Life
Course: Multidisciplinary Perspectives, Lawrence
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1986. pp. 99-149.
Flavell, J. H. 'Structures, stages, and sequences in
cognitive DEMO'. In W. A. Collins (ed.),
The Concept of Development: The Minnesota
Symposia on Child Psychology, Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ, 1982, pp. 1-28.
Flavell, J. H. 'An analysis of cognitive-developmental
DEMO'. Genetic Psychology Monographs, 86,
1972, pp. 279-350.
French, DEMO L. and C. H. Bell, Jr. Organization
Development: Behavior Science Interventions for
Organization Improvement, Prentice-Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ, 1978.
Garud, R. and A. H. Van de Ven. 'An empirical
evaluation of the internal corporate venturing
process', Strategic Management Journal, (this issue).
DEMO, C. J. 'Time and transition in work teams:
Toward a new model of group development',
Academy of Management Journal, 31(DEMO), 1988,
pp. 9-41.
Gersick, C. J. 'Revolutionary change theories: A
multilevel exploration of the punctuated equilibrium
paradigm', Academy of Management Review, 16(1),
January, 1991, pp. 10-36.
Gluck, F. W., S. P. Kaufman and A. S. Walleck.
'Strategic management for DEMO advantage',
Harvard Business Review, 58(4), 1980, pp. DEMO
Strategy Process Suggestions
187
Gould, S. J. 'Punctuated equilibrium in fact DEMO
theory', Journal of Social and Biological Structures,
12, 1989, pp. 117-136.
Gould, S. J. and N. Eldridge. 'Punctuated equilibria:
DEMO tempo and model of evolution reconsidered',
Paleobiology, 3, 1977, pp. 115-151.
Greiner, L. 'Evolution and revolution as organizations
grow', DEMO Business Review, July-August,
1972, pp. 165-174.
Hannan, M. T. DEMO J. Freeman. 'The population
ecology of organizations', American Journal of
DEMO, 82, 1977, pp. 929-964.
Hannan, M.T. and J. Freeman. Or.anizationa1 Ecol-
ogy. Harvard University Press, -cambridge, MA,
1989.
Huff, A. S. Mapping Strategic Thought, Wiley, New
York, 1990.
Kimberly, J. DEMO R. Miles. The Organizational Life
Cycle, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, 1980.
Kohlberg, L. 'Stage and sequence: The cognitive-
developmental approach to socialization'. In D. A.
Goslin (ed.), Handbook of Socialization Theory
and Research, Rand-McNally, San Francisco, CA,
1969, pp. 347-480.
DEMO, D. J. The Seasons of a Man's Life, Knopf,
New York, 1978.
Lindblom, C. E. The Intelligence of Democracy, Free
Press,New York, 1965.
Lorange, P. Corporate Planning: An Executive View-
point, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1980.
March, J. G. and J. P. Olsen. Ambiguity and Choice in
Organizations, Universitetsforlaget, Bergen, 1976.
March, J. G. and H. A. Simon. Organizations, Wiley,
DEMO York, 1958.
Martin, J. 'Deconstructing organizational taboos: The
suppression of gender conflict in organizations',
Organization Science, 1(4), 1990, pp. 339-359.
Masuch, M. 'Vicious cycles in organizations', Adminis-
trative DEMO Quarterly, 30(1), March, 1985,
pp. 14-33.
McKelvey, DEMO Organizational Systematics, University
of California Press, Berkley, CA, 1982.
Merton, R. Social Theory and Social Structure, Free
Press, New York, DEMO
Mintzberg, H., D. Raisinghani and A. Theoret. 'The
structure of 'Unstructured' decision processes',
Administrative Science Quarterly, 21(2), 1976,
pp. 246-275.
Mohr, L. B. Explaining Organizational Behavior: The
Limits DEMO Possibilities of Theory and Research,
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, DEMO
Nelson, R. R. and S. G. Winter. An Evolutionary
Theory of DEMO Change, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1982.
Nisbet, R. DEMO 'Developmentalism: A critical analysis'.
In J. McKinney and E. Tiryakin (eds), Theoretical
Sociology: Perspectives and Developments, Mered-
ith, New DEMO, 1970, pp. 167-206.
Parsons, R. The Social System, Free Press, New York,
1951.
Pettigrew, A. The Awakening Giant: Continuity and
Change in ICI, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1985.
Pfeffer, J. Power DEMO Organizations, Pitman, Boston,
MA, 1981.
Pfeffer, J. Orgarzizations and Organization Theory,
Pitman, Boston, MA, 1982.
Piaget, J. The DEMO's Conception of the World,
Littlefied, Adams, Totowa, 1975.
DEMO, M. S. and A. H. Van de Ven. 'Using paradox
to build management and organization theories',
Academy of Management Review, 14(DEMO), 1989,
pp. 562-578.
Poole, Roth. MtDecision S. development in
DEMO groups V: Test of a contingency model',
Human Communication Research, 15(4), 1989,
pp. 549-589.
Priem, R. L. 'Strategy making process, chief executive
configural decision rules, and firm performance',
Strategic Management Journal, (this issue).
Prigogine, I. and S. Stengers. Order Out of Chaos,
Heinemann, New York, 1984.
Quinn, J. B. Strategies for Change: Logical Incremen-
talism, Irwin, Homewood, IL, 1980.
Riegel, K. F. 'History as a nomothetic science: Some
generalizations from theories and research in
developmental psychology', Journal of Social Issues,DEMO
XXV, 1989, pp. 99-127.
Riegel, K. F. 'From traits and equilibrium toward
developmental dialectics'. In J. Cole and W. S.
Arnold (eds), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation,
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NE, 1975,
pp. 349407.
Schroeder, R., A. Van de DEMO, G. Scudder and D.
Polley. 'Managing innovation and change processes:
Findings from the Minnesota Innovation Research
Program', Agribusiness, 2(4), 1986, pp. 501-523.
Schumpeter, J. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy,
DEMO & Row, New York, 1942.
Scott, B. R. 'Stages of corporate development'.
Harvard Business School, Boston, MA, Unpub-
lished paper.
Singh, J. V. (ed.). Organizational Evolution: New
Directions, Sage, Newbury Park, CA, 1990.
Tsoukas, H. 'The validity of idiographic DEMO
explanations', Academy of Management Review,
14(4), 1989, DEMO 551-561.
Tushman, M. L. and E. Romanelli. 'Organizational
evolution: A DEMO model of convergence
and reorientation'. In B. Staw and L. Cummings
(eds), Research in Organizational Behavior, 7, 1985,
pp. 171-222.
Van de Ven, A. H., H. L. Angle and M. S. DEMO
Research on the Management of Innovation: The
Minnesota Studies, Harper & Row, New York,
1989.
Van de Ven, A. H, and R. Garud. 'The co-evolution
of technological and institutional innovations',
University DEMO Minnesota Strategic Management
Research Center, Minneapolis, MN, Discussion
Paper, 1992.
Van de Ven, A. H. and G. P. Huber. 'Longitudinal
field DEMO methods for studying processes of
organizational chance', Organization Science, 1(DEMO),
1990, pp. 213-219.
188
A. H. Van de Ven
Van de Ven, A. H. and D. Polley. 'Learning while
innovating', Organization Science, February 1992,
DEMO 92-116.
Van de Ven, A. H. and M. S. Poole. 'Paradoxical
requirements for a theory of organizational
change'. In R. Quinn and DEMO Cameron (eds),
Paradox and Transformation: Toward a Theory
of DEMO in Organization and Management,
Harper Collins, Ballinger Division, New York,
1988, pp. 19-63.
Van de Ven, A. H. and M. DEMO Poole. 'Methods for
studying innovation processes'. In A. H. Van DEMO
Ven, H. L. Angle and M. S. Poole (eds), Research
on the Management of Innovation: The Minnesota
Studies. BallingerIHarper & Row, DEMO York,
Chapter 2, 1989, pp. 31-54.
Van de Ven, DEMO H. and M. S. Poole. 'Methods for
studying innovation development in DEMO Minnesota
Innovation Research Program', Organization Sci-
ence, 1(3), DEMO, pp. 313-335.
Van de Ven, A. H. and M. S. Poole. 'In search of
theories of development and change', University of
Minnesota, Strategic Management Research Center,
Minneapolis, MN, Discussion Paper, 1991.
DEMO den Daele, L. D. 'Qualitative models in develop-
mental analysis', Developmental Psychology, 1(4),
1969, pp. 303-310.
Van den Daele, L. D. 'Infrastructure and transition
in developmental analysis', Human Development,DEMO
17, 1974, pp. 1-23.
Weick, K. E. The Social Ps,DEMO of Organizing,
2nd ed. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1979.
Zeeman, E. C. 'Catastrophe theory', Scientijic Amer-
ican, 234, April, DEMO, pp. 65-83.
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, 189-1 91 (1
992)
Reviewers for Special Issue on Strategy Process
Christopher Bartlett
Harvard University
Arvind Bhambri
DEMO of Southern California
Joseph Bower
Harvard University
Norman Bowie
University of Minnesota
Edward H. Bowman
University of Pennsylvania
Philip Bromiley,
University of Minnesota
DEMO Brush
University of Minnesota
Robert Burgelman
Stanford University
Roland Calori
E.S. C., Lyon
John Camillus
University of Pittsburgh
Andrew Campbell
Ashridge Strategic Management Centre
John Child
University of Aston
Karel Cool
INSEA D
Larry Cummings
University DEMO Minnesota
Richard d'Aveni
Dartmouth College
Arnoud De Meyer
INSEA D
Jane Dutton
University of Michigan
Robert G. Eccles
Harvard University
Kathleen Eisenhardt
Stanford DEMO
Paul Evans
INSEA D
Liam Fahey
Boston University
Sydney Finkelstein
University of Southern California
Marlene Fiol
University of Colorado
James Fredrickson
University of Texas
DEMO Fruin
INSEA D and University of California,
Los Angeles
Joseph Galaskiewicz
University of Minnesota
Raghu Garud
New York University
Sumantra Ghoshal
INSEA D
DEMO Ginsberg
New York University
Luis R. Gomez-Mejia
Arizona State University
Dale Goodhue
University of Minnesota
Vijay Govindarajan
Dartmouth College
John Grant
University of Pittsburgh
DEMO Grinyer
St. Andrews Management Institute
Anil Gupta
University of Maryland
William Guth
New York University
Taieb Hafsi
University of Montreal
Donald Hambrick
Columbia University
DEMO Hamel
London Business School
Charles Hampden Turner
Roffey Park Management College and
Cambridge University
Stuart Hart
University of Michigan
Philippe Haspeslagh
INSEA D
Gunnar DEMO
Stockholm School of Economics
Paul Hirsch
Northwestern University
Larry Hrebiniak
University of Pennsylvania
01992 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
190
List of Reviewers
Anne Huff
University of Colorado
Jose-Carlos Jarillo
IMD
DEMO Jelinek
College of William and Mary
David Jemison
University of Texas
William Joyce
Dartmouth College
Robert Kazanjian
Emory University
1d;lene Kesner
University of DEMO Carolina
Manfred Kets de Vries
INSEA D
Pradip Khandwalla
Indian Institute of Management
Bruce Kogut
University of Pennsylvania
Mitchell Koza
INSEA D
Theresa Lant
DEMO York University
AndrC Laurent
INSEA D
Stefanie Lenway
University of Minnesota
Donald Lessard
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Peter Lorange
The Norwegian School of Management
DEMO Lorenzoni
Istituto di Tecnica Economica, Bologna
Marjorie Lyles
Ball State University
DEMO MacMillan
University of Pennsylvania
Alfred Marcus
University of Minnesota
Leif Melin
Linkoping University
Stephen Mezias
New York University
Robert Miles
Emory University
John Montanari
DEMO State University
Cynthia Montgomery
Harvard University
Michael Scott Morton
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Elaine Mosakowski
University of Minnesota
Edwin Murray
Boston University
Daniel Muzyka
DEMO D
V. K. Narayanan
University of Kansas
Mary Nichols
University of Minnesota
Alain Noel
University of Montreal
Nitin Nohria
Harvard University
Paul Nutt
Ohio DEMO University
Wim Overmeer
INSEAD
John Pearce I1
George Mason University
Jeffrey Pfeffer
Stanford University
Christian Pinson
INSEA D
Marshall Scott Poole
University of Minnesota
DEMO Rajagopalan
University of Southern California
Vasu Ramanujam
Case Western Reserve University
Peter Smith Ring
Loyola Marymont University
Robert Ruekert
University of Minnesota
Lance Sandelands
DEMO of Michigan
Susan Schneider
INSEA D
Charles Schwenk
Indiana University
Paul Shrivastava
Bucknell University
Harbir Singh
University of Pennsylvania
Jitendra Singh
University of Pennsylvania
DEMO C. Snow
Pennsylvania State University
William Starbuck
New York University
John Stopford
London Business School
List of Reviewers
191
Detmar Straub
University of Minnesota
Charles Stubbart
University DEMO Southern Illinois
Raymond-Alain ThiCtart
Universitt! Paris-Dauphine
James Thomas
Pennsylvania State University
Jose de la Torre
University of California, Los Angeles
Andrew Van de Ven
University of Minnesota
N. Venkatraman
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
S. Venkatraman
University DEMO Pennsylvania
Eleanor Westney
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Rod White
University of Western Ontario
Edward Zajac
North western University
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 4 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Suggestions for Studying Strategy Process: A DEMO Note
Andrew H. van de Ven
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, Special Issue: Strategy Process: Managing Corporate
Self-Renewal. (Summer, 1992), DEMO 169-191.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28199222%2913%3C169%3ASFSSPA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from DEMO
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your DEMO web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
DEMO
A Primer on Sequence Methods
Andrew Abbott
Organization Science, Vol. 1, No. 4. (1990), pp. 375-392.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%281990%291%3A4%3C375%3AAPOSM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O
Transcending General Linear Reality
Andrew Abbott
Sociological Theory, Vol. 6, No. 2. (Autumn, 1988), pp. 169-186.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0735-2751%28198823%296%3A2%3C169%3ATGLR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7
The Theory of Evolution by Natural Selection: A Hierarchical Expansion
Anthony J. Arnold; Kurt Fristrup
Paleobiology, Vol. 8, No. 2. (Spring, 1982), pp. 113-129.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0094-8373%28198221%298%3A2%3C113%3ATTOEBN%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 4 -
Intraorganizational DEMO and Organizational Design: Reconciling Rational and Coalitional
Models of Organization
W. DEMO Astley; Edward J. Zajac
Organization Science, Vol. 2, No. 4. (Nov., 1991), pp. 399-411.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%28199111%292%3A4%3C399%3AIPAODR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
Intraorganizational Ecology of Strategy Making and Organizational Adaptation: Theory and
Field Research
Robert A. Burgelman
Organization Science, Vol. 2, No. 3. (Aug., 1991), pp. 239-262.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%28199108%292%3A3%3C239%3AIEOSMA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Density Delay in the Evolution of Organizational Populations: A Model and Five Empirical
Tests
Glenn R. Carroll; Michael T. Hannan
Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO 34, No. 3. (Sep., 1989), pp. 411-430.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198909%2934%3A3%3C411%3ADDITEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-K
A Garbage Can Model of Organizational Choice
Michael D. Cohen; James G. March; Johan P. Olsen
Administrative Science DEMO, Vol. 17, No. 1. (Mar., 1972), pp. 1-25.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197203%2917%3A1%3C1%3AAGCMOO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9
The Epigenesis of Political Communities DEMO the International Level
Amitai Etzioni
The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. DEMO, No. 4. (Jan., 1963), pp. 407-421.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9602%28196301%2968%3A4%3C407%3ATEOPCA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M
Time and Transition in Work Teams: Toward DEMO New Model of Group Development
Connie J. G. Gersick
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 31, No. 1. (Mar., 1988), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198803%2931%3A1%3C9%3ATATIWT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 4 -
Revolutionary DEMO Theories: A Multilevel Exploration of the Punctuated Equilibrium
Paradigm
Connie J. DEMO Gersick
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 16, No. 1. (DEMO, 1991), pp. 10-36.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered
Stephen Jay DEMO; Niles Eldredge
Paleobiology, Vol. 3, No. 2. (Spring, 1977), pp. 115-151.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0094-8373%28197721%293%3A2%3C115%3APETTAM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
The Population Ecology of Organizations
Michael T. Hannan; John Freeman
The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 82, No. 5. (Mar., 1977), pp. 929-964.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9602%28197703%2982%3A5%3C929%3ATPEOO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J
Deconstructing Organizational Taboos: The DEMO of Gender Conflict in Organizations
Joanne Martin
Organization Science, Vol. 1, No. 4. (1990), pp. 339-359.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%281990%291%3A4%3C339%3ADOTTSO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
Vicious Circles in Organizations
Michael Masuch
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 30, No. 1. (Mar., 1985), pp. 14-33.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198503%2930%3A1%3C14%3AVCIO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
The Structure of "Unstructured" Decision Processes
DEMO Mintzberg; Duru Raisinghani; Andr Thort
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 21, No. 2. (Jun., 1976), pp. 246-275.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197606%2921%3A2%3C246%3ATSO%22DP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 4 -
Using DEMO to Build Management and Organization Theories
Marshall Scott Poole; Andrew H. DEMO de Ven
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 14, No. 4. (Oct., 1989), pp. 562-578.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0363-7425%28198910%2914%3A4%3C562%3AUPTBMA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-K
The Validity of Idiographic Research Explanations
Haridimos Tsoukas
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 14, No. 4. (Oct., 1989), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198910%2914%3A4%3C551%3ATVOIRE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-B
Longitudinal Field Research Methods for Studying Processes of Organizational Change
Andrew H. Van de Ven; George P. Huber
Organization Science, Vol. 1, No. 3, Special Issue: DEMO Field Research Methods for
Studying Processes of Organizational Change. (1990), DEMO 213-219.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%281990%291%3A3%3C213%3ALFRMFS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-X
Learning While Innovating
Andrew H. Van de Ven; Douglas Polley
Organization Science, Vol. 3, No. 1. (Feb., 1992), pp. 92-116.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%28199202%293%3A1%3C92%3ALWI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
Methods for Studying Innovation Development in the Minnesota Innovation Research
Program
Andrew H. Van de Ven; Marshall Scott Poole
Organization Science, Vol. 1, No. 3, Special Issue: Longitudinal Field Research Methods DEMO
Studying Processes of Organizational Change. (1990), pp. 313-335.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1047-7039%281990%291%3A3%3C313%3AMFSIDI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0{1g42fwefx}