Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2004, Vol. 87, No. 4, 510 –528
Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/04/$12.00 DEMO: 10.1037/0022-3514.87.4.510
The Interpersonal Effects of Emotions in Negotiations:
A DEMO Information Processing Approach
Gerben A. Van Kleef and Carsten K. W. De Dreu
University of Amsterdam
Antony S. R. Manstead
University of Cambridge
Three DEMO tested a motivated information processing account of the interpersonal effects of anger
and happiness in negotiations. In Experiment 1, participants received information about the opponent’s
emotion (anger, happiness, or none) in a computer-mediated negotiation. DEMO predicted, they conceded
more to an angry opponent than to a DEMO one (controls falling in between), but only when they had DEMO
low (rather than a high) need for cognitive closure. Experiment 2 similarly showed that participants were
only affected by the other’s emotion under DEMO rather than high time pressure, because time pressure
reduced their degree DEMO information processing. Finally, Experiment 3 showed that negotiators were only
influenced DEMO their opponent’s emotion if they had low (rather than high) power. These results support
the motivated information processing model by showing that negotiators DEMO only affected by their
opponent’s emotions if they are motivated to consider them.
Negotiation is one of the most common and constructive ways
of DEMO with social conflict. It may be defined as the joint
decision making between interdependent individuals with diver-
gent interests (Pruitt, 1998). Most DEMO us negotiate on a regular
basis, for instance with our spouses DEMO the division of house-
hold chores, with our children about how DEMO spend the holidays,
and with our students about task assignments in a research project.
Although emotions are inherent to negotiation and social conflict
(Davidson & Greenhalgh, 1999), and are crucial to understanding
how individuals behave within bargaining situations (Barry, 1999),
surprisingly little attention has been given to the role of emotions
in negotiations. In this article DEMO focus on the social effects of
emotions in negotiation (i.e., the way negotiators respond to their
opponent’s emotions) and develop a motivated information pro-
cessing model that accounts for these effects.
Emotions in Negotiation
There DEMO myriad definitions of emotion. However, most defi-
nitions point to three DEMO features of emotion: physiological
reactions, action tendencies, and subjective experience (Lazarus,
1991). Emotions differ from moods in that they are DEMO (Rus-
sell & Feldman Barrett, 1999), of relatively high intensity and
Gerben A. Van Kleef and Carsten K. W. De Dreu, Department of
Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands;
Antony S. R. Manstead, Faculty of Social and Political Sciences, Univer-
sity of DEMO, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Antony S. R. Manstead is now at the School of Psychology, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom.
We DEMO Astrid Homan, Bernard Nijstad, and Scott Tindale for their
valuable comments on drafts of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed DEMO Gerben
A. Van Kleef, University of Amsterdam, Department of Psychology,
Roetersstraat 15, 1018 WB Amsterdam, the Netherlands. E-mail:
g.a.vankleef@uva.nl
510
DEMO duration (Barry, 1999; Forgas, 1992; Oatley & Jenkins,
DEMO), and intentional, that is, directed at an object, person, or
event (Frijda, 1993; Russell & Feldman Barrett, 1999). DEMO this
article we use the term emotion in the sense intended above,
whereas affect is used as a superordinate construct that encom-
passes DEMO moods and emotions (cf. Barry & Oliver, 1996).
Prior research has mostly focused on the intrapersonal effects of
affect (moods and emotions) in negotiation, that is, the influence of
a negotiator’s emotional state on his or her own behavior. For
example, positive affect has been shown to increase concession
making (R. A. Baron, 1990), stimulate DEMO problem solving
(Isen, Daubman, & Nowicki, 1987), increase joint gains (Allred,
Mallozzi, Matsui, & Raia, 1997; Carnevale & Isen, 1986), increase
preferences for cooperation (R. A. Baron, Fortin, Frei, Hauver, &
Shack, 1990), reduce the use of contentious tactics (Carnevale &
Isen, 1986), and increase the use of cooperative negotiation strat-
egies (Forgas, 1998). Conversely, negative affect has been shown
to decrease initial offers (R. A. Baron et al., 1990), decrease joint
gains (Allred et al., 1997), promote the rejection of ultimatum
offers (Pillutla & Murnighan, 1996), increase DEMO use of compet-
itive strategies (Forgas, 1998), and decrease the desire to work
together in the future (Allred et al., 1997)DEMO
These studies show quite consistently that negotiators experi-
encing positive affect tend to be more cooperative and concilia-
tory, whereas negotiators in a negative affective state tend to be
more competitive and reluctant to make concessions. DEMO this
research has greatly improved our understanding of the interplay
between a negotiator’s affective state and his or her cognitions and
behavior, it has ignored the fact that negotiation is a social phe-
nomenon—negotiators’ emotions influence DEMO only themselves,
but also their counterparts. Recently, several scholars have DEMO
sized the importance of the interpersonal effects of emotions in
negotiations (DEMO, Adler, Rosen, & Silverstein, 1998; Barry, 1999;
Barry, Fulmer, & Van Kleef, in press; Barry & Oliver, 1996;
Davidson & Greenhalgh, 1999; Morris & Keltner, 2000; Thomp-
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
511
son, Medvec, Seiden, & Kopelman, 2001; Thompson, Nadler, &
Kim, 1999; Van Kleef, DEMO Dreu, & Manstead, 2004), arguing that
emotions have important social functions and consequences. Most
notably, emotions convey information about how one feels about
things (Ekman, 1993; Scherer, 1986), about one’s social DEMO
(Ekman, Friesen, & Ellsworth, 1972; Fridlund, 1994), and about
one’s orientation toward other people (Knutson, 1996). In this
DEMO, emotions can serve as incentives or deterrents for other
people’s behavior (Klinnert, Campos, Sorce, Emde, & Svejda,
1983): Negative DEMO serve as a call for mental or behavioral
adjustment, whereas positive DEMO serve as a cue to stay the
course (Cacioppo & Gardner, 1999).
This shift in focus from the intrapersonal effects to the DEMO
personal effects of emotions has resulted in a number of articles on
different aspects of the interpersonal effects of emotions in nego-
tiation (see, e.g., Barry, 1999; Barry & Oliver, 1996; Kopelman,
DEMO, & Thompson, 2001; Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2004; Thomp-
son DEMO al., 2001; Van Kleef et al., 2004). Most relevant DEMO our
present purposes are the studies by Van Kleef et al. (DEMO) and
Sinaceur and Tiedens (2004). In a computer-mediated negotiation
task with a simulated opponent, Van Kleef et al. (2004, Experi-
ment 1) provided participants with information about the oppo-
nent’s emotional state (DEMO, happy, or no emotion) at three time
points during the DEMO Consistent with the social functions
perspective outlined above, participants with an DEMO opponent
placed lower demands and made larger concessions than did
participants with a nonemotional opponent, whereas participants
with a happy opponent placed higher demands and made smaller
concessions. Sinaceur and Tiedens (2004) examined the effects DEMO
anger using a different paradigm and obtained similar results. In
face-to-face negotiations, they instructed one negotiator in each
dyad to show either anger or no emotion. In line with the results
obtained by Van Kleef et DEMO (2004), Sinaceur and Tiedens found
that participants conceded more to DEMO angry as opposed to a
nonemotional counterpart. Thus, results from research DEMO different
experimental settings (i.e., computer-mediated and face-to-face)
point to the powerful social impact of anger and happiness on
negotiation behavior. These findings DEMO strongly compatible with
the social functions perspective, because they show that DEMO
triggers behavioral adjustment (i.e., larger concessions) by serving
as a DEMO reinforcer of other people’s behavior, whereas hap-
piness triggers smaller concessions DEMO serving as a positive
reinforcer.
Furthering the understanding of the processes underlying the
effects of anger and happiness, Van Kleef et al. (2004, Experiment
2) showed that these effects result from tracking (see Pruitt, 1981).
Negotiators used their opponent’s emotions to infer the location of
DEMO or her limits and subsequently used this information to make a
counteroffer. In other words, negotiators who were confronted
with an angry opponent estimated the opponent’s limit to be high,
and to avoid costly impasse, they placed low demands and made
large concessions. Conversely, negotiators with a happy opponent
judged the opponent’s limit to be low, felt no need to concede to
avoid impasse, and accordingly placed high demands and made
small concessions. In conjunction with the previously described
research on the social DEMO of emotions, these findings suggest
that the interpersonal effects of anger DEMO happiness are the result
of a process of strategic decision making on the part of the
emotion-perceiving negotiator. In other words, negotiators use the
information about the other’s emotion to design their own nego-
tiation strategy.
DEMO is a complex and cognitively taxing venture. Nego-
tiators need to keep in mind their own preferences and limits and,
at the same DEMO, monitor the opponent’s behavior, try to locate his
or her limits, and combine all this information to design an optimal
strategy. The question that arises is whether negotiators are moti-
vated to mobilize their scarce DEMO resources to pay attention
to, scrutinize, and process the strategic information that is provided
by the opponent’s emotions. In the following section, we provide
an overview of the literature pertaining to motivation and infor-
mation DEMO in negotiations and propose that the degree to
which negotiators will be influenced by their opponent’s emotions
will depend on their motivation to process DEMO strategic informa-
tion implicit in those emotions.
Motivated Information Processing
According to so-called dual-process models, individuals can
process information in either a quick, DEMO, and heuristic way
or in a more effortful, deliberate, and DEMO manner (for
overviews, see Chaiken & Trope, 1999; Kruglanski & Thompson,
1999; Smith & DeCoster, 2000). Whether individuals will DEMO
in such systematic and thorough information processing depends
on their epistemic motivation—the desire to develop and maintain
a rich and accurate understanding of the DEMO, including the
negotiation task (De Dreu & Carnevale, 2003; Kruglanski, 1989;
Kruglanski & Ajzen, 1983).
Epistemic motivation can be DEMO in individual differences.
For instance, individuals differ in their chronic need DEMO cognitive
closure (Kruglanski & Webster, 1996; Webster & Kruglanski,
DEMO). Individuals at the high need for closure end of the contin-
uum are characterized by considerable cognitive impatience. They
tend to process less DEMO before committing to a position or
a course of action, and DEMO are likely to leap to judgment on the
basis of incomplete information. Individuals low in need for clo-
sure, on the other hand, DEMO to suspend judgment until they have
processed all the available information or until time and energy are
depleted (Kruglanski & Ajzen, 1983; Kruglanski & Webster,
1996; Mayseless & Kruglanski, 1987).
Epistemic motivation DEMO also vary as a function of the situa-
tion. De Dreu and Carnevale’s (2003) review of the literature
suggests that epistemic motivation is DEMO when a task is
perceived as attractive (Webster, 1993) or DEMO involving
(Eagly & Chaiken, 1993; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986), when one is
held accountable for one’s judgments and decisions (Eagly &DEMO
Chaiken, 1993; Lerner & Tetlock, 1999; Petty & Cacioppo, DEMO;
Tetlock, 1992), and when outcomes are framed as losses (De Dreu,
Carnevale, Emans, & Van de Vliert, 1994; DEMO, 1993). Ex-
amples of conditions that have been shown to DEMO epistemic
motivation include environmental noise (Kruglanski & Webster,
1991), DEMO fatigue (Webster, Richter, & Kruglanski, 1996),
time pressure (De Dreu, 2003; Freund, Kruglanski, & Shpitzajzen,
1985; Heaton & Kruglanski, 1991; Jamieson & Zanna, 1989;
Kruglanski & Freund, 1983; Sanbomatsu & Fazio, 1990), and
power (Fiske, 1993; Fiske & De´pret, 1996; Goodwin, Gubin,
Fiske, & Yzerbyt, 2000; Neuberg & Fiske, 1987).
The consequences of having high versus low epistemic motiva-
tion have been investigated in a large number DEMO contexts, resulting
512
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
in convergent evidence as DEMO its effects on a multitude of dependent
variables. Among other things, DEMO epistemic motivation
has been shown to stimulate hypothesis generation (Mayseless &
Kruglanski, 1987), decrease the tendency to assimilate judgments
to primed constructs (Ford & Kruglanski, 1995), decrease the
selective use of information (Stuhlmacher & Champagne, 2000),
reduce judgmental confidence (e.g., Kruglanski & Webster, 1991),
discourage the use of stereotypes and heuristics (DEMO, De Dreu,
2003; De Dreu, Koole, & Oldersma, DEMO; Fiske & Neuberg,
1990; Kruglanski & Freund, 1983), DEMO information search on
diagnostic rather than prototypical information (Kruglanski &
Mayseless, 1988), decrease the support for chosen alternatives
(Zakay, 1993), reduce the tendency to reject opinion deviates
(Kruglanski & Webster, 1991), reduce the reliance on fixed-pie
perceptions in negotiations (De Dreu, 2003; De Dreu, Koole, &
Steinel, 2000), and increase the tendency to engage in systematic
information processing (De Dreu, 2003; De Dreu et al., 1999;
Mayseless & Kruglanski, 1987). This DEMO is by no means exhaus-
tive, but it suffices to characterize DEMO general effect of epistemic
motivation, which is to increase individuals’ deliberate, thoughtful,
and systematic information processing. This brief overview also
reveals that DEMO research on epistemic motivation has not
addressed the potential influence of these variables on the way in
which individuals process and act on other DEMO emotions. The
aim of the present research is to fill this void by investigating the
moderating influence of epistemic motivation on the interpersonal
effects DEMO anger and happiness in negotiations.
Present Research
Prior research by Van Kleef et al. (2004) on the interpersonal
effects of anger and happiness DEMO concession making suggests that
these effects are mediated by cognitive processes that require some
degree of information processing on the part of the emotion-
DEMO negotiator. Negotiators monitor their opponent’s emo-
tions, use those emotions to DEMO the opponent’s limits, and
modify their demands according to the presumed DEMO of those
limits. As a result, negotiators concede more to an DEMO opponent
than to a happy one. Because of the cognitive nature of this
process, it can be predicted that the effects of the opponent’s
emotions will be moderated by the focal negotiator’s motivation to
consider the DEMO information that is provided by those emo-
tions. Thus, the central DEMO of the current research is that
epistemic motivation determines the extent to which negotiators
will be influenced by their opponent’s emotions. Below we report
DEMO experiments that tested this proposition, each using a differ-
ent operationalization DEMO epistemic motivation. In Experiment 1,
participants’ dispositional need for cognitive closure was assessed,
and they were subsequently confronted with an angry, a happy, or
a nonemotional opponent. In Experiment 2, epistemic motivation
was DEMO through time pressure, and participants negoti-
ated with either an angry DEMO a happy counterpart. Finally, in
Experiment 3, epistemic motivation was manipulated by varying
participants’ power, and they were again confronted with an angry
or a happy opponent. To further confidence in the generalizability
of our DEMO and results, we decided to test our hypotheses within
different populations (undergraduate students in Experiments 1
and 2 and managers from a variety DEMO organizations in Experiment
3). To demonstrate that our findings are not limited to one partic-
ular experimental paradigm, we tested our theory using both lab-
oratory experiments (Experiments 1 and 2) and a scenario DEMO
(Experiment 3).
Experiment 1
Previous research has shown that negotiators DEMO an angry
opponent make lower demands than do those with a nonemotional
opponent, whereas those with a happy opponent make higher
demands (Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2004; Van Kleef et al., 2004). On
the DEMO of the literature on epistemic motivation and information
processing, we expected DEMO this effect would be stronger for
individuals low in dispositional need for cognitive closure (i.e.,
high epistemic motivation) than for individuals high DEMO need for
closure (i.e., low epistemic motivation). Furthermore, because DEMO
the nature of the emotion manipulation (see below), we expected
DEMO the effect of the opponent’s emotion for participants with a
low need for closure would become stronger after each negotiation
round (cf. Van Kleef et al., 2004). Thus, we predicted a three-way
interaction between DEMO opponent’s emotion, the participant’s need
for closure, and negotiation round, DEMO that only participants with
a low (as opposed to a high) need for closure would make lower
demands to an angry opponent than DEMO a happy one, and that this
effect would become stronger after DEMO consecutive round (Hy-
pothesis 1).
Method
Participants and Experimental Design
DEMO total of 115 male and female undergraduate students at the University
of Amsterdam participated either in partial fulfillment of a course require-
ment or DEMO monetary compensation (10 Dutch guilders, approximately
US$4; participants who were DEMO did not differ in their responses from
those who received course credits). The experimental design included the
opponent’s emotion (anger vs. happiness vs. no emotion) and the partici-
pant’s need for cognitive closure (high DEMO low) as between-participants
variables and demand level as the main dependent DEMO Participants
were randomly assigned to the experimental conditions, and the experi-
DEMO were blind to this assignment.
Procedure
For each session, 6 to DEMO participants were invited to the laboratory. On
arrival, participants were welcomed DEMO the experiment and seated in sep-
arate cubicles in front of a computer. From that point on, all instructions,
questionnaires, and experimental DEMO were presented on the computer
screen. To facilitate the manipulation of the opponent’s emotion (see
below), the experimenter led participants to believe that the purpose of the
study was to find out how knowledge about DEMO opponent’s intentions
affects negotiation processes in a situation in which the negotiating parties
cannot see each other. Subsequently, they were instructed that they would
engage in a computer-mediated negotiation with another participant
(whose behavior was in fact simulated by the computer). The experiment
consisted of four parts: the assessment of need for closure, a filler task, the
negotiation, and a postnegotiation questionnaire.
Assessment of need for closure. Need for closure DEMO assessed through
a validated (De Dreu et al., 1999) Dutch DEMO of the original Need for
Cognitive Closure Scale (NFCS) developed by Webster and Kruglanski
(1994). Participants received a 42-item questionnaire to be scored on
5-point Likert scales (1  totally disagree to 5  totally agree). The
questionnaire was introduced as a pilot study of DEMO ways people think
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
513
about different situations. Examples of items DEMO the NFCS are (a) “I
think that having clear rules and order at work is essential for success,” (b)
“I don’t like to go into a situation without knowing what I can expect DEMO
it,” (c) “I usually make important decisions quickly and confidently,” (d) “I
like to know what people are thinking all DEMO time,” and (e) “I do not
usually consult many different opinions before forming my own view.” To
reduce possible carryover effects from DEMO need for closure assessment onto
the negotiation task, we then gave DEMO a 5-min filler task that
consisted of a number of unrelated questions. After these questions had
been answered, the negotiation task was introduced.
Negotiation task. The negotiation task was one previously used by Van
Kleef et DEMO (2004) and adapted from De Dreu and Van Lange (1995; see
also Hilty & Carnevale, 1993). The task captures the main characteristics
of real-life negotiation (i.e., multiple issues differing in utility to DEMO
negotiator, information about one’s own payoffs only, and the typical
offer– counteroffer sequence). In the current version, participants learned
that they would be assigned the role of either buyer or seller of a consign-
DEMO of mobile phones (all participants were assigned to the seller role) and
that their objective was to negotiate the price, the warranty period, and the
duration of the free-service contract of the phones. Participants were then
presented with a payoff chart (see Table 1) that showed DEMO which
outcomes were most favorable to them, and they were told DEMO their
objective was to earn as many points as possible. As can be seen in Table
1, price for Level 9 ($110) yielded a 0 payoff and for Level 1 ($150)
yielded a 400 payoff (i.e., increments of 50 points per level). For warranty
DEMO, Level 9 (9 months) yielded a 0 payoff, and Level 1 (1 month)
yielded a 120 payoff (i.e., increments of 15 points per level). Finally, for
duration of service contract, DEMO 9 (9 months) yielded a 0 payoff, and
Level 1 (1 month) yielded a 240 payoff (i.e., increments of 30 points per
level). Participants were told, “You can see that the best deal for you is
1–1–1, for a total outcome of 760 points (400  120  240).” The
corresponding payoff table for the other party was not displayed, and
participants were told only that it differed from their own.
To enhance participants’ involvement in the negotiation task, they were
informed that points would be converted to lottery tickets at DEMO end of the
experiment, and the more points earned, the more lottery tickets obtained,
and the greater the chance of winning a DEMO (approximately US$
40) prize. To emphasize the mixed-motive nature of the negotiation,
participants were told that only those who reached an agreement DEMO
participate in the lottery. Thus, on the one hand there was DEMO incentive to
earn as many points as possible, whereas on the DEMO hand there was an
incentive to reach an agreement.
After a short pause during which the computer supposedly assigned
buyer and seller roles to DEMO participants, all participants were assigned the
role of seller. They were DEMO that the buyer (i.e., the opponent) would make
Table 1
DEMO Payoff Chart
Price of phones Warranty period Service contract
Level Price (DEMO) Payoff Warranty Payoff Service Payoff
1 150 400 1 month 120 DEMO month 240
2 145 350 2 months 105 2 months 210
3 140 300 3 months 90 3 months 180
4 135 250 4 DEMO 75 4 months 150
5 130 200 5 months 60 5 months 120
6 125 150 6 months 45 6 months 90
7 120 DEMO 7 months 30 7 months 60
8 115 50 8 months 15 8 months 30
9 110 0 9 months 0 9 months 0
DEMO Prices in Dutch guilders were converted to U.S. dollars and
rounded to the nearest US$5.
the first offer and the negotiation would continue until DEMO agreement was
reached or until time ran out. Just before the negotiation started, partici-
pants learned that an additional goal of the study was to examine the effects
of having versus not having information about the DEMO negotiator’s
intentions. They read that the computer had randomly determined that they
would receive information about the intentions of the opponent without the
opponent DEMO it and that the opponent would not receive information
about their intentions.
After these instructions, the negotiation started and the buyer (i.e., the
computer) made a first offer. Over the negotiation rounds the buyer
proposed the following levels of agreement (for price  warranty 
service): 8 –7– 8 (Round 1), 8 –7–7 (Round 2), DEMO – 6 –7 (Round 3), 7– 6 –7
(Round 4), 7– 6 – 6 (Round 5), and 6 – 6 – 6 (Round 6). Past research has
shown that this preprogrammed strategy has face validity and is seen as
intermediate in cooperativeness and DEMO (De Dreu & Van
Lange, 1995). A demand by the participant was accepted if it equaled or
exceeded the offer the computer DEMO about to make in the next round.
Thus, for example, if the participant demanded 7– 6 – 6 in Round 4, this
demand was accepted by the computer since its next offer (in Round 5)
would have been 7– 6 – 6. After the sixth round, the negotiation was
interrupted regardless of whether participants had reached an agreement
(cf. De Dreu & Van Lange, 1995; Van Kleef et al., 2004). Following Tripp
and Sondak (1992), participants who reached an agreement before Round
6(n  10) were excluded from the sample to allow for repeated-measures
analyses. (However, retaining these participants yielded a DEMO pattern of
results.)
Manipulation of the opponent’s emotion. In the current research, we
chose to manipulate the opposing negotiator’s emotion in the context of a
computer-mediated negotiation in which parties could not see each other
DEMO communicated via computers (see, e.g., De Dreu & Van Lange, 1995;
Hilty & Carnevale, 1993; Moore, Kurtzberg, Thompson, & Morris, 1999).
Participants were led to believe that the purpose of the study was to find out
how knowledge about one’s opponent’s intentions DEMO negotiation
processes and outcomes. After the first, third, and fifth negotiation rounds,
participants received information about “the intentions of the buyer,”
DEMO contained the manipulation of the buyer’s emotion. Participants had
to wait for about 1.5 min while the buyer was supposedly asked to reveal
what DEMO or she intended to offer in the next round and why. After this short
wait, participants received the answer supposedly given by the buyer,
which was presented in a separate box, in a different font, and contained
some minor typing errors to enhance experimental realism. The buyer’s
intentions were held constant across conditions and contained the buyer’s
intended offer DEMO the next round. That is, after Round 1 the buyer wrote DEMO
think I will offer 8 –7–7,” which would indeed be the buyer’s next offer.
The buyer’s intention information also contained an emotional statement
DEMO constituted the experimental manipulation. It was stressed that the
buyer did not know that his or her “intentions” were revealed to the
participant. This DEMO done to lead the participant to believe that he or she
was receiving information about the real emotions of the opponent and not
faked, inhibited, or exaggerated emotions. Thus, participants were led to
believe that DEMO emotion statements they received reflected the emotions as
experienced by the opponent at that time and not emotions that were altered
for self-presentational or DEMO reasons.
After the first negotiation round, participants in the angry-opponent
condition DEMO the following information: “This offer makes me really
angry,” followed DEMO the intention statement “I think I will offer 8 –7–7,”
which was the same for all conditions. In the happy opponent condition,
DEMO read “I am happy with this offer,” followed by the same
intention statement. In the control condition, participants only received the
intention statement. After the third and fifth negotiation rounds participants
again received an emotional DEMO and an intention. Table 2 displays all
statements used in the experiment. (Note that the intended offer always
matched the true offer subsequently made by the opponent.) The emotional
statements have been successfully pretested and used in previous research
514
Table 2
Statements Used for the Manipulation of the Opponent’s
Emotion DEMO Experiments 1 and 2
Opponent’s
emotion Statement
After Round 1
Angry This offer makes me really angry, I think I will
offer 8-7-7.
Happy I am happy with this offer, I think I will offer 8-7-7.
Nonemotional I think I will offer 8-7-7.
After Round 3
Angry This DEMO really getting on my nerves. I am going to
offer 7-6-7.
Happy This is going pretty well so far. I am going to offer
DEMO
Nonemotional I am going to offer 7-6-7.
After Round 5
Angry I am going to offer 6-6-6, because this negotiation
pisses me off.
Happy I am going to offer 6-6-6, because I feel good about
this negotiation.
Nonemotional I am going to offer 6-6-6.
Note. Statements were pretested DEMO have been translated from Dutch.
Deliberate typing errors were left out.
(DEMO Van Kleef et al., 2004), and they have yielded results DEMO have been
replicated in a face-to-face setting (Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2004). Therefore,
we are confident about the external validity of the DEMO obtained within
this paradigm. We return to this method, and its DEMO and disadvan-
tages, in the General Discussion.
Dependent measures. The main DEMO variable was level of de-
mand in Rounds 1 through 6. To check the adequacy of the manipulation
of the opponent’s emotion, participants were asked to indicate on a 7-point
scale how angry, irritated, happy, and satisfied they thought their opponent
had been during the negotiation (e.g., “The opponent appeared angry
during the negotiation,” 1  totally disagree to 7  totally agree). The
items designed to measure perceived DEMO and irritation correlated sub-
stantially (r  .84) and were combined into a single index of perception of
the opponent’s anger. Similarly, the items pertaining to happiness and
satisfaction were combined into an index of DEMO of the opponent’s
happiness (r  .77).
Results
Treatment of DEMO Data
Following Kruglanski et al.’s (1997) recommendation, we com-
bined DEMO responses on the 42 items of the NFCS into an aggregate
score, on which a median split was performed. The NFCS has
good internal reliability ( .83), and the median split (Mdn 
2.95) yielded 13 to 20 participants per condition. Overall ratings
on the NFCS DEMO not differ across the three emotion conditions
(anger: M  2.89, SD  0.33; happiness: M  2.90, SD  0.43;DEMO
no emotion: M  3.02, SD  0.34), F(2, 102)  1.39, ns.
The offers made by participants in each round were transformed
into an index revealing the negotiator’s total level of DEMO for
each negotiation round (i.e., the number of points demanded in that
round, summed across the three negotiation issues of price, war-
DEMO, and service; see Table 1). All analyses were computed using
the full-factorial design.
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
Manipulation Check
DEMO the manipulation of the opponent’s emotion was successful,
we should find an interaction between the opponent’s emotion and
the participant’s rating of their DEMO emotion, such that
ratings within each emotion condition are higher for DEMO corre-
sponding emotion than for the other emotion (i.e., a within-
participants manipulation check) and that ratings between the
emotion conditions are higher for the intended emotion than for the
other emotion (i.e., a DEMO check). To test whether
this was the case, we submitted DEMO perceptions of the
opponent’s emotion to a 3 (opponent’s emotion: angry vs. happy
vs. nonemotional)  2 (participant’s perception of the opponent’s
DEMO: angry vs. happy) mixed-model analysis of variance with
repeated measures on the second factor. (Need for closure was also
included as an independent variable in the analysis, but yielded no
significant effects.)
Results showed the predicted interaction between the oppo-
nent’s emotion and the participants’ perception DEMO the opponent’s
emotion, F(2, 99)  122.45, p  .01 (2  .71). Participants in the
angry-opponent condition rated the opponent as significantly more
angry (M  5.71, SD  1.64) than did participants in the happy
opponent (M  1.91, SD DEMO 0.90) or nonemotional opponent (M 
2.81, SD  1.12) conditions, all three means differing from each
other at p  .05 according to a Tukey’s honestly significant
difference (HSD) multiple-range test. Similarly, participants with a
happy opponent rated the opponent as happier (M  5.20, SD 
1.22) than did participants with an angry (M  1.81, SD  0.86)
or a nonemotional (M  DEMO, SD  1.15) opponent. Again, all
three means differed from DEMO other at p  .05. Further, paired-
sample t tests revealed DEMO ratings within the different emotion
conditions were indeed higher for the intended emotion than for
the other emotion: Participants in the angry-opponent condition
rated their opponents as more angry than happy (M  5.71 vs.
M  1.81), t(34)  10.20, p  .01, and those in the happy
opponent condition rated their opponents as more happy DEMO
angry (M  5.20 vs. M  1.91), t(37)  10.76, p  .01. In the
nonemotional opponent condition there was no significant differ-
ence. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed no main DEMO of
the opponent’s emotion and no interaction, Fs  1, ns. Together,
these results indicate that the manipulation of the opponent’s
emotion DEMO successful.
Demand Level
Demands in Rounds 1 through 6 were submitted to a 3 (oppo-
nent’s emotion: anger vs. happiness vs. no emotion)  2 (partic-
ipant’s need for closure: high vs. low) mixed-model ANOVA with
the opponent’s emotion and participant’s need for closure as
between-participants DEMO and demands in Rounds 1 through
6 as a repeated-measures variable (DEMO regression analysis with need
for closure as a continuous variable yielded results similar to those
reported below). Recall that we predicted a three-way DEMO
between the opponent’s emotion, the participant’s need for clo-
sure, and negotiation round, such that participants with a low (as
opposed to DEMO high) need for closure would make lower demands
with an angry DEMO than with a happy opponent and that this
effect would increase over time (cf. Van Kleef et al., 2004). To
facilitate understanding DEMO our findings, we first report main effects
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
515
and lower order interactions, and then turn to the results pertaining
to Hypothesis 1.
Preliminary analyses. First, ANOVA yielded a main effect of
negotiation round, F(5, 495)  253.41, p  .01 (2  .72),
indicating that participants’ demands declined over time (Round 1:
M  656, SD DEMO 74; Round 2: M  596, SD  83; Round 3: M 
556, SD  87; Round 4: M DEMO 522, SD  90; Round 5: M  498,
DEMO  99; Round 6: M 480, SD  104). DEMO main effect reflects
negotiators’ tendency to decrease their demands in the course of
the negotiation.
Second, we obtained a significant interaction between the op-
ponent’s emotion and negotiation round, F(10, 495)  2.73, DEMO 
.01 (2  .08). Inspection of the means indicated DEMO participants
with an angry opponent conceded most between the first and sixth
negotiation rounds (distance traveled: M  205, SD  87), fol-
lowed by participants with nonemotional opponents (distance trav-
eled: M DEMO 173, SD  88). Smallest concessions were made by
participants DEMO negotiated with a happy opponent (distance trav-
eled: M  151, SD  90). This finding replicates previous re-
search by Van Kleef et al. (2004).
Third, the analysis yielded a marginally DEMO interaction
between the opponent’s emotion and need for closure, F(2, 99) 
2.43, p  .10 (2  .05). Simple-effects analysis revealed a
significant multivariate effect of the opponent’s emotion for par-
DEMO with a low need for closure, indicating that participants
with an DEMO counterpart placed lower average demands than did
those with a happy counterpart (M 513, SD  86, and M 593,
SD  71, respectively), F(2, 99)  5.58, p  DEMO (2  .18).
Participants with a nonemotional opponent took an DEMO
position (M  573, SD  72) that did not DEMO significantly from
the other two conditions according to a Tukey’s HSD multiple-
range test. Simple-effects analysis revealed no effect of the oppo-
nent’s emotion DEMO participants with a high need for closure (542 
Ms  DEMO, 54  SDs  94), F(2, 99)  DEMO, ns.
Hypothesis test. As hypothesized, the effects described above
were qualified by a significant three-way interaction between the
opponent’s emotion, the participant’s need for closure, and nego-
tiation round, F(10, 495)  DEMO, p  .03 (2  .06), indicating
that the interactive effect of the opponent’s emotion and negotia-
tion round on level of DEMO is moderated by participant’s need
for cognitive closure. In accordance with Hypothesis 1, simple-
effects analyses showed that the interaction between the oppo-
nent’s emotion and negotiation round was significant for partici-
pants with a low DEMO for closure, F(10, 495)  3.07, p  .01
(2  .12), but not for participants with a high need for closure,
F(10, 495)  1.23, ns. As can be seen from Figure 1, participants
with a low need for closure were strongly influenced by the
opponent’s emotion, causing the different emotion conditions to
diverge more after each consecutive round. Planned comparisons
revealed that by DEMO 6 all contrasts were significant and in the
predicted direction: Participants DEMO lower demands to an angry
opponent than to a nonemotional one (DEMO  431 and SD  80 vs.
M  488 and SD  115), t(49)  1.64, p  .05 (one-tailed), and
they made higher demands to a happy opponent than to DEMO non-
emotional one (M  549 and SD  103 vs. DEMO  488 and SD 
115), t(49)  1.72, p  .05 (one-tailed). As expected, participants
with a high DEMO for closure were unaffected by the opponent’s
emotion (both ts  DEMO, ns).
Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 replicate and extend DEMO
findings. First, we replicated Van Kleef et al.’s (2004) finding DEMO
negotiators make lower demands to an angry opponent than to a
happy one and that this effect increases over rounds. Furthermore,
this effect DEMO qualified by the predicted interaction with need for
cognitive closure. Participants with a low need for closure were
strongly affected by the opponent’s emotion, but those with a high
need for closure remained unaffected. These results DEMO consistent
with the assertion that negotiators need to be motivated to consider
the opponent’s emotions, and process the strategic information that
they provide, DEMO be influenced by them. As such, the present
findings are in DEMO with a motivated information processing model
of the interpersonal effects of emotions.
A limitation of Experiment 1 is that epistemic motivation was
measured (by means of need for closure) rather than manipulated.
Figure 1. Demand level as a function of the opponent’s emotion, participants’ need for cognitive closure, and
negotiation round in Experiment 1.
516
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
Thus, although the results are consistent with our theory, we
cannot rule out the possibility that they are caused by some
unknown third variable that we did not DEMO into account. Further-
more, the fact that need for cognitive closure DEMO assessed prior to
the negotiation task carries with it the possibility that, in spite of
the filler task, participants’ responses to the NFC DEMO
may have carried over to the negotiation task and influenced their
behavior. Finally, Experiment 1 provides no direct evidence for the
mediating role of information processing. To overcome these
limitations, we conducted a second experiment in which epistemic
motivation was manipulated (through time pressure, see below),
and information processing was measured.
Experiment 2
The first objective of Experiment DEMO was to replicate the findings
obtained in Experiment 1 in a context with situationally induced
epistemic motivation. Of the many variables that affect epistemic
DEMO, time pressure is one of the most well-known (De Dreu,
2003; Freund et al., 1985; Heaton & Kruglanski, 1991; Jamieson
& Zanna, 1989; Kruglanski & Freund, 1983; Sanbomatsu & Fazio,DEMO
1990). Kruglanski and Freund (1983) reviewed evidence suggest-
ing that time pressure intensifies the tendency to seek cognitive
closure, which negatively affects information processing depth and
causes individuals to fall prey to, among other things, primacy
effects, ethnic stereotyping, and numerical anchoring. In a nego-
tiation study, De Dreu (2003) showed that time pressure reduces
individuals’ (self-reported) motivation to process information and
increases the reliance on inadequate DEMO heuristics. On the
basis of these findings and the results of Experiment 1, we hy-
pothesized that time pressure would moderate the interpersonal
effects of anger and happiness on concession making. Thus, we
predicted that, DEMO negotiation rounds, negotiators would make
increasingly lower demands to an angry DEMO than to a happy
opponent, but only under low (rather than high) time pressure
(Hypothesis 2).
The second objective was to DEMO more light on the process
underlying the moderating effect of epistemic motivation. As
discussed in the introduction, research has shown that under high
time pressure less systematic information processing takes place
(e.g., Carnevale, O’Connor, & McCusker, 1993; De Dreu, 2003;
Kruglanski & Freund, 1983). Consistent with this finding, research
on time pressure in negotiation has documented that high levels of
time pressure typically result in less integrative DEMO (e.g.,
Carnevale & Lawler, 1986; Druckman, 1994; Pruitt & Drews,
1969; Yukl, Malone, Hayslip, & Pamin, 1976), reflecting the fact
that information about the other party’s preferences is less well
processed under conditions of high time pressure. In a similar vein,DEMO
De Dreu (2003) found that time pressure promoted a motivated
closing of the mind, which resulted in a reduced motivation to
encode new, relevant information about the opponent’s prefer-
ences and priorities. Together, these DEMO strongly suggest that
negotiators are less likely to engage in systematic information
processing when there is high rather than low time pressure. Thus,
DEMO on the assumption that negotiators need to process the
information that is provided by the opponent’s emotions to be
influenced by them, we predicted that the interpersonal effects of
anger and happiness on participants’ concessions in DEMO course of
the negotiation (“distance traveled”) would be moderated by time
pressure (cf. Hypothesis 2) and that this moderating effect would
in DEMO be mediated by participants’ degree of information pro-
cessing (Hypothesis 3)DEMO
Method
Participants and Experimental Design
A total of 103 male and female undergraduate students at the University
of Amsterdam participated in the study either DEMO partial fulfillment of a
course requirement or for monetary compensation (7 DEMO, approximately
US$7; participants who received monetary compensation did not differ in
their responses from those who received course credits). The 2  DEMO
factorial design included the emotion of the opponent (anger vs. happiness)DEMO
and time pressure (high vs. low) as between-participants variables and
demand level as the main dependent variable. The participants were ran-
domly assigned DEMO the experimental conditions.
Procedure
The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1, except for the fact that
need for closure was manipulated through time pressure, rather than
measured. Twelve participants reached an agreement before the sixth round
of the negotiation and were dropped from the analyses (cf. Tripp &
Sondak, 1992). However, including these participants in the analyses did
not change the pattern of results.
Manipulation of time pressure. DEMO the start of the negotiation,
participants were told that they would be allowed 10 min to complete the
negotiation. In the low time DEMO condition, it was added that past
research using this negotiation task DEMO shown that 10 min is “plenty of
time to reach an agreement” and that there is “no need to hurry.” In the high
time DEMO condition, participants were told that past research had shown
that 10 DEMO is “barely enough time” to reach an agreement and that they
should “keep this in mind” during the negotiation. Just before the negoti-
ation DEMO, this information was briefly repeated (“You have 10 minutes
to reach an agreement, which is [plenty of time] / [rather tight]”). Similar
manipulations of time pressure have been successfully used in the past by
DEMO Dreu (2003) and Mosterd and Rutte (2000).
Dependent measures. DEMO in Experiment 1, participants’ demands in
Rounds 1 through 6 were DEMO into an index of the participant’s
total level of demand in each round. Additionally, participants completed
a postnegotiation questionnaire, which included manipulation checks DEMO
well as a number of items designed to measure participants’ appraisal of
the opponent’s limit, information processing, and, for exploratory pur-
poses, DEMO with the negotiation and willingness to engage in future
interaction. All items were scored on 7-point Likert scales, ranging from
1  totally disagree to 7  totally agree (except where otherwise
indicated).
Compared with Experiment 1, we used two additional items for the
manipulation check of the opponent’s emotion (“The opponent appeared
aggravated during the negotiation” and “The opponent appeared joyful
during the negotiation”). Thus, participants’ perceptions of the opponent’s
anger were now measured with three items, which were averaged into a
single index of perception of the opponent’s anger ( .95). Participants’
perceptions of the opponent’s happiness were also measured with three
items, which were combined into an index of perception of the opponent’s
happiness ( .93).
The manipulation of time pressure was checked with six DEMO We
included one item to check whether participants correctly recalled the
instructions they had received regarding negotiation time (“According to
prior research, is DEMO minutes usually enough time to complete the negoti-
ation?”; 1 DEMO definitely not to 7  definitely). The remaining five items
measured to what extent participants actually experienced time pressure
during the negotiation (e.g., “During the negotiation I felt that I had only
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
517
limited time to think”; “During the negotiation I had enough time to make
my decisions,” reverse scored; “During the negotiation I felt that I had to
hurry”). The DEMO items were combined into an Experienced Time Pressure
Scale ( .91)DEMO
Participants’ estimates of the opponent’s limits were measured using six
items, DEMO for each issue (“What do you think was the buyer’s lowest
DEMO offer on [price / warranty / service]?”; “How far do DEMO think
the buyer would be prepared to go on [price / warranty / service]?”).
Responses could range from 1 (extremely low limit)to9(extremely high
limit; see Table 1). The six items were averaged into a single index of
appraisal of the opponent’s limit ( .84).
Information processing was assessed by eight items (e.g., “During DEMO
negotiation, I hardly thought about my demands,” reverse scored; “During
the negotiation, I paid a lot of attention to the information about the buyer’s
intentions”; “During the negotiation, I made my decisions without DEMO
too much,” reverse scored; “During the negotiation, I tried to consider all
the available information before placing a demand”). The items DEMO
averaged into an index of participant’s information processing ( .77).1
DEMO a more indirect and unobtrusive measure of information processing, we
also DEMO the net amount of time participants spent negotiating. This
was done by recording the total negotiation time (in seconds) over the six
rounds DEMO the negotiation and then subtracting forced waiting times. The
resulting index provides an objective indication of the amount of time
participants spent thinking about DEMO opponent’s emotion and about their
own strategy. This index was significantly positively correlated with self-
reported information processing (r  .34, p  DEMO).
Participants’ satisfaction with the negotiation was measured by two
items (DEMO am satisfied with the course of the negotiation” and “I have a
good feeling about the negotiation”), resulting in a two-item index of
DEMO with the negotiation (r  .71). Willingness to engage in DEMO
interaction with the opponent was assessed with three items (“I would DEMO
interested in negotiating again with this buyer”; “I would like to DEMO
future negotiation with the buyer,” reverse scored; “I would like DEMO do
business with the same buyer in the future”). These three items were
combined into an index of desire for future interaction ( .86).
Results
Manipulation Checks
Opponent’s emotion. The adequacy of the manipulation DEMO the
opponent’s emotion was checked in the same way as in Experi-
ment 1. Thus, we conducted a 2 (opponent’s emotion: angry vs.
happy)  2 (participant’s perception of opponent’s emotion: angry
vs. happy) ANOVA, with repeated measures on the second vari-
able. (Time pressure was also included in the analysis; this yielded
no significant effects.) DEMO, results revealed an interaction be-
tween the opponent’s emotion and participants’ DEMO of the
opponent’s emotion, F(1, 87)  300.60, p  .01 (2  .78).
Participants in the angry-opponent condition rated their opponents
as significantly more angry (M  5.74, SD  DEMO) than did those
in the happy-opponent condition (M  1.99, DEMO  0.94). Simi-
larly, participants with a happy opponent rated DEMO opponent as
happier (M  4.78, SD  1.14) than DEMO those with an angry
opponent (M  1.96, SD  0.78). Furthermore, paired-sample t
tests showed that participants in the angry-opponent condition
rated the opponent as more angry than happy (M  5.74 vs. M 
1.96), t(43)  14.07, p  .01, and that participants in the happy-
opponent condition rated the opponent as DEMO happy than angry
(M  4.78 vs. M  1.99), DEMO(48)  10.74, p  .01.
Time pressure. The adequacy of the time pressure manipula-
tion was checked using the instruction check and DEMO experienced
time pressure index. ANOVA on the instruction check revealed
that participants in the low time pressure condition thought that 10
min would be DEMO of time to complete the negotiation (M 
6.31, SD  1.10), whereas those in the high time pressure condi-
tion thought DEMO 10 min would be rather tight (M  2.03, SD 
1.14), F(1, 87)  327.79, p  .01 (DEMO  .79). Furthermore,
ANOVA on the experienced time pressure index showed that
participants in the high time pressure condition actually experi-
enced DEMO time pressure (M  4.21, SD  1.42) than did
DEMO in the low time pressure condition (M  2.44, SD 
1.12), F(1, 87)  8.53, p  .01 (DEMO  .09). We found no main
effect of emotion and no interaction. Thus, it can be concluded that
the manipulation of time pressure was successful.
Demand Level
Demands in Rounds 1 to 6 were submitted DEMO a 2 (opponent’s
emotion: anger vs. happiness)  2 (time pressure: high vs. low)
mixed-model ANOVA with the opponent’s emotion and time
pressure as between-participants variables and demands in Rounds
1 to 6 DEMO a repeated-measures variable. Hypothesis 2 predicted a
three-way interaction between the opponent’s emotion, time pres-
sure, and negotiation round, such that over time participants would
make increasingly lower demands when dealing with an angry as
DEMO to a happy opponent, but only under low (rather than
high) time pressure. As in Experiment 1, we first report lower
order DEMO, and subsequently, we turn to the actual hypothesis
tests.
Preliminary analyses. As in Experiment 1, ANOVA revealed
the typical main effect of negotiation round, F(5, 435)  181.63,
p  .01 (DEMO  .68), indicating that participants’ demands declined
over time (Round DEMO: M 645, SD  83; Round 2: M 581, DEMO 
91; Round 3: M  537, SD  90; Round 4: M  513, SD  89;
Round 5: M  485, SD  94; Round 6: M  459, SD  92).
Further, ANOVA yielded a significant interaction between DEMO
opponent’s emotion and negotiation round, F(5, 435)  2.44, p 
.05 (2  .04). Consistent with previous research by Van Kleef et
al. (2004) and with the results of Experiment DEMO, participants with
an angry opponent conceded more in the course of DEMO negotiation
(distance traveled: M  209, SD  98) than did participants with
a happy opponent (distance traveled: M  165, SD  102).
Finally, results showed a marginally significant interaction be-
tween the opponent’s emotion and time pressure, F(1, 87)  2.83,
p  .10 (2  .04). Simple-effects analysis revealed a significant
multivariate effect of the opponent’s emotion in the low time
DEMO condition, indicating that average demands in Rounds 1 to
6 were DEMO for participants who negotiated with an angry oppo-
nent than for those who dealt with a happy opponent (M  519,
SD  64, and M  556, SD  92, respectively), F(1, 87)  2.88,
p  .05 (2  .05). In the high time pressure condition, there was
1 A confirmatory factor analysis revealed that experienced time pressure
and information processing are separate DEMO The five items de-
signed to measure experienced time pressure loaded on one factor, with
factor loadings ranging from .83 to .90 and discriminant factor loadings
ranging from .17 to .11. The eight items measuring information DEMO
ing all loaded on the other factor, with factor loadings between DEMO and .89
and discriminant coefficients between .15 and .05.
518
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
Figure 2. Demand level DEMO a function of the opponent’s emotion, time pressure, and negotiation round in
Experiment 2.
no significant effect of the opponent’s emotion on demands (M 
546, SD  78 and M  528, SD DEMO 74), F(1, 87)  1, ns.
Hypothesis test. DEMO predicted, ANOVA produced a significant
three-way interaction between the opponent’s emotion, time pres-
sure, and negotiation round, F(5, 435)  DEMO, p  .02 (2  .05).
Consistent with Hypothesis 2, simple-effects analysis revealed a
highly significant Emotion  Round interaction in the low time
pressure condition, F(5, 435)  5.78, p DEMO .01 (2  .20) but not
in the high time pressure condition, F(5, 435)  1, ns. As can be
DEMO from Figure 2, under low time pressure participants conceded
more to DEMO angry opponent than to a happy one, whereas under
high time DEMO there was no difference.
To facilitate mediation analysis (see below), DEMO also analyzed
the demand-level data by calculating a distance-traveled index
(demand DEMO Round 1  demand in Round 6; for discussions, see
De Dreu et al., 1999, and Pruitt, 1981). This distance-traveled
index yielded results similar to those described above. A margin-
ally significant main DEMO of the opponent’s emotion showed that
participants with an angry opponent conceded more between the
first and sixth rounds than did those with a DEMO opponent (M 
209, SD  98 vs. M  165, SD  102), F(1, 87)  3.44, p DEMO .07
(2  .04), and this main effect was qualified DEMO a significant
interaction between emotion and time pressure, F(1, 87)  3.94,
p  .05 (2  .05). Simple-effects DEMO revealed that partici-
pants who negotiated under low time pressure were strongly in-
fluenced by the opponent’s emotions, conceding more to an angry
opponent than to a happy one (M  222, SD  83 DEMO M  141,
SD  86), F(1, 87)  8.54, p  .01 (2  .19). By contrast,DEMO
participants who negotiated under high time pressure remained
unaffected by the opponent’s emotion (M  191, SD  116, and
M  194, SD  114, respectively), F(1, 87)  1, ns.2
Information Processing
In line with Hypothesis 3, ANOVA showed that information
processing was affected by time pressure. As predicted, partici-
pants in the low time pressure condition reported more information
processing than did participants in DEMO high time pressure condition
(M 4.49, SD  0.51 vs. M 3.61, SD  0.57), F(1, 87)  7.89,
p  .01 (2  .08). ANOVA revealed no main effect of the
opponent’s emotion and no interaction, Fs  1, ns. DEMO of the
time consumed index revealed that participants in the high time
pressure condition spent less time thinking (M  131, SD  DEMO)
than did those in the low time pressure condition (M DEMO 160, SD 
84), F(1, 87)  3.86, p  .05 (2  .05). There was no effect of
emotion on time consumed (F  1, ns) and no interaction (F 
1.80, ns). We also analyzed participants’ appraisal of DEMO oppo-
nent’s limits as an indirect way of assessing their degree of
information processing (cf. Van Kleef et al., 2004). This analysis
DEMO a marginally significant main effect of the opponent’s
emotion, showing that DEMO with an angry opponent judged
the other’s limit to be higher (DEMO 4.97, SD  0.63) than did those
with a happy opponent (M  4.76, SD  0.90), F(1, 87) DEMO 3.06,
p  .084 (2  .03). More important, the analysis revealed a
significant interaction between the opponent’s emotion and time
DEMO, F(1, 87)  6.47, p  .02 (2 DEMO .07). Simple-effects
analyses showed that participants’ estimates of the opponent’s
limits were strongly influenced by the opponent’s emotion in the
low time pressure DEMO (M  5.28 and SD  0.47 for anger
vs. M DEMO 4.58 and SD  0.91 for happiness), F(1, 87)  7.75, p 
.01 (2  .19) but not in the high time pressure condition (M 
4.77 and SD  0.64 for anger vs. M  4.90 and SD  0.88 for
happiness), F(1, 87)  1, ns. This finding provides additional
DEMO for the validity of the information processing measure
because it suggests that participants under high time pressure
thought less deeply about the other’s emotion DEMO did those under
low time pressure.
2 Analysis of covariance with the opponent’s emotion and time pressure
as the independent variables, demand in Round 6 as the dependent variable,
and demand in Round 1 as DEMO covariate produced similar results.
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
Mediation Analysis
Hypothesis 3 predicted that time DEMO would moderate the
effects of the opponent’s emotion on participants’ concession
making through its impact on participants’ degree of information
processing. To test this DEMO, we conducted a series of
regression analyses, using the distance-traveled index as the de-
pendent variable. This index was preferred over an average-
DEMO index because it captures the decrease in demands over the
course of the negotiation, and as such, it is more compatible with
the DEMO interaction between emotion, time pressure, and
negotiation round. Furthermore, average DEMO is a highly con-
servative measure, because it includes the first DEMO round
where no effects are to be expected (since the first DEMO
manipulation is introduced after Round 1). ANOVAs on the
distance-traveled index produced results that are fully compatible
with the repeated-measures analyses (see above), and therefore we
are confident that the index constitutes a valid DEMO of conces-
sion behavior.
To test the predicted pattern of mediation (DEMO Figure 3), we
followed R. M. Baron and Kenny’s (1986) procedure, performing
three separate regression analyses. Because the original predictor
(time DEMO) is interactively related to the dependent variable
(distance traveled), the proposed mediator (information process-
ing) is also interactively related to the DEMO variable (Hull,
Tedlie, & Lehn, 1992). The proper DEMO is then formed by taking
the “covariate interaction” between the mediator (DEMO pro-
cessing) and the independent variable (opponent’s emotion). To
establish mediation, we should find a main effect of time pressure
on information processing and an interaction between the oppo-
nent’s emotion and time pressure DEMO distance traveled. Finally, the
519
interaction between the opponent’s emotion and DEMO pressure
should be significantly reduced when the covariate interaction
(opponent’s emotion DEMO information processing) is controlled for
(see Hull et al., 1992, for an insightful explanation of the rationale
underlying this analysis; see also Stevens, 1996).
In the first step, we entered the opponent’s DEMO, time
pressure (both dummy coded), and their interaction into the re-
gression equation to predict distance traveled. This analysis
showed a significant DEMO of emotion,  .22, p  .04, and an
interaction DEMO emotion and time pressure,  .23, p  .02
(in DEMO 3 these effects are represented by 1 and 2, respec-
tively)DEMO In the second step, we used time pressure to predict
information DEMO and again found a significant regression,
 .29, p  DEMO (3 in Figure 3). In the third analysis, the
interaction between emotion and time pressure (including both
main effects) and the DEMO interaction between emotion and
information processing (including the main effect of DEMO
processing) were simultaneously entered into the equation to pre-
dict distance DEMO This analysis produced a significant effect
of the covariate interaction (Emotion DEMO Information Processing)
on distance traveled,   .28, p  .01 (4 in Figure 3), and the
originally significant interaction between emotion and time pres-
sure was reduced to nonsignificance,  .13, DEMO A Sobel test
indicated that the reduction in the regression weight was signifi-
cant (Z  1.98, p  .05; see Kenny, DEMO, & Bolger, 1998).
These results are in line with Hypothesis 3, and they support the
conclusion that time pressure moderates the interpersonal effects
of anger and happiness on concessions because it decreases nego-
tiators’ DEMO of information processing.3
Satisfaction With the Negotiation and Desire for Future
Interaction
Exploratory analyses revealed that participants with a happy
opponent were more satisfied DEMO the negotiation than partici-
pants with an angry opponent (M 4.43, SD  1.24 vs. M 3.65,
SD  1.51), F(DEMO, 87)  7.27, p  .01 (2  .08). Participants with
a happy opponent also reported a greater willingness to engage DEMO
future negotiation with the same party than did participants with an
angry opponent (M  4.77, SD  1.25 vs. M  3.03, SD  1.50),
F(1, 87)  35.55, p DEMO .01 (2  .29).
Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 DEMO our hypotheses. As
predicted, time pressure moderated the effects of anger DEMO hap-
piness on demands and concessions: Participants with an angry
opponent DEMO larger demands and made smaller concessions
than did those with a happy opponent, but only under low rather
than high time pressure. Furthermore, DEMO 2 showed that
this moderating effect of time pressure was mediated by informa-
Figure 3. A motivated information processing model of the interpersonal
effects DEMO anger and happiness. Standardized regression coefficients are
presented. 1 refers to the main effect of the opponent’s emotion on
distance traveled; 2 refers to the interaction between opponent’s emotion
and time pressure on distance traveled; 3 refers to the effect of time
pressure on information processing; 4 refers to the covariate interaction
between information processing and opponent’s emotion on distance DEMO
eled. *p  .05. **p  .01.
3 We report analyses with distance traveled as the dependent variable
because this index is most compatible DEMO the three-way interaction
between emotion, time pressure, and negotiation round (DEMO, it reflects
concession behavior over time). Hierarchical regression analyses with
DEMO in Round 6 as the dependent variable and demand in Round 1 as
a covariate (entered in Step 1) yielded similar results and DEMO con-
clusions as the regression analyses based on the distance-traveled index.
520
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
tion processing. Under low DEMO pressure, participants thoroughly
scrutinized the information about the opponent’s emotions, and
they modified their demands and concessions accordingly. By
contrast, participants who negotiated under high time pressure
engaged in less thorough information processing, and as a result,
they were not influenced by the opponent’s emotional state. DEMO
nally, exploratory analyses indicated that anger (compared with
happiness) decreases DEMO satisfaction with the negotiation
as well as their willingness to engage in future interaction with the
opponent.
There are some limitations associated with the DEMO mea-
sure of information processing that was used in this experiment.
One is that it may be difficult for individuals to get full access DEMO,
and reliably evaluate, their own cognitive processes. Furthermore,
the DEMO processing scale was administered after the nego-
tiation and not during the negotiation. We explicitly decided not to
ask participants about their information processing DEMO during
the negotiation because we suspected that doing so would influ-
ence their processing strategy and thereby confound the results.
These limitations notwithstanding, we are confident about the
validity of the information processing measure for three DEMO
First, similar self-report measures of information processing have
been used in DEMO research, yielding consistent results. For
example, De Dreu et al. (DEMO) found that participants with a high
dispositional need for cognitive closure DEMO less thorough
information processing than did those with a low need for closure.
Furthermore, De Dreu (2003) found that participants’ self-reported
information processing was affected by time pressure, with par-
ticipants under high time pressure reporting less thorough infor-
mation processing than those under low time pressure. DEMO,
self-report measures of information processing are influenced by
dispositional and situational factors in a predictable and theoreti-
cally meaningful way.
Second, our findings pertaining to self-reported information
processing are compatible with those obtained for the DEMO of
time spent thinking, which constitutes an objective and unobtru-
sive DEMO of information processing during the negotiation (see
De Dreu, 2003). Time spent thinking was affected by the time
pressure manipulation analogous to DEMO information pro-
cessing, and both measures were significantly positively
correlated.
Third, the validity of the Information Processing Scale is sup-
ported by the DEMO pertaining to participants’ appraisals of the
opponent’s limit. Previous research has shown that the opponent’s
emotion influences participants’ demands through their appraisal
of the DEMO limits. Negotiators believe angry opponents to have
a high limit and happy opponents to have a low limit, and there-
fore, they concede DEMO to an angry opponent than to a happy one.
However, this DEMO only occurs when it is in the negotiator’s
strategic interest to think about the other’s emotion (Van Kleef et
al., 2004). In DEMO with this finding, the results of the present
experiment show that DEMO effect of the opponent’s emotion on the
participant’s appraisal of the opponent’s limit is moderated by time
pressure: Negotiators with an angry opponent judge the opponent’s
limit to be higher than do negotiators with a happy DEMO, but
only under low time pressure. Under high time pressure the DEMO
ponent’s emotions do not influence participants’ appraisals of the
opponent’s limits. This finding suggests that individuals under
high time pressure think less deeply about DEMO implications of the
opponent’s emotions, and it provides additional support for DEMO
conclusion that epistemic motivation moderates the interpersonal
effects of anger and happiness on concessions through its influence
on participants’ information processing.
Experiment 3
Together, Experiments 1 and 2 strongly suggest that the degree
to which negotiators DEMO influenced by their opponent’s emotional
state depends on their epistemic motivation—negotiators with a
high epistemic motivation are more likely than those with a low
DEMO motivation to consider the information that is conveyed
by the opponent’s emotion, and they are therefore more likely to
act on it than are those with a low epistemic motivation. Although
these results are consistent with DEMO motivated information process-
ing model of the interpersonal effects of anger and happiness in
negotiations, it is important to consider an alternative account for
our findings.
So far we have investigated the moderating influence of epi-
DEMO motivation on the interpersonal effects of anger and hap-
piness by examining dispositionally based need for cognitive clo-
sure (Experiment 1) and situationally DEMO time pressure (Ex-
periment 2). Although both need for cognitive DEMO and time
pressure effectively induce variation in epistemic motivation, they
may DEMO have inadvertently introduced an urgency tendency—an
inclination to attain closure as soon as possible (Kruglanski &
Webster, 1996). Thus, it is DEMO that, apart from influencing
participants’ degree of information processing, our operationaliza-
tions of epistemic motivation in Experiments 1 and 2 introduced
the additional DEMO of finishing the negotiation as quickly as
possible. One could argue that the observed interaction effects
resulted from there being only one condition in DEMO experiment in
which there was no compelling reason to decrease demands (DEMO,
the low need for closure/low time pressure–happy opponent con-
dition). Participants in the other conditions either had an angry
opponent or DEMO goal of finishing quickly.
Although this alternative explanation is difficult to reconcile
with the information processing data and the mediation test re-
ported in DEMO 2, we decided to conduct a third experiment
in which we DEMO epistemic motivation without simulta-
neously introducing an incentive to finish the negotiation quickly.
One variable that does exactly this and that is highly relevant DEMO
negotiation, is power. Power can be broadly defined as the capac-
DEMO to exert influence on other people (Bacharach & Lawler, 1981;
Kelley & Thibaut, 1978). Although power may derive from a
variety of “power bases” (French & Raven, 1959), such as some-
DEMO position within a group or organization or the possession of
valuable resources, such as expertise (Lee & Tiedens, 2002; Pod-
sakoff & DEMO, 1985; Yukl & Falbe, 1991), it is the mutual
DEMO of individuals that allows power to occur. In exchange
relations (such DEMO negotiations) between two persons A and B, B’s
dependence on A increases with the value of the benefits A can
give B, and it decreases with B’s access to alternative sources for
those benefits (Bacharach & Lawler, 1981; Emerson, 1972; Kelley
& Thibaut, 1978). Accordingly, in some negotiation studies power
has been operationalized as the availability of alternatives (e.g.,
Brett, Pinkley, & Jackofsky, 1996; Giebels, De Dreu, & Van de
Vliert, 1998, 2000; Pinkley, DEMO; Pinkley, Neale, & Bennett,
1994). In Experiment 3 DEMO used a similar manipulation of power,
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
providing half of the participants with plenty DEMO alternatives to an
agreement with the current negotiation partner, whereas the DEMO
half were given no alternatives whatsoever.
Power in negotiation has been shown to increase a negotiator’s
limit (Pinkley, 1995; White & Neale, DEMO), sense of power
(Pinkley, 1995), and eventual share of the pie (e.g., Arunachalam,
Wall, & Chan, 1998; Brett et al., 1996; Pinkley et al., 1994). Fiske
(1993; Neuberg & Fiske, 1987) argued that people pay attention to
those DEMO control their outcomes so as to be able to predict what
will happen to them and (re)gain a sense of control. Therefore,
low-power individuals will be more motivated to attend to (infor-
mation about) others than will high-power individuals (Fiske &
De´pret, 1996). DEMO is ample evidence in support of this reason-
ing. For example, DEMO has been shown that compared with low-
power individuals those with high power pay less attention to
information that is inconsistent with their initial DEMO about
another person (Erber & Fiske, 1984), rely more on stereotypes
and less on individual attributes when forming impressions about
others (Goodwin et al., 2000; Neuberg & Fiske, 1987), pay less
attention to specific social stimuli (Snodgrass, 1985, 1992), and
ask less diagnostic questions aimed at acquiring accurate informa-
tion about others (De Dreu & Van Kleef, 2004). In other words,
power reduces the motivation to attend to, and process, social
information about others (see Keltner, Gruenfeld, & Anderson,
2003, for a comprehensive review of this literature).
On the basis of the research outlined above, negotiators with
high (compared to low) power can be expected to have DEMO
epistemic motivation and to be less motivated to consider infor-
mation about their opponent’s emotions. Thus, building on previ-
ous research regarding the effects of power on information pro-
cessing and on the results of Experiments DEMO and 2, we predicted
that high-power negotiators would be less influenced DEMO their
opponent’s emotions than low-power negotiators. Specifically, we
hypothesized that low-power DEMO would concede more to
an angry opponent than to a happy one, whereas high-power
negotiators would not be differentially affected by the opponent’s
emotions (Hypothesis 4).
To test this hypothesis, we conducted a scenario DEMO in
which we manipulated participants’ power by varying their num-
ber of alternatives to a negotiated agreement and by subsequently
confronting them with either DEMO angry or a happy counterpart. We
opted for a scenario approach for three reasons. First, using a
scenario allowed us to assess whether the results that we obtained
using the computer task generalize to other settings. DEMO, we
wanted to investigate whether our findings generalize to different
samples. DEMO of using undergraduate students as participants,
Experiment 3 involved managers of three different organizations.
Third, we wanted to create a negotiation context that more closely
resembles the kind of situation that people might encounter in DEMO
life. In real negotiations, the status of the opponent’s emotional
expressions DEMO often unknown, and negotiators have to make in-
ferences about whether DEMO expressions are reliable indicators of
the opponent’s actual inner state or part of a strategic influence
attempt. In Experiments 1 and 2, participants were given unam-
biguous and apparently reliable information about the opponent’s
emotional state. DEMO the third experiment, we created a situation in
which it was DEMO whether the opponent’s emotion was genuine
or not.
Sample
Method
521
The study was conducted with middle- and lower-level managers from
three different Dutch DEMO: a consultancy firm, a phone company,
and a firm of contractors. The HR managers of these companies were
contacted and asked to DEMO the questionnaires among the employees.
Depending on the manager’s preference, the DEMO were handed
out to the employees in person or distributed via the company e-mail.
Respondents participated in the study on a voluntary basis. They DEMO
the questionnaires anonymously, and they were assured that their individ-
ual DEMO would remain confidential. The final sample consisted of 82
respondents: 46 DEMO the consultancy firm (response rate 46%), 27 from
the phone DEMO (response rate 82%), and 9 from the firm of contractors
(response rate 56%). They were 50 men and 31 women (1 unknown) who
were on average 34 years old. The participants’ experience in their current
jobs ranged from 0 to 30 years, with an average of 4.5 years. The number
of people directly reporting to them varied DEMO 1 to 5, with an average of
2. Participants reported spending DEMO average 4 hr per month negotiating
and dealing with conflict.
Design and Procedure
The design was a 2 (opponent’s emotion: anger vs. happiness)  2
(participant’s alternatives: abundant vs. none) full factorial, with DEMO
as the major dependent variable. Employees who agreed to participate in
the study received a booklet containing a brief description of the research,
DEMO negotiation scenario, and a questionnaire. Participants who were recruited
via the DEMO received an electronic version of the document. Participants
who received a paper-and-pencil version of the study materials were
requested to return the completed questionnaire DEMO to the researchers
by means of the enclosed stamped addressed envelope. Those who received
the electronic version were asked to attach the file with DEMO responses to
an e-mail message addressed to the researchers.
Negotiation task. Participants were presented with a scenario that
featured a buyer–seller negotiation in an DEMO context. They were
asked to take their role seriously and to respond as if they were actually in
the situation. In the scenario, participants were given the role of a project
manager who had been assigned DEMO task of hiring an information technol-
ogy (IT) company to update and professionalize the company website.
They were told that their company preferred DEMO invest no more than 90,000
euros (roughly equivalent to US$90,DEMO).
Power manipulation. Power was manipulated by varying the partici-
pant’s number of alternatives to a negotiated settlement. After the general
situation had been DEMO, half the participants read that a thorough
search of all the DEMO IT companies in the region had shown there to
be as many as eight good candidates (high-power condition). The other half
read that there was only one good candidate (low-power condition). Par-
ticipants then learned that [one of the companies / this company] was
willing to DEMO the assignment for 120,000 euros. Subsequently, partic-
ipants were asked DEMO imagine that they had [randomly contacted one of the
companies / contacted the company] by phone to negotiate the price of the
assignment, and that they had just proposed to pay 90,000 euros.
Manipulation of DEMO opponent’s emotion. Participants then read that,
just as the other party was about to respond to this offer, the other’s mobile
phone rang, that the other apologized for the disturbance, and that the other
DEMO talked on the mobile phone to someone else. Participants in the
angry-opponent condition read that they overheard the following conver-
sation: “Hey Bernard, DEMO sorry, I don’t have time right now, I’m in the
middle of a negotiation with a client . . . . I just DEMO an offer which makes
me really mad. I’ll call you back . . . . Yeah, you’re right, I’m pretty angry.
Bye!” In DEMO, participants in the happy-opponent condition read that
they heard the opponent DEMO the following: “Hey Bernard, I’m sorry, I
don’t have time DEMO now, I’m in the middle of a negotiation with a client
522
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
. . . . DEMO just got an offer which makes me really happy. I’ll call you back ....
Yeah, you’re right, I feel very good about this. DEMO
After the emotion manipulation, participants were informed that the
opponent requested DEMO improved offer, which was to be communicated by
electronic mail. Participants DEMO then asked to write down the e-mail
message as they would send it to the IT company and to make sure to
mention their DEMO offer. Finally, they were asked to complete a brief
questionnaire containing DEMO of their intention to concede, experi-
enced power, manipulation checks, DEMO ability to imagine themselves in the
situation.
Dependent Variables
The main dependent variable was the participant’s demand, as written in
the e-mail to the IT company. We asked one question to measure partici-
pants’ intention to DEMO (“In this situation I would be inclined to
concede to the DEMO,” 1  definitely not to 5  definitely). The emotion
manipulation was checked by two items, one measuring perceived anger
(“During DEMO conversation over the mobile phone, the other person ex-
pressed anger DEMO my offer,” 1  definitely not to 5  definitely) DEMO
one measuring perceived happiness (“During the conversation over the
mobile phone, the other person expressed happiness regarding my offer,”
1  definitely DEMO to 5  definitely). The manipulation of the participant’s
alternatives was checked using three items (e.g., “Do you think that there
are DEMO IT companies in your region that could professionalize the
website for a better price?,” “Are there other qualified IT companies in
your region that you could contact?”), which were averaged into an
alternatives DEMO (  .80). Experienced power was measured by five
items (e.g., “I feel that I have a powerful negotiation position”; “I DEMO that
I need the other person to finish the project successfully,” reverse scored;
“I feel that I am dependent on the other DEMO,” reverse scored; “I feel
powerful in this situation”; 1  totally disagree to 5  totally agree).
These items were averaged DEMO a single index of the participant’s experi-
enced power ( .73)DEMO Finally, participants were asked to what extent they
had been able DEMO imagine themselves in the situation described in the
scenario (1  DEMO very well to 5  very well).
Results
Manipulation Checks
Opponent’s emotion. The manipulation of the opponent’s
emotion was checked in the same DEMO as in Experiments 1 and 2.
A 2 (opponent’s emotion: angry vs. happy)  2 (participant’s
perception of opponent’s emotion: angry vs. happy) ANOVA with
repeated measures on the second factor revealed a significant
interaction between the opponent’s emotion and participants’ per-
ceptions of the opponent’s DEMO, F(1, 78)  496.22, p  .01
(2 DEMO .86). Participants in the angry-opponent condition rated the
opponent as more angry (M  4.29, SD  0.81) than did those in
the happy-opponent condition (M  1.38, SD  0.63), and DEMO
ticipants in the happy-opponent condition rated the opponent as
happier (M DEMO 4.53, SD  0.55) than did those in the angry-
opponent condition (M  1.43, SD  0.83). There was no DEMO
effect of power and no interaction (both Fs  1, ns). Finally,
paired-sample t tests showed that participants in the angry DEMO
tion rated the other as more angry than happy (M  DEMO vs. M 
1.43), t(41)  13.16, p  .01, and that participants in the happy
condition rated the other as more happy than angry (M  4.53 vs.
M  1.38), t(39)  20.43, p  .01.
Power. A significant main DEMO of the alternatives manipu-
lation on the corresponding index revealed that participants in the
abundant-alternatives conditions felt that they had more alterna-
tives (M  4.47, SD  0.45) than did those in the no-alternatives
DEMO (M  3.56, SD  0.88), F(1, 78)  33.45, p  .01
(2  .30). We found DEMO main effect of the opponent’s emotion
and no interaction (both Fs DEMO 1, ns). Furthermore, a main effect of
the alternatives manipulation on the Experienced Power Scale
showed that participants who had abundant alternatives DEMO felt
more powerful (M  4.34, SD  0.45) than DEMO participants who
had no alternatives (M  3.43, SD  0.70), F(1, 78)  48.14, p 
.01 (2 DEMO .38). Again, there was no main effect of emotion (F 
1.81, ns) and no interaction (F  2.02, ns)DEMO
Preliminary Analyses
A one-sample t test showed that participants’ ratings on the
imagination item were significantly above the scale mean (M 
3.77, DEMO  1.22), t(81)  5.70, p  .01, DEMO that they had
been able to imagine themselves in the situation that we presented.
Preliminary analyses revealed no effects of any of the demo-
DEMO variables, so they are not discussed any further.
Demand Level
A DEMO effect of the opponent’s emotion showed that partici-
pants with an angry opponent conceded to a higher (i.e., less
favorable) price than did those with a happy opponent (M 
93,167 and SD  4,601 vs. M  88,956 and SD  2,998,DEMO
respectively), F(1, 78)  26.06, p  .01 (2  .25). Second, a
main effect of power revealed that participants with abundant
alternatives made tougher demands than did those who had DEMO
alternatives (M  90,125 and SD  2,399 vs. DEMO  92,054 and
SD  5,589, respectively), F(DEMO, 78)  4.85, p  .03 (2  .06).
Finally, and most important, both main effects were qualified by
the DEMO interaction between emotion and power, F(1, 78) 
8.60, p  .01 (2  .10). Consistent with Hypothesis 4, DEMO
effects analysis revealed that participants conceded more to an
angry opponent than to a happy one, but only when they had no
alternatives (DEMO  95,136 and SD  5,383 for anger vs. M 
88,663 and SD  3,504 for happiness), F(DEMO, 78)  33.07, p  .01
(2  .34). Participants with abundant alternatives did not differ as
a function of the DEMO emotion (M  91,000 and SD 
2,052 for DEMO vs. M  89,250 and SD  2,447 for happiness),
F(1, 78)  2.23, ns.
The results pertaining DEMO participants’ self-reported intention to
concede were consistent with those obtained for their actual de-
mands. A main effect of emotion indicated that participants were
DEMO inclined to concede to an angry opponent than to a happy one
(M  2.74 and SD  1.17 vs. M  2.05 and SD  0.88,
respectively), F(1, 78)  10.63, p  .01 (2  .12), and a main
effect of power showed that participants with abundant alternatives
were less likely to concede DEMO were those who had no alterna-
tives (M  1.95 and DEMO  0.88 vs. M  2.83 and SD  1.10,
respectively), F(1, 78)  18.12, p  .01 (2 DEMO .19). Again, a
significant interaction between emotion and power was DEMO,
F(1, 78)  7.63, p  .01 (2  .09). Simple-effects analyses
revealed that participants who had no alternatives DEMO more
inclined to concede to an angry opponent than to a happy one
(M  3.41, SD  1.01 and M  2.20, SD  0.83, respectively),
F(1, 78)  18.57, p  .01 (2  .31), whereas those with abundant
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
523
alternatives did not differ as a DEMO of the opponent’s emotion
(M  2.00, SD  0.86 and M  1.90, SD  0.91, respectively),
F(1, DEMO)  1, ns.
Discussion
Building on previous research on power and epistemic motiva-
tion (e.g., De Dreu & Carnevale, 2003; Fiske, 1993; Fiske &
De´pret, 1996; Neuberg & Fiske, 1987) DEMO on the results of
Experiments 1 and 2, we hypothesized and DEMO that the inter-
personal effects of anger and happiness on demands and conces-
sions are moderated by power. As predicted, low-power negotia-
tors were strongly influenced by their opponent’s emotions,
conceding more to an angry DEMO than to a happy one. By
contrast, high-power negotiators were unaffected DEMO the oppo-
nent’s emotion. These results corroborate Hypothesis 4, and they
DEMO the motivated information processing model outlined in
the introduction.
Importantly, this DEMO support for the motivated informa-
tion processing account also undermines the “urgency” explana-
tion that we advanced in the introduction to Experiment 3. The
DEMO was that, in Experiments 1 and 2, a low epistemic motivation
(i.e., high need for closure, high time pressure) possibly went DEMO
in hand with a desire to end the negotiation as quickly as possible
and that perhaps a sense of urgency rather than reduced motivation
DEMO process information is responsible for the results pertaining to
demands and concessions in the first two experiments. In Exper-
iment 3, however, this DEMO is far less plausible because it is
difficult to see how having few or plenty of alternatives would
unequivocally increase or decrease participants’ motivation DEMO
finish the negotiation. If anything, in Experiment 3 low epistemic
motivation DEMO likely to have coincided with a reduced rather than
an increased urgency motivation, because having plenty of alter-
natives enables a negotiator to safely try and get the most out of the
negotiation without risking ending DEMO with nothing at all. How-
ever, if one would make a DEMO that having no alternatives (i.e.,
high epistemic motivation) produces a desire to finish the negoti-
ation quickly, the pattern of means would be inconsistent with
those obtained in the first two experiments. Thus, although the
urgency explanation can account for some of the results of Exper-
DEMO 1 and 2, it cannot account for the combined effects of
DEMO 1 to 3. In contrast, the motivated information pro-
cessing model DEMO easily explain the results of all three experi-
ments by using the principle of epistemic motivation. The moti-
vated information processing account thus constitutes DEMO most
parsimonious explanation for the combined results of the present
experiments.
General Discussion
In the current research we drew on the motivated information
processing DEMO of negotiation (De Dreu & Carnevale, 2003; see
also Kruglanski, 1989; Kruglanski & Webster, 1996) to enhance
our understanding of the interpersonal effects of emotions in
negotiation. Experiment 1 demonstrated that negotiators’ tendency
DEMO concede more to an angry opponent than to a happy one (DEMO
Kleef et al., 2004) is moderated by individual differences in
epistemic motivation: Negotiators with a low dispositional need
for cognitive closure were strongly affected by the opponent’s
emotion, whereas those with a high dispositional need for cogni-
tive closure were unaffected. Experiment 2 showed a similar
pattern DEMO a situational manipulation of epistemic motivation.
Participants who negotiated under low time pressure (i.e., high
epistemic motivation) were strongly influenced by the other’s
emotion, whereas those under high time pressure (i.e., low epi-
stemic motivation) were not. This moderating effect of time pres-
sure was mediated by information processing. Finally, using a
different paradigm and participant population, DEMO 3 dem-
onstrated that the interpersonal effects of anger and happiness in
negotiations are moderated by power. In line with previous re-
search by DEMO and colleagues (Fiske, 1993; Fiske & De´pret,
1996; Neuberg & Fiske, 1987) showing that power reduces epis-
temic motivation, we found that low-power negotiators conceded
more to an angry counterpart than to DEMO happy one, whereas high-
power negotiators were unaffected by the other’s DEMO Taken
together, the results of these three studies provide strong support
DEMO the proposition that a negotiator’s epistemic motivation deter-
mines the extent to which he or she will be influenced by the
opponent’s emotions. The DEMO that we used three different opera-
tionalizations of epistemic motivation and found consistent results
renders alternative explanations less plausible. Below we consider
the implications DEMO these findings, discuss the strengths and limi-
tations of our approach, and outline some avenues for future
research.
Implications and Contributions
In exploring DEMO epistemic motivation moderates the interper-
sonal effects of emotions in negotiation, DEMO present work brings
together two separate lines of research. The synthesis of these
different lines of inquiry extends our knowledge about the nego-
tiation DEMO, the social effects of emotions, and the role of
epistemic motivation in social interaction. Our findings are con-
sistent with a motivated information DEMO approach to nego-
tiation (see De Dreu & Carnevale, 2003; DEMO Dreu et al., 1999,
2000), which holds that negotiators DEMO be more or less motivated
to engage in systematic and thorough information processing,
depending on personality characteristics such as need for cognitive
closure DEMO situational factors such as time pressure and power
(Fiske, 1993; DEMO & De´pret, 1996; Kruglanski & Webster, 1996).
Consistent with DEMO perspective, our data show that when negoti-
ators have a high DEMO motivation, they process the informa-
tion that is conveyed by the DEMO emotions more thoroughly,
and, as a result, the opponent’s emotional state has a stronger
impact on their behavior.
Recent research on the DEMO effects of emotions in
negotiation has demonstrated that anger and happiness have a
profound impact on negotiation behavior (Sinaceur & Tiedens,
2004; DEMO Kleef et al., 2004, Experiment 1). Furthermore, these
effects DEMO been shown to be produced by strategic consider-
ations. Negotiators who are confronted with an angry opponent
judge the other’s limits to be high, leading them to concede quickly
so as to avoid impasse. Conversely, negotiators who are con-
fronted with a happy opponent believe that the other DEMO low
limits, which causes them to stand firm and make tough DEMO
(Van Kleef et al., 2004, Experiment 2). The present DEMO
qualifies these findings by showing that the interpersonal effects of
emotions on negotiation behavior are moderated by epistemic
524
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
motivation: Negotiators only react to the opponent’s emotion in a
strategic way when they are motivated DEMO consider the implications
of the other’s emotion.
The current findings also add to what we know about the effects
of emotions in social settings. DEMO the previous decade has
witnessed an increasing interest in the interpersonal effects of
emotions (e.g., Frijda & Mesquita, 1994; Keltner & Haidt, 1999;
Morris & Keltner, 2000; Oatley & Jenkins, 1992), little is known
about potential moderators of these effects. The present research
DEMO this void by showing that the interpersonal effects of emotions
are contingent on the perceiver’s motivation to actively think about
the implications of the DEMO emotions. This finding has
interesting implications for the tactical use of emotions (cf. Barry,
1999), because it suggests that the effectiveness of the use of
emotional deception as a strategic ploy depends on whether DEMO
target of the influence attempt is motivated to think about the
implications of the other’s emotions for his or her own goal
attainment.
In DEMO research, epistemic motivation has been linked to social
psychological phenomena such DEMO impression formation, attribu-
tion, stereotyping, and language use (for a comprehensive over-
view, see Kruglanski & Webster, 1996) and their strategic impli-
cations in the context of conflict and negotiation (De Dreu &DEMO
Carnevale, 2003). The present research extends these findings to
the DEMO of emotions by showing that the interpersonal effects
of anger and happiness are moderated by epistemic motivation.
Although this finding is of importance in DEMO own right, its rele-
vance may extend beyond the specific effects DEMO emotion and may
well generalize to other domains of social interaction. Despite the
fact that lay epistemic theory has been investigated in a multitude
DEMO contexts, most support for the theory stems from settings that
involve DEMO or no social interaction. The current study shows that
the theory also holds in settings with (simulated) interaction, and
our finding that individuals with a high epistemic motivation are
more easily influenced by others’ emotions DEMO are individuals
with a low epistemic motivation suggests that similar moderating
effects may also obtain in other areas of social influence.
Dual-process models of DEMO information processing distin-
guish between the ability to process information and the motiva-
tion to do so (see e.g., Chaiken & Trope, 1999; Smith & DeCoster,
2000). An implicit assumption of lay epistemic theory and the
motivated information processing approach is that people have
sufficient DEMO resources available to process the information
that they receive but differ in the extent to which they are moti-
vated to process the information. DEMO raises the question of
whether our findings are caused by differences in motivation or
differences in ability. Although our experiments were not designed
to DEMO the relative effects of ability and motivation on
information processing, we DEMO that they can best be explained
in terms of differential motivation. First, chronic differences in
motivation to actively acquire and thoroughly scrutinize new
pieces of information (i.e., need for cognitive closure) have been
shown not to be related to measures of cognitive ability (i.e.,
intelligence; DEMO & Webster, 1996). Thus, the interaction
between dispositional need for closure and the opponent’s emotion
that was obtained in Experiment 1 would DEMO that it is moti-
vation, rather than ability, that moderates the interpersonal effects
of anger and happiness in negotiation.
Second, in contrast to previous research on the effects of time
pressure and information processing (e.g., Freund et al., 1985;
Heaton & Kruglanski, 1991; Kruglanski & Freund, 1983), we did
not vary the amount of time DEMO to reach an agreement.
Rather, all participants were given the same DEMO of time to
negotiate, and they were told that this was DEMO more than enough
or relatively tight. In other words, we manipulated DEMO
time pressure rather than the absolute amount of time available,
suggesting that our effects can be more easily attributed to moti-
vated closing DEMO the mind than to a reduced cognitive capacity to
process information (DEMO discussions, see De Dreu, 2003; Mosterd
& Rutte, 2000).
Third and foremost, the results of Experiment 3 cannot be
understood in terms of a reduced capacity to process information.
The power manipulation that DEMO used in this experiment cannot
have influenced participants’ information processing capacity, DEMO
yet negotiators with high power were unaffected by their oppo-
nent’s emotions, whereas those with low power were strongly
influenced. This finding can only be explained in terms of a
differential motivation to process the information DEMO by the
other’s emotion (cf. Fiske, 1993; Fiske & De´pret, 1996). Together,
these three experiments provide strong support for the DEMO
that a negotiator’s motivation to engage in thorough information
processing determines the extent to which he or she will be
influenced by the opposing DEMO emotions.
Another interesting issue concerns the potentially differential
effects of experienced and expressed emotions. In Experiments 1
and 2, participants received information about their opponent’s
experienced emotions, which could be trusted to reflect the oppo-
nent’s true feelings. One might argue that in real life negotiators
rarely have DEMO information about their opponent’s experi-
enced emotions. Rather, they perceive some DEMO of emo-
tion, and they have to make inferences as to DEMO this expres-
sion reflects the opponent’s real emotion or whether it is part of a
strategic influence attempt. The situation described in Experiment
3 DEMO the ambiguity that is characteristic of real life emotional
expressions. Instead of giving participants reliable information
about the other’s experienced emotions, participants were con-
fronted with the opponent’s verbal expressions of anger or happi-
ness, without receiving information pertaining to the trustworthi-
ness of the expressions. The results DEMO Experiment 3 are
compatible with those of Experiments 1 and 2, DEMO that
negotiators respond in similar ways to emotions with an ambigu-
ous status as they do to truly experienced emotions.
This conclusion is consistent DEMO research on the correspon-
dence bias (Jones, 1979), the fundamental attribution error (Ross,
1977), and spontaneous trait inferences (see, e.g., Uleman, New-
man, & Moskowitz, 1996), in which DEMO has been shown that
observers use other people’s apparent behavior to make inferences
about their personality or inner state. Furthermore, other research
has shown that observers are not very accurate at detecting faked
emotions but instead DEMO to believe that the emotions that others
pretend to be experiencing are real (e.g., DePaulo, 1992; DePaulo,
Stone, & Lassiter, DEMO; Zuckerman, DePaulo, & Rosenthal,
1981). All in all, it appears that when it is unclear whether the
expressed emotions are DEMO or strategic, perceivers tend to
respond as if the expressed emotions DEMO genuine. The question of
what happens when it is clear that the other’s expressed emotions
are part of a strategic ploy awaits further research.
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
525
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research
DEMO are some limitations to our findings. First, there was no
face-to-face DEMO The primary focus of this research was on
generating and testing hypotheses, and therefore we made an
explicit decision to maintain as much experimental control as
possible. Although the present findings generalize across settings,
operations, and populations, they may be limited to situations
where there is no face-to-face interaction. With the upsurge of
computer-mediated negotiations (Moore et al., DEMO), and the
increased reliance on other communication means than face-to-
face interaction (McGrath & Hollingshead, 1994), our findings
thus pertain to DEMO and more settings. However, in light of the
proven generalizability across DEMO paradigms of the interper-
sonal effects of emotions (cf. Sinaceur & DEMO, 2004; Van
Kleef et al., 2004), we see no DEMO why our findings should be
limited to situations that lack face-to-face contact.
A related issue concerns the “cognitive” nature of the emotion
manipulation that DEMO used in the present experiments. The fact
that we used verbal manipulations of emotion raises the question
of whether our findings generalize to settings DEMO which emotions
are communicated in a different manner (e.g., nonverbally). One
could argue that the effects would be different if people were
DEMO with behavioral instead of cognitive emotion cues. This
possibility cannot be ruled out on the basis of the present data.
However, previous research has shown similar interpersonal ef-
fects of emotions regardless of whether a verbal (Van Kleef et al.,
2004) or nonverbal (Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2004) manipulation was
used. By analogy, the effects of epistemic motivation DEMO been
observed in many different contexts and settings (De Dreu &
Carnevale, 2003; Kruglanski & Webster, 1996). Therefore we are
quite confident about the external validity of our findings. How-
ever, future research is needed to explore this issue in greater
depth.
Another avenue for DEMO study concerns the long-term conse-
quences of anger. How does anger influence the relationship
between the negotiators? Do the effects of anger persist over time
or do they diminish or even backfire in the long run? The present
findings show that negotiators with an angry opponent are less
DEMO with the negotiation and are less willing to engage in
future interaction with the same opponent than are negotiators with
a happy counterpart. These DEMO point to an interesting di-
lemma facing negotiators who anticipate future interaction. On the
one hand, negotiators may be motivated to strategically present
happiness to make a good impression and to induce or maintain a
positive DEMO relationship. On the other hand, they may
choose to use anger DEMO get their opponents to go along with their
preferences. Future research could investigate which of these strat-
egies is more beneficial in the long DEMO
Conclusion
Consistent with the motivated information processing approach
outlined in the introduction, the present research shows that the
interpersonal effects of anger and happiness on negotiation behav-
ior are moderated by the focal negotiator’s epistemic motivation.
DEMO epistemic motivation is high, negotiators thoroughly scru-
tinize the information that DEMO in the opponent’s emotions, and
they act accordingly, standing firm against a happy opponent and
conceding to an angry opponent. However, when epistemic moti-
vation is low, negotiators engage in shallow and nonsystematic
information processing, which renders them impervious to the
other’s emotional state. Thus, the DEMO research suggests that the
interpersonal effects of emotions are contingent upon the perceiv-
er’s motivation to engage in thoughtful and deliberate information
processing. The DEMO of these findings is unlikely to be
limited to the negotiation setting and may well generalize to other
domains of social interdependence.
References
Adler, R. S., Rosen, B., & Silverstein, E. M. (1998). Emotions in negoti-
ation: How to manage fear and anger. Negotiation Journal, 14, 161–180.
Allred, K. G., Mallozzi, J. S., Matsui, F., & Raia, C. P. (1997). The
influence of anger and compassion on negotiation performance. Orga-
nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 70, 175–187.
Arunachalam, V., Wall, J. A., Jr., & DEMO, C. (1998). Hong Kong versus
U.S. negotiations: Effects of DEMO, alternatives, outcome scales, and
mediation. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28, 1219 –1244.
Bacharach, S., & Lawler, E. (1981). Bargaining: Power, tactics, and
outcomes. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Baron, R. A. (1990). Environmentally induced positive affect: Its impact
on self-efficacy, task performance, negotiation, and conflict. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 20, 368 –384.
Baron, R. A., Fortin, S. P., Frei, DEMO L., Hauver, L. A., & Shack, M. L.
(1990)DEMO Reducing organizational conflict: The role of socially-induced
positive affect. International Journal DEMO Conflict Management, 1, 133–
152.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological DEMO: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO,
51, 1173–1182.
Barry, B. (1999). The tactical use DEMO emotion in negotiation. Research on
Negotiation in Organizations, 7, 93–121.
Barry, B., Fulmer, I. S., & Van Kleef, G. A. (DEMO). I laughed, I cried, I
settled: The role of DEMO in negotiation. In M. J. Gelfand & J. M.
Brett (Eds.), The handbook of negotiation and culture (pp. 71–94). Palo
Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Barry, B., & Oliver, R. L. (1996). Affect in dyadic negotiation: A model
and propositions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses, 67, 127–143.
Brett, J. F., DEMO, R. L., & Jackofsky, E. F. (1996). Alternatives to
having a BATNA in dyadic negotiation: The influence of goals, self-
DEMO, and alternatives on negotiated outcomes. International Journal
of Conflict Management, 7, 121–138.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Gardner, W. L. (1999). Emotion. Annual Review of
Psychology, 50, 191–214.
Carnevale, P. J., & Isen, A. M. (1986). The influence of positive affect and
visual access on the discovery of integrative solutions in bilateral nego-
tiation. DEMO Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 37,
1–13.
Carnevale, P. J., & Lawler, E. J. (1986). Time pressure and the develop-
ment of integrative agreements in bilateral negotiations. Journal of
Conflict Resolution, 30, 636 – 659.
Carnevale, P. J., O’Connor, K. M., & McCusker, C. (1993). Time pressure
in negotiation and mediation. In DEMO Svenson & A. J. Maule (Eds.), Time
pressure and stress DEMO human judgment and decision making (pp. 117–
127). New York: Plenum Press.
Chaiken, S., & Trope, Y. (Eds.). (1999). Dual-process theories in social
psychology. New York: Guilford Press.
Davidson, DEMO N., & Greenhalgh, L. (1999). The role of emotion DEMO
negotiation: The impact of anger and race. Research on Negotiation in
DEMO, 7, 3–26.
526
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
De Dreu, C. K. W. (2003). Time pressure and closing of the mind in
negotiation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
91, 280 –295.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & Carnevale, P. J. (2003). Motivational DEMO of
information processing and strategy in conflict and negotiation. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 35, pp.
235–291). New York: Academic Press.
De Dreu, C. K. W., Carnevale, P. J. D., Emans, B. J. M., & Van DEMO Vliert,
E. (1994). Effects of gain–loss frames in negotiation: Loss aversion,
mismatching, and frame adoption. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 60, 90 –107.
De Dreu, C. K. W., Koole, S. L., & Oldersma, F. L. (1999). On the seizing
and freezing of negotiator inferences: Need for cognitive closure mod-
erates the use of heuristics in negotiation. Personality and Social Psy-
chology Bulletin, 25, 348 –362.
De Dreu, C. K. W., Koole, S. L., & Steinel, W. (2000). Unfixing the fixed
pie: A motivated information processing approach to integrative nego-
tiation. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 79, 975–987.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & Van Kleef, G. A. (2004). The influence of power on
the information DEMO, impression formation, and demands in negotia-
tion. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 303–319.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & Van DEMO, P. A. M. (1995). The impact of social
value orientations on negotiator cognition and behavior. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, DEMO –1188.
DePaulo, B. M. (1992). Nonverbal behavior and self-presentation. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 111, 203–243.
DePaulo, B. M., Stone, J. I., & Lassiter, G. D. (1985). Deceiving and
detecting deceit. In B. R. Schlenker (Ed.), The self and social life (pp.
DEMO). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Druckman, D. (1994). Determinants of DEMO behavior in negoti-
ation: A meta-analysis. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 38, 507–556.
Dunegan, K. J. (1993). Framing, cognitive modes, and image theory:
Toward an understanding of a glass half full. Journal DEMO Applied Psy-
chology, 78, 491–503.
Eagly, A., & Chaiken, DEMO (1993). The psychology of attitudes. New York:
Harcourt Brace DEMO
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. American Psychologist,
48, 384 –392.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., & Ellsworth, P. (1972). Emotion in the human
face: Guidelines for research and an integration of findings. London:
Pergamon Press.
Emerson, R. M. (1972). Exchange theory, Part 1: A psychological basis for
social exchange. In J. Berger, M. Zelditch, & B. Anderson (Eds.),DEMO
Sociological theories in progress (Vol. 2, pp. 38 –57). Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.
Erber, R., & Fiske, S. T. (1984). DEMO dependency and attention to
inconsistent information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
47, 709 –726.
Fiske, S. T. (1993). Controlling other people: The impact of power on
stereotyping. American Psychologist, 48, 621– 628.
Fiske, S. T., & De´pret, E. (1996). Control, interdependence, and power:
Understanding social cognition in its social context. In W. Stroebe & M.
Hewstone (Eds.), European review of social psychology (Vol. 7, pp.
31– 61). Chichester, United Kingdom: Wiley.
DEMO, S. T., & Neuberg, S. L. (1990). A continuum of impression forma-
tion, from category-based to individuating processes: Influences of DEMO
formation and motivation on attention and interpretation. In M. P. Zanna
(DEMO), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 23, pp. 1–74).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ford, T. E., & Kruglanski, A. W. (1995). Effects of epistemic motivations
on the use of accessible constructs in social judgment. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, DEMO –962.
Forgas, J. P. (1992). Affect in social judgments and decisions: A multi-
process model. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), DEMO in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 25, pp. 227–275). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Forgas, J. P. (1998). On feeling DEMO and getting your way: Mood effects
on negotiator cognition and behavior. DEMO of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 565–577.
French, J., & Raven, B. (1959). The bases of social power. In D. DEMO
(Ed.), Studies in social power (pp. 150 –167). Ann Arbor, MI: Institute
for Social Research.
Freund, T., Kruglanski, A. W., & Shpitzajzen, A. (1985). The freezing and
unfreezing of impressional primacy: Effects of the need for structure and
the fear of invalidity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 11,
479 – 487.
Fridlund, A. J. (1994). Human facial expression: An evolutionary view. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Frijda, N. H. (1993). Moods, emotion episodes, and emotions. In M. Lewis
& J. M. Haviland (DEMO), Handbook of emotions (pp. 381– 403). New
York: Guilford Press.
Frijda, N. H., & Mesquita, B. (1994). The DEMO roles and functions of
emotions. In S. Kitayama & H. S. Markus (Eds.), Emotion and culture:
Empirical studies of mutual influence (DEMO 51– 87). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Giebels, E., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Van de Vliert, E. (1998). The alternative
negotiator as the invisible third at the table: The impact of potency
information. International Journal of Conflict Management, 9, DEMO
Giebels, E., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Van de Vliert, E. (2000). Interdepen-
dence in negotiation: Effects of exit options and social motive on
distributive and integrative negotiation. European Journal of DEMO
Psychology, 30, 255–272.
Goodwin, S. A., Gubin, A., Fiske, S. T., & Yzerbyt, V. Y. (2000). Power
can DEMO impression processes: Stereotyping subordinates by default and
by design. Group Processes DEMO Intergroup Relations, 3, 227–256.
Heaton, A. W., & Kruglanski, DEMO W. (1991). Person perception by intro-
verts and extraverts under DEMO pressure: Effects of need for closure.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 161–165.
Hilty, J. A., & Carnevale, P. J. (1993). Black-hat/white-hat strategy in
bilateral negotiation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
DEMO, 55, 444 – 469.
Hull, J. G., Tedlie, J. DEMO, & Lehn, D. A. (1992). Moderator variables in
personality DEMO: The problem of controlling plausible alternatives.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 115–117.
Isen, A. M., Daubman, K. A., & Nowicki, G. P. (1987). Positive affect
facilitates creative problem solving. Journal DEMO Personality and Social
Psychology, 52, 1122–1131.
Jamieson, D. W., & Zanna, M. P. (1989). Need for structure in attitude
formation DEMO expression. In A. R. Pratkanis & S. J. Breckler (Eds.),
Attitude structure and function. The third Ohio State University volume
on attitudes DEMO persuasion (pp. 383– 406). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jones, E. E. (1979). The rocky road from acts to dispositions. American
Psychologist, 34, 104 –117.
Kelley, H. H., & Thibaut, J. (DEMO). Interpersonal relations: A theory of
interdependence. New York: Academic Press.
Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D. H., & Anderson, C. (2003)DEMO Power, approach,
and inhibition. Psychological Review, 110, 265–284.
Keltner, D., & Haidt, J. (1999). Social functions of emotions at four levels
of analysis. Cognition and Emotion, 13, 505–521.
Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Bolger, N. (1998). Data analysis in social
psychology. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & A. Lindzey (Eds.), The
handbook of social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 233–265). Boston: McGraw-
Hill.
Klinnert, M., Campos, J., Sorce, J., Emde, R., & Svejda, M. (1983).
Emotions as behavior regulators: Social referencing in infants. In R.
Plutchik & H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion theory, research, and experi-
ence: DEMO 2. Emotions in early development (pp. 57– 68). New York:DEMO
Academic Press.
EMOTION AND MOTIVATION IN NEGOTIATIONS
527
Knutson, B. (1996). Facial DEMO of emotion influence interpersonal
trait inferences. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 20, 165–182.
Kopelman, S., Rosette, A. S., & Thompson, L. L. (2001, June). Poker face,
smiley face, and rant ‘n’ rave: An examination of the strategic use of
emotion in negotiation. Paper presented at the 14th Annual Conference
of the International Association for Conflict DEMO, Paris, France.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). Lay epistemics and human knowledge: Cogni-
tive and motivational bases. New York: Plenum.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Ajzen, I. (1983). Bias and error in human judgment.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 13, 1– 44.
Kruglanski, A. W., Atash, M. N., DeGrada, E., Mannetti, L., Pierro, A., &
Webster, D. M. (1997). Psychological theory testing versus psychomet-
ric nay-saying: Comment on Neuberg et al.’s (1997) critique of the Need
for Closure Scale. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 73,
1005–1016.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Freund, T. (DEMO). The freezing and unfreezing of
lay-inferences: Effects on impressional primacy, ethnic stereotyping,
and numerical anchoring. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
DEMO, 448 – 468.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Mayseless, O. (DEMO). Contextual effects in hypoth-
esis testing: The role of competing DEMO and epistemic motiva-
tions. Social Cognition, 6, 1–20.
Kruglanski, A. DEMO, & Thompson, E. P. (1999). Persuasion by a single
DEMO: A view from the unimodel. Psychological Inquiry, 10, 83–109.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M. (1991). Group members’ reactions to
opinion deviates and conformists at varying degrees of proximity to
decision DEMO and of environmental noise. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61, 212–225.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M. (1996). DEMO closing of the
mind: “Seizing” and “freezing.” Psychological Review, 103, DEMO
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York: DEMO Uni-
versity Press.
Lee, F., & Tiedens, L. Z. (2002). Is it lonely at the top? The independence
and interdependence of power holders. In B. M. Staw & R. I. Sutton
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 23, pp. 43–92). New
York: JAI Press.
Lerner, J. S., & Tetlock, P. E. (1999)DEMO Accounting for the effects of
accountability. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 255–275.
Mayseless, O., & Kruglanski, A. W. (1987). What makes you DEMO sure?:
Effects of epistemic motivations on judgmental confidence. Organiza-
tional DEMO and Human Decision Processes, 39, 162–183.
McGrath, J. E., & Hollingshead, A. B. (1994). Groups interacting with
technology: Ideas, DEMO, issues, and an agenda. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Moore, D. A., Kurtzberg, T. R., Thompson, L. L., & Morris, M. W. (1999).
Long and short routes to success in DEMO mediated negotiations:
Group affiliations and good vibrations. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 77, 22– 43.
Morris, M. W., & Keltner, D. (2000). How emotions work: An analysis of
the social DEMO of emotional expression in negotiations. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 22, 1–50.
Mosterd, I., & Rutte, C. G. (2000). Effects of DEMO pressure and account-
ability to constituents on negotiation. International Journal of Conflict
Management, 11, 227–247.
Neuberg, S. L., & Fiske, S. T. (1987). Motivational influences in impres-
sion formation: Outcome dependency, accuracy-driven attention, and
individuating processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
53, 431– 444.
Oatley, K., & Jenkins, J. M. (1992). Human emotions: Functions and
dysfunctions. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 55– 85.
Oatley, K., & Jenkins, J. M. (1996). Understanding DEMO Cambridge,
MA: Blackwell.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of
persuasion. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 123–205). New York: Academic Press.
Pillutla, M. M., & Murnighan, DEMO K. (1996). Unfairness, anger, and spite:
Emotional rejections DEMO ultimatum offers. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 68, 208 –224.
Pinkley, R. L. (1995). Impact of knowledge regarding alternatives to
DEMO in dyadic negotiations: Whose knowledge counts? Journal of
Applied Psychology, DEMO, 403– 417.
Pinkley, R. L., Neale, M. A., & DEMO, R. J. (1994). The impact of
alternatives to settlement in dyadic negotiation. Organizational Behav-
ior and Human Decision Processes, 57, 97–116.
DEMO, P. M., & Schriescheim, C. A. (1985). Field studies of French
and Raven’s bases of power: Critique, reanalysis, and suggestions for
future research. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 387– 411.
Pruitt, D. G. (1981). Negotiation behavior. New York: Academic Press.
Pruitt, D. G. (1998). Social conflict. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (Vol. DEMO, 4th ed., pp.
470 –503). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Pruitt, D. G., & Drews, J. L. (1969). The effect of time pressure, time
elapsed, and the opponent’s concession rate on behavior DEMO negotiation.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 5, 43– 60.
Ross, DEMO (1977). The intuitive psychologist and his shortcomings: Distor-
tions in the attribution process. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 10, pp. 173–220). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Russell, J. A., & Feldman Barrett, L. F. (1999)DEMO Core affect, prototypical
emotional episodes, and other things called emotion: DEMO the
elephant. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 805– 819.
Sanbomatsu, D. M., & Fazio, R. H. (1990). The DEMO of attitudes in
memory-based decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 59, 614 – 622.
Scherer, K. R. (1986). DEMO affect expression: A review and a model for
future research. Psychological DEMO, 99, 143–165.
Sinaceur, M., & Tiedens, L. Z. (2004). Get mad and get more than even:
The benefits of DEMO expression in negotiation. Unpublished manu-
script, Stanford University.
Smith, E. R., & DeCoster, J. (2000). Dual-process models in social and
cognitive psychology: Conceptual integration and links to underlying
memory systems. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4, 108 –
131.
Snodgrass, S. E. (1985)DEMO Women’s intuition: The effect of subordinate role
on interpersonal sensitivity. Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 49, 146 –155.
Snodgrass, S. DEMO (1992). Further effects of role versus gender on interper-
sonal DEMO Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62,
154 –158.
Stevens, J. (1996). Applied multivariate statistics for the social sciences
(3rd DEMO). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stuhlmacher, A. F., & Champagne, DEMO V. (2000). The impact of time
pressure and information on DEMO process and decisions. Group
Decision and Negotiation, 9, 471– 491.
Tetlock, P. E. (1992). The impact of accountability on judgment and
DEMO: Toward a social contingency model. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
DEMO in experimental social psychology (Vol. 25, pp. 331–376).
New York: Academic Press.
Thompson, L. L., Medvec, V. H., Seiden, DEMO, & Kopelman, S. (2001).
Poker face, smiley face, DEMO rant ‘n’ rave: Myths and realities about
emotion in negotiation. In DEMO A. Hogg & R. S. Tindale (Eds.), Blackwell
handbook of DEMO psychology: Group processes (pp. 139 –163). Mal-
den, MA: Blackwell.
Thompson, L. L., Nadler, J., & Kim, P. H. (1999). Some like it hot: The
case for the emotional DEMO In L. L. Thompson, J. M. Levine, &
D. M. DEMO (Eds.), Shared cognition in organizations: The manage-
ment of knowledge (pp. 139 –161). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
528
VAN KLEEF, DE DREU, AND MANSTEAD
Tripp, T. M., & Sondak, H. (1992). An evaluation of dependent variables
in experimental negotiation studies: Impasse rates and Pareto efficiency.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 51, 273–295.
Uleman, J. S., Newman, L. S., & Moskowitz, G. B. (1996). People as
flexible interpreters: Evidence DEMO issues from spontaneous trait infer-
ence. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 28, pp. 211–279). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2004). The
interpersonal effects of anger and happiness in negotiations. Journal of
Personality and DEMO Psychology, 86, 57–76.
Webster, D. M. (1993). Motivated augmentation and reduction of the
overattribution bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65,
261–271.
Webster, D. M., & Kruglanski, A. W. (DEMO). Individual differences in
need for cognitive closure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 67, 1049 –1062.
Webster, D. M., Richter, L., & Kruglanski, A. W. (1996). On leaping to
conclusions when feeling tired: Mental fatigue effects on impressional
primacy. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 181–195.
White, S. B., & Neale, M. A. (1991). Reservation prices, resistance points,
and BATNAs: Determining the parameters of acceptable negotiated
outcomes. Negotiation Journal, 7, 379 –388.
DEMO, G. A., & Falbe, C. M. (1991). Influence tactics and objectives in
upward, downward, and lateral influence attempts. Journal of DEMO
Psychology, 75, 132–140.
Yukl, G. A., Malone, M. P., Hayslip, B., & Pamin, T. A. (1976). The
effects DEMO time pressure and issue settlement order on integrative bar-
gaining. Sociometry, DEMO, 277–281.
Zakay, D. (1993). The impact of time perception DEMO on decision
making under time stress. In O. Svenson, & A. DEMO Maule (Eds.), Time
pressure and stress in human judgment and DEMO making (pp. 59 –
72). New York: Plenum Press.
Zuckerman, M., DePaulo, B. M., & Rosenthal, R. (1981). DEMO and
nonverbal communication of deception. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances
DEMO experimental social psychology (Vol. 14, pp. 1–59). San Diego, DEMO:
Academic Press.
Received March 28, 2003
Revision received January 8, 2004
Accepted June 7, 2004 
New Editor Appointed for History of Psychology
The American Psychological Association announces the appointment of James H. Capshew, PhD,
as editor of History of Psychology for a 4-year term (2006 –2009).
As of January 1, 2005, manuscripts should be DEMO electronically via the journal’s Manuscript
Submission Portal (www.apa.org/journals/hop.html). DEMO who are unable to do so should
correspond with the editor’s office about alternatives:
James H. Capshew, PhD
Associate Professor and Director of Graduate Studies
Department of History and Philosophy of Science
Goodbody Hall 130
DEMO University, Bloomington, IN 47405
Manuscript submission patterns make the precise date of completion of the 2005 volume uncertain.
The current editor, Michael M. Sokal, PhD, will receive and consider manuscripts through
December 31, 2004. Should the 2005 volume be completed before that date, manuscripts will be
redirected to the new editor for consideration in the 2006 volume.{1g42fwefx}