1042"2587-98-224$1.50
Copyright 1999 by
Baylor University
Do Serial and Non-Serial
Investors DEMO
Differently?:
An Empirical and
Theoretical Analysis
E
Mark Van Osnabrugge
DEMO research investigates the differences between experienced private investors ('serial
angeis') in the UK, who have funded three or more unquoted ventures, DEMO their iess experi-
enced counterparts (non-serial angels'). Using a theoreticai base and data on 141 business
angels, this study tentatively concludes that, relative to non-serial angels, serial angels may be
less concerned with DEMO risks and more concerned with market risks. In particular, serial
angels DEMO their investments more to (and conduct slightly more research on) industry sec-
tors in which they have personal experience, prefer markets with less competition, choose to
co-invest, are slightly less involved in their investments, and are less concerned with the loca-
tion of the venture.
Internalionally. DEMO economic imporlance of small entrepreneurial firms has been widely recog-
nized. In the US and other major industrial nations a transition has occurred from DEMO indus-
trial economies to emerging entrepreneurial economies (Wetzel. 1996). "In the US, from 1979 to
1995. while Fortune 500 payrolls declined by over 4 million jobs, the entrepreneurial economy
generated over 24 million jobs. About seventy-five percent of these jobs were created by fewer
than 10% DEMO small firms." (Freear. Sohl. & Wetzel. 1997. p. 47) Likewise DEMO the UK. small firms
are a major economic force and have been the subject of some recent policy initiatives. But all
small firms are DEMO alike. The small minority of firms that have such economic potential are entre-
preneurial ventures that can be distinguished from the others by their DEMO potential rather than
size. Because they have a vision of rapid growth of at least 20% annually, they are able to attract
external suppliers of equity capital (Wetzel & Freear. 1994).
Despite their considerable potential, these entrepreneurial firms often have difficulties obtain-
ing outside equity capital. Because they are often in the early stage of development and have lit-
DEMO or no track record or collateral, they are seen as risky DEMO by banks and other lending
institutions (Mason & Harrison. 1996). DEMO venture capital firms, these firms are also unappealing
since their funding DEMO are well below the venture capitalist's minimum investment
threshold. Furthermore, DEMO also require too much active hand-holding, their returns are risky and
DEMO, and any foreseeable exit route at the time of investment is DEMO (Gupta & Sapienza.
1988: Norton. 1995).
Primarily due to the reluctance of banks and venture capital firms to fund early-stage entre-
preneurial DEMO, an equity gap exists for their funding (Freear et al., DEMO; Mason. 1996a).
The Importance of Business Angels
Business angels (also known as private equity investors) are the primary source of finance that
Summer, 1998 23
is attempting to fill this equity gap (Coveney & Moore, 1997; Harrison & Mason. 1996: Wetzel &
Freear, 1994). They are private individuals who have substantial sums of finance available to fund
entrepreneurial DEMO
The potential of business angels and the informal venture capital market is enormous. They
have been identified as the largest single source of risk DEMO for entrepreneurial companies, far
exceeding the venture capital industry (Wetzel, DEMO; Wetzel & Freear, 1994; Mason & Harrison,
1993). DEMO the US. it is estimated that business angels finance 30-40 times as many firms as the
institutional venture capital community (Gaston, 1989; Wetzel & Freear, 1994). Business angels
invest around $IO-2Obn per annum in around 30,000 businesses, whereas venture capitalists fund
around $3-4bn per annum in around 3.000 businesses (Wetzel, 1996). Similarly in the UK. DEMO
ness angeis are estimated to invest about £2bn per annum in small entrepreneurial firms, compared
to about £lbn per annum for the in.stilutional venture capital market (Mason & Harrison, 1992.
1993). However, more recent research shows that the amount provided hy business angels may be
significantly DEMO than these estimates (Van Osnabrugge, 1998; Stevenson & Coveney, 1994).
But, due to the invisibility of the business angel marketplace, DEMO are only 'ball park" estimates
and should not be regarded as definitive (Freear et ai., 1997; Mason, 1996b).
In addition DEMO the already greater influence of the informal venture capital market over the for-
mal venture capital market, business angels have even greater unutilized finance potential than
these figures suggest (Mason & Harrison. 1993, Coveney & DEMO, 1997). Research shows that
angels have up to three times DEMO capital available for investment than what they have already
invested, but DEMO primarily restricts them is the availability of good investment opportunities and
the right policy incentives (Mason & Harrison. 1993; Freear et al.. 1997; Stevenson & Coveney.
1994). Even though business angeis have substantial financial DEMO, it is their hands-on involve-
ment and sharing of business expertise DEMO makes them an especially valuable asset to entrepre-
neurs (Wetzel, 1983).
Despite their importance, business angels are still not fully understood. It is hoped that
through a greater understanding of the attitudes, behaviors, DEMO characteristics of business angels
it may be possible to gain insights into ways of harnessing some of their untapped potential so that
this may DEMO the entrepreneurial economy hy putting these resources to work for entrepreneurs
(DEMO etal., 1997).
One key conclusion that has emerged from previous DEMO on business angels is that they
do not constitute a homogeneous group (Coveney & Moore, 1997). The remainder of this article
will DEMO theory and UK data to consider one of the most important dimensions by which active
angels differ—the number of investments they make.
The Importance DEMO Serial Angels
A number of studies have researched this diversity and identified different types of business
angels (Stevenson & Coveney, 1994; Kelly & Hay, 1996a, b). But despite this work, little is known
about the characteristics and behaviors of the most active segment of the DEMO angels market—
serial angels. These investors differ from non-serial angels in that they have made three or more
investments in young unquoted companies, whereas the latter have made two or less.
Although serial angels represent a DEMO of business angels, they have a sizable influence
on entrepreneurial ventures DEMO the market for entrepreneurial finance and therefore, warrant fur-
ther investigation. DEMO particular, this research study concentrates exclusively on serial angels for
several DEMO Firstly, in al! likelihood, these investors probably account for a disproportionate-
ly large percentage of actual investment activity (Kelly & Hay, 1996a, b). Secondly, gaining
greater understanding of the most active segment of the informal venture capital market may serve
to stimulate additional investment activity DEMO relatively inactive investors (Kelly & Hay. 1996a.
b). Thirdly, since serial investors are usually experienced investors, it may be reasonable to sug-
gest that experience effects may be operating and thus we may be DEMO to learn from them (Kelly
& Hay, 1996a, b). DEMO particular, the investment experience of serial investors may enable them to:DEMO
24 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTICE
choose safer and better investment opporttinities; negotiate a fair investment deal more effective-
ly: write better investment contracts; and monitor less actively but DEMO as effectively.
Thus far, only one study has investigated serial angels DEMO this was by means of an explorato-
ry study with eight investors (Kelly & Hay, 1996a, b). Although this exploratory study rendered
some valuable insight into the topic, further questions still remain.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Inherent in the nature of small entrepreneurial firms is considerable uncertainty and DEMO
(Petlit & Singer, 1985). Because small firms have a high failure rale, highly uncertain growth
potential, potential management problems that impose DEMO monitoring eosts, and provide
risks that are not commensurate with returns, they are often unattractive equity investments for
investors (Landstrom, 1992). DEMO particular, when investing in a new venture, two primary types of
risk are evident: market risk and agency risk (Fiet, 1991; DEMO,
Market Risk and Agency Risk
Market risk is the degree of uncertainty associated with unforeseen competitive conditions.
This may depend on size, growih, accessibility of the market, and on the existence of a market
DEMO (Fiet, 1991, 1995a, b). Although market risk is not always directly observable, the following
factors can serve as good indicators: DEMO obsolescence; many competitors; many potentially
new competitors; many substitute products/DEMO; weak customer demand for a product or ser-
vice; and market attractiveness (Fiet, 1995a, Porter, 1980). Thus, the variables indicative of mar-
ket risk mirror those presented by Michael Porter in his DEMO forces model for competitive advan-
tage (Porter, 1980).
Agency risk, however, is risk that is caused by the possibility of divergent DEMO between
fund providers and the entrepreneur running the firm (Jensen & DEMO, 1976; Fiet, 1995a).
When the interests and incentivesof the DEMO differ from those of the fund providers (busi-
ness angels), DEMO entrepreneur may be seen as making decisions that the business angeis may not
believe are in their mutual interest (Jensen & Meckling, 1976; Fama & Jensen, 1983). Agency
problems tend to arise particularly in small firms because their levels of asymmetries of informa-
tion, the differences in knowledge available to entrepreneurs and outside equity providers, are
greater. The greater these asymmetries are, the easier it is for the entrepreneur to make decisions
to the detriment of the outside fund providers (Landstrom, DEMO; Jensen & Meckling, 1976).
Controlling Market Risk and Agency Risk
According to classical finance theory, market risk, the risk associated with DEMO com-
petitive conditions in the market and business environment, can be DEMO by holding a diversi-
fied portfolio of investmetits (Wagner & Lau, 1971). Doing so largely eliminates the unique risk
of each investment, although the systematic market risk of the portfolio will still be evident (Ross,
1978; Roll & Ross, 1994). Under this assumption, we might expect business angels to prefer a
portfolio of investments that DEMO diversified across industry segments and development stages
(Gupta & Sapienza. 1988)DEMO Holding such a portfolio would significantly decrease the diversifiable
market risk of each investment opportunity and the investor's primary effort could then be DEMO
on the selection of investments (which complement the diversified nature of DEMO portfolio) rather
than on active participation in these portfolio firms (which may not be deemed to affect the port-
folio returns) (Wagner & Lau, 1971; Kelly & Hay, 1996b).
Conversely, agency risk, which is largely dependent upon the divergent views between the
investor and the entrepreneur, may be reduced through two primary approaches: 1) formulating
contractual agreements that align the incentives of the fund provider with those DEMO the entrepre-
neur; and 2) monitoring by the fund provider (DEMO angel) of the entrepreneur's activities and
Summer, 1998 25
expenditures (Jensen & Meckling. 1976). These contracts (written or unwritten) usually specify
the rights ofthe entrepreneur, the performance criteria upon which the entrepreneur will be eval-
uated, and the payoff functions they face (DEMO & Jensen. 1983). The thoroughness of these con-
tractual agreements, DEMO turn, determines the level of monitoring undertaken by the fund provider.
DEMO contracts can never incorporate all future contingencies (i.e. contracts are never DEMO),
there will always be some degree of monitoring (Hart. 1995).
In addition to these two ways of reducing agency risk, the informal venture capital literature
suggests thai business angels can limit their investments DEMO entrepreneurs or investment referrers.
they know personally (Haar, Starr. & MacMillan, 1988; Harrison & Mason. 1991; Landstrom
1990; Kelly & Hay. DEMO, b). Unfortunately, in this study no direct information was acquired on
this particular aspect, especially because most of the business angels interviewed for this study
used a business introduction service to locate the investment DEMO
Clearly, investors will try to reduce both market and agency risks DEMO utilizing information
(general and deal-specific) and the expertise they have acquired over the years. Fiet (1995a) sug-
gests that the importance an DEMO may attach to a particular type of risk could be inversely
related to that investor's ability and competence to control that type of DEMO Therefore, it is possi-
ble that the type of risk that DEMO investor may evaluate more is the risk that he/she wants to avoid.
For example, if an investor has greater ability in monitoring the entrepreneur, rather than in screen-
ing the market, the investor may DEMO less concerned about making an agency mistake because the
investor can structure the deal to protect himself from the risk, or the investor can get more active-
ly involved as a means of monitoring agency risks. DEMO this investor would have to avoid, how-
ever, would be committing to a deal in an unattractive market in which he/she may DEMO little con-
trol (Fiet, 1995a).
In this paper, this DEMO of risk controllability will. thus, be loosely linked to the level DEMO an
investor's investment experience as a possible indication of that investor's ability io control one
type of risk better than another, ln particular, we may assume that serial angels have climbed fur-
ther up the learning curve (than non-serial angels), since they have made more unquoted invest-
ments. They have, in ail likelihood, experienced a few DEMO losses and may now be less naive and
more realistic in the screening/due diligence and investment processes. This idea of the benefit of
DEMO is echoed by Wetzel who states:
the intensity of an individual's interest in venture investing appears to be dependent in
part upon DEMO investor's familiarity with the techniques of successful venture investing,
as well as upon the availability of opportunities Learning the tricks ofthe trade DEMO
time and time is scarce (Wetzel, 1987, p. 311).
DEMO might also be assumed that, on average, serial business angels have more experience in
dealing with entrepreneurs and agency issues. This may make DEMO more adept at negotiating and
formulating an investment deal that better aligns the incentives of the entrepreneur with those of
the serial investor. This DEMO that they may have more control over, and are better able DEMO reg-
ulate agency issues contractually, rather than through active participation and DEMO This is
similar to the behavior of venture capitalists, who "'DEMO worry less about agency risk becau.se they
are able to protect themselves through the use of boilerplate contractual terms and conditions that
they append DEMO each venture capital agreement" (Fiet. 1995b, p. 556); This DEMO of contract com-
pleteness has received little attention in previous articles on agency theory and venture capital sup-
pliers, but can certainly shed more light on business angels.
Thus, since serial angels may formulate better contracts to reduce agency risks and have more
experience in dealing with entrepreneurs DEMO agency issues, we might propose that they are (rela-
tive to non-serial angels) less concerned with agency issues. Conversely, market risk is DEMO
by macroeconomic variables, and therefore may be particularly challenging to control DEMO evalu-
ate. Thus, with less agency concerns, serial angels may plaee more emphasis on reducing market
26 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
risks in the investment process. Indeed, in interviews with angels, serial DEMO certainly appeared
to stress market risk issues more than their less experienced and more naive counterparts.
Serial Angels' Greater Concern for Market Risk
To reduce market risk, it was previously stated that diversification of investments is a sound
strategy. However, in the entrepreneurial environment, research has shown DEMO business angels
(serial and non-serial) tend to invest in non-diverse industry segments (Freear & Wetzel, 1988.
1990; Aram, 1989; Ehrlich, DEMO, Moore, & Weaver. 1994). This implies that they do not hold a
diversified investment portfolio, which could reduce market risk. Thus, DEMO their exposure to
these risks is particularly paramount. Fortunately, there are DEMO other methods that serial angels,
especially, may wish to employ DEMO reduce market risks.
The first method involves investing in market sectors in which the investor has previous expe-
rience (Sullivan, 1991; Mason, DEMO & Chaloner, 1991; Landstrom, 1993; Harrison & Mason,
1991; Aram, 1989; Kelly & Hay, 1996a. b). Supporting this DEMO, Fiet (1991, 1995a. b) suggests
that business angels may be more comfortable dealing with market risk (and more concerned
about agency risk) due to their previous experience in the industries in which they have invested.
Fiet also presents empirical evidence to support that venture capitalists are DEMO concerned with
market risk than business angels in general, who give DEMO importance to agency risk. However,
my research' has found that DEMO capitalists (who are generally more concerned about market
rather than agency DEMO) tend to have significantly more experience than business angels in the DEMO
tors in which they invest (p < .001). Therefore, I would like to argue that an investor's prior indus-
try experience DEMO not necessarily indicate that the investor is less concerned (and more DEMO
fortable dealing) with markel risk (relative to agency risk), but that the investor uses his/her prior
industry experience to reduce the DEMO of market risk.
Based on this and previous arguments, it is DEMO that experienced investors may be more
concerned with controlling market risks by limiting investments lo sectors in which they have
experience. Indeed. Harrison & DEMO (1992. p. 13) state that it is often the "active DEMO in
particular (who) have a preference for investing in sectors or activities in whieh they have experi-
ence." These investors may feel that their efforts are better focused on deals in which they have
an DEMO and skill advantage (Norton, 1995). This idea is also supported by the authors of
the only other specific paper on serial investors. DEMO & Hay (1996b), who found that;
a number of DEMO commented that they became somewhat more selective in the sub-
sequent investments they made after a negative event by investing in industrial sectors in
DEMO they had direct experience and, more importantly, by backing people known to
them personally or lo their syndicate partners (p. 171).
A seeond method a business angel may use to reduce market risks is DEMO conduct researeh in
the market sectors in which he/she invests. Although it might be argued that those with more expe-
rience in a DEMO will be less inclined lo conduct further research in it. I would like to contend that
although two ventures might be in the same DEMO sector, and thus have similar general market
risks, they will each have more unique risks within the market which need to be investigated DEMO
to investment (especially since angel investors do not follow a diversification DEMO). In this
sense, this research proposes that, relative to non-serial angels, serial angels act more like venture
capitalists in their due diligence of risk. Like venture capitalists, serial angels have less concern
about agency risk factors (which they have experience in controlling) and focus more DEMO the pre-
investmenl evaluation of market factors. This is not to say that serial angels closely mirror venture
capitalists (in fact they still behave rather differently), but relative lo non-serial angels, serial
angels place less emphasis and concern on agency factors and more on market risk factors. DEMO
I. The research finding is discussed more fully in a forthcoming paper.
Summer, 1998 27
on the arguments presented thus far. two hypotheses can be formulated.
HI: Compared to non-serial investors, serial investors are more concerned with market
risks and therefore more likely to limit their unquoted investments to industry sectors
DEMO which they have prior experience.
H2: Cotnpared to non-serial investors, serial investors are more concerned with evaluating
market risks and thus also conduct DEMO research in the industry sectors in which they
wish to invest.
A more detailed discussion of serial angels* lesser concern for agency risk, reiative to non-ser-
ial angels, will now be given.
Serial Angels' Lesser DEMO for Agency Risk
To reduce agency risk, it has heen stated DEMO two possible approaches are contract formula-
tion and investment monitoring. In this section, it will be shown more fully that due to the invest-
ment experience of serial angels, they may have better command of these two risk-reduction meth-
ods and therefore may be, compared to non-serial angels, less concerned about agency risk. This
argument will now be more fully analyzed for each risk-limiting approach.
With respect to contract formulation as a DEMO of agency risk reduction, a notion was pro-
posed earlier that DEMO investors (with more unquoted investment experience) arc more thorough
in their investment deal negotiation and formulation. In all likelihood, their past investment expe-
riences (both positive and negative) have taught them to reduce their DEMO This study's interview
results certainly indicate that most serial investors have experienced past investment losses and
(with their acquired investment experience) now DEMO more comprehensive contracts than non-
serial angels. Conversely, some non-serial investors DEMO that their investment contracts
were basically a "friendly handshake." This finding is supported by Mason, Harrison, and Allen
(1995) who found DEMO only 38% of business angels use professional assistance, and in only DEMO
of investments was an investment agreement drawn up.
With respect to monitoring as a means of risk reduction, serial investors may have fewer
incentives (than non-serial angels) to monitor clo.sely. This is partly because they DEMO have better
investment contracts but also because they have more experience (DEMO possibly more skill) in deal-
ing with entrepreneurs of unquoted companies, and therefore may be less concerned about possi-
ble agency risks, compared to the less experienced non-serial angel. A number of researchers also
support DEMO notion that (here is a learning or experience curve to the DEMO of portfolio firms
(Norton. 1995; Ruhnka. Feldman. & Dean. 1992). Another explanation may be that because seri-
al angels have larger investment DEMO, and the time commitments required to actively moni-
tor each investment DEMO large (Neiswander. 1985), it would be less likely that they DEMO have time
to be actively involved in their unquoted investments.
Based on all the aforementioned a.ssumptions. the following hypothesis is formulated:
H3: Serial investors are less actively involved in their unquoted investment portfolio com-
panies, compared to non-serial angels.
With less involvement, serial investors may prefer to co-invest as a means of risk reduction.
With more investor eyes on DEMO entrepreneur, there is less need for each individual investor to
actively DEMO This leads us to the next hypothesis:
H4: Compared to DEMO angels, serial angels prefer to co-invest more.
However, the relationship between co-investing and monitoring may not be clear. Kelly and
28 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
Hay (1996b) state that when co-investing in a syndicate:
(i)t is reasonable to suggest that it is not necessary for a DEMO investor to be actively
involved with all the venture.s in which he has invested, rather a member(s) of the syndi-
cate whose DEMO is best suited to the task can assume an active role while other
members are only passively involved, (p. 164)
Although this DEMO seem plausible, it has the potential to create a free-rider problem. DEMO
occurs when an individual shareholder does not have an incentive to monitor management, since
the gains from improved management are enjoyed by all shareholders, whereas the costs are bome
only by those who are active {Hart. 1995). One adverse result of this is Ihat there may be DEMO
incentive for individual fund providers to monitor the entrepreneur and this may reduce the entre-
preneur's constraints on pursuing his/her own goals (Hart, 1995).
In this article more emphasis is placed on the contractual agreements that serial angels have
formulated and their more limited time DEMO for monitoring as more probable reasons for
their less active monitoring. Since this study has taken a more contractual view of the agency risk
DEMO, this argument may be classified more as a principal-agent research approach DEMO than the
positivist approach to agency theory (Landstrom, 1992; Fama & Jensen, 1983; Eisenhardt. 1989).
Building on some of the assumptions already made, we might assume that if serial investors
are going to be less actively involved in their investments, they will be less concerned with invest-
ing in ventures that are geographically close. Indeed, many investors prefer to invest locally pre-
cisely because of monitoring considerations (Mason et al.. 1995). This allows the next hypothesis
to be formulated.
H5: With less active involvement in the venture, serial investors are less concerned than
non-serial angels about the geographical location of the firm they are DEMO
In the previous sections, the notion of unquoted investment experience and DEMO curves
was applied to the theoretical issues surrounding investment risks. It has been assumed (primari-
ly based on the interview findings and theory) DEMO greater experience in making unquoted invest-
ments has motivated serial investors to take a more thorough approach to contract formulation and
thus a more "laissez-faire" approach to the active daily monitoring of their investments, relative
DEMO non-serial angels. Since, thus far, it has been assumed that greater unquoted investment experi-
ence has positive effects on the investment process, we might also expect that these more experi-
enced serial investors may also DEMO a higher rate of return on their investments.
H6: Because serial DEMO have more experience and expertise in making unquoted invest-
ments, all DEMO things being equal, we might expect them to have higher rates DEMO
return on their investments compared to non-serial angels.
This relationship between experience and returns is discussed by Kelly and Hay (1996b, p.
171) who ponder whether: •'(o)ver time, .. . an investor enhance(s) his ability to identify 'win-
ners'?" Hopefully, DEMO paper's findings will shed more light on this issue.
METHODOLOGY
Due to the diverse, dispersed, and confidential nature of most business angel DEMO trans-
actions, it is extremely difficult for researchers to identify these DEMO for research purposes
(Wetzel. 1982). Their preference for anonymity adds DEMO challenge to the researcher's task.
These difficulties limit the researcher to four main methods for tackling this problem. Firstly, the
Summer, 1998 DEMO
Table 1
Analysis of Data Collections'
Number ot Questionnaires Response Rate
DEMO 252
Received 130 (51.5%)
Unusable (because of material faults) (12) (4.7%)
Missing data on 'number of unquoted investments done' (2) (< 1%)
Total Number of usable questionnaires 116 (46%)
Number of interviews conducted +25
Total number of Business Angels DEMO the study 141
Since the questionnaire.s were distributed through business introduction services, it was usually not possi-
ble to send a second mailing to those angels not responding. (This was; however, possible with one of the
services.) In addition some respondents were from another researcher's database of past respondents: these
21 non-BIS respondents may partially help to account for the high response rate.
researcher can use a convenience or a DEMO sample of firms from a database and encourage them
to provide information on their informal investors (Aram. 1989; Freear & Wetzel. 1990: Freear.
Sohl, & Welzel. 1994a}. Secondly, a sample of high-net-worth individuals can DEMO identified from
a database (such as those with mortgages above a DEMO threshold) and these individuals can be
targeted in the hopes that DEMO have made informal investments (Freear, Sohl. & Wetzel. 1994b).
Thirdly, since business angels usually are closely connected to other angels, a DEMO technique
can also be utilized to increase sample size (Wetzel, 1983). Fourthly, with the help of business
introduction services (BISs)—firms DEMO match entrepreneurs seeking funding with potential
investors looking for investment opportunities—business angels who subscribe to these services
can be targeted as a convenience sample. DEMO last approach is not widely used in the US. but is
more commonly used in the UK (Mason & Harrison, 1992: Stevenson & Coveney. 1994: Coveney
& Moore, 1997).
For this research study, the fourth approach was utilized to empirically test the theoretically
based hypotheses. DEMO angels were identified through their membership with certain business
introduction services, DEMO those services made initial contact with the angel to notify them of the
research study. A two-phased approach was then adopted for the data DEMO In the first phase.
semi-structured and open-ended questions were administered in 25 personal interviews. At the end
of each interview session, a quantitative questionnaire was also administered. In the second phase,
the first phase interview DEMO were used to formulate a two-page postal questionnaire, which
enabled a DEMO sample to be targeted for greater generalization of the results and as a means of
triangulating the data findings. This questionnaire contained a series DEMO 5-poim Likert-scale ques-
tions, which allowed respondent to rate the attractiveness DEMO particular features of their last invest-
ment, and some short-answer questions. DEMO, this approach ensured that the data collected would
be deal-specific and DEMO on actual investments made rather than on general investment prefer-
ences. Using a total of eleven business introduction services around the UK. 252 active DEMO
angels (who had each made an unquoted investment within the last DEMO years) were targeted, for
30 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y ond PRACTICE
Table 2
Correlation Matrix'
1. Serial business angel 1.00
2. Number DEMO unquoted investments done .042'' 1.00
3. Number of new firms founded 0.29" 0.65" 1.00
4. Amount of sector experience O.\9' 0.18' DEMO" 1.00
5. Amount of sector research 0.13 0.09 0.08 .25' 1.00
6. Desire for finn involvement -0.08-0.19" -0.10 0.22' 0.03 1.00
7. DEMO of visits to firm -0.11 -0.15 -0.11 0.08 0.19' 0.35^ I.OO
DEMO Prefer co-investors 0.17' 0.18' 0.04 -0.04 0.06 -0.09 -0.04 1.00
9. Locality of venture -0.16-0.18- -0.2P -0.03 -0.18a 0.37b 0.20- -0.13 1.00
10. DEMO R.O.I, expected 0.19 0.13 0.05 0.06 0.14 0.03 -0.02 0.06 0.05 DEMO
11. R.0,1, now expected 0.14 0.16 -0.05 0.13 0.33^ 0.01 DEMO O.Ol 0.09 0.53^ 1.00
Indicates significance level of p < 0.05
^ Indicates significance level of p < 0.01
*" These are two-tailed bivariate correlations.
a total response rate of 51%. and a total of 141 DEMO business angel responses. This response rate
is much higher than that received in other studies, which may be due to the shortness of the ques-
tionnaire and the referral sources used. Using SPSS software, the quantitative data were analyzed
for statistically significant differences between the two investor types.
DEMO
Using the serial investor classification proposed by Kelly and Hay (1996a. DEMO). the total sam-
ple of business angels was divided into those who had made three or more unquoted investments
and those who had DEMO invested in two or less. The former were then considered, for DEMO purpose
of this research, to be serial angels, and the latter, non-serial angels. Since dividing the data at
three, rather than four DEMO five, "unquoted investments made" might seem a bit arbitrary, some cor-
relation results (of the number of 'unquoted investments made" with certain variables) will be pre-
sented throughout the results section to show relationships that are evident regardless of the cut-
off mark used for DEMO classification. Unfortunately, this study does not consider the time peri-
od DEMO which these investments were made. This is recognized as another potential variable that
can be used for classification, and its omission here may certainly be a limitation. Thus, out of the
141 angels in this study, 91 (65%) were considered to be serial investors and 50 (DEMO) non-serial
investors. On average, serial angels have made a total of 7.2 unquoted investments, while non-ser-
ial angels only 1.5 investments (the DEMO number is five and two respectively).
Investors Characteristics
Due to their propensity to invest in a larger number of firms, serial investors might appear to
be more entrepreneurial in their investment behavior than non-serial investors. DEMO is confirmed
Summer, 1998 31
Chart 1
Amount of Prior Experience in Firm's Industry Sector*
Serial DEMO
Non-Serial Angels
Extensive Some Minimal None
Amount of Industry Experience
* The differemes hemecn aiif^el types depicted in this chart are statisticallv sii>nifkcinl (p<0.05)
by statistical analysis, which shows that serial angels have founded considerably more ventures as
entrepreneurs than non-serial angels. On average, serial angels have founded 3.04 firms while
non-serial angels have started 1.08 firms: the difference is statistically significant (p < .001).
Running a correlation, across the total sample, between "the number of firms founded as an entre-
preneur' and 'the number of unquoted investments' produces a very strong correlation of .6490**.-
One potential explanation of this result may DEMO that a number of respondents might have consid-
ered some of their unquoted investments as entrepreneurial ventures. However, the question on the
questionnaire was clearly stated so as to ask for the number of businesses founded DEMO an entrepre-
neur, not those funded as an investor, although the potentially low degree of care afforded to ques-
tionnaire completion by some DEMO should not be over-looked. This result is also support-
ed by some previous research that compared the characteristics of entrepreneurs and non-entre-
preneurs. One DEMO the conclusions of this work was that:
there is reason to believe that entrepreneurs who are investing in the business venture of
another DEMO to identify with the person and the process. Tbis identification with or empa-
thy for a fellow entrepreneur may manifest itself in more readily DEMO in earlier stage
ventures and in making a greater number of informal investments (Sullivan, 1991, p. 466).
Since these more entrepreneurial (DEMO) investors bave more empathy for the entrepreneur
and seem to understand DEMO better, it may be possible to assume that these investors worry DEMO
about the entrepreneur as a source of risk. This would support the assertion made earlier that ser-
ial investors are less concerned about agency DEMO and more about market risks, relative to their
more inexperienced counterparts.
DEMO Experience
During the 25 interviews conducted with business angels it became clear that there is a con-
siderable learning curve when making unquoted investments. DEMO on this premise, Hypothesis
1 supposed that because serial angels have DEMO experience investing in risky unquoted firms (and
are more likely to DEMO experienced a potential loss) they are more likely to restrict their DEMO
ed investments to industry sectors in which they have experience and understanding (and are more
comfortable investing in).
This hypothesis (HI) is supported by the empirical data. There is a statistically significant dif-
ference DEMO the amount of specific industry sector experience that serials have, compared DEMO
non-serial investors, in the ventures they funded (p < .050). A correlation for the whole angel sam-
2. For Ihe remainder nf DEMO article: * * correlation is significant al O.OI; * correlation is significant at 0.05.
32 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
Chart 2
Amount of Research on Firm's Industry Sector*
40%
35%
DEMO
25% • Serial Angels
m 20% I Non-Seria! Angels
15%
10% —
5%
0%
" 1
[^ m—
Extensive Some Minimal None
Amount of DEMO Research
* The differcmes between cinyel types depicted in this ihuri are statisticully siiinificant (p<l).2()i
pie of 'the number of unquoted investments made' by "investor experience of the investee firm's
DEMO sector" al.so showed a significant positive correlation (.1875*). Thus, DEMO to non-
serial investors, serial investors have more experience in the DEMO sector of the unquoted port-
folio firms they fund. This may also add some strength to the assertion that because serial investors
have more DEMO for market risk, compared to non-serial investors, (and iess concern DEMO agency
risk) they tend to reduce their potential market risks by DEMO their investments to sectors with
which they are familiar. However, this DEMO not imply that serial angels have more concern for
market risk as they get more experience, but that due to their experience they have less concern
about agency risk, and so may be more able to focus on market risk.
Sector Research
In the second hypothesis it was DEMO that because serial investors are more concerned
about market risk than serial angels, tbey are also more likely to conduct pre-investment research
in the sector of the investee firm, relative to non-serial angels.
This hypothesis (DEMO) is only partly supported hy the empirical data. Serial, rather than non-ser-
ial, investors were more likely to conduct pre-investment research in tbe sector of a potential
investee firm. Although this finding was not significant DEMO the 10% significance level, it was at the
12.6% level (p < .200). Compared to non-serial investors, serial investors might view tbeir greater
inclination to invest in venture sectors they know (and conducting more research in those sectors) as
their most effective way of reducing market risk. One researcher contends that business angels, in
general, may get DEMO in obtaining market risk information themselves and substitute agency
information for it, and thus rely on tbe entrepreneur to evaluate market risk for them (Fiet, 1995b).
Experienced business angels may have discovered that such DEMO do not always lead to a
positive outcome and may now feel more inclined to conduct the market research themselves.
The empirical result presented DEMO may offer very loose support to tbe assertion tbat serial
investors are more concerned with controlling market risks ex ante investment than are non-seri-
DEMO angels. However, other data show that serial angels are more attracted DEMO non-serial angels to
ventures in industries witb less competition (p < DEMO). Tbis may thus add slightly more support
to the notion tbat serial angels are more concerned about market risks.
Post-investment involvement
It was DEMO earlier that due to their more restricted time availability for active participa-
tion (Kelly & Hay, 1996b) and better investment contracts to protect their interests in the investee
firm (Norton, 1995; Hart, 1995), serial business angels may be less inclined to get actively
Summer, DEMO 33
ach
ngel type
Chart 3
Importance of Co-Investors*
• Serial Angels
Non-Serjal Angels
very
important
DEMO
important
Importance of Co-Investors
* The differences between an^et types depicted in this chart are statistically stgnificant (p<0.U5)
involved in their investments.
This hypothesis (H3) is not supported by the empirical regression data DEMO is given weak sup-
port by the correlational data. Although the variable that measured an 'investor's desire for
involvement" was not significantly DEMO based upon the cut-off for the classification set {i.e.
those with < 3 unquoted investments are non-serial angels), there was a statistically significant
DEMO relationship across the whole angel sample for 'the number of unquoted DEMO
made' and 'desire for involvement'{correlation -.1951*). Likewise, the DEMO to which investors
actively monitor their investments did not significantly differ for the two angel groups classified.
However, there was a statistically significant negative relationship across the angel sample
between 'the number of unquoted investments made' and 'the degree to which the investor active-
ly monitors the DEMO" {correlation -.1783*).
On average, .serial investors telephone their portfolio firms 7.1 times per month, while non-
serial angels call 9.1 times per month {p = .267). But when the degree of telephone contact DEMO con-
sidered across the non-serial investor population, there is a strong DEMO relationship between
'telephone contact'and 'the number of unquoted investments made'{correlation -.3127*).
Similarly, the average number of visits per month for serial investors is 2.7 times per month
and 3.8 times per month DEMO non-serial investors, which was not significantly different (p = .209).
But like the number of telephone calls per month, there is a statistically significant negative rela-
tionship across the non-serial angel sample between 'the number of unquoted investments made'
and 'the number of visits per month" to the portfolio firm {correlation -.3127*).
Although the opportunity to get Involved is rarely one of the most influential factors that
attracts DEMO, the empirical results do show, to some degree, that serial DEMO are less involved
in the monitoring of their unquoted portfolio firms than non-serial angels. But, because serial
angels have (by definition) more ventures to monitor, we might expect that the amount of hands-
on monitoring will decrease with an increase in investments. But this does not imply DEMO serial
angels' monitoring effectiveness also decreases, in fact, the opposite DEMO be true.
Preference for Co-investing
In addition to their greater industry sector experience and sector research, .serial investors
might consider co-investing with other business angels as another means of risk reduction. With
more investments to cater DEMO in their investment portfolio, serial investors have less available time
to DEMO each venture. Although they might have more developed investment contracts aligning
the actions of the entrepreneur with their own, one business angel stated that "'the quality of the
investment contract is only as good as DEMO business." With this in mind, serial investors may be
34
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTICE
Chart 4
Importance of Location of Investment*
-• - CO/
O '^' °
•-P (TV
very
important
Importance ot Location
not
important
DEMO Serial Angels
I Non-Seria! Angels
* The differences between an^el types depicted in this chart are statistically .significant ip<O.IO)
prone to finding DEMO ways to reduce agency and market risks.
Co-investing may render these more seasoned investors the knowledge that "if two other
investors are investing in the firm, then it must be a good investment opportunity." Thus, safety in
numbers may be seen as a way to reduce market DEMO due diligence, but also by having more co-
investors to monitor DEMO investment, agency risk may also be reduced. Past research in the DEMO has
shown that over half the business angels prefer to co-invest, DEMO it has been suggested that UK
business angels prefer to invest alone more than their US counterparts {Freear et al., 1994). Based
on the belief that serial angels might be slightly less active in monitoring DEMO firm, it was hypoth-
esised that they might prefer to co-invest DEMO order to share the monitoring responsibility.
This hypothesis {H4) is supported DEMO the empirical data. Serial investors show a significant
preference over non-serial investors for co-investing {p < .050). When analysed across the whole
angel DEMO, there is a strong positive relationship between 'liking to co-invest" DEMO 'the number
of unquoted investments made' {correlation .1850*). However, DEMO hypothesis 3 did not conclu-
sively show that serial angels are less "hands-on,"" an additional explanation for the serial angel's
greater DEMO for co-investing, compared to the non-.serial angel, may be due to the former's
greater opportunity to co-invest. Indeed, with more investment experience and market familiarity,
a serial angel may know more players in DEMO market with whom he/she might prefer to co-invest.
^ 30%
•5 25%
I* 20%
j= 15%
Geographical Locality Preferences
With greater unquoted investment DEMO, slightly less active involvement in their
investee firms, and more co-investing, serial investors may feel less inclined to restrict their search
for a good investment opportunity in their local geographical area, whereas individual investors
{not co-investing) .seem to have a preference for investments relatively close to home {Wetzel &
Freear, 1994).
This hypothesis (H5) is supported DEMO the empirical data. There is a statistically significant dif-
ference between a serial investor's concern for investing locally compared to that of the DEMO
ial investor {p < .100). When this is analyzed across the whole angel sample, there is a strong neg-
ative relationship between 'DEMO number of investments made' and 'the preference for investing
locally" (-.1847*). There is also a positive correlation for 'desire for involvement' and 'preference
for a local venture' {correlation .3700**). Forty-four percent of the serial angels indicated that the
location of the venture was DEMO very important or important attraction, while almost 60% of the non-
DEMO angels thought so.
One explanation may be the lesser degree of active involvement by the serial angel as his/her
number of investments grows. DEMO second explanation' may be that due to the serial angel's DEMO
Summer, 1998
35
Chart 5
% Annual ROI Initially Expected on the Investment*
< 10% DEMO 20-29% 30-39% 40-49%
% Annual ROI Initially Expected
> = 50%
• Serial Angels
I Non-Serial Angels
* The differences betn-een an^el types depicted DEMO this chart are stansiically significant lp<0.05)
level of investment activity, he/she will more likely have saturated a local area in the search for
suitable investment opportunities and may search further away from home.
DEMO on Investment and Venture Performance
AlthoLigh investment performance of small unquoted entrepreneurial ventures is dependent
upon many factors beyond the inve.stor's and cntrepreneur"DEMO control, all oiher things being equal,
one might expect that DEMO experienced investors in these firms will have greater expertise in
making successful investments. Furthemiore. the past entrepreneurial experience of seriai angeis
may imply thai DEMO ''have acquired the kind of experience (street smarts) that it takes to start,
manage and harvest a successful entrepreneurial venture" (DEMO, Sohl. & Wetzel, 1992, p .379).
Research on venture DEMO has shown that they have an above average tendency to pick win-
ners (Hail & Hofer. 1993)—could this be the case for serial angels loo?
This hypothesis (H6) is supported by the empirical DEMO When asked to list the annual rate of
return initially expected on the venture, serial investors stated an average rate of 33%. while non-
serial angels gave 22.9%. a difference that i.s statistically significant (p < .050). The median rates
of return initially expected are 20% and DEMO respectively, adding further support that serial angels
appear to be more DEMO in their investment returns than non-serial angeis. These findings are
relevant because little research has been conducted on the returns from investing in the DEMO
venture capital market (Mason et al.. 1995; Freear et al., DEMO). When comparing the annual rate
of return that the business angels now expect (an average of 1.2 to 1.5 years since the investment
for the seriai and non-serial investors respectively), the seriai angels stated DEMO average return of
29%, while the non-seriai angels stated an average DEMO of 18%, a difference that is statistically
significant (p < ,DEMO).
However, since the median returns are 17.5% and 20% respectively, it is clear that serial
angels have more investors at the high DEMO of the return rate spectrum. Thus, although .serial angels
do appear DEMO have better performing investments, one must be careful not to linTily DEMO that
they make significantly larger rates of return than non-seriai angels. To actually realize these
investment returns, an investor must have an exit route. Comparing this criterion for the two
groups shows that 36% of the DEMO angels thought that identification of an exit route before
investment was essential, whereas it was only of similar importance for 24% of the non-serial
angels.
Whether past investment (and possibly entrepreneuriai) experience in unquoted companies DEMO
responsible for the slightiy higher returns for serial investors cannot be determined, but it couid
certainly be the case that when investing in smali, risky, entrepreneuriai ventures, experience may
count. Past research has shown that cenain entrepreneurs are abie to utiiize experience gained from
3. This allemalivc DEMO was suggesied by Professor Jeffrey Sohl in a conversalion with the author.
36 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
Chart 6
% Annual ROI Now Expect on the Investment*
40%
a> 30% • Serial Angels
20% I Non-Serial Angels
10%
0%
O)
(C
c
o
< 10% 10-19% 20-29% 30-39% 40-49%
> = 50%
DEMO Annual ROI Now Expect
* The differences between angel types depicted in this chart are statistically significant (p<().20)
Starting previous ventures to enhance the survival chances of their businesses {Carter, Williams, &
Reynolds, 1997). In this way, serial investors may also use DEMO past entrepreneurial experience to
make better unquoted investments. A second explanation may be that non-serial investors do not
reduce risks {and steer the venture) as actively, and with as much effect, as they might have DEMO
when initially entering the investment. This suggestion is supported by previous research:
{p)erhaps the most straightforward interpretation is that unsuccessful investors have DEMO
inflated opinion of the value of their hands on contribution, whereas DEMO investors
recognise that the entrepreneur is in the driving seat and hence an external investor's
influence is, inevitably, relatively marginal to the DEMO or otherwise of the business.
{Lumme, Mason, & Suomi, 1996)DEMO
Alternatively, serial investors may just be more confident investors (as the larger sample of
firms in their portfolio shows) and therefore may be inherently more optimistic about the realized
returns they will receive, as may be shown by the high correlation between 'initial returns expect-
ed'and 'returns now expected to realize'{correlation .5311*). This is partly supported by a previ-
ous study, which found that with regard to their investment practices, "entrepreneurs perceived
their downside risk to be less'" DEMO did non-entrepreneurs (Sullivan, 1991).
CONCLUSIONS
This is the first large-scale attempt to study the investment characteristics of the most influ-
ential group DEMO informal equity investors—serial angels. Due to the exploratory nature of this
study, and some of the inherent methodological limitations, the results presented in DEMO paper
should not be considered as firm conclusions, but rather as DEMO that can be used as building
blocks for future research.
Some the empirical and theoretical findings on the differences between serial and non-serial
angels DEMO in this paper now follow.
Compared to non-serial angels, serial angels:DEMO
• have founded more firms as entrepreneurs themselves.
• tend to invest more in industry sectors in which they have previous experience.
• tend DEMO conduct slightly more research on the industry sectors in which they invest.
• prefer co-investing with other business angels.
• are more attracted to DEMO with less competition.
• are possibly less inclined to take a "DEMO"' role in running the firm.
• are less concerned about the location of the ventures they fund.
• are more optimistic upon entering DEMO investments, but show only slightly higher rates
Summer, 1998 37
eaci
type
Table 3
Significant Differences'
Serial Angel Non-Serial Angel P value''
Mean Mean
Number of unquoted investments done 7.27 1.58 <0.001
Number of new venlures founded 3.04 1.08 <O.OOI
Amount of experience in sector"* 3.09 2.68 0.040
Amount of sector research conducted'' 2.46 2.72 0.126
DEMO of finn's competition'' 2.39 2.73 0.026
Intended length of investment time (years) 4.90 5.76 0.160
Preference for co-invstors^ 2.68 3.32 0.026
DEMO for local investors^ 2.98 2.48 0.058
Initial annual R.O.I, expected {%) 33.02 22.94 0.013
Annual R.O.I, now expect (%) 29.45 18. 0.0H9
" These variables were ruled un a fi-ptiinl sake (1 = very important. ."S = not important)
'^These variables were rated on a 4-point st;ale (1 = cxlensive. 4 = none)
' Due to the imposed cut-olT level for subject calegorization. the correlation matrix DEMO also be seen for full sample
differences dependent upon the number of unquoted investments done.
^ Significance is based on two-taile /- tests.
of return.
• may be more concerned about controlling market risks and less DEMO about agency
risks (than non-seriai angeis).
But what main conciusion DEMO be generated from these findings? The findings presented in
this paper DEMO shed some iight on the question: "(to) what extent does a 'piay money' mentality
set in whereby investors are prepared to DEMO ventures competing in an unfamiliar industry lead
by an entrepreneur unknown to them or to other investors in the deal?" (Kelly & Hay, 1996b. p.
i71) The results presented in this paper indicate that DEMO more unquoted investment experience,
business angels may take on iess of a "play money' mentality because their pa.st gains and losses
on DEMO investments have taught them to be iess naive and potentially more careful with their
financiai investments. One indication of this may be their greater DEMO, than tnore inexperi-
enced investors, to invest in industry sectors in which they have prior experience. For these more
experienced seriai investors, the market risks may seem iess controilable than agency risks, and
may therefore take on a greater importance in the investment process.
IMPLICATIONS
As the DEMO infiuentiai private investors in smail entrepreneuriai firms, serial business angels
need DEMO be understood better to determine what attracts this segment of the informai capitai mar-
ket to invest so Irequently. Although both serial and non-seriai DEMO invest simiiar amounts on
average per unquoted investment (in this study, each group invested an average of £55,(X)0), ser-
iai investors make a greater number of investments and therefore have a much DEMO economic
impact than any other informai investor type. The research findings presented in this study may
have beneficiai impiications for entrepreneurs, business angeis, DEMO introduction services,
and poiicy.
Entrepreneurs may benefit from this research by gaining greater understanding of how serial
angels assess an investment proposai and DEMO as investors. In addition, having a better under-
standing of the DEMO types of business angels allows entrepreneurs to assess which investor
wiii best match their firm's needs and enable them lo specificaiiy target that DEMO type.
38 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Business angels may also benefit from this research by learning "'the DEMO of the trade"; bet-
ter knowledge of the investment behavior of experienced investors can be of great benefit to more
inexperienced angels who DEMO to ieam (Riding, Daicin, Druxbury, Haines, & Safrate, 1993). The
comparison of non-seriai with serial angel, may highlight some important areas of potential
improvement for both angei types, but especially for the more inexperienced non-serial angei. A
greater understanding of seriai and non-serial investor DEMO and preferences may also shed
more light on how to motivate virgin angels. These are individuals with an inciination and enough
discretionary weaith to DEMO an entrepreneuriai firm, but who have not yet done so.
Business DEMO services may use this research to gain a better understanding of how the
most active segments of business angeis differ, especially in respect to their initial review proce-
dures and preferences. This will provide valuable information DEMO them on the types of information
they should include, or not DEMO, in their investment databases, and the ordering and layout of
their materials (Mason & Harri.son, 1994). Information on business angel behavior DEMO aiso iden-
tify areas where these investors need assistance, so that DEMO needs can be better met by the ser-
vices offered by the business introduction service {Mason et ai., i995).
Policy to promote entrepreneurial ventures and their procurement of financial backing may
also benefit from this DEMO A better understanding of the informal venture capital market may
aliow poiicy to be better formulated, with potentially more success. Although the UK has ied the
way in poiicy initiatives (Freear et ai., i997), DEMO has been pointed out that, thus far, policy may be
running ahead of knowledge (Mason, i996a).
DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Although DEMO this study qualitative data from the 25 personal interviews was used to enlighten
the quantitative findings, a number of facets were not fully explored across the rest of the respon-
dents. One of these facets was DEMO degree to which the investor has prior knowledge of the entre-
preneur (Keiiy & Hay, 1996a, b). Future studies may want to investigate this cioser and iink it with
the generai findings presented in DEMO paper.
This paper also suggests that seriai investors, relative to their DEMO angel counterparts,
may piace more weight on market risks than agency risks in the inve.stment evaiuation process.
Aithough this was based on a DEMO overview and circumstantial empirical evidence, these
possible relationships need to be DEMO more fully.
Likewise, this paper has shown that serial investors have DEMO initial expected rates of return
and higher expected realized rates of return than those of non-serial investors. Whether this is due
to their better DEMO and experience of investing in (and starting) unquoted investments, or
DEMO this is due to greater optimism by the average serial angel, DEMO needs to be further
explored.
Throughout this paper, certain assumptions were DEMO based upon the greater unquot-
ed investment experience of serial angeis reiative to that of non-serial angels. Although the inter-
views conducted clearly showed DEMO there is a steep leaming curve when making business angei
investments, DEMO is uncertainty as to when this curve starts to even out and if it differs greatly
depending upon the investor's industry background or DEMO sector preferences.
One of the most interesting findings from this research was that serial investors have a pref-
erence for co-investing. This is an DEMO aspect of business angel investing that needs to be
investigated further, DEMO and Hay (1996b) echo this sentiment:
(a) clear need also exists to examine issues related to investment syndication and co-
investment DEMO If the most active segment of the population disproportionately
invests as part of a group, it is imperative to understand the dynamics of syndication.
(p.i72)
Cioseiy reiated to the issue of co-investment is the issue of geographicai iocation and how a
Summer, 1998 39
preference for local investing differs depending upon the level of investment activity DEMO co-
investment.
Lastly, although a theoretical background supports this research, there is little application of
theory to the study of informal venture capital (Freear et al.. 1997). Unlike past theoretical
approaches (Fiet 1991, DEMO 1995b: Landstrom, 1992). this paperalludes to the quality of invest-
ment contracts as one possible manner of reducing potential agency costs. A DEMO definitive study
ofthe relationship between the completeness of investment contracts and an investor's business
angel experience may add more support to the principal DEMO made in this paper, which, with
respect to this issue, DEMO heavily based upon the data from the business angel interviews. One
goal of this paper is to forward this issue of contract incompleteness for DEMO and further
examination in the business angel context.
REFERENCES
Aram, J. DEMO (1989) Aiiittidcs and behaviors of informal investors toward early-stage investmenls. technology-based ven-
lures and coinvestors. Journal of Business Venliiritig. 4. 333-347.
Carter. N. DEMO, Williams, M.. & Reynolds. R D. (1997). Discontinuance anuing DEMO firms in retail: The influence of initial
resources, strategy, and DEMO Journal of Business Venturing. 12. 125-145.
Coveney, P.. & Moore. K. (1998). Business angels: securing start up finance. London: John Wiley &. Sons.
Ehrlich, S. B., Noble, A. F., Moore, T, & Weaver, R. R. (1994). After the cash arrives: DEMO comparative study of venture eap-
iial firms and private investor involvement in entrepreneurial firms. Journal of Business Venturing. 9, 67-82.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Ageney theory: An assessment and K\\tw. Academy of Manai>ement Review, !4{]). 57-74.
Fama. E., & Jensen. M. C. (1983). Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law & Economics. 26, 301-325.
Fiel, J. 0 . (1991). Network reliance by venture DEMO firms: An empirical and Ibeoretical lest. In N. C. Cburchill, W. D.
Bygrave. J. G. Covin, D. L. Sexton. D. P. Slevin. K. H. Vesper. & W. E. Wetzel. Frotitiers of etitrepreneursliip research, pp.
445-455. Wellesley MA: Babson College.
Fiel, J. 0 . (1995a). Reliance upon informants in the venture capital \ndu%tTy. .fournal of Business Venturing, 10, 195-223.
Fiet, J.OP (1995b). Risk avoidance strategies in venture capital markets, Journal of Management Studies, i2(4). 551-574.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E.. & Wclzel, W. E. (1992). The DEMO attitudes, behavior and characteristics of high net worth indi-
viduals. In DEMO C. Churchill, S. Birley, W. D. Bygrave, D. E. Muzyka, G. Wahlbin. & W. E. Wetzel, Frontier.^ of entrepre-
neurship research, DEMO 374-387. Wellesley MA: Babson College.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E,.& Wetzel, W.E. (1994a). The private investor market for venture capital. The Financier: ACMT. t(l),
7-15,
Freear. J., Sohl. J. E.. & Wetzel, W. E. (1994b) Angels and non-angels: Are there differences? J(W/'n<j/()/S«i;>ie.sj Venturing,
9. 109-123,
Freear. J,. Sohl, J. E., & Wetze!, W. E. (1997) Tbe informal venlure capital market: Milestones passed and the road ahead.
In D. Sexlon, & R. Smilor. (DEMO), Enirepreneurship 2000. pp. 47-70. Chicago: Upslart Publications Company.
Freear. J.. & Wetzel. W. E, (1988). Equity financing for new tecbnology-based firms. In B. A. Kirchhoff. W. A. Long, W.
E. McMullan, K. DEMO Vesper, & W. E. Wetzel (Eds.), Frotitiers of enirepreneurship research, pp. 347-367. Wellesiey MA:
Babson College.
Freear. J., & Wetzel. DEMO E. (1990). Who bankrolls high-tech entrepreneurs? Journal of Business Venturing. 5. 77-89.
Ga.ston. R.J. (1989) Finding private venture capital for your DEMO: A complete guide. New York: Wiley & Sons.
Gupta, A. DEMO, & Sapienza, H. J. (1988). The pursuit of diversity DEMO venture capital firms: Antecedents and implications. In
B. A, Kirchhoff. W, A, Long. W. E. McMullan. K. H. Vesper, & W. E. Wetzel, (Eds.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research, pp. 290-302. Wellesley MA: Babson College.
Haar, N. E., Starr, J.. & MacMillan. I, C , (1988). Informal risk capital investors: Investment patterns on DEMO east coast of
the U.S.A.. Journal of Business Venturing. 3. 11-29.
Hall, J., & Hofer, C. W. (1993). Venture capitalists' decision criteria in new venture evaluation. Journal of Business
Venturing. S.25-4\.
40 ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
Harrisoti, R. T . & Masoti, C. M. (1991). Informal venture capital in the UK and the USA: A comparison of investor char-
acteristics and decision-making. In N. C. Churchill, W. D. Bygrave, DEMO G. Covin, D. L. Sexton. D. P. Sievin, K. H. Vesper.
& W. E. Wetzel, (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, pp, 469-481, Wellesley MA: Babson College.
Harrison, R, T., & DEMO, C. M. (1992) The roles of investors in entrepreneurial companies: A comparison of informal
investors and venture capitalists. Venture Finance Research Project, Workinf; Paper Nc).5, University of Southampton and
Ulster Business School.
DEMO, R, T . & Mason. C. M, (1996). Developments in the promotion of informal venture capital in the UK.
International Journal DEMO Entrepreneurial Behaviour & Research. 2(2) 6-33.
Hart, 0 . (DEMO). Firms, contracts, and fmaneial structures. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
DEMO, M. C , & Meckling, W. H. (1976). Theory DEMO the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure.
Journal of Financial Economics, 3. 305-360,
Kelly, P., & Hay, M. (1996a), Serial investors: An exploratory study. In P, D. Rynolds. DEMO, Birley. J, E, Butler, W. D, Bygrave,
P. DEMO, W, B. Gartnor, & P P, McDougall, (Eds,), Frontiers of entreprcneursjiip research, pp. 344-358. Wellesley
MA: Babson College.
Kelly. P., & Hay, M. (19')6b). Serial investors and DEMO stage finance, Entrepreneurial and Small Business Finance.
5(3)159-174.
Landstrom, H, (1990). Co-operation between venture capital companies and small firms. DEMO & Regional
Development. 2. 345-362,
Landstrom, H. (1992) The DEMO between private investors and small finns: An agency theory approach.
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development. 4. 199-223.
Landstrom. H. (1993). Informal risk capital DEMO Sweden and some international comparisons. Journal of Business Venturing.
H, 525-540,DEMO
Lumme, A,, Mason, C , & Suomi, M. (1996). The returns from informal venture capital investments: Some evidence from
Finland. In P. D, Rynoids. S. Birley. J. E. Butler. W. D. Bygrave, P, Davidsson, W, B, Gartnor, & P. P, McDougall, (Eds.).
Frontiers of entrepreneurship researeh. pp. 344-358Wellesley MA: Babson College.
Mason, C. M. (1996a) Informal venture capital: Is policy running DEMO of knowledge? International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Behaviour & Research, 2{\). 4-14.
Mason. C. M. (1996b). International informal venture eapital researeh newsletter, dumber 4, Summer.
Mason, C. M,, & Harrison, R. DEMO (1992). The supply of equity finance in the UK: A strategy for closing the equity gap.
Journal of Business Venturini<. 4(DEMO), 357-380.
Mason, C, M.. & Harrison, R, T. (DEMO). Strategies for expanding the informal venture capital market. International Small
Business Journal. IJ{4), 23-38,
Mason, C. M,, & Harrison. R,T, (1994), Why business angels say no: A case study of opportunities rejected by an informal
investor syndicate. Venture Einance Research Project, Working Paper No.7, University of Southampton and Ulster Business
School,
Mason, C. M., & Harrison. R. T. (1996). The UK clearing banks and the informal venture capital market. International
Journal of Bank Marketing, /-^(l) , 5-14,
Mason, C. M., & Harrison, R,T. (1997) Business angels in the UK: Aresponse to Stevenson & Coveney. InternationaJ Small
Business Journal. Jan/March, 83-89,
Mason. C. M., Harrison. R. T., & Allen, P. (1995). Informal DEMO capital: A study of the investment process, the post-
investment experience and investment performance. Venture Finance Research Project, Working Paper No. 12, DEMO
of Southampton and Ulster Business School,
Mason, C. M,, DEMO, R. T,, & Chaloner, J, (1991), Informal risk capital in the UK: A study of investor characteristics,
investment preferences and investment decision-making. Venture Einance Research Project, Working Paper No, 2,DEMO
University of Southampton and Ulster Business School,
Mason. C. M.. & Rogers, A. (1996). Understanding the business angel's investment decision.Venture DEMO Research
Project, Working Paper No. 14, University of Southampton and Ulster Business School,
Summer, 1998 41
Neiswander. D. K. (1985). Informal seed slage invcslors. In J. A. Homday. E. B. Shils. J. A. Tinimons, K, H. Vesper, (DEMO),
Frontiers of entreprenettrship research, pp. 185-197. Wellesley MA: Babson DEMO
Nonon, E. (1995). Venture capital as an aliemalive means to allocate capital: An agency-theorelic view. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 20(2\ DEMO
Peiiit. R. R.. & Singer. R. F. (1985). Small business DEMO: A research agenda. Financial Management. /4(3). 47-59.
Porter, DEMO E. (1980).Com/jfr/r(rc stralegy. New York: Free Press.
Riding. A., Dal Cin, P.. Druxbury. L.. Haines. C , & DEMO, R. (1993). hifornial investors in Canada: The identification of
DEMO characteristics. Ottawa: Carlelon University.
Roll. R,.& Ros.s.S. (1994).Onthecross-seclional DEMO between expected returns and betas. ./owraij/rt/F/nc/ncc. 49.
101-121.
Ross, S. (1978). The curTenl status of the capital DEMO pricing model. ./(>(»7?(j/(>/fm(jnft'. DEMO and Proceedings. 135-143.
Ruhnka. J., Feldman, H.. & Dean. T. (DEMO). The living dead' phenomenon in venture capital investments. Jotirnal of
DEMO Venturitig. 7(2), 137-155.
Stevenson, H.. & Coveney. P. (1994). Survey of business angels: Fallacies corrected and six distinct types of angel. Henley-
on-Thanies: Venture Capital Report Lid,
Sullivan, M, K. (1991). Entrepreneurs as informal investors: Are there distinguishing characteristics? In N. C, Churchhill.
W. D. Bygrave. J. G. Covin. D. L, DEMO D. P. Slevin. K. H. Vesper. W, E, Wetzol, (Eds.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research, pp. 436-468. Wellesley MA: Babson College, 456-468,
Van Osnabrugge, M. (1998) The financing of entrepreneurial firms in the UK: a comparison of business angel atid vetiture
capitalist investment procedures, unpublished doctoral thesi.s. Oxford University,
Wagner, W, H., & Lau. S. C. (1971). The effect of diversification on risk. DEMO Analysts Journat. 27. 48-53.
Wet/el. W. E. (1982). Risk DEMO research. In C. A. Kent, D. L. Sexton, & K, DEMO, Vesper, (Eds,), Encyclopedia of entre-
preneurship, chiipler 8. DEMO Cliffs. NJ: Prentice Hall.
Wetzel, W. E. (1983). Angels DEMO informal risk capital. Sloan Management Review. Summer. 23-34.
Wetzel, W, E, (1987), The informal venture capital market: Aspects of scale and market efficiency. Journal of Business
Venturing. 2. 299-?,U.
Wetzel. W. E, (1993), Statements (o Ihe House Banking. Finance and Urban Affairs Committee. Subcommittee of Economic
Growth and Credit Formation. Roundtable Hearing, November 16. 1993.
Wet7.el, W, E, (1996). Economic policy in an DEMO world: Seven treacherous misconceptions and half-truths.
Venture Capital Report. April.
Wetzel, W, E,. & Freear. J. (1994). Promoting informal venture DEMO in the United States: Reflections on the hi.story of
the venture DEMO network. In R, Harrison. & C. M. Mason. (Eds.), Informal venture capital: Information. netv>'orks and
piihlic policv. Hemel-Hempstead: Woodhead-Faulkner.
The author would tike to thank Colin Mayer and Keith Grint. his Oxford DEMO thesis supervisors, and Lucius Cary.
Chairman and Founder of Venture Capital DEMO Ltd. In addition, a debt of gratitude is extended to the DEMO UK busi-
ness introduction services for iheir assistance: Venture Capital Report (VCR). SouthWest Investment Group (SWIG).
TEChlNVEST. Capital Access. Capital Connections. Capital Match. Cheshire Contracts. Gloucestershire Business Angels
Scheme, IDJ Ltd.. Informal Register of Investment Services, and Kidsons Impey, Lastly, sincere thanks also to Kristine
Eschner for her support and guidance.
Financial assistance for (his study was received from The Tony Lorenz Memorial Trust Fund (British Venture Capital
Association) and through an ORS Scholarship (British Government).
Mark Van DEMO is a Post Doctoral Fellow at the Harvard Business SchooL
Address for correspondence: Harvard Business School, Morgan 142, Soldiers Field, Boston, MA 02163.
42 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
{1g42fwefx}