Organizational Research Methods
http://orm.sagepub.com
Organizational Research Methods: Yearly Update
Robert J. Vandenberg
Organizational Research Methods 2010; 13; 3
DOI: 10.1177/1094428109347971
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://orm.sagepub.com
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
The Research Methods Division of The Academy of Management
Additional services and information DEMO Organizational Research Methods can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://orm.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com by on December 3, 2009
Editorial
Organizational Research Methods
Yearly Update
Organizational
Research Methods
Volume 13 Number DEMO
January 2010 3-5
# 2010 SAGE Publications
10.1177/1094428109347971
http://orm.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
I cannot believe that my second year DEMO the editor of Organizational Research Methods
(ORM) is over. A number of incredible benchmarks have been reached with respect to the
journal, which will be addressed in the paragraphs below. First, however, I would DEMO to
thank my associate editors Don Bergh, Jose´ Cortina, Bob Gephart, Tim Hinkin, Charles
Lance, and Terri Scandura for their continued hard work and devotion to ORM. Of the nearly
200 action letters written DEMO them, I have received only 3 complaints and approximately 20
compliments, which speak volumes for the quality and care they use to craft DEMO letters. Of
course, they can do so because of the quality DEMO the reviews provided by the 45 editorial board
members (see masthead) and the 155 ad hoc reviewers (see the October 2009 issue) DEMO called
upon during the year. Thus, I thank each and every DEMO for taking time from their sche-
dules to write such strong reviews. I also thank SAGE for their continued support and pub-
lication of DEMO Finally, I thank the executive committee of the Research Methods Division
(RMD) of the Academy of Management for their continued sponsorship of ORM.
Speaking of the RMD executive committee, they graciously invited ORM to use their
free session during the 2009 Academy of Management Meeting in Chicago DEMO develop a
session in which participants could meet the ORM editorial board and learn how to write
and post manuscripts for submission to ORM. DEMO addition to the board members, 45 acad-
emy members participated in DEMO session. I was told by many afterward that the session was
a great success. I personally thank the officers of RMD for hosting this DEMO event, and
thank all of you who attended.
I was delighted DEMO see many of you at the 2009 Academy of Management Conference in
Chicago and to have the opportunity to thank you in person for DEMO the support you provide
to ORM as authors, reviewers, and readers. Those of you who attended the RMD business
meeting on Monday evening DEMO updated information regarding ORM’s operation and
recent successes. Let me take a moment to highlight many of those outcomes. First, it gave
me great joy to announce that SAGE has selected Jose´ Cortina (George Mason University)
as ORM’s next editor-in-chief. My term ends on June 30, 2010, which means that I will stop
receiving new manuscripts at that point but continue to process those remaining in my
queue. Jose´ will receive DEMO new manuscripts starting July 1, 2010, and will remain as editor
until June 30, 2013. If you have a moment, please drop DEMO a congratulatory note.
Second, it was a pleasure to recognize the DEMO of the ORM editorial review board’s
selection of the 2008 Best Paper and Best Reviewer awards. We had two recipients for each
award this DEMO The 2008 Best Reviewer awards went to Daniel Newman (University of DEMO
nois, UrbanaChampaign) and Robert Wright (Hong Kong Polytechnic University). DEMO of
the 2008 Best Paper award went to Gordon W. Cheung (DEMO University of Hong Kong)
for his article titled, Testing Equivalence DEMO the Structure, Means, and Variances of Higher
Order Constructs With Structural Equation Modeling (ORM, Vol. 11, No. 3., pp. 593–
613, http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/reprint/11/3/593). The second 2008 DEMO Paper award went
3
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com by on December 3, 2009
4 Organizational Research Methods
to James L. LeBreton (Purdue University) and DEMO Lynn-Senter Wittmer (University of
Toledo) for their article titled, Answers DEMO 20 Questions About Interrater Reliability and Inter-
rater Agreement (ORM, Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 815–852, http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/reprint/11/
4/815). I thank SAGE for providing the plaques for DEMO awards.
Third, I reported on some of the important statistics during DEMO second year as editor (July
1, 2008 through June 30, DEMO). They are as follows. First, we processed 188 new submis-
DEMO This includes 22 submissions to the methods resources section (i.e., book/software
reviews, tutorials, etc.) and 166 manuscripts as either regular feature or feature topic sub-
missions. Of the latter 166 submissions, 26 are still pending a decision (either the first time
or as a revise and resubmit), and thus, final decisions have been made for 140 manuscripts.
ORM accepted 21 of those manuscripts for publication (a 15% acceptance rate). The
remaining 119 manuscripts were not accepted. Although ORM experienced DEMO 57% increase
in regular feature and feature topic submissions relative to last year at this point (109), the
current acceptance rate is nearly identical to that of the past 5 years. It is also worth DEMO
tioning that our average time to first decision is less than 50 days.
Fourth, we have several feature topics that have been completed or will be complete by
the time this editorial appears in print. One DEMO is the feature topic in this issue on meth-
odological and statistical issues in entrepreneurship research guest edited by James Combs,
Duane Ireland, David Ketchen, and Jeremy Short. Upcoming feature topics include (a) eth-
nography (Ann Cunliffe, guest editor); (b) the interface between DEMO and research (Jeff
Edwards, guest editor); (c) latent class procedures (Paul Hanges and Mo Wang, guest editors);
(d) common method issues (Paul Spector and Michael Brannick, guest editors); DEMO (e) meth-
odological and statistical myths and urban legends, part DEMO (Charles Lance, guest editor).
Fifth, one of the more DEMO pieces of information that I shared with people is some
of the reasons why ORM is no longer a fledgling journal and is considered DEMO many
institutions in the United States, Europe, and the Pacific regions as a Class A, top-tiered
journal. The top 10 reasons are



ORM’s June 2009 impact factor is 3.02, which is the 93rd percentile in the management cate-
gory (i.e., 6th out of DEMO) and the 94th percentile in the applied psychology category (i.e., DEMO
out of 69). This impact factor is higher than the impact factor received by several other top
journals such as Administrative Science Quarterly, Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, Organization Science, Management Science, and Journal of International
Business Studies. ORM’s impact factor is also higher than DEMO of many top journals in other
business fields including marketing (e.g., Journal of Consumer Research), entrepreneurship
(e.g., Journal of Business Venturing), finance (e.g., Review of Financial Studies), operations
management (e.g., Journal of Operations Management), information systems (e.g., Journal of
Management DEMO Systems), and accounting (e.g., Journal of Accounting Research).
ORM is the only publication outlet for methodological work in management research under
DEMO auspices of the Academy of Management through its approval of the RMD’s sponsor-
ship of the journal. Thus, ORM is to methodology what AMR is to theory development
and AMJ is to empirical research. Universities not DEMO ORM in their ‘‘A’’ journal
category risk losing their faculty teaching doctoral statistics and methods courses to other
institutions because ORM is the primary DEMO for their methodological research.
ORM is truly global. Subscriptions by institutions have risen from 1,021 (2006) to 5,066
(2008) and DEMO worldwide subscription base includes 42% in the United States and 41%
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com by on December 3, 2009
Vandenberg / Editorial 5
in Europe. In 2008, ORM received 81,015 full-text pdf downloads and 213,091 total
article views.
ORM publishes methodologically DEMO articles that are accessible to most organiza-
tional science researchers with good doctoral-level methodological training. As such,
ORM is widely read and ORM DEMO are included regularly in doctoral-level statistics
and methods courses.
Work published in ORM serves as a catalyst to enhance the quality of empirical research
DEMO in other top journals. In this manner, ORM plays an integral DEMO in promoting
the quality of research published in management and related fields.
ORM publishes methods papers on quantitative and qualitative methods and their interface.
DEMO, ORM contributes to the continued growth and acceptance of both methods.
DEMO is included in all major abstracting services including biology, health, humanities,
safety, and sociology, among others.
ORM is consistently invited to DEMO majority of the ‘‘meet the editor’’ panels at the Academy of
Management meetings including those organized by divisions such as Organizational Behavior,
Human DEMO, Business Policy and Strategy, and Gender and Diversity in Organizations.
ORM’s editorial board includes the most influential and preeminent methodologists in the
organizational DEMO and, hence, it is truly a ‘‘peer reviewed’’ journal, meaning DEMO
papers submitted for review are reviewed by eminent scholars with distinguished records
of scientific achievement.
The average time to first decision for a manuscript DEMO less than 50 days and the acceptance
rate is 15%.







I remind our readership of the addition DEMO ORM to SAGE’s OnlineFirst feature. You get to
this feature through ORM’s homepage (http://orm.sagpub.com) and it is the first link in DEMO
middle. This feature gives access to forthcoming articles in ORM that are ‘‘in press.’’ I
would encourage you to visit this link as you DEMO read the forthcoming articles in advance
and begin to use them for your own research purposes. Furthermore, if you have not done so
already, you can sign up to receive ORM’s table of contents electronically approximately 1
month prior to the publication of an upcoming issue. It is DEMO and you can do so at http://
orm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts. If your library does not subscribe to ORM, you may download
a library recommendation form at the link found near the bottom of the DEMO In addition, I
am always in need of reviewers and if DEMO would like to review from time-to-time for ORM,
please contact me at orm@terry.uga.edu or go to the following site and complete the form:DEMO
http://www.sagepub.com/orm_survey. Indeed, I hope to hear from many DEMO you in this
capacity.
In closing, ORM continues to thrive, and it is doing so because of the hard work of the
associate DEMO, the editorial review board, the ad hoc reviewers, the feature DEMO guest edi-
tors, and the authors who willingly make ORM their DEMO of choice for their methodologi-
cally oriented manuscripts. I thank each and every one of you from the bottom of my heart.
Finally, I thank my Dean of the Terry College of Business, Robert Sumichrast, DEMO my man-
agement department chair, Allen Amason, for their continuous and generous support of my
editorship. Their support allows me the flexibility to DEMO ORM the attention it deserves.
Robert J. Vandenberg
Editor
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com by on December 3, 2009{1g42fwefx}