Neuron
Article
Separate Neural Mechanisms Underlie Choices
and Strategic Preferences in Risky DEMO Making
Vinod Venkatraman,1,2 John W. Payne,2,3 James R. Bettman,2,3 Mary Frances Luce,2,3 and Scott A. Huettel1,DEMO,*
1Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3918, Durham, NC 27710, USA
2Center for Neuroeconomic Studies, Duke DEMO, Box 90999, Durham, NC 27710, USA
3Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, 1 Towerview Drive, Durham, NC 27708, USA
*Correspondence: scott.huettel@duke.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.04.007
SUMMARY
Adaptive decision making in real-world contexts often
relies on strategic simpliﬁcations of decision prob-
lems. Yet, the neural mechanisms that shape these
strategies and their implementation remain largely
unknown. Using an DEMO decision-making task,
we dissociate brain regions that predict speciﬁc
choices from those predicting an individual’s preferred
strategy. Choices that maximized gains or minimized
DEMO were predicted by functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging activation in ventromedial prefrontal
cortex or anterior insula, respectively. However,
choices that followed a simplifying strategy (i.e.,
attending to overall probability of winning) were asso-
DEMO with activation in parietal and lateral prefrontal
cortices. Dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, DEMO
differential functional connectivity with parietal and
insular cortex, predicted individual variability DEMO stra-
tegic preferences. Finally, we demonstrate that robust
decision strategies follow DEMO neural sensitivity to
rewards. We conclude that decision making reﬂects
more than compensatory interaction of choice-related
regions; in addition, speciﬁc brain systems potentiate
DEMO depending on strategies, traits, and context.
INTRODUCTION
The neuroscience of decision making under risk has focused on
identifying brain systems that shape behavior DEMO or against
particular choices (Hsu et al., 2005; Kuhnen and DEMO, 2005;
Platt and Huettel, 2008). These studies typically involve compen-
satory paradigms that trade two decision variables against each
other, as when individuals choose between a safer, lower-value
option and a riskier, DEMO option (Coricelli et al., 2005; De
Martino et al., 2006; Huettel, 2006; Tom et al., 2007). Activation in
distinct DEMO reliably predicts the choices that are made:
increased activation in the anterior insula follows risk-averse
choices (Paulus et al., 2003; Preuschoff et al., 2008) and
increased activation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) and striatum predicts risk-seeking choices (Kuhnen
and Knutson, 2005; Tobler DEMO al., 2007). In contrast, prefrontal
and parietal control regions support executive control processes
associated with risky decisions, as well as the evaluation of risk
and judgments about probability and value (Barraclough et al.,
2004; Huettel et al., 2005; Paulus et al., 2001; Sanfey et al.,
2003). These and other studies have led to DEMO choice-centric
neural conception of decision making: tradeoffs between deci-
sion variables, such as whether someone seeks to minimize
potential losses or maximize potential DEMO, reﬂect similar trade-
offs between the activation of brain regions (Kuhnen and Knut-
son, 2005; Loewenstein et al., 2008; Sanfey et DEMO, 2003). Accord-
ingly, individual differences in decision making have been
characterized neurometrically by estimating parameters associ-
ated with a single model of DEMO choice and identifying regions
that correlate with individual differences in those parameters
(De Martino et al., 2006; Huettel et al., 2006; Tom et al., 2007).
Yet, following a purely compensatory approach to DEMO
making would require substantial computational resources,
especially for complex decision problems that involve multiple
decision variables. It has become increasingly apparent that
people DEMO a variety of strategies to simplify the representa-
tions of decision problems and reduce computational demands
(Camerer, 2003; Gigerenzer and Goldstein, 1996; Kahneman
and Frederick, 2002; Payne et al., 1992, 1988; Tversky and Kah-
neman, 1974). For example, when faced with a DEMO decision
scenario that could result in a range of positive or negative mone-
tary outcomes, some individuals adopt a simplifying strategy that
deemphasizes the relative magnitudes of the outcomes but maxi-
mizes the overall probability of DEMO Other individuals empha-
size the minimization of potential losses or the maximization of
potential gains in ways consistent with more compensatory
models of risky DEMO such as expected utility maximization
(Payne, 2005). Adaptive decision making in real-world settings
typically involves multiple strategies that may be adopted based
DEMO the context and computational demands of the task (Giger-
enzer and DEMO, 1996; Payne et al., 1993). As noted above,
DEMO has been considerable research on identifying brain
systems that shape behavior toward or against particular choices
(risky or safer gambles); however, much DEMO is known about the
neural mechanisms that underlie inter- and intraindividual vari-
ability in decision strategies. We sought to address this limitation
in the DEMO study by dissociating choice-related and strategy-
related neural contributors to decision making.
We used an incentive-compatible decision-making task (Payne,
2005) that contained DEMO gambles with ﬁve rank-ordered
Neuron 62, 593–602, May 28, 2009 DEMO Elsevier Inc.
593
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
Figure 1. Experimental Task DEMO Behavioral Results
(A) Subjects were ﬁrst shown, for 4–6 s, a multiattribute mixed gamble consist-
ing of ﬁve potential outcomes, each associated with a probability of occur-
rence. Then, two alternatives for improving the gambles were highlighted in
red, whereupon subjects had 6 s to decide which improvement they preferred.
Finally, after two arrows identiﬁed the buttons corresponding to the choices,
subjects indicated their choice by pressing the corresponding DEMO as
soon as possible. Here, the addition of $20 to the DEMO, reference outcome
would maximize the overall probability of winning (Pmax choice), whereas the
addition of $20 to the extreme loss would reﬂect DEMO Lmin choice. The next trial
appeared after a variable interval of 4, 6, or 8 s. In other trials, subjects could
have a chance to add money to the extreme gain outcome, reﬂecting a Gmax
choice.
outcomes, ranging from large monetary losses to large monetary
gains (DEMO 1). There were three types of choices: gain maxi-
mizing (Gmax), loss minimizing (Lmin), or probability maximizing
(Pmax). DEMO a Gmax choice increased the magnitude of the
largest monetary gain (DEMO, the most money that could be won),
whereas making a Lmin choice reduced the magnitude of the
largest monetary loss (i.e., DEMO most money that could be lost).
The gambles were constructed so that these two choices (Gmax
and Lmin) were generally consistent with DEMO compensatory strategy
(see Supplemental Experimental Procedures for a discussion of
model DEMO), such as following expected utility theory
and/or rank-dependent expectation models like cumulative pros-
pect theory (Birnbaum, 2008; Payne, 2005; Tversky and Kahne-
man, 1992). On the other hand, making a DEMO choice increases
the overall probability of winning money compared to losing
money. Therefore, such choices would be consistent with a simpli-
fying strategy (DEMO, ‘‘maximize the chance of winning’’) that
ignores reward magnitude. Finally, DEMO characterized our subjects’
strategic preferences according to their relative proportion of
simplifying (Pmax) versus compensatory (Gmax and Lmin) choices.
Such a deﬁnition DEMO the two strategies as the end points
of a continuum with a high value indicating an individual’s prefer-
ence for a simplifying strategy and DEMO low value indicating a prefer-
ence for a compensatory strategy. We emphasize that, as deﬁned
operationally here, strategies for decision making may be DEMO
explicit or implicit.
To distinguish neural mechanisms underlying choices from
those underlying the strategies that generate those choices,
594 Neuron 62, 593–602, DEMO 28, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
we collected several forms of behavioral DEMO functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) data. Consistent with many previous
studies (De Martino et al., 2006; Sanfey et al., 2003), DEMO charac-
terized brain regions as choice related if the magnitude of their
activation predicted a speciﬁc behavior (e.g., selecting the
option providing the DEMO gain) throughout our subject sample.
In contrast, we characterized brain regions as strategy related
based on their association with individual difference measures;
DEMO, if the magnitude of their activation depended on whether
or not DEMO individual engages in their preferred strategy, regard-
less of which of DEMO choices that entails. Moreover, strategy-
related regions should exert a modulatory DEMO on choice-
related regions. A strong candidate for a strategy-related region
is the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), which has been
shown to play an important role in tasks involving decision
conﬂict, as well as in making decisions that run counter to
general behavioral tendencies (De Martino et al., 2006; Pochon
et al., 2008). Moreover, this region DEMO distinct patterns of
functional connectivity to affective and cognitive networks (Mer-
DEMO et al., 2006), making it a candidate for shaping activation DEMO
those networks based on context and computational demands
(Behrens et al., 2007; Kennerley et al., 2006).
Using large-sample behavioral experiments, we ﬁrst demon-
strate systematic individual variability in decision making, with
a signiﬁcant bias toward choices that maximize the overall prob-
ability of winning (i.e., toward a simplifying strategy). Then, using
fMRI, we show that distinct neural systems underlie choices
made on each trial and variability in DEMO preferences across
individuals. Finally, we also demonstrate a striking relation
between DEMO sensitivity to monetary outcomes and individual
differences in strategic preferences, indicating DEMO robust deci-
sion strategies may follow from the neural response to rewards.
These results demonstrate that decision making under uncer-
tainty does not merely DEMO competition between brain regions
predicting distinct decision variables; in addition, the relation
between neural activation and subsequent decisions is medi-
ated by underlying DEMO tendency.
RESULTS
We conducted two behavioral experiments (n1 = 128 and DEMO = 71)
and one fMRI experiment (n = 23), DEMO involving the basic para-
digm illustrated in Figure 1. Subjects were young adult volun-
teers from the Duke University community (see Supplemental
Experimental Procedures for details on the experiments).
Research was conducted under protocols approved DEMO the Insti-
tutional Review Boards of Duke University and Duke University
Medical Center.
Across both behavioral experiments (details available in
Supplemental Experimental Procedures), we found a signiﬁcant
bias toward the Pmax choices (Figure S1 available online), ex-
tending prior ﬁndings in the behavioral literature (Payne, DEMO).
In addition to demonstrating the robustness of the preferences
toward the Pmax choices, the second experiment also indicates
that this bias can be reversed or accentuated by experimental
manipulations. The ﬁndings from these studies are DEMO consis-
tent with Pmax choice representing a simplifying strategy (see
Supplemental DEMO Procedures). Finally, importantly
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
for the goals of DEMO imaging studies, we also found substantial
interindividual variability: some subjects nearly always preferred
a simplifying strategy (choosing the Pmax option in most trials);
others nearly always preferred a compensatory strategy
(choosing the Gmax DEMO Lmin options in most trials), while still others
switched strategies on different trials resulting in both intra- and
intersubject variability in strategy (Figure S2).
Variability in Underlying Neural Mechanisms
We used high-ﬁeld (4T) DEMO to evaluate the neural systems
associated with strategic decision making under uncertainty.
We adapted the basic design from our behavioral experiments
to the fMRI DEMO Subjects ﬁrst made a series of choices
without feedback. On each trial, subjects initially viewed the
decision options and then learned the assignment of choices
to responses, to eliminate any potential confounding effects of
response selection (Pochon et al., 2008). Then, following the
completion of all decision trials, we resolved a set of those trials
for real monetary rewards. This allowed us to measure reward-
related activation without altering subsequent DEMO through
learning.
Consistent with our two behavioral experiments, fMRI subjects
made DEMO choices on approximately 70% of the trials when the
choices were matched for expected value. Moreover, the propor-
tion of Pmax choices was systematically modulated by the trade-
off in expected value between the choices, indicating that
subjects were not simply insensitive to expected value (Table
S1). We evaluated intrasubject choice consistency using split-
sample analysis. We split each DEMO choices into samples
from odd-numbered runs and from even-numbered runs. There
was a strong correlation between the proportion of Pmax choices
in each sample (r = 0.61; p < 0.01), even without considering other
factors like relative expected value. For comparison, we used
a similar split-sample approach to estimate subject-speciﬁc
Figure 2. Distinct Sets of Brain Regions
Predict Choices
(A) Increased activation in the right anterior insula
(peak MNI space DEMO: x = 38, y = 28, z = 0)
DEMO in the vmPFC (x = 16, y = 21, z DEMO 23) pre-
dicted Lmin and Gmax choices, respectively, while
increased DEMO in the lateral prefrontal cortex
(x = 44, y = 44, z = 27) and PPC (x = 20, y = DEMO, z =
57) predicted Pmax choices. Activation maps show
active clusters that surpassed a threshold of z >
2.3 with cluster-based Gaussian random ﬁeld
correction.
(B–D) Percent signal change in these three regions
to DEMO type of choice. Error bars represent ± 1
standard error of the mean for each column.
parameters for canonical expected utility
and cumulative prospect DEMO models
of decision making (see Supplemental
Experimental Procedures). We found
DEMO model parameters estimated from
one half of the experimental data did not
signiﬁcantly classify choices within the
other runs (Figure S3). Finally, DEMO propor-
tion of Pmax choices decreased with increasing self-reported
tendency to maximize (r = 0.67, p < 0.001; Figure S4).
Neural Predictors of Choices
Our initial analyses identiﬁed brain regions whose activation was
driven, across subjects and trials, by the selected choice. There
was greater activation in anterior insular cortex (aINS) and vmPFC
(Figure 2A) for DEMO compensatory magnitude-sensitive choices
(combined across Gmax and Lmin). These regions DEMO typically
associated with emotional function, particularly the affective eval-
uation of DEMO outcome of a choice in decision-making tasks
(Bechara et al., 2000; Dalgleish, 2004; Paulus et al., 2003; Sanfey
et al., DEMO). We subsequently performed a region of interest (ROI)
analysis DEMO explore speciﬁcally the differences in activation
between Gmax and Lmin. Note that this analysis was restricted,
a priori, to a subset of 15 subjects with a sufﬁcient number of
choices in each condition of interest. DEMO found a clear double
dissociation between aINS and vmPFC: Gmax choices DEMO asso-
ciated with greater activation within vmPFC, whereas Lmin
choices were DEMO with increased activation in aINS
(Figures 2B and 2C). Conversely, Pmax choices resulted in
increased activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC)
and posterior parietal cortex (PPC; Figure 2A and Table S2),
regions typically associated with executive function and decision
making under risk DEMO uncertainty (Bunge et al., 2002; Huettel
et al., 2005, DEMO; Paulus et al., 2001). These regions showed
greater activation for Pmax choices compared to both Gmax and
Lmin, but no difference between Gmax and Lmin options (Figure 2D).
Neural Predictors of Strategic Variability
across Individuals
We next investigated whether there were brain regions whose
activation DEMO systematically with individual differences in
strategic preferences. To do this, we DEMO each subject’s
Neuron 62, 593–602, May 28, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier DEMO 595
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
Figure 3. dmPFC Predicts DEMO Use
during Decision Making
(A and B) Activation in dmPFC (DEMO = 10, y = 22, z =
45; indicated with DEMO) and the rIFG exhibited
a signiﬁcant decision-by-trait interaction, such
that the difference in activation between compen-
satory and simplifying choices was signiﬁcantly
correlated DEMO preference for simplifying strategy
(mean-subtracted) across individuals.
(C and D) Functional connectivity of dmPFC varied
as a function of strategy: there was increased
connectivity with dlPFC (and PPC) for simplifying
choices and increased DEMO with aINS
(and amygdala) for compensatory choices. Error
bars represent ± 1 standard error of the mean for
each column.
strategic preference as DEMO normalized regressor into the across-
subjects fMRI analyses of the contrast between choices. Stra-
tegic variability predicted individual differences in activation in
two clusters (Figures 3A and 3B): the dmPFC and the right infe-
rior DEMO gyrus (rIFG). Within these regions, there was no signif-
icant difference in activation between the choices. However,
there was a signiﬁcant DEMO: activation increased when
an individual with preference for the more compensatory
DEMO made a simplifying Pmax choice and vice versa. We
focus on the dmPFC in the rest of this manuscript, based on
our prior hypothesis about the role of this region as well as the
fact that DEMO this region signiﬁcantly predicted trial-by-trial
choices (as discussed later).
We DEMO evaluated whether dmPFC activation might shape
activation in those regions that predicted speciﬁc choices (i.e.,
Pmax: dlPFC and PPC; Lmin: aINS; Gmax: vmPFC), using seed-
voxel-based whole-brain functional connectivity analyses. This
would provide additional converging evidence for the role of this
region in determining DEMO behavior, contingent on preferred
strategies. We found a double dissociation in DEMO functional
connectivity of dmPFC depending on the choice made by the
subject (Figures 3C and 3D). When subjects made Pmax choices,
connectivity with dmPFC increased in dlPFC and PPC, whereas
when subjects made more magnitude-sensitive compensatory
596
Neuron 62, 593–602, May 28, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
choices, connectivity increased in the
aINS (and amygdala, but not in vmPFC).
Moreover, the relative strength of the
connectivity between dmPFC and these
regions was signiﬁcantly associated with
individual differences in strategy prefer-
DEMO across subjects (Figure S5). Finally,
we also conducted additional DEMO to
rule out the possibility that dmPFC activa-
tion was related to response conﬂict, as
has been found in several previous studies
(Botvinick DEMO al., 1999; Kerns et al., 2004;
details can be DEMO in Supplemental
Experimental Procedures).
Thus, we provide a broad range DEMO
converging results, drawn from overall
activation, functional connectivity, factor
analysis DEMO behavioral data (see Supplemental Experimental
Procedures), association with individual differences DEMO strategy,
and trial-by-trial analysis (below), that together indicate that
DEMO supports strategic considerations during decision mak-
ing by shaping behavior toward or against individual strategic
preferences.
Integrating Choices and Strategies to Predict Behavior
We DEMO the brain regions implicated above as choice related
(aINS, vmPFC, DEMO, and PPC) or strategy related (rIFG and
dmPFC) to predict choices on individual trials. We extracted,
for every trial for every DEMO, the activation amplitude in
each of these ROIs, along with the decision made on that trial.
We used a hierarchical logistic regression approach DEMO evaluate
which of these regions were signiﬁcant and independent predic-
tors of trial-to-trial decisions (Table 1).
We ﬁrst entered into the model subjects’ overall preference for
the simplifying strategy (proportion of Pmax choices). We found,
unsurprisingly, that this was a highly signiﬁcant predictor of
trial-to-trial choices. Next, we used activation values from our
brain ROIs, considering DEMO both in isolation and with strategic
preference already entered into the model. We found that activa-
tion in insular cortex was a signiﬁcant predictor DEMO magnitude-
sensitive choices, while parietal activation was a signiﬁcant
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
Table 1. Predicting Trial-by-Trial DEMO from Trait and Neural Data
Model Variables Coefﬁcient (SE) Wald (DEMO) Model Signiﬁcance (c2) Model Fit (Nagelkerke R2)
Trait 76.09 0.069
Constant
Proportion of Pmax choices
Brain
Constant
Right PPC
Right anterior DEMO 40.52 (13.28) 9.31 (0.002)
Trait (+ Brain) 90.26 DEMO
Constant 0.22 (0.06) 13.38 (0.000)
Proportion of Pmax choices DEMO (0.12) 67.23 (0.000)
Right PPC 30.54 (8.62) 12.56 (0.000)
Right anterior insula 33.32 (13.69) 5.93 (.012)
Trait + Brain + (Trait*Brain) 97.66
Constant 0.23 (0.06) 13.78 (.000)
Proportion of Pmax choices 1.10 (0.13) 71.75 (.000)
Right PPC 31.96 (8.70) 13.49 (.000)
Right anterior insula 33.00 (DEMO) 5.74 (.017)
dMPFC * strategic variability 70.58 (26.28) 7.21 (.007)
All c2 values were highly signiﬁcant (p < 104)DEMO We used stepwise logistic regression to evaluate the contributions of trait effects (i.e., overall proportion
of choices) and brain effects (i.e., activation of a given region on a given trial) to the speciﬁc choices (coded as a binary variable of Pmax choice) made by
subjects. DEMO expected, subjects’ overall preference for simplifying strategy was a good predictor DEMO Pmax choices on individual trials. An independent
logistic regression analysis revealed that two brain regions, the PPC and anterior insula, were signiﬁcant positive DEMO negative predictors of Pmax
choices and that these regions remained signiﬁcant predictors even when the behavioral data were included in the model. Note that DEMO dmPFC
activation, when not weighted by strategy, did not signiﬁcantly improve the model ﬁt at any stage. However, when weighted by strategy, DEMO resulting
brain * strategy variable was a highly signiﬁcant predictor of choices, even when the strategy itself was already included in the model. Regions not
indicated in this table were not signiﬁcant predictors of choice behavior.
DEMO
0.14 (0.05) 6.19 (0.13)
1.02 (.12) 70.79 (0.000)
18.05
0.21 (0.06) 13.10 (0.000)
32.41 (8.43) 14.80 (0.000)
0.017
predictor of Pmax choices. Critically, activation in these DEMO
regions improved the ﬁt of the model even when the behavioral
data had already been included. None of the other regions,
including dmPFC, predicted either type of choice. Yet, when
we weighted dmPFC activation with each subject’s strategy
preference, the resulting variable became a signiﬁcant and
robust predictor of behavior and overall model error was
reduced (Table 1). Thus, dmPFC activation does not predict
either type of choice, but DEMO predicts choices that are incon-
sistent with one’s preferred decision strategy.
We emphasize that the brain-behavior relations reported here
were highly signiﬁcant even though DEMO behavioral choice data
across trials for each subject (an indicator of DEMO strategy)
were already included in the logistic regression model. That is,
we could use the fMRI activation evoked within key brain regions
DEMO improve our predictions of subjects’ decisions on individual
trials over what was predicted from behavioral data alone.
Neural Reward Sensitivity Predicts Individual
Differences in DEMO
Finally, we evaluated whether an independent neural measure of
reward sensitivity DEMO predict the strategic preferences out-
lined in the previous sections. At the end of the scanning session,
each subject passively viewed a subset DEMO their improved
gambles, which were each resolved to an actual monetary DEMO
or loss. While subjects were anticipating the outcome of each
gamble, DEMO was increased activation in the ventral striatum
(vSTR), a brain DEMO commonly implicated in learning about
positive and negative rewards (Schultz et DEMO, 1997; Seymour
et al., 2007; Yacubian et al., 2006)DEMO Then, when the gamble
was resolved, vSTR activation increased to gains but decreased
to losses (Figures 4A and 4B). Moreover, there DEMO striking and
signiﬁcant correlations between strategic variability and vSTR
activation: those DEMO who showed the greatest vSTR
increases to gains and decreases to losses both preferred the
simplifying Pmax strategy (Figure 4C) and scored low DEMO a behav-
ioral measure of maximizing (Figure S6). These results DEMO
that the use of a simplifying strategy that improves one’s overall
chances of winning (Pmax) may result from increased neural
sensitivity to reward DEMO
DISCUSSION
When facing complex decision situations, many individuals
engage in simplifying DEMO, such as choosing based on
the overall probability of a positive DEMO, to reduce computa-
tional demands compared to compensatory strategies. Here, we
demonstrated two neural predictors of strategic variability in
decision making. First, during the decision process, the dmPFC
shapes choices (in a manner depending DEMO strategic tendency)
through changes in functional connectivity with insular and
prefrontal cortices. Second, independent neurometric responses
Neuron 62, 593–602, May 28, DEMO ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
597
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
Figure 4. Ventral Striatal DEMO to Rewards Predicts Strategic Variability
At the end of the experiment, DEMO gambles were resolved to monetary gains or losses.
(A and B) Activation in the vSTR (x = 14, y = 16, z = 10) increased when subjects were waiting for gambles to be resolved (anticipation) and, after resolution,
increased to gains but decreased to losses. Error bars represent ± 1 standard error of the mean for DEMO column.
(C) Notably, the difference between gain-related and loss-related activation DEMO the vSTR correlated with variability in strategic preferences across subjects, with
DEMO who were most likely to prefer the Pmax exhibiting the greatest neural sensitivity to rewards.
to rewards predicted strategic preferences: those individuals
with the greatest striatal sensitivity to reward valence are most
likely to use a DEMO strategy that emphasizes valence, but
ignores magnitude. These results provide clear DEMO converging
evidence that the neural mechanisms of choice reﬂect more
than competition between decision variables; they additionally
involve strategic inﬂuences that vary across trials and individuals.
A large literature suggests that decisions between simple
gambles can DEMO predicted by compensatory models like ex-
pected utility and Cumulative Prospect Theory (Fennema and
Wakker, 1997; Huettel et al., 2006; Preuschoff et al., 2008; Wu
et al., 2004). Individual differences in sensitivity to the parame-
ters within these models lead to distinct patterns of DEMO,
even when the same model is applied to all individuals (DEMO
et al., 2006; Tom et al., 2007). As decision DEMO become
more complex, however, the assumption of a single canonical
decision strategy becomes more and more problematic. As sug-
gested by Tversky and DEMO (1992) and Payne et al. (1993),
people employ a variety of strategies to represent decision prob-
lems and evaluate options. Some DEMO those strategies will be
consistent with traditional models like expected utility maximiza-
tion, whereas other strategies will be more heuristic or simpli-
fying. Further, depending on the decision context, people shift
among multiple strategies to DEMO a balance between mini-
mizing cognitive effort or maximizing decision accuracy, DEMO
other goals (Payne et al., 1993). Finally, strategy use DEMO solve the
same decision problem differs across individuals, perhaps re-
ﬂecting DEMO differences such as a tendency toward satisﬁcing
versus maximizing. Our ﬁndings, DEMO both behavioral and neu-
roimaging experiments, provide evidence in favor of DEMO and
intersubject variability in the use of strategies across partici-
pants. Importantly, we show that the parameters estimated
using traditional economic models of risky choice were poor
predictors of choices in our paradigm, providing possible
evidence for differences in decision strategy within and across
participants.
One inﬂuential conjecture DEMO decision making is that people
frequently use a variety of simplifying heuristics that reduce effort
associated with the decision process (Shah and Oppenheimer,
2008; Simon, 1957). Pmax choices in the current task are DEMO
tent with such an effort-reduction framework, given that they
were associated DEMO faster response times in the behavioral
experiments (note that we do DEMO have accurate estimates of
response times in the imaging experiment as we sought to
explicitly separate the decision and response phases in our
design) and that the proportion of Pmax choices decreased adap-
tively with increasing DEMO in terms of expected value in all exper-
iments. We suggest, DEMO, that strategic preferences in the
current task reﬂect tradeoffs, resolved differently by individual
subjects and over trials, between one strategy that simpliﬁes
a complex decision problem by using a simple heuristic of maxi-
mizing the DEMO of winning (Pmax) and another, more
compensatory strategy that involves DEMO of additional
information as well as the emotions associated with extreme
gains (Gmax) or losses (Lmin).
To the extent that the Pmax choices reﬂect a more simplifying
strategy, the pattern of activations seen in this study seems
counterintuitive: the regions conventionally associated with
automatic and affective processing (aINS and vmPFC) predicted
magnitude-sensitive choices that were more consistent DEMO
traditional economic models such as expected utility maximiza-
tion, whereas the DEMO conventionally associated with execu-
tive functions (dlPFC and PPC) predicted choices more consis-
tent with a simplifying strategy. The lateral prefrontal cortex
has DEMO shown in previous studies to be active during probabi-
listic decision making (Heekeren et al., 2004, 2006) as well as
sensitive to DEMO differences in the processing of probability
(Tobler et al., 2008). Neurons within this region have also been
shown to track reward probabilities (Kobayashi et al., 2002)
and process reward and action in stochastic situations (Barra-
clough et al., 2004). Similarly, the parietal cortex also plays an
important role in tracking outcome probabilities (Dorris and
Glimcher, 2004; Huettel et al., 2005). Given that Pmax choices
are based on the overall probability of winning, activation in
dlPFC and PPC could be associated with tracking subjective
probabilities in these gambles.
598
Neuron DEMO, 593–602, May 28, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
Conversely, the Gmax and Lmin choices increase the chances of
an aversive outcome, relative to a neutral aspiration level (Lopes
and Oden, 1999). Supporting this interpretation, we found a clear
double dissociation with activation in vmPFC predicting Gmax
DEMO and activation in aINS predicting Lmin choices. The
contributions of vmPFC to gain-seeking behavior (at the expense
of potential losses) have been documented DEMO both patient
(Bechara et al., 2000) and neuroimaging studies (Tobler et al.,
2007). Conversely, there has been substantial recent work
demonstrating the importance of aINS for aversion to negative
consequences, even to the point of making risk-averse mistakes
in economic decisions (Kuhnen and Knutson, 2005; Paulus et al.,
2003; Preuschoff et al., 2008; Rolls et al., 2008). Together, these
ﬁndings suggest that the DEMO notion that decisions
reﬂect compensatory balancing of decision variables is an over-
simpliﬁcation. In addition, different brain regions bias how
people approach decision problems, which may in turn lead to
one form of behavior or another depending on the task context.
Furthermore, the balance between cognitive and affective
brain regions did not, by itself, explain individual differences in
strategy DEMO Activation in another region, dmPFC, pre-
dicted variability in strategic preferences across subjects. We
note that the role of dmPFC in complex decision DEMO remains
relatively unknown. One very recent experiment found increased
activation in this region when subjects faced greater decision-
related conﬂict (Pochon et al., DEMO), as dissociable from the
more commonly reported response conﬂict (Botvinick DEMO al.,
2001). A similar region of dmPFC was implicated by De Martino
et al. (2006), again when subjects made decisions counter to
their general behavioral tendency (i.e., against typical framing
effects). DEMO, it is important to note that all subjects in their
study DEMO a bias toward using the framing heuristic, while in
the current DEMO subjects varied in their relative preference for
two different strategies. Therefore, DEMO parsimonious explanation
for the function of this region of dmPFC is that it supports
aspects of decision making that are coded in relation to DEMO
underlying strategic tendency, not effects speciﬁc to framing.
Further support for DEMO hypothesis is provided by the differential
functional connectivity of the dmPFC to dlPFC and anterior in-
sula for simplifying and compensatory choices, respectively.
These ﬁndings are consistent with the interpretation that activa-
tion differences of the DEMO shape behavior by modulating
choice-related brain regions, with the strength of DEMO modulatory
effect dependent on an individual’s preferred strategy.
We additionally observed a striking relationship between neu-
rometric sensitivity to reward and strategic biases across DEMO
viduals. Our initial analyses found that activation of the vSTR
increased when anticipating the outcome of a monetary gamble,
increased further if that DEMO was resolved to a gain, but
decreased if that gamble was DEMO to a loss. This pattern
of results was consistent with numerous prior studies using
human neuroimaging (Breiter et al., 2001; Delgado et al., 2000;
Seymour et al., 2007) and primate electrophysiology (Schultz
DEMO al., 1997). However, we additionally observed the result that
the magnitude of the vSTR response was a strong predictor of
individual strategic DEMO Speciﬁcally, the sensitivity to
gains and losses in the vSTR is DEMO for individuals who
prefer the Pmax choices, consistent with their strategy DEMO
maximizing their chances of winning. We emphasize that the
gambles were not resolved until after all decisions were made,
so this effect could DEMO be attributed to learning from outcomes.
Although our design does not allow determination of the direc-
tion of causation, these results suggest that an increased sensi-
tivity to reward valence may lead to simple decision rules DEMO
overemphasize the probability of achieving a positive outcome.
Depending on the circumstances, organisms may adopt strat-
egies that emphasize different forms of computation, DEMO to
obtain additional information (Daw et al., 2006), to improve
models of outcome utility (Montague and Berns, 2002), or to
DEMO a complex decision problem. Accordingly, the activation
of a given brain DEMO (e.g., dlPFC) may sometimes lead to
behavior consistent with economic DEMO of rationality (Sanfey
et al., 2003) and in other circumstances (such as the present
experiment) predict a nonnormative choice consistent with
a simplifying strategy. Our results demonstrate that decision
making reﬂects an interaction among DEMO systems coding for
different sorts of computations, with some regions (e.g., aINS
and vmPFC) coding for speciﬁc behaviors and others (e.g.,
dmPFC) for preferred strategies.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Subjects
We conducted two behavioral experiments (n1 = 128 and n2 = 71) and one fMRI
experiment (n = 23). All subjects were young adults who participated for DEMO
tary payment. All subjects gave written informed consent as part of protocols
approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Duke University and Duke
University DEMO Center. Details of the procedures for the behavioral exper-
iments can be found in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Twenty-three healthy, neurologically normal young-adult volunteers
(13 female; age range 18–31 years; mean age 24 years) DEMO in the
fMRI session. No subject was repeated from the behavioral pilot session. All
subjects acclimated to the fMRI environment using a mock MRI DEMO and
participated in two short practice runs consisting of six trials each, one inside
and one outside of the fMRI scanner. Three subjects were excluded from some
analyses involving strategy effects due to lack of variability DEMO their response
(two subjects always chose the Pmax option while the DEMO subject never chose
the Pmax option), leaving a total of 20 subjects in the complete analyses of
the decision-making trials. One additional subject DEMO excluded from the
outcome-delivery trials due to a computer error in saving the timing associated
with the trials.
At the outset of the experiment, subjects were provided detailed instructions
about the payment procedures (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures
for details). They were then given a sealed envelope that DEMO an endow-
ment to offset potential losses; this envelope was sufﬁciently DEMO that
they could see that there was cash inside, even though DEMO quantity could not
be determined. Subjects were also told that there was no deception in the
study and were given an opportunity to question DEMO experimenter about any
procedures before entering the scanner. All subjects expressed that they
understood and believed in the procedures.
Experimental Stimuli
In the fMRI DEMO, all subjects were presented with a total of 120 ﬁve-
outcome DEMO gambles in a completely randomized order. Each of the
gambles comprised two positive outcomes (an extreme outcome of $65 to
$80 and an intermediate outcome of $35 to $50), two negative outcomes (an
extreme outcome of $65 to $85 and an intermediate outcome of $35 to
$50), and a central, reference outcome. The reference outcome was $0 in
DEMO of the trials. Probabilities of each of the ﬁve outcomes varied between 0.1half the trials and a negative value ranging from $10 to $25 DEMO the remaining
and 0.3 in units of 0.05 and always summed to 1 across the ﬁve outcomes. We
Neuron 62, 593–602, May 28, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
599
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
describe the similar stimuli DEMO methods for the behavioral experiments in the
Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
On each trial, subjects could choose between two options for adding money
to one of the outcomes. Adding to the reference outcome increased the overall
chance DEMO winning money compared to losing money and hence was called
the Pmax choice. Alternatively, adding money to an extreme option either
increased the magnitude of the best monetary outcome or decreased the
magnitude of the worst DEMO outcome and hence were referred to as
Gmax and Lmin choices, DEMO The amount of money that subjects could
add to the outcomes ranged between $10 and $25 and could differ between
the two outcomes. For DEMO with negative reference values, one of the options
for adding money DEMO changed the reference option to $0. All outcome
values used in this experiment were multiples of $5.
Expected value relations between the two choices DEMO systematically
manipulated by changing the amount and/or probabilities associated with
each of the options (See Supplemental Experimental Procedures). Only trial
types that placed the two choices in maximal conﬂict (72 gambles per subject)
were included in the primary imaging analyses; other trials were included in the
model as separate regressors, but not further analyzed. Note that the trials
were counterbalanced for valence of the extreme outcome (i.e., gain DEMO loss)
and for valence of the reference outcome (i.e., neutral or loss).
Experimental Design
Each trial began with the display of DEMO ﬁve-outcome gamble for 4 or 6 s
(Figure 1). Subjects DEMO instructed to examine each gamble as it was pre-
sented. Subsequently, DEMO were given a choice between two ways of
improving the gamble. The amount that could be added and the resulting
modiﬁed outcome values were DEMO in red for both choices, to minimize
individual differences resulting from DEMO or estimation biases. The
modiﬁed gamble remained on the screen for 6 s, whereupon two arrows ap-
peared to specify which button corresponded to which choice. The associa-
tion of the buttons to choice was random. DEMO then pressed the button
corresponding to their choice. Response times were coded as the time
between the appearance of arrows and the button press DEMO (note that
this may not be a true representation of the DEMO decision times in this
task). Subjects were instructed to arrive at their decision during the 6 s interval
and to press the button DEMO to their choice as soon as the arrows
appeared. The decision and response phases were explicitly separated to
prevent the contamination of decision effects DEMO response-preparation
effects. During the intertrial interval of 4–8 s, a ﬁxation DEMO was displayed
on the screen. Notice that no feedback was provided at the end of each trial
and hence there was no explicit learning DEMO the decision phase of the task.
Subjects participated in six runs of this decision task, each containing 20
gambles and lasting approximately 6 min. Before those runs, subjects had
the opportunity to practice the experimental task (without reward) in two six-
gamble blocks, one presented outside the MRI scanner and the other pre-
sented within the MRI scanner but DEMO to collection of the fMRI data. All
stimuli were created using the Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997; Pelli,
1997) for MATLAB (Mathworks, inc.) and were presented to the subjects via
MR-compatible LCD goggles. DEMO responded with the index ﬁngers of
each hand via a MR-compatible response box.
After completion of the decision phase, there was a ﬁnal 6 min run in which
40 of the improved gambles were resolved to DEMO actual monetary gain or loss.
These gambles were selected randomly from the gambles presented during
the decision phase and were presented in modiﬁed form DEMO on that
subject’s choices. On each trial, subjects passively viewed one DEMO these
improved gambles on the screen for 2 s (anticipation phase), during which
time random numbers ﬂashed rapidly at the bottom of the screen before stop-
ping at a particular value. A text message corresponding DEMO the amount won or
lost was then displayed for 1 s, DEMO by an intertrial ﬁxation period of 3–7 s
before the onset of the next trial.
Imaging Methods
We acquired fMRI data on a 4T DEMO scanner using an inverse-spiral pulse
sequence (Glover and Law, 2001; DEMO and Song, 2003) with the following
parameters: TR = 2000 DEMO; TE = 30 ms; 34 axial slices parallel to the AC-PC
plane, with voxel size of 3.75 3 3.75 3 3.8 mm. High-resolution 3D full-brain
600 Neuron 62, 593–602, May 28, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
SPGR anatomical images were acquired and used for normalizing and core-
DEMO individual subjects’ data.
Analysis was carried out using FMRI Expert Analysis Tool (version 5.63),
which is part of FMRIB’s Software Library (www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) package
(Smith et al., 2004). The following pre-statistics processing steps were applied:
motion correction using MCFLIRT, slice-timing correction, removal DEMO non-
brain voxels using BET, spatial smoothing with a Gaussian kernel DEMO FWHM
8 mm, and high-pass temporal ﬁltering. Registration to high-resolution and
DEMO images was carried out using FLIRT. All statistical images presented
were thresholded using clusters determined by z > 2.3 and a whole-brain cor-
rected DEMO signiﬁcance threshold of p < 0.05.
We used separate ﬁrst-level regression models to analyze decision effects
and outcome effects. The decision model comprised two DEMO modeling
the magnitude-sensitive compensatory choices (Gmax and Lmin were
combined for DEMO power) and simplifying Pmax choices in the conﬂict
conditions, one regressor modeling the responses in the remaining conditions,
one regressor for the DEMO presentation of the gamble, and one regressor to
model the subject DEMO (An additional post-hoc analysis on a subset
of 15 subjects separated DEMO magnitude-sensitive choices according to
whether they were Gmax or Lmin.) Analysis DEMO the outcome phase consisted
of three regressors: one to model the DEMO phase (as subjects were
waiting for the corresponding outcome to be DEMO), one for positive
outcomes (gain), and one for negative DEMO (loss). All regressors were
generated by convolving impulses at the DEMO of events of interest with
a double-gamma hemodynamic response function. Second-level analysis
for condition and decision effects within each subject was carried out using
DEMO ﬁxed-effects model across runs. Random-effects across-subjects analyses
were carried out using FLAME (stage 1 only). When evaluating the effects of
behavioral traits (DEMO into z scores) on brain function, we included
our subjects’ trait measures as additional covariates in the third-level analysis.
Logistic Regression Models of DEMO Choices
For obtaining the parameter estimates from individual trials for trial-by-trial
prediction analysis, we used data that were corrected for motion and differ-
ences in slice scan timing but were not smoothed. The data were also DEMO
formed into standard space on which the individual ROIs were deﬁned. We
used seven different ROIs for this analysis: the right anterior insula and vmPFC,
which show greater activation for Lmin and Gmax choices respectively; the right
PPC, the right precuneus, and right dlPFC, which show greater activation for
Pmax choices; and ﬁnally the dmPFC and rIFG, DEMO track strategic variability
across subjects. All ROIs were deﬁned functionally based on the third-level
activation maps. Activation amplitude was deﬁned as the mean signal DEMO
(in percent) over the 6 s time interval from 4 s to 10 s after the onset of decision
phase (i.e., when DEMO are shown the two alternative choices). This time
window was chosen to encompass the maximal signal change of the fMRI
hemodynamic response. A DEMO measure was obtained for each ROI by
averaging over all constituent voxels.
We then performed a hierarchical logistic regression using SPSS to predict
the DEMO made by subjects on each individual trial based on strategic pref-
erence (proportion of Pmax choices), brain activation, and interactions between
trait DEMO activation. The complete model included a total of 1440 trials (72 DEMO
for each of 20 subjects). Parameters were entered into the model in a stepwise
manner, starting with just the behavioral trait measure, DEMO brain activations
from the seven ROIs, and ﬁnally an interaction term DEMO of activation
in dmPFC multiplied by strategic tendency. All parameters that signiﬁcantly
improved the model at each stage are summarized in Table 1. The DEMO
were consistent regardless of whether forward selection or backward elimina-
tion was used in the hierarchical regression.
Functional-Connectivity Analyses
We used a modiﬁed version DEMO the decision model described above to perform
task-related connectivity analysis. A seed region was deﬁned using activation
in the dmPFC that covaried with the DEMO variability across subjects
(Figure 3). For each run for each DEMO, we then extracted the time series
from this region. A box-car DEMO was then deﬁned for each condition of
interest, with the ‘‘on’’ DEMO deﬁned from 4 s to 10 s after the onset of the
decision phase for each trial in that condition. These box-car vectors were
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
then multiplied with the DEMO time series to form the connectivity regres-
sors. This allowed us to examine brain connectivity as a function of strategy,
speciﬁc to the DEMO phase. These regressors were then used as covariates
in a separate GLM analysis, which included the original variables of interest,
from the decision model described above (Cohen et al., 2005). Group activa-
tion DEMO were then obtained in the same way as the traditional regression
analysis. A positive activation for the connectivity regressors indicates that
the region correlates DEMO positively with the seed region during the experi-
mental condition of interest.
SUPPLEMENTAL DATA
Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures, two
tables, and DEMO ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at http://
www.cell.com/neuron/supplemental/S0896-6273(09)00288-8.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Antonio Rangel DEMO Charles Noussair for suggestions about
behavioral analyses; Michael Platt, Alison Adcock, and Enrico Diecidue for
comments on the manuscript; Adrienne Taren for DEMO with the connec-
tivity analysis; and Kelsey Merison for assistance in DEMO collection. All authors
contributed to the design of the experiments. V.V. led the programming of the
experiments, data collection, and data analysis, in collaboration with S.A.H. All
authors contributed to writing and editing the ﬁnal DEMO This research
was supported by the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH-70685)
and by the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disease and Stroke
(NINDS-41328). S.A.H. was supported by an Incubator Award from the Duke
Institute for Brain Sciences.
Accepted: April 7, 2009
Published: May 27, 2009
REFERENCES
Barraclough, D.J., Conroy, M.L., and Lee, DEMO (2004). Prefrontal cortex and
decision making in a mixed-strategy game. DEMO Neurosci. 7, 404–410.
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., and Damasio, H. (2000). Characterization of the deci-
sion-making deﬁcit of patients with ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions.
Brain 123, 2189–2202.
Behrens, T.E., Woolrich, DEMO, Walton, M.E., and Rushworth, M.F. (2007).
Learning the DEMO of information in an uncertain world. Nat. Neurosci. 10,
1214–1221.
Birnbaum, M.H. (2008). New paradoxes of risky decision making. Psychol.
Rev. DEMO, 463–501.
Botvinick, M., Nystrom, L.E., Fissell, K., Carter, C.S., and Cohen, J.D. (1999).
Conﬂict monitoring versus selection-for-action in anterior cingulate cortex.
Nature 402, 179–181.
Botvinick, M.M., Braver, T.S., Barch, D.M., Carter, C.S., and Cohen, J.D.
(2001). DEMO monitoring and cognitive control. Psychol. Rev. 108, 624–652.
Brainard, D.H. (DEMO). The psychophysics toolbox. Spat. Vis. 10, 433–436.
Breiter, H.C., DEMO, I., Kahneman, D., Dale, A., and Shizgal, P. (2001). Func-
tional imaging of neural responses to expectancy and experience DEMO monetary
gains and losses. Neuron 30, 619–639.
Bunge, S.A., Hazeltine, E., Scanlon, M.D., Rosen, A.C., and Gabrieli, J.D.
(2002). Dissociable contributions of prefrontal and parietal cortices to
response selection. Neuroimage DEMO, 1562–1571.
Camerer, C.F. (2003). Behavioural studies of strategic thinking DEMO games.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 225–231.
Cohen, M.X., Heller, A.S., and Ranganath, C. (2005). Functional connectivity
with anterior cingulate and orbitofrontal cortices during decision-making.
Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 23, 61–70.
Coricelli, G., Critchley, H.D., Jofﬁly, M., O’Doherty, J.P., Sirigu, A., and Dolan,
R.J. (2005). Regret and its avoidance: a neuroimaging study of choice
behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1255–1262.
Dalgleish, DEMO (2004). The emotional brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 583–589.
Daw, N.D., O’Doherty, J.P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B., and DEMO, R.J. (2006).
Cortical substrates for exploratory decisions in humans. Nature 441, 876–879.
De Martino, B., Kumaran, D., Seymour, B., and Dolan, R.J. (2006). Frames,
biases, and rational decision-making in the human brain. Science 313,
684–687.
Delgado, M.R., Nystrom, L.E., Fissell, C., Noll, D.C., and Fiez, J.A. (2000).
Tracking the hemodynamic responses to reward and punishment in the stria-
DEMO J. Neurophysiol. 84, 3072–3077.
Dorris, M.C., and Glimcher, P.W. (DEMO). Activity in posterior parietal cortex is
correlated with the relative subjective desirability of action. Neuron 44,
365–378.
Fennema, H., and Wakker, P. (1997). Original and cumulative prospect theory:
a discussion of empirical differences. J. Behav. Decis. Making 10, 53–64.
Gigerenzer, G., and Goldstein, D.G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and frugal way:
DEMO of bounded rationality. Psychol. Rev. 103, 650–669.
Glover, G.H., and DEMO, C.S. (2001). Spiral-in/out BOLD fMRI for increased SNR
and reduced susceptibility artifacts. Magn. Reson. Med. 46, 515–522.
Guo, H., and Song, A.W. (2003). Spiral-in-and-out functional image acquisition
with embedded z-shimming DEMO susceptibility signal recovery. J. Magn. Reson.
Imaging 18, 389–395.
Heekeren, H.R., Marrett, S., Bandettini, P.A., and Ungerleider, L.G. (2004). A
general mechanism for perceptual decision-making in the human brain. Nature
431, 859–862.
Heekeren, H.R., Marrett, S., Ruff, D.A., Bandettini, P.A., and Ungerleider, L.G.
(2006). Involvement of human left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in perceptual
decision making is independent of response modality. Proc. Natl. DEMO Sci.
USA 103, 10023–10028.
Hsu, M., Bhatt, M., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., and Camerer, C.F. (2005). Neural
systems responding to degrees of uncertainty in human decision-making.
Science 310, 1680–1683.
Huettel, S.A. (2006). Behavioral, but not reward, risk modulates activation DEMO
prefrontal, parietal, and insular cortices. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 6,
141–151.
Huettel, S.A., Song, A.W., and McCarthy, G. (2005)DEMO Decisions under uncer-
tainty: probabilistic context inﬂuences activity of prefrontal and DEMO
cortices. J. Neurosci. 25, 3304–3311.
Huettel, S.A., Stowe, C.J., DEMO, E.M., Warner, B.T., and Platt, M.L. (2006).
Neural signatures of economic preferences for risk and ambiguity. Neuron 49,
765–775.
DEMO, D., and Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness revisited: attri-
DEMO substitution in intuitive judgement. In Hurestics and Biases: The
Psychology of DEMO Thought, T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman,
eds. (New York: Cambridge University Press), pp. 49–81.
Kennerley, S.W., Walton, M.E., Behrens, T.E., Buckley, M.J., and Rushworth,
M.F. (2006). Optimal decision making and the anterior cingulate cortex. Nat.
Neurosci. DEMO, 940–947.
Kerns, J.G., Cohen, J.D., MacDonald, A.W., 3rd, Cho, R.Y., Stenger, V.A., and
Carter, C.S. (2004). DEMO cingulate conﬂict monitoring and adjustments in
control. Science 303, 1023–1026.
Kobayashi, S., Lauwereyns, J., Koizumi, M., Sakagami, M., and Hikosaka, O.
(2002). Inﬂuence of reward expectation on visuospatial processing in DEMO
lateral prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 87, 1488–1498.
Kuhnen, C.M., and DEMO, B. (2005). The neural basis of ﬁnancial risk taking.
Neuron 47, 763–770.
Lopes, L.L., and Oden, G.C. (1999). The role of aspiration level in risky choice:
a comparison of cumulative DEMO theory and SP/A theory. J. Math. Psy-
chol. 43, 286–313.
DEMO 62, 593–602, May 28, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.
601
Loewenstein, G., Rick, S., and Cohen, J.D. (2008). DEMO Annu.
Rev. Psychol. 59, 647–672.
Meriau, K., Wartenburger, I., DEMO, P., Prehn, K., Lammers, C.H., van der
Meer, DEMO, Villringer, A., and Heekeren, H.R. (2006). A neural DEMO reﬂecting
individual differences in cognitive processing of emotions during perceptual
decision making. Neuroimage 33, 1016–1027.
Montague, P.R., and Berns, G.S. (2002). Neural economics and the biological
substrates of valuation. Neuron 36, 265–284.
Paulus, M.P., Hozack, N., Zauscher, B., McDowell, J.E., Frank, L., Brown,
G.G., and Braff, D.L. (2001). Prefrontal, parietal, and temporal cortex networks
underlie decision-making in the presence of uncertainty. Neuroimage 13,
91–100.
Paulus, M.P., Rogalsky, C., Simmons, A., Feinstein, J.S., and Stein, M.B.
(2003). Increased activation in the right insula during risk-taking decision
making is related to harm avoidance DEMO neuroticism. Neuroimage 19,
1439–1448.
Payne, J.W. (2005). It is whether you win or lose: the importance of the overall
probabilities of winning or losing in risky choice. J. Risk Uncertain. 30, 5–19.
Payne, J.W., Bettman, J.R., and Johnson, E.J. (1988). Adaptive DEMO selec-
tion in decision making. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 14, 534–552.
Payne, J.W., Bettman, J.R., Coupey, E., and Johnson, E.J. (1992). A construc-
tive process view of decision-making—multiple strategies DEMO judgment and
choice. Acta Psychol. (Amst.) 80, 107–141.
Payne, J.W., Bettman, J.R., and Johnson, E.J. (1993). The Adaptive Decision
Maker (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press).
Pelli, D.G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: trans-
forming numbers into movies. Spat. Vis. 10, 437–442.
Platt, M.L., and Huettel, S.A. (2008). Risky business: the neuroeconomics of
decision making under uncertainty. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 398–403.
Pochon, J.B., Riis, J., Sanfey, A.G., Nystrom, L.E., and Cohen, J.D. (2008).
Functional imaging of decision DEMO J. Neurosci. 28, 3468–3473.
Preuschoff, K., Quartz, S.R., and DEMO, P. (2008). Human insula activation
reﬂects risk prediction errors as well as risk. J. Neurosci. 28, 2745–2752.
Rolls, E.T., McCabe, DEMO, and Redoute, J. (2008). Expected value, reward
outcome, DEMO temporal difference error representations in a probabilistic deci-
sion task. Cereb. Cortex 18, 652–663.
602
Neuron 62, 593–602, May 28, 2009 ª2009 DEMO Inc.
Neuron
Strategies and Choices in Risky Decision Making
Sanfey, A.G., Rilling, J.K., Aronson, J.A., Nystrom, L.E., and Cohen, J.D.
(2003). The neural basis of economic decision-making in the Ultimatum
Game. Science 300, 1755–1758.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., and Montague, DEMO (1997). A neural substrate of
prediction and reward. Science 275, 1593–1599.
Seymour, B., Daw, N., Dayan, P., Singer, T., and Dolan, R. (2007). Differential
encoding of losses and gains in the human striatum. J. Neurosci. 27, 4826–
4831.
Shah, A.K., and Oppenheimer, D.M. (2008). Heuristics made easy: an effort-
reduction framework. Psychol. Bull. 134, 207–222.
Simon, H.A. (1957). Models of Man: Social and Rational (New York: Wiley).
Smith, S.M., Jenkinson, M., Woolrich, M.W., Beckmann, C.F., Behrens, T.E.J.,
Johansen-Berg, H., Bannister, P.R., De Luca, M., Drobnjak, I., Flitney, D.E.,
et al. (2004). Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and
implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23, S208–S219.
Tobler, P.N., O’Doherty, J.P., Dolan, R.J., and Schultz, W. (DEMO). Reward
value coding distinct from risk attitude-related uncertainty coding in human
reward systems. J. Neurophysiol. 97, 1621–1632.
Tobler, P.N., Christopoulos, G.I., O’Doherty, J.P., Dolan, R.J., and Schultz, W.
(2008). DEMO distortions of reward probability without choice. J. Neurosci.
28, 11703–11711.
Tom, S.M., Fox, C.R., Trepel, C., and Poldrack, R.A. (2007). The neural basis of
loss aversion in decision-making under risk. Science DEMO, 515–518.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment DEMO uncertainty: heuristics
and biases. Science 185, 1124–1131.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory: cumula-
tive representation of uncertainty. J. Risk Uncertain. 5, 297–323.
Wu, G., Zhang, DEMO, and Gonzalez, R. (2004). Decision under risk. In Handbook
DEMO Judgment and Decision Making, D. Koehler and N. Harvey, eds. (DEMO,
UK: Blackwell Publishing).
Yacubian, J., Glascher, J., DEMO, K., Sommer, T., Braus, D.F., and
Buchel, C. (2006). Dissociable systems for gain- and loss-related value predic-
tions and DEMO of prediction in the human brain. J. Neurosci. 26, 9530–9537.{1g42fwefx}