A Theoretical Extension of the Technology
Acceptance Model: Four Longitudinal
Field Studies
Viswanath Venkatesh • Fred D. Davis
Robert H. Smith School of Business, Van Munching Hall, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742
Sam M. Walton College of Business Administration, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701
vvenkate@mbs.umd.edu • fdavis@walton.uark.edu
he present research develops and tests a theoretical DEMO of the Technology
T Acceptance Model (TAM) that explains perceived usefulness and usage intentions in
terms of social inﬂuence and cognitive instrumental processes. DEMO extended model, referred
to as TAM2, was tested using longitudinal data collected regarding four different systems at
four organizations (N  156), two involving voluntary usage and two involving mandatory
usage. Model constructs were DEMO at three points in time at each organization:
preimplementation, one DEMO postimplementation, and three months postimplementation.
The extended model was strongly supported DEMO all four organizations at all three points of
measurement, accounting for DEMO 60% of the variance in usefulness perceptions and
34%–52% of the variance in usage intentions. Both social inﬂuence processes (subjective norm,
voluntariness, DEMO image) and cognitive instrumental processes (job relevance, output quality,
DEMO demonstrability, and perceived ease of use) signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced user acceptance.
These ﬁndings advance theory and contribute to the foundation for future research aimed DEMO
improving our understanding of user adoption behavior.
(Adoption of Information Technology; Technology Acceptance Model; Social Inﬂuence; Perceived
Usefulness)
Introduction
Information technology DEMO and use in the work-
place remains a central concern of information sys-
tems research and practice. Despite impressive ad-
vances in hardware and DEMO capabilities, the
troubling problem of underutilized systems continue.
Low usage of DEMO systems has been identiﬁed as
a m ajor factor underlying the “productivity paradox”
surrounding lackluster returns from organizational
investments in information technology (Sichel 1997).
Understanding and creating the conditions under
which information systems w ill DEMO embraced by the
human organization remains a high-priority research
issue.
Management Science © 2000 INFORMS
Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 pp. 186 DEMO
Signiﬁcant progress has been made over the last
decade in explaining and predicting user acceptance
of information technology at work. In particular,
substantial DEMO and empirical support has
accumulated in favor of the Technology Acceptance
Model (TAM) (Davis 1989, Davis et al. 1989). Nu-
merous DEMO studies have found that TAM
consistently explains a substantial proportion of the
variance (typically about 40%) in usage intentions
and behavior, and that TAM compares favorably
with alternative models such as the Theory of
Reasoned DEMO (TRA) and the Theory of Planned
Behavior (TPB) (see DEMO 1999 for recent re-
view). TAM theorizes that an individual’s behav-
0025-1909/00/4602/0186$05.00
1526-5501 electronic ISSN
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
ioral DEMO to use a system is determined by two
beliefs: perceived usefulness, deﬁned as the extent
to which a p erson believes that using DEMO system
will enhance his or her job performance, and per-
ceived DEMO of use, deﬁned as the extent to which a
person believes DEMO using the system will be free of
effort. TAM theorizes that the effects of external
variables (e.g., system characteristics, development
process, training) on intention to use are mediated
by perceived usefulness and p erceived DEMO of use.
According to TAM, perceived usefulness is also
inﬂuenced by DEMO ease of use because, other
things being equal, the easier the system is to use
the more useful it can be. As of DEMO 2000, the
Institute for Scientiﬁc Information’s Social Science
Citation Index listed DEMO journal citations to the two
journal articles that introduced TAM (i.e., Davis
1989, Davis et al. 1989). In 10 years, TAM DEMO
become w ell-established as a robust, powerful, and
parsimonious model for predicting u ser acceptance.
Across the many empirical tests of TAM, perceived
usefulness has consistently been a strong determinant
of usage intentions, with standardized regression co-
efﬁcients typically around 0.6. Since perceived useful-
ness is such DEMO fundamental driver of usage intentions,
it is important to understand the determinants of this
construct and how their inﬂuence changes over time
with DEMO experience using the system. Per-
ceived ease of use, TAM’s other DEMO determinant of
intention, has exhibited a less consistent effect on
intention DEMO studies. Whereas some research has
been done to model the determinants of perceived
ease of use (Venkatesh and Davis 1996), the determi-
nants of perceived usefulness have been relatively
overlooked. A better understanding of the DEMO
nants of perceived usefulness would enable us to
design organizational interventions that would in-
crease user acceptance and usage of new systems.
Therefore, the goal of the present research is to extend
TAM to include additional DEMO determinants of TAM’s
perceived usefulness and usage intention constructs,
and to understand how the effects of these determi-
nants change with increasing user DEMO over
time w ith the target system.
Theory and Hypotheses
Figure 1 shows the proposed model, referred to as
TAM2. Using TAM as the starting point, TAM2 incor-
porates additional theoretical constructs spanning so-
cial inﬂuence processes (subjective norm, voluntari-
ness, and image) and cognitive instrumental DEMO
(job relevance, output quality, result demonstrability,
and perceived ease DEMO use). Below we deﬁne each of
these constructs and develop the theoretical rationale
for the causal relationships of the model.
Social Inﬂuence Processes
DEMO reﬂects the impacts of three interrelated social
forces impinging on an individual facing the oppor-
tunity to adopt or reject a new system: subjective
norm, voluntariness, and image.
Subjective Norm. Consistent with TRA, which
was a key theoretical underpinning for the original
development of TAM, w e tap into social inﬂuences via
subjective norm,deﬁned as a “person’s perception DEMO
most people who are important to him think he
should or should not perform the behavior in ques-
tion” (Fishbein and Ajzen 1975, DEMO 302). Subjective
norm is included as a direct determinant of behavioral
intention in TRA (Fishbein and Ajzen 1975) and the
subsequent TPB (Ajzen 1991). The rationale for a
direct effect of subjective norm DEMO intention is that
people may choose to perform a behavior, even DEMO they
are not themselves favorable toward the behavior or
its consequences, DEMO they believe one or more impor-
tant referents think they should, DEMO they are sufﬁ-
ciently motivated to comply with the referents. User
acceptance research examining the direct effect of
subjective norm on intention has yielded DEMO re-
sults. Mathieson (1991) found no signiﬁcant effect of
subjective norm on intention, whereas Taylor and
Todd (1995) did ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect. In their
empirical comparison of TAM and TRA, Davis et al.
(1989) found that subjective norm had no signiﬁcant
effect on intentions DEMO and above perceived useful-
ness and ease of use, and they DEMO it from the
original TAM, but they did acknowledge the need DEMO
additional research to “investigate the conditions and
mechanisms governing the impact of social inﬂuences
on usage behavior” (p. 999).
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 187
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
Figure DEMO Proposed TAM2—Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
Voluntariness and Compliance with Social Inﬂu-
ence. A contingency underlying the mixed ﬁndings
regarding subjective norm was DEMO by Hartwick
and Barki (1994): After separating their respondents
into DEMO and voluntary usage contexts, they
found that subjective norm had a DEMO effect on
intention in mandatory settings but not in voluntary
settings. We refer to the causal mechanism underlying
this effect as compliance. In general, the direct com-
pliance effect of subjective norm on intention is theo-
DEMO to operate whenever an individual perceives
that a social actor wants him or her to perform a
speciﬁc behavior, and the social actor has the ability to
reward the behavior or punish nonbehavior (French
and Raven 1959, Kelman 1958, Warshaw 1980). TAM2
theorizes that, in a computer usage context, the direct
compliance-based effect of subjective norm on inten-
tion over and above perceived usefulness and per-
ceived ease of use DEMO occur in mandatory, but not
voluntary, system usage settings. To distinguish be-
tween mandatory and voluntary usage settings, our
model posits voluntariness as a m oderating variable,
188
deﬁned as “the extent to which DEMO adopters
perceive the adoption decision to be non-mandatory”
(Agarwal and Prasad DEMO, Hartwick and Barki 1994,
Moore and Benbasat 1991). As DEMO and Barki
(1994) found, even when users perceive system use DEMO
be organizationally mandated, usage intentions vary
because some users are unwilling DEMO comply with such
mandates.
Hypothesis 1a. Subjective norm will have a positive
direct effect on intention to use when system use is
perceived to DEMO mandatory.
Hypothesis 1b. Subjective norm will have no signiﬁ-
cant direct effect on intention to use when system use is
perceived to be voluntary.
DEMO 1c. Voluntariness will moderate the effect
of subjective norm on intention to use.
Internalization of Social Inﬂuence. Whereas the
direct relationship between subjective norm DEMO inten-
tion in TRA and TPB is based on compliance, TAM2
DEMO two additional theoretical mechanisms
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
by DEMO subjective norm can inﬂuence intention
indirectly through perceived usefulness: internaliza-
tion DEMO identiﬁcation. Internalization (Kelman 1958,
Warshaw 1980) refers to the process by which, when
one perceives that an important referent thinks one
should use a system, one incorporates the referent’s
belief into one’s own belief structure. Internalization is
equivalent to what Deutsch and Gerard (1955) refer DEMO
as informational (in contrast to normative) social in-
ﬂuences, deﬁned DEMO “inﬂuence to accept information
from another as evidence about reality” (p. DEMO). In the
present context, if a superior or co-worker suggests
DEMO a particular system might be useful, a person may
come to DEMO that it actually is useful, and in turn
form an intention DEMO use it. In French and Raven’s
(1959) taxonomy, the basis DEMO internalization is expert
power, where the target individual attributes exper-
tise DEMO credibility to the inﬂuencing agent (Kelman
1958). In the case DEMO internalization, subjective norm
has an indirect effect on intention through perceived
DEMO, as opposed to a direct compliance effect on
intention. Research based DEMO Salancik and Pfeffer’s
(1978) social information processing model is consis-
tent with the proposed internalization effect (e.g., Fulk
et al. 1987, Rice and Aydin 1991). TAM2 theorizes that
internalization, unlike compliance, will DEMO whether
the context of system use is voluntary or mandatory.
That is, even when system use is organizationally
mandated, users’ perceptions about usefulness DEMO
still increase in response to persuasive social informa-
tion.
Hypothesis 2. Subjective norm will have a positive
direct effect on perceived usefulness.
Image and DEMO Inﬂuence. Individuals often re-
spond to social normative inﬂuences to establish or
maintain a favorable image within a reference group
(Kelman 1958). Drawing from research on diffusion of
innovations, Moore and Benbasat (1991, p. 195) deﬁne
image as “the degree to which use of an innovation is
perceived to enhance one’s... status in one’s social
system.” TAM2 theorizes DEMO subjective norm will
positively inﬂuence image because, if important mem-
bers DEMO a person’s social group at work believe that he
or she should perform a behavior (e.g., using a sys-
tem), then performing DEMO will tend to elevate his or her
standing within the group (DEMO 1964, Kiesler and
Kiesler 1969, Pfeffer 1982). Kelman (1958) refers to this
source of social inﬂuence as identiﬁcation and distin-
guishes DEMO from compliance and internalization.
Viewed from the perspective of French and Raven’s
(1959) taxonomy, the basis of identiﬁcation is referent
power. In the typical work environment, with a high
degree of interdependence with other social actors in
carrying out one’s duties, increased status within the
group is a basis of power and inﬂuence via processes
such as social exchange, coalition formation, and re-
source allocation (Blau 1964, Pfeffer 1981, DEMO). As
Pfeffer (1982, p. 85) argues, by performing behaviors
that are consistent with group norms, an individual
“achieves membership and the social support that
such membership affords as well as possible goal
attainment DEMO can occur only through group action
or group membership.” The increased power and
inﬂuence resulting from elevated status provides a
general basis for greater DEMO An individual
may thus perceive that using a system will lead to
improvements in his or her job performance (which is
the deﬁnition of perceived usefulness) indirectly due
to image enhancement, over and above any DEMO
mance beneﬁts directly attributable to system use.
This identiﬁcation effect is captured in TAM2 by the
effect of subjective norm on image, coupled with the
effect of image on perceived usefulness. TAM2 theo-
rizes that identiﬁcation, like internalization but unlike
compliance, will occur whether the context of system
use is voluntary or mandatory.
Hypothesis 3a. Subjective norm will have a DEMO
effect on image.
Hypothesis 3b. Image will have a positive effect on
perceived usefulness.
Changes in Social Inﬂuence with Experience.
How might the effects DEMO these social inﬂuence pro-
cesses change with increasing experience using a target
system? There is theory and evidence to suggest that
the direct effect of subjective norm on intentions may
subside over time with increased system DEMO
Hartwick and Barki (1994) found that, although sub-
jective norm DEMO a signiﬁcant effect on intentions prior
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. DEMO, February 2000 189
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
to DEMO development, the effect became nonsigniﬁ-
cant three months after system implementation. DEMO
interpretation of this pattern is that, before a system is
developed, users’ knowledge and beliefs about a sys-
tem are “vague and ill-formed,DEMO and they must there-
fore rely more on the opinions of others as a basis for
their intentions (Hartwick and Barki 1994, pp. DEMO –
459). After implementation, when more about the
system’s strengths DEMO weaknesses are known
through direct experience, the normative inﬂuence
subsides. A DEMO pattern of results was obtained by
Agarwal and Prasad (1997), DEMO found that “mandat-
ing the use of a system can increase initial system
utilization,” enabling users to “overcome the hurdle of
ﬁrst-time use,DEMO but that such pressure seems to erode
over time (p. 575)DEMO Research outside the domain of
information systems also indicates that normative
pressure attenuates over time (Ram and Jung 1991).
Therefore, TAM2 theorizes DEMO the direct effect of
subjective norm on intentions for mandatory usage
contexts will be strong prior to implementation and
during early usage, but will weaken over time as
increasing direct experience with a system provides a
DEMO basis for intentions toward ongoing use.
Similarly, we expect the effect DEMO subjective norm on
perceived usefulness (internalization) to weaken over
time, DEMO greater direct experience will furnish con-
crete sensory information (Doll and DEMO 1992, Fazio
and Zanna 1981, Tybout and Scott 1983), supplanting
reliance on social cues as a basis for usefulness per-
ceptions. In DEMO, we do not expect the inﬂuence of
image on perceived usefulness (identiﬁcation) to
weaken over time since status gains from system use
will continue as long as group norms continue to favor
usage of the DEMO system.
Hypothesis 4a. The positive direct effect of subjective
norm on intention for mandatory systems will attenuate
with increased experience.
Hypothesis 4b. The positive DEMO effect of subjective
norm on perceived usefulness will attenuate with increased
experience for both mandatory and voluntary systems.
Cognitive Instrumental Processes
Beyond the social DEMO processes affecting per-
ceived usefulness and usage intention discussed
190
above, DEMO theorize four cognitive instrumental deter-
minants of perceived usefulness: job relevance, output
quality, result demonstrability, and perceived ease of
use. As we DEMO below, people form perceived use-
fulness judgments in part by cognitively DEMO
what a system is capable of doing with what they need
to get done in their job. To develop the theoretical
basis for these DEMO determinants, we draw
from recent developments in the reference paradigms
upon DEMO TAM’s perceived usefulness construct
was originally formulated. These theoretical under-
pinnings come from three main areas: work motiva-
tion theory (e.g., Vroom 1964), action theory from
social psychology (e.g., Fishbein and Ajzen 1975), and
task-contingent decision making from behavioral de-
cision theory (e.g., Beach and Mitchell 1978). Recent
work in these areas has converged on DEMO view of
behavior being driven by a m ental representation that
links higher-level goals to speciﬁc actions that are
instrumental for achieving those goals.
DEMO work motivation theory, Locke and Latham
(1990) discuss task-speciﬁc plans, which are cognitive
mechanisms by which acts are selected, combined,
and sequenced in order to achieve goals. Task-speciﬁc
plans guide behavior through a DEMO
process (see also Bandura 1986) linking instrumental
acts to goals. Within social psychology, action identi-
ﬁcation theory (Vallacher and Wegner 1987, p. 4)
posits an organized cognitive representation of action,
called the DEMO structure, which links lower-level
identities regarding speciﬁc actions to higher-level
identities DEMO why the action is done or what its
effects or implications are. This identity structure is
seen as a fundamental mechanism by which people
DEMO regulate their behaviors in the furtherance
of higher-level goals (Vallacher and DEMO 1996).
Within behavioral decision theory, recent work in
image theory (Beach and Mitchell 1996, 1998) has
embraced the concepts of a DEMO image, which is
a m ental representation of adopted goals and DEMO ideal
future state, and a strategic image, which is a m ental
representation of possible action sequences that can
guide behavior toward the DEMO states of the trajectory
image. When deciding among alternative instrumen-
tal action sequences (called the adoption decision),
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
image DEMO posits two distinct decision stages. In the
ﬁrst stage, a compatibility DEMO is used to screen from
further consideration any options that are incompati-
ble with one’s decision standards. In the second stage,
a proﬁtability DEMO is performed to compare the accept-
able options directly with one another to determine
the best option. For example, in searching for and
hiring a new employee, an employer would ﬁrst
eliminate any candidates whose attributes violate
more than a threshold number of standards. If more
than one DEMO candidate remains in the choice
set after the compatibility test, then DEMO proﬁtability
test is used to select the best candidate on a compen-
satory basis. Although different with respect to the
pattern of information processing DEMO, both the
compatibility and proﬁtability tests are based on cog-
nitively DEMO the match between the characteris-
tics of the trajectory image and the perceived conse-
quences of alternative action plans.
These recent theoretical developments cutting
DEMO action theory, work motivation theory, and
behavioral decision theory share the view that the
impetus for engaging in speciﬁc behaviors stems from
a DEMO ental representation linking instrumental behav-
iors to higher-level goals or purposes. Following this
line of reasoning, TAM2 theorizes that people use a
mental representation for assessing the match be-
tween important work goals and the consequences DEMO
performing the act of using a system as a basis for
forming judgments about the use-performance contin-
gency (i.e., perceived usefulness).
Job DEMO One key component of the match-
ing process discussed above is a potential user’s
judgment of job relevance, w hich we deﬁne as an
individual’s perception regarding the degree to which
the target system is applicable DEMO his or her job. In
other words, job relevance is a DEMO of the impor-
tance within one’s job of the set of tasks the system is
capable of supporting. Research in human-computer
interaction (Black et al. 1987, Norman 1987) has pos-
tulated similar goal-hierarchy models, though operat-
ing at more micro levels of analysis wherein higher-
level goals DEMO tasks such as writing a document,
and lower-level actions are at the level of keystrokes
and mouse clicks. Kieras and Polson (1985) DEMO Polson
(1987) argued that users possess distinct knowledge
about their job situation, which they can use as a basis
for determining what tasks can be performed with a
given system. The existence of well-deﬁned knowl-
DEMO structures regarding important job goals is sup-
ported by research from personnel psychology (e.g.,
Roberson 1989). We regard job relevance as a cognitive
judgment that exerts a direct effect on perceived
usefulness, distinct from social inﬂuence processes.
Empirically, user acceptance has been linked in other
research to variables similar to job relevance, includ-
ing job-determined importance (Leonard-Barton DEMO
Deschamps 1988), involvement (deﬁned by Hartwick
and Barki (1994) DEMO personal importance and rele-
vance), task-technology ﬁt (Goodhue 1995), DEMO cog-
nitive ﬁt (Vessey 1991). We conceptualize perceptions
of job DEMO to be part of a compatibility test
within the context of Beach and Mitchell’s (1996, 1998)
image theory since systems below a DEMO inimal thresh-
old value of perceived job relevance would be
screened from further adoption consideration.
Hypothesis 5. Job relevance will have a positive effect
DEMO perceived usefulness.
Output Quality. TAM2 posits that, over and above
considerations DEMO what tasks a system is capable of
performing and the degree to which those tasks match
their job goals (job relevance), people will take into
consideration how well the system performs those
tasks, which we refer to as perceptions of output
quality. Empirically, the relationship between per-
ceived output quality and perceived usefulness has
been shown before (Davis et al. 1992). We expect
output quality to be empirically distinct from, and to
explain signiﬁcant unique variance in, perceived use-
fulness over and above job relevance because a differ-
ent underlying judgmental process is involved. DEMO the
context of image theory (Beach and Mitchell 1996,
1998), judgments of job relevance are more apt to take
the form of a compatibility test whereby systems that
are judged not to be job-relevant DEMO eliminated from
one’s choice set for further consideration. Judgments
of output quality, in contrast, are less likely to be used
for excluding options DEMO consideration. Instead,
they are more apt to take the form of a proﬁtability test
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 DEMO
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
in DEMO, given a choice set containing multiple rele-
vant systems, one would be inclined to choose a
system that delivers the highest output quality.
DEMO 6. Output quality will have a positive
effect on perceived usefulness.
Result Demonstrability. Even effective systems
can fail to garner user acceptance if people DEMO
difﬁculty attributing gains in their job performance
speciﬁcally to their use of the system. Therefore,
TAM2 theorizes that result demonstrability,deﬁned by
Moore DEMO Benbasat (1991, p. 203) as the “tangibility
of the results DEMO using the innovation,” will directly
inﬂuence perceived usefulness. This implies that indi-
viduals can be expected to form more positive percep-
tions of DEMO usefulness of a system if the covariation
between usage and positive results is readily discern-
able. Conversely, if a system produces effective job-
relevant results desired by a user, but does so in an
obscure fashion, users of the system are unlikely to
understand how useful such a system really is. Em-
pirically, Agarwal and Prasad (1997) found a signiﬁ-
cant correlation between usage intentions and result
demonstrability. The relationship between DEMO de-
monstrability and perceived usefulness is also consis-
tent with the job characteristics model, which empha-
sizes knowledge of the actual results of work activities
as a key psychological state underlying work motiva-
tion (Hackman and Oldham 1976, Loher et al. 1985).
Hypothesis 7. Result demonstrability will have a pos-
itive effect on perceived usefulness.
Perceived Ease of Use. DEMO retains perceived ease
of use from TAM as a direct determinant of perceived
usefulness (Davis et al. 1989), since, all else being
DEMO, the less effortful a system is to use, the more
using it can increase job performance. There is exten-
sive empirical evidence accumulated DEMO a decade
that perceived ease of use is signiﬁcantly linked to
intention, both directly and indirectly via its impact on
perceived usefulness (e.g., Davis et al. 1989, Venkatesh
1999). Although beyond the scope of the present
extension of TAM, other research has begun to model
the antecedents of perceived ease of use. For example,
Venkatesh and Davis (1996) model perceived ease of
use as being anchored on one’s general computer
self-efﬁcacy and adjusted to account for a system’s
objective usability via DEMO behavioral experience
using the target system. We note that the mechanisms
by which ease of use perceptions are theorized to form
and evolve are DEMO distinct from, and com-
plementary with, the social inﬂuence and cognitive
instrumental processes within TAM2.
Hypothesis 8. Perceived ease of use will have DEMO posi-
tive effect on perceived usefulness.
Changes in Cognitive Instrumental Inﬂuences
with Experience. Consistent with the theories of
mental representation discussed above, we expect
that, even over time, people will continue to rely on
the DEMO between their job goals and the conse-
quences of system usage (DEMO relevance) as a basis for
their ongoing usefulness perceptions. Just as DEMO role
of what a system does remains inﬂuential, we expect
that DEMO well a system does what it does (output
quality) will remain a signiﬁcant determinant of per-
ceived usefulness over time. Similarly, we have no
basis to expect the effect of result demonstrability on
perceived usefulness DEMO become either stronger or
weaker over time. Although there is no theoretical
account of such temporal shifts, the effect of perceived
ease of use on perceived usefulness has sometimes
been found to increase over time (e.g., Davis et al.
1989, Venkatesh and Davis 1996), whereas the DEMO
effect of perceived ease of use on usage intention has
been observed in some research to decrease over time
(e.g., Davis et al. DEMO), and in other research to
increase over time (e.g., Venkatesh and Davis 1996).
Presently, we lack sufﬁcient theoretical rationale to
hypothesize speciﬁc temporal shifts in the strength of
any of the effects of DEMO instrumental determi-
nants (job relevance, output quality, result demonstra-
bility, or ease of use) on either perceived usefulness or
intention to use.
In summary, the proposed TAM2 encompasses so-
cial inﬂuence processes (subjective DEMO, voluntari-
ness, and image) and cognitive instrumental processes
(job relevance, output quality, result demonstrability,
and perceived ease of use) as determinants of per-
ceived usefulness and usage intentions. We also hy-
192
DEMO Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
pothesize DEMO decrease in the strength with which social
inﬂuence processes affect perceived usefulness and
intention to use with increasing experience over time.
Method
Four longitudinal DEMO studies were conducted to test
TAM2. In the interest of ecological validity, we sought
naturalistic research sites that closely mirrored the
target situation to which we would like our results to
generalize: where a new system is about to be intro-
duced in the workplace. The four ﬁeld DEMO spanned a
range of industries, organizational contexts, functional
areas, and DEMO of system being introduced. We chose
two sites where usage of the system was voluntary,
and two w here usage was m andatory DEMO explicitly
examine the theorized moderating role of voluntari-
ness. To assess whether system use was mandatory or
voluntary, the researchers initially interviewed senior
managers in each of the organizations prior to the
actual system introduction. In DEMO actual questionnaire
we measured user perceptions of voluntariness using
a three-item scale (discussed below) since, although
we expected these measures to coincide with senior
manager reports, our theoretical model posits per-
ceived rather than actual voluntariness as a m oderator
of the subjective norm-intention relationship. Ques-
tionnaires DEMO administered to potential users at
three points in time: after initial DEMO (T1), one
month after implementation (T2), and three months
after implementation (T3). Self-reported usage behav-
ior was m easured at T2 and T3, and also ﬁve months
after implementation (T4).
DEMO Sample
Study 1. Subjects were 48 ﬂoor supervisors in a
medium-sized manufacturing ﬁrm who were being
introduced to a proprietary system for their day-to-
DEMO activities, which included ﬂoor and machine
scheduling and personnel assignment. Before DEMO in-
troduction of the system, m ost ﬂoor supervisors used
a DEMO anual system, though there was software on mul-
tiple stand-alone Macintosh DEMO Use of the new
system was voluntary, and none of the DEMO had
any prior knowledge of the system. The subjects
received two days of training, including one day of
on-the-job training, to familiarize them DEMO the use of
the system. Thirty-eight subjects completed the study
and provided usable responses at all points of mea-
surement.
Study 2. Subjects were DEMO members of the personal
ﬁnancial services department of a large ﬁnancial ser-
vices ﬁrm, representing various levels of the organi-
zational hierarchy. The speciﬁc system project was to
move all current mainframe operations to a Windows-
DEMO environment. Given the magnitude of the
change, subjects were also given DEMO access to
the old system and the discretion to use either system,
thus rendering use of the new system to be voluntary.
A DEMO on-site training program was
conducted to educate the users on the new environ-
ment. Thirty-nine subjects provided usable responses
at all points of measurement.
DEMO 3. Subjects were 51 employees from various
levels of the organizational hierarchy of a small ac-
counting services ﬁrm. The subjects performed vari-
ous DEMO related to customer accounts and tele-
phone customer service. The new system introduced
was a Windows-based customer account management
system, which replaced a combination of a paper-
based and a DOS-based system. A one-day on-site
training DEMO was conducted to educate all em-
ployees on the use of the new system and software
environment. Unlike the ﬁrst two studies, where use
was voluntary, the old system was phased out over a
one-week period, so use of the new system became
mandatory. Forty-three subjects provided usable re-
sponses at all points of measurement.
Study 4. Subjects were 51 DEMO of a small
international investment banking ﬁrm. The subjects,
who represented various levels of the organization,
performed a variety of functions related DEMO domestic
and international stock management. The new system
introduced was designed to assist in analyzing and
creating ﬁnancially sound international stock portfo-
lios. Compared DEMO the existing system, the new
system introduced new functionality such as DEMO abil-
ity to quantitatively weight and incorporate subjective
information (e.g., political stability) into risk assess-
ment. The new system (a custom-built DOS-based
DEMO Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 193
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
system) w as developed by a different vendor and had
a very different DEMO and feel from the current system
(which was also DOS-based). DEMO subjects participated
in a four-hour training program on the new system.
Similar to Study 3, system use was mandatory, as the
old system DEMO immediately phased out. Thirty-six
subjects provided usable responses at all points of
measurement.
Measurement Scales
Theoretical constructs were operationalized using val-
idated items from DEMO research (see Appendix 1). The
TAM scales of perceived usefulness, perceived ease of
use, and behavioral intention were measured using
items adapted from Davis (1989) and Davis et al.
(1989). The measurement of subjective norm was
adapted from Taylor and Todd (1995). Measures of
result demonstrability and image were adapted from
Moore and Benbasat (1991). Measures of job relevance
and output quality were adapted from Davis DEMO al.
(1992). Following Davis (1989), we measured usage
behavior by asking subjects: “On average, how much
time d o you DEMO on the system every day? _ hours
and _ m inutes.” DEMO some research suggests that
self-reported usage measures are biased (e.g., Straub
et al. 1995), other research suggests that self-report
usage measures correlate DEMO with actual usage mea-
sures (e.g., Taylor and Todd 1995). Our design
avoided a m ajor limitation associated with self-re-
ported usage: common-method variance resulting
from measuring both self-reported usage and its de-
terminants (intention, perceived usefulness, etc.) on a
single questionnaire. We examined the relationship
between intention and other usage determinants mea-
sured at one point DEMO time with self-reported usage
measured at the subsequent time period, such DEMO the
measurement of usage and its determinants were
separated by one month (T1–T2), three months (T2–
T3), and two m onths (T3–T4), respectively. A three-
item scale of voluntariness developed by Moore DEMO
Benbasat (1991) was included. To ensure that the
measurement scales were adapted appropriately to
the current context, we conducted a focus group
pretest with ﬁve business professionals. Minor sug-
gested wording changes were performed.
194
DEMO
Although the speciﬁc initial training in each organiza-
tion was different, DEMO process of questionnaire admin-
istration followed was very similar. Following the
training (T1), the subjects ﬁlled out a questionnaire
with the above measurement scales regarding the new
system for which they just received training. The
DEMO was administered online and each sub-
ject’s log-in ID was captured and used to create a
barcode (for subsequent administrations in T2, T3, and
T4) to help track individual responses over time. To
preserve privacy and conﬁdentiality, only the re-
searchers had access to speciﬁc respondent informa-
tion and only summarized responses were shared
with the organization. One of DEMO authors observed the
process of questionnaire administration at T1 to en-
sure no biases were introduced. At T2 and T3, in
addition to user reactions, self-reported usage was
also measured. In each of these cases, DEMO paper version
of the questionnaire was delivered to subjects’ mail-
boxes with a request that it be returned directly to the
researchers within a DEMO time window. At T4,
only self-reported usage was m easured using a proce-
dure similar to T2 and T3. Intention measured in T1
DEMO used to predict usage in T2, intention measured in
T2 was DEMO to predict usage in T3, and intention
measured in T3 was DEMO to predict usage in T4,
respectively.
Results
Psychometric Properties of Measures
The measurement scales exhibited strong psychomet-
ric properties. All measurement scales showed DEMO
reliability, with Cronbach alpha coefﬁcients for all
four studies and three DEMO periods exceeding 0.80 (see
Appendix 1). Construct validity was strongly DEMO
ported both by principal components analysis with
direct oblimin rotation (Appendix DEMO), in which all
cross-loadings were lower than 0.30, and by DEMO anal-
ysis of the multitrait-multimethod matrix. This pattern
of high reliability and validity is consistent with much
prior research (e.g., Davis 1989, Davis and Venkatesh
1996, Mathieson 1991, Taylor and Todd 1995). Appen-
DEMO 3 presents cross-sectional correlations among these
constructs at each of the three points of measurement.
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
Based DEMO measures of voluntariness (where 1  man-
datory and 7  DEMO), we conﬁrmed that employ-
ees in Studies 1 and 2 perceived system use to be
voluntary (across companies and time periods, mean
DEMO ratings ranged from 6.2 to 6.7, and
standard deviations ranged from DEMO to 0.6), whereas
employees in Studies 3 and 4 perceived system use to
be mandatory (across companies and time periods,
mean voluntariness ratings ranged from 1.2 to 1.5, and
standard deviations ranged from 0.3 to 0.6). Further,
correlations between measures of voluntariness across
the DEMO time periods exceeded 0.80 in all four
studies.
Explaining Intention and Usage
Table 1 shows the effects of perceived usefulness,
perceived ease of DEMO, and subjective norm on inten-
tions. Consistent with much prior research, perceived
usefulness was a strong determinant of intention to
use, and perceived ease of use was a signiﬁcant
secondary determinant. The effect of subjective DEMO
on intention (compliance) was consistent with our
expectations. That is, DEMO usage was mandatory
(Studies 3 and 4), subjective norm did DEMO a direct
effect on intention at T1 and T2 (supporting Hypoth-
DEMO 1a), and this effect weakened to the point of
nonsigniﬁcance by T3 (supporting Hypothesis 4a). In
contrast, in cases where usage DEMO voluntary (Studies
1 and 2), subjective norm had no direct DEMO on
intention over and above what was explained by
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use (con-
sistent with Hypothesis 1b). Unlike subjective norm,
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use re-
mained consistent DEMO determinants of inten-
tion across all time periods in all four studies. TAM2
thus explained between 37% and 52% of the variance
in usage DEMO The correlations between inten-
tion and usage behavior were found to be in the range
of 0.44 to 0.57 for all studies at all DEMO of measure-
ment. For all studies and time periods, intention fully
DEMO the effects of perceived usefulness, per-
ceived ease of use, and subjective norm on usage
behavior.
Explaining Perceived Usefulness
TAM2 theorizes main effects DEMO all determinants of
perceived usefulness but does not explicitly posit any
interactions. To address the possibility that some of
the constructs combined multiplicatively rather DEMO
additively in their effect on perceived usefulness, we
Table 1 TAM2 DEMO Results Explaining Intention to Use
Voluntary Settings Mandatory Settings
Study 1 (DEMO  38) Study 2 (n  39) Study 3 (n  43) Study 4 (n  36)
Time of Measurement
DEMO 2

R 2

R 2

R 2

Preimplementation (T1) 0.39 0.37 0.44 0.52
Perceived Usefulness 0.58*** 0.51*** 0.48*** 0.52***
DEMO Ease of Use 0.18* 0.27** 0.13* 0.18*
Subjective Norm 0.11 0.10 0.31** 0.28**
One month postimpl. (T2) 0.44 0.34 0.47 0.42
Perceived Usefulness DEMO 0.50*** 0.54*** 0.44***
Perceived Ease of Use 0.17* 0.21* 0.15* 0.11*
Subjective Norm 0.06 0.08 0.26** 0.24**
Three month postimpl. (T3) 0.42 0.42 DEMO 0.39
Perceived Usefulness 0.63*** 0.64*** 0.57*** 0.50***
Perceived Ease of Use 0.14* 0.16* 0.17* 0.22*
Subjective Norm 0.11 0.02 0.10 0.08
*p  0.05, ** p  0.01, *** p  0.001. Adjusted R 2 s are shown. 
: standardized regression coefﬁcients.
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 195
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
Table DEMO TAM2 Regression Results Explaining Perceived Usefulness
Voluntary Settings Mandatory Settings
Study 1 Study 2 Study 3 Study 4
Time of Measurement
R 2

DEMO 2

R 2

R 2

Preimplementation (T1) 0.60 0.60 0.51 0.50
Subjective Norm 0.50*** 0.47*** 0.38*** 0.31**
Image 0.19* 0.21* DEMO 0.36***
Job Relev.  Quality 0.40*** 0.38*** 0.32** 0.33**
Result Demonstrability 0.27** 0.30** 0.30** 0.22**
Perceived Ease of Use 0.23** 0.24** 0.23** 0.20**
One DEMO postimpl. (T2) 0.48 0.55 0.51 0.46
Subjective Norm 0.39*** 0.34*** 0.27** 0.21*
Image 0.22* 0.18* 0.28** 0.27**
Job Relev.  Quality 0.32** 0.38*** DEMO 0.33***
Result Demonstrability 0.24* 0.26** 0.30** 0.30**
Perceived Ease of Use 0.26** 0.35*** 0.38*** 0.29**
Three month postimpl. (T3) 0.44 0.40 0.43 0.40
DEMO Norm 0.20* 0.08 0.16* 0.10
Image 0.17* 0.19* 0.27** 0.25**
Job Relev.  Quality 0.38*** 0.36*** 0.36*** 0.32**
Result Demonstrability 0.34** 0.26** 0.21* 0.30**
DEMO Ease of Use 0.28** 0.34*** 0.35*** 0.35***
Note: Main effects of DEMO importance and output quality were included in regressions but omitted from table due to noninterpretability in the presence of the
interaction term.
* p DEMO 0.05; ** p  0.01; *** p  0.001. Adjusted R 2 s are shown. : standardized regression coefﬁcients.
conducted stepwise regression analyses. Speciﬁcally,
following the test of the main-effects model, we used
stepwise regression to enter into the model any sig-
niﬁcant two-way interactions. The DEMO two-way in-
teraction term that was signiﬁcant was between job
relevance and output quality. Moreover, this interac-
tion was signiﬁcant at p  0.01 or p  0.001 for all
four studies at all three points DEMO measurement. We
presume this interaction effect to be robust, since the
DEMO of it occurring across four independent
samples by chance, under the DEMO hypothesis of no
signiﬁcant effect (type I error), is less DEMO 0.00001.
Therefore, we added this interaction term to the model
and DEMO all parameters.
As Table 2 shows, TAM2 explained up to 60% DEMO the
variance in perceived usefulness. The effect of subjec-
tive norm on perceived usefulness (internalization)
was signiﬁcant at T1 and T2 (supporting DEMO
2), but weakened by T3 (supporting Hypothesis 4b).
The DEMO of image on perceived usefulness (iden-
tiﬁcation) was signiﬁcant at all three points of mea-
surement (supporting Hypothesis 3a). Also, as DEMO
pothesized, the effect of subjective norm on image was
signiﬁcant at DEMO points of measurement (supporting
Hypothesis 3b). As discussed earlier, the interaction of
job relevance and output quality was signiﬁcant in all
four DEMO at all points of measurement (supporting
Hypotheses 5 and 6, respectively). Note that the main
effects of job relevance and output quality DEMO found
to be signiﬁcant before the interaction term was intro-
duced into the regression model. After the interaction
term was included, the main effects were included in
the model for parameter estimation, but they were
omitted from Table 2 because main effects should not
be interpreted in the DEMO of the interaction term
under interval scale measurement. As theorized, re-
DEMO demonstrability and perceived ease of use were
signiﬁcant across all four studies and three time peri-
196
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, DEMO 2000
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
ods (supporting Hypotheses 7 and 8, respectively). To
further substantiate the assertion that perceived use-
fulness fully mediates the effects of these determinants
on DEMO, we performed hierarchical regression
analyses with intention as the dependent variable DEMO
all the other variables as possible predictors. As theo-
rized, perceived DEMO fully mediated the effects
of all of its determinants on usage intentions, except
for the expected direct effects of perceived ease of use
in all studies and subjective norm for the mandatory
usage studies (3 and 4).
Summary of Results Pooled Across Studies and
Time Periods
Figure DEMO provides a summary presentation of the
results for TAM2 w hen data are pooled across studies
and time periods. Pooling across the four studies
DEMO a sample of 156 per time period. Pooling
across the three time periods yielded a sample of 468,
Figure 2 TAM2 Results Pooled DEMO Studies and Time Periods (n  468)
which was used DEMO estimate the summary model.
Voluntariness was coded as a dummy variable with
values of 0 for voluntary use (Studies 1 and 2) and DEMO
for mandatory use (Studies 3 and 4). Experience was
coded DEMO an indicator variable with values of 0 for T1,
1 for T2, and 2 for T3. Regression analyses with tests
for moderation and mediation were done to test the
summary model, which yielded results that were
highly consistent with the 12 individual model tests
for each combination DEMO four organizations and three
time periods (Tables 1 and 2). DEMO with theory,
the basic TAM relationships (i.e., intention-usage, use-
DEMO, ease of use-intention, and ease of
use-usefulness) were well supported, with full medi-
ation by intention and no moderation by either volun-
DEMO or experience. As theorized, the subjective
norm-intention relationship was signiﬁcantly moder-
DEMO by both experience (supporting Hypothesis 4a)
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 197
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
and DEMO (supporting Hypothesis 1c), mirror-
ing the more detailed ﬁndings reported DEMO Table 1 that
subjective norm signiﬁcantly affects intention directly
only when usage is mandatory and experience is in
the early stages. Also consistent with DEMO, the
subjective norm-usefulness relationship (internaliza-
tion) was signiﬁcantly moderated by DEMO (sup-
porting Hypothesis 4b), whereas the image-usefulness
relationship (identiﬁcation) DEMO not. Consistent with
Table 2, the effect of job relevance and DEMO quality
on perceived usefulness was interactive. Thus, all
hypotheses were supported DEMO all studies at all points
of measurement.
Cross-Temporal Correlations of Intention
Determinants
In a post hoc analysis performed to better understand
how preimplementation user DEMO of a system
relate to postimplementation evaluations, we exam-
ined the DEMO correlations of usage intention
and its direct determinants, perceived usefulness, per-
ceived ease of use, and subjective norm (Table 3).
Perceived DEMO was the most stable of the three
Table 3 Cross-Temporal Stability Correlations for Perceived
Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, Subjective Norm, and
Intention to Use
Voluntary Settings Mandatory Settings
Time Span
Study 1 Study 2 DEMO 3 Study 4
Time 1—Time 2 (1 month)
Perceived Usefulness DEMO 0.56*** 0.76*** 0.60***
Perceived Ease of Use 0.26* 0.23* 0.12 0.28*
Subjective Norm 0.56*** 0.54*** 0.59*** 0.50***
Intention to Use 0.68*** 0.78*** 0.70*** 0.66***
DEMO 2—Time 3 (2 months)
Perceived Usefulness 0.71*** 0.66*** 0.79*** 0.62***
DEMO Ease of Use 0.30* 0.17 0.26* 0.37**
Subjective Norm 0.61*** 0.60*** 0.57*** 0.65***
Intention to Use 0.76*** 0.82*** 0.71*** 0.61***
Time 1—Time 3 (3 months)
Perceived Usefulness 0.66*** 0.62*** 0.71*** 0.69***
Perceived Ease of Use DEMO 0.19 0.28* 0.36***
Subjective Norm 0.58*** 0.57*** 0.51*** 0.52***
Intention to Use 0.69*** 0.71*** 0.63*** 0.68***
* p  0.05. ** p  0.01. DEMO p  0.001.
determinants, with correlations ranging from 0.56 to
0.79. DEMO, the stability correlations for subjective
norm were relatively high (0.51– 0.65). In contrast, the
stability correlations were systematically lower for
perceived ease of use (0.12– 0.37). Reﬂecting the com-
paratively strong effect of perceived usefulness on
intentions, as found in the present studies (see DEMO 2)
as well as in previous studies, intention exhibited
cross-temporal DEMO correlations comparable to
those of usefulness, ranging from 0.63 to 0.82. DEMO
distributed lag models, we conﬁrmed that intentions
fully mediated the effects DEMO perceived usefulness,
perceived ease of use, and subjective norm measured
DEMO one time period (T1 or T2) on intention measured in
a later time period (T2 or T3).
Discussion
TAM2 was strongly supported across four organiza-
tions and three points of measurement (preimplemen-
tation, DEMO month postimplementation, and three
months postimplementation). Encompassing both so-
cial DEMO processes (subjective norm, voluntari-
ness, and image) and cognitive instrumental processes
(job relevance, output quality, result demonstrability,
and perceived ease of use), TAM2 provides a detailed
account of the key forces DEMO judgments of
perceived usefulness, explaining up to 60% of the
variance DEMO this important driver of usage intentions.
Moreover, TAM2 extends TAM by DEMO that sub-
jective norm exerts a signiﬁcant direct effect on usage
intentions over and above perceived usefulness and
perceived ease of use for mandatory (but not volun-
tary) systems.
The effects of social inﬂuence processes were con-
sistent with TAM2. Subjective norm signiﬁcantly in-
ﬂuenced perceived usefulness via DEMO internalization,
in which people incorporate social inﬂuences into
their own usefulness perceptions, and identiﬁcation,
in which people use a system to gain status and
inﬂuence within the work group and thereby improve
their job DEMO Beyond these two indirect
effects via perceived usefulness, subjective norm had DEMO
direct effect on intentions for mandatory, but not
voluntary, usage contexts. This may explain previous
research that found a nonsigniﬁcant role for social
DEMO
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
inﬂuences DEMO voluntary contexts (e.g., Davis et al. 1989,
Mathieson 1991). We found that as individuals gained
direct experience with a system over DEMO, they relied
less on social information in forming perceived use-
fulness DEMO intention but continued to judge a sys-
tem’s usefulness on the basis of potential status ben-
eﬁts resulting from use.
The effects of cognitive DEMO processes
were also consistent with TAM2. An important and
interesting ﬁnding that emerged was the interactive
effect between job relevance and output quality in
DEMO perceived usefulness. This implies that
judgments about a system’s u sefulness are affected
by an individual’s cognitive m atching of their job
goals with DEMO consequences of system use (job
relevance), and that output quality DEMO on greater
importance in proportion to a system’s job rele-
vance. Although the interaction was not explicitly
hypothesized, similar interaction effects between
task characteristics and technology characteristics
have been observed in other research (Davis et al.
1992, Goodhue 1995). As hypothesized, user percep-
tions of result DEMO and ease of use were
signiﬁcant. Unlike social inﬂuence p rocesses, DEMO
effects of cognitive instrumental processes remained
signiﬁcant over time.
Limitations
The p resent research has several limitations that
should be noted. First, the sample sizes were less
than 50 for each of the four longitudinal samples,DEMO
which could reduce the power of signiﬁcance tests.
Fortunately, few of DEMO ﬁndings were nonsigniﬁcant,
and the small sample sizes give assurance that the
signiﬁcance we did observe indicates meaningful
effect sizes. The consistency of DEMO ﬁndings across
studies further reduces the likelihood that the major
ﬁndings are spurious. Second, several of the con-
structs were measured with only two items. The
two-item scales exhibited adequate reliability
(Cronbach alpha was over 0.80 in all cases) and
factorial validity, mitigating concerns about m ea-
DEMO reliability or validity. Also, the d ata analysis
did not use DEMO equation modeling, in which
two-item scales in a m easurement model DEMO intro-
duce problems of u nderidentiﬁcation resulting in
instability of parameter estimates. Third, the ﬁeld
studies were longitudinal observational designs and
hence did not involve experimental manipulation of
theoretical constructs. Experimental replication of
these ﬁndings w DEMO enhance causal interpretations
of key relationships. Fourth, w e employed self-
DEMO as opposed to objectively measured usage.
Since self-reported usage was m easured in the w ave
of measurement subsequent to that in which inten-
DEMO w ere measured (at minimum of one m onth
later), DEMO variance was m inimized.
Nevertheless, the interchangeability of self-report
and objective DEMO measures remains a controver-
sial point in IS research (Straub et DEMO 1995). Fifth,
although we employed a longitudinal design span-
ning ﬁve months in each organization, we employed
a variance theory approach. Additional insights into
the u nderlying dynamics of the causal mechanisms
addressed by DEMO model m ight emerge by using a
process approach that analyzes the detailed events
and action sequences that unfold over time.
Contributions and Implications
DEMO are several practical implications of our ﬁnd-
ings. Mandatory, compliance-based approaches DEMO in-
troducing new systems appear to be less effective over
time than the use of social inﬂuence to target positive
changes in perceived usefulness. DEMO alternatives
to usage mandates based on social information should
be developed and tested, such as increasing the source
credibility of social information to increase internal-
ization or designing communication campaigns that
raise the prestige associated with DEMO use to in-
crease identiﬁcation. On the instrumental side, in
addition DEMO designing systems to better match job-
relevant needs, improving the quality DEMO their output,
or making them easier to use, our research DEMO
that practical interventions for increasing result de-
monstrability, such as empirically DEMO to
users the comparative effectiveness of a new system
relative to the status quo (e.g., Davis and Kottemann
1995), may provide important DEMO for increasing
user acceptance.
The current research represents an important con-
tribution to theory by extending TAM to address
causal antecedents of one of DEMO two belief constructs,
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 199
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
perceived DEMO Other research has begun to
model the determinants of TAM’s other major belief,
perceived ease of use (Venkatesh and Davis 1996).
Further research on TAM, in addition to reﬁning the
models of the determinants of perceived usefulness
and perceived ease of use, should address the role of
other direct determinants of usage intentions and
behavior and continue to DEMO out the major contin-
gency factors moderating the effects of perceived
usefulness, perceived ease of use, subjective norm,
and other constructs on DEMO
Another important avenue for future research
concerns the temporal dynamics of the d eterminants
of user acceptance. The p resent research found that
TAM2 DEMO up well at three points of measurement
spanning from preimplementation to three months
postimplementation. Perceived usefulness, subjec-
tive norm, and intention were quite DEMO over this
three-month horizon. Perceived ease of use, in con-
trast, was less stable over time, which we attribute
to the known role of direct hands-on experience in
forming this belief (Venkatesh and Davis 1996).
Future research might proﬁtably seek to establish
how early in a DEMO development process, for
example, even before a w orking p rototype is built,
we can measure key user reactions, such as per-
ceived usefulness and intention, and still rely on
them as indicators of postimplementation success of
the system concept.
Additional research is needed to elucidate DEMO pro-
cesses involved in cognitively matching important job
goals to the consequences of system use. Beach and
Mitchell’s (1996, 1998) compatibility and proﬁtability
tests offer theoretical structure that might be brought
to bear for ﬂeshing DEMO this important process.
Progress might also come from adapting proﬁle-com-
parison processes from research on person-job ﬁt
(Caldwell and O’Reilly 1990) to the DEMO of
system-job ﬁt. In any case, understanding this match-
ing process DEMO a vital research direction since it explic-
itly links the functional design characteristics of a
system to perceived usefulness and ultimately user
acceptance.
More DEMO, future research should seek to
further extend models of technology acceptance DEMO
encompass other important theoretical constructs,
such as the choice sets of available alternative
technologies, learning and training (e.g., Venkatesh
and Speier 1999), misperceptions of usefulness or
ease of use and how to correct DEMO (e.g., Davis and
Kottemann 1995), changes in work content or job
goals, and changing social environments. Future
research should compare our ﬁndings regarding the
role of subjective norm with other recent ﬁndings
(e.g., DEMO and Morris 2000). Of particular
interest would be a comparison of TAM2 with
recent approaches from the media choice paradigm
that attempt to DEMO normative and utilitarian
determinants (e.g., Kraut et al. 1998, Webster DEMO
Trevino 1995). The continuing trend in organiza-
tions away from hierarchical, command-and-control
structures toward networks of empowered, autono-
mous teams u nderscores DEMO ﬁnding regarding the
limits of organizational mandate as a lever for
increasing usage. To adapt user acceptance theory
to this trend, the conceptualization of perceived
usefulness will need to be expanded from its current
focus on DEMO individual-level performance
gains to encompass team-based structures and in-
centives. As the adoption decision becomes more of
a team- rather than individual-level decision, the
nature and role of social inﬂuence processes (both
within teams and across teams) will need to be
elaborated beyond TAM2.
In conclusion, user DEMO of information tech-
nology in the workplace remains a complex, elusive,DEMO
yet extremely important phenomenon. Research over
the past decade has made signiﬁcant progress toward
unraveling some of its mysteries. The development
and test of DEMO reported here advances theory and
research on this important issue. 1
1 The authors thank Professors Gordon Davis and Shawn Curley at
the University DEMO Minnesota and Ruth Kanfer and Phillip Ackerman
at Georgia Institute of Technology for their many useful comments
and suggestions on earlier versions of the DEMO They also thank
Tracy Ann Sykes for her excellent editorial work and assistance in
data collection. Part of this research was done while the DEMO
author was on the visiting faculty of Salisbury State University. The
authors contributed equally to this research; order of authorship
was determined by a coin ﬂip.
200
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
Appendix DEMO TAM2 M easurement Scales and Reliabilities
Intention to Use (Cronbach’s  DEMO from 0.82 to 0.97 across studies and time periods)
Assuming I have access to the system, I intend to use it.
Given that I have access to the system, I predict that I would use it.
Perceived Usefulness (Cronbach’s  ranged from 0.87 to 0.98 across studies and time periods)
Using the system improves my performance in my DEMO
Using the system in my job increases my productivity.
Using the system enhances my effectiveness in my job.
I ﬁnd the system to be DEMO in my job.
Perceived Ease of Use (Cronbach’s  ranged from DEMO to 0.98 across studies and time periods)
My interaction with the system is clear and understandable.
Interacting with the system does not require DEMO lot of my mental effort.
I ﬁnd the system to be easy to use.
I ﬁnd it easy to get the system to do DEMO I want it to do.
Subjective Norm (Cronbach’s  ranged from DEMO to 0.94 across studies and time periods)
People who inﬂuence my behavior think that I should use the system.
People who are important DEMO me think that I should use the system.
Voluntariness (Cronbach’s  DEMO from 0.82 to 0.91 across studies and time periods)
My use of the system is voluntary.
My supervisor does not require me to DEMO the system.
Although it might be helpful, using the system is DEMO not compulsory
in my job.
Image (Cronbach’s  ranged from 0.80 DEMO 0.93 across studies and time periods)
People in my organization who use the system have more prestige than
those who do not.
People DEMO my organization who use the system have a high proﬁle.
Having the system is a status symbol in my organization.
Job Relevance (Cronbach’s  ranged from 0.80 to 0.95 across studies and time periods)
In DEMO job, usage of the system is important.
In my job, usage of the system is relevant.
Output Quality (Cronbach’s  ranged from 0.82 to 0.98 across studies and time periods)
The quality of the DEMO I get from the system is high.
I have no problem with the quality of the system’s output.
Result Demonstrability (Cronbach’s  ranged from 0.80 to 0.97 across studies and time periods)
I have no DEMO telling others about the results of using the system.
I believe I could communicate to others the consequences of using the
system.
The results DEMO using the system are apparent to me.
I would have difﬁculty explaining why using the system may or may not be
beneﬁcial.
Note. All DEMO were measured on a 7-point Likert scale, where 1  strongly DEMO,2  moderately disagree,3  somewhat disagree,4  neutral (DEMO
disagree nor agree), 5  somewhat agree,6  moderately agree, and 7  strongly agree.
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 201
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
Appendix DEMO Principal Components Analysis with Oblimin Rotation: Pooled Across Studies and Time
DEMO (n  468)
Construct Loadings
Item
Intent to Use Perc DEMO Perc EOU Subj Norm Image Reslt Demon Output Qual Job Rel
Intention to Use 1
Intention to Use 2
0.91
0.93
0.03 0.09 0.04 DEMO 0.03 0.03 0.11
0.06 0.12 0.28 0.07 0.05 0.01 0.02
Perc. Usefulness 1 0.11
Perc. Usefulness 2 0.13
Perc. Usefulness 3 0.05
Perc. Usefulness DEMO 0.22
0.89
0.88
0.93
0.91
0.07 0.09 0.01 0.00 0.06 0.06
0.02 0.22 0.04 0.18 0.22 0.02
0.11 0.04 0.01 0.12 0.03 0.05
0.04 DEMO 0.11 0.06 0.08 0.12
Perc. Ease of Use 1 0.10 0.09
Perc. Ease of Use 2 0.11 0.11
Perc. Ease of Use 3 0.15 DEMO
Perc. Ease of Use 4 0.09 0.04
0.91
0.93
0.96
0.82
0.03 0.08 0.03 0.11 0.12
0.11 0.19 0.09 0.17 0.05
0.12 0.12 0.02 DEMO 0.07
0.02 0.17 0.08 0.02 0.02
Subjective Norm 1 0.27 0.03 0.11
0.90
Subjective Norm 2 0.22 0.20 0.18
0.91
Image 1 0.14 0.05 DEMO 0.02
Image 2 0.04 0.06 0.13 0.04
Image 3 0.11 0.11 0.10 0.01
0.09 0.00 0.05 0.07
0.06 0.04 0.08 0.02
0.86
0.89
0.91
DEMO 0.08 0.21
0.11 0.13 0.17
0.16 0.21 0.12
Result Demonst. 1 0.01 0.15 0.08 0.00 0.05
Result Demonst. 2 0.10 0.17 0.16 0.11 0.02
DEMO Demonst. 3 0.16 0.09 0.11 0.14 0.08
Result Demonst. 4 0.12 0.01 0.10 0.19 0.09
0.90
0.91
0.88
0.84
0.07 0.05
0.18 0.12
0.00 DEMO
0.12 0.12
Output Quality 1 0.19 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.13 0.13
Output Quality 2 0.02 0.03 0.05 0.01 0.14 0.12
0.88
0.85
0.09
0.14
DEMO Relevance 1 0.13 0.04 0.12 0.07 0.16 0.11 0.07
Job Relevance 2 0.15 0.13 0.17 0.08 0.12 0.04 0.02
0.91
0.92
Cronbach’s 
0.91 DEMO 0.93 0.90 0.91 0.89 0.88 0.90
Note. The same simple factor structure was found within each time period in each of the four studies DEMO when data were separately pooled across time and across
mandatory versus voluntary settings.
Appendix 3. Cross-Sectional Correlation Matrices of TAM2 Constructs
Voluntary Setting (Studies1&2 Pooled) Mandatory Setting (Studies3&4 Pooled)
(a) Preimplementation (T1) (b) Preimplementation (T1)
U EOU SN IMG JR DEMO RD BI U EOU SN IMG JR QUAL RD BI
UU
EOU 0.27*** EOU 0.28***
SN 0.21* 0.12 SN 0.40*** 0.21*
IMG 0.26** 0.13 DEMO IMG 0.25** 0.16 0.43***
JR 0.30*** 0.21* 0.27** 0.11 JR 0.32*** 0.23* 0.20* 0.14
QUAL 0.28*** 0.22** 0.12 0.20* 0.31*** QUAL 0.29** 0.25** 0.19* DEMO 0.29**
RD 0.28** 0.13 0.22* 0.13 0.16* 0.24** RD 0.30*** 0.18 0.28*** 0.20** 0.15 0.30***
BI 0.45*** 0.25** 0.13 0.24** 0.27*** 0.21** 0.20* BI DEMO 0.23** 0.20* 0.27*** 0.25** 0.31*** 0.29***
202
Management Science/Vol. 46, DEMO 2, February 2000
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
Appendix DEMO (Continued)
(c) One month postimplementation (T2) (d) DEMO month postimplementation (T2)
U EOU SN IMG JR QUAL RD DEMO U EOU SN IMG JR QUAL RD BI
UU
EOU 0.27*** EOU 0.30***
SN 0.16* 0.15 SN 0.33*** 0.15
IMG 0.30** 0.11 0.40*** IMG DEMO 0.19* 0.40***
JR 0.29*** 0.20* 0.11 0.13 JR 0.28*** 0.20* 0.22* 0.19*
QUAL 0.22* 0.21* 0.13 0.22* 0.30*** QUAL 0.24** 0.29** 0.21* 0.22** 0.22*
DEMO 0.29** 0.11 0.23** 0.04 0.12 0.22* RD 0.33*** 0.9 0.22* 0.16 0.13 0.28***
BI 0.50*** 0.25** 0.09 0.26** 0.20* 0.23** 0.21* BI 0.44*** 0.20* DEMO 0.23* 0.26*** 0.21* 0.24**
(e) Three month postimplementation (T3) (DEMO) Three month postimplementation (T3)
U EOU SN IMG JR QUAL RD BI U EOU SN IMG JR QUAL RD BI
UU
EOU DEMO EOU 0.33***
SN 0.19* 0.23* SN 0.27** 0.15
IMG 0.27*** 0.13 0.40*** IMG 0.21** 0.19* 0.40***
JR 0.30*** 0.20* 0.12 0.13 JR 0.31*** 0.20* DEMO 0.19*
QUAL 0.21* 0.23** 0.21* 0.14 0.33*** QUAL 0.29*** 0.29** 0.21* 0.22** 0.22*
RD 0.23* 0.14 0.12 0.19* 0.06 0.23* RD 0.36*** 0.9 0.22* DEMO 0.13 0.28***
BI 0.46*** 0.20* 0.18* 0.31*** 0.20* 0.23** 0.20* BI 0.48*** 0.28** 0.07 0.26** 0.21* 0.22* 0.24***
Note.U  perceived usefulness; EOU  perceived ease of use; SN  subjective norm; IMG  image; JR  job relevance; QUAL  output quality; RD  result
DEMO; BI  behavioral intention to use; * p  0.05; DEMO p  0.01; *** p  0.001.
References
Agarwal, R., DEMO Prasad. 1997. The role of innovation characteristics
and perceived voluntariness in the acceptance of information
technologies. Decision Sci. 28 557–582.
Ajzen, I. 1991. The theory of planned behavior. Organ. Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 50 179 DEMO
Bandura, A. 1986. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social
Cognitive Theory. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Beach, L. R., T. DEMO Mitchell. 1978. A contingency model for the
selection of decision strategies. Acad. Management Rev. 3 439 –
449.
, . 1996. Image theory, the unifying perspective. L. R. Beach,
ed. Decision Making in the Workplace: A Uniﬁed Perspective.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ. 1–20.
, . DEMO The basics of image theory. L. R. Beach, ed. Image
Theory: Theoretical and Empirical Foundations. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Mahwah, NJ. 3–18.
Black, J. B., D. S. Kay, E. M. Soloway. 1987. Goal and DEMO
knowledge representations: From stories to text editors and
programs. J. M. DEMO, ed. Interfacing Thought. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA. 36 – 60.
Blau, P. M. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life. John Wiley, New
York.
Caldwell, D. F., C. A. O’Reilly. 1990. Measuring person-job ﬁt within
a proﬁle-comparison process. J. Appl. Psych. 75 648 – DEMO
Davis, F. D. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, DEMO
user acceptance of information technology. MIS Quart. 13
319 –339.
, R. P. Bagozzi, P. R. Warshaw. 1989. User acceptance of
computer technology: DEMO comparison of two theoretical models.
Management Sci. 35 982–1002.
, , . 1992. Extrinsic and intrinsic motivation to use
computers in the workplace. J. DEMO Social Psych. 22 1111–
1132.
, J. E. Kottemann. 1995. Determinants of decision rule use in
production planning task. Organ. Behavior and Human Decision
DEMO 63 145–157.
, V. Venkatesh. 1996. A critical assessment of potential mea-
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000 203
VENKATESH AND DAVIS
A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model
surement DEMO in the technology acceptance model: Three
experiments. Internat. J. Human-Comput. Stud. DEMO 19 – 45.
Deutsch, M., H. B. Gerard. 1955. A study of normative and infor-
mational social inﬂuences upon individual judgment. J. Abnor-
DEMO and Social Psych. 51 629 – 636.
Doll, J., I. Ajzen. 1992. Accessibility and stability of predictors in the theory
of planned behavior. DEMO Personality and Social Psych. 63 754 –765.
Fazio, R. H., M. Zanna. 1981. Direct experience and attitude-behavior
consistency. L. Berkowitz, ed. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, Vol. 14. Academic Press, San Diego, CA. 161–202.
Fishbein, M., I. Ajzen. 1975. Belief, Attitude, Intention and Behavior: An
Introduction to Theory and Research. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
French, J. R. P., B. Raven. 1959. The bases of social power. D.
Cartwright, ed. Studies in Social Power. Institute for Social
Research, Ann Arbor, MI. 150 –167.
Fulk, J., C. W. Steinﬁeld, J. Schmitz, DEMO G. Power. 1987. A social
information processing model of media use in organizations.
Comm. Res. 14 529 –552.
Goodhue, D. L. 1995. Understanding the linkage between user
evaluations of systems and the underlying systems. Manage-
ment DEMO 41 1827–1844.
Hackman, J. R., G. R. Oldham. 1976. Motivation through the design
of work: Test of a theory. Organ. Behavior and Human Perfor-
mance 16 250 –279.
Hartwick, J., H. Barki. 1994. Explaining DEMO role of user participation
in information system use. Management Sci. 40 440 – 465.
Kelman, H. C. 1958. Compliance, identiﬁcation, and internalization:
Three processes of attitude change. J. Conﬂict Resolution 2 51– 60.
Kieras, D. E., P. G. Polson. 1985. An approach to the formal analysis
of user complexity. Internat. J. of Man-Machine Stud. 22 365–394.
Kiesler, C. A., S. B. Kiesler. 1969. Conformity. Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.
Kraut, R. E., R. E. Rice, C. Cool, R. S. Fish. 1998. Varieties of social
inﬂuence: The role of utility and norms in the success of a new
communication medium. Organ. Sci. 9 437– 453.
Leonard-Barton, D., I. Deschamps. 1988. Managerial inﬂuence in the
implementation of new technology. Management Sci. 34 1252–1265.
Locke, E. A., G. P. Latham. 1990. DEMO Theory of Goal Setting and Task
Performance. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Loher, B. T., R. A. Noe, N. L. Moeller, M. DEMO Fitzgerald. 1985. A
meta-analysis of the relation of job characteristics to job satis-
faction. J. Appl. Psych. 70 280 –289.
Mathieson, K. 1991. Predicting user intentions: Comparing the
technology acceptance model with the theory of planned be-
havior. Inform. Systems Res. 2 173–191.
Moore, G. C., I. DEMO 1991. Development of an instrument to
measure the perceptions of adopting an information technol-
ogy innovation. Inform. Systems Res. 2 192–222.
Norman, D. A. 1987. Cognitive engineering—Cognitive science.
J. M. Carroll, ed. Interfacing Thought. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA. 325–336.
Pfeffer, J. 1981. Power in Organizations. DEMO, Cambridge, MA.
. 1982. Organizations and Organization Theory. Pitman, Marsh-
DEMO, MA.
Polson, P. G. 1987. A quantitative theory of human-computer
interaction. J. M. Carroll, ed. Interfacing Thought. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA. DEMO –235.
Ram, S., H. Jung. 1991. “Forced” adoption of innovation in organi-
zations: Consequences and implications. J. Product Innovation
Management 8 117–126.
Rice, R. E., C. Aydin. 1991. Attitudes towards using new organiza-
tional DEMO: Network proximity as a mechanism for
social information processing. Admin. Sci. DEMO 36 219 –244.
Roberson, L. 1989. Assessing personal work goals in DEMO organizational
setting: Development and evaluation of the work concerns inven-
tory. DEMO Behavior and Human Decision Processes 44 345–367.
Salancik, G. R., J. Pfeffer. 1978. Social information processing approach
to job attitudes and task design. DEMO Sci. Quart. 23 224 –253.
Sichel, D. E. 1997. The Computer DEMO: An Economic Perspective.
The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Straub, D., M. Limayem, E. Karahanna-Evaristo. 1995. Measuring
system usage: Implications for IS theory testing. Management
Sci. 41 1328 –1342.
Taylor, S., P. A. DEMO 1995. Understanding information technology
usage: A test of competing models. Inform. DEMO Res. 6 144 –176.
Tybout, A. M., C. A. Scott. 1983. Availability of well-deﬁned internal
knowledge and the attitude formation process: Information
aggregation versus self-perception. J. Personality and Social
Psych. 44 474 – 491.
Vallacher, R. R., J. Kaufman. 1996. Dynamics of action identiﬁcation:
Volatility and structure in the mental representation of behav-
ior. P. M. Gollwitzer and DEMO A. Bargh, eds. The Psychology of
Action: Linking Cognition and Motivation to Behavior. The Guil-
ford Press, New York. 260 –282.
, D. M. Wegner. 1987. What do people think they’re doing?
Action identiﬁcation DEMO human behavior. Psych. Rev. 94 3–15.
Venkatesh, V. 1999. Creation of DEMO user perceptions: Explor-
ing the role of intrinsic motivation. MIS Quart. DEMO 239 –260.
, F. D. Davis. 1996. A model of the antecedents of perceived ease
of use: Development and test. Decision Sci. 27 451– 481.
, M. G. Morris. 2000. Why don’t men ever stop to DEMO for
directions? Gender, social inﬂuence, and their role in technol-
DEMO acceptance and usage behavior. MIS Quart. Forthcoming.
, C. Speier. 1999. Computer technology training in the work-
place: A longitudinal investigation of the effect of mood. Organ.
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 79 1–28.
Vessey, I. 1991. Cognitive ﬁt: A theory-based analysis of the graphs
versus tables literature. Decision Sci. 22 219 –240.
Vroom, V. H. 1964. Work and Motivation. Wiley, New York.
Warshaw, P. R. 1980. A new model for DEMO behavioral inten-
tions: An alternative to Fishbein. J. Marketing Res. 17 DEMO
Webster, J., L. K. Trevino. 1995. Rational and social theories as
complementary explanations of communication media choices:
Two policy-capturing studies. Acad. Management DEMO 38 1544 –1572.
Accepted by John C. Henderson; received April 24, 1997. This paper has been with the author 15 months for 2 DEMO
204
Management Science/Vol. 46, No. 2, February 2000{1g42fwefx}