The Neuronal Substrate of Risky Choice
An Insight into the Contributions of DEMO
to the Understanding of Theories on Decision
Making under Risk
VERENA VORHOLD
Institute of Neuroscience and Biophysics (INB-3), Research Centre Juelich GmbH,
Juelich, Germany
Child Neuropsychology Section, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,DEMO
University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany
This chapter provides an overview of studies in the ﬁeld of neuroscience that investigate some of
the processes DEMO concepts of risk perception, risky choice, and decision making under risk. First,
early studies in the ﬁeld of neuroscience addressing the diminished DEMO abilities in
lesion patients are presented. A classical task in this research ﬁeld is described along with its
neural implications. After this, the underlying model, its hypotheses, and neuronal implications
are discussed. Different aspects within DEMO decision making, such as the inﬂuence of memory,
inhibition, motivation, and personality, on risky choice and the respective underlying neuronal
substrate DEMO described. After this, studies of risky decision making in healthy subjects DEMO re-
viewed. A selection of studies shows that theories focusing on cognitive aspects only have to be
enriched in order to allow for additional DEMO within risky decision making (e.g., emotion). Next,
the classical economic approaches and the development of theories incorporating further aspects
within economical DEMO making and the underlying neuronal substrate will be presented. Fi-
nally, DEMO in the ﬁeld of neuroeconomics, focusing on the role of social DEMO making and
evaluative judgment within risky decision making, is reviewed.
Key DEMO: decision making; risk; fMRI; neuroeconomics
Introduction
In recent years, DEMO knowledge, new technolo-
gies, diseases, environmental challenges, and progress
in science have broadened existing deﬁnitions and con-
cepts of risk. The more DEMO models and deﬁni-
tions of risk become, the more hope is DEMO into new
technologies to provide a deeper understanding. Brain
imaging techniques, DEMO as functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging (fMRI), allow studying the DEMO basis
of various cognitive functions by investigating changes
in cerebral blood ﬂow, which is an indirect measure
Address for correspondence: Verena Vorhold, Cognitive Neurology
Group, Institute of Neuroscience and Biophysics (INB-3), Research
Centre DEMO GmbH, Leo-Brandt Str. 5, 52425 Juelich, Germany;
Child Neuropsychology DEMO, Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, University Hospital Aachen, Neuenhofer DEMO 21, 52074
Aachen, Germany. Voice: +49-(0)2461-61-5820; fax: DEMO(0)2461-61-
1518.
v.vorhold@fz-juelich.de
of oxygen use at speciﬁc locations in the brain. fMRI
provides insight into the spatial distribution and dy-
namics of DEMO activation as a function of stimulus
presentation or task performance or as a consequence
of disease or medication. At ﬁrst glance, fMRI seems to
be a straightforward, promising, and convincing tool
that directly accesses cognitive DEMO and provides
a window into the brain. It offers the “extraordinary
opportunity” to observe the processes of the human
brain,1 and it is DEMO as the “key technology of our
times.”2
Especially enthusiastic are researchers in ﬁelds that
are in a stalemate concerning new ideas for further re-
DEMO “The neuroscience revolution occurred when
... scientists realized that the best hope for under-
standing the workings of the brain comes from an in-
DEMO approach, a combination of traditional
approaches to yield a new synthesis, a new perspec-
tive”(p. 4).1 For example, researchers in the ﬁeld of
neuroeconomics hope to ﬁnd evidence for the neu-
ronal substrate DEMO risk perception or decision
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1128: 41–52 (2008).  2008 New York Academy of Sciences.
doi: 10.1196/annals.1399.006 41
C
42
making under risk. By connecting these processes to
behavior, they hope to gain a better understanding of
the phenomenon.3 Nonetheless, even if imaging tech-
niques allow investigating neural correlates of cognitive
function, certain limitations in temporal and spatial
resolution restrict design and experimental manipu-
lation and hence DEMO research questions that can be
answered with this technique.
This chapter provides a critical overview of neu-
roscience studies that investigate processes and con-
DEMO potentially relevant to risk perception and
communication. First, early studies by DEMO and
colleagues addressing the issue of risk perception in
patients with lesions within the ventromedial pre-
frontal cortex (VMPFC) are presented.4–12 The clas-
DEMO gambling task in research ﬁelds investigating
risk decision making is introduced, DEMO the neural
implications are presented and critiqued. After this,
the somatic marker hypothesis (SMH) and its neu-
ronal implications are discussed. Different DEMO
of risk perception using such decision-under-risk
paradigms are shown. In particular, DEMO changes
in the tasks result in an altered underlying neu-
ronal substrate. Neural changes are supposed to
highlight the inﬂuence of memory, inhibition, DEMO
tivation, and personality on risky choice. After
this, the underlying neuronal substrate of risky and
informed decision making in healthy subjects is
summarized.
DEMO the subsequent section, a selection of studies in
neuroscience is introduced DEMO show that theories fo-
cusing only on cognitive processes have to be enriched
with models that further distinguish possible emotional
aspects of risk decisions. DEMO the next section, risky
choices investigated with economic models are intro-
DEMO This section will start with classical approaches
and lead to the development of Prospect Theory (PT)
and its assumptions. The hypothesized underlying neu-
ronal substrate as well as the problems arising will be
described. Finally, the aspects in neuroeconomic stud-
ies focusing on social decision making and DEMO role of
evaluative judgment within risky decision making will
be critically discussed.
The Iowa Gambling Task and Neural
Implications when Administered to Lesion
Patients
DEMO the ﬁeld of neuroscience, studies simulating real-
life risky decision making DEMO a laboratory setting de-
tect the cognitive and neural mechanisms that, DEMO
damaged, are responsible for impairments. Such im-
pairments have been observed, for example, in pa-
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
tients with damage to certain sectors of the VMPFC.a
The problems that DEMO occur especially within the
personal and social functioning of the patients. Symp-
toms manifest themselves, for example, in oblivious-
ness toward the future DEMO of actions and
the reward-related guidance of behavior.8 The litera-
ture gives a detailed description of the symptoms these
patients suffer.13,14 Beyond difﬁculties DEMO the cog-
nitively demanding aspects of a task (e.g., estimation
of prices), the ability to understand, experience, and
effectively use emotions DEMO especially impaired.14
Bechara et al.8 introduced the “Iowa Gambling
Task” (IGT), an experimental neuropsychological task
in which participants search for monetary payoffs
by selecting cards from several decks arrayed before
them. Each deck holds a DEMO number of win-
ning/rewarding and loosing/punishing cards, and the
DEMO proportions of these cards can be learned by
repeated drawing. Healthy subjects are able to make
successful choices based on their intuitive estimates of
DEMO decks are risky and which decks are proﬁtable
in the long run. They show an improvement over time.
They fail, however, to give DEMO account of the net gains
and losses associated with any single deck. In their ini-
tial article, Bechara and colleagues introduce E.V.R.,
a prototypical patient with damaged VMPFCs who
behaves disadvantageously in real-life decision making
(pp. 7–8).8 To determine the speciﬁc inﬂuence of the
VMPFC on DEMO making under risk, subsequent re-
search with the IGT included six DEMO subjects”
and compared their performances to nine control pa-
tients with lesions in other brain regions (p. 10).8, b
The researchers found DEMO task detects impairments in
brain-damaged patients. Such patients perform “de-
fectively in this task, and ... the defect is stable over
time” (p. DEMO).8
Studying patient deﬁcits in gambling tasks enable
researchers to compare performance within or even
between patient groups. Moreover, such studies allow
the assignment of behavioral deﬁcits to particular brain
areas when lesions are shared or DEMO However,
there are some constraints of fMRI techniques that
limit the ability of these studies to provide an exact
causal relationship between lesions DEMO the behavior in
deﬁcit. For example, patient studies usually investigate
a DEMO VMPFC, as classiﬁed by the Iowa group, includes the medial
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and parts of the lateral OFC. Moreover, it
overlaps with medial Brodmann’s areas 10, 11, and 12 and lower Brod-
DEMO areas 24, 25, and 32.5,6 It is important to note that other authors
refer to a similar region when using the term DEMO,16
b Detailed descriptions of the patients’ lesions are given in Bechara
et al.12
Vorhold: The Neuronal Substrate of Risky Choice
a few patients only, DEMO makes statistically meaning-
ful analyses difﬁcult. Moreover, although the lesions
of DEMO overlap in a region of interest, such as the
VMPFC, patients’ lesions are not of an equal size and
hence cover heterogeneous regions DEMO the brain.
It is also important to note that in different studies
the labeling of brain areas varies. The data regard-
ing individual brain DEMO, once acquired, has to
be spatially preprocessed and normalized via (DEMO
mated) transformations in order to match a standard
brain physiology template. DEMO enables the researcher
to make anatomical and physiological statements and
comparisons between the brains of different patients.
Functional data is likewise normalized to the DEMO,
enabling the assignment of functions to speciﬁc brain
structures. These transformations and normalizations
can be tricky when the brain of a patient is DEMO
damaged. Thus, it is important to be aware of the
need DEMO patient or lesion studies to consider alternative
techniques to normalize the data in order to overcome
a mismatch between template, image, and functional
DEMO
The Somatic Marker Hypothesis
and Its Neural Implications
The inability of patients to decide advantageously
(i.e. to, learn from an experience in order DEMO gain a
reward) led to the formulation of the SMH.14 The
DEMO states that, in an uncertain situation where
different behavioral alternatives can DEMO chosen, so-
matic markers guide behavior by excluding previously
experienced emotionally DEMO behaviors. Somatic
markers can be either “primary inducers,” like un-
conditioned pleasurable and aversive stimuli, or “sec-
ondary inducers,” such as memorable learned entities
that are generated by recall. The inducers produce
a somatic DEMO, which in turn can overtly be per-
ceived as a feeling DEMO covertly remain as a represen-
tation at the level of the brain stem.18,19 Somatic states
reached through secondary inducers enable the re-
experiencing DEMO a feeling that is associated with some-
thing. All of these somatic states, either negative or posi-
tive, combine to produce one overall DEMO state. This
overall state provides important signals to the brain,
including the overall emotional state (via insula, so-
matosensory cortex) and it suggests overtly or covertly how
decisions should be biased when choosing between
DEMO,8,10,14,20
Bechara and colleagues8 state that the IGT detects
brain-injured patients’ impairments in a controlled set-
ting. They assume that patients’ DEMO reﬂect
“their real-life inability to decide advantageously, es-
pecially in personal DEMO social matters. ... In life, as in
43
the task, an exact calculation of the future outcomes is
not possible and choices must DEMO based on approxima-
tions” (p. 13).8 Moreover, with the SMH the respective
roles of primary and secondary inducers in decision
making can DEMO differentiated.14 Conclusions can also
be drawn about the underlying neuronal substrate of
the inducers as these are believed to be regulated by
different brain DEMO
The VMPFC is the part of the brain most crucial in
encoding secondary inducers via dispositional associa-
tions, i.e., it recalls the learned DEMO and bodily states
from past experiences. The VMPFC is thought to reac-
tivate representations of a situation or state by recruit-
ing this information DEMO other areas in the brain. Sec-
ondary inducers can be recalled from areas represent-
ing a change in the body, like the somatosensory cortex,
insula, cingulate, basal ganglia, and brain stem nu-
clei.21 For primary inducers, i.e., unconditioned emo-
tional stimuli, the VMPFC recruits information from
the amygdala.4,9 It appears that damage to the amyg-
dala DEMO performance in the IGT because of its role
in linking stimuli to affective attributes. The VMPFC
holds the role of a decision maker over DEMO alterna-
tive inputs received from other areas as well.4 Further-
more, DEMO systems, like the dopaminergic
system in the brain stem, are thought to bias the action
of the somatic states in response selection11,14,DEMO
The assumptions of the SMH were tested by the
Iowa laboratory in several studies5,8,10,12.Results show
that somatic markers, as measured by skin conduc-
tance responses (SCRs), allow people to make better
choices even before conscious knowledge is accessible.
In the initial study, the authors provide three differ-
ent explanations for the impaired patients’ behavior:
the DEMO is extremely sensitive to reward, is insensi-
tive to punishment, or is generally insensitive to future
consequences. After varying aspects of the task, the
authors concluded that patients fail to perform advan-
tageously in the DEMO because they are “unresponsive
for future consequences,”8 reﬂecting “myopia for the
future.”
The SMH shows how a (cognitive) model can con-
tribute DEMO the understanding of a phenomenon of in-
terest. It delivers hypotheses that can be tested and
falsiﬁed despite the fact that one experiment was DEMO
enough to provide satisfying evidence. Altogether, the
SMH has, via the IGT, identiﬁed some brain regions
involved in decision making under risk. It shows how
emotion-related feedback from the body can guide per-
formance. Nonetheless, it fails to describe how exactly
the interaction between body state, emotion, and de-
cision making is supposed to happen, especially when
the DEMO guiding behavior are unconscious.21,22
44
The Role of Working Memory, Inhibition,
Motivation, Personality, and Underlying
Neuronal Substrate in Risky Choice
Since its inception, different aspects of the IGT have
been varied and results have been replicated and aug-
DEMO Apart from new ideas about mechanisms and
factors other than “myopia for the future” that might
be responsible for the ﬁndings, these studies provide
evidence for additional brain regions presumably in-
volved in regulating task performance. DEMO is true not
only for tasks focusing on decision making under risk
but also for a whole range of tasks that are likely to DEMO
inﬂuenced by the same factors (e.g., evaluative judg-
ment, risk DEMO).
The role of working memory on the IGT was ques-
tioned by studies with dual-task methodologies.23,24
Bechara et al.7 dissociated working memory DEMO
decision-making capacities by showing that working
memory did not depend on intact decision making.
Interestingly, decision making was affected by work-
ing memory. Performance in the IGT was worse when
patients had working memory problems. A DEMO
damage to the prefrontal cortices (PFCs), including
the dorsolateral prefrontal DEMO (DLPFC), leads to
impairments in the IGT.7,16 Other authors DEMO for
different explanations of the impact of working mem-
ory in task performance.22,25 New methods to screen
the knowledge people have about the DEMO decks reveal
that a hypothesis about unconscious somatic markers
may not be necessary to explain the behavior in gam-
bles.22 The authors conclude that DEMO know about
theadvantageousstrategy. Whethertheyapplythis
knowledge to guide their behavior remains another
question.
Other research considers that impaired perfor-
mance in the IGT may be DEMO of an inability to
inhibit responses or deﬁcits in reversal learning. Studies
investigating the impairments of patients with frontal
lobe damage have found that DEMO PFC and OFC
(but not DLPFC) patients show an impaired reversal
learning performance.26–28 If impairments in reversal
learning are responsible for poor performance DEMO the
IGT, we have to add the OFC as a candidate DEMO in
risky decision making.
Deﬁcits in task performance from a lack of motiva-
tion or personality inﬂuences were investigated. Dif-
ferent patient groups were DEMO and their typical
behavioral patterns were analysed (e.g., increased or
decreased betting). Personality changes in participants
with either bilateral VMPFC lesions or DEMO prefrontal
lesions but not bilateral ventromedial involvement and
persons with nonprefrontal lesions were investigated.
The results suggest that diminished emotionality, im-
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
paired decision making, and psychosocial dysfunction
may be related to ventromedial prefrontal dysfunction
in both prefrontal lesion groups compared DEMO nonpre-
frontal.29
Sanfey et al.25 investigated patients’ risk preferences
independently from the accuracy of their decisions
in order to detect whether they were risk DEMO or
avoiding. They found VMPFC patients to be both risk
seeking and risk avoiding. In comparison, healthy con-
trols, both old and young, were risk averse. Moreover,
the authors could not clearly disentangle any DEMO
differences that could contribute to a better under-
standing of the ﬁndings for the patient group. The
risk-taking group only tended to have lesions DEMO
to the DLPFC. Hence, these studies do not suggest
additional regions DEMO interest nor do they exclude the
VMPFC concerning the role it plays in risky decision
making.
Risky and Informed Decision Making and the
Neuronal DEMO in Healthy Subjects
So far we have discussed conclusions about candi-
date regions drawn from knowledge about lesion loca-
tions in impaired patients. Studies DEMO neuroimaging
also gain evidence from the investigation of healthy
subjects. Hence, DEMO can draw conclusions about the
underlying neural substrate of task aspects. Such stud-
ies provide mixed support for the central role of the
VMPFC DEMO OFC. When the decision-making com-
ponent of a computerized “Iowa Gambling-like-task”
was isolated, decision making, per se, activated OFC,
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), medial PFC, DLPFC,
insula, inferior parietal cortex, DEMO, and cerebel-
lum. Guessing (i.e., unlearned task performance oc-
curring DEMO the ﬁrst task administration) activated
sensory-motor associative areas and the left DEMO
Informed decision making (learned risk-taking task
performance during a second administration) activated
the hippocampus, posterior cingulate (responsible for
memory processes), striatum, and the cerebellum (reg-
ulating motor control).30 Moreover, a study DEMO on
the risk anticipation period of the IGT found that dur-
ing that period the medial frontal gyrus was activated
exclusively. Interestingly, no orbitofrontal regions were
activated.31
We have to bear in mind that especially fMRI DEMO
are likely to be distorted in the frontal brain and
that they are relatively slow measures. Hence, subtle
variations of task aspects in order to tease out even
more speciﬁc regional functions might be an aim DEMO
can only be reached with the support of additional
physiological measures (DEMO, eye movement parame-
ters, physiological parameters from the pupil, SCR,
Vorhold: The Neuronal Substrate of Risky Choice
reaction time measures). Further, even if participants
of these studies were considered “healthy,” this does
not mean that their brains are exactly matching. Vari-
ations are conceivable DEMO structure and function. Ad-
ditionally, personality traits (e.g., sensation seekers DEMO
sus harm avoiders) and constitution may differ, not
to mention gender differences that could lead to per-
formance discrepancies and hence should at DEMO be
controlled.
The Neural Substrate for Emotional, Social,
and Cognitive DEMO within Decision
Making under Risk
Sanfey20 sum up the advantages of the SMH in that
it offers a way of integrating emotional inﬂuences into DEMO
domain that predominantly would explain behavioral
strategies by traditional views within cognitive psychol-
ogy. He picks up some critical points regarding existing
studies. According DEMO Sanfey,20 the SMH fails to clearly
indicate how unconscious emotional processes interact
during decision making. The SMH does not offer a way
to DEMO in detail the emotional processes (e.g., fear,
anger) or DEMO somatic markers triggered by the IGT.
To better disentangle emotional and cognitive pro-
cesses in decision making, Sanfey et al.25 investigated
performances in another game known as the Ultima-
tum Game. In this game, two players have to split a
sum of money. One of the participants, the offerer,
proposes a split of the money and the other, the re-
sponder, can accept or reject this offer. If the offer
is rejected, neither participant is rewarded. Theories
based on rational choice predict that no offer should
ever be rejected by the responder. However, in all stud-
ies employing the game, responders readily reject low
offers.
People reject offers not because they lack knowledge
about how to play the game DEMO rather because they re-
act angrily to an offer perceived as unfair. These studies
provide evidence for the neural basis of decision mak-
ing DEMO risk, while suggesting an important role for
emotions, besides cognitive processes, in risky decision
making. Unfair offers elicit activity in the DLPFC and
ACC which relate to cognitive processes, but, more
interestingly, they also result in bilateral activity in the
anterior insula, an area related to emotion processing.
Moreover, activation in this emotional state processing
region correlated with subsequent decisions to reject or
accept an offer, showing stronger activation in subjects
that rejected more unfair offers. Hence, the authors
concluded that “neural representations of emotional
states guide human decision-making” and that “mod-
els of DEMO cannot afford to ignore emotion
45
as a vital and dynamic component of our decisions and
choices in the real world.”25
Further evidence that DEMO neural substrate for emo-
tional and social intelligence and cognitive intelli-
gence are different is provided by Bar-On et al.32
They compared patients with DEMO cognitive intel-
ligence and with an emotional intelligence lying be-
low average. The experimental group included three
kinds of patients with lesions in either DEMO ventrome-
dial cortex, the amygdala, or, alternatively, in the in-
sula/somatosensory cortex. Control subjects had le-
sions in the superior and/DEMO middle frontal gyri in the
right PFC, right precentral gyrus, and/or in the right
paracentral lobule with neither damage below the cor-
DEMO callosum nor an extension to the frontal pole. In
some subjects, DEMO middle temporal gyrus and the oc-
cipital cortex (without insula or DEMO cortex)
were affected too. Emotional intelligence was mea-
sured with the Bar-On EQ-I, which is a self-reported
measure of social and emotional behavior. It provides
an estimate of underlying emotional and social intelli-
gence.33
With DEMO IGT, the researchers investigated the sub-
jects’ ability to “exercise personal DEMO in deci-
sion making.” Social functioning was employed with
semi-structured interviews as well as rating scales that
provided a “Total Social Scale” score indicating DEMO ex-
tent of impairment (see Tranel et al.34 for more details)DEMO
Cognitive intelligence, perception, memory, and exec-
utive functioning were also DEMO and, as intended,
did not differ between the groups. Additionally, no sig-
niﬁcant correlation was found between cognitive and
emotional intelligence.
Both DEMO functioning and personal judgment in
decision making differed signiﬁcantly between the
groups. On the one hand, the authors’ assumption
that emotional and social intelligence as well as the
underlying neuronal system differ from cognitive in-
telligence DEMO its neural substrate is supported. On
the other hand, the results DEMO the neurological
substrate that mediates somatic state activation and
personal judgment within decision making found in
patient studies. These neural systems seem to over-
DEMO with those of social and emotional intelligence.
The authors sum up that
the processes of judgment and decision making depend
on neural systems for: (i) memory, which is supported by
high-order association cortices as well as the dorsolat-
eral sector of the prefrontal cortex; (ii) emotion, which is
mediated by subcortical limbic structures that trigger the
emotional response; and (iii) feelings which are supported
by limbic as well as closely associated regions such as the
insula, surrounding parietal cortices and the cingulate
46
cortex. (...) The VMPFC links these systems together;
(...). Impairment of these mechanisms (...) can have an
ill effect DEMO one’s ability to effectively cope with daily
demands. Such impairment may include a decrease in
one’s ability to: (...) (v) cope ﬂexibly with the immediate
situation, make decisions and solve problems of a personal
and interpersonal nature.32
The studies by Sanfey and Bar-On indicate that
ideas DEMO candidate areas can come from all
types of studies that investigate behavior that is based
on a variety of cognitive processes possibly intermin-
gled DEMO the behavior of interest. Examples are studies
exclusively investigating neural networks of emotions
or emotion processing35–37 or studies focusing on task
variations that only DEMO cognitive processes. Over-
all, fMRI does not unambiguously delineate areas re-
DEMO solely for one behavior of interest. In other
words, there is DEMO area exclusively active during risk
perception. Connections in the brain are complex, and
hypotheses regarding locations of activity from a spe-
ciﬁc task have to be discerned with the help of cognitive
models.
Ecological Decision Making
DEMO different origin for neuroscientiﬁc approaches re-
lated to a concept of risk comes from studies interested
in the neural circuits associated with ecological deci-
DEMO making. Neuroeconomical theories have been de-
veloped describing the neuronal substrate of behavior
by integrating normative approaches of emotion and
cognition with decision making. DEMO the quickly growing
ﬁeld of neuroeconomics, the overall goal is to DEMO a
better understanding of the cognitive processes of deci-
sion making and to draw conclusions for risky behavior
in everyday life.
Most classical economic DEMO assume that hu-
mans are rational decision makers that follow the rules
of probability without being inﬂuenced by emotions.
Given this assumption, mathematical models and the-
ories exist that predict and explain decision making.
Such models DEMO the most valuable tools ecologists
have had so far to analyse complex problems. How-
ever, these models often fail to consider biases in hu-
man decision making. They neglect that people might
use various, rather irrational, strategies (e.g., heuristic
routines) to overcome uncertainties in risky decision
DEMO As a consequence, the rational economists’
models, providing a normative description of behavior,
were supplemented with psychological and biological
assumptions. The purpose DEMO to account for less ra-
tional, more realistic, human behavior and to be able
to draw conclusions and generate hypotheses about be-
havior DEMO looking at the underlying neural processes.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
In the following section, the classical economical
view of peoples’ behavior is introduced and it is shown
how deﬁcits of such models DEMO to the formulation of
PT. After that, the neural implications of DEMO
nomic models are discussed.
From a Rational Economic View to the
Development of Prospect Theory
Bernoulli, a Swiss mathematician, observed in 1738
that DEMO do not evaluate options by their objec-
tive utilities to maximize their expected (net) wealth
but rather by some kind of personal utility DEMO
He assumed that within this personal utility system
one chooses the option with the highest expected util-
ity in each possible state, constructing a weighted av-
erage. The weights are probability estimates of each
state; hence, the expected utility is an expectation in
terms of probability theory. The Expected Utility The-
ory, introduced later by Neumann and Morgenstern,39
proved that any normal preference relation over a set
of states can be DEMO as expected utility. It is one of
the most traditional models and it describes decisions
under risk and uncertainty with the help of a DEMO
function. The function assumes a concave relationship
between wealth and utility. Nevertheless, this model
fails to explain certain paradoxes (e.g., the Ellsberg
paradox, the Allais paradox), and hence the model’s
descriptive value was questioned.40
A new theory introduced by Kahneman and Tver-
sky,41 PT, replaced the term “utility” with “value.” PT
predicts that preferences will depend on DEMO a prob-
lem is framed. Value is deﬁned in terms of gains and
losses, i.e., people do not make decisions based on the
DEMO level of net wealth. Gains and losses are eval-
uated relative to some kind of neutral reference point,
which may vary from situation DEMO situation. Moreover,
the value function for losses differs from that for gains
in that it is convex and steeper with its curve lying DEMO
low the horizontal axis.41 Unlike the Expected Utility
Theory, which concerns DEMO with how decisions un-
der uncertainty should be made, PT concerns DEMO with
how decisions are actually made. It is taking into account
some irrational tendencies or asymmetries, reﬂected
in so-called framing and editing procedures within hu-
man choices, by introducing a ﬂexible reference level
for the decision maker.
Neural Implications of Neuroeconomics
and Prospect Theory
In economic models, ﬁndings of research focus-
ing on “decision utility,” “expected utility,” and DEMO
come probability” (OP) can be distinguished. In PT,
decision utility is central. PT attempts to overcome
Vorhold: The Neuronal Substrate of Risky Choice
shortcomings of classical economical models by deﬁn-
ing subjective value functions with different assump-
tions about the DEMO for gains and losses. The im-
pact of high and low probabilities is characterized by
a weighting function. Additional major components of
PT are DEMO “value function,” which focuses on the neu-
ronal representations of values, the “weighting func-
tion,” which focuses on the neural processes involved
in the generation of such a value function, and “rep-
resentation.” The latter encompasses a presentation
of the neural processes underlying framing effects and
DEMO operations that help inform behavior.
Decision utility and expected utility predict
neuronal representations from anticipated and
experienced reward and punishment. Results from
neuroimaging studies DEMO that different brain
mechanisms in decision making could embody both
forms of utility. Signals related to reward, if experi-
enced or expected, have DEMO found in brain areas,
such as the striatum, DLPFC, OFC, posterior parietal
cortex, supplementary eye ﬁeld, and ACC and poste-
rior cingulate cortex (for a review see Ref. 42).
Regions involved in decision utility, which is an
estimate or anticipation of experienced utility dur-
ing decision making, should be recruited during re-
ward anticipation or when a subjective value of future
events is evaluated. The dopaminergic system is DEMO sys-
tem arising from the midbrain to various cortical and
subcortical areas. The system occupies a modulatory
neurotransmitter, dopamine, which seems to be DEMO
primary substrate for decision utility. Neurons within
this system heighten their ﬁring rate when unexpected
rewards or stimuli that predict future rewards are be-
DEMO processed (see Schultz43 for a review). Candidate
brain areas are DEMO ventral striatum, PFC, and the
amygdala. The ventral striatum is one of the target
regions of the dopaminergic system. It integrates sig-
nals DEMO from PFC, amygdala, and hippocampus,
and it seems to play a crucial role in the representa-
tion of anticipated rewards. It increases DEMO during
an exposure to a riskless stimulus (i.e., in a pure win
situation).44
The PFC may be further divided into the DLPFC
DEMO the VMPFC, which both play a role in decision
making under DEMO The importance of the DLPFC
and VMPFC was predominantly shown in the studies
investigating the impaired behavior of lesion patients
playing the IGT. Here, the DLPFC was important for
manipulating and/or maintaining cognitive represen-
tations DEMO working memory in order to better plan fu-
ture behavior. The VMPFC was more associated with
experienced than anticipated reward. However, as pa-
tients with lesions in that brain region fail to develop
47
anticipatory SCRs DEMO risky choices, a certain involve-
ment of the VMPFC in the DEMO of anticipa-
tory responses was presumed as well.12
The amygdala is involved in emotion and learning.
It is essential for the production of fear DEMO and
crucial for the learning of associations between emo-
tional stimuli and behavior (for review see Refs. 35–37).
Again, studies by the DEMO group provide evidence that
the amygdala is required to help build fearful anticipa-
tory SCRs to losses.4
Regions involved in expected utility, which im-
plies that an action has already resulted in a
reward or punishment, should show differential
activation during the experience of positive or neg-
ative DEMO Moreover, brain activity possibly varies
depending on the magnitude and valence DEMO the out-
come. Studies show activation related to such processes
in the striatum, the OFC, the VMPFC, and in the
amygdala.
The striatum can be divided into its dorsal and ven-
tral parts, and each part receives inputs from different
structures. The ventral striatum is thought to DEMO input
from amygdala, hippocampus, and VMPFC, whereas
the dorsal part DEMO the striatum receives signals from the
dorsal and lateral PFCs. This suggests different roles
for dorsal and lateral areas in risky decision making.
The DEMO part, which includes nucleus accumbens
and ventral putamen, is active during reward anticipa-
tion and experience. The dorsal part of the striatum,
DEMO, caudate nucleus and dorsal putamen, is central in
the processing of experienced reward magnitude and
valence.44–47
The VMPFC shows signal changes during reward
DEMO not so much during loss. Gambling tasks show
that it plays a role in the choice between desirable
stimuli. Patient studies suggest involvement in DEMO
ior of executive control rather than in representing
value per se. The ACC seems sensitive to perception
of negative outcomes, which is presumably inﬂuenced
by the dopaminergic activity within this region.44 The
amygdala, however, seems DEMO be speciﬁcally involved in
the representation of negative outcomes, as previously
DEMO by Bechara et al.4
In PT, the same brain process could DEMO responsible
for representing the value of gains and losses as the
shape of the value function is assumed to be equal in-
dependently of DEMO direction of the actual outcome. So
far, separate systems for the DEMO of reward
magnitude and the valence of an outcome were mostly
suggested by neuroscientiﬁc data (see review by Lee42).
There is also evidence that there are brain regions,
like the striatum, that are involved in the processing of
outcome valences as well as reward magnitude.45–47
48
In a situation that offers both potential gains and
losses, PT assumes that the value function is steeper
for losses than for gains, implying risk or loss aversion.
Again, the ventral striatum may play an important role
in signal integration of gain and loss representations. It
has DEMO to representations of positive and negative
outcome values as it receives input from the amygdala,
hippocampus, and PFC. As described in detail above,
it has been shown in studies with patients suffering
from lesions DEMO the amygdala and/or in the VMPFC
that these regions are essential for building up and
“holding/keeping” a risk aversion. Nevertheless, it was
also shown that, with task variations, the deﬁcits are
more or DEMO present in particular patients. The role
of the OFC was discussed as the region important for
learning reward associations, suggesting that this, and
DEMO loss aversion, could be the mechanism responsible
for the deﬁcits found DEMO patients.
The neural representations of OP are mostly de-
scribed with the help of animal studies (see review by
Trepel et al.44). When animals make choices between
stimuli that promise different probable rewards, it was
found that neurons in the lateral intraparietal area in-
crease ﬁring rates DEMO growing probability of a positive
outcome. Moreover, reward probability may also DEMO re-
ﬂected by the dopaminergic system, which was found
to respond DEMO varying ﬁring rates in dependence of
reward probabilities in human midbrains (DEMO cen-
tral for dopamine reception) and monkeys.48,49 Great-
est dopaminergic DEMO was found during the condi-
tions of highest uncertainty. This again speaks for the
assumption that the dopaminergic system codes for the
degree of DEMO associated with a decision.44
In accord with PT, the most important DEMO of OP
is that high probabilities are underweighted while low
probabilities are overweighted. The result is a charac-
teristic curve of a weighting function DEMO stands for an
overall willingness to entertain risk. The shape of the
curve could emerge from diminishing sensitivity and
also from emotional aspects within DEMO decision mak-
ing. For example, underweighting high probabilities
might reﬂect fear DEMO overweighting low probabilities
might reﬂect hope. Trepel et al.44 hypothesize that fear
could be represented by amygdala activation and hope
would be reﬂected in DEMO of the ventral striatum.
Additionally, they hypothesized that an impulsive ac-
DEMO of gambles, as found in some patients, would
result in an increase in weighting function elevation.
Hence, the individual differences in the elevation of a
weighting function could be related to differences in
the dopaminergic DEMO as well as the serotonergic (5-
HT) system, as both DEMO been shown to be associated
with individual levels of impulsivity.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
Framing and editing operations are hypothesized
DEMO PT to be responsible for guiding decision mak-
ing via shaping of representations of the prospects.
In dual-process models of judgment and choice, re-
searchers distinguish between two processing routes
that can inﬂuence judgment and decision DEMO The
one route would be spontaneous, associative, and affec-
tive and would, for example, use availability and/or af-
fect heuristics to DEMO choices. The other route would
be rule based, cognitive, and reﬂected through domi-
nance in choice and/or higher order reasoning in de-
DEMO making.
Assuming a dual route within PT for the genera-
tion of judgment and choice might also contribute to
the understanding of underlying brain DEMO Passive
framing and probability weighting may be processes
belonging to the ﬁrst system, which relies on limbic and
basal ganglia regions. More controlled active framing
and editing operations may reﬂect changes within the
second system, incorporating regions of the lateral and
dorsomedial PFCs.50
The neural substrate of framing DEMO becomes ev-
ident in studies focusing on reward perception in de-
pendence of the reward context. It was shown that the
ventral striatum and DEMO VMPFC responded to out-
comes more when the respective outcome was viewed
as a gain or when it was presented in a gains-only
gamble.45 DEMO processes involve controlled refor-
mulations of prospects and hence should recruit mem-
ory and executive control processes, thereby relying
on the DLPFC. Moreover, DEMO requires inhibition
of fast automatic (and hence route one driven) re-
sponses, which is known to take place in the right
lateral PFC and with the help of the dopaminergic
system. Studies strengthen this assumption DEMO showing
that patients with lesions in the VMPFC fail to inhibit
responses.
There is growing evidence regarding the neural rep-
resentation of risky decision DEMO Models like the
PT try to absorb the losses of pure rational economic
models by introducing more ﬂexible explanations for
risk-seeking or risk-adverse behavior. DEMO, fur-
ther work is needed to disentangle the exact contribu-
tions DEMO the different aspects hypothesized by PT that
are shaping the choices. Especially, the framing and
editing effects have to be investigated in some more de-
tail as well as the exact cognitive and affective processes
that DEMO to the perception of an overall probability
weight. So far, only DEMO or indirect knowledge
gained through animal or patient studies are available.
Moreover, it is unclear how people are thought to be-
have if the probabilities are unknown, i.e., if they are
making uncertain decisions.
Vorhold: The Neuronal Substrate of Risky Choice
As discussed above, fMRI DEMO only answer these
questions with many subsequent studies. PT may be
too complex a model to allow investigating neural
representation of risky decision making DEMO one fMRI
experiment. Meaningful tasks have to be found that
allow such designs. Those tasks have to be repeated
in a block-wise manner to DEMO for shorter cogni-
tive events than those lasting 2–8 s. Risky decisions are
among such cognitive events. As a consequence, we
need to average the brain signal over many trials. In
such studies, outcome depends on the rate with which
stimuli are presented because a certain amount of DEMO
stimulus type is required to get a sensitive measure
of one condition. If neural activity underlying certain
stimuli is compared, the same should only differ in the
exact matter of interest (as we build differential con-
trasts for comparisons), i.e., stimuli need to be matched.
Without a control task (i.e., comparing activation to a
resting state), fMRI DEMO are even harder to interpret.
It is probably most challenging to ﬁnd a suitable
control condition that exclusively differs from the ex-
perimental task DEMO one single aspect, i.e., the effect
of interest. Unfortunately, the DEMO to date are not
constructed in that way. They usually describe a phe-
nomenon and not how to control for it in an experi-
DEMO
Neuroeconomical Studies Focusing on Social
Decision Making and Evaluative Judgment
Decisions made during social interaction, or when
the outcome depends on the behavior of another per-
son, are different from decisions made in isolation.
Brain areas important in individual decision making
are relevant in interactive decision making, too. Sig-
nal changes from interactive decision making in a trust
game were DEMO in the nucleus caudate.51 Here, acti-
vation changed systematically depending on DEMO
the player perceived an opponent’s response as malevo-
lent, neutral, or benevolent. As described in more detail
above,25 the activation in the DEMO insula changes
when an opponent’s offer in the Ultimate Game is
perceived as unfair. Brain activation in the anterior in-
sula, ACC, and DEMO also changes depending on
whether or not subjects believe they are playing with a
real partner or a computer. This indicates that aspects,
DEMO than reward, can bias decisions.25,52
Other decision-making strategies are learned
DEMO past experiences. People, when recruiting
experiences to generate an evaluation of DEMO
alternatives in a game, may update their own value
functions or DEMO their beliefs about other play-
ers’ behavior.51,53,54 There is little literature provid-
ing evidence for the neural substrate of interactive
49
reinforcement DEMO (in the sense of revising utili-
ties of certain choices of DEMO self and others in order
to perform better). Bhatt55 investigated players’ beliefs
about their own and other players’ beliefs and choices.
Earnings from DEMO and accurate beliefs correlated
negatively with activity in the insula and positively with
ventral striatum activity. The same brain mechanisms
could also contribute to DEMO risk, as people can
come to different conclusions about the hazard DEMO a
certain risk resulting from learned experiences and be-
liefs. So far, there are not many studies investigating
interactive risky decision making.
Evaluative judgment (when the decision maker has
to evaluate alternatives before making a choice) plays
a central role within everyday decision making. How-
ever, judgment DEMO decision making depend on the
same neural systems. Evaluative judgment can and
should be investigated separately because judgments,
for example in connection with DEMO expression, are
not restricted to decision making.
The neuronal basis for DEMO judgment was
explicitly investigated by Zysset et al.56 They deﬁne
judgment as “the assessment of an external or inter-
nal stimulus on an internal DEMO Thus, evaluative
judgments represent a special type of judgment. Like
memory DEMO tasks, evaluative judgments also de-
pend on previously acquired knowledge and DEMO
enced events and these are closely related to a person’s
value system. Which internal scale an event is related
to is, therefore, self DEMO
In the study by Zysset and co-workers,56 the evalua-
tive process was isolated by comparing brain activation
during evaluative judgment with brain activation DEMO
ing episodic and semantic memory retrieval. Anterior
frontomedian cortex, inferior precuneus, and left in-
ferior PFC were found as the underlying substrate for
DEMO judgments. The anterior frontomedian cor-
tex activation reﬂects metacontrol processes, and DEMO
activation of the inferior precuneus reﬂects episodic
memory retrieval during evaluative judgments. The
inferior frontal gyrus shows signal increase when peo-
ple are selecting DEMO among alternatives dur-
ing an evaluative judgment. Furthermore, the results
suggest DEMO functional interdependence of the anterior
frontomedian and the median parietal cortex, DEMO the
former being more activated by processes incorporat-
ing self-referential processes as well as self-initiation
of subsequent cognitive processes. The latter (inferior
precuneus) DEMO thought to be more activated by processes
incorporating episodic retrieval.
That aspects within evaluative judgment, for exam-
ple if it is performed explicitly or implicitly, involve
different neural networks is highlighted in a study by
50
Cunningham et al.57 The authors found that, de-
pendent on whether the task is explicit or implicit,
different brain regions are important. DEMO example,
right OFC and temporal pole were associated with
emotional intensity only during explicit evaluation.
Inferior frontal/insular cortex activation correlated
signiﬁcantly with DEMO valence not with emotion
intensity. Nevertheless, activity in some areas was
DEMO to be task independent, suggesting some sort
of automatic implicit processing DEMO these areas. Ac-
tivity in the amygdala correlated with emotional in-
tensity, and activity in the right insula and the ACC
correlated with valence in both tasks. A study by
Vorhold et al.58 provides evidence that, during an ex-
plicit risk rating task, the medial PFC, the DEMO
frontal gyrus, the cerebellum, and the amygdala are all
activated.
Altogether, it is important to note that evaluative
judgment is, like decision DEMO, not a single process.
It varies, for example, in the DEMO to which it is im-
plicit (automatic, unconscious) or explicit (controlled,
conscious). As a consequence, different brain mecha-
nisms should also subserve different aspects within an
evaluation judgment like emotional intensity, valence,
memory recruitment, and the self-initiated processes
to change and/or control an initial behavior. Usually,
judgment features are not modelled or deﬁned DEMO
rately but are rather subsumed under decision-making
properties.
Northoff et al.59 try to disentangle the contributions
of cognitive and affective components within decision
making. DEMO, these components are be-
lieved to be reﬂected in affective judgment DEMO
of a reaction to emotional stimulation and an evalu-
ation requiring rational categorizations. Subsequently,
affective judgment may inﬂuence decision making. It
was found DEMO healthy subjects that the brain signal
in the VMPFC when performing affective judgments
(with and without a preceding expectancy period) cor-
related with DEMO subsequent performance in the IGT.
This can be seen as evidence that VMPFC activity
during affective judgment is crucial for beneﬁcial deci-
sion making. DEMO the VMPFC holds the key role in
the complex interplay between affective judgment and
successful decision making.
Further, ideas for an explanation of the exact rela-
tionship between judgment and decision making are
discussed.59 Judging risk DEMO an ability needed and used
frequently within everyday life. Judgments occur even
without direct decision making. It seems indispensable
to consider the neural substrates DEMO all of the displayed
mechanisms when generating ideas about candidate
regions active in risk perception.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
Taken DEMO, theories assuming solely rational be-
havior cannot account for complex real-life DEMO
making. It is becoming clearer that affect plays an im-
portant role in risky choice.60 Models of emotion-based
choices can help to enrich these DEMO theories. Join-
ing different ideas, models, or even disciplines together
helps to draw conclusions about underlying neuronal
processes in more complex real-life behavior. DEMO per-
ception, risky decision making, and risk judgments are
such complex behaviors. fMRI can contribute to the
understanding of the underlying neuronal substrate DEMO
risky choice. Despite this, some important restrictions
have been outlined above DEMO have to be considered
when using fMRI to interpret these phenomena.
Conﬂicts of Interest
The author declares no conﬂicts of interest.
References
1. BEAR, M.F., B.W. CONNORS &M.A.PARADISO. 2007.
NEUROSCIENCE. Exploring the Brain, 3rd ed. Lippin-
cott Williams & Wilkins. Philadelphia, PA.
2. RAEYMAEKERS,P., K. DEMO &M.SLOB (Eds.) April 2004.
Connecting Brains and Society. The present DEMO future
of brain science: what is possible, what is desirable? DEMO
pean Workshop, 22 and 23. Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proceedings and Synthesis report.
3. GLIMCHER,P.W.&A. RUSTICHINI. 2004. Neuroeconomics:
the consilience of DEMO and decision. Science 306: 447–
452.
4. BECHARA,A.,H.DAMASIO,A.R.DAMASIO &G.P.LEE. 1999.
Different contributions of the human amygdala and ven-
tromedial prefrontal DEMO to decision-making. J. Neu-
rosci. 19: 5473–5481.
5. BECHARA,A., D. TRANEL &H.DAMASIO. 2000. Charac-
terization of the decision-making deﬁcit of patients with
ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions. Brain 123: 2189–
2202.
6. BECHARA A.,H.DAMASIO &A.R.DAMASIO. 2000. Emotion,
decision making and the orbitofrontal cortex. Cerebral
Cortex 10: 295–307.
7. BECHARA, A. 1998. Dissociation of working memory from
DEMO making within the human prefrontal cortex. J.
Neurosci. 18: 428–437.
8. DEMO, A., A.R. DAMASIO,H.DAMASIO &S.W.ANDER-
SON. 1994. Insensitivity to future DEMO following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition 50: 7–15.
9. BECHARA,DEMO, H. DAMASIO &A.R.DAMASIO. 2003. Role
of the amygdala in decision-making. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.
985: 356–369.
10. BECHARA,A., H. DAMASIO,D.TRANEL &A.R.DAMASIO.
1997. Deciding advantageously before knowing the ad-
vantageous strategy. Science 275: 1293–1295.
Vorhold: The Neuronal Substrate of Risky Choice
11. BECHARA,A., H. DEMO,D.TRANEL &A.R.DAMASIO.
2005. The Iowa Gambling Task and the somatic marker
DEMO: some questions and answers. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 9: 159–162
12. BECHARA, A. 1996. Failure to respond autonomically to an-
ticipated future outcomes following damage to prefrontal
cortex. Cereb. Cortex. 6: 215–225.
13. ANDERSON, S.W., J. BARRASH,A.BECHARA &D.TRANEL.
2006. Impairments of emotion and real-world complex
behavior following childhood- or adult-onset damage to
ventromedial prefrontal cortex. J. Int. Neuropsychol. DEMO
12: 224–235.
14. DAMASIO, A.R., Ed. 1994. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Rea-
son, and the Human Brain. Putnam. New York.
15. ROGERS, R.D., A.M. OWEN,H.C.MIDDLETON, et al. 1999.
Choosing between small, likely rewards and large, unlikely
rewards activates inferior and orbital prefrontal cortex. J.
Neurosci. 19: 9029–9038.
16. MANES, F. 2002. Decision-making processes following dam-
DEMO to the prefrontal cortex. Brain 125: 624–639.
17. BRETT, M. 2001. Spatial normalization of brain images with
focal lesions using cost function masking. DEMO 14:
486–500.
18. MADDOCK, R.J. 1999. The retrosplenial cortex and DEMO:
new insights from functional neuroimaging of the human
brain. Trends Neurosci. 22: 310–316.
19. DAMASIO, A.R., T.J. GRABOWSKI,A.BECHARA, et al.
DEMO Subcortical and cortical brain activity during the
feeling of self-generated emotions. Nat. Neurosci. 3:
1049–1056.
20. SANFEY, A.G. 2004. Is knowing always feeling? Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 101: 16709–16710.
21. DUNN, B.D., DEMO DALGLEISH &A.D.LAWRENCE. 2006. The
somatic marker hypothesis: a critical evaluation. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 30: 239–271.
22. MAIA, T.V. 2004. A re-examination of DEMO evidence for the
somatic marker hypothesis: What participants really know
in DEMO Iowa gambling task. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
101: 16075–16080.
23. DEMO, O.H., C.E. EVANS,A.BUNCE, et al. 2005.
Emotion-based learning and DEMO executive resources:
an investigation of intuition and the Iowa Gambling Task.
Brain Cogn. 57: 244–247.
24. HINSON, J.M., T.L. JAMESON &P.WHITNEY. DEMO Somatic
markers, working memory, and decision making. Cogn.
Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 2: 341–353.
25. SANFEY, A.G., J.K. RILLING,J.A.ARONSON, et al. DEMO The
neural basis of economic decision-making in the Ultima-
tum Game. Science 300: 1755–1758.
26. ROLLS, E.T., J. HORNAK,D.WADE &J.MCGRATH. 1994.
DEMO learning in patients with social and emo-
tional changes associated with frontal lobe damage. J. Neu-
rol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 57: 1518–1524.
27. CLARK, DEMO 2004. The neuropsychology of ventral pre-
frontal cortex: decision-making and reversal DEMO
Brain Cogn. 55: 41–53.
28. HORNAK,J., J. O’DOHERTY,J.BRAMHAM, DEMO al. 2004.
Reward-related reversal learning after surgical excisions
in orbito-frontal or dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in hu-
mans. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16: 463–478.
51
29. BARRASH J., D. TRANEL &S.W.ANDERSON. 2000. Acquired
personality disturbances associated with DEMO damage
to the ventromedial prefrontal region. Dev. Neuropsychol.
18: 355–381.
30. DEMO,M., K. BOLLA,M.MOURATIDIS, et al. 2002.
Decision-making in a risk-taking task: a PET study. Neu-
ropsychopharmacology 26: 682–691.
31. FUKUI,H., T. MURAI,H.FUKUYAMA, et al. 2005. Functional
activity related to risk anticipation during performance of
the Iowa Gambling Task. Neuroimage 24: 253–259.
32. BAR-ON,R., D. TRANEL,N.L.DENBURG &A.BECHARA.
2003. Exploring the neurological substrate of DEMO
and social intelligence. Brain 126: 1790–1800.
33. BAR-ON, R. 1997. The Bar-On Emotional Quotient Inven-
tory (EQ-I): a test of emotional intelligence. Multi-Health
Systems. Toronto, Canada.
34. TRANEL,D.,A.BECHARA &N.L.DENBURG. 2002. Asymmet-
DEMO functional roles of right and left ventromedial prefrontal
cortices in social conduct, decision-making, and emotional
processing. Cortex 38: 589–612.
35. LEDOUX, J.E. DEMO Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 23: 155–184.
36. DEMO, K.L., S.F. TAYLOR,R.C.WELSH, et al. 2003. Activa-
tion of DEMO medial prefrontal cortex and extended amyg-
dala by individual ratings of emotional arousal: a fMRI
study. Biol. Psychiatry 53: 211–215.
37. PHAN, K.L., T.D. WAGER,S.F.TAYLOR &I.LIBERZON.
2004. Functional neuroimaging studies of human emo-
DEMO CNS Spectr. 9: 258–266.
38. BERNOULLI, D. 1738. Specimen theoriae novae de mensura
sortis. In: Comentarii academiae seientiarum imperialis
Petropolitanae, 5, 1730/31, 175–192; Translation: Som-
mer, L. (1954). Exposition of a New Theory on the Mea-
surement of Risk. Econometrica 22: 23–26.
39. NEUMANN,J.V.&O. MORGENSTERN. 1944. Theory of
Games and Economic Behavior, 2nd ed. Princeton. 1947.
(German Translation: Spieltheorie und wirtschaftliches
Verhalten, Wrzburg 1961.)
40. ALLAIS, M. 1953. Le comportement de l’homme rationel de-
vant le risque, critique des postulates et axiomes de l’ecole
americaine. Economerica 21: 503–546.
41. KAHNEMAN,D.&A. TVERSKY. 1979. Prospect theory: an
DEMO of decision under risk. Econometrica 47: 263–
291.
42. LEE, D. 2006. Neural basis of quasi-rational decision making.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 16: 191–198.
43. SCHULTZ, W. 1998. Predictive reward signal of dopamine
neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 80: 1–27.
44. TREPEL,C., C.R. FOX &R.A.POLDRACK. 2005. Prospect
theory on the brain? Toward a cognitive neuroscience of
decision under risk. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 23: 34–
50.
45. BREITER, H.C., I. AHARON,D.KAHNEMAN, et al. 2001. Func-
tional imaging of neural responses to expectancy and ex-
perience of monetary gains and losses. Neuron 30: 619–
639.
46. KNUTSON,B., C.M. ADAMS,G.W.FONG &D.HOMMER.
2001. Anticipation of DEMO monetary reward selec-
tively recruits nucleus accumbens. J. Neurosci. 21: 1–5.
DEMO
52
47. KNUTSON,B., G.W. FONG,C.M.ADAMS, et al. 2001. Dis-
DEMO of reward anticipation and outcome with event-
related fMRI. Neuroreport 12: DEMO
48. ARON AR, SHOHAMY D, CLARK J, et al. 2004. DEMO mid-
brain sensitivity to cognitive feedback and uncertainty
during classiﬁcation learning. J. Neurophysiol. 92: 1144–
1152.
49. FIORILLO, C.D., P.N. TOBLER &W.SCHULTZ. DEMO Discrete
coding of reward probability and uncertainty by dopamine
neurons. Science 299: 1898–1902.
50. MILLER,E.K.&J.D. COHEN. 2001. An integrative theory
of prefrontal cortex function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24:
67–202.
51. KING-CASAS,B., D. TOMLIN,C.ANEN, et al. 2005. Getting to
know you: reputation and DEMO in a two-person economic
exchange. Science 308: 78–83.
52. RILLING, J.K., A.G. SANFEY,J.A.ARONSON, et al. 2004. The
neural correlates of theory DEMO mind within interpersonal
interactions. Neuroimage 22: 1694–703.
53. CAMERER,C.&T.-H.HO. DEMO Experience-weighted at-
traction learning in normal form games. Econometrica
67: 827–874.
DEMO of the New York Academy of Sciences
54. CAMERER, C.F. 2003. DEMO and economics. Strategiz-
ing in the brain. Science 300: 1673–1675.
55. DEMO, M. 2005. Self-referential thinking and equilibrium
as states of mind in DEMO: fMRI evidence. Games Econ.
Behav. 52: 424–459.
56. ZYSSET,S., DEMO HUBER,E.FERSTL &D.Y. VON CRAMON.
2002. The anterior frontomedian cortex and DEMO
judgment: an fMRI study. Neuroimage 15: 983–991.
57. CUNNINGHAM, W.A., C.L. RAYE &M.K.JOHNSON. 2004.
Neural correlates of evaluation associated with promotion
and prevention regulatory focus. Cogn Affect Behav. Neu-
rosci. 5: 202–211.
58. VORHOLD,V., C. GIESSING,P.M.WIEDEMANN, et al. 2007.
The neural basis of DEMO ratings: Evidence from a func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) DEMO Neu-
ropsychologia 45: 3242–3250.
59. NORTHOFF,G., S. GRIMM,H.BOEKER, DEMO al. 2006. Affective
judgment and beneﬁcial decision making: ventromedial
prefrontal activity DEMO with performance in the Iowa
Gambling Task. Hum. Brain Mapp. 27: DEMO
60. LOEWENSTEIN, G.F., C.K. HSEE,E.U.WEBER &N.WELCH.
2001. Risk as DEMO Psychol. Bull. 127: 267–286.{1g42fwefx}