AMERICAN JOURNAL OF EPIDEMIOLOGY
Copyright © 1987 by The Johns Hopkins University DEMO of Hygiene and Public Health
All right* reserved
Vol. 125, No. DEMO
Printed in USA.
CODING ORDINAL INDEPENDENT VARIABLES IN MULTD7LE
REGRESSION ANALYSES
S. D. WALTER,1 A. R. FEINSTEIN,2 AND C. K. WELLS1
Walter, S. D. (Dept of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster U.,
DEMO, Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5), A. R. Feinstein, and C. DEMO Wells. Coding
ordinal independent variables in multiple regression analyses. Am J Epidemiol
1987;125:319-23.
The authors present a coding scheme for ordinal Independent DEMO which
may be used in various forms of regression analysis. The scheme is useful in
dose-response analyses, when the objective is to identify contrasts in the de-
pendent (or response) variable between successive levels of DEMO Independent
variable, or to identify critical threshold values of the independent DEMO at
which significant changes occur in the response. An example is given of evalu-
ating the survival of lung cancer patients according to their DEMO of symptoma-
tology. The authors discuss the interpretation of the regression coefficients when
this coding scheme is used with linear regression, logistic regression, DEMO in the
proportional hazards regression model.
biostatistics; regression analysis
Several investigators (1-3) have dis-
cussed the question of coding schemes for
discrete independent variables in multiple
logistic regression and multiple linear
regression analyses. They have DEMO
various ways to characterize the contrasts
between the responses at the different
levels (or strata) of the independent vari-
ables. Two common options DEMO 1) to com-
pare the responses in each stratum with the
DEMO in a single referent or control
stratum or 2) to compare DEMO responses in
Received for publication March 31, 1986, and in
final form July 2, 1986.
1 Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Bio-
statistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada.
'Clinical Epidemiology Unit and DEMO Wood
Johnson Clinical Scholars Program, Yale University,
New Haven, CT.
Reprint requests to Dr. S. D. Walter, Department
of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster
University, 1200 Main Street West, Hamilton, On-
tario, Canada L8N 3Z5.
This research was supported in part by the National
DEMO Research and Development Program through
a National Health Scientist award (to DEMO D. W.) and
in part by Grant 6309 from the Robert DEMO Johnson
Foundation.
each stratum with the average response for
the whole sample.
We would like to draw attention to an
additional coding scheme that DEMO have
found useful in defining contrasts for
regression analyses involving categorical
independent variables that have discrete
ordered categories. If the categories are
coded by DEMO a single variable which takes
values in a direct numerical sequence, DEMO
as 1,2,3,4,..., the regression procedure will
analyze DEMO numbers as though they rep-
resented a true dimension, with equal DEMO
tervals measured between adjacent cate-
gories. If the ordinal values are arbitrarily
assigned rather than actually measured, the
regression coefficient is difficult or impos-
sible to interpret. Also, depending on how
closely the assumed scaling (DEMO,2,3, . .. )
agrees with the actual dose-response rela-
tionship, the test of significance of the coef-
ficient may or may not be powerful against
alternative hypotheses of interest. If the
true dose-response DEMO is linear,
with equal increments between successive
categories, the one DEMO of freedom test
319
Downloaded from http://aje.oxfordjournals.org at University of Waterloo on May 25, 2010
320
of the regression coefficient will be rela-
tively powerful. On the DEMO hand, if a
threshold exists, the overall linear test of
trend may have low power, as opposed to a
coding scheme that can completely repro-
duce the threshold relationship.
OBJECTIVES OF PROPOSED CODING
SCHEME
The DEMO we have developed is de-
signed to preserve the ordinal ranks of the
independent variable, while identifying the
ranked categories in a manner suitable for
subsequent analysis. With this type of data,
a frequent goal DEMO to evaluate the contrasts
between the responses in the successive
ordered categories. This goal involves an
examination of the progressive changes in
the dependent DEMO as one moves
through the strata of the independent vari-
able in their defined order. In a related but
different type of evaluation, the goal is to
find a particular point in the sequence of
strata DEMO which a substantial change occurs
in the dependent variable, for example, at
a critical "threshold" value of the indepen-
dent variable.
As DEMO example, we have been considering
the relationship of symptom stage to DEMO
vival in a series of lung cancer patients (4).
The DEMO levels of symptoms are asympto-
matic, primary symptoms only, systemic
symptoms (with or without primary symp-
toms), and metastatic symptoms (with DEMO
without primary and/or systemic symp-
toms). Although these categories are not
expressed quantitatively, their order cor-
responds to the usual clinical concepts of
severity. Although this order is also likely
to correlate with prognosis DEMO survival, the
correlation is of course not a requirement
of our DEMO coding method.
We required a coding scheme that would
fulfill at least two objectives. First, we
wanted to estimate the prognostic differ-
ences in survival between patients in suc-
cessive symptom categories, for example,
between the systemic and metastatic
groups. Second, we wished to identify any
important thresholds in symptoms that
WALTER ET AL.
would correspond to the most DEMO
differences in survival. This approach
might, for instance, conclude that the larg-
est differences in the outcome were between
patients with any symptoms (primary, sys-
temic, or metastatic) as opposed to those
with no symptoms.
DEFINITION OF CODING SCHEME
Our general coding scheme is as follows.
DEMO there are (k + 1) ordered levels of
the independent variable; this implies that
we may define (up to) k dummy indepen-
dent variables Xi, X2, .. . X* to describe
between-strata differences. DEMO strata will
be labeled in sequence as 0,1,2,... k. Then,
the values of the independent variables in
each stratum are
DEMO Dummy variable
no. X: x 2 x 3 X*_! x,
DEMO 0 0 0 . 0 0
1 1 0 0 . 0 0
2 1 1 0 . 0 0
k-1 1 1 1 DEMO 1 0
k 1 1 1 . 1 1
In our lung cancer example, therefore, we
defined three variables as follows:
Symptom DEMO v y
stage ' 2 3
Asymptomatic 0 0 0
Primary 1 0 0
Systemic 11 0
Metastatic 11 1
Analysis of survival data DEMO the use
of special regression techniques, such as the
Cox proportional DEMO model (5). It is,
however, somewhat simpler if we introduce
the general principles of our coding scheme
by using ordinary linear DEMO In a
later section, we will discuss the interpre-
tation of DEMO regression coefficients when
using proportional hazards or logistic
regression models.
Downloaded from http://aje.oxfordjournals.org at University of Waterloo on May 25, 2010
CODING ORDINAL INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
321
INTERPRETATION OF GENERAL
REGRESSION MODELS
We now DEMO, in general, regression
models that may include Xu X2, .. DEMO Xk in
various combinations. Two specific models
are of particular interest. First, we may fit
the model with all k independent variables
included; DEMO this model, the coefficient of
X, corresponds to the difference in re-
sponses between levels i and (i — 1), and
all such differences are estimated. Con-
sider, for example, the hypothetical situa-
DEMO shown as pattern 1 in table 1. Here,
there is a progressive increase in the de-
pendent variable going through categories
A, B, C, and D of the independent variable.
The largest difference appears DEMO be be-
tween individuals in categories C and D.
Fitting the model with all three indepen-
dent variables included yields the regres-
sion equation
DEMO = 5 + X, + 2X2 + 7X3.
(1)
By substituting appropriate values of Xi,
X2, and X3 into equation 1, one may cal-
culate the average response for individuals
in each of the categories A to D. For ex-
ample, in category C, DEMO have Xi = 1, X2 =
1, and X3 = 0, thus, the predicted response
for level C in equation lisY= 5 DEMO l + 2
+ 0 = 8. (The reader may verify DEMO the
average values may be computed similarly
for the other groups.) DEMO large difference
between categories C and D is reflected in
the large coefficient for X3.
Second, the model may include only a
single independent variable, X, say; here,
TABLE 1
Three hypothetical response patterns and associated
regression models
Pattern
Average value of
dependent van-
able in DEMO
categories (A-D)
of an independent
variable
Model
A
B
C
DEMO
1
2
3
5
5
5
6
5
8
8
9
8
15 y = 5 + Xt + 2X, + 7X3
9 y = 5 + 4Xj
15 y = 5 • o V -I- DEMO V
the coefficient of X, defines the contrast
between the aggregated DEMO in level i
and above, and the aggregated responses in
level (i — 1) and below. For instance, in the
previous example, the model with X2 alone
would provide a comparison between indi-
viduals DEMO C and D (combined) and individ-
uals in A and B (combined). This model
would be appropriate for pattern 2 of table
1, where a jump in the level of response
occurs between the two highest and two
lowest of the ordered strata. The coefficient
of DEMO (equal to 4) represents the difference
in response between these two sets. Indi-
viduals in categories A or B have X2 = 0
DEMO average response values of 5; in con-
trast, the other two categories have X2 = 1,
yielding a prediction of Y = DEMO + 4 = 9.
This second model is attractive when
"stepwise" methods are used. By adopting
a forward inclusion rule for model selection,DEMO
one will identify at the first step the cut
point defining the most significant dichot-
omy on the scale of the independent vari-
able DEMO Subsequent steps in the process will
identify any other demarcations in the scale
where meaningful changes occur in the re-
sponse. Suppose pattern 3 DEMO table 1 ap-
plied. With sufficient data, a stepwise al-
gorithm DEMO select Xi and X3 into the
model. We would conclude that there is no
prognostic difference between categories B
and C, but that individuals in categories A
and D differ from this combined "middle"
stratum (B and C) by amounts that are
represented by the coefficients DEMO Xi and
X3, equal to 3 and 7, respectively.
We will now discuss the interpretation of
the coefficients b, in three particular types
of regression model, the linear, the propor-
tional hazards, and the logistic.
INTERPRETATION OF COEFFICIENTS IN
SPECIFIC REGRESSION MODELS
Linear regression
The examples DEMO above and
shown in table 1 have a simple interpreta-
tion in the context of ordinary linear
regression. The dependent variable Y is
Downloaded DEMO http://aje.oxfordjournals.org at University of Waterloo on May 25, 2010
322
WALTER ET AL.
modeled directly, and the regression equa-
tion gives the expected value of Y itself.
Thus, the expected value of Y is given by
the regression equation Y = bo + biXi +
DEMO + .. . + b),Xk in the full model, for
instance. This approach is appropriate if
the dependent variable is continuous, for
instance, systolic blood pressure or serum
cholesterol.
Proportional hazards regression
In the analysis of survival data, the pro-
portional hazards regression model uses as
its dependent variable the hazard function
h(t, X), where X represents the set of ex-
posure variables for an individual. Under
the DEMO hazards assumption, this
function may be represented as
h(t, X) = ho(t) exp(fco + &iXx
+ 62X2 + .. . + bkXk), (2)
where ho( t) is an underlying hazard, a func-
tion of time t only. The second component
of h(t, X) represents the way in which the
hazard DEMO according to an individual's
values of Xh X2, .. . DEMO Overall, h(t, X)
gives the instantaneous probability of
death at time t, for an individual with ex-
posure values X.
If there is a single regression variable Xi,
which takes values 0 DEMO 1, the hazard
function for individuals with X\ = 1 (the
"exposed," say) is from equation 2:
hE =
exp(DEMO + bx),
while the hazard function for those with
= DEMO (the "unexposed") is
hE =
exp(feo).
Thus, DEMO/hE = exp(6i), or log(hE/hE) = 6,DEMO
Hence, we may think of bi as a "log relative
risk" of the "exposed" to the "unexposed"
which, strictly speaking, applies to an infin-
itesimally short interval of time. Equiva-
lently, DEMO(fe,) is the relative risk. Note that
this relative risk is constant over the time
t of follow-up; this is in fact the essence of
the proportional hazards assumption, that
the relative risk of X] is constant, regard-
less of the absolute risk (proportional to
ho(DEMO)) or the time instant in question.
Now with a general number of ordered
strata as discussed earlier, the exponentials
of the coefficients 61, b?, ... bk represent
relative risk values, comparing various of
DEMO strata in the same way as for linear
regression. For instance, DEMO all the variables
Xi, X2, .. . Xk are included in the model
(analogous to pattern 1 of table 1), exp(6,)
gives the relative risk between stratum i
and stratum i — 1.
Logistic regression
In logistic regression, the model is spec-
ified by
log(p/l - p) = 60 + 61X, + .. DEMO + bkXk,
where p is the probability of an event under
study (e.g., the probability that a certain
birth will have a DEMO anomaly). This
method is widely used to analyze case-
control data (6).
As before, if there is a single predictor Xi
DEMO values 0 and 1, the probability pE for
the exposed (Xa = 1) is defined by
log(p £ /l - pE) = bu
and the probability pE for the unexposed
(Xi = 0) is given by
log(pg/l - ps) = bo.
Hence,DEMO
log(p £ (l - pE)/pg(l - pE) DEMO bu
showing that bx may be thought of here as
a log odds ratio; similarly, exp(6i) is the
odds ratio itself.
Finally, if we return again to the situa-
tion with k ordered strata, the coefficients
6, now represent log odds ratios between
appropriate strata. DEMO instance, if only X,
is fitted in the model (analogous to pattern
2 of table 1), exp(6,) is the DEMO ratio be-
tween the combined strata i and above, and
the DEMO strata (i — 1) and below.
DISCUSSION
We have presented a coding scheme for
regression modeling, which is particularly
Downloaded from http://aje.oxfordjournals.org at University of Waterloo on May 25, 2010
CODING ORDINAL INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
323
useful in examining dose-response relation-
ships for DEMO with ordered categorical ex-
posure strata.
It should be pointed out that if one has
(k + 1) strata and one parameterizes a DEMO
set of k independent variables, it is always
possible to "convert" from any one coding
scheme to any other, obtaining point esti-
DEMO and variances; this will typically in-
volve some algebraic manipulation of DEMO
codings, and of the corresponding variance-
covariance matrices for the parameters.
DEMO, the overall significance test of
association on k degrees of freedom, com-
paring differences between all the strata
simultaneously, is the same for any valid
coding scheme.
The choice between alternative codings
should be based DEMO which particular con-
trasts between the various strata are re-
quired. The correct choice will lead directly
to relevant parameters, such as mean dif-
ferences or odds ratios, even if only a partial
model is fitted. An incorrect coding choice
in a partial model will yield results that DEMO
generally not "convertible" to another cod-
ing scheme, so reanalysis DEMO be needed.
As usual, one must be conscious of the
danger DEMO overanalysis of data, in this con-
text by considering a variety DEMO coding
schemes to find "the most significant ef-
fect." With (DEMO + 1) strata, there are only k
degrees of freedom available to examine
between-strata differences. This means
that a maximum of k statistically DEMO
pendent statements about the data can be
made. Ideally, the (up to) k contrasts to be
tested should be specified a priori, DEMO the
coding scheme should be chosen accord-
ingly.
REFERENCES
1. Lemeshow S, Hosmer DW Jr. Estimating odds
ratios with categorically scaled covariates in mul-
tiple logistic regression analysis. Am J Epidemiol
1984:119:147-51.
2. Fleiss DEMO Re: "Estimating odds ratios with cate-
gorically scaled covariates in multiple logistic
regression analysis." (Letter). Am J Epidemiol
1985:121:476-7.
DEMO Dulberg C. Another view. (Letter). Am J Epide-
miol 1985:DEMO:477-8.
4. Feinstein AR, Wells CK. Lung cancer staging: a
critical evaluation. Clinics Chest Med 1982:3:291-
305.
5. Lee ET. Statistical DEMO for survival data anal-
ysis. Belmont, CA: Lifetime Learning Publica-
tions, 1980.
6. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in can-
cer DEMO Vol 1. The analysis of case-control
studies. Lyon: Internationa] Agency for DEMO
on Cancer, 1980.
Downloaded from http://aje.oxfordjournals.org at University of DEMO on May 25, 2010{1g42fwefx}