NORMAL ACTS OF IRRATIONAL
TRUST: MOTIVATED ATTRIBUTIONS
AND THE TRUST DEVELOPMENT
PROCESS
J. Mark Weber, Deepak Malhotra and
J. Keith Murnighan
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a new, motivated attributions model of trust development.
The model builds on two simple insights: that the parties in a potentially
trusting relationship are likely to view their interaction differently and
that their attributions of DEMO other’s behavior will be self-servingly
motivated. The model speciﬁcally focuses on the role of dependence in
motivating attributions of trustworthiness, suggesting, for instance, that
people ameliorate the anxiety associated with dependence by perceiving
others as DEMO The model explains why trustors, contrary to the
prescriptions of the DEMO, rational choice approach, often engage in
large, seemingly irrational acts DEMO trust and when and why these acts, despite
being tremendously risky, can be crucial to trust development. The paper
explores the consequences of DEMO insights for interpersonal interactions as
well as touching on the potential for extensions to inter-organizational and
international interactions.
Research in Organizational Behavior
Research in DEMO Behavior, Volume 26, 75–101
Copyright © 2005 by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved
ISSN: 0191-3085/doi:10.1016/S0191-3085(04)26003-8
75
76 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
... Although trust is an obvious DEMO of life, it is an exasperating one. Like the ﬂight of DEMO
bumblebee or a cure for hiccoughs, it works in practice but DEMO in theory.
Martin Hollis (1998)
Trust is a precious and DEMO commodity in interpersonal and organizational
relationships. Few compliments surpass being told that you are trusted. One party
professing (and experiencing) trust in another DEMO much about their relationship.
Organizational action is also predicated on trust (DEMO, 1974). “Without trust the
corporation becomes not a community but DEMO brutish state of nature, a war of all
against all in DEMO employment tends to be nasty, brutish, and short” (Solomon
& DEMO, 2001, p. 5). Fisher and Brown (1988, p. 107) argued that trust might
be “the single most important element of a good working relationship.” Trust can
facilitate cooperation and help people and organizations DEMO information more
efﬁciently. Trust also helps to reduce uncertainty (Luhmann, 1979) and its related
anxieties (Holmes, 1991).
Trust is clearly a fundamental, complex aspect of human interaction. It has
recently attracted considerable attention from social scientists and organization
scholars (cf. Cook, 2001; Dirks & Ferrin, 2001; Kramer & Tyler, 1996). A
variety of models have approached trust and its development (cf. Kramer,
1999; Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt & Camerer, 1998), leading to a variety of
DEMO conceptualizations (e.g. Kelley, 1979; Rempel, Holmes & Zanna,
1985). Deﬁnitions of trust typically incorporate elements of interdependence,
vulnerability (risk), and intentionality. Two common expectations are that mutual
trust will increase DEMO via carefully considered, repeated positive
interactions and that an unexpected breach DEMO result in an abrupt loss of
trust. Theoretical conceptualizations of trust that emphasize these characteristics
conform, at least in part, to what Kramer (1999, p. 572) calls the “trust as rational
choice” perspective (e.g. Hardin, 2002). Rational choice models can be both elegant
and descriptive of many instances of trust development.
Trusting actions, however, can at DEMO be sudden and dramatic rather than
incremental, to the point where DEMO appear unwise and potentially dangerous (cf.
McKnight, Cummings & Chervany, DEMO; Murnighan, Malhotra & Weber, 2004).
Common examples of precipitous DEMO/or sizable trusting in the absence of due
consideration include: (1) companies that fund expansion before they have worked
out the details of a new contract; (2) managers who have delegated important,
sensitive duties to new employees; or (3) individuals who have made tremendous
emotional investments in a nascent romantic relationship. In all of these cases,DEMO
trust may be reciprocated and both parties may consequently beneﬁt. The trustor’s
risks are considerable, however, and exceed the recommendations of a cautious,DEMO
rational choice approach to trusting.
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
77
This paper starts with the observation DEMO, counter to the predictions of a “trust
as rational choice” perspective, instances of individuals and organizations trusting
more than incrementally are not uncommon, especially early in a relationship
(Murnighan et al., 2004). We DEMO develop a model that helps to explain why
people engage in signiﬁcant and seemingly irrational acts of trust and under what
conditions trusted parties DEMO likely to reciprocate. Consideration of the trusted
party’s perspective also provides insight into how large, precipitously trusting acts
can be simultaneously risky and yet critically important to the process of trust
development.
Our model uses two DEMO insights for its foundation: (1) that the parties in a
DEMO trusting relationship are likely to view the interaction differently; and
(2) that their attributions of each other’s behavior will be self-servingly biased
and will be motivated to a great extent by their feelings of dependence. DEMO
assumptions allow us to develop a new model of the trust development process
that can accommodate both the data that is explained well by DEMO rational choice
perspective as well as what may appear to be irrational trusting behaviors. Our
approach extends prior research that has recognized the critical DEMO that attribution
processes play in the trust development process (e.g. Ferrin & Dirks, 2002; Lewis
& Weigert, 1985; Zand, 1972); DEMO also responds directly to McAllister’s (1995)
call for more theoretical DEMO on the development of cognition-based trust.
The resulting motivated attributions model of trust development does not negate
the rational choice perspective, but instead demonstrates that behavior that
conforms to rational choice predictions is but one case DEMO a more general
model.
TRUST AND TRUST DEVELOPMENT
Scholars in many disciplines (e.g. psychology, sociology, economics) have taken
a variety of approaches DEMO deﬁning trust. In their seminal paper, Mayer, Davis
and Schoorman (DEMO, p. 712) deﬁned trust as “the willingness to be vulnerable
to the actions of another party based on the expectation that the other DEMO
perform a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the DEMO
to monitor or control that other party.” By focusing on vulnerability, DEMO et
al. built on Gambetta’s (1988) classic deﬁnition as well as earlier observations
that the “willingness to take risks may be one of DEMO few characteristics common
to all trust situations” (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982, p. 1306). Rousseau
and her colleagues’ interdisciplinary review of the trust literature (Rousseau
et al., 1998, p. 395) offered a similar DEMO: “Trust is a psychological state
comprising the intention to accept vulnerability DEMO upon positive expectations
78 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
of the intentions or behavior of DEMO Trusting behavior, by extension, entails
accepting vulnerability in the hope or expectation of gain at the discretion of
another person (cf. Snijders, DEMO). Although some researchers have argued that
trust entails a set of shared expectations, necessarily situated in (and a characteristic
of) the relationship between individuals (e.g. Garﬁnkel, 1967; Macauley, 1963;
Zucker, 1986), Rousseau et al.’s conceptualization focuses on individual-level
experiences and the decision(DEMO) by individuals to trust. Their conceptualization
is appropriate for our model, as one of the factors we highlight is the potential for
the DEMO to have differing perspectives within a relationship.
Trust, as Rousseau et DEMO (1998) suggest, is a psychological state. Trust
development, in contrast, is the process by which that state is achieved, shaped,
DEMO inﬂuenced. Our primary focus in this paper is on the process of developing
trust rather than the nature of trust itself although, throughout the paper, we will
note some of the ways that the experience of trust (as a psychological state) shapes
the further development of a DEMO relationship.
RATIONAL CHOICE MODELS
OF TRUST DEVELOPMENT
Before presenting our motivated attributions model of trust development, we ﬁrst
elaborate on the dominant, rational DEMO approach to trust, which provides both
a clear and clean foundation DEMO theorizing about trust development, as well as
a standard of comparison DEMO our new model. Rational choice models, “arguably
the most inﬂuential image[s] DEMO trust within organization science” (Kramer, 1999,
p. 572), suggest that trust grows gradually as positive interactions accumulate (e.g.
Blau, 1964; Holmes, 1991; Kelley, 1979; Luhmann, 1979; Rempel et al., 1985).
Developing trust gradually allows each party to take successively larger DEMO as
their conﬁdence in the other’s trustworthiness grows. Like Bayesian updating,
each positive act increases the perceived probability of the other’s continued
trustworthiness DEMO, over repeated interactions, additional positive information
has less impact. If all goes well, the pattern should resemble a classic S-curve (see
Fig. DEMO), with trust building slowly through small but increasingly larger risks by
each party in the trust relationship. As positive attributions regarding each other’s
DEMO accumulate, trust can develop more rapidly via mutual reciprocity.
Eventually, when the parties have achieved a high level of trust and there is DEMO
room for growth, trust development slows. This pattern is reminiscent of DEMO
(1962) GRIT model of positive relationship building: “graduated reciprocation in
DEMO reduction” suggests that interacting parties should initially engage in small,
unilateral acts of cooperation and, contingent on reciprocity, gradually increase
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
79
Fig. 1.
Trust Development as Rational DEMO
their cooperativeness (see Lindskold, 1978, for an application of GRIT DEMO trust
development).
As noted, rational choice models of trust tend DEMO share a set of implicit
assumptions. One central assumption (which is DEMO present in the motivated
attributions model) is that trust generally develops DEMO the iterative reciprocation
of the parties’ trusting acts. The process begins with one party trusting another
enough to act on that trust, i.e. taking an intentional risk, making themselves
vulnerable, and hoping for the (eventual) beneﬁts made possible by mutual trust.
Although a variety of contextual factors may provide the antecedent conditions
for such an act (cf. McKnight et al., 1998), for our purposes, trust development
begins with a DEMO party’s decision to act. Trust development continues (or, in
some cases, ends) with the trusted party’s response, which can also vary widely,
from rejection to non-action to simple reciprocity or more (cf. Pillutla, Malhotra &
Murnighan, 2003). After the trusted party responds, DEMO focus then returns to initial
trustors and their next move. Early trust development, then, is almost necessarily
sequential, moving back and forth between the two parties via turn taking and
reciprocity (expected and hoped for, if not always complete).
Beyond assumptions of iterative reciprocity, rational DEMO approaches include
assumptions that our motivated attributions model challenges. For example,
rational choice approaches assume that both parties will understand the process
of DEMO development and its inherent risks and will choose to trust and/or to
engage in a trusting act carefully and deliberately. They also assume, implicitly,
that both parties’ expectations of the process will be similar, i.e. trusted
parties who might gain from building trust will view a DEMO initial move by
a trustor as appropriate, laudable, and worthy of reciprocity, just as trustors
themselves perceive it. In contrast, our model DEMO on the ideas that parties
view their choices and their interaction from differing perspectives (Malhotra,
80 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
2004) and that idiosyncratic and self-serving motivations shape their perceptions
and attributions of each other. As a result, trusting parties may engage in
behaviors that contradict the predictions of rational DEMO approaches to trust
development.
IRRATIONAL TRUST
The rational choice approach does not easily accommodate large, highly risky
trusting acts that occur early in a relationship. Recent research, however, indicates
that such seemingly rash acts are DEMO infrequent (Murnighan et al., 2004). In a
restricted experimental context, for instance, Berg, Dickhaut and McCabe (1995)
studied “the DEMO game,” in which “trustors” decided how much of $10 they
would send to “recipients.” In the experiment, both parties knew that the recipient
would receive three times the amount that the trustor sent, and that the recipient
could then decide how much of this larger amount (if any) he or she would return
to the trustor. In this interaction, sending more money represents more trusting:
it increases the potential for greater mutual gain but does so at the risk of the
trustor DEMO exploited (e.g. ending with less than the original $10). Because DEMO
parties in this experiment were anonymous and would not see each other, a rational
choice approach might suggest that participants would be quite guarded in their
actions.
Economic and game theoretic models that focus on narrow DEMO predict
no trust in this context because there is no incentive to reciprocate; recipients
should take whatever cash they receive and return nothing. Thus, to protect
themselves, potential trustors should also send nothing. Berg et DEMO (1995) found
that even though the players had no history with each other, no possibility of
future interaction, and everyone was anonymous, participants still sent an average
of slightly more than half of their DEMO endowment and ﬁve of the 32 participants
(15%) sent all of their $10.
These ﬁndings document that individuals are willing to trust people DEMO they
do not know and whom they will never meet or see. Furthermore, contrary to the
rational choice approach to trust development, which, broadly construed, predicts
that if people take any risks at all, DEMO should take very small initial risks in
interactions like this, a DEMO by Pillutla et al. (2003) found that hedging may be
worse than trusting fully. Pillutla et al. (2003) found that the more DEMO trustors
sent, the more recipients reciprocated, exponentially. Although some recipients
returned nothing, reciprocity was less likely and proportionally smaller when initial
senders had risked less rather than more money. Pillutla et al. (2003) also DEMO
that recipients interpreted trustors sending their entire endowment as a clear signal
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
81
of trust, boosting feelings of obligation to reciprocate; failing to send their entire
endowment was interpreted as a lack of trust (which was not viewed positively). A
consequence of these attributions was that trustors maximized their ﬁnal outcomes
when they sent DEMO entire endowment (risking everything). The second-best
strategy was to send DEMO at all. Sending small or moderate amounts was
worse (for trustors) than any other strategy. Thus, hedging one’s bets and trusting
only partially were truly ineffective in that they failed to engender reciprocity and
reduced DEMO trustor’s ﬁnal outcomes.
These results are signiﬁcant departures from the predictions (DEMO prescriptions)
of a rational choice approach to trust development. Although some of the trustors
who chose large initial acts of trust had their DEMO exploited, the data in these
studies document the overall positive effects DEMO follow such obviously risky
actions: more extreme trusting acts were more DEMO, on average, than small
or moderate trusting acts. This suggests that the rational choice approach to trust
development must be reﬁned to accommodate DEMO the descriptive (i.e. observed
behavior) and prescriptive (i.e. beneﬁts of) aspects of large initial trusting acts. The
extant literature does not offer DEMO explanations for why such large risks are
sometimes taken or why they might yield considerable beneﬁts to trustors in terms
of either tangible outcomes DEMO the acceleration of the trust development process.
Another central, underlying difﬁculty DEMO rational choice approaches to trust
development has been a tendency to treat trustors and trusted parties symmetrically,
assuming that each party interprets each DEMO actions similarly. From a modeling
perspective, the rational choice approach is DEMO and, in many instances,
its assumptions are appropriate. Indeed, although many trusting relationships may
emerge between parties with similar perspectives on important DEMO, it is also
likely that many potentially trusting pairs will be DEMO dependent on
their relationship (Emerson, 1962) and will have systematically DEMO capacities
or motivations for perspective taking (e.g. Galinsky, 2002; Malhotra, 2004).
Further, an extensive body of research has demonstrated that the attributions
people make about each other are affected by their goals, preferences, context, and
perspectives, and become causal factors in their subsequent decisions (Kruglanski,
1996; Kunda, 1990). The motivated nature of attribution processes makes it likely
that the parties will perceive and want to DEMO others’ behaviors in self-
serving ways. We therefore present a model that attends to the implications of the
differences between the parties and to DEMO (self-servingly motivated) attributions
that mediate their decisions. A better understanding of the types of attributions
each party is likely to make and the DEMO that inﬂuence these attributions allows
us to explain when and why some parties will engage in seemingly irrational acts of
trust and when and DEMO these acts will be effective, as trusted parties are inﬂuenced
to DEMO and accelerate the trust development process.
82 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
A MOTIVATED ATTRIBUTIONS MODEL
OF TRUST DEMO
The motivated attributions model begins with a single party’s initial willingness
to accept risk. Like most models of trust, it expects that the reputation of the
other party, as well as personal experiences with the other party, will contribute
to perceptions of the other’s trustworthiness. Unique to the motivated attributions
model is a careful consideration of each party’s motivated perspective. DEMO particular,
the motivated attributions model suggests that the extent to which a party feels
dependent on the other affects their attributions of the DEMO trustworthiness
and their evaluation of information regarding the other’s reputation and observed
behavior (cf. Luhman, 1979). Figure 2 presents a diagram depicting DEMO essential
elements of this new model.
Our conceptualization of dependence follows directly from Emerson’s (1962)
seminal paper. According to Emerson, a party’s DEMO dependence is
contingent upon their desire (or need) for the outcomes that they feel that they can
obtain through their relationship with the DEMO party. For a trustor or a trusted party,
then, the DEMO of relationship dependence that they experience should increase
with: (a) DEMO desirability of the anticipated beneﬁts of a trusting relationship; and (b)
Fig. 2.
A Motivated Attributions Model of Trust Development.
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
83
the criticality of the other party DEMO achieving those beneﬁts (e.g. whether alternative
partners can provide similar beneﬁts DEMO).
As noted in Fig. 2, the initial process of trust DEMO clearly begins with
the cognitions of a potentially trusting actor, whom DEMO designate as the “trustor.”
Whether a trustor is deliberate, thoughtful, and cognizant of their observations
of a potentially trusted party, they must engage in some thought about the target
that they have chosen for a DEMO trusting act. Considering past observations
and experiences with a party, combined DEMO reputation information, leads to an
assessment of the trusted party’s trustworthiness. DEMO reputation can be augmented
or deﬂated by others’ reports or their own observations of the target party.
The motivated attributions model suggests that the DEMO will evaluate,
in a potentially biased fashion, the trustworthiness of DEMO counterparts. In
particular, attributions of trustworthiness will be affected by individuals’ DEMO
of dependence and their desire (or lack of desire) to believe that the trusted party
is trustworthy. As dependence increases, individuals will be motivated to see their
potential target as more trustworthy. As a result, positive (or negative) judgments
of a target’s trustworthiness are possible even DEMO outside observers might come
to decidedly different conclusions.
The motivated attributions model also suggests that, when feelings of
dependence are relatively low, the DEMO process may not begin at all because
potential trustors will be less motivated to take the risks that are involved in
trusting actions. This DEMO, in some cases, result in considerable Pareto inefﬁciency,
as many relationships that might produce mutual beneﬁt will not even begin to
develop. DEMO, overcoming the barriers to starting a trusting relationship may,
ironically, require miscalculations on the part of a dependent party, in terms of
either overestimations of the likelihood of potential beneﬁts or underestimations
of the DEMO involved.
Following a conclusion of sufﬁcient trustworthiness to act, trustors can DEMO
from a variety of trusting actions, some more risky than others. DEMO depends
on the trustor’s speciﬁc, context-dependent perceptions of the trustworthiness of
DEMO other party and their predictions about the likely results of their action. Thus,
to consider a simple example, a lawyer might be willing to trust one of her most
articulate partners to present a joint DEMO to a potential client, but she might
have considerably more faith DEMO another partner to responsibly accompany her
younger sister to an important social event.
The model assumes that, prior to action, trustors will be DEMO least somewhat self-
aware and might therefore consider how their upcoming actions will reﬂect upon
them. Intense fears of embarrassment, for instance, may DEMO with trusting
acts, as few people are comfortable playing the fool. DEMO generally, previous
research (Murnighan, Oesch & Pillutla, 2001) suggests DEMO individuals, even when
84 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
they are acting anonymously, are still concerned about how their actions affect
their own self-impressions. In the decidedly DEMO social context of interpersonal
trust, in which the trusted party and DEMO other observers may observe a trustor’s
initial act, social impression management DEMO – wanting to create a good
impression in others – can also loom large. People want to be seen positively,
by others (Schlenker, 1980) and by themselves (Baumeister, 1998). The model
predicts DEMO these impression management concerns will inﬂuence the form and
the probability of an initial trusting act, and that trustors will choose acts that they
feel will reﬂect well on them. Their perceptions of the impact of DEMO actions on
others’ evaluations of them, however, will be as biased as their other perceptions
and may be particularly idiosyncratic.
Once a trusting DEMO has been chosen and implemented, the interaction moves
into the trusted DEMO court, at which point the trusted party’s own levels
of dependence DEMO into play to inﬂuence their perceptions, judgments, and,
ultimately, DEMO decision to reciprocate.
MIXED MOTIVES AND THE TRUST DILEMMA
Underlying each party’s decision to trust and/or to engage in a trusting act is DEMO
we call “the trust dilemma.” Trust development, with all its potential DEMO creating
value, requires investments from each party, but each party has an incentive (at
least in the short run) not to invest. DEMO is particularly true when neither party is
sure that the other will reciprocate. More speciﬁcally, parties are motivated to trust
and be seen as trustworthy, but they are also motivated to minimize their risks and
to escape the costs that may be associated with obligation and reciprocity. While
DEMO trusting parties seek ways to justify their acts of trust, trusted DEMO may
seek ways to justify inaction and/or non-reciprocity. Thus, parties DEMO to gain from
the establishment of trust but, in the short-term (particularly in the initial phases of
trust development), they are also DEMO by self-interest, which can undermine
the trust development process. As Messick DEMO Kramer (2001, p. 97) note, “both
parties have very clear preferences for what they want the other party to do, even
though they themselves have decision conﬂicts ... if they could choose for each
DEMO, there would be no problem.”
These self-oriented motivations can have important DEMO A trusted
party who is motivated to devalue or ignore a trustor’s actions may escape feelings
of obligation but will, as a result, DEMO exploitative and unethical to the trustor.
To avoid this outcome, a DEMO who wishes to convey an unambiguous signal
of trust – one that makes non-reciprocity difﬁcult to justify – may be motivated
to engage in DEMO, and seemingly irrational, acts of trust. In contrast, potential
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
85
trustors who are unable to adequately DEMO the perspective of obligated or
highly dependent trusted parties may underestimate the likelihood of reciprocity
and forego opportunities to build trust. We now consider DEMO of these possibilities
as we look at the motivations underlying decisions to trust and to reciprocate.
The Motivation to Trust
As social beings, individuals learn early in their development that the fulﬁllment
of their needs and DEMO requires interaction and cooperation with others (Simon,
1990). The DEMO to interact with others to create mutual gain, however, also
creates the possibility of being exploited (e.g. Trivers, 1971). Since it DEMO impossible
to manage all of our vulnerabilities through raw power or enforceable contracts,
people rely on trust to facilitate cooperation. This is especially DEMO when parties
– individuals or organizations – seek long-term cooperation, as DEMO is particularly
difﬁcult to delineate all future contingencies in a single contract.
Despite the pervasive need to engage with others, people vary in their willingness
to trust (e.g. Rotter, 1967; Yamagishi, 2001). For DEMO individuals, trusting
intentions are central to their conceptions of their social DEMO (Soloman & Flores,
2001); for others, the social world takes second place to their individually motivated
concerns. Despite individual differences in DEMO and proclivities, extrinsic
motivations – the tangible beneﬁts that result from DEMO in a particular context
–provide strong motivations to establish mutual trust and/or mutually trusting
reciprocal actions.
When the potential for these beneﬁts exists DEMO at least one party recognizes this,
trusting acts and the start of a trusting relationship are possible. When both parties
see the possibilities, an important question surrounds the identity of the initial
trustor. An extension DEMO Emerson’s (1962) model of dependence suggests that,
ceteris paribus, DEMO party that feels more dependence on the potential relationship
will be more likely to see possibilities that would be facilitated by mutual trust and
DEMO therefore be more likely to initiate the trust development process.
As we have noted, however, the motivation to trust that is inspired by DEMO
dependence may cloud a trustor’s judgment. Thus, potential trustors who feel
DEMO may be less judicious and cautious than is warranted, given the
DEMO risks. Murray and Holmes (1994, p. 651) have shown that DEMO
often construct personal narratives that create an overarching, positive gestalt “to
DEMO feelings of conﬁdence and security in the face of the inevitable risks
posed by interdependence.” Further, people’s relationship satisfaction is positively
correlated with idealized images of their partners (Murray, Holmes & Grifﬁn,
1996) and the (often false) belief that their partners are highly similar to DEMO
86 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
on key dimensions (i.e. “kindred spirits”; Murray, Holmes, Bellavia, Grifﬁn &
Dolderman, 2002). Though DEMO images and impressions are inaccurate, they
stem from cognitions that are DEMO to sustain relationship satisfaction. Thus,
in the context of trust, DEMO (even inaccurately) that those on whom
we are dependent are trustworthy may be a natural, easy way to deal with
fears of exploitation and to facilitate social risk taking that can yield beneﬁcial
outcomes.
The DEMO Syndrome” provides an extreme example of this phenomenon.
This syndrome takes its name from a hostage crisis that occurred years ago in
the city DEMO Stockholm. When the authorities stormed the hostage-taker’s enclave,
they were surprised by the responses of many of the captives, who actively helped
the hostage-takers rather than the people who were trying to secure their release.
DEMO have explained this behavior by pointing to the extreme conditions that the
hostages faced during their captivity. Because hostage takers control the hostages’
well-being (indeed, their lives), hostages can become so psychologically dependent
on their captors that they come to trust them more than they trust the DEMO As a
result, hostages often warn their captors of possible danger, resist the commands
of authorities, and even risk bodily harm to protect their captors. With respect to
our model, the Stockholm syndrome represents an extreme example of dependent
parties using the questionable, though undoubtedly motivated conclusion that their
hostage-takers are trustworthy to reduce the anxiety that is inherently DEMO to
their feelings of dependence.
On its face, using trust as DEMO corrective for the discomfort of dependence is
neither an obvious nor an attractive conception, though it may be adaptive. Like
Emerson (1962), DEMO suggest that the more dependent of two parties will experience
their asymmetric dependence as psychologically aversive and anxiety producing.
Emerson argued that these individuals (or groups) are motivated to engage in one
or more of four “balancing operations” to achieve greater symmetry. They can
withdraw from the relationship, build coalitions, ﬁnd alternatives, and/or bestow
status. These alternatives emphasize DEMO rather than cognitive solutions
to the problems of dependence. The motivated attributions model suggests that
dependent parties also have an additional, cognitive solution: DEMO conclude that
the less dependent party is trustworthy and will not exploit the counterpart’s
dependence (cf. Kruglanski, 1996; Kunda, 1990).
This DEMO suggests that “rational” (i.e. carefully and deliberately reasoned)
assessments of DEMO party’s trustworthiness will become increasingly unlikely
as dependence increases. In particular, DEMO dependence increases, so will selective
attention to information that conﬁrms what DEMO party wants to believe (e.g. Berscheid,
Graziano, Monson & Dermer, 1976; Erber & Fiske, 1984; Ruscher & Fiske, 1990),DEMO
increasing the likelihood of a conclusion that the other party is trustworthy (e.g.
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
87
Fine & Holyﬁeld, 1996). For initial trustors, this increases the likelihood that they
will engage in trusting behavior and that the risks that they will assume will be
larger DEMO careful analysis might recommend.
Thus, dependence should have several consequences for DEMO initiators.
Proposition1. As their dependence increases, potential trustors will: (a) engage
in less information search to assess a potential counterpart’s trustworthiness;
(b) be more likely to evaluate ambiguous information about the counterpart
positively; (c) exaggerate the likelihood that the trusted party will reciprocate;
(d) be more likely to engage in initial acts of trust; and (e) be more likely to trust
precipitously.
Consider an example. DEMO 1 suggests that an entrepreneur who does not
have sufﬁcient resources to bring a product to market will be more likely to: (a)DEMO
accept capital guarantees from the ﬁrst venture capitalist (VC) who offers it; (b)
minimally seek or assess information regarding the VC’s DEMO or credentials;
(c) conclude that the VC is trustworthy; DEMO (d) incur costs or invest considerably
in the process (or DEMO), especially as the desire to launch the product increases.
Drawing overly strong conclusions on the basis of minimal information is more
likely than DEMO rational choice approach would anticipate, especially early in a
relationship when DEMO party perceives itself to be dependent upon the other.
Paradoxically, while DEMO should lead individuals to be more likely
to engage in risky trusting acts, the more dependent they appear to a trusted
party, the DEMO likely might the trusted party be to reciprocate. In particular,
trustors who are perceived as desperate or calculating – eminently possible
interpretations of DEMO actions – may be less likely to induce
reciprocity and subsequent trust development. Obvious dependence offers a trusted
party an alternative to attributing a DEMO party’s behavior to genuine trust (cf.
Kelley, 1971). The needy suitor, either in romance or in business, often generates
skeptical reactions DEMO can interfere with trust development. Thus, the impetus of
dependence can DEMO dual-edged implications. Nonetheless, Cialdini (1993) notes
that the norm of DEMO can be strong enough to overcome a decision-maker’s
hesitations and reticence, DEMO in contexts in which manipulation is expected (e.g.
when dealing with DEMO used car salesman). We discuss these kinds of dynamics
further in the next section on obligation and reciprocity.
The Motivation to Escape Obligation
DEMO trustors, trusted parties necessarily interpret information in the context of their
DEMO motivations and interests. At one extreme, trusted parties may see a DEMO
88 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
and valuable opportunity in the overtures DEMO a trusting party, making reciprocity
and the quick propulsion of the DEMO development process particularly likely. At
the other, trusted parties who have DEMO alternatives may have little desire or
need to build a new relationship (Emerson, 1962).
Gouldner (1960) notes, however, that we DEMO feel obligated to reciprocate
and tend to believe that we “should repay (in kind) what another has provided.”
Extensive research on reciprocity has DEMO that people often reciprocate even
when it goes against their self-interest (DEMO Cialdini, 1993; Gouldner, 1960). As a
result, even those who are uninterested in reciprocating and developing a mutually
trusting relationship may DEMO compelled to reciprocate unless they have (or can
ﬁnd) ways to justify non-reciprocity and escape what might otherwise be powerful
and natural feelings DEMO obligation.
Berg et al. (1995) have demonstrated that both the likelihood and the magnitude
of reciprocity vary across individuals. Thus, some trusted parties do overcome
what others feel is an obligation to reciprocate. Pillutla et DEMO (2003) suggest that
reciprocity depends on the trusted party’s attributions of the trustor’s actions. While
trustors might hope that trusted parties will acknowledge DEMO initiatives that they
have taken to establish a trusting relationship, some DEMO parties may not even
know that they have been trusted (e.g. DEMO et al., 1995). For others, the high cost of
reciprocity may induce them to seek ways to justify not reciprocating. This may DEMO
easiest when the trustor’s desperation is obvious: reciprocity is particularly unlikely
DEMO the trustor is perceived as parasitic, overly calculative, or self-interested (DEMO
Brehm, 1966; Williamson, 1993).
To a large degree, the trusted party’s attributions about the trustor and the trusting
act will be DEMO by the trusted party’s own dependence, motivations, and interests.
As trusted parties’ own dependence increases, the likelihood that they will interpret
trusting acts as sincere will increase, as will the likelihood that they will reciprocate.
Thus, their own motivated attributions will help to determine whether trust will
develop. This suggests the following proposition:
Proposition 2. Trusted parties will DEMO trustors’ initial acts of trust more
favorably, and they will be DEMO likely to reciprocate, as their own perceived
dependence on initial trustors DEMO
The motivated attributions model notes that the characteristics of the trusting act
itself will also have independent effects on the trusted party’s attributions regarding
DEMO trustor’s intentions and interests. As Pillutla et al. (2003) discovered, DEMO
who hedged and took small or moderate risks were seen as non-trusting or cheap,
attributions that also justiﬁed non-reciprocity. Large acts of trust DEMO entailed
greater risk and provided greater mutual beneﬁt were more often interpreted as
unequivocal and sincere acts of trust and this trusting attribution led DEMO more
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
89
frequent (and more sizable) acts DEMO reciprocity. Large acts of trust are inherently less
ambiguous: they provide DEMO signals of trust, making it difﬁcult to downplay
the signiﬁcance of DEMO trustor’s act or to justify non-reciprocity. Thus, although
rational choice approaches DEMO the efﬁcacy and reasonableness of small, initial
acts of trust, the Pillutla et al. (2003) ﬁndings suggest that potential trustors may
be DEMO served by choosing between large, seemingly irrational acts of trust (i.e.
risking everything) and not trusting at all.
An initial trustor’s precipitous trusting act not only makes it difﬁcult to justify
not reciprocating, but it also makes it easier for a trusted party to reciprocate
by reducing DEMO trusted party’s risks. Even cooperatively inclined individuals are
naturally wary of being exploited (Kelley & Stahelski, 1970), so any risk reduction
can DEMO the process (Weber, 2003). Gulati, Khanna and Nohria (1994), for
example, documented how the potential parties in a merger eliminated alternative
suppliers to signal their trustworthiness and make it easier for the DEMO party
to commit. The underlying logic is that, in a relationship DEMO sequential
decision making, each act can change the perceived payoffs and DEMO risks associated
with different choices for the other decision maker. In interpersonal interactions,
people who share sensitive personal information provide their counterparts with
DEMO opportunity to later exploit this information if the relationship deteriorates,
reducing the trusted party’s own risks. Both of these examples suggest that
precipitous DEMO acts give trusted parties “fate control” over initial trustors
(Thibaut & DEMO, 1959), thereby reducing trusted parties’ risks in reciprocating
and, consequently, increasing the likelihood that they will reciprocate. Thus,
Proposition 3. Precipitous trusting acts that beneﬁt the trusted party will: (a)
be DEMO difﬁcult to judge as insincere; (b) reduce the costs and DEMO associated
with reciprocity; (c) increase the likelihood of reciprocity; and (d) accelerate
the development of mutual trust.
A trusted party’s self-attributions DEMO also be critical to their response. Both
trustors and their trusted parties, in both private and social contexts, are motivated to
create and DEMO positive self-impressions (Murnighan et al., 2001). Decisions
to reciprocate the trusting acts of others can be particularly meaningful to people’s
self-perceptions. For DEMO, people who choose not to reciprocate others’
trust may see themselves DEMO attractive (for having stimulated an initial trusting
act), independent (for not needing to reciprocate), or untrustworthy (for not
reciprocating a sincere, trusting act).
Thus, trustors who increase the size and salience DEMO their trusting act (and
consequently, their risks and vulnerability, as DEMO Proposition 3) can prompt
negative self-attributions for trusted parties who might DEMO be inclined not
to reciprocate. Individual differences also come into play, DEMO some people will
90 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
consider a trusting act to be DEMO while others will view objectively identical
actions as gullible or na¨ıve (DEMO et al., 2001). In general, however, acts
that reﬂect DEMO on an actor will be more likely and will help fuel the trust
development process; acts that reﬂect negatively, in any way, will help inhibit trust
development. Thus,
Proposition 4. Initial acts of trust DEMO/or acts that reciprocate trusting actions
will be more likely when they reinforce actors’ positive self-impressions or
reduce the likelihood of negative self-impressions.
DISCREPANT DEMO AND
THE ROLE OF COMMUNICATION
Each successive step in the trust development process is laden with potential
attributional errors, not only due to cognitive and perceptual limitations, but also
due to the motivated and at times strategic nature of trusting choices. When parties
are motivated not to trust DEMO not to reciprocate, for example, they may more easily
project non-trusting motivations onto others (Sagarin, Rhoads & Cialdini, 1998).
In doing so, they are better able to justify their own behavior. Tenbrunsel (DEMO,
p. 337), for instance, notes “... seeing the competition DEMO unethical may only
escalate one’s own unethical behavior.” The converse, as DEMO have noted, is also
likely: strong desires for the mutual beneﬁts of trust may lead to unwarranted
feelings of trust and perceptions of DEMO
These misguided attributions also apply to breaches of trust. Luhmann (1979)DEMO
and Jones and George (1998) suggested that people do not view every deviation
from their expectations to be a breach of trust. Instead, they establish thresholds that
determine whether unfulﬁlled expectations denote a breach. These DEMO, and
the establishment of such thresholds (consciously or unconsciously), are likely to
be inﬂuenced by the same factors that inﬂuence trusting choices DEMO reciprocity.
An extremely dependent party, for instance, may fail to acknowledge (much less
sanction) even the most ﬂagrant breaches of trust.
Attributional DEMO, however, are not always (or even usually) dysfunctional.
Accurate attributions regarding trust and trustworthiness hinge on each party’s
ability to understand the DEMO party’s choices and constraints. The trust
development process can be rapid when each act of trust or reciprocity provides a
clear basis for dispositional DEMO of trustworthiness. As Kelley (1971, p. 8)
noted, however, “the role of a given cause in producing a given effect is DEMO
if other plausible causes are also present.” When beneﬁcial acts of trust can be
attributed to self-interest, contracts, or social sanctions, for instance, attributional
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
91
discounting may be considerable (Malhotra & Murnighan, 2002). The problem
intensiﬁes when attributions are self-servingly motivated.
Objective observers whose attributions are relatively unmotivated are likely to
evaluate the actions DEMO highly dependent parties more positively than their less
dependent counterparts would, DEMO less positively than the parties themselves.
Our model suggests, then, that there is an ever-present risk that trustors and
trusted parties will have DEMO similar and (often) less positive conceptions of each
other’s actions than might be necessary for trust to develop. This is similar to the
DEMO of reactive devaluation in negotiations, in which each party sees the DEMO
concessions as smaller than they actually are, because the other party DEMO them
(Stillinger et al., 1990). These biases create the potential for a negative spiral of
discrepant interpretations of each party’s trusting acts (Zand, 1972).
Clear communication seems the most promising solution to this problem.
Empirical evidence and our current theorizing suggest two communication modes:
DEMO trust precipitously to reveal the extent of one’s risks and commitment (DEMO
in Proposition 3) and/or talk clearly about the act of DEMO, preferably face-to-
face. Communicating one’s reasoning and expectations via explicit statements DEMO
describe intentions and expectations can be effective in clarifying the dynamics
of a trusting act (Messick & Kramer, 2001). For example, a manager delegating
important responsibility to an inexperienced employee might help to create DEMO
beneﬁt and increased trust by stating, “This is an important project DEMO I am
assigning it to you because I trust you: I DEMO that you will meet all of the deadlines
and keep costs to a minimum.” The motivated attributions model suggests that a
manager who assumes DEMO employees will accurately judge the importance of a
project or will naturally feel obligated to perform exceptionally because they have
“obviously” been trusted may DEMO disappointed.
Because face-to-face communication can make explicit the implicit messages
that trustors hope to send, it can provide a simple (although still limited) defense
against mutual misattributions. It can also make failing to reciprocate more DEMO
cult, since the physical presence of a vulnerable trustor can create DEMO pressure
and elicit empathy. Research on behavior in social dilemmas, for DEMO, has
consistently found that communication and the reduction of social distance DEMO
tates cooperation (Weber et al., 2004). Communication elicits commitments (DEMO
& Kaufman-Gilliland, 1994) that create mutually desired outcomes because most
individuals adhere to an internal norm that requires follow-through (Kerr et al.,
1997). Valley, Moag and Bazerman (1998), for instance, demonstrated that face-
to-face negotiations allowed each of two parties to proﬁt in DEMO context that, without
face-to-face communication, repeatedly favored one over the other or sometimes
hurt both. As business interactions become increasingly mediated by technology,DEMO
then, the beneﬁts of face-to-face interaction may become more and more DEMO
92 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
INTER-ORGANIZATIONAL AND
INTERNATIONAL TRUST
The archetypes DEMO trust development that have motivated most of our theorizing are
primarily interpersonal rather than inter-organizational. Because organizations are
replete with interpersonal interactions of endless DEMO, individual archetypes are
both relevant and helpful in thinking about trust DEMO organizations. Indeed,
we have offered examples of this sort throughout this paper. However, inter-
organizational, inter-institutional, and international exchanges can have broader
consequences than those of individuals and are more likely to include multi-
DEMO and inter-group dynamics. Consequently, additional factors undoubtedly
inﬂuence trust development between DEMO At the same time, a variety of
intra- and inter-organizational interactions DEMO on the perceptions, cognitions,
and behaviors of individual organizational actors. DEMO these cases, the motivated
attributions model may apply beyond the domain DEMO individual interactions to
include interactions that are often ascribed to organizations or even larger entities.
The recent accounting scandals provide a particularly striking (and unfortunate)
inter-organizational illustration of the motivated attributions model. In a
compelling DEMO of the potential for bias in auditing, Bazerman, Loewenstein,
and Moore (2002, p. 98) noted that one of the central lessons of behavioral decision-
making research is that “when we are motivated to DEMO a particular conclusion, we
usually do.” Despite their professionalism, accountants are prone to the same biases
in decision making as the rest of DEMO populace. Situational and/or interpretational
ambiguity and familiarity with and/or attachment to clients (and therefore tacit
loyalty to those who pay them) DEMO just some of the sources of bias to which
accountants and the audit ﬁrms that they work for are unconsciously prone. The
motivated attributions DEMO would also suggest that overly favorable audits may
reﬂect irrational trust (DEMO a client’s claims) that has been facilitated by high levels
of DEMO on clients who provide access to information and opportunities for
future business in accounting and managerial consulting.
Several scholars have documented other effects pertaining DEMO inter-
organizational trust that are also consistent with the model. In his ethnographic
study of embeddedness in New York’s better-dress ﬁrms, for instance, DEMO
(1997, pp. 43, 44) noted that “trust developed when extra effort was voluntarily
given and reciprocated.” In-depth interviews with CEOs and selected DEMO yielded a
consistent characterization of trust that was at odds with rational choice predictions
of calculative risk assessments. Uzzi noted that, when referring to trusted ﬁrms,
respondents denounced the notion of monitoring their transaction partners DEMO
it was inappropriate in a trusting relationship. Furthermore, decision-making in
these DEMO, trusting relationships was the antithesis of the hard-headed
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
93
calculations of a rational approach to DEMO: “... the calculative stance of risk-
based judgments, denoted by the skeptical interpretation of another’s motives when
credible data are absent, was replaced by favorable interpretations of another’s
unmonitored activities.” Uzzi (1997) noted that DEMO trust yields
economies of effort, which facilitate other signiﬁcant beneﬁts like DEMO
information transfer, efﬁcient joint problem-solving “on the ﬂy,” and complex
DEMO
Gulati, Khanna and Nohria (1994) found that in a context DEMO which up to 80%
of inter-organizational alliances failed, among the best DEMO of success were
large, unilateral commitments by one of the parties. DEMO of such unilateral
acts of trust included: (a) a company DEMO a long-term contract with a third-
party supplier for material needed for an impending alliance; (b) a computer
hardware manufacturer dissolving its internal software department to signal its
commitment to an alliance with a software DEMO; (c) an automobile manufacturer
making its design speciﬁcations fully available DEMO an alliance partner before the
partner had invested in the alliance; DEMO (d) a company making a promise of
exclusivity even when it could pursue a number of viable partnerships to diversify
its risks. Consistent DEMO the logic of the motivated attributions model, Gulati et al.
noted DEMO these actions, by virtue of their size and the risks involved, signaled that
the organizations’ intentions were sincere. This created a social context DEMO which
reciprocity was expected (and typically delivered) and, given the DEMO nature
of relationship development, fundamentally changed their counterparts’ social and
risk DEMO In fact, Gulati et al. (1994, p. 68) “... found no examples in which the
partner took advantage of [a] unilateral gesture; in all cases the partner responded
by cooperating.” Our model suggests that DEMO kinds of large trusting acts may
be encouraged by the initiating organization’s own feelings of dependence and
their motivated perceptions of the other party’s DEMO They might also
be intentional inﬂuence strategies designed to shape the other parties’ motivated
attributions.
The value of large, unambiguous trusting acts (risks) between polarized
counterparts in international relations has also been repeatedly noted. For DEMO,
Kahn and Kramer (1990) described the importance of Anwar Sadat’s (1977) trip to
Jerusalem as a major unilateral initiative that created DEMO potential for future value
– at considerable risk to Sadat. (Also, consistent with our model, it is not clear
whether Sadat fully appreciated the risks to which he was exposing himself). His
groundbreaking visit DEMO the doors to the Camp David Accords and ultimately
a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt. It probably also energized the internal
Egyptian opposition DEMO culminated in his assassination. Kahn and Kramer (1990)
also highlight DEMO repeated unilateral concessions to Reagan and the
United States as catalysts for the development of trust and the consequent creation
94 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
of considerable joint value. Consistent with DEMO model, some observers have noted
that, after such repeated concessions, DEMO of reciprocity and social pressures
demanded a conciliatory response from Reagan.
Despite these provocative examples of interorganizational and international
trust processes that mirror our DEMO predictions, it is important to note that
the actions of organizations DEMO engender weaker feelings of obligation than
do the actions of individuals because people tend to view organizations less
personally than they do individuals. The DEMO services industry, for example,
appears fully aware of the strength DEMO interpersonal connections because they
assign personal bankers to clients to establish a stronger sense of loyalty than any
that could be engendered by repeated DEMO with different organizational
representatives. The same phenomenon is true in sales in general: organizations
try to build personal relationships with their clients through regular, repeated
contact between the same individuals. Thus, the predictions of the DEMO
attributions model may be applicable in inter-organizational contexts, particularly
when individuals’ DEMO ﬁgure prominently. More generally, we expect that
feelings of dependence are DEMO for parties that may be much larger than
individuals or small groups. We predict that it will also inﬂuence the proclivity to
engage in DEMO, seemingly irrational acts of trust between departments, divisions,
organizations, DEMO even nations, but these inﬂuences may be less direct and less
DEMO
DISCUSSION
Rational choice approaches to trust development cannot easily explain large,
“irrational” trusting acts, even though they occur with considerable frequency. This
observation led us to formulate a motivated attributions model of trust development
that DEMO on: (1) the role of attributions as mediators in trust DEMO reciprocity
decisions; (2) asymmetries in the perceptions, cognitions, and DEMO of the
trusting parties; (3) the motivated nature of attributions; and (4) the dynamics of
dependence and asymmetric dependence.
Table 1 DEMO some of the fundamental differences and similarities
between traditional rational choice models and our motivated attributions model
of trust development.
Our core argument suggests DEMO potential trustors may make exaggerated
evaluations of a potential trusted party’s trustworthiness. Such evaluations are
the consequence of motivated perceptions and cognitions that accentuate DEMO
consistent evidence (i.e. of the other party’s trustworthiness) while failing
to observe or actively discredit disconﬁrming evidence. These exaggerated
Table 1.
A Motivated Attributions Model of Trust Development Versus Traditional Rational DEMO Models of Trust
Development.
Expected
Pattern of Trust
Development
Risk
Orientation
Cognitive Processing Potential for
Making
Attributional
Errors
Search for
Information
About
Counterpart
Views DEMO to
Trust
Development ...
Traditional “rational
choice” models
Motivated attributions
model
Gradual S-curve Cautious and
defensive
Low motivation:
Gradual S-curve
Low motivation:
DEMO and
defensive
High motivation:
Steep, accelerated
S-curve
High motivation:
DEMO and
provocative
Deliberate, careful,
and comprehensive
Low motivation:
Unlikely DEMO
haphazard
Moderate motivation:
Somewhat careful and
deliberate
High motivation:
Shallow and
goal-driven
Low Comprehensive
and complete
Likely; driven by
motivation (i.e.
DEMO motivation →
“undertrust”; high
motivation →
“overtrust”)
Low motivation:
DEMO
High motivation:
Relatively little;
avoiding reasons
not to trust
... as generally
symmetric in
terms of interests
and motivations.
... as often
DEMO in
terms of interests
and motivations.
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
95
96 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
evaluations of trustworthiness are likely to DEMO shaped by feelings of dependence and
can lead to precipitous acts of trust. Relative to the small initial risks prescribed
by rational choice approaches, precipitous acts of trust have the advantage of
overcoming a trusted party’s DEMO inclinations to be defensive: such serious acts
demand attention and are DEMO to attribute to motives other than trust. These
characteristics increase the probability of reciprocity and, as a result, they also
contribute to the DEMO for accelerated trust development.
We conceptualize our motivated attributions model of trust development as a
general model that encompasses the rational choice approach. The DEMO S-
curve of rational trust development (Fig. 1) ﬁts the assumptions of our motivated
attributions model, particularly when the parties’ feelings of dependence are
similar, mild to moderate in degree, and when trust actually DEMO
This last point is important. Small trusting acts signal small investments in
a potential relationship: they are less likely to generate reciprocity, which, if not
forthcoming, can terminate the process and lead initial trustors to seek other means
to achieve the beneﬁts that they desire. This implies DEMO rational choice models may
have developed by sampling on the dependent variable – mapping out the trust de-
velopment process only when it happens DEMO rather than predicting all of the possible
responses to small, incrementally DEMO acts. Therefore, in addition to explaining
normal acts of precipitous, irrational trust and their efﬁcacy, the motivated
attributions model also identiﬁes when and why trust may fail to develop, even in
the absence of negative information about a trusting party or a breach of trust.
A natural DEMO that arises from our approach concerns the potential for
strategic manipulation of another’s trust by engaging in precipitous acts of trust.
Our primary focus DEMO been on the natural emergence of trusting acts, which implies
that DEMO acts are neither particularly deliberate nor strategic. Indeed, we suggest
that DEMO lack of deliberate calculation, which arises from biased perceptions and
motivated DEMO, leads to what Luhman (1979) has called “supererogatory”
acts of DEMO, i.e. doing more than is required. Cialdini (1993), however, DEMO noted
that professional salespeople and fundraisers can (and do) exploit our natural
tendency to reciprocate. Clearly, there is potential for manipulation in the trust
development process. Such strategic behavior is difﬁcult to the extent that DEMO
perceived as calculative or strategic rather than genuine elicits non-reciprocity. In
contrast, the unique combination of sincerity plus a precipitous act of seemingly
irrational trust can increase the likelihood of reciprocity and truly accelerate the
trust DEMO process. The challenge for trusted parties, then, is to be able to
detect insincerity. The challenges for strategic “trustors” are to both appear DEMO
and be able to take risks that are truly precipitous. Ironically, DEMO kinds of acts for
sincere trustors may be most likely when they do not clearly identify and consider
the effect of their dependence, i.e. when their choices are less “rational.”
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
97
IMPLICATIONS
Cultivating trust is important for DEMO, advancing, or cementing a
relationship (Sheppard & Sherman, 1998). Our model extends existing theory
by explaining the conditions under which precipitous DEMO of trust are most likely
and why they may be surprisingly effective at achieving initial trustors’ goals for
a relationship.
One immediate implication of DEMO motivated attributions model is for individuals
in potentially trusting relationships to seriously consider the effects of their
motivations, their dependencies, their need to DEMO themselves positively, and their
inability to fully understand their counterparts’ perceptions. DEMO model makes
these considerations explicit by focusing on the attributions that surround initial
trusting acts.
The model also suggests that people who are contemplating DEMO
risky trusting acts might make the motives for their acts explicit – or at least
unambiguous. Clear statements of intent may be effective in DEMO a
trustor’s exposure to risk by invoking the powerful norm of reciprocity (Cialdini,
1993; Gouldner, 1960). Depending on the circumstances, DEMO, this kind of
communication can backﬁre. Saying “I’m doing this because DEMO trust you” may
signal to trusted parties that the action is not based on trust but is chosen to
manipulate. A party that “doth DEMO too much” may lead counterparts not to
reciprocate. Thus, “the communication DEMO in the trust development process
requires that trustors reveal enough to be understood, but not so much that they
lead their counterparts to question their sincerity. As is true of any communication
process, this can be perilously difﬁcult, requiring tremendously astute interpersonal
sensitivity. Thus, rather than depend DEMO communications that almost always
contain some element of ambiguity, the strongest DEMO in developing trust
may stem from acts that seem too risky, DEMO they elicit more unambiguous
attributions.
We have suggested that precipitous trusting acts that contradict the predictions
and prescriptions of the rational choice approach to DEMO may be strategically
(if unintentionally) advantageous. There is no doubt that those who take large,
trusting risks are more vulnerable to exploitation DEMO those who do not. Yet “what
people often fail to see is the other side of the coin – the beneﬁts foregone by
distrusters” (Yamagishi, 2001, p. 142). In particular, the cautious initial trusting
of rational actors may reduce the risk of exploitation but may simultaneously, and
more seriously, reduce the likelihood of potentially proﬁtable and advantageous
opportunities and relationships. The logic of our new model, then, suggests that
DEMO motivational proclivities and (consequently) imperfect and irrational
reasoning may actually serve important, adaptive purposes (Simon, 1990).
98 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
In sum, the motivated attributions model expands the range of possible trusting
actions and reactions that we might DEMO expect in interpersonal and inter-
organizational interactions. It further provides a basis for predicting when to expect
different patterns of trust development and clariﬁes DEMO signiﬁcant trusting acts can
be perceived as normal and reasonable rather than irrational, especially to the actors
themselves. It also portrays the trust development process as one that depends on
each party’s interpretations of each other’s DEMO and which, as a result, may be far
from smooth. By focusing on dependence and motivated attributional processes,
it explains how trust DEMO to develop, at times against apparent odds, and why, too
DEMO, it may not.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many people have contributed to the ideas DEMO this paper through comments and
reactions to earlier drafts and presentations. We particularly thank Tupper Cawsey,
Karen Cook, Peer Fiss, Rod Kramer, Gillian Ku, Madan Pillutla, John Rempel,
and the members of DEMO at a conference on trust at Stanford’s Graduate
School of Business and colloquia at the University of British Columbia, the Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, the Wharton School of Business
at the University of Pennsylvania, and the Kellogg School of Management at
Northwestern University.
REFERENCES
Arrow, K. (1974). The limits of organization. New York: Norton.
Baumeister, R. F. (1998). The self. In: D. T. Gilbert, DEMO T. Fiske & G. Lindzey (Eds), The Handbook of
Social DEMO (4th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 680–740). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bazerman, M. H., Loewenstein, G., & Moore, D. A. (DEMO). Why good accountants do bad audits.
Harvard Business Review (November)DEMO
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., & McCabe, K. (1995). Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Games and Economic
Behavior, 10, DEMO
Berscheid, E., Graziano, W., Monson, T., & Dermer, DEMO (1976). Outcome dependency: Attention,
attribution and attraction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 978–989.
Blau, P. M. (1964)DEMO Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley.
Brehm, J. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. New York: Academic Press.
DEMO, R. B. (1993). Inﬂuence: Science and practice. New York: Harper Collins College Publishers.
Cook, K. S. E. (2001). Trust DEMO society. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2001). The role of trust in DEMO settings. Organization Science,
12(4), 450–467.
Emerson, R. M. (1962). Power-dependence relations. American Sociological Review, 27(1), 31–41.
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
99
Erber, R., & Fiske, S. T. (1984). Outcome dependency and attention to inconsistent information. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 709–726.
Ferrin, D. L., & DEMO, K. T. (2002). The use of rewards to increase and decrease trust: mediating
processes and differential effects. Organization Science, 8, 450–467.
Fine, G. A., & Holyﬁeld, L. (1996). Secrecy, trust, and dangerous leisure: Generating group cohesion
in voluntary organizations. Social Psychology DEMO, 59(1), 22–38.
Fisher, R., & Brown, S. (DEMO). Getting together. New York: Penguin.
Galinsky, A. D. (2002)DEMO The self and the group: The role of perspective-taking in improving DEMO
evaluations. In: M. A. Neale, E. A. Mannix & H. Sondak (Eds), Research on Managing in
Teams and Groups (Vol. 4)DEMO Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Gambetta, D. (1988). Can we trust trust? In: D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and DEMO
Cooperative Relationships (pp. 213–237). Cambridge: Blackwell.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gouldner, A. W. (1960). The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American Sociological
DEMO, 25, 161–179.
Gulati, R., Khanna, T., & Nohria, DEMO (1994). Uniltateral commitments and the importance of process
in alliances. DEMO Management Review, 35(3), 61–69.
Hardin, R. (2002). DEMO and trustworthiness. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hollis, M. (1998). Trust within reason. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Holmes, J. G. (1991). Trust and the appraisal process in close relationships. In: W. H. P. D. Jones (Ed.),
Advances in Personal Relationships: A Research Annual (pp. 57–104). London, England, UK:DEMO
Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Johnson-George, C., & Swap, W. C. (1982). Measurement of speciﬁc interpersonal trust: Construction
and validation of a scale to assess trust in a speciﬁc other. Journal of Personality & Social
DEMO, 43(6), 1306–1317.
Jones, G. R., & George, J. M. (1998). The experience and evolution of trust: Implications for DEMO
and teamwork. Academy of Management Review, 23, 531–546.
Kahn, R. DEMO, & Kramer, R. M. (1990). Untying the knot: De-escalatory processes in international
conﬂict. In: R. L. Kahn & M. Zald (DEMO) Organizations and National States: New Perspectives
on Conﬂict and Cooperation (DEMO 139–180). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kelley, H. H. (1971). DEMO in social interaction. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.
Kelley, H. DEMO (1979). Personal relationships: Their structures and processes. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
Kelley, H. H., & Stahelski, A. J. (1970)DEMO Social interaction basis of cooperators’ and competitors’
beliefs about others. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 16(1), 66–91.
Kerr, N. L., Garst, J., Lewandowski, D. A., & Harris, S. E. (DEMO). That still, small voice: Commitment
to cooperate as an internalized versus a social norm. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin,
23(12), 1300–1311.
Kerr, N. L., & Kaufman-Gilliland, C. M. (1994). Communication, commitment, and cooperation in
social dilemma. Journal of Personality & DEMO Psychology, 66(3), 513–529.
Kramer, R. M. (1999). DEMO and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives, enduring questions.
Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 569–598.
Kramer, R. M., & Tyler, T. R. (Eds) (1996). Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and DEMO
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1996). Motivated social cognition: Principles of the interface. In: E. T. Higgins &
A. W. Kruglanski (Eds), Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles (pp. 493–520). New
York: Guilford.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480–498.
100 J. MARK WEBER ET AL.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. (1985). Trust as a social reality. Social Forces, 63, 967–985.
Lindskold, S. (1978). Trust development, the GRIT proposal, DEMO the effects of conciliatory acts on
conﬂict and cooperation. Psychological Bulletin, DEMO(4), 772–793.
Luhmann, N. (1979). Trust and power. New York: Wiley.
Macauley, S. (1963). Non-contractual relations in business: DEMO preliminary study. American Sociology
Review, 28, 55–67.
Malhotra, D. (2004). Trust and reciprocity decisions: The differing perspectives of trustors and trusted
parties (Vol. 94, pp. 61–73). OBHDP.
Malhotra, D., & DEMO, J. K. (2002). The effects of contracts on interpersonal trust. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 47, 534–559.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integration model of organizational trust.
Academy of Management Review, 20, 709–734.
McAllister, D. J. (1995). Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation
in organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 24–59.
McKnight, D. H., DEMO, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial Trust Formation in New
Organizational Relationships. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 473–490.
Messick, D. M., & Kramer, R. M. (2001). DEMO as a form of shallow morality. In: K. S. Cook (Ed.),
Trust in Society (pp. 89–117). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Murnighan, J. K., Malhotra, D., & Weber, J. M. (2004). Paradoxes of trust: Empirical and theoretical
departures from a DEMO model. In: R. M. Kramer & K. S. Cook (Eds), Trust and
Distrust in Organizations: Emerging Perspectives, Enduring Questions. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Murnighan, J. K., Oesch, J. M., & DEMO, M. (2001). Player types and self impression management
in dictator games: Two experiments. Games and Economic Behavior, 37, 388–414.
Murray, DEMO L., & Holmes, J. G. (1994). Storytelling in close DEMO: The construction of
conﬁdence. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20(6), 650–663.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Bellavia, G., Grifﬁn, D. W., & Dolderman, D. (2002). Kindred spirits? The
beneﬁts of egocentrism in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
82(4), 563–581.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Grifﬁn, D. W. (1996). The beneﬁts of positive illusions: Idealization
and the construction of satisfaction in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 70(1), 79–98.
Osgood, C. E. (1962). An alternative to war or surrender. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Pillutla, M., Malhotra, D., & Murnighan, J. K. (DEMO). Attributions of trust and the calculus of
reciprocity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39(5), 448–455.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, DEMO G., & Zanna, M. P. (1985). Trust in close DEMO Journal of Personality
& Social Psychology, 49(1), 95–112.
Rotter, J. B. (1967). A new scale for the measurement of interpersonal trust. Journal of Personality,
35, 651–665.
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998)DEMO Not so different after all: A cross-
discipline view of trust. DEMO of Management Review, 23(3), 393–404.
Ruscher, J. B., & Fiske, S. T. (1990). Interpersonal competition can cause individuating impression
formation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 614–622.
Sagarin, B. J., Rhoads, K. L., & Cialdini, R. (1998). Deceiver’s distrust: Denigration as a consequence
of undiscovered deception. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 24(11), 1167–1176.
Schlenker, B. R. (1980). Impression management: The self-concept, social identity, and interpersonal
relations. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Normal Acts of Irrational Trust
101
Sheppard, B. H., & Sherman, D. M. (1998). The grammars of trust: A model and DEMO implications.
Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 422–437.
Simon, H. A. (1990). A mechanism for social selection and successful altruism. Science, 250,
1665–1668.
Snijders, C. (1996). Trust and commitments. Interuniversity Center for Social Science Theory and
Methodology.
Solomon, R. C., & DEMO, F. (2001). Building trust in business, politics, relationships, DEMO life. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Stillinger, C., Epelbaum, M., Keltner, D., & Ross, L. (1990). The ‘reactive devaluation’ DEMO to
conﬂict resolution. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University.
Tenbrunsel, A. DEMO (1998). Misrepresentation and expectations of misrepresentation in an ethical
dilemma: The role of incentives and temptation. AcademyofManagementJournal, 41, 330–339.
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. New York: Wiley.
Trivers, R. L. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Journal of Biology, 46, 35–57.
Uzzi, B. (1997). Social structure and competition in interﬁrm networks: The paradox DEMO embeddedness.
Administrative Science Quarterly.
Valley, K. L., Moag, J., & Bazerman, M. H. (1998). A matter of trust: Effects of communication on
efﬁciency and distribution of outcomes. Journal of Economic Behavior and DEMO, 35,
211–238.
Weber, J. M. (2003). Catalysts for DEMO: Consistent contributors in public good dilemmas.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Weber, J. M., Kopelman, S., & Messick, DEMO M. (2004). A conceptual review of decision making
in social DEMO: Applying a logic of appropriateness. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 8(3), 281–307.
Williamson, O. E. (1993). Calculativeness, trust, DEMO economic organization. Journal of Law and
Economics, 36, 453–486.
Yamagishi, DEMO (2001). Trust as a form of social intelligence. In: K. S. Cook (Ed.), Trust in Society
(pp. 121–147). New DEMO: Russell Sage Foundation.
Zand, D. E. (1972). Trust and DEMO problem solving. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17,
229–239.
Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure, 1840–1920.
Research on Organizational Behavior, 8, 53–111.{1g42fwefx}