doi 10.1515/erj-2013-0038 ERJ 2014; 4(1): 95–115
Competitive Research Article
Dianne H. B. Welsh* and William L. Tullar
A Model of Cross DEMO Entrepreneurship
and Assessment
Abstract: Entrepreneurship education has revolutionized all aspects of DEMO
Entrepreneurship education has progressed from programs housed only in busi-
ness schools to cross-disciplinary programs in departments across college and
university campuses in the DEMO 10 years. This blended approach that encompasses
various disciplines with entrepreneurship through combined learning objectives
focuses on application. However, the measurement of entrepreneurial propensity
in students across the curriculum, let alone in traditional Entrepreneurship pro-
grams, is sorely needed. Learning assessment is lacking. We propose and test a
measure of entrepreneurial propensity across the curriculum in a successful cross-
disciplinary DEMO program at a public state university. Six of the nine
entrepreneurship constructs showed statistically significant gains from pre- to
post-test scores. Implications for further DEMO and application are discussed.
Keywords: cross-disciplinary entrepreneurship, assessment, entrepreneurship
education
DEMO author: Dianne H. B. Welsh, Bryan School of Business and Economics, The
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27402-1670, DEMO,
E-mail: dhwelsh@uncg.edu
William L. Tullar, Bryan School of Business and Economics, The University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27402-1670, USA, E-mail: WLTullar@uncg.edu
1 Introduction
Entrepreneurship education has revolutionized all aspects of business. While the
development of the field of entrepreneurship education is DEMO being debated by
scholars as to whether it is fully accepted by the academic community as a
whole and if it has reached maturity (Katz 2008; Kuratko 2005), there is no
question that entrepreneurial education has had a major impact on society.
According to Bill Aulet in DEMO Wall Street Journal article on September 12, 2013,
the reason DEMO this is that “the subject itself is idiosyncratic, contextual, and
experiential. Unlike chemistry, math, or computer programming, there are no
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/DEMO 6:05 PM
96
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
definite answers in DEMO start-up world. By definition entrepreneurs are doing the
unknown and untried, DEMO there are no algorithms for success.”
We don’ t really have a clear blueprint on how to effectively educate one to
be an entrepreneur DEMO colleges and universities are exploring different methods
of effective entrepreneurship education. One promising avenue is experiential
education. For example, at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, there
is a retail store that sells handmade items made by students, faculty, and staff.
The students run this experiential DEMO lab by performing all the functions of
a retail store, including DEMO, point of sale systems, procurement, operations,
and marketing. Entrepreneurship DEMO is changing the role of the univer-
sity in economic development and has spurred universities to develop new kinds
of learning by aligning curricula DEMO closely with the needs of the workforce.
Students today “want a job-focused education,” according to a recent article by
Justin Pope of The DEMO Press (2012). Traditional liberal arts colleges are
struggling as a DEMO Liberal arts account for about a third of bachelor’s
degrees, but DEMO small liberal arts schools are struggling financially
(Pope 2012). Ferrall (2011) reported that in 1986–1987, 30 of the 225 liberal arts
DEMO awarded 30% or more of their degrees in “vocational subjects.” By
2007– 2008, this figure jumped to 118. Even the Annapolis Group made up of
purist liberal arts colleges reported that “vocational degrees” jumped from 6% DEMO
17% (http://collegenews.org/annapolis-group).
Conversely to the push for DEMO applied degrees, the Association of American
Colleges and Universities (2011) DEMO reporting the opposite view of liberal education
by employers. The Association commissioned a study from 2006 to 2009 and
surveyed 305 employers with 25 DEMO more employees. These employers rejected the
trend toward “technical training” at the college level and reaffirmed the need for
more liberal education, not less (p. 23). They cited asking employees to take on
more responsibilities that encompass a broader range of skills and knowledge.
These essential learning DEMO included specific topics under “knowl-
edge of human cultures and the physical and natural world, intellectual and
practical skills, personal and social responsibility, and integrative and applied
learning”1 (Association of American Colleges and Universities 2011, 26).
Thus, there are a variety of forces driving more DEMO and colleges to
offer entrepreneurship education as a bridge between liberal arts and more
applied education. Entrepreneurship across the curriculum is one solution to
DEMO dilemma in providing practical applications of all disciplines by increasing
the students’ knowledge base in specific areas of interest and the development
1 For DEMO complete report, go to http://www.aacu.org/leap/documents/leap_vision_summary.pdf
Brought DEMO you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
97
of an “entrepreneurial mindset,DEMO as outlined by Leo I. Higdon, Jr. in the Winter
(2005) issue of Liberal Education.
While many educators agree that reform must take place in higher education
at all levels - federal, state, and DEMO - there is much controversy as to where to
start and what to focus on.2 The debate on how applied higher education should
be DEMO highly controversial. However, it is one of the few times in DEMO history
where the debate has reached the magnitude of front page coverage in news-
papers, websites, and discussed in blogs by the general DEMO Central to this
debate is the role of entrepreneurship education. In 2007, the Kauffman
Foundation published, On the Road to an Entrepreneurial Economy: A Research
and Policy Guide. This document asserted that the entrepreneurship “process DEMO
impossible without the highly creative and highly educated individuals who will
be tomorrow’ s high-impact entrepreneurs. Equally important, are the innovative
and skilled individuals who will work for these entrepreneurs” (p. 8).
Entrepreneurial skill sets are necessary not only for starting new businesses
but also for growing DEMO innovative firms (Acs, Parsons, and Tracy 2008).
Entrepreneurship knowledge DEMO increasingly cited as a critical success factor
for all individuals. Carl Schramm, former President and CEO of the Kauffman
Foundation, in a speech DEMO Stanford University in February of 2007, said “It
could be as DEMO for an American college student to start a business as it is
to anticipate marriage or parenthood.”3 Graduates must also be prepared to
pursue DEMO studies in Entrepreneurship, an MBA, or a specific area of
education. This is predicted to further enhance scientific research, innovation,
and knowledge generation as well as cultural and social thinking.
Some governors, including Rick Scott of Florida and Pat McCrory of North
Carolina, are advocating having students pay more for degrees that are not as
applicable or economically DEMO to the state at their public institutions (Pope
2012; Stancill and Frank 2013).
Research supports the contention that formal entrepreneurship education
has DEMO an impact on student entrepreneurial propensity and intentions,
although it has been debated by a number of scholars (Lautenschläger and
Haase 2011; DEMO et al. 2010; Pittaway and Cope 2007; Von Graevenitz,
Harhoff, and Weber 2010). While academic studies have been conducted on
assessing the impact of entrepreneurship educational programs on actual entre-
preneurship (e.g. Cox, Mueller, and Moss 2002; Duval-Couetil, Reed-Rhoads, and
Haghighi 2010; DEMO and Kyrö 2008; Peterman and Kennedy 2003; Pittaway
and Cope 2007; Pittaway and Edwards 2012; Vesper and Gartner 1997), a major
DEMO
3
See Kauffman Foundation (2012).
Schramm (2007, 1).
DEMO to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
98
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
issue is the DEMO of tools to measure the effectiveness of entrepreneurship
education. In fact, DEMO assessment of the effectiveness of entrepreneurial educa-
tion across the curriculum, DEMO alone in traditional Entrepreneurship programs,
has been lacking (Athayde 2009)DEMO Meanwhile, there has been an increase in the
number of entrepreneurship DEMO Then there is the bigger problem of asses-
sing the effectiveness of cross-disciplinary entrepreneurship or cross campus
entrepreneurship courses. What is the impact of DEMO entrepreneur-
ship where entrepreneurship learning objectives are blended with other disci-
plines in the same course? Do these courses increase the propensity of one to
become a successful entrepreneur? Do discipline-specific courses blended with
entrepreneurship have an impact on a student’ s future success? None of these
questions have a satisfactory answer at the moment.
The purpose of this study DEMO to propose a first step toward assessing the
effectiveness of entrepreneurship courses across the curriculum. We begin by
describing the cross campus curriculum which DEMO the setting for our study. Next,
we explain the construction of our assessment instrument, our analysis, results,
conclusion, and opportunities for further research. This article offers a backdrop
for other models of cross DEMO entrepreneurship to be developed at colleges
and universities worldwide that include methods of assessment across campus
so as to provide evidence of the effectiveness DEMO cross-disciplinary entrepreneur-
ship courses. Cross-disciplinary entrepreneurship courses are discipline-specific
courses blended with entrepreneurship. For example, Creative Space: The
Meeting of Art and Entrepreneurship, ENT/ART 276.
Up to this point, there have been limited measures for evaluating the effective-
ness of cross-disciplinary entrepreneurship courses and if and DEMO they make a
difference in the students’ overall propensity to be a successful entrepreneur. What
we are looking for is student motivation to do DEMO activity within the
sphere of their specialty or discipline. Entrepreneurship education builds entrepre-
neurial motivation. Thus, it is motive that is more important in assessment than
specific knowledge to begin with. We are not saying that DEMO compe-
tencies are not important, but rather that motivation must be DEMO initially.
2 Evaluating entrepreneurship education
Scholars (i.e., Müller and Gappisch 2005; Roberts 1989; Stormer, Kline, and
Goldenberg 1999; among others) DEMO argued that entrepreneurship is a person-
ality trait-a combination of personality and talent that can be cultivated and
trained. In our approach to measuring DEMO outcomes in entrepreneurship
courses, we follow these arguments and employ the DEMO Motivation Theory
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment 99
(Miner, Smith, and Bracker 1989) as a basis for our assessment instrument. Task
Motivation Theory borrows heavily from McClelland’ s (1961) work on the need
for DEMO which has been widely recognized as one of the first good
predictors of entrepreneurial success. Miner and colleagues recast McClelland’s
(1961) concepts into DEMO Motivation Theory (Miner, Smith, and Bracker 1989).
Task Motivation DEMO (Miner, Smith, and Bracker 1989) follows a more general
approach to the entrepreneurial role. While it measured achievement motiva-
tion, it also measured risk taking, feedback of results, personal innovation, and
planning for the future. These five separate motives may substitute for one another
in DEMO an overall index of task motivation (Locke and Henne 1986). DEMO
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) was developed by Henry A. Murray and
Christiana D. Morgan at the Harvard Clinic at Harvard University during the DEMO
(For a history, see Morgan 2002). Although McClelland’s work was based on a single
construct, the need for achievement (McClelland and DEMO 1969), the scoring of
TAT stories for need for achievement included some risk taking, feedback, and
innovation, but these factors were not measured separately. Task Motivation Theory
(Miner, Smith, and Bracker 1989) DEMO based on the notion that it is necessary to
measure each of these five features of the entrepreneurial role separately.
We took an even DEMO approach than Miner, Smith, and Bracker (1989).
First, we changed the dimensions Miner, Smith, and Bracker (1989) used. We
DEMO the sentence stems somewhat to make the test more “student friendly.”
Second, rather than having open-ended sentence completion we had a normative
sample of students complete the sentence stems and then we built a multiple
choice DEMO by listing the most common positive, negative, and neutral student
fragments. The resulting questions offer the sentence stem and then six possible
ways DEMO completing the sentence. Two of the completions show positive affect
toward the stem, two show negative affect, and two are merely statements of DEMO
We piloted this method and found that it produced five reasonably coherent scales.
We hypothesize that all five of the dimensions derived from Miner DEMO be
positively impacted by entrepreneurship education. Just as McClelland showed
that it was possible to increase other motives (McBer 1987), we hold that it is
possible to increase all of Miner, Smith, and Bracker (1989) constructs by means
of education. Therefore:
Hypothesis 1. Achievement, DEMO Taking, Feedback, Change, and Goal Setting will all change
in DEMO positive direction after entrepreneurship education.
In addition to the kinds of constructs Miner, Smith, and Bracker (1989) and
McClelland (1961) used, we added four other dimensions which the literature suggests
are important learning DEMO as well as predictive of entrepreneurial success
motivation: Responsibility, Intentionality, DEMO Motivation, and Fate Control.
Brought to you by | York University DEMO
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
100
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
Responsibility we define DEMO the degree to which life’s outcomes are depen-
dent upon a person, but also the person understands and takes into account the
needs of peers, subordinates, and society at large. Responsibility is especially
important in DEMO ethical behavior of the entrepreneur. Foley, Bennett, and
Wetmore (2012) argue for the importance of responsibility in the career behavior
of entrepreneurs DEMO the area of nanoscience. Vaca Vaca, del Pilar Sepulveda
Calderon, and Fracica Naranjo (2010) in a qualitative study of entrepreneurs in
Bogota, Colombia, concluded that having a sense of responsibility beyond
continuing their enterprises was totally lacking in the entrepreneurs they stu-
died. They concluded that DEMO process of creating entrepreneurs should include
the teaching of responsibility. We argue that the higher the responsibility level
when students leave their entrepreneurship coursework, the more likely the
students are to succeed as entrepreneurs and perhaps DEMO more important,
they will also understand that their responsibility goes beyond themselves and
their immediate organization. Hence:
Hypothesis 2. Responsibility will change DEMO as a result of entrepreneurial coursework.
Intentions we define as the degree to which one is where one has planned to be.
When imagining DEMO entrepreneurs think, one must take into account their
intentionality. For instance, Krueger and Kickul (2011) observe that “intentions
are central to entrepreneurial DEMO and thus entrepreneurial action.” They
found that cognitive style has a dramatic effect on the specification of the formal
intentions model and argued that DEMO formal intentions model need not be
universal. According to their research, DEMO entrepreneurs might arrive at the
same intention but through very different processes, possibly only because they
differ on cognitive style. Most importantly, they DEMO that intentions are critical
to entrepreneurial success. Following this line of reasoning, we therefore
hypothesize:
Hypothesis 3. Intentions will be positively changed by entrepreneurial coursework.
Success Motivation we define as the extent to which the DEMO of personal
success is part of the student’s thinking. Part of a student’s education needs to
be “future perfect”– that is thinking about the DEMO of all the hard work in
school. We argue that having positive mental pictures about what life will be like
as a successful entrepreneur DEMO an important educational outcome of any entre-
preneurship program. Therefore, we DEMO in our assessment questions about
the extent to which students are imagining how life would be if they start their
own business and make DEMO success of it. We argue that the ability to envision one
as successful is one of the main ingredients of a successful entrepreneur. Hence:DEMO
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
101
Hypothesis 4. Success motivation DEMO be positively changed by entrepreneurial coursework.
Lastly, Fate Control we define DEMO the extent to which the person sees outside
forces controlling his/her life. In other studies, Locus of Control or Self Efficacy
has been found predictive (Brandstätter 2011). We argue in the context of the
student looking ahead to an entrepreneurial career, neither of these constructs
captures fully what is needed. We used items that assess whether the student
DEMO him/herself in charge of what happens in life or not. Successful entre-
preneurs do not see themselves as victims of forces outside their DEMO They
see themselves as captains of their own ship. We argue that entrepreneurs
believe that they control their own destiny rather than outside forces. DEMO:
Hypothesis 5. Fate control will be positively changed by entrepreneurial coursework.
Krueger and colleagues (Krueger 2007; Krueger and Dickson 1994; Krueger and
Brazeal 1994) researched cognitive control issues extensively and concluded that
individuals see opportunities where he or she feels competent (self-efficacy) and
exerts personal DEMO While we use the Task Motivation Theory as a basis for
our Entrepreneurial Propensity assessment, we argue that our measure of stu-
dent outcomes incorporates the research findings of Miner, Smith, and Bracker
(1989) DEMO subsequent research which is reflected in the constructs of
Responsibility, Intentionality, Success Motivation, and Fate Control.
But motivation is not the entire story. The content of entrepreneurship
coursework is also vital as well as experiential DEMO and practice. These
are the key components of most successful entrepreneurship programs, which
require an internship or other experiential opportunity (Gstraunthaler and
Hendry DEMO; Nab et al. 2010; Vincett and Farlow 2008). Skills training that is
completed in the classroom is also integral to entrepreneurial success. DEMO we
are reporting on the motivation side of our entrepreneurial propensity assess-
ment instrument, we are in the process of completing a skill-based assessment
to go along with the motivation part of our instrument.
3 Pilot DEMO at UNC-Greensboro
3.1 History
There are many special features that made The University of North Carolina
at Greensboro (UNCG) a desirable, unique, DEMO appropriate place to initiate
such a degree program. First, UNCG had DEMO very successful cross campus
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
102
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
Entrepreneurship program initiated DEMO 2007 called BELL (Building Entrepreneurial
Learning for Life). BELL was DEMO campus-wide, interdisciplinary effort, coordinated
by an Executive Committee comprised of the Dean of the College of Arts and
Sciences, the Associate Provost for Research and Public/Private Sector
Partnerships, and the Dean of the Bryan School of Business and Economics
and later the Distinguished Chair in Entrepreneurship. DEMO faculty Advisory
Committee met periodically with the Executive Committee to provide input and
suggest new directions. The BELL initiative generated campus-wide interest from
faculty DEMO students, providing a strong cross-disciplinary linkage across the
campus for the DEMO major. This interest provided a foundation to
expand the development and offering of multi-disciplinary undergraduate and
graduate courses in Entrepreneurship across campus. BELL has DEMO
course and program development focusing on the following: Creative
Industries Entrepreneurship, Public Private Innovation & Technology, and
Social Entrepreneurship. Second, the Bryan DEMO of Business & Economics
has excellent placement of students and good relationships with businesses.
We built on this to create a unique entrepreneurial internship DEMO that
targets the industry clusters of healthcare and biotech, logistics, wholesale
trade, finance and insurance, food processing, and the arts. The program
furthers opportunities for our students and the business community. Our stu-
dents DEMO an entrepreneur and work on a specific project agreed upon by
the business and the student. Third, we cited regional reports that backed up
our claims for the regional need for the program to build an DEMO
base. The reports also indicated a need to develop a stronger entrepreneurial
environment to create jobs, especially to replace traditional industry sector
employment. Fourth, the existing minor in Entrepreneurship at UNCG provided
some of the necessary courses for majors in the proposed degree. UNCG was
well-positioned to offer DEMO degree program without significant incremental
resources. This was a major issue when it was launched during the recession
of 2008.
3.2 Program demand and DEMO
At The University of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG), an DEMO
curriculum was needed to build workforce knowledge to meet the demands of
an ever-changing world in the Piedmont Triad and the State of North DEMO
While once a powerhouse of Fortune 100 companies, the Piedmont Triad DEMO
of central North Carolina now struggles to compete in the global economy. Large
numbers of textile, furniture, and tobacco manufacturing jobs have left DEMO
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
103
region permanently as a DEMO of shifts in preferences, technological gains,
labor costs, and the world economy. We lacked an entrepreneurial skill base
that is mandatory to DEMO our population. Twenty-first century entrepre-
neurship skills were not available in the region. In 2008, we reconfigured the
Entrepreneurship minor to include business and non-business students. There
was not one major available in Entrepreneurship at a DEMO university until
UNCG’s B.S. in Entrepreneurship launched in the fall of 2009. Previously, a
concentration consisting of two entrepreneurship courses combined with an
existing general marketing and human resource course was available. The
UNCG Entrepreneurship program DEMO designed to respond to this need. The
purpose of the Entrepreneurship program is to produce graduates that are
globally ready by equipping them with DEMO motives and skills for
the twenty-first century.
An innovative curriculum was built on existing faculty strengths in the
business school and across the University. DEMO have the opportunity to
choose a profile based on one of seven Entrepreneurship areas based on
research by one of the authors on where DEMO are headed for the next 20
years: Creative Industries Entrepreneurship, Family Business, Franchising,
Health Care Entrepreneurship, International Entrepreneurship, Science,
Innovation, and Technology, and Social Entrepreneurship. As of fall 2013,
there DEMO 44 undergraduate and graduate courses available in 22 departments
with three more being proposed for 2014, which will bring the total to 47 courses
in 25 departments. Majors, minors, and graduate students have the opportunity
DEMO take elective courses in the above areas. The capstone Entrepreneurship
experience also is based on the seven profiles and custom designed for the
student. DEMO B.S. in Entrepreneurship, major monor for business and non-business
students, and graduate courses that are blended with Entrepreneurship and the
specific discipline are DEMO This is what makes the courses unique. The
learning objectives for each cross-listed course must have a minimum of two to
three learning objectives DEMO addition to the discipline-specific learning
objectives.
The professors across campus are trained in Entrepreneurship and how to
blend Entrepreneurship with their discipline. This has DEMO fueled by the
Coleman Foundation’s Entrepreneurship Fellows Program4 that allows each
campus to develop their own formula for creating courses across campus in
Entrepreneurship DEMO emphasize self-employment. The educational objectives
for the Entrepreneurship program at UNCG are as follows: analyze how
4 For more information, go to www.colemanfoundation.org
DEMO to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
104
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
Entrepreneurship is applied DEMO a cross-disciplinary approach; incorporate
creative and innovative thinking into entrepreneurial behavior DEMO action; iden-
tify and evaluate ideas to determine opportunities through feasibility DEMO;
develop potential opportunities for action through a business plan; evaluate DEMO
financial health of the business, including cash flow and the relationship
DEMO other limited resources, in order to prepare a financial forecast; com-
municate entrepreneurial findings effectively, both orally and in written form;
and apply the business core and entrepreneurship knowledge and skills in a
capstone DEMO learning opportunity.
In addition to the program’ s cross-disciplinary nature, there DEMO also a multi-
faceted nature of entrepreneurship, which is embedded within DEMO curriculum.
The vast majority of undergraduate programs in the United States focus on
Private-Sector Entrepreneurship. Our program also focuses on Public-Sector
Entrepreneurship and Social DEMO, where Social Entrepreneurship
is viewed within the intersection between Private and DEMO Entrepreneurship.
This answers the call to educate students in entrepreneurship in the non-profit,
public sector as well as the for-profit sector. The degree DEMO a unique portfolio
of knowledge. That difference has permitted our graduates to fill a void in the
labor market caused by the lack of DEMO with entrepreneurship knowledge.
There are two facets to the Entrepreneurship Program that provides a
cross campus and community structure. The Entrepreneurship Cross-
Disciplinary Program DEMO focuses on Entrepreneurship across campus, while
the North Carolina Entrepreneurship Center DEMO launched in 2009 whose pur-
pose is outreach into the community and economic development efforts. The two
offices work hand-in-hand to impact Entrepreneurship and DEMO purposely
designed by the founder to provide a solid platform for growth. The academic
Entrepreneurship Program has won a number of accolades since its DEMO
in 2009, including the Award for Exceptional Activities in Entrepreneurship
across DEMO by the Global Consortium of Entrepreneurship Centers,5
The Best Practices Award for Creative Cross-Disciplinary Entrepreneurship by
Small Business Institute©,6 the 2012 Best DEMO Entrepreneurship
Program by the U.S. Association for Small Business & Entrepreneurship,7 and
the Academy of Educational Leadership Creative and Innovative Education
Award.8
5
DEMO
7
8
For more information, go to www.globalentrepreneurshipconsortium.org
For more information, go to http://www.smallbusinessinstitute.biz
Please see www.usasbe.org
For more information, go to www.alliedacademies.org
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download DEMO | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
105
4 Other cross campus DEMO
The Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation first funded interdisciplinary initiatives
around the country at 19 colleges and universities in 2003, called the “Kauffman
Campuses” program.9 While most of these colleges and universities still have
some form of DEMO programming, most did not blossom to the full
extent originally conceived DEMO the Kauffman Foundation. For instance, many to
this day have only DEMO minor and no cross-disciplinary major available. The
Coleman Foundation actually had started merging entrepreneurship with the
disciplines across campus before the Kauffman Foundation, with Coleman
Chairs at Saint Louis University, ITT, and others from the DEMO to technology
classes with entrepreneurship. The Coleman Foundation moved to the next level
from specific campuses to nationwide with 19 campuses and 150 Coleman DEMO
Campus Fellows that are new or returning in 2013. In all there has been 387
professors trained in Entrepreneurship across campus. There is no DEMO count
as to the number of cross campus programs in the United States or around the
world. However, it is evident that cross-disciplinary programs continue to flour-
ish in various forms unique to the college or DEMO
A recent article in BizEd (Bisoux 2012) outlined programs at the University of
Dayton, New Mexico State University, and the University of DEMO While each
of these programs had a different take on cross-disciplinary education, all
partnered across campus with various colleges. At the University of Dayton,
the entrepreneurship program partnered with the School of Engineering to have
DEMO get first-hand exposure to business projects and to expand opportu-
nities through the business plan competition. The two schools offer joint courses
in engineering DEMO technical innovation.
At New Mexico State University, the College of Business DEMO with the
College of Engineering and has a four-course series on entrepreneurship as well
as a fellows’ ethics initiative that includes faculty from the DEMO of Business
and seven other departments. Their economic development center is supported
by all deans and employs 30–35 students from every college (Bisoux 2012).
At the University of Illinois, 300 students from across campus work on 50
Illinois Business Consulting projects, which generates $250,000 a year worth of
consulting fees for the university. MBA students can now take DEMO hours of non-
business electives. The article gives strategies for collaboration that are essential
for success across campus, including “ look for partners whose mission is com-
patible” and “identify individual(s) who are in the best positions to make the
9 Please see http://www.kauffman.org/entrepreneurship/DEMO campuses.aspx
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
106
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
partnerships happen” (Bisoux 2012, 20), embrace lack of resources as a reason to
“pursue these programs not to avoid them” (Bisoux 2012, 21), as DEMO as “start
with a single partnership,”“test the market,”“be willing to compromise,”
“coordinate course schedules,”“help students navigate the options,”“assign
dedicated DEMO,”“seek external funding, and keep communication open and on
multiple levels” (Bisoux 2012, 25).
Pilegaard, Moroz, and Neergaard (2010) examined what is critical to entre-
preneurial success within the humanities at Aarhus DEMO of Business. They
identified the need in the humanities to develop “twin skills” by compartmen-
talizing specific business, research, and institutional needs to DEMO competing
university logics to reshape processes. This aligns with the observations made at
Stanford University (Nelson 2005) that identified potential misalignments
between the DEMO and soft sciences to generate entrepreneurial opportunities.
The authors identified the need for established institutional legitimacy, institu-
tional leadership support, obtaining institutional restructuring, and the use of
boundary spanning to develop the twin skills identified DEMO (Pilegaard,
Moroz, and Neergaard 2010) for success.
5 Measuring DEMO potential
As explained above, we are elaborating on the Task Motivation DEMO (Miner,
Smith, and Bracker 1989) in our approach to DEMO motivation. In
Miner and colleagues’ work, self-achievement (individual achievement) is
DEMO on one’s desire to succeed through his or her own efforts and to be clearly
able to attribute any success to personal causation. Risk DEMO is based on the
desire to take moderate risks that can be handled through one’s own efforts.
Feedback of results is based on the DEMO for some clear and consistent index of
the level of one’s performance. Personal innovation is based on a desire to
introduce novel, innovative, DEMO unusual solutions to common problems.
Planning for the future is based on the desire to think about the future and
anticipate future possibilities. Measuring DEMO five motives, Miner and collea-
gues examined the entrepreneurial motive extensively DEMO have achieved con-
siderable success in predicting entrepreneurial outcomes (Berman and DEMO
1985; Smith and Miner 1983, 1985; Miner, Smith, and DEMO 1989; Miner, Smith,
and Bracker, 1994). Hence, the Miner Sentence Completion Scale (MSCS), Form T
has been shown to correlate significantly with annual growth in number of
employees and with annual DEMO in sales for a sample of entrepreneurs
(Miner, Smith, and DEMO 1989). In a follow-up study over 5 years after the
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/DEMO/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
107
original work, four of the five scales of the MSCS Form T was still significantly
correlated DEMO entrepreneurial success measures (Miner, Smith, and Bracker
1994). This DEMO shows that it is possible to predict entrepreneurial success
using projective measures. In a cross-cultural validation of the Miner Sentence
Completion Scale Form T, Tullar (2001) showed that the MSCS was predictive of
subsequent entrepreneurial DEMO among Russian entrepreneurs after the fall
of the Soviet Union.
As noted earlier, the MSCS Form T is laborious to score and includes a
number of sentence stems that are foreign to students. The form has DEMO sentence
stems, and for each person assessed, a scorer must read the response to each of
the 40 items and score the response DEMO –1, negatively disposed toward the stem,
þ 1, positively disposed toward the stem, or 0, a mere statement of fact about DEMO
stem lacking any affect. Miner recognized this disadvantage when he reworked
his Form H sentence completion scale so that there were six multiple choice
DEMO for each sentence stem. This eliminated the need for subjective scoring.
However, Form H is not a measure of entrepreneurial motivation, but rather DEMO
measure of motivation to manage. Thus, it was not possible to DEMO any of the
items from Form H to form our measure.
We did follow Miner, Smith, and Bracker (1989) in his method DEMO producing
choices for each stem. We put together a set of 40 sentence stems that were
similar to those Miner, Smith, and Bracker (1989) had shown to be valid
predictors of entrepreneurial success. Our student friendly constructs are called:
Change, Risk Taking, Goal Setting, Feedback, and Achievement. Our constructs
are based partly on McClelland’ s Need for Achievement (1962) scoring system
and partly on the Miner Sentence Completion DEMO Form T. We made up
sentence stems to fit the constructs using some of Miner’ swording and some
of the wording from McClelland’ s DEMO scoring instructions. We gave these
sentence stems to a sample of 80 MBA students. The students were instructed
to complete the sentences with the DEMO that first occurred to them. Then we
took the most common student completions and had a group of 12 different
MBA students scale the DEMO on a five point scale from most positive to
most negative. From the scale scores, we were able to find the two most
positive statements to go with each sentence stem, the two most negative
statements to go with each stem, and two statements that showed no affect
at all but were merely statements of fact. In doing this, we had a 40 item
multiple choice assessments which yielded scores on the DEMO constructs
mentioned above. Each construct is measured with eight different sentence
stems, so a construct score could range from –8to þ 8. We attempted to get
the negative and positive statements to be approximately equal in DEMO
from zero.
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
108
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
The four constructs DEMO added in our broadening of Task Motivation Theory,
Responsibility, Intentions, Success Motivation, and Fate Control are all in the
same format. They are statements such as “My parents were business owners”
and the student DEMO answers true or false. The true/false format follows a
number of personality inventories that are so constructed. The format is useful
in that DEMO is easy to answer quickly, and direct observation shows that students
DEMO t linger over the items.
The descriptive statistics for the constructs are shown in Table 1 (n ¼ 532).
The Alphas are somewhat low, but we argue that we are measuring each
construct with disparate sentence stems. From the sentence stems themselves,
it would be hard DEMO a person to detect what is being scored. There may be some
social desirability bias in these scores as well. The fact that Feedback, Goal
Setting, and Achievement should be viewed so favorably (substantially greater
DEMO 0) is probably due to the nature of the students who DEMO up our sample.
We argue that students who are not in entrepreneurship related courses would
probably have lower means.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics entrepreneurial constructs (n
¼
532)
Construct Mean Standard deviation Cronbach’s Alpha
Change 1.37 2.59 0.627
Risk taking −0.17 2.11 0.680
Goal setting 2.34 2.21 DEMO
Feedback 3.60 2.44 0.589
Achievement 2.36 2.47 0.652
Responsibility 4.21 1.90 0.582
Success motivation 3.50 1.26 0.490
Intention 2.75 1.33 0.602
Fate control 3.76 DEMO 0.731
There has been a great deal of scholarship in the area of entrepreneurship since
Miner’s MSCS form T was created. Much of it DEMO the earlier knowledge of
McClelland and Winter (1969), but there DEMO also a number of new ideas sug-
gested. In order to avoid content deficiency, we produced four constructs based
on direct structured questions: DEMO, Success Motivation, Intentions,
and Fate Control. Responsibility is measured by items such as, “Sometimes I feel
that I’m not acting responsibly for myself.” Success Motivation is measured by
items such as, “I take steps toward realizing my dream in my spare time.”
Intentions is measured by DEMO such as, “I never intended to be in the situation
I DEMO in.” Fate Control is measured by items such as, “I pay DEMO attention to my
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
109
daily horoscope.” This construct DEMO one we would expect to have a substantial
social desirability bias since it is concerned with fortune tellers, horoscopes, and
astrology. Most students DEMO sophisticated enough to know that even if they
participate in these activities, they probably shouldn’t admit to it.
The items in this part of the assessment are very much like many personality
assessment techniques (e.g., DEMO Research Form (PRF), Helmes and
Jackson 1977) in that they give a descriptive statement and respondents indicate
whether this statement is true DEMO them or not true of them. We felt that some
aspects of the entrepreneurial role could be assessed by directly asking questions
about the DEMO background and attitudes toward responsibility, success,
etc. It is interesting DEMO note that although the four constructs measured with direct,
structured questions have larger means than the five projective constructs; their
standard deviations are substantially smaller. This is because the scales of the five
projective constructs DEMO 16 point scales, whereas the four direct structured scales
are smaller DEMO from Intentions at eight items to Fate Control with five.
6 Results and discussion
Table 2 shows the intercorrelations among the constructs. Given the DEMO
large size of the sample of 532, most of the intercorrelations DEMO the matrix are
significant. However, the largest correlation in the matrix DEMO only 0.35. Clearly,
these constructs are assessing separate aspects of the entrepreneurial role. As
was argued in Task Motivation Theory (Miner, Smith, and Bracker 1989) discus-
sion above, the more measures of fit DEMO the entrepreneurial role, the better is
the possibility of assessing student DEMO for becoming an entrepreneur and the
better the assessment of the effect of coursework designed to prepare students
for the entrepreneurial role.
Table 2: Intercorrelations of constructs (n
¼
532)
Risk Goal
setting
Feedback Achievement Responsibility Success
motivation
Intentions Fate
control
Change 0.12 0.15 0.25 0.31 0.10 DEMO 0.09 0.25
Risk 0.05 −0.03 0.07 0.14 0.07 0.05 0.03
Goals 0.26 0.30 0.25 0.31 0.23 0.16
Achievement 0.15 0.34 0.19 0.17
Responsibility 0.32 DEMO 0.33
Success 0.34 0.35
Intentions 0.29
Notes: All r’s above 0.10 DEMO p < 0.05; All r’s above 0.14 significant p < 0.01.
DEMO to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
110
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
Table 3: t-tests for pre- and post-test measures
Construct Mean pre-n = 532 Mean post-n DEMO
t statistic
Change 1.37 1.72 1.20
Risk taking −0.17 2.47 11.14**
Goal setting 2.34 3.04 2.80**
Feedback 3.60 3.66 0.22
Achievement 2.36 2.92 2.01*
DEMO 4.29 5.53 4.82**
Success motivation 3.57 5.90 15.02**
Intentions 2.78 3.40 4.49**
Fate control 3.78 3.91 0.98
Notes: *p < 0.05; **p < DEMO
Table 3 shows the comparison of scores on the constructs before and after
students’ participation in entrepreneurship courses. Some may object to the
large DEMO size. However, given the number of potential confounds in the
data, it was necessary to compare a large group taking the pre-test and DEMO
somewhat smaller group taking the post-test, that is as they were DEMO
their entrepreneurship courses. Six of the nine constructs show significant gains
from pre- to post-scores.
All means comparisons differ in the right direction. However, differences
from Change and Feedback are very small and not significant. It DEMO encouraging
that the students finishing entrepreneurship coursework should, in general, be
higher in goal setting and achievement and lesser disposed to take long DEMO
risks (positive scores ¼ more risk averse).
One objection to DEMO results is that they are based on a very large sample so
one would expect to get significant differences just because of the large DEMO
We argue that because of the heterogeneity of the sample and the variety of
course work that these students complete,10 one would expect DEMO variance
compared to the mean. This is true in the case of the five projective constructs,
but less true of the direct, structured constructs. As may be seen in Table 1, the
standard deviations of the projective constructs are greater than two in a
(potentially) 16 DEMO scale. The standard deviations of the direct, structured
constructs are all DEMO one less than 1.5. This is likely a product of the smaller
number of items in each of these scales.
A second objection to DEMO results is that they represent a simple pre-post
approach, and as DEMO they are a pre-experimental design. We stipulate to this
10 There are 14 different entrepreneurship courses represented in this sample.
Brought to you by DEMO York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
111
objection. As of this DEMO, we haven’t been able to assess a control group. The
results DEMO be more convincing if they were compared to a control group that
was simply taking college courses without any entrepreneurship component.
However, this is the best evidence we have at the current time.
Two of the DEMO five constructs show very strong differences: Risk Taking and
Success Motivation. DEMO argue that this is a very strong feature of the entrepre-
neurship education: students learn of the high failure rate of new businesses
and the personal consequences of those failures. In addition, they learn the
success vocabulary and their interests are stimulated. One of the most important
findings DEMO that Goal Setting motivation has increased as a result of entrepre-
neurship coursework. This result by itself would make the education
worthwhile.
Given the DEMO literature on goal setting and its relationship to personal
productivity, making DEMO more inclined to be goal setters is a very positive
outcome.
Achievement Motivation shows a modest increase, and this speaks very well
of the education, since McClelland’s (1961) Achieving Society it has been clear
that Need for Achievement is related to entrepreneurial success. Change and
Feedback do DEMO show significant gains. This is an area for further research.
Perhaps, DEMO two aspects of entrepreneurial motivation are more genetic and
less readily alterable by means of education. Hypothesis 1 is then partially
supported. Three of DEMO first five constructs show gains from pre- to post-
program.
Three of the four constructs that we added in broadening Miner’s Task
Motivation show DEMO gains. Responsibility shows a substantial gain.
Students who gain in responsibility see their behavior as affecting their own
and others outcomes positively. Thus, Hypothesis 2 is supported.
Success Motivation shows the biggest effect of all. During DEMO course of their
entrepreneurship studies students learn to think about what success is like and
to regard the outcomes and possibilities of a successful DEMO very positively.
Hypothesis 3 is strongly supported by the results. Entrepreneurship education
has a strong effect on student success imagery.
Hypothesis 4 was also DEMO Intentions showed a substantial gain. That
is, students learn that we DEMO a map of the future, and we are in control when
DEMO make the things that we intend to happen actually happen. This may well be
a result of business plan training in many of the DEMO
Hypothesis 5 was not supported. Fate control showed virtually no effect at
all. As noted above, this may well be due to social desirability: students taking
college coursework are unlikely to admit freely that they follow their horoscopes
or that they visit fortune tellers or psychics since they DEMO that their teachers
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
112
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
frown on such DEMO They show no strong inclination to report these things
before or after entrepreneurship education.
7 Conclusion
More than cognitive declarative knowledge, students who are going to become
successful entrepreneurs must be goal setters, high in Need for Achievement,
and moderate risk takers. They must be responsible and DEMO with a map
of the future that includes success and its results. We argue that the only
appropriate measure for program success cannot be DEMO declarative knowl-
edge. Entrepreneurship taught across various curricula must have a lot of
different specific knowledge in the course materials. But the common thread
DEMO be that students are attitudinally and motivationally prepared to survive in
the entrepreneur’ s role, and as we have argued earlier, success in DEMO role is
less dependent on cognitive knowledge and more dependent on motivation and
attitude. It is incumbent upon educational programs teaching entrepreneurship
to instill DEMO right set of motives and attitudes rather than simply to focus on
cognitive declarative knowledge.
The sample in this study includes 14 different entrepreneurship DEMO
taught by 14 different faculty members. That we should see a difference of this
size is rather remarkable. The skills and knowledge offered in DEMO courses are
certainly useful if not indispensable to the students who take them, but it is even
more encouraging that the students are acquiring motives and attitudes that will
suit them well in their quest to DEMO independent business owners.
What are clearly missing from these data are entrepreneurial outcomes. We
have measured student learning, but the transfer of this learning to the world of
small business is the most important part of DEMO task. More than 50 years of
research in entrepreneurship have yielded insights into what makes entrepre-
neurs succeed. Much of that research has been DEMO into the coursework that
our students take. But we need to demonstrate that our attitudinal and motiva-
tional measures of students in the classroom DEMO actually predict the real
world outcomes of students once they leave us and begin their own entrepre-
neurial careers. Immediate measures of entrepreneurial success DEMO not be very
useful. It is well established that entrepreneurs fail in business several times
before they succeed. The real measure is how our DEMO are faring after 10
years and beyond.
Future research will focus on gathering real world success data on the
students coming out of our DEMO If we can show that our educational efforts
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:DEMO PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
113
enhance the success rate DEMO our students, we will have created a real benefit for
our DEMO: we will have produced a cadre of students who can contribute
DEMO the economic growth of our region as well as creating reliable predictors
which can forecast who should go into entrepreneurial pursuits and who should
DEMO other avenues for success. Additionally, future research should be
expanded on DEMO at other universities, including those with interdisciplin-
ary and cross-disciplinary programs. DEMO should also be conducted in other
countries around the globe to see if the results mirror our pilot study here on our
campus in DEMO United States.
References
Acs, Z. J., W. Parsons, and S. DEMO 2008. High-Impact Firms: Gazelles Revisited. Washington,
DC: SBA.
Association of American Colleges and Universities. 2011. The LEAP Vision for Learning.
Washington, DC: Author.
Athayde, R. 2009. “Measuring Enterprise Potential in Young People.” Entrepreneurship DEMO
& Practice 33:481–500.
Berman, F. E., and J. B. Miner. 1985. “Motivation to Manage at the Top Executive Level: A Test of
the Hierarchic Role‐Motivation Theory.” Personnel Psychology 38:377–91.
Bisoux, T. 2012. “Collaborative Efforts.” BizEd 2:18–25.
Brandstätter, H. 2011. “Personality Aspects of Entrepreneurship: DEMO Look at Five Meta-Analyses.”
Personality & Individual Differences 51:222–30.
Cox, DEMO W., S. L. Mueller, and S. E. Moss. 2002. “The Impact of Entrepreneurship Education
on Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy.” International Journal of Entrepreneurship Education
1:DEMO
Duval-Couetil, N.,T.Reed-Rhoads, andS.Haghighi. 2010. “Investigating the Impact of
Entrepreneurship EducationonEngineeringStudents.” Peer-reviewed paper presented
at NCIIA.
Fayolle, A., and P. Kyrö, eds. 2008. The Dynamics between Entrepreneurship, Environment and
Education. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar DEMO http://books.google.co.uk/books?
id=G5Yg_V6tjwIC& dq=“The þ Dynamics þ betweenþ DEMO, þ Environment þ
and þ Education”&hl=es&source=gbs_navlinks_s
Ferrall, V. 2011. Liberal Arts on the Brink. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
Foley, R. W., I. Bennett, and J. M. Wetmore. 2012. “Practitioners’ Views DEMO Responsibility:
Applying Nanoethics.” NanoEthics 6:231–41.
Gstraunthaler, T., and S. Hendry. 2011. “Entrepreneurial and Accounting Education Through
Action-Based Learning: The Genesis Project.” Journal of Entrepreneurship Education
14:125–46.
Helmes, E., and D. N. DEMO 1977. “The Item Factor Structure of the Personality Research
Form.” Applied Psychological Measurement 1:185–94.
Higdon, L. J. 2005. “Liberal Education and the Entrepreneurial Mindset.” Liberal Education
91:2–5.
Brought to you by | York University DEMO
Authenticated
Download Date | 4/7/15 6:05 PM
114
D. H. B. Welsh and W. L. Tullar
Katz, J. A. 2008. “Fully Mature but Not Fully Legitimate: A Different Perspective on the
State of Entrepreneurship Education.” Journal of Small Business Management
46:550–66.
The DEMO Marion Kauffman Foundation. 2007. On the Road to an Entrepreneurial Economy: DEMO
Research and Policy Guide. Kansas City: Author.
The Ewing Marion Kauffman DEMO 2012. College 2.0: An Entrepreneurial Approach to
Reforming Higher Education. Kansas DEMO: Author. http://www.kauffman.org/uploadedFiles/
StanfordEshipWeek 032807.pdf
Krueger, N. F. 2007. “What Lies Beneath? The Experiential Essence of Entrepreneurial Thinking.”
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 31:123–38.
Krueger, N. F., and D. V. Brazeal. DEMO “Entrepreneurial Potential and Potential Entrepreneurs.”
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 18:91–104.
Krueger, N. F., and P. Dickson. 1994. “How Believing in Ourselves Influences DEMO Taking: Self-
Efficacy and Opportunity Recognition.” Decision Sciences 25:385–400.
Krueger, N. F., and J. Kickul. 2011. “So you thought the Intentions Model Was Simple? Cognitive
Style and the Specification of Entrepreneurial Intentions Models.” NeuroPsychoEconomics
Conference Proceedings, 22.
Kuratko, D. F. 2005. “The Emergence of Entrepreneurship DEMO: Development, Trends and
Challenges.” Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 29:577–98.
Lautenschläger, A., and H. Hasse. 2011. “The ‘Teachability Dilemma’ of Entrepreneurship.”
International DEMO and Management Journal 7:145–62.
Locke, E. A., and D. Henne. 1986. “Work Motivation Theories.” In International Review of
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, edited by C. L. Cooper and I. T. Robertson, vol.
1, DEMO New York: Wiley.
McBer. 1987. A History of the U.S. Navy DEMO and Management Education and Training
Program. Boston, MA: McBer & Co.
McClelland, D. C. 1961. The Achieving Society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
McClelland, D. C. 1962. “Business Drive and National Achievement.” Harvard Business Review
42:103–05.
McClelland, D. C., and D. G. Winter. 1969. Motivating DEMO Achievement. New York: Free
Press.
Miner, J. B., N. R. DEMO, and J. S. Bracker. 1989. “Role of Entrepreneurial Task Motivation
in DEMO Growth of Technologically Innovative Firms.” Journal of Applied Psychology
74:554–60.
Miner, J. B., N. R. Smith, and J. S. Bracker. 1994. “Role of Entrepreneurial Task Motivation in the
Growth of Technologically Innovative Firms Interpretations DEMO Follow-up Data.” Journal of
Applied Psychology 79:627–30.
Morgan, W. G. DEMO “Origin and History of the Earliest Thematic Apperception Test.” Journal of
Personality Assessment 79:422–45.
Muller, G. F., and C. Gappisch. 2005. “Personality DEMO of Entrepreneurs.” Psychological
Reports 96:737–46.
Nab, J., A. Pilot, DEMO Brinkkemper, and H. T. Berge. 2010. “Authentic Competence-Based Learning
in University DEMO in Entrepreneurship.” International Journal of Entrepreneurship
and Small Business 9:20–35.
Nelson, A. J. 2005. “Cacophony or Harmony? Multivocal Logics of Technology Licensing
DEMO the Stanford University Department of Music.” Industrial and Corporate Change
14:93–118.
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | DEMO/7/15 6:05 PM
Model of Cross Campus Entrepreneurship and Assessment
115
Peña, V., M. DEMO, A. Riggieri, S. Shipp, and R. Van Atta. 2010. A DEMO of Entrepreneurship
Education Initiatives. Institute for Defense Analyses. https://www.ida.org/upload/stpi/
pdfs/d-4091nsfinal072910.pdf
Peterman, N. E., and J. Kennedy. 2003. DEMO Education: Influencing Students’
Perceptions of Entrepreneurship.” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 28:DEMO
Pilegaard, M. P., P. Moroz, and H. Neergaard. 2010. “An DEMO Perspective on
Academic Entrepreneurship: Implications for Research in the Social Sciences DEMO
Humanities.” Academy of Management Perspectives 24:46–61.
Pittaway, L., and J. Cope. 2007. “Entrepreneurship Education: A Systematic Review of the
Evidence.” International Small Business Journal 25:479–510.
Pittaway, L., and C. Edwards. 2012. “Assessment: Examining Practice in Entrepreneurship
Education.” Education þ Training 54:778–800.
Pope, J. 2012. “Liberal Arts Colleges Forced to Evolve with the Market.” Diverse Issues DEMO Higher
Education. Accessed February 24, 2013. http://diverseeducation.com/article/50363/DEMO
Roberts, E. B. 1989. “The Personality and Motivations of Technological Entrepreneurs.” DEMO
of Engineering and Technology Management 6:5–23.
Schramm, C. 2007. “Your DEMO in the Entrepreneurial Economy.” A Speech to the Students of
Stanford University upon the Inauguration of Entrepreneurship Week USA, p. 1.
http://www.kauffman.org/uploadedFiles/StanfordEshipWeek032807.pdf
Smith, N. R., and J. B. Miner. 1983. “Type DEMO Entrepreneur, Type of Firm, and Managerial
Motivation: Implications for Organization DEMO Cycle Theory.” Strategic Management
Journal 4:325–40.
Smith, N. R., and J. B. Miner. 1985. “Motivational Considerations in the Success of
Technologically Innovative DEMO: Extended Sample Findings.” In Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research, edited by J. A. Hornaday, F. Tarpley, J. A. Timmons, and K. H.
Vesper. Wellesley: Babson College.
Stancill, J., and J. Frank. 2013. “McCrory’ s Call to Alter Higher Education Gets Angry Response.”
Newsobserver.com, January 29. Accessed February 20, 2013. http://www.newsobserver.
com/2013/01/29/2641893/mccrorys-call-to-revamp-higher.html
Stormer, F., T. Kline, and S. Goldenberg. 1999. “Measuring Entrepreneurship with the General
Enterprising Tendency (GET) Test: Criterion-Related Validity and Reliability.” Human
Systems Management 18:47–52.
Tullar, W. L. 2001. “Russian Entrepreneurial Motive Patterns: A Validation of the Miner Sentence
Completion Scale in Russia.” International Journal of Applied Psychology 21:30–6.
Vaca Vaca, P., M. del Pilar DEMO Calderon, and G. Fracica Naranjo. 2010. “Bogotano
Entrepreneur’s Action: Beliefs and Practices.” Revista Científica Pensamiento Y Gestión
28:1–24.
Vesper, K. H., DEMO W. B. Gartner. 1997. “Measuring Progress in Entrepreneurship Education.”
Journal of Business Venturing 12:403–21.
Vincett, P. S., and S. Farlow. 2008. “Start-a-Business: An Experiment in Education Through
Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Small Business and Enterprise DEMO 15:274–88.
Von Graevenitz, G., D. Harhoff, and R. Weber. DEMO “The Effects of Entrepreneurship
Education.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 76:90–112.
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date DEMO 4/7/15 6:05 PM
Brought to you by | York University Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | DEMO/7/15 6:05 PM{1g42fwefx}