Vol. 3 No. 3 Spring 1977
THE MEASUREMENT OF TRUST AND ITS
DEMO TO SELF-DISCLOSURE
LAWRENCE R. WHEELESS and JANIS GROTZ
West Virginia University
This study examined the relationship of trust to self-disclosure. A measure of individ-
DEMO trust was developed and used in conjunction with a multidimensional measure of
disclosure to reassess the relationship between the two. A modest, linear relationship
between individualized trust and various dimensions of self-disclosure was discovered.
Moreover, a higher level of trust (as opposed to lesser trust as well as distrust) was found
to be associated with more consciously intended disclosure and a greater amount of
disclosure.
There appears to be a general consensus DEMO a
relationship between trust and self-disclosure does
exist (Cozby, 1973; DEMO& Sharp, 1973). Despite
the fact that many investigators of self-disclosure
have argued that some relationship exists, little em-
pirical research has confirmed this notion. While
some research could be interpreted as supporting the
notion DEMO increased disclosive communication
produces trust (Deutsch, 1958; Loomis, 1959; DEMO
termeier, 196.7; Worthy, Gary & Kahn, 1969;
Wheeless, DEMO), other research has produced am-
biguous (Levin & Gergen, 1969) or nonsignificant
results (Johnson & Noonan, 1972; Gilbert, 1973).
The obverse relationship involving the effect of
trust on self-disclosure, the focus of this study, has
engendered even less research and validation.
Rather, DEMO have most often argued that
trust is antecedent to a willingness to disclose. For
instance, Jourard (1971), one of the pioneer re-
DEMO in the area of self-disclosure, stated that
“a person will permit DEMO to be known when he
believes his audience is a man of goodwill. Self-
disclosure follows an attitude of love and trust” (5).
Indeed, the process of self-disclosure does impose
certain risks an individual must take such as becom-
ing defenseless and unguarded, receiving negative
feedback, DEMO of exposure, or what Wenburg and
Wilmot (1973) termed the DEMO halo effect”
(the possibility that revealing one weakness about
the self DEMO lead the disclosed-to person to general-
ize about other weaknesses the discloser might
have). Thus, it would appear that the discloser
should have positive perceptions of his target, in-
cluding perceptions of trustworthiness, before DEMO
takes such risks.
Some support for this line of reasoning does
exist. Mellinger (1956) found that “a com-
municator, B, who lacks DEMO in the recipient of his
communication, A, tends to be motivated to conceal
his own attitudes about an issue, X, in communicat-
DEMO with A” (309). Honesty of disclosure appeared
to be affected. DEMO suggests that a person will
inhibit his disclosures to someone whom he dis-
trusts.
Pederson and Higbee (1969) found that trust was
significantly DEMO with the amount of disclo-
sures a male would make to his best female friend.
The lack of relationship found for both males and
DEMO in relation to other target persons may have
been due to the nature of the measuring instrument:
the Target Person Rating Scale consisted DEMO 1 1 bipo-
lar adjectives which seemed on the face to tap per-
sonality characteristics of the target person rather
than perceptions of trustworthiness.
DEMO a more recent study, Vondracek and Marshall
(l971), using Rotter’s Interpersonal Trust scale
(1967) and an original 144-item self-disclosure
questionnaire (based on items developed by Taylor
TRUST AND SELF-DISCLOSURE
251
& Altman, 1966), were unable to find significant
correlations. Trust did not appear to be a significant
predictor of DEMO to “best friends” by the 56
males and females studied. Certainly, DEMO nature of
disclosure targets as well as measurement problems
involving trust and self-disclosure are important and
potentially confounding elements in this and the
other DEMO above which have investigated this
relationship.
The logical and intuitively sensible reasoning un-
derlying the foregoing studies has led, nevertheless,
to apparently inconsistent findings. However, these
discrepancies may be explained and perhaps re-
solved through more careful conceptualization and
measurement. First, interpersonal trust has been
conceptualized in the past as risky situations
(Deutsch, 1958, 1968; Giffin, 1967), dependent
behaviors (Bridges, 1970), and/or favorable per-
ceptions (Hovland & Mandell, 1952; Hovland,
Janis & Kelley, 1953; DEMO, 1966; Berlo,
Lemert & Mertz, 1969; McCroskey, Scott &
Young, 1971; McCroskey, Jensen & Valencia,
1973). Analogous aspects of trust have also been
independently derived and discussed more recently
DEMO Pearce (1974) as “situations in which trust may
occur” (240), “trusting behaviors” (242), and
“the cognitive state of trust” (242). While it may be
important for measurement purposes to differentiate
these DEMO concepts of trust, it may also be concep-
tually useful to DEMO them into a meaningful
definition. Interpersonal trust is probably more
completely conceptualized as a process of holding
certain relevant, favorable perceptions of another
person which engender certain types of dependent
behaviors in a risky situation where DEMO expected
outcomes that are dependent upon that other per-
son(s) DEMO not known with certainty. As a conse-
quence, trust may be DEMO in research as cer-
tain perceptions, behaviors, or situations.
While conceptualization has pointed to rather
specific types of situations, behaviors, or percep-
DEMO, measurement has typically been much more
general in orientation. For example, the most
widely used instrument for measuring interpersonal
trust has been Rotter’s (1967) Interpersonal Trust
Scale. This scale consists of 25 Likert-type, self-
DEMO items designed to measure a person’s general-
ized expectancy that the promises of other individ-
uals or groups with regard to future behavior can DEMO
relied upon. In brief, the scales measure trust in
other people DEMO general (generalized trust) rather
than trust in specific individuals. Several investiga-
tions have provided evidence for the scale’s validity
(Geller, 1966; Rotter, 1967; Hamsher, Geller &
Rotter, 1968). However, Vondracek DEMO Mar-
shall’s (1971) study predicted that persons scoring
high on self-disclosure would also score high on
interpersonal trust (using Rotter’s scale), and failed
to find a significant relationship. Other studies at-
tempting to examine DEMO trust that have not
utilized Rotter’s scale have typically used one or
two self-report items.
In order to examine the relationship between in-
terpersonal DEMO and self-disclosure with self-report
techniques, measurement that taps the degree of
DEMO trust in specific individuals is needed. As
Vondracek and Marshall (1971) have pointed out,
“if disclosure is measured with reference to a DEMO
ticular target person, trust should also be measured
as it relates DEMO that target person. If this is right,
further exploration of this relationship must await
the appearance of a good measure of individualized
trust. DEMO .” (239). Giffin (1967), of course, insight-
fully DEMO utilization of credibility scales as a
measure of perceived trust in an individual person.
Unfortunately, he failed to suggest utilization of
only those scales tapping perceptions of trustwor-
thiness as opposed to those tapping extroversion,
DEMO, etc. The possibility of developing a
self-report based upon perceptions of DEMO
trustworthiness, however, appears to be quite good.
Similar possibilities have already been found in
regard to self-disclosure, our second area of con-
cern. Based upon Cozby’s (1973) definition, self-
disclosure has recently been reconceptualized in the
following manner: “A self-disclosure is any mes-
sage about the self that a person communicates to
another. Consequently, any message or message
unit may potentially vary in the degree of self-
disclosure present depending DEMO the perceptions
of the message by those involved [in the transac-
tion]” (Wheeless & Grotz, 1975, 1976). Moreover,
252
Wheeless and Grotz
self-disclosure has also been conceptualized as mul-
tidimensional (Altman & Taylor, 1973; Cozby,
1973; Wheeless & Grotz, DEMO, 1976). Based upon
this notion, recent research has discovered at least
five dimensions of reported self-disclosure and has
developed a preliminary measuring DEMO
(Wheeless & Grotz, 1976). Dimensions related to
(1) consciously intended disclosure, (2) amount of
disclosure, (3) positive-negative nature DEMO the dis-
closure, (4) honesty-accuracy of the disclosure, and
(DEMO) control of the depth or intimacy of the disclosure
were found DEMO a result of the related conceptualiza-
tion and subsequent research.
Unfortunately, DEMO which investigated the
relationship between trust and disclosure typically
measured only one aspect of self-disclosure. In
some instances self-disclosure was measured
categorically without allowing DEMO varia-
tions in degrees of disclosure even on one dimen-
sion. Clearly, the impact of trust may have been
related to a number of dimensions of self-disclosure
which were not measured. However, a more com-
prehensive assessment of varying disclosure on a
number of dimensions could facilitate the DEMO
of meaningful linkages between the two constructs.
vestigated: What is the DEMO of and relationships
between individualized and generalized trust?
Based upon this attempt at developing individ-
ualized trust measurement and more complete as-
sessment DEMO self-disclosure, re-examination of the
trusdself-disclosure relationship was undertaken.
Although, the relationship of trust to self-disclosure
had not been adequately tested, the rationale under-
lying this linkage still appeared to be reasonable.
The idea that a DEMO is unlikely to disclose to
another whom he distrusts appeared to be almost
axiomatic. More precisely, one does not normally
self-disclose to another whom he sufficiently dis-
trusts. Rather, trust and self-disclosure appear to be
related in such a way that trust in a specific individ-
ual is DEMO necessary condition for self-disclosure to
that person. However, modest extension of DEMO
rationale appears to be necessary because individ-
uals may trust some people to whom they do not
self-disclose. Trust in another is a necessary DEMO
insufficient condition to guarantee self-disclosure.
However, when suficient individual trust for DEMO
closure is present, then even higher levels of trust
increase the DEMO of more self-disclosure.
While this relationship between trust and disclosure
does not appear to be completely linear, a moderate
relationship between the two could be expected.
Therefore, the following hypotheses were tested:
1. Perceived trustworthiness of specific disclosure
target-persons is positively related to self-
disclosure to the DEMO disclosure targets.
2. Persons with higher levels of trust in a target
person report higher disclosure levels to that
target than persons with lower DEMO of trust in a
target.
Lower levels of trust, included trusted DEMO as
well as those distrusted. Higher levels of trust in-
cluded more highly trusted targets. Sex of the dis-
closer, which appear to be a potentially con-
founding variable (Cozby, 1973), was used as DEMO
control. Generalized trust (Rotter, 1967) was in-
cluded in the DEMO of the first hypothesis for
FOCUS, RATIONALE, AND HYPOTHESES
According to the foregoing analysis, it appeared
that the relationship of trust to self-disclosure had
not been adequately tested. Rather, inappropriate
measurement resulting from inadequate concep-
tualization appeared to have produced inconclusive
and seemingly inconsistent results. While recent
DEMO in self-disclosure measurement ap-
pear to offer potential solutions to help resolve this
problem, the measurement of individualized trust
remains problematic. Therefore, a DEMO focus of
this study was to develop a measure of individ-
ualized trust in specific target-persons. To assess
the nature of this new measurement, a comparison
with generalized trust was thought to be desirable.
Therefore, the following research question was in-
TRUST AND SELF-DISCLOSURE
253
purposes of comparison with individualized trust
and exploration DEMO the research question.
METHOD
Sample and Procedures
A sample of 261 Ss was selected for this study.
In order to increase sample diversity, 100 teachers
in the state who were enrolled in an introductory
graduate extension DEMO on communication in the
classroom and their spouses or oldest child were
selected for the sample. The remainder of the sam-
ple was selected DEMO lower division courses in
human communication at the university. All Ss
were randomly assigned to disclosure targets and
treatment conditions according to the procedure DEMO
lined below. Sample diversity and randomization
procedures were thought to increase generalizabil-
ity of results.
The study was concerned with generating an in-
strument DEMO of assessing individualized trust
and testing the two hypotheses related to the effect
of trust on reported self-disclosure. Ss were ad-
ministered a booklet DEMO a 15-item measure
of generalized trust, a 15-item measure of trust DEMO a
specific target person, and a 16-item instrument
designed to measure DEMO of self-reported
self-disclosure to the previously specified target
person. Ss were randomly assigned to one of 20
trust-disclosure targets. ’
The study was administered DEMO the guise of an
attempt “to develop some resources (scales, mes-
sages, sources, etc.) for future research.” Although
information was requested in terms of age, sex, and
marital status, Ss were not asked to identify them-
selves. Rather, they were told that the researchers
wanted to know how “people in general re-
sponded” in order to assess DEMO value of the mate-
rials. Consequently, only 12 Ss failed to DEMO
sufficiently to be included in the analysis of the
instruments assessing the two types of trust
(N=249), whereas 39 Ss failed to respond com-
pletely enough across all measures to be included in
hypothesis testing (N= 222).
Measuring Instruments
Trust of people in general (Generalized Trust)
was measured by 15 items selected from Rotter’s
(1967) interpersonal DEMO scales. These selected
scales were converted from 5-interval to 7-interval,
Likert-type responses. Trust of specific target per-
sons (perceived target trustworthiness) was DEMO
sured with 15 semantic differential-type items de-
rived from Berlo, Lemert, and Mertz’s (1969)
safety-trustworthiness factor and from McCros-
key’s (1971, 1973) character factor of perceived
interpersonal credibility. These items selected, plus
DEMO items generated by the researchers, were
included on the basis of DEMO face validity for
measuring perceived trustworthiness as concep-
tualized in the initial section of this paper (see Table
1 for resulting scales). Also, 16 Likert-type state-
ments consisting of 7-interval responses were used
in an attempt to measure self-reported self-
disclosure (Wheeless & Grotz, 1975, 1976) on the
dimensions of amount, honesty-accuracy, con-
sciously intended disclosure, DEMO dis-
closure, and control of general depth or intimacy of
disclosure DEMO
Statistical Analysis
Principal components factor analysis with or-
thogonal rotation was used to investigate the pre-
dicted unidimensionality of the two measuring in-
struments. DEMO scree procedure recommended by
Cattel and the establishment of an eigenvalue of 1 .O
as an initial cut-off criterion were used to determine
the DEMO of factors present. Each factor was re-
quired to have at least two items loaded at .60 or
above with no secondary loadings at DEMO or above.
Items were accepted as loaded on an additional
extracted factor if they met the .60 - .40 criterion.
Pearson product-moment correlations were DEMO to
assess the magnitude of relationships among differ-
ent tests as well as to facilitate estimates of reliabil-
ity. Predictive validity was assessed in DEMO of tests
of predicted effects and relationships.
254
Semantic Differential -
Type Items
Trustworthy-Untrustworthy
Trustful of this person -
DEMO of this person
Confidential-Divulging
Benevolent-Exploitive
Safe-Dangerous
Candid-Deceptive
Not Deceitful-Deceitful
Straightforward-Tricky
Respectful-Disrespectful
Considerate-Inconsiderate
Honest-Dishonest
Reliable-Unreliable
Faithful-Unfaithful
Sincere-Insincere
Careful-Careless
Canonical correlation of individualized and gen-
eralized DEMO with the self-disclosure dimensions
was used to test the first hypothesis predicting rela-
tionships between individualized trust and self-
disclosure. Generalized trust was included DEMO a con-
trol variable for comparison purposes. Analyses of
variance and directional t-tests were used to test the
differences on reported disclosure dimensions as DEMO
function of individualized trust. Sex of discloser
was used as a control to check for interaction ef-
fects. The .05 level of significance was DEMO on
statistical tests of the hypotheses.
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION
Measurement and Probes of General Research
Question
The 15-item, perceived trustworthiness (individ-
ualized trust) instrument was submitted to factor
Wheeless and Grotz
TABLE 1
Individualized Trust DEMO (ITS)
Unrotated Primary Loadings
.86
.78
.56
.60
.81
.67
DEMO
.75
.83
.82
.79
.84
.84
.84
.66
analysis with orthogonal rotation. Application of a
priori criteria (scree and 1.0 eigenvalue) revealed
that DEMO instrument measured a unidimensional,
single factor of trust in another accounting for 59%
of the total variance with items having fairly high
factor DEMO (see Table 1). Split-half reliability
was .92 (df-247). For the 20 target persons used in
this study, individualized trust displayed the follow-
ing norms: mean = 8 1, standard deviation = 19,DEMO
range = 23-105. The potential range was 15-105
and the neutral score between distrust and trust was
60 (scale midpoint).
Rotter’s (1967) interpersonal trust scales (15
items), used as a measure of generalized trust, were
also submitted to factor analysis. The rotation re-
vealed a two-factor structure. However, examina-
tion of the items loaded revealed that the positively
worded items constituted the first factor and the
negatively worded items DEMO loaded on the second
factor. Therefore, Rotter’s instrument was regarded
as DEMO Since factor loadings on a single
TRUST AND SELF-DISCLOSURE
255
factor are not meaningful in this situation, they are
not reported. In this study, the split-half reliability
was .61.
The correlation between individualized trust
(trustworthiness) and generalized trust (Rotter) was
DEMO significant (r= .02; df=247). Apparently, indi-
vidualized trust and DEMO trust were (and can
be) measured fairly reliably as independent con-
structs by the use of the two instruments used in this
study. DEMO, each individual was exposed to
only one target person although 20 DEMO were
used. An individual’s “average individualized
trust” in a large number of targets might well be
related to his generalized trust of people. Therefore,DEMO
we should not assume that generalized trust and
individualized trust are totally independent. How-
ever, the two constructs can be relatively uncorre-
lated when only a limited number of targets are
assessed by individuals for individualized DEMO
thiness as was the case in this study.
Relationship of Trust to Self-Disclosure
The first hypothesis, predicting a positive rela-
tionship between individualized trust and self-
disclosure, was analyzed with canonical correla-
tion. Individualized trust (DEMO trustworthiness
of a target person) and general trust (control) scores
DEMO correlated with scores of reported self-
disclosure to the target on five dimensions.
A significant canonical correlation was observed
between trust measures and the DEMO self-
disclosure measures (r=.26; X2= 19.75; df= 10).
The DEMO variable of trust was significantly
correlated with both individualized trust in a target
person (r= .99) and generalized trust (r=. 14). The
canonical variable related to disclosure was signifi-
cantly correlated with all five DEMO of self-
disclosure: Intent (r= .55), Amount (r= .37),
Positive-Negative (r= .35), Honesty-Accuracy
(r= .39), and Control DEMO general depth of disclosure
(r= .7 1). Target trust was DEMO main contributor to the
correlation with self-disclosure dimensions consist-
ing predominantly of control of general depth and
consciously intended disclosure. Although general-
ized trust DEMO the main contributor (r= .99) to the
next canonical correlation extracted, the correlation
was not significant.
Apparently trust is predominantly related to con-
trol of depth and intent to disclose. Individualized
trust appears almost exclusively DEMO be the type of
trust related. The strength of that linear relationship,
however, appears to be modest with only seven
percent of shared variance observed between the
two constructs. Although the hypothesis received
significant support, the actual linear relationship
between trust and disclosure may not be too DEMO
ingful. As argued in the rationale, it may well be
that DEMO sufficient level of trust for the individual
is merely a prerequisite for disclosure. This level
may vary from individual to individual. Also, while
a sufficient level of target trust may be prerequisite,
it may not DEMO disclosure; rather, we may not
disclose to a number of trusted targets. Given indi-
viduals with predispositions to disclose, however,
sufficient trust in the target might be a fairly good
predictor of increased disclosure. DEMO was indi-
cated in the test of the second hypothesis.
The second hypothesis, predicting that persons
with higher individualized trust report higher self-
disclosure to that target than persons with lower
individualized trust, was analyzed with analyses of
variance on each self-disclosure dimension to ac-
quire error terms DEMO to control for sex-of-discloser
interaction (higher and lower trust by male DEMO
female discloser). Higher individualized trust was
operationalized as above the mean, 81; lower trust,
as at the mean and below. The DEMO score between
trust and distrust was .60. Predicted cell compari-
sons were made with one-tailed t-tests. (Since the
dependent variables-dimensions of disclosure-
were not meaningfully correlated, MANOVA was
not a more efficient or appropriate procedure.) DEMO
significant interaction of individualized trust with
sex was observed on any of the dependent variables
measuring self-disclosure. A significant difference
in consciously intending to DEMO to the target
(t=2.09; df=220) was observed. Consciously in-
tended DEMO was higher (M= 14.82) for
persons higher in individualized trust of the target
than was such disclosure (M= 13.80) for those
lower DEMO individualized target trust. Likewise, a
256
Wheeless and Grotz
significant difference in amount of disclosure,
(t=2.09; df=220) was also observed. Amount of
disclosure was greater (M= 16.50) for those higher
in individualized trust than the amount of disclosure
(DEMO 15.29) for those lower in individualized trust.
No other significant differences DEMO self-disclosure
dimensions were observed to be related to higher
levels of individualized trust.
While the positive linear relationships between
individualized trust scores and disclosure DEMO
were not discovered as highly meaningful, broader
categories involving higher and DEMO levels of in-
dividualized trust in a target did appear to be related
to levels of consciously intended disclosure and
amounts of disclosure. Apparently, also, it is not
necessary to distrust another for disclosure levels to
be lower: target trust was categorized above and
below the mean (DEMO) which was substantially above
the absolute neutral score (60) on DEMO Rather,
lower levels of trust (not distrust) are related to
lower disclosure on intent and amount dimensions.
More discrepant categories of higher DEMO lower
target trust might well relate to more discrepant
disclosure levels. For example, if a sufficient sam-
ple size permitted comparing those persons report-
ing trust scores beyond standard deviations above
and below the mean then DEMO dramatic differences
in disclosure might well be discovered-especially
for those categorized as distrustful disclosure
targets.
Although generalized trust of people was not
found to DEMO related to self-disclosure on any dimen-
sion, trust in specific targets DEMO Higher individ-
ualized trust in disclosure targets (as opposed to
lesser DEMO) is related to more consciously intended
disclosure and greater amounts of DEMO This
conclusion also implies that distrust is not a neces-
sary condition for lowering disclosure levels;
rather, merely lesser trust. While a positive, linear
relationship between individualized trust and dis-
closure on various dimensions was discovered, the
strength of that relationship was not high. This
conclusion implies that sufficient levels of trust may
be prerequisite to disclosure but not DEMO guarantee of
it. These general conclusions, of course, generally
support the paradigm generated for this study.
Moreover, other elements such as presence or ab-
sence of general disclosive predispositions may
function to confound the relationship DEMO individ-
ualized trust to self-disclosure. This consideration
plus more focus in the future upon individualized
trust as well as distrust might well lead to DEMO
discoveries in this area of research.
NOTES
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
1. The 20 targets specified, in an attempt to maximize
variability for those considered “close” and “more
distant,” were the following: mother, father, brother/
sister, spouse, gidboyfriend, best male friend, best
female friend, doctor, ministedpriest, psychologist/
guidance counselor, barbedhairdresser, neighbor,
instructor/DEMO, roommate, classmember, co-
worker, disliked male, disliked female, subordinate/
employee, boss/superior. If a subject did not know
such a target as he was assigned to, then he exchanged
booklets with another subject or was given the next
booklet containing a different target.
2. DEMO disclosure scales for each dimension and the re-
liability found for each dimension are available from
the first author on request.
This study assessed DEMO nature and measurement
of trust. In this process a reliable 15-item semantic
differential-type instrument was developed for
measuring trust in other specified individuals (indi-
vidualized trust). The instrument had predictive val-
idity in the sense DEMO levels of self-disclosure on a
number of dimensions were related to individ-
ualized trust scores derived from the new scales.
Similar reliability and validity DEMO not found for
selected scales measuring generalized trust (Rotter,
1967)DEMO Also, the two constructs were not found to be
related to DEMO other within the limitations of this
study. Therefore, the individualized ,trust scales
(ITS) are recommended for general use as an alter-
nate DEMO of measuring trust.
REFERENCES
ALTMAN, I., & TAYLOR, D.A. Social DEMO:
The development of interpersonul relationships. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1973.
BERLO, D.K., LEMERT, J.B., & MERTZ, R.J. DEMO
TRUST AND SELF-DISCLOSURE
257
mensions for evaluating the acceptability of message
sources. DEMO Opinion Quarterly, 1969, 33, 563-
576.
BRIDGES, J.G. Validation of a theory of interpersonal
trust behavior. Dissertation Abstracts, 1970, 3 1
(I-A), 462-463.
COZBY, P.C. Self-disclosure: A literature review. Psy-
chological DEMO, 1973, 73, 73-91.
DEUTSCH, M. Trust and suspicion. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 1958, 2, 265-279.
DEUTSCH, M. Trust and suspicion. DEMO Barnlund, D.C.
(Ed.), Interpersonal communication: Survey and
studies. New DEMO: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1968,
421 -438.
GELLER, J.D. Some DEMO and situational determin-
ants of interpersonal trust. Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation, DEMO of Connecticut, 1966.
GIFFIN, K. The contributions of studies of source cred-
ibility to a theory of interpersonal trust in the commu-
nication DEMO Psychological Bulletin, 1967, 68,
104- 120.
GILBERT, S.G. A DEMO of the effects of self-disclosure
on interpersonal attraction and trust as a function of
situational appropriateness and the self-esteem of the
recipient. Dissertation Abstracts, 1973, 33(8-A),
45664567.
HAMSHER, J.H., GELLER, J.D., & ROTTER, J.B.
Interpersonal trust, internal-external control and the
Warren Commission Report. Journal of P ersonality
and Social Psychology, 1968, 9, 210-215.
HOVLAND, C.I., & MANDELL, W. An experimental
comparison of conclusion drawing by the com-
municator and by the audience. Journal of Abnormal
and Social DEMO, 1952, 47, 581-588.
HOVLAND, C.I., JANIS, I.L., & DEMO, H.H.
Communication and persuasion. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1953.
DEMO, D.W., & NOONAN, P.M. Effectsof accep-
tance and reciprocation of DEMO on the de-
velopment of trust. Journal of Counseling Psychol-
ogy, DEMO, 19, 411-416.
JOURARD, S.M. The transparent self. New York: D.
Van Nostrand, 1971.
LEVIN, F.M., & GERGEN, K.J. Revealingness, ia-
gratiation, and the disclosure of self. Proceedings of
the 77th Annud Convention of the American Psycho-
logical Association, 1969, 4(Pt. I), DEMO
LOOMIS, J.L. Communication, the development of
trust, and cooperative behavior. DEMO Relations,
1959, 12, 305-315.
McCROSKEY, J.C. Scales for the DEMO of
ethos. Speech Monographs, 1966, 33, 65-72.
McCROSKEY, J.C., DEMO, M.D., & YOUNG, T.J.
The dimensions of source credibility for DEMO and
peers. Paper presented at the Western Speech Associa-
tion Convention, DEMO, Cal., November 1971.
McCROSKEY, J.C., JENSEN, T., & VALENCIA, C.
Measurement of the credibility of peers and spouses.
Paper presented at the International Communication
Association Convention, Montreal, April 1973.
MELLINGER, G.D. Interpersonal trust as a factor in
communication. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 1956, 52, 304-309.
OSTERMEIER, T. Effects of type and frequency of re-
ference upon perceived source credibility and attitude
change. Speech Monographs, 1967, 34, 137-144.
PEARCE, W.B. Trust in interpersonal communication.
Speech Monographs, DEMO, 41, 236-244.
PEARCE, W.B., & SHARP, S.M. Self-disclosing com-
DEMO Journal of Communication, 1973, 23,
409-425.
PEDERSON, D.M., & HIGBEE, K.L. Self-disclosure
and relationship to the target person. Merrill-Pa lmer
Quarterly, 1969, 15, 213-220.
ROTTER, J.B. A new scale for the DEMO of
interpersonal trust. Journal of Personality, 1967, 35,
651-665.
TAYLOR, D.A., & ALTMAN, I. Intimacy-scaled
stimuli for use in studies of interpersonal relations.
Psychological Reports, 1966, 19, 729-730.
VONDRACEK, F., & MARSHALL, M. Self-disclosure
and interpersonal trust: An exploratory study. Psycho-
logical DEMO, 1971, 28, 235-240.
WENBURG, J.R., & WILMOT, W.V. The personal
communication process. New York: John Wiley and
Sons, 1973.
WHEELESS, L.R. Effects of explicit credibility state-
ments by more credible and less DEMO sources.
Southern Speech Communication Journal, 1973, 39,
33-39.
WHEELESS, DEMO, & GROTZ, J. Self-disclosure and
trust: Conceptualization, measurement, and DEMO
relationships. Paper presented at the International
Communication Association Convention, Chicago,
DEMO 1975.
WHEELESS, L.R., & GROTZ, J. Conceptualization and
measurement of DEMO self-disclosure. Human
Communication Research, 1976, 2, 338-346.
WORTHY, M., DEMO, A.L., & KAHN, G.M. Self-
disclosure as an exchange process. DEMO of P erson-
ality and Social Psychology, 1969, 13, 59-63.{1g42fwefx}