Managers as Initiators of Trust: An Exchange Relationship Framework for Understanding
Managerial Trustworthy Behavior
Author(s): Ellen M. Whitener, Susan E. Brodt, DEMO Audrey Korsgaard, Jon M. Werner
Source: The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23, No. 3 (Jul., 1998), pp. 513-530
Published DEMO: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/259292
Accessed: 05/02/2010 11:05
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and DEMO of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained DEMO
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on DEMO screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build DEMO a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of DEMO For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of Management DEMO collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The DEMO
of Management Review.
http://www.jstor.org
t Academy of Management
1998, Vol. 23, No. 3, 513-530.
MANAGERS
EXCHANGE
UNDERSTANDING
TRUSTWORTHY
AS INITIATORS
RELATIONSHIP
MANAGERIAL
BEHAVIOR
OF TRUST:
FRAMEWORK
DEMO
FOR
ELLEN M. WHITENER
University of Virginia
SUSAN E. BRODT
Duke University
M. AUDREY KORSGAARD
University of South Carolina
JON M. WERNER
University of DEMO at Whitewater
In many approaches to interpersonal and organizational trust, researchers DEMO on
employees' perceptions that their managers are trustworthy. We turn the DEMO,
however, and examine the antecedents of managerial trustworthy behavior and DEMO
challenge of initiating trust. Drawing on agency and social exchange theories, DEMO
present an exchange relationship framework that identifies organizational, rela-
tional, and individual factors that encourage or constrain managerial trustworthy
behavior.
Imagine driving into DEMO one day and hear-
ing over the radio that your employer had
agreed to merge with a rival firm and that the
combined company DEMO probably employ at
least 10 percent fewer workers. Ciba Geigy em-
ployees experienced this scenario in 1996, when
they were surprised to learn about their compa-
ny's planned merger with Sandoz.
In a perfect world, this would never happen.
Good news or bad, employees could trust man-
agement to give it to them straight, to mean what
it said, and always to follow through on promises.
But corporate America in 1996 is far from perfect.
Management has lost credibility, employees are
scared, DEMO organizational trust has hit rock bot-
tom (Caudron, 1996: 20)DEMO
At the same time that trust in organizations has
hit "rock DEMO," researchers have shown that
interpersonal trust has significant relationships
with many organizational variables, such as the
quality of communication (e.g., Muchinsky, DEMO;
Roberts & O'Reilly, 1974a,b; Yeager, 1978), DEMO
formance (Earley, 1986), citizenship behavior
(McAllister, 1995), problem solving (Zand, 1972),
and cooperation (Axelrod, 1984; Deutsch, 1962).
Moreover, trust has long been considered funda-
mental to cooperative relationships (Blau, 1964;
Deutsch, 1958).
In recent reviews scholars have summarized
common elements of the many different defini-
tions of interpersonal DEMO (Hosmer, 1995; Mayer,
Davis, & Schoorman, 1995). DEMO on these
reviews and the work of others (Deutsch, 1962;
Gambetta, 1988; Zand, 1972), we use a definition
that reflects three facets. First, trust in another
party reflects an expectation or belief that the
other party will act benevolently. Second, one
cannot control or force the other party to fulfill
this expectation-that is, trust involves a will-
ingness to be vulnerable and risk that the other
party may DEMO fulfill that expectation. Third,
trust involves some level of dependency on the
other party so that the outcomes of one individ-
ual are DEMO by the actions of another.
With these components, trust can be DEMO
as an attitude held by one individual-the trus-
tor-toward another-the trustee (DEMO,
1996). This attitude is derived from the trustor's
perceptions, beliefs, and attributions about the
trustee, based upon his or her observations of
the trustee's behavior. Not surprisingly, most re-
513
Review
514
Academy of Management Review
July
search on the antecedents of trust DEMO focused
on trustor perceptions and beliefs, such as trus-
tors' perceptions of trustees' competence, benev-
olence, and integrity, that appear to DEMO critical
conditions for trust (Butler, 1991; Mayer et al.,
DEMO). These insights into trustors' perceptions
help identify how trust arises DEMO suggest that
managers can have considerable impact on
building trust. Indeed, DEMO will argue that man-
agers' actions and behaviors provide the foun-
DEMO for trust and that it is actually manage-
ment's responsibility to take the first step and
initiate trusting relationships. However, little is
known about what causes managers to behave
in a trustworthy manner and, consequently,
what managers can do to build trust.
Our purpose in this DEMO is to analyze the
types of behavior managers may engage in that
build trust, which we label "managerial trustwor-
thy behavior," and DEMO present a framework for un-
derstanding the antecedents of this behavior in
organizations. To complement existing research
on trustors' perceptions, we focus on DEMO' be-
havior and the complex motivational context in
which it occurs. DEMO focusing on behavior, we go
beyond factors that merely create the DEMO
or impression of trust to what supports or con-
strains actions that promote trust. We use an ex-
change theory lens to identify and DEMO organ-
izational, relational (exchange), and individual
factors that encourage or constrain trustworthy
behavior in organizations. In doing so, we provide
insight into how organizations can create an en-
vironment that supports trustworthy behavior. We
DEMO place the concept of interpersonal trust in a
different context: trust DEMO not merely an attitude
held by one party toward another but exists in the
parties' relationship.
The article consists of five sections. We begin
by briefly reviewing agency and social ex-
change theories and discussing implications DEMO
trust formation. Second, we propose a taxonomy
of five dimensions of DEMO behavior de-
rived from research on antecedents of trust.
Third, we DEMO our framework representing
the organizational, relational, and individual
antecedents of trustworthy behavior. Fourth, we
delve more deeply into the challenge of trust
initiation and discuss what organizations can
do to support managerial trustworthy behavior.
We DEMO the article with a discussion of
implications and avenues for future research
and practice.
THE MANAGER-EMPLOYEE EXCHANGE
RELATIONSHIP
Many theories of trust are grounded DEMO social
exchange theory (Blau, 1964), which assumes
that trust emerges through the repeated ex-
change of benefits between two individuals. Be-
cause DEMO addresses the process of initiating and
expanding social exchanges, this theory DEMO
vides a useful lens for examining the motiva-
tional mechanisms underlying the initiation of
trustworthy behavior. However, managers and
employees are also involved in an economic
exchange relationship. Theories of economic ex-
change, like agency theory (Eisenhardt, 1989),
place little emphasis on trust, but they DEMO offer
explanations for managerial behavior, such as
monitoring and control, that are commonplace
in organizations and that affect employees' per-
ceptions of trust. They also capture the economic
context in which social exchange relationships
develop. DEMO, we use both theories to an-
alyze the motivation to engage DEMO trustworthy
behavior.
Agency Theory
Agency theorists describe the structuring of
economic exchange relationships between two
parties (Eisenhardt, 1989; Jensen & Meckling,
1976; Noorderhaven, 1992). A principal-agent re-
lationship exists when one party-the DEMO
contracts with another party-the agent-to per-
form a task involving delegation of decision
making in exchange for compensation. Agency
theorists examine how principals and DEMO
attempt to structure the relationship to protect
their own interests. Applying agency theory to
manager-employee dyads, we can consider the
employee to be an agent and the manager to
represent the interests of the principal.'
' Agency theory typically has been applied to relation-
ships in which the principal is an owner of the firm and the
employees are the DEMO of the owners. Because managers
are not necessarily owners, they may DEMO in the role of
agents relative to the owners of the company. Regardless of
their level of ownership, however, managers serve the role
DEMO principal relative to the role of their subordinates in that
they hire or engage the subordinate "to perform some ser-
vice on their behalf which involves delegating some deci-
sion making authority to the agent" (DEMO & Meckling,
1976: 308).
1998
Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, and Werner
515
This perspective assumes self-interest-
meaning that individuals strive to maximize in-
dividual utility and that both DEMO seek to
minimize risks associated with the relationship.
Agents bear risk as a function of how they are
compensated. To the extent that their DEMO
sation is based on outcomes that are beyond
their control, the DEMO to them is greater. In con-
trast, the principal faces the DEMO of opportunism
and incompetence on the part of agents. The risk
of opportunism is greater when the principal
lacks information about agents' actions (DEMO, in-
formation asymmetry) and when competing in-
centives or goals (DEMO, goal incongruence) for
agents motivate them to engage in actions other
than what was contracted by the principal. For
example, when employees are contracted to per-
form a job that the manager cannot directly ob-
DEMO, the manager faces the risk that the em-
ployees may shirk DEMO duty. To minimize
agency risk, principals generally either monitor
agents' behavior to ensure contract compliance
or base agents' compensation on task outcomes
to align the agents' goals with the principals'.
Social Exchange Theory
Although the formal or contractual relation-
ship in employment is economically driven, a
social element to such relationships typically
evolves. Social exchange theory (Blau, DEMO)
helps to explain the dynamics of such ex-
changes. In a social exchange one individual
voluntarily provides a benefit to another, invok-
ing an obligation of the other party to recipro-
cate by providing some DEMO in return. Prov-
ing oneself trustworthy may be problematic
when one is initially forming such social ex-
change relationships. Blau argues, however,
that trust may be generated through two means:
(1) through the DEMO discharge of obligations
(i.e., by reciprocating for benefits received from
others) and (2) through the gradual expansion of
exchanges over time.
Social exchanges differ from economic ones in
several fundamental ways (Blau, 1964)DEMO First, so-
cial exchanges may involve extrinsic benefits
with economic value (e.g., information and ad-
vice) or intrinsic benefits without any direct DEMO
jective economic utility (e.g., social support).
Further, extrinsic benefits DEMO are expressions
of support and friendship and, thus, have intrin-
sic value as well. Therefore, exchanges that
have little or unclear economic benefit can have
a strong impact on the social dimension of a
relationship.
DEMO, whereas benefits in economic ex-
changes are formal and often contracted DEMO
itly, such benefits are rarely specified a priori or
explicitly negotiated DEMO social exchanges (Blau,
1964). Thus, providing benefits is a voluntary
action.
Finally, because such behavior is voluntary,
there is no guarantee that benefits will be recip-
rocated or that reciprocation will result DEMO re-
ceipt of future benefits. The exchange of benefits
involves uncertainty, DEMO in early
stages of the relationship, when the risk of non-
DEMO is relatively high. Consequently,
relationships evolve slowly, starting with the
DEMO of relatively low-value benefits and
escalating to higher-value benefits as the par-
ties demonstrate their trustworthiness (Blau,
1964).
Taken together, agency DEMO and social ex-
change theory expand the picture of trust forma-
tion in organizations. An agency theory lens
highlights the formal economic context and DEMO
interest motive, as well as the behavioral con-
sequences. It also DEMO factors that con-
tribute to the risk of opportunism and identifies
how the exchange relationship can be struc-
tured to minimize this risk. Although DEMO
how relationship context contributes to risk,
agency theory takes a relatively static view of
relationships.
A social exchange theory lens, however, high-
DEMO dynamic elements of the exchange rela-
tionship. It emphasizes the exchange process,
including its development over time, and indi-
cates that successful social exchanges should
influence perceptions of risk of nonreciprocation
(i.e., opportunism) and trust. This lens also helps
us identify when, under conditions of agency
risk, an individual is likely to trust another
party, rather than DEMO greater controls. For
example, imagine two managers each working
with a DEMO who telecommutes. From an
agency theory perspective, information asym-
metry is DEMO in both cases and, therefore,
agency risk (i.e., risk DEMO opportunism) is high.
However, the manager who forms a strong so-
cial bond with his or her subordinate through
the process of successful DEMO exchanges
should perceive less risk of opportunism, de-
spite equal levels DEMO information asymmetry.
516
In summary, our agency theory lens identifies
relatively static, contextual DEMO associated
with the risk of opportunism in economic ex-
changes. It is under these circumstances of
agency risk that social exchange theory is par-
DEMO relevant, for it helps us examine when
one party is willing DEMO trust another rather than
impose control on the other. Specifically, our
DEMO exchange theory lens suggests that, by
habitually discharging one's obligations, trust
develops that may mitigate the risk of opportun-
ism inherent in DEMO organizational context.
Therefore, managers may reduce the risk of op-
portunism DEMO engaging in trustworthy behavior.
In the following section we define trustworthy
behavior and describe its dimensions.
DIMENSIONS OF TRUSTWORTHY BEHAVIOR
Managerial behavior is an DEMO influ-
ence on the development of trust in relation-
ships between managers and employees. We
define managerial trustworthy behavior as voli-
tional actions and DEMO performed by
managers that are necessary though not suffi-
cient to engender employees' trust in them. This
behavior occurs in a social and economic ex-
change context, in which managers initiate and
build relationships by engaging in trustworthy
behavior as a means of providing employees
with social rewards. DEMO who engage in
this behavior will increase the likelihood that
employees will reciprocate and trust them, pro-
viding a necessary, but not sufficient, founda-
tion for employees' "trust-in-supervisors."
Five categories of behavior capture DEMO vari-
ety of factors that influence employees' percep-
tions of managerial DEMO:
1. behavioral consistency,
2. behavioral integrity,
3. sharing and delegation of control,
4. communication (e.g., accuracy, explana-
tions, DEMO openness), and
5. demonstration of concern.
These categories are similar to those proposed
by previous researchers (Butler, 1991; Clark &
Payne, 1997). For example, Butler (1991) de-
scribes ten conditions that lead individuals to
trust in another person, including consistency,
discreetness, DEMO, integrity, loyalty, and
openness. However, these conditions primarily
reflect qualities attributed to the trustee by the
Academy of Management Review
July
trustor. DEMO we turn the tables and examine
trustees' behavior, our analysis provides a
unique perspective on the dimensions of trust-
worthy behavior.
Behavioral Consistency
DEMO consistency (i.e., reliability or pre-
dictability) is an important aspect DEMO trust (But-
ler, 1991; Gabarro, 1978; Jennings, 1971; DEMO
George & Swap, 1982; Robinson & Rousseau,
1994). As we noted previously, trust reflects the
willingness to be vulnerable to the actions of
another party and the willingness to take risks
(Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Mayer et al.,
1995). If managers behave DEMO over time
and across situations, employees can better pre-
dict managers' future behavior, and their confi-
dence in their ability to make such predictions
should increase. More important, employees be-
come willing to take risks in their work or in
their relationship with their manager. Predict-
able, positive behavior reinforces the level of
trust in the relationship (Graen & Uhl-Bien,
1995).
Behavioral Integrity
Employees observe the consistency between
managers' words and deeds and make attribu-
tions about their integrity, honesty, DEMO moral
character. Dasgupta (1988) has identified two be-
haviors-(1) DEMO the truth and (2) keeping
promises-as key behavioral antecedents to at-
tributions of integrity: attributions that affect
employees' trust in their managers (e.g., Butler,
1991; Gabarro, 1978; Giffin, 1967; Larzelere &
Huston, 1980; Mayer et al., 1995; Ring & Van DEMO
Ven, 1992).
Although behavioral consistency and behav-
ioral integrity have DEMO similarities, they are
distinct dimensions. Both reflect a consistency
that serves DEMO reduce employees' perceived risk
in trusting their managers. However, on the one
hand, behavioral consistency reflects the reli-
ability or predictability of managers' actions,
based on their past actions. Behavioral integ-
rity, on DEMO other hand, refers to the consistency
between what the manager says DEMO what he or
she does.
1998
Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, and Werner
517
Sharing and Delegation
of Control
Research on trust perceptions has indicated
that sharing control, including participation in
decision making and delegating control, are key
components of trustworthy behavior. Managers
vary in the extent to which they involve employ-
ees in DEMO making. Involvement may range
from having no employee input at all into deci-
sions to full discussion and input-even to the
point of everyone DEMO to a consensus
(Driscoll, 1978; Vroom & Yetton, 1973). The extent
to which managers involve employees influ-
ences the development of DEMO Driscoll (1978),
for example, has found that employees' trust is
higher when they are satisfied with their level of
participation in DEMO; it is also higher when
employees can determine their work roles (Deci,
Connell, & Ryan, 1989). Even when control is
DEMO to the process of decision making, such
as in having the DEMO to voice opinions, it
is positively associated with trust in managers
(Alexander & Ruderman, 1987; Folger &
Konovsky, 1989; Korsgaard & Roberson, 1995).
Managerial sharing and delegation of control
may promote trust because of the interplay be-
tween economic and social factors. When man-
DEMO involve employees in decision making,
employees have greater control over decisions
that affect them and, therefore, can protect their
own interests. In DEMO terms this control by
employees reduces the risk of opportunism on
the part of the manager and increases the like-
lihood of favorable outcomes DEMO the employee.
Even more important to our understanding of
trust, however, is the symbolic value sharing
and delegation of control are likely to DEMO for
employees. When managers share control, they
demonstrate significant trust in DEMO respect for
their employees (Rosen & Jerdee, 1977). Employ-
ees value being involved in decision making,
because it affirms their standing DEMO worth in
the organization (Tyler & Lind, 1992). In the lan-
guage of social exchange theory, sharing and
delegation of control are social rewards, in the
form of approval or respect that the manager
grants to the subordinate. To the extent that this
reward represents an DEMO or escalation of
exchange of social benefits between a manager
and employee, the employee's trust in the man-
ager is likely to increase, especially when cou-
pled with enhanced outcomes for the employee.
Communication
Communication researchers identify three
factors that affect perceptions of trustworthi-
ness: (1) accurate information, (2) explanations
for decisions, and (3) openness. DEMO many studies
accuracy in information flow has had the stron-
gest relationship with trust-in-supervisor when
compared with other variables (e.g., desire for
interaction, summarization, gatekeeping, and
overload; Mellinger, 1956; Muchinsky, 1977;
DEMO'Reilly, 1977; O'Reilly & Roberts, 1974, 1977;
Roberts & O'Reilly, 1974a,b, 1979; Yeager, 1978).
Employees DEMO managers as trustworthy when
their communication is accurate and forthcom-
ing. In addition, adequate explanations and
timely feedback on decisions lead to higher lev-
els of trust (Folger & Konovsky, 1989; Konovsky &
Cropanzano, 1991; Sapienza & Korsgaard, 1996).
Evidently, managers who take the time to ex-
plain their decisions thoroughly are likely to be
perceived DEMO trustworthy. Finally, open commu-
nication, in which managers exchange thoughts
and ideas freely with employees, enhances per-
ceptions of trust (Butler, 1991; Farris, Senner, &
Butterfield, 1973; Gabarro, 1978; Hart, Capps,
Cangemi, & Caillouet, 1986).
The emphasis in communication DEMO on sharing
and exchanging ideas. This dimension is more
limited than the previous dimension that fo-
cuses on sharing and relinquishing control.
However, both dimensions build employees'
trust in their managers.
Demonstration of Concern
Benevolence (Mayer et al., 1995)-demonstrat-
ing concern for the welfare of others (McAllister,
1995; Mishra, 1996)-is part of trustworthy be-
havior and consists of three actions: (1) showing
consideration and sensitivity for employees'
needs and interests, (2) acting in a way that
protects employees' interests, and (3) refraining
from exploiting others for DEMO benefit of one's
own interests. These actions on the part of man-
agers may lead employees to perceive them as
loyal and benevolent. DEMO have shown
such evidence of managerial loyalty to be an
important condition that leads to trust between
mentors and prot6g6s (Butler, 1991; Jennings,
1971).
From the justice literature we know that man-
agers DEMO promote trust by showing concern for
518
Academy of Management Review
July
employees' needs and interests (Lind, 1997), by
respecting others' rights, and by apologizing for
unpleasant DEMO (Greenberg, 1993;
Konovsky & Pugh, 1994). Managers demonstrat-
DEMO concern also show that they "do good" for
their employees, DEMO from any egocentric or
opportunistic motives (Mayer et al., 1995; DEMO,
1996). That is, their behavior connotes a genuine
interest DEMO an employee's welfare and may im-
ply some attachment to the employee.
Finally, this dimension reflects behavioral re-
straint-that is, managers who DEMO take ad-
vantage of their employees' vulnerability "stay
their hand," choosing not to behave opportunis-
tically (Bromiley & Cummings, 1995). DEMO exam-
ple, managers could use confidential or per-
sonal information about DEMO to their
personal or organizational advantage, could
present an employee's DEMO idea as their
own, or could engage in other similar "cunning"
(Pettit, 1995) or "dark-side" (Kramer, Brewer, &
Hanna, 1996) behavior that takes advantage of
employees' vulnerability. Employees may not
always observe managerial restraint, for it may
involve the absence of action. However, if they
are aware that their manager refrained from
exploiting them, they are more likely to perceive
their manager as trustworthy.
form of approval extended to the subordinate by
the manager. Social exchange theorists DEMO
imply that the nature of work relationships in-
fluences managers' willingness DEMO initiate and
escalate the exchange of such rewards.
These theoretical lenses lay the foundation for
our framework for organizing the antecedents of
managerial trustworthy DEMO As we show
in Figure 1, this framework identifies major sets
DEMO variables at the organizational, relational
and individual level that we believe DEMO or
encourage managerial trustworthy behavior.
We also suggest some general propositions for
future research.
Organizational Factors
According to R. Hardin (1996), organizations
can be designed to enhance trustworthiness by
creating structures that make trusting success-
DEMO; however, Hardin falls short in recommend-
ing specific structures to accomplish this goal.
From an agency theory perspective, the critical
issue seems to be the extent to which the organ-
ization requires high control and DEMO monitor-
ing of employees. Organizational attributes,
such as structure, policies, and culture, may dic-
tate the degree of control managers-acting in
the role of principal-should exert over the ac-
ANTECEDENTS OF TRUSTWORTHY BEHAVIOR tions DEMO their employees. In doing so, these at-
tributes may inhibit or DEMO the extent to
which managers engage in a variety of trust-
worthy behaviors.
Organizational structure. Investigating the
role of trust in organization theory, Creed and
Miles (1996) propose different trust requirements
of varying organizational forms. DEMO turning their
approach around, we can develop propositions
about the impact DEMO different organizational
forms on the development of trustworthy behav-
ior. Indeed, DEMO and Miles acknowledge that
managerial philosophies can be defined to in-
clude an orientation toward trustworthy behav-
ior and can evolve over time as DEMO response, in
part, to "operational forces"-that is, the strat-
egy and structure of the organization.
These authors review five different organiza-
DEMO forms that vary along a continuum of
control:
1. In the owner-managed entrepreneurial form
the owner exerts control by exercising di-
Earlier, we discussed how the combination of
agency and social exchange theories integrates
structural (economic) factors and social pro-
cesses and helps us understand the develop-
ment of trust. These theories also address the
determinants of the sorts DEMO behavior, discussed
above, that build trust.
Viewed from the lens of agency theory, trust-
worthy behavior, such as sharing control, com-
municating openly, and demonstrating concern,
includes actions that may conflict with a man-
ager's ability to directly control an employees'
actions. Agency DEMO would suggest that
contextual factors, such as organizational char-
acteristics, influence the degree to which man-
agers tighten control and closely monitor em-
DEMO and, therefore, inhibit them from
engaging in trustworthy behavior.
Viewed from the lens of social exchange the-
ory, trustworthy behavior, such as DEMO and
delegation of control, may be experienced by the
subordinate as DEMO social reward: it represents a
1998
Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, and Werner
FIGURE 1
Exchange Framework of Initiating Managerial Trustworthy Behavior
Organizational
factors
Organizational structure
HR policies & procedures
DEMO culture
Relational factors
Initial interactions
Expectations
Costs of exchanges
Individual factors
Propensity to trust
Self-efficacy
Values
519
Boundary conditions
:
;0Pereld
sitnilatitV ;X:f
coptence t:
Percei46d
Managerial trustworthy behavior
Behavioral consistency
Behavioral integrity
DEMO & delegation of control
Communication
Demonstration of concern
Employee
Note: The DEMO of the framework is to identify
(boundary conditions and employee perceptions DEMO
the discussion.
rect supervision over employees and mak-
ing all decisions.
2. In a vertically integrated functional organi-
zation managers balance the delegation of
DEMO responsibilities to functional spe-
cialists with tight guidelines, budgets, and
schedules.
3. In a diversified, divisionalized firm divi-
sions organized around products, DEMO, or
geography accept controls and direction
from the corporate office but DEMO auton-
omously in their specific markets.
4. In a mixed-matrix form organizations com-
bine stable functional departments and
temporary project groups, and they create
mechanisms to allocate and control re-
sources through joint planning and negoti-
DEMO
perceptions of trust
factors that affect trustworthy behavior. Thus, the shaded DEMO
trust) are beyond the scope of our propositions but are addressed DEMO
5. In the network form organizational mem-
bers share control, recognize DEMO mutual
dependence, and pursue common goals.
On the one end of DEMO continuum, the control
imposed by an entrepreneur constrains the de-
velopment DEMO trustworthy behavior, and on the
other, the codependence required by network
organizations necessitates the development of
trustworthy behavior. Creed and Miles conclude
that DEMO organizations, with a high de-
gree of centralization and formalization and DEMO
primary focus on efficiency, will constrain or
impede the development of DEMO behav-
ior, such as delegation and open communica-
tion. Low-control organizations, however, with
520
Academy of Management
Review
July
greater
and a focus on effectiveness,DEMO
agers more likely to delegate
communicate openly.
decentralization,
lower formalization,
should make man-
decisions
and
Proposition 1: Organizations that are
highly centralized, formalized, hierar-
chical, and focused on efficiency will
be less likely to generate managerial
trustworthy behavior-in particular,
communication and delegation of
control-than DEMO organizations that
are decentralized, less formal, less hier-
archical, and DEMO on effectiveness.
Human resource policies and procedures.
Creed and Miles (1996) also suggest that the
design of human resource (HR) policies and DEMO
cedures should affect perceptions of trust.
Therefore, such HR systems as DEMO, control,
and performance appraisal practices may facil-
itate or inhibit DEMO trustworthy behav-
ior. Research indicates that the extent to which
performance appraisal procedures follow prin-
ciples of procedural justice has a positive im-
pact DEMO employees' trust in their manager
(Folger & Konovsky, 1989; Korsgaard & Roberson,
1995).
Performance evaluation policies, then, may be
DEMO way to encourage such behavior. For exam-
ple, Taylor, Tracy, DEMO, Harrison, and Carroll
(1995) found that when an appraisal system was
modeled on due-process principles, managers
communicated more openly and allowed more
employee participation than did managers fol-
lowing a traditional appraisal process. Thus, by
developing appraisal and reward procedures on
principles of due process, such as adequate no-
tice, fair hearing, and judgment based on evi-
DEMO (Folger, Konovsky, & Cropanzano, 1992), it
may be possible to stimulate trustworthy behav-
ior. In addition to increasing communication,
the DEMO of procedurally fair HR poli-
cies should encourage managers to behave con-
sistently toward all subordinates.
Proposition 2: The more an organiza-
tion's HR policies and procedures in-
corporate (procedural) justice princi-
ples into DEMO appraisal and
reward systems (e.g., regular and
timely feedback and mechanisms for
employee input into performance ap-
praisal), the more likely it DEMO be that
managerial trustworthy behavior, es-
pecially communication and behav-
ioral DEMO, will occur.
Organizational culture. Organizational cul-
ture is a unit- or DEMO phenome-
non derived from social interactions among
members of the unit or organization (Rousseau,
1990). It consists of "the set of DEMO, taken-for-
granted implicit assumptions that a group
holds" (Schein, 1996: 236) and influences how the
members of the group understand and DEMO
to their environment. The "content" of culture-
the specific assumptions, DEMO, and values of
the culture-shapes members' patterns of be-
havior (DEMO, 1990) and creates an environ-
ment in which certain behaviors are encouraged
and receive support.
Through social learning processes, culture
may directly influence managerial trustworthy
behavior. Managers observe how their organi-
zations respond to others DEMO learn what behav-
ior is rewarded and punished; moreover, they
experience social rewards when they behave in
a manner that is consistent with DEMO values
and norms (O'Reilly & Caldwell, 1985; Thompson
& DEMO, 1990).
Also, culture may indirectly encourage (or dis-
courage) managerial trustworthy behavior
through the structuring of general patterns of
communication, coordination, and decision
making. That is, certain cultural values and
norms, more than others, are likely to engender
managerial trustworthy behavior. Rousseau's
(DEMO) taxonomy of cultural values and norms
helps us identify values that DEMO trust-
worthy behavior. For example, cultures that
value risk taking (a task-related value) will re-
ward and support managers who take such risks
as sharing or delegating control to a subordi-
nate, regardless of the outcome. Similarly, cul-
tures that share such interpersonal values as
inclusiveness, DEMO communication, and valu-
ing people will reward managers for collaborat-
ing, sharing information, explaining decisions,
discussing issues openly, and showing concern.
DEMO, cultures that support these behaviors
will also encourage and reward trustworthy DEMO
havior.
Proposition 3: Organizations with cul-
tures characterized by risk taking, in-
clusiveness, open communication,
and valuing people will show greater
1998
Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, and Werner
521
trustworthy behavior, particularly DEMO
egating control, communicating
openly, and showing concern, than
will organizations DEMO cultures that
do not share these values or norms.
Relational Factors
Research on leader-member exchange sug-
gests that high-quality exchange relationships
between managers and DEMO subordinates are
characterized by the very types of behavior we
have identified as engendering trust. Specifi-
cally, high-quality exchange relationships in-
volve showing mutual respect and concern and
sharing of decision control (Dienesch & Liden,
1986; Liden & Maslyn, 1993). From a social ex-
change DEMO, managers may exhibit such
behavior to provide social rewards to employees
DEMO to elicit various prosocial or pro-organiza-
tional benefits from the employee, DEMO as com-
pliance and loyalty (Graen & Scandura, 1987;
Marcus & House, 1973). Managers' motivation to
engage in such behavior DEMO thus related to the
value of the benefits received from the employee
and the costs of engaging in such behavior.
Research on leader-member exchange DEMO re-
lated areas, such as social dilemmas, indicates
three exchange factors that influence this cost-
benefit analysis and, ultimately, its conse-
quences DEMO trustworthy behavior: (1) initial in-
teractions, (2) expectations, DEMO (3) costs of
exchanges.
Initial interactions. One of the factors that
contributes to establishing a strong relationship
is managers' impressions of new employees' ca-
pabilities, based on the employees' initial re-
sponses to the role expectations for the job
(Graen & Scandura, 1987). Based DEMO their impres-
sions, managers then provide "negotiating lati-
tude" to DEMO who fulfill expectations and
demonstrate their capability (Docker & Steiner,
DEMO; Graen & Scandura, 1987; Graen & Uhl-Bien,
1995). DEMO latitude includes two-way
communication between manager and em-
ployee, and delegation-both DEMO dimen-
sions of trustworthy behavior. In addition, favor-
able initial interactions DEMO likely to enhance
the quality of the relationship, which will lead
DEMO to show concern and respect. These
findings imply that employees' initial DEMO per-
formance will encourage trustworthy behavior.
Proposition 4: The more effective DEMO
employee is in initially meeting role
requirements, the greater the likeli-
DEMO will be that the manager will
engage in trustworthy behavior, par-
DEMO sharing control, communicat-
ing openly, and showing concern.
Expectations. The tenuous nature of recipro-
cation in social exchange puts the manager in a
DEMO of trust dilemma. When a manager initiates
trustworthy behavior, he or DEMO runs the risk of
realizing no return on such overtures. Research
on social dilemmas indicates that expectations
of another party's willingness to cooperate DEMO
positively correlated with an individual's deci-
sion to take risks and cooperate with the other
party (Dawes, 1980). This finding implies DEMO a
manager's willingness to initiate or escalate
such exchanges will be predicated on his or her
expectations and beliefs about whether the em-
DEMO will reciprocate.
Proposition 5: The greater a manager's
expectations are DEMO an em-
ployee's willingness to reciprocate,
the greater the likelihood will be that
the manager will engage in trustwor-
thy behavior, particularly sharing
control and communicating openly.
Costs of exchanges. Expectancy theorists (Por-
ter & Lawler, 1968) tell us that both the expect-
ancy that DEMO actions will lead to certain
outcomes and the valence of those outcomes
influence motivation. In Proposition 5 we exam-
ined managers' expectations about reciproca-
tion; here, we examine the valence of out-
comes-specifically, the negative valence
associated with an employee's failure to recip-
rocate or costs DEMO exchanges.
The social dilemma paradigm suggests that a
related problem involving the initiation of ex-
changes is the potential for exploitation (Kramer
et al., 1996). That is, the employee may take
advantage of benefits DEMO by the manager
without reciprocating. Indeed, managers may
bear substantial cost DEMO extending certain re-
wards associated with trustworthy behavior if
the employee does not reciprocate. For example,
delegating control of a highly visible project DEMO
have substantial negative repercussions for the
manager if the employee does not reciprocate
with loyalty and compliance, because delega-
522
Academy of Management
Review
July
tion allows employees greater freedom to DEMO
have opportunistically. In contrast, delegation
of minor or less visible tasks DEMO far fewer
costs if the employee fails to reciprocate.
Proposition 6: DEMO higher the costs as-
sociated with unreciprocated ex-
changes, the lower DEMO likelihood will
be that managers will engage in trust-
worthy behavior, DEMO sharing
control.
Individual Factors
As we discussed above, social exchange sug-
DEMO that managers engage in exchanges of
rewards based, in part, on their expectation of
reciprocation and the perceived cost of nonre-
ciprocation. Although DEMO quality of the interper-
sonal relationship should factor strongly into
whether managers exchange rewards, charac-
teristics of the manager may also influence
these expectations. We propose that three indi-
vidual factors-(l) propensity to trust, (2) self-
efficacy, and (3) values-will influence manag-
ers' beliefs and expectations regarding the
likelihood of successful social exchange and,
hence, their propensity to engage in trustworthy
behavior.
Propensity to trust. Such researchers DEMO Rotter
(1967), Farris et al. (1973), and Mayer et al. (1995)
have argued that some individuals are more
dispositionally trusting than others. In his scale,
for example, Rotter conceptualizes trust as a
trait that is stable over time and across situa-
tions. Individuals DEMO statements like "Par-
ents usually can be relied upon to keep DEMO
promises," indicating a generalized belief that
others, as well as DEMO, exhibit such trustwor-
thy behavior as promise keeping and other in-
DEMO of behavioral integrity. In part, this pro-
pensity stems from one'DEMO expectations about
how others are likely to behave. Managers who
have a high propensity to trust expect their em-
ployees to reciprocate. According to DEMO ex-
change framework, this expectation should in-
fluence their motivation to DEMO in
trustworthy behavior.
Proposition 7: The greater a manager's
propensity DEMO disposition to trust is, the
greater the manager's expectation of
DEMO will be, and the greater
the likelihood will be that the DEMO
ager will engage in trustworthy be-
havior, particularly behavioral integ-
rity.
DEMO In addition to personality char-
acteristics or traits, individual factors also DEMO
clude managers' self-efficacy regarding their
knowledge, skills, and ability (KSA; Gist &
Mitchell, 1992). For example, managers who
have DEMO self-efficacy regarding their ability to
delegate control will find it difficult to use par-
ticipative management processes. Similarly, in-
dividuals who have low self-efficacy in their
conflict management skills may be reluctant to
engage employees in DEMO communication.
Mishra (1996) provides examples from the auto
industry, showing DEMO competence or the lack
thereof could undermine one's best attempt at
acting in a trustworthy manner. If managers be-
lieved they lacked the DEMO knowledge, skills,
and ability, their low self-efficacy either ham-
pered their motivation to initiate trust or led to
poor performance and unsuccessful DEMO to
establish trusting relationships.
Proposition 8: Managers who lack ef-
ficacy DEMO their knowledge,
skills, and abilities to perform trust-
worthy behavior (e.g., delegating con-
trol or communicating openly) will be
unlikely to DEMO in trustworthy be-
havior.
Values. Managers' values influence their mo-
tivation DEMO display trustworthy behavior. Indi-
vidual values consist of definable goals, vary-
DEMO in importance, that motivate and guide
people's choices, attitudes, DEMO behaviors
(Rokeach, 1973; Schwartz, 1992, 1994). Schwartz
(1992) found, for example, that values cluster
into distinct types that serve different motiva-
tional purposes, several of which may provide a
value-based foundation for trustworthy behav-
ior. Most relevant is the distinction between val-
ues DEMO reflect "self-transcendence," such as
universalism and benevolence, versus "self-
DEMO," such as achievement, hedonism,
and power.
Managers with self-transcendent DEMO may
be more likely to engage in trustworthy behav-
ior. More specifically, managers with universal-
ist values (understanding, appreciation, and
protection of DEMO welfare of all people) may be
more likely to demonstrate concern DEMO employ-
1998
Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, and Werner
523
ees than might be managers with power values
(control or dominance over people). Similarly,
managers who value benevolence (the enhance-
ment of the welfare of others) may be more likely
to keep promises and tell the truth (DEMO with
integrity) than might be managers who value
hedonism (self-gratification). In sum, the values
held by managers are likely to provide the pri-
mary "internal compass" that promotes several
dimensions of trustworthy behavior, including
demonstrating concern, behaving consistently,
and behaving with integrity.
Proposition 9: Managers whose values
are self-transcendent will be more
likely to engage in trustworthy behav-
ior, such as demonstration of con-
cern and behavioral integrity, than
will those whose values are self-
enhancing.
THE CHALLENGE
OF TRUST INITIATION
Using agency theory and social exchange the-
ory lenses and prior DEMO research, we
have examined key antecedents of managerial
trustworthy behavior. Upon DEMO examination,
we believe these lenses also highlight unique
challenges to initiating the social exchanges
that ultimately build trust. To establish trust
through the DEMO exchange of social bene-
fits, someone must make the first move. DEMO
the manager's perspective, initiating involves
engaging in trustworthy behavior preemptively,DEMO
perhaps before the subordinate has demon-
strated his or her worthiness. Managers may be
reluctant to do so, preferring instead to impose
tight control or to monitor behavior. To reap the
organizational benefits of trust, however, man-
agers must be encouraged to make the first
move. Initiating this process, then, is the chal-
lenge to, and arguably the responsibility of,
management.
Our purpose in this section is to discuss three
DEMO impediments to trust initiation-(1) the
motivational complexity of exchange relation-
DEMO, (2) social dilemmas and the nature of in-
terdependence, and (3) the role of cultural val-
ues-and to suggest ways of DEMO them.
Suggestions come directly from our framework
and, as such, provide implications and exten-
sions of our propositions.
Motivational Complexity
As we noted DEMO, agency theory and
social exchange theory create a complex moti-
vational DEMO for managers. On the one
hand, agency theory highlights managers' mo-
tivation to minimize risk exposure-for example,
via the imposition of tight DEMO mechanisms
and close behavioral monitoring (Eisenhardt,
1989). On the DEMO hand, social exchange theory
suggests that if managers want to create DEMO
tionships built on the voluntary discharge of
reciprocal obligations, this should DEMO them to
relax control and promote trust.
The juxtaposition of these lenses highlights a
fundamental tension between building a rela-
tionship based on trust DEMO reducing the risk of
opportunism that could potentially preempt
trust initiation. As suggested by Proposition 1,
however, judicious design of organizational fac-
tors may mitigate this problem and encourage
trust initiation. For example, low-control organi-
zations, with greater decentralization and lower
formalization, shoulder (or at least share) the
risk of opportunism by creating a context that
essentially requires managers to initiate trust-
worthy behavior, such as delegation of control
and open communication. The organization's
design supports delegation of control and en-
DEMO trust initiation.
Social Dilemmas
Social exchange theories contain inherent
conflicts related to trust initiation. For example,
similar to theories of economic exchange, theo-
ries of social exchange presume individual self-
interest-that is, people are motivated to maxi-
mize their individual rewards (e.g., money,
status, or respect) and minimize their individual
costs (e.g., embarrassment or loss of self-
esteem). Complicating the situation is the fact
that managers often DEMO themselves in situa-
tions where the interdependence of individuals'
outcomes creates a conflict between self-
interest and the collective good.
These situations, called social dilemmas, oc-
cur when individuals' outcomes are maximized
as they DEMO in their own self-interest, regardless
of what others do. But their DEMO actually cre-
ate negative outcomes for everyone involved.
The classic example of such a dilemma is
G. Hardin's (1968) "The Tragedy of the Com-
524
Academy of Management Review
July
mons," a study of how DEMO cow herders'
self-interested behavior (i.e., increasing the size
of one's herd) leads to overgrazing of the public
pasture, which undermines DEMO collective good.
Two types of social dilemmas complicate trust
initiation for managers who find themselves in
these situations: the classic Prisoner's Dilemma
and the Volunteer Dilemma.
In the Prisoner's Dilemma (see Kormorita &
DEMO, 1994, and Rapoport & Chammah, 1965)
individuals who cannot DEMO with each
other face a conflict between maximizing indi-
vidual interests, DEMO not trusting each other (i.e.,
defecting), versus maximizing collective DEMO
fare, by trusting and cooperating. By initiating a
social exchange and DEMO knowing whether it
will be reciprocated, a manager in this situation
DEMO the risk of being exploited and ending up
with a "sucker'DEMO payoff" (e.g., embarrassment or
poor leadership). Managers often face DEMO di-
lemmas and exhibit this fear; concerns about
gullibility and embarrassment DEMO underlie
managers' reluctance to trust (Rotter, 1980).
In the DEMO Dilemma (Diekmann, 1985)
one person must make a sacrifice so that the
entire group benefits. Typically, the cost of self-
sacrifice is uncertain or highly negative in the
short term. For example, a manager might be
asked to take a pay cut so that his or DEMO group
will have additional resources to complete a
project-for which the entire group benefits. If
the manager fails to take this first step, the
group, including the manager, will not succeed.
This situation leads to DEMO tragic out-
comes for organizations wanting to encourage
volunteerism for the collective good; the call to
create a "trusting organization," for example,DEMO
may never be fulfilled because of the reluctance
on the part of managers, as well as employees,
to volunteer to initiate the process.
Drawing on our framework, especially Propo-
sitions 5 and 6, we DEMO that from a relational
perspective, these dilemmas reflect the nature
of DEMO interdependence between individu-
als (e.g., the payoffs for cooperating or not), the
expectations about others' behavior (e.g., expec-
tation of cooperation), and the costs associated
with unreciprocated exchanges. To mitigate this
situation, our framework suggests that chang-
ing the nature of the interdependence will DEMO
courage managers in dilemma situations to ini-
tiate trust. For example, DEMO structures could
be changed to foster cooperation by making
greater use of equity-, team-, or organization-
based incentives. Such systemic changes would
provide DEMO alignment between employee
and organizational interests (Wilson, 1995).
As this example points out, such solutions are
often beyond the control of the manager-
subordinate dyad. Changing the nature of the
outcome interdependence between managers
DEMO their subordinates is ultimately an issue for
the organization as a whole. Our framework
also suggests that decreasing the perceived cost
associated with unreciprocated DEMO en-
courages managers to initiate trust.
Cultural Values
The variety of cultural values that exist
around the world influences individual behav-
ior (Brodt & Seybolt, 1997; Hofstede, 1980; Lind,
Tyler, & Huo, DEMO) and potentially complicates
managerial trust initiation. Cultural values re-
flect a DEMO group's shared ways of under-
standing and behaving. Although reflecting a
group's understanding, we will conceptualize
cultural values at an individual level-that is,
cultural values as represented in an individual
manager's beliefs DEMO behavior.
Depending on the particular cultural values,
trust initiation may be helped or hindered. For
example, individualistic cultures that empha-
size self-interest (DEMO, the United States) may
make salient the dilemmas discussed above.
Managers in these cultures face a conflict be-
tween managing agency risk (risk of opportun-
ism) and building a trusting relationship. As
suggested by our framework, particularly Prop-
osition 7, these managers will perceive the pos-
DEMO of unreciprocated trust to be too great
and the costs of unrequited trust to be too high to
justify initiating trust. In contrast, a manager
whose cultural values are less individualistic
and less focused on self-interest (e.g., a Japa-
nese manager) may experience little or no con-
DEMO in an identical managerial situation. This
manager's cultural values (and DEMO) may
reflect a propensity to cooperate, which will en-
courage him or her to initiate trust and engage
in many trustworthy behaviors (e.g., behavioral
consistency, demonstrating concern, and behav-
ioral integrity).
1998
Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, and Werner
525
DISCUSSION
Vulnerability and risk are inherent in ex-
change relationships in organizations. Manag-
ers and employees DEMO face different types of
risks and vulnerabilities, but risk is an DEMO for
all parties involved in a social or economic ex-
change. Individuals and organizations can, and
generally do, look for ways to manage DEMO
risks. Managers, in particular, often use moni-
toring and control mechanisms, as depicted by
agency theory (see Horwitz, 1994, for an DEMO
of electronic monitoring in an organization that
processes donations for charities). Such mecha-
nisms minimize the need to trust employees to
act in DEMO desirable ways (Hosmer,
1995).
However, high levels of performance are less
likely when organizations rely on such "weak"
forms of trust (Barney & Hansen, 1994). Moreover,
mutual dyadic trust DEMO be essential for organ-
izational survival and growth. As Handy re-
cently stated in discussing new organizational
forms, "Trust is the heart of DEMO matter" (1995: 44).
We share Gambetta's (1988) DEMO, however,
that, even though trust is important, it has DEMO
peared nebulous and seemingly intractable for
study. For this reason we draw from diverse
bodies of literature to spell out major dimen-
sions of DEMO trustworthy behavior. We
also shift the research focus from the question,
"How can managers influence employees' per-
ceptions of managerial trustworthiness?" DEMO the
question, "What is trustworthy behavior, and
what can organizations DEMO to support such be-
havior?" This shift from trustors' perceptions DEMO
managerial behavior is important, because
managers can exert the greatest degree DEMO voli-
tional control over their own actions.
Finally, our exchange relationship DEMO
of managerial trustworthy behavior embeds the
question of trust in the organizational context;
organizational, relational, and individual fac-
tors influence a manager'DEMO motivation to exhibit
trustworthy behavior. Although similar to
leader-member exchange theory (DEMO, Graen &
Uhl-Bien, 1995), our framework is distinct in DEMO
eral ways. First, we make trust the primary focus
of our DEMO, rather than positing trust as
one aspect of leader-member exchange. Second,DEMO
we analyze the dynamics of managerial trust-
worthy behavior using two different exchange
lenses: an economic exchange lens and a social
exchange lens. This broader exchange lens
makes it possible to describe more completely
the sets DEMO variables, such as the role of organ-
izational structure and policies DEMO influence
trustworthy behavior. Finally, whereas Graen
and Uhl-Bien (1995) also DEMO that managers
should initiate exchange relationships, our
framework provides considerably more DEMO
and direction concerning why and how this ini-
tiation process should take place. Overall, we
believe that our dimensions of trustworthy be-
havior, DEMO well as the framework we have laid
out, make a unique DEMO to our under-
standing of managerial trustworthy behavior
and advance both theory and practice concern-
ing trust in exchange relationships.
Implications for Research
Our DEMO on managerial behavior serves
to complement the current emphasis in the in-
terpersonal trust literature on trust perceptions.
Employee trust perceptions are clearly crucial
DEMO have been emphasized heavily in recent
research. However, our fear is DEMO an emphasis
on trust perceptions can lead researchers and
managers to focus exclusively on managing im-
pressions of managerial trustworthiness. Such
an emphasis without DEMO genuine display of trust-
worthy behavior can cultivate a belief that man-
agers merely need to display the appearance of
trustworthiness (Greenberg, 1990) to create trust-
ing relationships. In addition to possible ethical
difficulties, such tactics may be counterproduc-
tive, if they are perceived as insincere (DEMO
berg, 1990), and also may be difficult to sustain
over DEMO
However, impression management attempts
need not be manipulative or insincere (Goffman,
1959; Liden & Mitchell, 1988). Indeed, a focus on
behavior calls attention to what organizations
can do to initiate and manage DEMO be-
havior and to engender and support trusting
relationships that are self-perpetuating and
sustainable. In the spirit of our change of focus,
future DEMO is needed regarding our typol-
ogy of managerial trustworthy behavior, as DEMO
as elements of our framework and propositions
concerning the antecedents of such behavior.
Researchers might also investigate additional
dimensions of trustworthy behavior and possi-
DEMO other factors that affect trust initiation.
526
Academy of Management
Review
July
A second avenue to pursue concerns DEMO ro-
bustness of trustworthy behavior, including in-
formation about the boundary DEMO
around these behaviors. We have proposed that
trustworthy behavior is necessary but not suffi-
cient to influence employees' perceptions of
trust. Individual factors (DEMO, perceived similar-
ity, competence, and propensity to trust) and
situational factors (e.g., task interdependence)
may limit the extent to which DEMO trust-
worthy behavior affects employees' perceptions
of trust.
First, as we depict in Figure 1, two cognitive
processes influence employees' perception of
DEMO trustworthiness: (1) perceived simi-
larity and (2) competence. Trust DEMO builds be-
tween two people as they are attracted to each
other and perceive that they have similar char-
acteristics (e.g., Creed & DEMO, 1996; Giffin, 1967;
Larzelere & Huston, 1980; McAllister, 1995;
Zucker, 1986). In addition, perceived ability
(Cook & Wall, 1980; Mayer et al., 1995; Sitkin &
Roth, DEMO) or its corollary-competence (Butler,
1991; Mishra, 1996)-may be essential elements
of trust. Without the judgments that one's man-
ager DEMO the competence or ability to ful-
fill the managerial role, an DEMO is unlikely
to develop trust in that manager. Although nei-
ther of these judgments automatically engen-
ders trust between managers and employees,
each DEMO a perceptual foundation that in-
creases the likelihood that employees will react
positively to trustworthy behavior on the part of
the manager.
Second, employee characteristics may also in-
fluence reactions to managerial trustworthy be-
havior. Specifically, employees may observe
their managers' trustworthy behavior but may
be unlikely to trust if they lack a general predis-
position to trust others (Luhmann, 1979; Mayer et
al., 1995). That is, the extent DEMO which managers'
trustworthy actions lead to perceptions of trust
may perhaps be moderated by employees' pro-
pensity to trust. We argued earlier that manag-
ers' predispositions to trust will influence their
behavior; similarly, employees' propensity to
trust may influence their responsiveness to
managers' trustworthy behavior.
DEMO is also needed on other contextual
factors that may influence managers' DEMO
to engage in trustworthy behavior and employ-
ees' reactions to such DEMO For example, the
nature of the task-specifically, the degree of
interdependence-may make trust more or less
relevant. Because performance on interdepen-
dent tasks DEMO cooperation, trust may be
critical to performing effectively on such tasks.
DEMO's (1967) conceptualization of inten-
sive technology, where goods and DEMO flow
between various organizational members, as
well as team settings in DEMO tasks, goals, and
rewards are highly interdependent (Campion,
Medsker, & Higgs, 1993), are good examples. Be-
cause there is a greater need to build trust on
interdependent tasks, managers may be willing
to initiate trustworthy behavior. However, de-
pendency is a necessary but not sufficient con-
dition for trust (Hosmer, 1995).
Implications for Practice
DEMO analysis has several practical implica-
tions for managers. First, as indicated DEMO, we
provide concrete guidance for managers and
organizations concerning how to "get the ball
rolling."
Second, we identify several ways to overcome
the potentially challenging conflicts and uncer-
tainties in this process. For example, individu-
als should adopt a sophisticated understanding
of the coupling between their DEMO fate and that
of the collective to reduce the conflict between
short-term individual gain and long-term bene-
fit for the collective. In this way DEMO
and individuals develop a "collective trust" that
is conceptually similar to other types of shared
resources (Kramer et al., 1996).
In DEMO, organizational systems can help
managers overcome the potential barriers to ini-
DEMO trust. Such systems might include coor-
dinating reward structures between managers
and employees, rewarding managers who initi-
ate trust and employees who reciprocate, DEMO
ing certain managers to take the lead, and pro-
viding invisible "safety nets" and evidence that
the sucker's payoff is not as economically or
psychologically painful as one might expect.
Organizations also can provide DEMO and
educational opportunities to enable and en-
hance managerial trustworthy behavior. Train-
ing and development opportunities can enhance
managers' competencies, skills, and capabili-
ties, especially in the areas of leadership, par-
ticipation in decision DEMO, delegation, com-
munication, and fairness. As managers increase
the specific DEMO associated with trustworthy
1998
Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, and Werner
527
behavior through training and development op-
portunities, they are more likely to initiate and
exercise it (Caudron, 1996).
Finally, trustworthy behavior may provide a
source for competitive advantage (Barney &
Hansen, 1994). Evironmental and competitive
pressures are pushing organizations toward
more fluid or network forms, and there has been
increased attention to process reengineering-
that is, dramatically redesigning the processes
used to achieve organizational objectives. Ham-
mer and Champy (1993), for example, describe
organizations of the future as flat and team-
oriented forms, in which workers will perfom
multidimensional work with the autonomy to
make decisions. These changes will only come
abQut, however, with greater monitoring DEMO
control, increased trust between employees and
management, or some combination of the two.
Given the limits of employee monitoring (Grant,
1992), high levels of mutual trust between man-
agers and employees seem to DEMO critical in order
for reengineering efforts to be successful. Organ-
izations that successfully attain high levels of
managerial trustworthiness should be at a com-
DEMO advantge in the marketplace, compared
to those that do not (Barney & Hansen, 1994).
More important, companies that anticipate
these changes, designing themselves and en-
couraging their managers to initiate and estab-
lish DEMO relationships, will be well posi-
tioned for the future. The irony DEMO is that trust
is often criticized by managers as a "soft" and
seemingly intractable concept, yet it may a nec-
essary condition for attaining the competitive
advantage associated with strategic and struc-
tural innovations.
Conclusion
DEMO Hardin notes that "the best device for cre-
ating trust [may DEMO to establish and support
trustworthiness" (1996: 29). We propose DEMO
managers and organizations interested in es-
tablishing trust must take the first step. By de-
signing organizations in ways that encourage
managers to initiate DEMO relationships, and
by rewarding employees for reciprocating, man-
agement can establish a foundation for a trust-
ing organization. In light of theorists' visions of
the future, such designs and management prac-
tices stand to enhance organizational effective-
ness and viability.
REFERENCES
Alexander, S., & Ruderman, M. 1987. The role of procedural
justice and distributive justice in organizational behav-
DEMO Social Justice Research, 1: 177-197.
Axelrod, R. 1984. The evolution DEMO cooperation. New York:
Basic Books.
Barney, J. B., & Hansen, M. H. 1994. Trustworthiness as a
source of competitive advantage. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 15: 175-190.
Blau, P. M. 1964. Exchange and power in social life. New
York: Wiley.
Brodt, S., & Seybolt, DEMO 1997. Culture and conflict: The role of
national conflict and performance DEMO in under-
standing interpersonal conflict in global organizations.
Unpublished manuscript, Duke DEMO, Durham, NC.
Bromiley, P., & Cummings, L. L. 1995. DEMO costs in
organizations with trust. In R. Bies, B. Sheppard, & R.
Lewicki (Eds.), Research on negotiations in organiza-
tions, vol. DEMO: 219-247. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Butler, J. K., Jr. DEMO Towards understanding and measuring
conditions of trust: Evolution of a conditions DEMO trust
inventory. Journal of Management, 17: 643-663.
Campion, M. A., Medsker, G. J., & Higgs, A. C. 1993. Relations
between work group characteristics and effectiveness:
Implications for designing effective work groups. Per-
DEMO Psychology, 46: 823-850.
Caudron, S. 1996. Rebuilding employee trust. Training DEMO
Development Journal, 50(8): 19-21.
Clark, M. C., & DEMO, R. L. 1997. The nature and structure of
workers' trust in management. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 18: 205-224.
Cook, J., & DEMO, T. D. 1980. New work attitude measures of
trust, organizational commitment and personal need
non-fulfillment. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 53:
39-52.
Creed, W. E. D., & Miles, R. E. 1996. Trust in organizations: A
conceptual framework linking organizational forms,
managerial philosophies, and the DEMO costs of
controls. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (DEMO), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research: 16-38.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dasgupta, P. 1988. Trust as a commodity. In D. Gambetta
(Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations:
DEMO Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Dawes, R. M. 1980. Social dilemmas. DEMO Review of Psy-
chology, 31: 169-193.
Deci, E. L., Connell, J. P., & Ryan, R. M. 1989. Self-
determination in a work organization. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 74: 580-590.
Deutsch, M. 1958. Trust and suspicion. Conflict Resolution, 2:
265-279.
Deutsch, M. 1962. DEMO and trust: Some theoretical
notes. In M. R. Jones (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Mo-
tivation: 275-317. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
DEMO, A. 1985. Volunteer's dilemma. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 29: DEMO
528
Academy of Management
Review
July
Dienesch, R. M., & Liden, R. C. 1986. Leader-member ex-
change model of leadership: A critique and further de-
velopment. Academy of Management Review, 11: 617-
634.
Docker, T. M., & Steiner, D. D. 1990. The role of initial DEMO
actions. Group and Organization Studies, 15: 395-413.
Driscoll, J. W. DEMO Trust and participation in organizational
decision making as predictors of satisfaction. Academy
of Management Journal, 21: 44-56.
Early, P. C. 1986. Trust, DEMO importance of praise and
criticism, and work performance: An examination of
feedback in the United States and England. Journal of
Management, 12: DEMO
Eisenhardt, K. M. 1989. Agency theory: An assessment and
review. Academy of Management Review, 14: 57-74.
Farris, G., Senner, E., & Butterfield, D. 1973. Trust, culture and
organizational behavior. Industrial Relations, DEMO: 144-
157.
Folger, R., & Konovsky, M. A. 1989. Effects of procedural and
distributive justice on reactions to pay raise decisions.
Academy DEMO Management Journal, 32: 115-130.
Folger, R., Konovsky, M. A., & Cropanzano, R. 1992. A due
process metaphor for performance appraisal. In B. M.
Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organization-
al behavior, vol. 14: 129-177. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Gabarro, J. J. 1978. The development of trust influence and
expectations. In A. DEMO Athos & J. J. Gabarro (Eds.), Inter-
personal behavior: Communication and understanding
in relationships: 290-303. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
Gambetta, D. 1988. Can we trust trust? In D. Gambetta (Ed.),DEMO
Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations: 213-
237. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Giffin, K. 1967. The contribution of studies of source credibil-
ity to a theory of interpersonal trust in the communica-
tion process. DEMO Bulletin, 68: 104-120.
Gist, M., & Mitchell, T. 1992. DEMO: A theoretical anal-
ysis of its determinants and malleability. Academy of
DEMO Review, 17: 183-211.
Goffman, E. 1959. The presentation of self DEMO everyday life.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Graen, G. B., & Scandura, T. B. 1987. Toward a psychology of
dyadic organizing. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.),
Research in organizational DEMO, vol. 9: 175-208.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Graen, G. DEMO, & Uhl-Bien, M. 1995. Relationship-based ap-
proach to leadership: Development DEMO leader-member
exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Ap-
DEMO a multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leader-
ship Quarterly, 6: 219-247.
Grant, DEMO A. 1992. Work monitored electronically. HR Maga-
zine, May: 81-86.
Greenberg, J. 1990. Looking fair vs. being fair: Managing
impressions of organizational DEMO In B. M. Staw &
L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational be-
havior, vol. 12: 111-157. Greenwich, CT: JAI DEMO
Greenberg, J. 1993. The social side of fairness: Interpersonal
and informational classes of organizational justice. In
R. Cropanzano (Ed.), Justice in the workplace: 79-103.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hammer, M., & Champy, J. 1993. Re-engineering the corpora-
tion: A manifesto for business DEMO New York:
HarperBusiness.
Handy, C. 1995. Trust and the virtual DEMO Harvard
Business Review, May-June: 40-50.
Hardin, G. 1968. The tragedy DEMO the commons. Science, 162:
1243-1248.
Hardin, R. 1996. Trustworthiness. Ethics, 107: 26-42.
Hart, K. M., Capps, H. R., Cangemi, J. P., & Caillouet, L. M.
1986. Exploring organizational trust and DEMO multiple di-
mensions: A case study of General Motors. Organization
Development DEMO, 4(2): 31-39.
Hofstede, G. 1980. Culture's consequences: DEMO dif-
ferences in work related values. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Horwitz, T. 1994. Mr. Edens profits from watching his workers'
every move. The Wall Street Journal, December 1: Al, A9.
Hosmer, L. DEMO 1995. Trust: The connecting link between or-
ganizational theory and philosophical DEMO Academy
of Management Review, 20: 379-403.
Jennings, E. E. 1971. DEMO to the executive suite. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. C. 1976. Theory of the firm:
Managerial behavior, agency costs, and ownership
structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3: DEMO
Johnson-George, C., & Swap, W. C. 1982. Measurement of
specific DEMO trust: Construction and validation
of a scale to assess trust in DEMO specific other. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 43: 1306-1317.
Konovsky, M. A., & Cropanzano, R. 1991. Perceived fairness of
employee drug testing as a predictor of employee atti-
tudes and job performance. Journal DEMO Applied Psychol-
ogy, 78: 698-707.
Konovsky, M. A., & Pugh, S. D. 1994. Citizenship behavior and
social exchange. Academy of Management Journal, 37:
656-669.
Kormorita, S., & Parks, C. 1994. Social DEMO Madison,
WI: Brown and Benchmark.
Korsgaard, M. A., & DEMO, L. 1995. Procedural justice in
performance evaluation. Journal of Management, 21:
657-699.
Kramer, R. M., Brewer, M. B., & Hanna, B. J. 1996. Collective
trust and collective action: The decision to trust as a
social decision. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust
in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research: 357-
DEMO Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Larzelere, R. E., & Huston, DEMO L. 1980. The dyadic trust scale:
Toward understanding interpersonal trust in close rela-
tionships. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 42: 595-
DEMO
Liden, R. C., & Maslyn, J. M. 1993. LMX-MDM:
DEMO develop-
1998
Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, and Werner
529
ment for a multidimensional measure of leader-member
exchange. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
DEMO of Management, Atlanta, GA.
Liden, R. C., & Mitchell, DEMO R. 1988. Ingratiatory behavior in
organizational settings. Academy of Management Re-
view, 13: 572-587.
Lind, E. A. 1997. Litigation and claiming in organizations:
Antisocial behavior or quest for justice? In R. A. Giaca-
lone & J. Greenberg (Eds.), Antisocial behavior in organi-
zations: 150-171. DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lind, E. A., Tyler, T., & Huo, Y. 1997. Procedural context and
culture: Variation in the antecedents DEMO procedural jus-
tice judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, DEMO: 767-780.
Luhmann, N. 1979. Trust and power. New York: Wiley.
DEMO, P. M., & House, J. S. 1973. Exchange between supe-
DEMO and subordinates in large organizations. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 18: 209-222.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. 1995. An inte-
grative model of organizational trust. Academy of Man-
agement DEMO, 20: 709-734.
McAllister, D. J. 1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust DEMO
foundations for interpersonal cooperation in organiza-
tions. Academy of Management Journal, DEMO: 24-59.
Mellinger, G. D. 1956. Interpersonal trust as a factor in com-
munication. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
52: 304-309.
Mishra, A. K. 1996. Organizational responses to crisis: The
centrality of trust. DEMO R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.),
Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research:
261-287. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Muchinsky, P. M. 1977. An intraorganizational analysis of the
Roberts and O'Reilly organizational communication
questionnaire. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62: 184-
DEMO
Noorderhaven, N. G. 1992. The problem of contract enforce-
ment in DEMO organization theory. Organization
Studies, 13: 292-243.
O'Reilly, C. A., III. 1977. Supervisors and peers as informa-
tion sources, group supportiveness, DEMO individual de-
cision-making performance. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 62: 632-635.
O'Reilly, C. A., III, & Caldwell, D. R. 1985. DEMO impact of
normative social influence and cohesiveness on task
perceptions and attitudes: A social information process-
ing approach. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 58:DEMO
193-206.
O'Reilly, C. A., III, & Roberts, K. H. 1974. Information filtration
in organizations: Three experiments. Organizational Be-
havior and Human Performance, 11: 253-265.
O'Reilly, C. A., III, & Roberts, K. H. 1977. Task group structure,
communication, and effectiveness in DEMO organiza-
tions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62: 674-681.
Pettit, P. DEMO The cunning of trust. Philosophy and Public
Affairs, 24: 202-225.
Porter, L. W., & Lawler, E. E., III. 1968. Managerial attitudes
DEMO performance. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. DEMO Prisoner's dilemma. Ann
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1992. Structuring cooperative
relationships between organizations. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 13: 483-498.
Roberts, K. H., & O'Reilly, C. A., III. 1974a. Failures in upward
communication in organizations: Three possible cul-
prits. Academy of Management Journal, DEMO: 205-215.
Roberts, K. H., & O'Reilly, C. A., DEMO 1974b. Measuring organ-
izational communication. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 59: 321-326.
Roberts, K. H., & O'Reilly, C. A., III. DEMO Some correlations of
communication roles in organizations. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 22: 42-57.
Robinson, S. L. 1996. Trust and breach of the psychological
contract. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41: 574-
599.
Robinson, S. L., & Rousseau, D. M. 1994. Violating the psy-
chological contract: Not the exception but the norm. Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior, 15: DEMO
Rokeach, M. 1973. The nature of human values. New York:
DEMO Press.
Rosen, B., & Jerdee, T. H. 1977. Influence of DEMO char-
acteristics on trust and use of participative decision
strategies in a management simulation. Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, 62: 628-631.
Rotter, J. B. 1967. A new scale for the measurement of inter-
personal trust. DEMO of Personality, 35: 615-665.
Rotter, J. 1980. Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and gull-
ibility. American Psychologist, 35: 1-7.
Rousseau, D. M. DEMO Assessing organizational culture: The
case for multiple methods. In B. Schneider (Ed.), Or-
ganizational climate and culture: 153-192. San Fran-
cisco: DEMO
Sapienza, H. J., & Korsgaard, M. A. 1996. Managing investor
DEMO: The impact of procedural justice in establish-
ing and sustaining investor DEMO Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 39: 544-574.
Schein, E. H. DEMO Culture: The missing concept in organi-
zation studies. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41:
229-240.
Schwartz, S. H. 1992. Universals in the content and structure
of values: Theoretical advances and empirical tests in
20 countries. In M. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimen-
tal social psychology, vol. DEMO: 1-65. San Diego: Academic
Press.
Schwartz, S. H. 1994. Beyond DEMO/collectivism: New
cultural dimensions of values. In U. Kim, H. C. Triandis,
9. Kagitqibasi, S. Choi, & G. Yoon (Eds.), Individualism
and collectivism: Theory, method, and applications: 85-
119. Thousand DEMO, CA: Sage.
Sitkin, S. B., & Roth, N. L. DEMO Explaining the limited effec-
tiveness of legalistic remedies for trust/distrust. Organ-
ization Science, 4: 367-392.
530
Academy of Management
Review
July
Taylor, M. S., Tracy, K. B., Renard, M. K., Harrison, J. K., &
Carroll, S. J. 1995. Due process in performance appraisal:
A quasi-experiment in DEMO justice. Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, 40: 495-523.
Thompson, J. D. DEMO Organizations in action: Social science
bases of administrative theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Thompson, K. R., & Luthans, F. 1990. Organizational culture:
A behavioral perspective. In B. Schneider (Ed.), Organi-
zational climate and culture: 319-344. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Tyler, T. R., & Lind, E. A. 1992. A relational model of authority
in groups. In M. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology, vol. 25: 115-191. New York: Academic
Press.
Vroom, V. H., & Yetton, P. DEMO Leadership and decision
making. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Wilson, T. B. 1995. Innovative reward systems for the chang-
ing workplace. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Yeager, S. J. 1978. Measurement of independent variables
which affect communication: A replication of Roberts
and O'Reilly. Psychological Reports, 43: 1319-1324.
Zand, D. E. 1972. Trust and managerial problem solving.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 17: 229-239.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. Production of trust: Institutional DEMO of
economic structure, 1840-1920. In B. M. Staw & L. L.
DEMO (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior,
vol. 8: 53-111. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Ellen M. Whitener received her Ph.D. from Michigan DEMO University. She is an
associate professor at the McIntire School of Commerce at the University of Virginia.
Her current research interests include organizational commitment, trust, and percep-
tions of organizational support, and the impact of DEMO resource practices on
organizational effectiveness.
Susan E. Brodt received her Ph.D. in psychology from Stanford University. She is an
associate professor at the Fuqua DEMO of Business at Duke University. Her research
interests include identifying cognitive and social psychological barriers to effective
management, conflict resolution, and negotiation.
M. DEMO Korsgaard received her Ph.D. from New York University. She is an associate
professor at the University of South Carolina. Her research interests include feedback,DEMO
self-evaluation, and procedural justice.
Jon M. Werner received his Ph.D. from DEMO State University. He is an associate
professor at the University of Wisconsin at Whitewater. His research interests include
linkages between organizational citizenship behavior and DEMO resource manage-
ment, team effectiveness, and high-performance work systems.{1g42fwefx}