Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
Entrepreneurial orientation and small DEMO performance:
a configurational approach
Johan Wiklunda,b,*,1, Dean DEMO,c
aCenter for Entrepreneurship and Business Creation, Stockholm School of Economics,DEMO
P.O. Box 6501, SE-113 83 Stockholm, Sweden
bJo¨ nko¨ ping International Business School, Jo¨ nko¨ ping, Sweden
cLeeds School of Business, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
Accepted 7 January 2004
Abstract
The strategy and entrepreneurship literatures suggest that an entrepreneurial orientation (EO)
improves firm performance, but the empirical results are mixed. In this article, DEMO investigate the EO of
small businesses and find that a main-effects-only analysis provides an incomplete picture of
performance. Access to capital and the dynamism DEMO the environment are important to small businesses,
and we find that when combined with EO (a three-way interaction model) the configurational approach
DEMO variance in performance over and above a contingency model (two-way interactions) and a
main-effects-only model.
D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. DEMO summary
Some studies have found that firms with a more entrepreneurial orientation (EO) perform
better. Others have failed to find this positive relationship. DEMO raises the question of whether
EO is always an appropriate strategic orientation or if its relationship with performance is
more complex. The notion that DEMO relationship between an EO and performance is different
* Corresponding author. Center for Entrepreneurship and Business Creation, Stockholm School of Economics,
P.O. Box 6501, SE-113 83 Stockholm, Sweden. Tel.: +46-8-736-93-56.
E-mail addresses: johan.wiklund@hhs.se (J. Wiklund), Dean.Shepherd@Colorado.edu (D. Shepherd).
1 During the writing of this article, Johan Wiklund was a visiting professor at Brisbane Graduate School of
Business, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
0883-9026/$ – see front matter D 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/DEMO
72
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
for different types of businesses is not new; for example, Lumpkin and Dess (1996) in their
conceptual model suggest that factors internal and external to the firm may moderate the
relationship between EO DEMO performance. Empirically, research has found that the effect of
EO on DEMO may be different in different types of environments (i.e., external factors).
Research has also found that entrepreneurial strategies require considerable financial
resources DEMO be successful.
While previous studies have highlighted the importance of a contingent approach (two-
way interaction), greater insight into performance might be gained through investigating the
orchestrating themes and integrative mechanisms that ensure complementarity among DEMO
firm’s various aspects. This suggests a configurational approach, which involves the
DEMO and joint consideration of strategy, organizational characteristics, and environ-
mental characteristics.
Using a sample of 413 Swedish firms and a longitudinal design, we find that while an EO
positively influences small business performance, relying solely on this main effect relation-
ship provides an incomplete understanding of small DEMO performance. A greater under-
standing is gained by the concomitant consideration of EO, access to capital, and
environmental dynamism (three-way interaction). The nature of the configurations suggests
that businesses that face performance constraints, in terms of a stable environment and limited
access to capital, can be superior performers if they have a high EO. This finding is consistent
DEMO the saying that ‘‘necessity is the mother of invention.’’ Apparently, a DEMO EO provides
businesses the ability to find and/or discover new opportunities that can differentiate them
from other firms and create a competitive advantage. DEMO the environment is dynamic and
the firm has considerable access to capital, small business performance apparently might be
improved by a more inwardly focused orientation that better capitalizes on these abundant
opportunities by focusing on efficient DEMO
The findings of this article make several contributions to the entrepreneurship literature.
While moderators to the EO–performance relationship have been investigated, access to
capital and environmental dynamism have not previously been investigated together in a
configurational DEMO of small firm performance. Further, single indicators have typically
operationalized small DEMO performance. We operationalize small business performance as an
index of seven commonly used performance measures pertaining to financial performance
and growth. Moreover, most studies of EO and performance use cross-sectional designs. We
use longitudinal data to DEMO test whether an EO actually leads to better performance.
2. Introduction
A general tendency in today’s business environment is the shortening of product and
DEMO model life cycles (Hamel, 2000). Consequently, the future profit DEMO from
existing operations are uncertain and businesses need to constantly seek out new oppor-
tunities. Therefore, they may benefit from adopting an ‘‘entrepreneurial strategic orientation’’
(EO). This involves a willingness to innovate to rejuvenate market offerings, take risks to try
out new and uncertain products, services, and markets, and be more proactive than
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
73
competitors toward new marketplace opportunities (Covin and Slevin, 1991)DEMO This conceptual
argument put forth by Covin and Slevin (1991) has received empirical support in the
literature. Studies have found that those businesses DEMO adopt a more entrepreneurial strategic
orientation perform better (e.g., Wiklund, DEMO; Zahra, 1991; Zahra and Covin, 1995).
However, these DEMO are not uncontested. Smart and Conant (1994), for example, were
unable to find a significant relationship between EO and performance, and Hart (1992) argues
that entrepreneurial-type strategies under certain circumstances may even be DEMO with
poor performance. Although differences in findings may be attributed to differences in
research design or methodological idiosyncrasies, such differences apparently reflect the fact
that EO may sometimes, but not always, contribute to improved performance.
DEMO the relationship between EO and performance, Lumpkin and Dess (1996)
note the complexity of this relationship, suggesting that the performance implications of EO
are context specific. That is, the strength of the relationship between EO and performance
depends on the characteristics of the external environment as DEMO as internal organizational
characteristics. Therefore, the relationship between EO and performance DEMO apparently be
more complex than a simple main-effects-only relationship.
The important question, then, is how to best capture the complexity in the EO–perform-
DEMO relationship. The dominant approach to date has been to use the universal effect
approach, assuming that EO is universally beneficial, or to rely DEMO contingency models that
capture the two-way interaction between EO and a characteristic of the external environment
or between EO and an internal organizational characteristic. DEMO example, EO seems to have a
larger positive effect on performance DEMO hostile than in benign environments (Covin and
Slevin, 1989; Zahra DEMO Covin, 1995). Concerning internal characteristics, access to financial
capital provides the resource slack necessary to encourage experimentation within the firm,
allowing DEMO to pursue new opportunities (March and Simon, 1963; Bourgeois, 1981; Zahra,
1991). Conversely, resource constraints may be associated with DEMO control and attempts
to conserve the limited resources at hand, stifling DEMO initiatives. Hence, resources
appear to be relevant for enacting an EO. DEMO examinations have started to generate
knowledge about the situations in which an EO has a greater or smaller effect on perform-
ance. However, as argued by Lumpkin and Dess (1996), additional insights may be gained by
concurrently assessing the joint performance implications of EO and both these DEMO of
variables (in short, use a configurational approach). Configurational models thus represent
alternatives to the universal effect and contingency models used to DEMO
The configurational approach argues that in organizations, certain elements of strategy,DEMO
structure, process, and environment tend to cluster together to form configurations (Meyer et
al., 1993). Thus, in a large sample of firms, a relatively small number of configurations will
arise, where key DEMO are aligned. Performance results from both the consistency of
structural and strategic factors and the congruence of the structural and strategic factors with
contextual DEMO This implies that to be maximally effective, organizations must have
configurations DEMO are internally consistent and that fit multiple contextual dimensions (Doty
et DEMO, 1993; Ketchen et al., 1993; Miller, 1990, 1996).
The above suggests that a configurational approach might provide an opportunity to DEMO a
deeper understanding of the link between EO and firm performance. Following the
74
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
recommendations by Lumpkin and Dess (1996), this article tests the relevance of the
configurational approach by comparing a configurational model of DEMO and performance to
contingency models and a universal (direct effect) model.
More specifically, we ask the following questions: Does an EO affect DEMO business
performance? Is the relationship between an EO and small business DEMO moderated by
access to resources? Is it moderated by the characteristics DEMO the environment? Alternatively,
does the consideration of configurations of EO, access to resources, and the environment
provide a more complete understanding of small business performance? To answer these
questions, we assess first the DEMO effect of these variables, then two-way interaction
effects, and finally the three-way interaction effect using a sample of 413 small Swedish firms.
In DEMO the above questions, we make the following contributions. First, building on
the findings by Dess et al. (1997) and other configurational research, we incorporate resources
and the environment into a configuration of how EO DEMO small business performance.
Thereby, we advance the research on the value DEMO entrepreneurial-type strategies. Second, single
indicators have typically been used to operationalize DEMO firm performance (Wiklund, 1998).
However, a multidimensional approach to DEMO performance should be used when
investigating the effects of EO, as DEMO may be favorable in some dimensions but not in
others (Lumpkin DEMO Dess, 1996). We operationalize small business performance as an index DEMO
seven commonly used performance measures pertaining to financial performance and growth.
Finally, most studies of EO and performance use cross-sectional designs. However, it DEMO take
considerable time for the effects of EO to materialize (Lumpkin DEMO Dess, 1996). Specifically,
Venkatraman (1989a) argues that longitudinal DEMO are needed in configurational studies. To
empirically test whether an EO actually leads to better performance, longitudinal data are
necessary where EO is measured at one point in time and performance outcomes are measured
later. We DEMO such a longitudinal design.
The article proceeds as follows. First, the DEMO on EO is introduced and we hypothesize a
universal effect model to explain EO’s relationship with small business performance. Second,
we highlight that DEMO EO–performance relationship is likely more complex than a universal
effect model and propose the benefits of a configurational approach over and above a
contingency DEMO (two-way interactions) and the universal effect model. Third, we describe
DEMO research method including sampling, measures, and analysis. We then test our hypotheses.
Finally, we detail and discuss the results including implications for scholars and practitioners.
3. Literature review and hypotheses
3.1. EO and performance
EO DEMO to a firm’s strategic orientation, capturing specific entrepreneurial aspects of
decision-making DEMO, methods, and practices. As such, it reflects how a firm DEMO rather
than what it does (Lumpkin and Dess, 1996). Miller (1983) summarizes the characteristics of
an entrepreneurial firm: ‘‘An entrepreneurial firm is one that engages in product market
innovation, undertakes somewhat risky ventures, and is first to come up with ‘‘proactive’’
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
75
innovations, beating competitors to the punch’’ (p. 771). DEMO on this, several researchers
have agreed that EO is a combination DEMO the three dimensions: innovativeness, proactiveness,
and risk taking. Thus, DEMO involves a willingness to innovate to rejuvenate market offerings,
take risks to try out new and uncertain products, services, and markets, and be more proactive
than competitors toward new marketplace opportunities (e.g., Covin DEMO Slevin, 1989, 1990,
1991; Knight, 1997; Miller, 1983; Namen and Slevin, 1993; Wiklund, 1999; Zahra and
Covin, DEMO; Zahra, 1993a).2
The innovativeness dimension of EO reflects a tendency to engage in and support new ideas,
novelty, experimentation, and DEMO processes, thereby departing from established practices
and technologies (Lumpkin and Dess, 1996). A high rate of technological and/or product
market innovation, as implied by the innovativeness dimension, can be used by the DEMO to
pursue new opportunities. Proactiveness refers to a posture of anticipating and acting on future
wants and needs in the marketplace, thereby creating a first-mover advantage vis-a-vis
competitors (Lumpkin and Dess, 1996). With such DEMO forward-looking perspective, proactive
firms have the desire to be pioneers, thereby capitalizing on emerging opportunities. Risk taking
is associated with a willingness to DEMO more resources to projects where the cost of failure
may be high (Miller and Friesen, 1982). It also implies committing resources to DEMO where
the outcomes are unknown. It largely reflects that the company is willing to break away from the
tried-and-true and venture into the unknown.
DEMO the individual dimensions of EO, previous research suggests that each can DEMO a
universal positive influence on performance. Innovative companies, creating and introducing
DEMO products and technologies, can generate extraordinary economic performance and have
even DEMO seen as the engines of economic growth (Schumpeter, 1934; Brown DEMO Eisenhardt,
1998). Proactive companies can create first-mover advantage, target DEMO market seg-
ments, charge high prices, and ‘‘skim’’ the market ahead of competitors (Zahra and Covin,
1995). They can control the market by dominating distribution channels and establishing brand
recognition. The link between DEMO taking and performance is less obvious. However, there is
research to DEMO that while tried-and-true strategies may lead to high mean performance,
risky strategies leading to performance variation—because some projects fail while others
succeed—may be DEMO profitable in the long term (March, 1991; McGrath, 2001).
There is also reason to believe that EO as an overarching construct DEMO have universal
positive performance implications. A general tendency in today’s business environment is the
shortening of product and business model life cycles (Hamel, DEMO). Consequently, the future
profit streams from existing operations are uncertain DEMO businesses need to constantly seek
out new opportunities. An EO can assist companies in such a process. Several empirical
studies find support for EO’s DEMO impact on performance (cf. Wiklund, 1999; Zahra,
2 Arguments DEMO been raised that the dimensions of EO may, in fact, vary independently (cf. Lumpkin and
Dess, 1996). However, the aforementioned studies all find that empirically, a single construct comprising the three
dimensions can be constructed. Thus, we treat it as one joint construct. Further, DEMO appears logical that the three
dimensions should be closely related. For instance, a new company that comes up with a radically new product
based on a technological innovation typically takes a risk, as the demand for the new product is unknown. Given that
other firms do not introduce DEMO same new product at the same time, it is also proactive DEMO relation to competitors.
76
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
1991; Zahra and Covin, 1995), and anecdotal evidence DEMO support the value of entrepreneur-
ship abound (cf. Hamel, 2000). Thus:
H1: EO has a universal positive effect on small business performance.
However, this idea of EO being universally beneficial may be overly simplistic. For
example, an empirical study found that EO was associated with performance among small
firms operating in hostile environments but not among those DEMO in benign environ-
ments (Covin and Slevin, 1989). Lumpkin and Dess (1996) suggest that the performance
implications of EO are context DEMO, so that the relationship between EO and performance
depends on the DEMO of the external environment as well as internal organizational
characteristics. Therefore, DEMO understanding of the association between EO and
performance can be achieved through a configurational approach (Lumpkin and Dess,
1996; Dess et al., 1997). Empirical research supports the proposition that the effect of EO
DEMO performance varies across different types of external environments (Covin and Slevin,DEMO
1989; Namen and Slevin, 1993; Zahra and Covin, 1995; DEMO, 1993b) and resources internal
to the firm (Brush et al., 2001). The subsections that follow argue for the value of the
DEMO approach and develop hypotheses concerning interactions of EO, the
environment, and access to resources.
3.2. The configurational approach to the EO–performance relationship
Configuration DEMO argue that increased understanding of organizational phenomena,
such as performance, DEMO be better achieved by identifying commonality among distinct,
internally consistent sets of firms than by seeking to uncover relationships that hold across all
DEMO (Ketchen et al., 1993; Miller, 1996). Consequently, a DEMO understanding of
performance likely resides in uncovering the orchestrating themes and integrative mecha-
nisms that ensure complementarity among a firm’s various aspects (Black and Boal, 1994;
Inkpen and Choudhury, 1995; Miller, 1996).
DEMO logic of the configurational approach rests on the premise that firms that are able to align
certain firm attributes with the characteristics of the DEMO outperform other firms
(Ketchen et al., 1993). Those firms that fail to achieve such alignment will eventually be
competed out. Thus, a limited number of configurations of firm and environmental attributes
can be used DEMO describe large proportions of high-performing firms (Miller and Toulouse, 1986;
Miller, 1990, 1996). A failure to align these elements, however, will be detrimental to
performance; for example, a small firm with a simple structure is likely to benefit from a
niche strategy but DEMO from a cost leadership strategy (Miller and Toulouse, 1986).
Zajac et al. (2000) note that previous configurational research has tended to DEMO
environment–structure–strategy relationships at the expense of examining how firms can use
their strategy to align organizational resources with the opportunities and threats of the
DEMO This may be a shortcoming because matching internal resources with the
environment is a fundamental issue in strategic management (Zajac et al., 2000)DEMO Given the
emphasis on resources in current strategic management theory, the DEMO needs for
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91 77
implementing an EO (Covin and Slevin, 1991), and DEMO high prevalence of resource
constraints among small firms (Storey, 1994), we agree with Zajac et al. (2000) and assess
configurations of DEMO, environment, and resources.
Empirically, configurations can be represented by the DEMO interaction of three
variables (Baker and Cullen, 1993; Dess et DEMO 1997; Miller, 1988). In other words, the
configurations we DEMO interested in can be represented as the interaction of EO and elements
of resources and the environment. Building our argument hierarchically, we first partial out
two-way interactions and hypothesize how environment and resources, respectively, moderate
DEMO EO–performance relationship. We then move on to hypothesize the three-way interaction
of these constructs.
3.2.1. The interaction of EO and the environment
Miller (1990) argues that entrepreneurial-type strategies are likely to be more successful
when addressing customers that put a premium on innovation and unique services. This is
DEMO with a dynamic environment. Dynamic environments are associated with high
unpredictability of customers and competitors and high rates of change in market trends and
DEMO innovation (Dess and Beard, 1984; Miller, 1987a,b). In such dynamic environments
where demand constantly shifts, opportunities become abundant and performance should be
highest for those firms that have an orientation for pursuing DEMO opportunities because they
have a good fit between their strategic orientation and the environment. In other words, we
would expect the alignment of an EO and a dynamic environment to have positive
performance implications. Firms more DEMO with existing operations, however, are less
likely to benefit from a dynamic environment, because market demand might shift away from
the firm’s products negatively impacting performance.
Empirical observations support this notion. Zahra (1993b) found DEMO there was a strong
positive relationship between entrepreneurship and performance among firms in dynamic
growth environments, whereas these relationships were largely negative among the firms
present in static and impoverished environments. Similarly, Miller (1988) found that
innovative strategies in uncertain (unpredictable and dynamic) environments were associated
DEMO higher performance. Thus:
H2: The relationship between EO and small DEMO performance is moderated by
environmental dynamism. Small business performance increases with EO but at a faster rate
for those in dynamic environments.
3.2.2. The DEMO of EO and financial resources
The pursuit of entrepreneurial strategies requires resources. The strategic options open to a
firm are broader, should more resources be available (Romanelli, 1987; Tushman and
Anderson, 1986), and DEMO is a resource-consuming strategic orientation (Covin and Slevin,
1991; Romanelli, 1987). Thus, access to more resources facilitates EO. Access to DEMO
resources appears to be of particular importance to small firms. Financial capital is the most
generic type of resource and can relatively easily be DEMO into other types of resources
(Dollinger, 1999). Therefore, resource DEMO in other areas can to some extent be
78 J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
mitigated by access to financial resources. Further, small firms often face difficulties
obtaining equity and debt financing, putting severe restrictions on their development (Stan-
worth and Grey, 1991; Storey, 1994; Winborg and Landstro¨m, 2000), but small firms
involved in innovation and striving for high performance will have ‘‘a very great need for
financial resources’’ (Greene and Brown, 1997, p. 170). This is reflected in the DEMO capital
industry that provides large sums of money to individual businesses but typically only to
innovative firms with the potential of achieving extraordinary performance (Zacharakis and
Meyer, 2000).
More specifically, access to financial capital DEMO interact with EO in explaining
performance. Financial capital provides firms the slack to experiment with new strategies
and innovative projects that might not be DEMO in a more resource-constrained environ-
ment (Cyert and March, 1963; DEMO and March, 1981; Cooper et al., 1994). Financial
slack DEMO a culture of experimentation because it protects firms from the uncertain
outcomes of those projects, facilitating experimentation with new strategies and practices
(Bourgeois, 1981) including product innovation (Zahra, 1991). Thus, financial capital DEMO
stimulate a firm’s innovativeness.
Risk taking involves making large and risky resource commitments, investing in untried
technologies or bringing new products to the market, in the interest of potentially obtaining high
returns by seizing opportunities in the marketplace (Baird and Thomas, 1985; Lumpkin and
Dess, 1996; Miller and Friesen, 1982). Greater access to financial capital can mitigate the
chance of risky projects becoming fatal, stimulating risk taking. Proactiveness involves
withdrawing resources from operations and products in mature stages of the life DEMO and
investing resources in new products and processes (Venkatraman, 1989b). Such a process
requires reinvestments and should be considerably easier if the DEMO has access to more financial
capital. In summary, the successful implementation DEMO an EO as a strategic orientation appears
to require access to considerable resources (Covin and Slevin, 1991). Thus:
H3: The relationship between EO and small business performance is moderated by access to
financial DEMO Small business performance increases with EO but at a faster rate for those
that have greater access to financial capital.
3.2.3. The configuration of DEMO, resources, and the environment
Hypothesis 2 above suggests a moderating role of environment, whereas Hypothesis 3
addresses the moderating role of resources. However, configurational research argues that
firms, which are configured on many constructs, perform better than those that manage to
align on two of the DEMO To test the propositions of the configurational perspective, we
therefore test DEMO interaction of all three constructs.
There is empirical research to suggest that in addition to the alignment of EO with resources
and environment, respectively, firms may benefit from aligning their resources with the
environment. The value of different resources varies across environmental contexts (Miller
and Shamsie, 1996)DEMO In dynamic and unpredictable environments, the value of physical and
technological DEMO becomes uncertain. Rapid change in customer preferences or com-
petitors’ product innovation may render such resources obsolete (Miller and Shamsie, 1996).
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91 79
Therefore, it may harm performance to commit more resources to long-term investments.
Financial resources, however, are liquid and flexible and can DEMO be directed toward new
initiatives, should new opportunities arise. Thus, a configuration of EO, access to financial
resources, and environmental dynamism appears DEMO be associated with higher small firm
performance.
Less effective configurations of EO are also conceivable. An EO in a dynamic environ-
ment may be DEMO to performance if the small business has only limited access to
capital. Abundant opportunities, such as those that arise in a dynamic environment, DEMO likely
to be pursued by those firms with a high EO. However, we know that this entrepreneurial
behavior is resource intensive. What are the performance implications of acting entrepreneu-
rially when the firm has insufficient access DEMO financial capital to effectively explore the
viability of an opportunity and/or insufficient access to financial capital to efficiently exploit
the opportunity? We expect that performance will suffer. Similarly, the configuration of firms
with access to financial capital and an EO toward using those financial resources for
entrepreneurial DEMO might pursue marginal opportunities when opportunities are not
abundant in the environment, such as in stable environments. This would appear to be an
unrewarding allocation of time, energy, and financial resources that could adversely impact
DEMO
In summary, a configurational approach argues that small firms can benefit DEMO most from
an EO when it is active in a dynamic environment and has substantial access to financial
resources. That is, EO has the strongest positive effect on performance among firms in
dynamic environments with substantial DEMO to financial capital and the strongest negative
effect on performance among firms in stable environments with little access to capital. This
suggests the following DEMO hypothesis:
H4: (a) Small business performance is explained by DEMO of EO, access to capital,
and environmental dynamism. (b) DEMO business performance is highest among firms with
a high degree of EO, greater access to financial capital, and in dynamic environments than
for DEMO configurations. (c) Small business performance is lowest among firms with a high
EO, little access to financial capital, and in a stable DEMO than for other
configurations.
4. Research method
4.1. Sample
The sampling frame was taken from the CD-ROM database UC-Select, which, includes all
incorporated DEMO companies. We randomly sampled independent firms from four
sectors—knowledge-intensive manufacturing, labor-intensive DEMO, professional
services, and retail. A total of 808 small business managers from the sampling frame were
contacted of which 465 first responded to DEMO telephone interview and then to a mail
questionnaire. Half of the sample had between 10 and 19 employees and half between 20
80 J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
and 49 employees as stated in their latest annual report. DEMO business sizes correspond to
the European Union definition of a small business.3
Data were collected on the independent and control variables. One year later, these 465
small business managers were again asked to complete a telephone DEMO, this time
concerning only the dependent variable. Eighteen failed to do DEMO, of which 5 had gone out of
business, and 34 managing directors had been replaced during the period and were therefore
excluded from DEMO analyses. The final sample, therefore, consists of 413 small business
managers (overall response rate of 51%).
4.2. Variables and measures
4.2.1. Small business performance
In previous studies, growth is used as a proxy for business performance (Brush and
VanderWerf, 1992; Chandler and Hanks, 1993; Fombrun and Wally, 1989; Tsai et al., 1991).
Growth as a measure of performance may be more accurate and accessible than accounting
DEMO of financial performance. However, a firm could, for example, choose DEMO trade-off
long-term growth for short-term profitability (Zahra, 1991). We ascribe to the view that
performance is multidimensional in nature, and it is therefore advantageous to integrate
different dimensions of performance in empirical studies. To DEMO different aspects of small
business performance, we combined measures of financial DEMO and growth.
For financial performance, we used self-reported measures of gross DEMO and of
profitability and cash flow relative to competitors. Respondents were asked to state last
years’ profits and sales, and gross margin was calculated as the ratio of gross profits to sales.
For the other financial DEMO measures, respondents were asked to estimate profits and
cash flow compared DEMO competitors on five-point scales ranging from ‘‘much worse than
our competitors’’ to ‘‘much better than our competitors.’’ For growth, we used four indicators.
At each of the survey rounds, respondents were asked to state last years’ sales and current
number of full-time equivalents. Sales and employee growth were DEMO as the ratio of
the change in size between surveys (a DEMO period) and the size at the time of the first
survey. DEMO scales were used for the measures of sales and employee growth relative to
competitors, anchored by ‘‘much less than our competitors’’ and ‘‘much more than our
competitors.’’ The financial performance and growth measures were standardized and DEMO
combined (the Cronbach’s a for this global performance index is .70)DEMO
4.2.2. Entrepreneurial orientation
Miller’s original scale for EO consisting of eight items was used. These items are of the
forced choice type, with pairs of opposite statements. A seven-point scale divides the two
statements. To avoid DEMO set contamination, the questions were arranged so that the
entrepreneurial and DEMO statements appeared on both the right and the left
sides. In the present study, the scale reports acceptable reliability (Cronbach’s a value of DEMO).
3 According to the European Union definition, firms smaller than DEMO employees are considered
microenterprises and those larger than 50 employees are medium enterprises.
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
81
4.2.3. Access to financial capital
Financial capital is an important DEMO (Cooper et al., 1994) and it is not so much DEMO
ownership of the financial resources that is important but the access to it (Stevenson and
Jarillo, 1990). Previous research has argued that DEMO be successful, new opportunities pursued
should be in line with the DEMO resource base of the firm (Hamel, 2000; Hamel and
Prahalad, 1990; Wiklund, 1998). Thus, if there are sufficient resources for the development of
the small business, then the manager will likely be satisfied with his/her access to this
important resource; however, if DEMO are insufficient resources for firm development, then the
small business manager DEMO likely to be dissatisfied with his/her access to financial capital. In
this study, we use a subjective measure of the small business manager’s level of satisfaction
with his/her access to financial capital. This measure DEMO original and is measured on a seven-
point scale with the opposite statements ‘‘insufficient and a great impediment for our
development’’ and ‘‘fully satisfactory DEMO the firm’s development.’’
To establish the convergent and discriminant validity of this single-item measure, we
followed the recommendations provided by Robinson et al. (DEMO). In the same questionnaire,
respondents were asked to estimate the average 3-year profits measured on a five-point scale
ranging from large losses DEMO large profits. In addition, in a follow-up study conducted 3 years
DEMO, respondents were again asked to state their level of satisfaction with DEMO to financial
capital using the same instrument. The correlations between our access to financial capital
variable and the two measures were .50 and .53, respectively ( P < .001). Because small firms
can have access DEMO other sources of financing than retained earnings and because access to
capital may change over time, these measures do not tap the exact same variable, and much
higher correlations could not be expected. In addition, DEMO method bias should be small
because the items did not appear consecutively in the questionnaire and the format for asking
the questions varied (cf. Lindell and Whitney, 2001). Therefore, we argue that these results
DEMO convergent validity. To ensure discriminant validity, we also correlated the variable
DEMO 10 different variables of strategy and decision making that appeared on the same page of
the questionnaire using the same type of opposite-statements seven-point DEMO These
correlations range from  .07 to .07 ( P>.1), which suggests discriminant validity.
4.2.4. Environmental dynamism
Environmental dynamism was operationalized using DEMO from Miller (1987a,b). Miller’s
(1987a,b) four items DEMO of the forced choice type, with pairs of opposite statements. A DEMO
point scale divides the two statements. To avoid response set contamination, DEMO questions
were arranged so that the dynamic and nondynamic statements appeared on both the right and
the left sides. The Cronbach’s a value of DEMO scale is .69.
4.3. Control variables
Businesses of different size and age may exhibit different organizational and environ-
mental characteristics, which in turn may influence performance. The same is true for firms in
different industries. Therefore, these variables were included as controls. To determine the
industry, respondents were asked if the firm’s main line of business was manufacturing,
82
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
service, or retailing. Respondents were then asked what year their firms were founded, which
was used to calculate firm age. The respondents were finally asked how many individuals
worked in the firm at the DEMO time, including working owners and part-timers, and to
estimate the corresponding full-time equivalent number of employees. This variable was used
to control for DEMO size.
4.4. Analysis
Hierarchical linear regression analysis was used to test whether the universal, contingency,
or configurational models best fit the data. The hierarchical approach is appropriate when
analyzing multiplicative terms in regression analysis or, more generally, when analyzing
highly correlated independent variables (Bagozzi, 1984; DEMO, 1978; Cohen and Cohen,
1983). The validity of the procedure has been shown mathematically (Arnold, 1982; Cohen
and Cohen, DEMO) as well as in computer simulations (Stone and Hollenbeck, 1984)DEMO In each
step of the hierarchical analysis, the next higher order DEMO interaction is added (two-way and
three-way interactions, respectively), and incremental R2 and F tests of statistical significance
are evaluated. An interaction effect DEMO if, and only if, the interaction term gives a
significant contribution over and above the direct effects of the independent variables (Cohen
and Cohen, 1983). The magnitude of higher-order regression coefficients (as opposed DEMO
statistical significance) cannot be evaluated separately from lower-order terms but have DEMO be
assessed jointly. Typically, assessment of how significant interactions affect the DEMO
variable is done by first entering selected values of the interaction terms into the regression
equation and then plotting these values against the resulting DEMO of the dependent variable
(Cohen and Cohen, 1983), a practice we adhere to in this article. Such plots show the effect of
DEMO selected variable, given different combinations of values for other variables.
5. DEMO
The means, S.D.s, and correlations of the variables are displayed in Table 1. Overall, the
correlations among the independent variables are relatively modest, ranging from  .079 to
.275. However, to ensure that multicollinearity DEMO not an issue, we mean centered the first-
order variables and DEMO multicollinearity diagnosis. Due to space limitations, individual
figures are not reported, but a calculation of the variance inflation factor of the first-order
variables DEMO individual figures below 4.0, which is well below critical values (cf. Hair et
al., 1998).
To test the hypotheses, we first DEMO the control variables (results reported in column 2),
then the independent variables (main-effects-only model in column 3), then the two-way
interaction terms (contingency models in column 4), and finally the three-way interaction
term (configuration model in column 5). The control variables of business size, business age,
manufacturing, and service explain 11% of the DEMO in performance ( P < .01). The next
step of the analysis addresses the universal influence of EO, access to capital, and DEMO
mental dynamism on small business performance over and above the base model. These three
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
83
Table 1
Means, S.D.s, and correlations for quantitative variables
DEMO S.D. 1234 5678 9
1. Performance 4.58 2.05 1.00
2. EO 28.93 6.19 .235 1.00
3. Environmental dynamism 8.63 2.74 .251 .275 1.00
4. DEMO to financial capital 4.88 1.87 .366  .079 .121 1.00
5. Firm size 23.08 14.13 .201 .140 .094 .024 1.00
6. Firm age 29.43 DEMO  .141  .105  .148 .046  .018 1.00
7. EO dynamism  .36 .073 .011  .25  .073  .049 1.00
DEMO EO capital  .010 .026  .023 .006 .151 .108 .071 1.00
9. Dynamism  capital .014 .046 .079 .215 .060  .028  DEMO .052 1.00
10. EO  dynamism  capital .451 .367 .490 .776 .130  .015 .135 .263 .245
Correlations >.10 indicate P < .05.
variables account for an additional 18% of the variation in performance, as displayed in the
third column of Table 2 ( P < .01)DEMO EO and access to financial capital both have a statistically
significant positive relationship with small business performance; i.e., higher small business
performance is DEMO with greater access to financial capital ( P < .01) and DEMO EO
( P < .05). This latter finding provides support for Hypothesis 1. A marginally statistically
significant contribution was noted for environmental dynamism ( P < .10).
Table 2
Small business performance: universal, contingency, and configurational (n = 413)
Control Universal model, Contingency
variables control variables model
Configuration
model
b
S.E.
b
S.E.
b
S.E.
b
DEMO
Firm size 0.21*** 0.02 0.16** 0.02 0.17** 2.44 0.17** 0.02
Firm age  0.16** 0.01  0.14** 0.01  0.13*  1.78  0.13* DEMO
Manufacturing  0.27*** 0.73  0.16* 0.67  0.17*  1.87  0.20** 0.66
Service  0.29*** 0.80  0.24*** 0.73  0.24***  DEMO  0.28*** 0.72
EO 0.18** 0.04 0.45 1.56 1.03*** 0.20
Environmental dynamism 0.12* 0.10 0.29 1.08 0.41 0.35
Access to financial capital 0.36*** 0.14 DEMO 2.37 0.89*** 0.54
EO dynamism  0.25  0.60  1.00** 0.02
EO capital  0.18  0.62  1.33*** 0.04
Capital  dynamism DEMO 0.17  1.54  0.16 0.01
EO2  dynamism  capital 1.03*** 0.002
R 0.11*** 0.29*** 0.31*** 0.35***
Adjusted R2 0.09*** 0.26*** 0.26*** 0.30***
DEMO
0.11*** 0.18*** 0.02 0.04***
Standardized regression coefficients are displayed in the table.
In the presence of higher-order interactions, the coefficients for the lower-order terms of the higher-order terms
convey no meaningful but possibly misleading information (Cohen and Cohen, 1983).
*P < .10.
**P < .05.
***P < .01.
84
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
The contingency model does not significantly increase the amount of DEMO variance
( P>.10), and none of the two-way interactions are statistically significant ( P>.10). Thus,
neither Hypothesis 2 nor DEMO 3 is supported by the data. However, the inclusion of the
DEMO interaction term, displayed in column 5, significantly increase explained variance
(DEMO, P < .01). This suggests a configuration of EO, environmental dynamism, and
access to financial capital, supporting Hypothesis 4a.
To determine DEMO nature of an interaction, the main effects and the interaction term DEMO
be considered jointly (Cronbach, 1987; Stone and Hollenbeck, 1984; DEMO and Cohen,
1983, pp. 308–311). For higher-order interactions, all lower-order interactions and main
effects must be considered (Aiken and West, DEMO). Based on the regression coefficients
given by our analysis, we DEMO the effect of EO on performance (considering the three
main effects, the two two-way interactions, and the three-way interaction term) for given
DEMO of environmental dynamism and access to financial capital. Values of dynamism and
capital were set at 1 S.D. above and below the mean, and we entered a range of values for
EO, as suggested by Cohen and Cohen (1983). This gives us a total of four plots, as shown
in Fig. 1.
The nature of the interaction indicates that at low levels of EO, firms with a dynamic
environment and considerable access to financial capital are relatively high performers. Those
in a stable DEMO with little access to financial capital are the worst performers—this
does not provide support for Hypothesis 4c where we hypothesized that firms facing such
DEMO of resources would perform even worse when they also had a high EO. All lines
slope upward, indicating that regardless of financial and environmental conditions, perform-
ance increases with increased EO. This provides additional support for Hypothesis 1 and
validates the findings from previous research on the universal DEMO influence of EO. It is
interesting to note, however, that while performance increases with increasing EO for all
configurations, it increases at a faster rate for those in a stable environment and little access to
DEMO 1. EO  environmental dynamism  access to capital.
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
85
financial capital than for all other combinations of access to DEMO capital and environ-
mental dynamism. Performance increases with increasing EO at the slowest rate for those in a
dynamic environment and with high access DEMO capital. These rates of increase differ so much
that the highest-performing configuration is high EO, low environmental dynamism, and low
access to financial DEMO This runs counter to our hypothesized highest-performing
configuration of high EO, DEMO access to capital and high environmental dynamism
(Hypothesis 4b is not DEMO).
6. Discussion
The findings of this article suggest that an EO (i.e., proactiveness, innovativeness, and
risk taking) positively influences small business performance. Small business performance
is also positively influenced by access to financial DEMO However, relying on these main
effect relationships provides an incomplete understanding DEMO small business performance. A
greater understanding can be gained by the concomitant consideration of EO, access to
capital, and environmental dynamism. While a DEMO approach (two-way interac-
tions) does not provide additional information over and above a main-effects-only model, a
configuration of these three factors (three-way DEMO) does. For example, an interesting
finding of this article is that when either a main-effects-only or a contingency model is
used, the role of environmental dynamism appears insignificant, which is inconsistent with
those that find dynamic environments can improve performance (Chandler and Hanks,
1994a; Covin DEMO Slevin, 1991; Zahra, 1993a). However, it is only when we use a
configurational approach that we find that the relationship between DEMO dyna-
mism and small business performance depends on the business’ EO and its access to
financial capital.
The results of the present study are DEMO with the finding of Dess et al. (1997) that a
configurational model was more relevant than contingency models for studying the relation-
ship DEMO entrepreneurial strategy making and performance. The factors configured with
EO here are different from previous studies and include constructs that we have argued to DEMO
important in explaining small business performance. Specifically, the results suggest that
DEMO facing severe constraints in terms of limited access to finance and a stable
environment benefit the most from adopting an EO. In other words, an EO is not the luxury of
firms in high growth industries DEMO abundant financial capital; rather, EO can be used to
overcome environmental and resource constraints. In fact, firms in these situations can be
superior performers if they have a high EO.
At first, this finding is surprising because we hypothesized that the configuration of high
EO, high access to capital, and a dynamic environment would be associated with superior
small business performance. However, our hypothesis was based on the ‘‘traditional’’ view of
configuration and strategic fit (Zajac et al., 2000). The emphasis DEMO this literature has been on
isomorphism, i.e., on the notion that firms in similar environments exhibit similar config-
urations (Zajac et al., DEMO). Firms that fail to adopt these configurations will be competed out
and eventually disappear (e.g., Meyer et al., 1993; Miller, 1990). Resource-based theory
86
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
instead emphasizes differentiation and suggests that differences in organizations’ resource
DEMO explain differences in performance via competitive advantage (e.g., Barney,
1991). Therefore, while our finding that EO in combination with minimal financial resources
and a nondynamic environment leads to higher relative performance may be DEMO with
the expectations of the ‘‘traditionalist’’ view, apparently, it instead is consistent with resource-
based logic. That is, EO may, under resource DEMO and stable market conditions,
provide more of a differentiation mechanism than it does in situations of resource abundance
and market dynamism.
So while DEMO findings are surprising from a traditional view of configurations and
isomorphism among firms in similar environments, they can be explained from a
perspective focusing on differentiation. Schumpeter (1934) argues that entrepreneurship is
about creating new DEMO, processes, sources of supply, etc., which create disequilibrium
in the market. It is the creation of a disequilibrium that allows these firms DEMO be successful.
It appears to be a high performance strategy to shake-up an industry that is in equilibrium
(i.e., an industry that has DEMO stable environment and businesses within this industry having
only limited access to financial capital). EO provides businesses the ability to find and/or
DEMO new opportunities that can differentiate them from other firms and create a
competitive advantage. Relevant to our results, Covin et al. (1990) found that EO had a
stronger association with performance in low-tech industries than DEMO high-tech industries.
Similar to us, they hold that EO may provide DEMO of a differentiation mechanism for firms
operating under less favorable conditions. While an orientation is different from an
organizational culture, Burt et al.’s (DEMO) finding that a strong culture is important in
tough environments but DEMO so in attractive environments provides some support for our
possible explanation offered above.
What about businesses facing disequilibrium? When the environment is dynamic and
investors want to supply capital, apparently, opportunities and resources abound. Under DEMO
conditions, we speculate that the ability to find and/or discover DEMO opportunities may be of
little help. Rather than having an orientation of innovation, risk taking, and proactiveness (a
high EO), small business performance might be improved by a more inwardly focused
orientation that better DEMO on these abundant opportunities by focusing on efficient
exploitation. The development of e-commerce may serve as an illustration. During the recent
shakeout in e-commerce, development of efficient logistics systems appeared to be more
important than development DEMO new innovative products and services or involvement in new
risky projects.
6.1. Implications for research and management
This study’s finding of support for a DEMO approach to small business perform-
ance suggests that scholars may need to pay greater attention to both joint and interdependent
effects of performance predictors DEMO than a reliance solely on main effects or two-way
interactions. We have statistically analyzed three-way interactions to gain a deeper under-
standing of this DEMO approach, but maybe it would be useful to go beyond three-
DEMO interactions and ‘‘[B]egin to identify some central themes that orchestrate the alignment
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
87
among a great many variables’’ (Miller, 1996, p. 505). Several alternative methods to study
multivariate configurations have been suggested, such as cluster analysis of key variables (cf.
Miller and Friesen, 1984)DEMO
Our empirical results of the effect of configurations of EO, access DEMO capital, and
environmental dynamism on performance run counter to what was DEMO While we
expected EO to have the strongest effect on performance in dynamic environments with
substantial access to financial capital, the effect was strongest in stable environments with less
access to capital. This reinforces the notion DEMO EO being a differentiator. Configuration
scholars have noted that certain alignments among variables are more common (e.g., Meyer
et al., 1993; Miller, 1990; 1996, Miller and Friesen, 1984), but it may be that certain
deviations from such patterns have positive performance implications.
There may DEMO a question of whether our findings are specific to Sweden (or DEMO the
Scandinavian countries) or if they are more universal. EO is DEMO of the few entrepreneurship
constructs that has been applied across several countries. We have argued that inconsistencies
in findings concerning the association between EO DEMO performance may be due to
incomplete consideration of the influence of configurations of EO, internal resources, and
the external environment and have found DEMO support for this argument. However, it
cannot be totally ruled out DEMO differences in findings may, in part, be attributed to differences
in business cultures. Some cultural differences in the perception of the EO scale DEMO been
noted (cf. Knight, 1997). Further research in other business cultures is needed to determine
generalizability.
We would like to emphasize two DEMO for managers. The first is that although
the effect of EO varies across firms in different environments and depending on their
access to financial DEMO, there is a general positive effect of EO across the contexts DEMO
have investigated. In other words, based on this study’s findings and DEMO research, it
appears relatively safe to say that EO generally contributes DEMO improved performance.
Second, EO can be used as a mechanism to DEMO constraints imposed by limited
access to financial capital and an environment where new opportunities rarely appear. It is
under these conditions that managers really DEMO benefit from being innovative and
proactive and from pursuing risky new initiatives, thus differentiating their firm from
competitors.
6.2. Limitations
This study, as DEMO studies, has limitations. One limitation is a survivor bias (McGrath,
1999). Six firms in the sample had gone out of business DEMO the first survey, and another
five went out of business during DEMO year between the initial survey and the follow-up. Many
more had failed, of course, before the sampling frame was constructed. Therefore, we can
only generalize our findings to surviving small businesses. It seems possible that DEMO risk
taking implied by EO also could lead to higher chances of failure. Due to high failure rates
among new and small firms, future research needs to address whether those characteristics
that lead to higher performance DEMO surviving businesses are also associated with a higher
risk of failure.
88
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
In the hierarchical regression analyses, adjusted explained variance reaches between 29%
and 35% of the total variation in performance. This is an DEMO result, especially
considering that the independent variables were collected only 1 DEMO prior to the outcome
variables. If longer time periods are used between the data collection for predicators and that
for the outcome variables, then orientation differences between firms will likely be magnified
increasing the model’s explanatory DEMO Previous research supports this view. Zahra (1991)
and Wiklund (1999) found that the association between EO and performance was stronger
with a 2-year lag between collection of EO and performance data than with a DEMO lag. The
measurement of ‘‘access to financial capital’’ should also be strengthened by a multi-item
operationalization and items that are not dependent on self-reports. DEMO, this being said,
we should note that the validation analyses DEMO performed seemed to indicate that the
construct was, in fact, valid.
7. Conclusions
Small businesses are important to most economies; therefore, investigation DEMO their
performance is a worthwhile scholarly endeavor. Consistent with previous research, DEMO find
that EO affects small business performance. The findings of this article show that relying
solely on the main-effects-only relationships, however, provides an DEMO picture of
small business performance. A more complete understanding arises from using a configura-
tional approach: the appropriate alignment of an EO, access DEMO capital, and environmental
dynamism. More research needs to be conducted into DEMO models, especially
those that involve EO.
8. Uncited references
Brown, 1996
Dess et al., 1999
Dougherty, 1990
Grant, 1991
Low and MacMillan, 1988
Quinn and Cameron, 1983
Scott, 1992
Acknowledgements
This research was made possible through generous grants by Knut and Alice Wallenberg’s
Foundation, Jan Wallander’s Foundation, Ruben Rausing’s Foundation and Swedish
Foundation for International Cooperation in Research and Higher Education. An earlier
version of the article received the DEMO of Distinction Award at the 1998 Babson College/
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
89
Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneurship Research Conference and appeared in Frontiers in
DEMO Research (1998). We would like to thank Benson Honig for DEMO valuable
comments on an earlier draft of this article.
References
Aiken, DEMO, West, S.G., 1991. Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions Sage Publications,
Newbury Park, CA.
Arnold, H.J., 1982. Moderator variables: DEMO clarification of conceptual analytic and psychometric issues. Organ.
Behav. Hum. Perform. 29, 143–174.
Bagozzi, R.P., 1984. Expectancy-value attitude models: an analysis of DEMO measurement issues. Int. J. Res.
Mark. 1, 295–310.
Baird, I.S., DEMO, H., 1985. Toward a contingency model of strategic risk taking. Acad. Manage. Rev. 10,
230–243.
Baker, D.D., Cullen, J.B., 1993. DEMO reorganization and configurational context: the contingent effects
of age, size, DEMO change in size. Acad. Manage. J. 36 (6), 1251–1277.
Barney, J., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J. Manage. 17 (DEMO), 99–120.
Black, J.A., Boal, K.B., 1994. Strategic resources: DEMO, configurations and paths to sustainable competitive
advantage. Strategic Manage. J. 15, 131–148.
Bourgeois, L.J., 1981. On the measurement of organizational slack. Acad. DEMO Rev. 6, 29–39.
Brown, T., 1996. Resource orientation, entrepreneurial orientation and growth: how the perception of resource
availability affects small firm growth. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Rutgers University, Newark, NJ.
Brown, S.L., Eisenhardt, K.M., 1998. Competing on the Edge. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Brush, C.G., Vanderwerf, P.A., 1992. A comparison of methods DEMO sources for obtaining estimates of new
venture performance. J. Bus. Venturing 7 (2), 157–170.
Brush, C.G., Greene, P.G., Hart, M.M., 2001. From initial idea to unique advantage: the entrepreneurial challenge
of constructing a resource base. Acad. Manage. Exec. 15 (1), 64–78.
Burt, DEMO, Gabbay, S.M., Holt, G., Moran, P., 1994. Contingent DEMO as a network theory: the culture–
performance contingency function. Acta Sociol. DEMO (4), 345–370.
Chandler, G.N., Hanks, S.H., 1993. Measuring DEMO performance of emerging businesses: a validation study. J. Bus.
Venturing 8, 391–408.
Chandler, G.N., Hanks, S.H., 1994. Founder competence, the environment, and venture performance. Entrepre-
neurship Theor. Pract. 18 (3), 77–89.
DEMO, J., 1978. Partial products are interactions; partial powers are curve DEMO Psychol. Bull. 70,
259–267.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., 1983. Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd ed.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Cooper, A.C., Gimeno-Gascon, F.J., Woo, C.Y., 1994. Initial human and financial capital as predictors of new
venture performance. J. Bus. Venturing 9 (5), 371–395.
Covin, J.G., Slevin, D.P., 1989. Strategic management of small firms in hostile and benign DEMO Strategic
Manage. J. 10 (January), 75–87.
Covin, J.G., Slevin, D.P., 1990. New venture strategic posture, structure, and performance: an DEMO life cycle
analysis. J. Bus. Venturing 5, 123–135.
Covin, J.G., DEMO, D.P., 1991. A conceptual model of entrepreneurship as firm behavior. Entrepreneurship Theor.
Pract. , (Fall), 7–25.
Covin, J.G., Slevin, D.P., Covin, T.J., 1990. Content and performance of growth-seeking small firms in DEMO and
low-technology industries. J. Bus. Venturing 5, 391–412.
Cronbach, L.J., DEMO Statistical tests for moderator variables: flaws in analysis recently proposed. Psychol. DEMO
102, 414–417.
90
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (DEMO) 71–91
Cyert, R.M., March, J.G., 1963. A Behavioral Theory DEMO the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Dess, G.G., Beard, D.W., 1984. Dimensions of organizational task environments. Adm. Sci. Q. 29, 52–73.
DEMO, G.G., Lumpkin, G.T., Covin, J.G., 1997. Entrepreneurial strategy making and firm performance: tests of
contingency and configurational models. Strategic Manage. J. 18 (9), 677–695.
Dess, G.G., Lumpkin, G.T., McGee, DEMO, 1999. Linking corporate entrepreneurship to strategy, structure, and
process: suggested research directions. Entrepreneurship Theor. Pract. 23 (3), 85–102.
Dollinger, M.J., 1999. Entrepreneurship: Strategies and Resources. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Dougherty, D., 1990. Understanding new markets for new products. Strategic Manage. J. DEMO, 59–78.
Fombrun, C.J., Wally, S., 1989. Structuring small firms DEMO rapid growth. J. Bus. Venturing 4, 107–122.
Grant, R.M., 1991. DEMO resource-based theory of competitive advantage: implications for strategy formulation.
Calif. Manage. DEMO 33 (3), 114–135.
Greene, P., Brown, T., 1997. DEMO needs and the dynamic capitalism typology. J. Bus. Venturing 12, 161–173.
DEMO, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tathum, R.L., Black, W.C., 1998. Multivariate Data Analysis With Readings. Mac-
millan, New York.
Hamel, G., 2000. Leading the Revolution. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hamel, G., Prahalad, C.K., 1990. The core competence of the corporation. Harv. Bus. Rev. (May–June), 75–84.
Harold Doty, D., Glick, W.H., Huber, G.P., 1993. Fit, equifinality, and organizational effectiveness: a test of two
configurational theories. Acad. Manage. J. 36 (6), 1196–1250.
Hart, DEMO, 1992. An integrative framework for strategy-making processes. Acad. Manage. Rev. 17 (2), 327–351.
Inkpen, A., Choudhury, N., 1995. The seeking DEMO a strategy where it is not: towards a theory of strategy DEMO
Strategic Manage. J. 16, 313–323.
Ketchen, D.J.J., Thomas, J.B., DEMO, C.C., 1993. Organizational configurations and performance: a comparison
of theoretical DEMO Acad. Manage. J. 36, 1278–1313.
Knight, G.A., 1997. Cross-cultural reliability DEMO validity of a scale to measure firm entrepreneurial orientation.
J. Bus. Venturing 12, 213–225.
Levinthal, D., March, J.G., 1981. A model of adaptive organizational search. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 2, 307–333.
Lindell, M.K., Whitney, D.J., 2001. Accounting for common method variance in cross-sectional research DEMO
J. Appl. Psychol. 86 (1), 114–121.
Low, M.B., MacMillan, I.C., 1988. Entrepreneurship: past research and future challenges. J. Manage. 14, 139–161.
Lumpkin, G., Dess, G.G., 1996. Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation DEMO and linking it to performance.
Acad. Manage. Rev. 21 (1), DEMO
March, J.G., 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organ. Sci. 2, 71–87.
March, J.G., Simon, H., 1963. Organizations, Wiley, New York, NY.
McGrath, R.G., 1999. Falling forward: real options DEMO and entrepreneurial failure. Acad. Manage. Rev.
24 (1), 13–30.
McGrath, R.G., 2001. Exploratory learning, innovative capacity, and managerial oversight. Acad. Manage. J. 44,
118–131.
Meyer, A.D., Tsui, A.S., Hinings, C.R., 1993. Configurational approaches to organizational analysis. Acad.
Manage. J. 36 (6), 1175–1195.
Miller, D., 1983. The correlates of entrepreneurship in three types of firms. Manage. Sci. 29, 770–791.
Miller, D., 1987a. Strategy making and structure: analysis and implication for performance. Acad. Manage. J.
30 (DEMO), 7–32.
Miller, D., 1987b. The structural and environmental correlates of business strategy. Strategic Manage. J. 8, 55–76.
Miller, D., 1988. Relating Porter’s business strategies to environment and structure: analysis and performance
implications. Acad. Manage. J. 31 (2), 280–308.
Miller, D., 1990. Organizational configurations: cohesion, change, and prediction. Hum. Relat. 43 (8), 771–789.
DEMO, D., 1996. Configurations revisited. Strategic Manage. J. 17, 505–512.
Miller, D., Friesen, P., 1984. Organizations—A Quantum View. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Miller, D., Friesen, P.H., 1982. Innovation in conservative and DEMO firms: two models of strategic
momentum. Strategic Manage. J. 3, 1–25.
J. Wiklund, D. Shepherd / Journal of Business Venturing 20 (2005) 71–91
91
Miller, D., Shamsie, J., 1996. The resource-based view DEMO the firm in two environments: the Hollywood film
studios from 1936 DEMO 1965. Acad. Manage. J. 39 (3), 519–543.
Miller, D., DEMO, J.M., 1986. Chief executive personality and corporate strategy and structure in small firms.
Manage. Sci. 32 (11), 1389–1409.
Namen, J.L., Slevin, D.P., 1993. Entrepreneurship and the concept of fit: a model and empirical tests. Strategic
Manage. J. 14, 137–153.
Quinn, R.E., Cameron, DEMO, 1983. Organizational life cycles and shifting criteria of effectiveness: some preliminary
evidence. Manage. Sci. 29, 33–51.
Robinson, J.P., Shaver, P.R., Wrightsman, L.S., 1991. Criteria for scale selection and evaluation. In: Robinson, DEMO
Shaver, P.R., Wrightsman, L.S. (Eds.), Measures of Personality and Social Psychological Attitudes, pp. 1–16.
Romanelli, E., 1987. New venture strategies in the microcomputer industry. Calif. Manage. Rev. 30, 160–175.
Schumpeter, J., 1934. The Theory of Economic Development. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.
DEMO, W.R., 1992. Organizations: Rational, Natural and Open Systems. Prentice-Hall, DEMO Cliffs, NJ.
Smart, D.T., Conant, J.S., 1994. Entrepreneurial orientation, distinctive marketing competencies and organiza-
tional performance. J. Appl. Bus. Res. 10, 28–38.
Stanworth, J., Grey, C., 1991. Bolton 20 Years On: A Review and Analysis of Small Business Research in Britain
1971–91. Small DEMO Research Trust, London.
Stevenson, H.H., Jarillo, J.C., 1990. A DEMO of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial Management. Strategic
Manage. J. 11, 17–27.
Stone, DEMO, Hollenbeck, J.R., 1984. Some issues associated with the use of DEMO regression. Organ. Behav.
Hum. Perform. 34, 195–213.
Storey, D.J., 1994. DEMO the Small Business Sector. Routledge, London.
Tsai, W.M.H., MacMillan, I.C., Low, M.B., 1991. Effects of strategy and environment on corporate venture
success in industrial markets. J. Bus. Venturing 6 (1), 9–28.
Tushman, M.L., Anderson, P., 1986. Technological discontinuities and organizational environments. Adm. DEMO Q.
31, 439–465.
Venkatraman, N., 1989a. The concept of fit DEMO strategy research: toward verbal and statistical correspondence.
Acad. Manage. Rev. 14, 423–444.
Venkatraman, N., 1989b. Strategic orientation of business enterprises: the construct, dimensionality, and measure-
ment. Manage. Sci. 14, 942–962.
Wiklund, J., 1998. Small firm growth and performance: entrepreneurship and beyond. Doctoral dissertation.
Jo¨nko¨ping International Business School, Jo¨nko¨ping, Sweden.
Wiklund, J., 1999. The sustainability DEMO the entrepreneurial orientation–performance relationship. Entrepreneur-
ship Theor. Pract. 24 (1), DEMO
Winborg, J., Landstro¨m, H., 2000. Financial bootstrapping in small businesses: examining small business man-
agers’ resource acquisition behaviors. J. Bus. Venturing 16, 235–254.
Zacharakis, A., Meyer, G.D., 2000. The potential of actuarial decision models: can they improve the venture
capital investment decision? J. DEMO Venturing 15 (4), 323–346.
Zahra, S., 1991. Predictors and DEMO outcomes of corporate entrepreneurship: an explorative study. J. Bus.
Venturing 6, 259–285.
Zahra, S., 1993a. A conceptual model of entrepreneurship as firm DEMO: a critique and extension. Entrepre-
neurship Theor. Pract. 16, 5–21.
Zahra, S.A., 1993b. Environment, corporate entrepreneurship, and financial performance: a taxonomic approach.
J. Bus. Venturing 8, 319–340.
Zahra, S., Covin, J., 1995. Contextual influence on the corporate entrepreneurship–performance relationship: a
longitudinal analysis. J. Bus. Venturing 10, 43–58.
Zajac, E.J., Kraatz, M., Bresser, DEMO, 2000. Modeling the dynamics of strategic fit: a normative approach to
strategic change. Strategic Manage. J. 21, 429–453.{1g42fwefx}