Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual Relations
Author(s): Oliver E. Williamson
Source: Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 22, No. 2 (Oct., 1979), pp. 233-261
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/725118
Accessed: 19/12/DEMO 15:16
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use DEMO, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you DEMO not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://DEMO/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ucpress.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or DEMO
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly DEMO to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and DEMO build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal
of Law and Economics.
http://www.jstor.org
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS: THE
GOVERNANCE OF CONTRACTUAL
RELATIONS*
OLIVER E. WILLIAMSON
University of Pennsylvania
T HE new institutional economics is preoccupied with the origins, inci-
dence, and ramifications of transaction costs. Indeed, if transaction costs are
DEMO, the organization of economic activity is irrelevant, since any
advantages one mode of organization appears to hold over another will
simply be eliminated DEMO costless contracting. But despite the growing reali-
zation that transaction costs are central to the study of economics,1 skeptics
remain. Stanley Fischer's DEMO is typical: "Transaction costs have a
well-deserved bad name as a theoretical device . . . [partly] because there is a
suspicion that DEMO anything can be rationalized by invoking suitably
specified transaction costs."2 Put differently, there are too many degrees of
freedom; the concept wants DEMO definition.
* This paper has benefited from support from the Center for Advanced Study in the Behav-
ioral Sciences, the Guggenheim Foundation, and DEMO National Science Foundation. Helpful
comments by Yoram Ben-Porath, Richard Nelson, Douglass North, Thomas Palay, Joseph
Sax, David Teece, and Peter Temin DEMO from the participants at seminars at the Yale Law
School and the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton are gratefully acknowledged. The
paper was DEMO to advantage after reading Ben-Porath's discussion paper, the
F-Connection: Family, Friends, and Firms and the Organization of Exchange, and Temin's
discussion paper, Modes of Economic Behavior: Variations on Themes of J. DEMO Hicks and
Herbert Simon.
1 Ronald Coase has forcefully argued the importance of transaction costs at twenty-year
intervals. See R. H. Coase, The Nature of the Firm, 4 Economica 386 (n.s. 1937), reprinted in
DEMO in Price Theory 331 (George J. Stigler & Kenneth E. Boulding DEMO 1952) and R. H.
Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, DEMO J. Law & Econ. 1 (1960). Much of my own DEMO has been
"preoccupied" with transaction costs during the past decade. See especially Oliver E. William-
son, Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust DEMO (1975). Other works in
which transaction costs are featured include: Guido Calabresi, Transaction Costs, Resource
Allocation, and Liability Rules: A DEMO, 11 J. Law & Econ. 67 (1968); Victor P. Goldberg,
Regulation and Administered Contracts, 7 Bell J. Econ. 426 (1976); Benjamin Klein, Robert G.
Crawford, and Armen A. Alchian, Vertical DEMO, Appropriable Rents, and the Competi-
tive Contracting Process, 21 J. DEMO & Econ. 297 (1978); and Carl J. Dahlman, The Problem of
Externality, 22 J. Law & Econ. 141 (1979). For DEMO examination of Pigou in which transaction
costs are featured, see Victor DEMO Goldberg, Pigou on Complex Contracts and Welfare Econom-
ics (1979) (unpublished manuscript).
2 S. Fischer, Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy: Comment, 3 J.
Monetary Econ. 317, 322 n. 5 (1977).
233
234 THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
Among the factors on which DEMO appears to be developing a general
consensus are: (1) opportunism DEMO a central concept in the study of transac-
tion costs;3 (DEMO) opportunism is especially important for economic activity that
involves transaction-specific investments DEMO human and physical capital;4 (3)
the efficient processing of DEMO is an important and related concept;S
and (4) the assessment of transaction costs is a comparative institutional
undertaking.6 Beyond these general propositions, a consensus on transaction
costs is lacking.
Further progress in the study DEMO transaction costs awaits the identification
of the critical dimensions with respect to which transaction costs differ and
an examination of the economizing properties of DEMO institutional
modes for organizing transactions. Only then can the matching of transac-
tions with modes be accomplished with confidence. This paper affirms the
proposition DEMO transaction costs are central to the study of economics,
identifies the critical dimensions for characterizing transactions, describes
the main governance structures of transactions, and indicates how and why
transactions can be matched with institutions in a discriminating way.
I am mainly concerned with intermediate-product market transactions.
Whereas DEMO I have emphasized the incentives to remove transactions
from the market and organize them internally (vertical integration),7 the
analysis here is symmetrical DEMO deals with market, hierarchical, and inter-
mediate modes of organization alike. The question of why there is so much
vertical integration remains interesting, but no more so than the question of
why there are so DEMO market- (and quasi-market) mediated transactions. A
discriminating analysis will explain which transactions are located where
and give the reasons why. The overall object DEMO the exercise essentially
comes down to this: for each abstract description DEMO a transaction, identify
3 Opportunism is a variety of self-interest seeking DEMO extends simple self-interest seeking to
include self-interest seeking with guile. It is not necessary that all agents be regarded as oppor-
tunistic in identical DEMO It suffices that those who are less opportunistic than others are
difficult to ascertain ex ante and that, even among the less opportunistic, DEMO have their price.
For a more complete discussion of opportunism, see DEMO E. Williamson, supra note 1, at
7-10, 26-30. For a DEMO application see Benjamin Klein, Robert G. Crawford, & Armen A.
Alchian, supra note 1.
4 The joining of opportunism with transaction-specific investments (DEMO what Klein, Crawford,
and Alchian refer to as "appropriable quasi rents") is a leading factor in explaining decisions to
vertically integrate. DEMO Oliver E. Williamson, The Vertical Integration of Production: Market
Failure 61 Am. Econ. Rev. 112 (Papers & Proceedings, May 1971); Oliver DEMO
Williamson, supra note 1, at 16-19, 91-101; and Benjamin Klein, Robert G. Crawford, &
Armen A. Alchian, supra note 1.
DEMO But for the limited ability of human agents to receive, store, retrieve, and process data,
interesting economic problems vanish.
6 See Carl J. Dahlman, supra note 1.
7 See note 4 supra.
Considerations,
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 235
the most economical governance structure--where by governance structure I
DEMO to the institutional framework within which the integrity of a transac-
tion is decided. Markets and hierarchies are two of the main alternatives.
Some DEMO background to the study of transactions is briefly reviewed in
Section I. Of the three dimensions for describing transactions that I propose,
investment DEMO are the least well understood and probably the most
important. The special relevance of investments is developed in the context
of the economics of DEMO in Section II. A general contracting schema
is developed and applied to commercial contracting in Section III. Applica-
tions to labor, regulation, family DEMO, and capital markets are
sketched in Section IV. Major implications are DEMO in Section V.
Concluding remarks follow.
I. SOME CONTRACTING BACKGROUND
Although there is widespread agreement that the discrete-transaction
paradigm-"sharp in by clear agreement; sharp out by clear per-
formance"8-has served both law and economics DEMO, there is increasing
awareness that many contractual relations are not of DEMO well-defined kind.9
A deeper understanding of the nature of contract has emerged as the legal-
rule emphasis associated with the study of discrete contracting DEMO given
way to a more general concern with the contractual purposes to be served.10
8 I. R. Macneil, The Many Futures of Contract, DEMO S. Cal. L. Rev. 691, 738 (1974) [here-
inafter cited DEMO cross-reference as Macneil, Many Futures of Contract].
9 With respect to DEMO contracts, see Karl N. Llewellyn, What Price Contract?--An
Essay in Perspective, 40 Yale L. J. 704 (1931); Harold C. Havighurst, The Nature of Private
Contract (1961); Lon L. Fuller, Collective DEMO and the Arbitrator, 1963 Wis. L. Rev. 3;
id., The Morality of Law (1964); Stewart Macaulay, Non-Contractual Relations in Business, 28
Am. Soc. Rev. 55 (1963); Lawrence M. Friedman, Contract DEMO in America (1965); Arthur
Allen Left, Contract as a Thing, 19 Am. U. L. Rev. 131 (1970); I. R. Macneil, Many Futures of
Contracts; id., Contracts: Adjustment of Long-Term Economic Relations under Classical,
Neoclassical, and Relational Contract Law, 72 Nw. U. DEMO Rev. 854 (1978) [hereinafter cited
without cross-reference as Macneil, Contracts]; and Victor P. Goldberg, Toward an Expanded
Economic Theory of Contract, DEMO J. Econ. Issues 45 (1976). Labor lawyers have made similar
DEMO regarding contracts governing the employment relationship. See Archibald Cox,
The Legal Nature of Collective Bargaining Agreements, 57 Mich. L. Rev. 1 (1958); Clyde W.
Summers, Collective Agreements and the Law of Contracts, 78 Yale L. J. 525 (1969); and
David E. Feller, A DEMO Theory of the Collective Bargaining Agreement, 61 Cal. L. Rev.
663 (1973).
10 The technical versus purposive distinction is made by Clyde DEMO, supra note 9. He
distinguishes between "black letter law," on the one hand (539, 543, 548, 566) and a more
circumstantial approach to law, on the other (549-51, 561, 566)DEMO "The epitome of abstraction is
the Restatement, which illustrates its black letter rules by transactions suspended in mid-air,
creating the illusion that DEMO rules can be stated without reference to surrounding circum-
stances and are therefore generally applicable to all contractual transactions" (566). He observes
DEMO such a conception does not and cannot provide a "framework for DEMO rules and
principles applicable to all contractual transactions" (566) but DEMO this must be sought in a more
236
THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
A. Classical Contract Law
As DEMO observes, any system of contract law has the purpose of
facilitating DEMO What is distinctive about classical contract law is that
it attempts to do this by enhancing discreteness and intensifying "presentia-
tion,"13 where DEMO has reference to efforts to "make or render
present in place DEMO time; to cause to be perceived or realized at present."14
DEMO economic counterpart to complete presentiation is contingent-claims
entails comprehensive contracting whereby all relevant
pertaining to the supply of a good or service are de-
DEMO and discounted with respect to both likelihood and futurity.15
Classical contract law endeavors to implement discreteness and presentia-
tion in several ways. For one DEMO, the identity of the parties to a transac-
tion is treated DEMO irrelevant. In this respect it corresponds exactly with the
"ideal" market transaction in economics.16 Second, the nature of the agree-
ment is carefully delimited, and the more formal features govern when
formal (for example, written) and informal (for example, oral) terms are
contested. Third, remedies are narrowly prescribed such that, "should the
initial presentiation fail DEMO materialize because of nonperformance, the con-
sequences are relatively predictable from DEMO beginning and are not open-
affirmative
interpretation and completing contracts are among
n See
contracting-which
future contingencies
these
affirmative
functions.
especially Macneil, Many Futures of Contract; Macneil, Contracts; and references
to
related work of his cited
12 Macneil,
therein.
Many Futures of Contracts 738-40; Macneil, DEMO 902-05.
Contracts 862.
at 863 n. 25.
15 For a discussion of complex contingent-claims contracting and its mechanics, see Kenneth
J. Arrow, Essays DEMO the Theory of Risk Bearing 121-34 (1971); J. E. Meade, The Controlled
Economy 147-88 (1971); and Oliver E. Williamson, supra DEMO 1, at 20-40.
16 As
Lester G. Telser & Harlow N. DEMO put it: "In an organized market the
participants trade a standardized contract such that each unit of the contract is a perfect
substitute DEMO other unit. The identities of the parties in any mutually agreeable transaction
deliberately not affect creates the terms a homogeneous of exchange. good The DEMO organized can be traded market anonymously itself or some by the other participants institution or
their agents." Organized Futures Markets: Costs and Benefits DEMO J. Pol. Econ. 969, 997 (1977).
13
14
Id.
do
Macneil,
for
Ian Macneil, in a series of thoughtful and wide-ranging essays on contract,
usefully distinguishes between discrete and relational transactions. 11 DEMO fur-
ther supplies twelve different "concepts" with respect to which these differ.12
Serious problems of recognition and application are posed by such a DEMO
classificatory apparatus. More useful for my purposes is the three-way
classification of contracts that Macneil offers in his most recent article,
where classical, neoclassical, and relational categories of contract law are
recognized.
emphasized.
Contract
view of the law in which
effective
governance
relations
are
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS
237
ended."17 Additionally, third-party participation is discouraged.18 The em-
phasis, thus, is on legal rules, formal documents, and self-liquidating DEMO
actions.
B. Neoclassical Contract Law
Not every transaction fits comfortably into the classical-contracting
scheme. In particular, long-term contracts executed under conditions of un-
certainty are ones for which complete presentiation is apt to be prohibitively
costly DEMO not impossible. Problems of several kinds arise. First, not all future
DEMO for which adaptations are required can be anticipated at the
outset. Second, the appropriate adaptations will not be evident for many
contingencies until the circumstances materialize. Third, except as changes
in states of the world are unambiguous, hard contracting between autono-
mous parties may well give rise to veridical disputes when state-contingent
claims are made. In a world where (at least some) parties are inclined to be
opportunistic, whose representations are DEMO be believed?
Faced with the prospective breakdown of classical contracting in these
circumstances, three alternatives are available. One would be to forgo such
transactions altogether. A second would be to remove these transactions
from the DEMO and organize them internally instead. Adaptive, sequential
decision making would then DEMO implemented under common ownership and
with the assistance of hierarchical incentive and control systems. Third, a
different contracting relation which preserves trading but provides for addi-
tional governance structure might be devised. This last brings us DEMO what
Macneil refers to as neoclassical contracting.
As Macneil observes, "Two common characteristics of long-term contracts
are the existence of gaps in their DEMO and the presence of a range of
processes and techniques used by contract planners to create flexibility in
lieu of either leaving gaps or DEMO to plan rigidly."19 Third-party assistance
in resolving disputes and evaluating performance often has advantages over
litigation in serving these functions of flexibility and DEMO filling. Lon Fuller's
remarks on procedural differences between arbitration and litigation are
instructive:
. . . there are open to the arbitrator DEMO . . quick methods of education not open to the
courts. An arbitrator will frequently interrupt the examination of witnesses with a
request that DEMO parties educate him to the point where he can understand the
testimony being received. This education can proceed informally, with frequent
interruptions by the arbitrator, and by informed persons on either side, when a point
DEMO Macneil, Contracts 864.
18 Id.
19 Id. at 865.
238 THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
needs clarification. Sometimes there will DEMO arguments across the table, occasionally
even within each of the separate DEMO The end result will usually be a clarification
that will enable everyone to proceed more intelligently with the case. There is in this
informal DEMO no infringement whatever of arbitrational due process.20
A recognition that the world is complex, that agreements are incomplete,
and that some contracts will never be reached unless both parties have
confidence in the settlement machinery DEMO characterizes neoclassical con-
tract law. One important purposive difference in arbitration and litigation
that contributes to the procedural differences described by Fuller is that,DEMO
whereas continuity (at least completion of the contract) is presumed under
the arbitration machinery, this presumption is much weaker when litigation
is employed.21
C. Relational Contracting
The pressures to sustain ongoing relations "have led to the spin-off of
many subject areas from the classical, and later the neoclassical, contract
law system, e.g., much of corporate law and collective bargaining."22 Thus,
progressively increasing the "duration and complexity" of DEMO has re-
sulted in the displacement of even neoclassical adjustment processes by
adjustment processes of a more thoroughly transaction-specific, ongoing-
administrative kind.23 The fiction of discreteness is fully displaced as the
relation takes on the properties DEMO "a minisociety with a vast array of norms
beyond those centered DEMO the exchange and its immediate processes."24 By
contrast with the neoclassical system, where the reference point for effecting
adaptations remains the original agreement, the reference point under a
truly relational approach is the "entire DEMO as it has developed . . .
[through] time. This may or may not include an 'original agreement'; and if
it does, DEMO or may not result in great deference being given it."25
II. THE ECONOMICS OF IDIOSYNCRASY
Macneil's three-way discussion of contracts discloses that DEMO are a
good deal more varied and complex than is commonly realized.26 It further-
20 Lon L. Fuller, supra note 9, at 11-12.
DEMO As Lawrence Friedman observes, relationships are effectively fractured if a dispute
DEMO litigation. Supra note 9, at 205.
22 Macneil, Contracts 885.
23 Id. at 901.
24 Id.
2S Id. at 890.
26 To be DEMO, some legal specialists insist that all of this was known all DEMO There is a
difference, however, between awareness of a condition and an understanding. Macneil's treat-
ment heightens awareness and deepens the understanding.
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 239
more suggests that governance structures--the institutional matrix within
which DEMO are negotiated and executed-vary with the nature of the
transaction. But the critical dimensions of contract are not expressly iden-
tified, and the purposes of governance are not stated. Harmonizing interests
that would otherwise give way DEMO antagonistic subgoal pursuits appears to be
an important governance function, but DEMO is not explicit in his discussion.
That simple governance structures should be used in conjunction with
simple contractual relations and complex governance structures reserved DEMO
complex relations seems generally sensible. Use of a complex structure to
govern a simple relation is apt to incur unneeded costs, and use of a simple
structure for a complex transaction invites strain. But what is DEMO and
complex in contractual respects? Specific attention to the defining attributes
DEMO transactions is evidently needed.
As developed in Section III, the three DEMO dimensions for characteriz-
ing transactions are (1) uncertainty, (2) DEMO frequency with which transac-
tions recur, and (3) the degree DEMO which durable transaction-specific invest-
ments are incurred. Of these three, uncertainty DEMO widely conceded to be a
critical attribute;27 and that frequency matters is at least plausible.28 The
governance ramifications of neither, however, have DEMO fully developed-
nor can they be until joined with the third critical dimension: transaction-
specific investments. Inasmuch as a considerable amount of the "DEMO" in
the study of governance is attributable to investment differences, some ex-
plication is needed.
A. General
The crucial investment distinction is this: to what degree are transaction-
specific (nonmarketable) expenses incurred. Items that DEMO unspecialized
among users pose few hazards, since buyers in these circumstances DEMO easily
turn to alternative sources, and suppliers can sell output intended DEMO one
order to other buyers without difficulty.29 Nonmarketability problems arise
27 For a recent study of contractual relations in which uncertainty is featured, see Peter
Temin, Modes of Economic Behavior: Variations on Themes of J. DEMO Hicks and Herbert
Simon (March 1979) (Working Paper No. 235, MIT Dep't of Econ.).
28 Gordon Whinston emphasizes frequency in DEMO "A Note on Perspective Time: Goldberg's
Relational Exchange, Repetitiveness, and Free Riders in Time and Space" (October 1978)
(unpublished paper).
29 See Lester A. Telser & Harold N. Higinbotham, supra note 16; also Yoram Ben-Porath,
The F-Connection: Families, Friends, DEMO Firms and the Organization of Exchange (December
1978) (Report No. DEMO/78, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem) and Yoram Barzel, Measure-
DEMO Cost and the Organization of Markets (April 1979) (unpublished paper)DEMO Note that
Barzel's concern with standardization is mainly in connection with final-product markets,
whereas I am more interested in nonstandard investments. The DEMO are not unrelated, but
identical quality can often be realized with DEMO variety of inputs. I am concerned with specialized
(transaction-specific) inputs.
240 THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
when the specific identity of DEMO parties has important cost-bearing conse-
quences. Transactions of this kind will be referred to as idiosyncratic.
Occasionally the identity of the parties is important DEMO the outset, as
when a buyer induces a supplier to invest DEMO specialized physical capital of a
transaction-specific kind. Inasmuch as the value of this capital in other uses
is, by definition, much smaller than DEMO specialized use for which it has been
intended, the supplier is DEMO "locked into" the transaction to a sig-
nificant degree. This is symmetrical, moreover, in that the buyer cannot turn
to alternative sources DEMO supply and obtain the item on favorable terms, since
the cost DEMO supply from unspecialized capital is presumably great.30 The
buyer is thus committed to the transaction as well.
Ordinarily, however, there is more to DEMO exchange than special-
ized physical capital. Human-capital investments that are transaction-
specific commonly occur as well. Specialized training and learning-by-doing
economies in production operations DEMO illustrations. Except when these
investments are transferable to alternative suppliers at low cost, which is
rare, the benefits of the set-up costs can DEMO realized only so long as the
relationship between the buyer and seller of the intermediate product is
maintained.
Additional transaction-specific savings can accrue at DEMO interface between
supplier and buyer as contracts are successively adapted to unfolding events,
and as periodic contract-renewal agreements are reached. Familiarity here
permits DEMO economies to be realized: specialized language de-
velops as experience accumulates DEMO nuances are signaled and received in a
sensitive way. Both institutional and personal trust relations evolve. Thus
the individuals who are responsible for adapting DEMO interfaces have a per-
sonal as well as an organizational stake in what transpires. Where personal
integrity is believed to be operative, individuals located at the interfaces may
refuse to be a part of opportunistic efforts DEMO take advantage of (rely on) the
letter of the contract when the spirit of the exchange is emasculated. Such
refusals can serve as DEMO check upon organizational proclivities to behave
opportunistically.31 Other things being equal, DEMO exchange rela-
30 This assumes that it is costly for the incumbent supplier to transfer specialized physical
assets to new suppliers. On this, see Oliver E. Williamson, Franchise Bidding for Natural
Monopolies-in General and with Respect to CATV, 7 Bell J. Econ. 73 (1976). Klein, Craw-
ford, & Alchian use the term "appropriable quasi rent" to refer to this condition. Use versus user
distinctions are relevant in this connection: "The quasi-rent value of the asset is the excess of its
value over its salvage value, that is, its value in its next DEMO use to another renter. The
potentially appropriable specialized portion of the quasi rent is the portion, if any, in excess of
its value DEMO the second highest-valuing user." Benjamin Klein, Robert G. Crawford, & DEMO
A. Alchian, supra note 1, at 298.
31 Thorstein Veblen's remarks on the distant relation of the head of a large enterprise DEMO
transactions are apposite. He observes that under these impersonal circumstances "The DEMO
ing effect which personal conduct may have in dealings between man and man is ... in great
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 241
tions which feature personal trust will survive greater stress DEMO display
greater adaptability.
Idiosyncratic goods and services are thus ones where investments of
transaction-specific human and physical capital are made and, contingent
upon successful execution, benefits are realized. Such investments can and
do occur in conjunction with occasional trades where delivery for a special-
ized design is stretched DEMO over a long period (for example, certain construc-
tion contracts). The transactions that I wish to emphasize here, however, are
exchanges DEMO the recurring kind. Although large-numbers competition is
frequently feasible at the initial award stage for recurring contracts of all
kinds, idiosyncratic transactions are ones for which the relationship between
buyer and supplier is quickly thereafter transformed DEMO one of bilateral
monopoly-on account of the transaction-specific costs referred to above.
This transformation has profound contracting consequences.
Thus, whereas recurrent spot contracting is feasible for standardized
transactions (because large-numbers competition is continuously self-
policing in these circumstances), such contracting has seriously defective
investment incentives where idiosyncratic DEMO are involved. By as-
sumption, cost economies in production will be DEMO for idiosyncratic
activities only if the supplier invests in a special-purpose plant and equipment
or if his labor force develops transaction-specific skills in the DEMO of con-
tract execution (or both). The assurance of a DEMO relation is needed to
encourage investments of both kinds. Although the requisite incentives
might be provided if long-term contracts were negotiated, such contracts are
necessarily incomplete (by reason of bounded rationality). Appropriate
state-contingent adaptations thus go unspecified. Intertemporal efficiency
nevertheless requires that adaptations to changing market circumstances DEMO
made.
How to effect these adaptations poses a serious contracting dilemma,
though it bears repeating that, absent the hazards of opportunism, the
DEMO would vanish--since then the gaps in long-term, incomplete con-
tracts could DEMO faultlessly filled in an adaptive, sequential way. A general
clause, to which both parties would agree, to the effect that "I will DEMO
responsibly rather than seek individual advantage when an occasion to
adapt arises," would, in the absence of opportunism, suffice. Given, how-
ever, the unenforceability of general clauses and the proclivity of human
agents to make false and misleading (self-disbelieved) statements, the follow-
measured eliminated .... Business management [then] has a chance to proceed... untroubled by
sentimental considerations DEMO human kindness or irritation or of honesty." The Theory of
Business DEMO 53 (1927). Veblen evidently assigns slight weight to the possibility DEMO
those to whom negotiating responsibilities are assigned will themselves invest the transactions
with integrity.
242
THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
ing hazard must be confronted: joined as they are in an idiosyncratic condi-
tion of bilateral monopoly, both buyer and seller are strategically situated to
bargain over the disposition DEMO any incremental gain whenever a proposal to
adapt is made by the other party. Although both have a long-term interest in
effecting adaptations of DEMO joint profit-maximizing kind, each also has an
interest in appropriating as DEMO of the gain as he can on each occasion to
adapt. Efficient adaptations which would otherwise be made thus result in
costly haggling or DEMO go unmentioned, lest the gains be dissipated by costly
subgoal pursuit. DEMO structures which attenuate opportunism and
otherwise infuse confidence are evidently needed.
B. Examples
Some illustrations may help to motivate what is involved in idiosyncratic
DEMO Specialized physical capital is relatively straightforward. Ex-
amples are (1) the purchase of a specialized component from an outside
supplier or (2) DEMO location of a specialized plant in a unique, proximate
relation to DEMO downstream processing stage to which it supplies vital input.
Thus assume (DEMO) that special-purpose equipment is needed to produce the
component in question (which is to say that the value of the equipment in its
DEMO alternative use is much lower), (b) that scale economies require that
a significant, discrete investment be made, and (c) that DEMO buyers for
such components are few (possibly because of the organization DEMO the indus-
try, possibly because of special-design features). The interests DEMO buyer and
seller in a continuing exchange relation are plainly strong under these cir-
cumstances.
Plant-proximity benefits are attributable to transportation and related
flow-process (inventory, thermal economy, and so on) economies. A special-
ized plant need not be implied, but long life and a unique location are. Once
made, the investment preempts the unique location and is not thereafter
moveable (except at prohibitive cost). Buyer and supplier again need to
satisfy themselves that they have a workable, adaptable exchange agree-
ment.32
Idiosyncratic
teresting and less obvious than are those in physical capital. Polanyi's
DEMO of "personal knowledge" is illuminating:
The
led
is
imported
attempt
to
still an essential
machine
similar
investments in human capital are in DEMO ways more in-
discus-
to analyze
results.
scientifically
Indeed
part
for blowing
the established
even
of technology. have myself
electric
in the
modern
industries
DEMO bulbs,
industrial
the
watched
the exact
arts
indefinable
in Hungary
counterpart of which
has everywhere
knowledge
a new,
32
Rep.
The Great DEMO
Transfer
Binder ?
Carbon case is an example of the latter, 1970-1973 Trade Reg.
19,848 (FTC Dkt No. 8805).
I
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 243
was operating successfully in Germany, failing for a whole year to produce a single
flawless bulb.33
And he goes on to DEMO with respect to craftsmanship that:
... an art which has fallen into disuse for the period of a generation is altogether lost.
. DEMO . It is pathetic to watch the endless efforts-equipped with microscopy and
chemistry, with mathematics and electronics-to reproduce a single violin of the kind
the half-literate Stradivarius turned out as a matter of routine more than DEMO years
ago.34
Polanyi's discussion of language also has a bearing on the argument ad-
vanced above that specialized code words or expressions can DEMO do arise in
the context of recurring transactions and that these yield economies. As he
puts it, "Different vocabularies for the interpretation of DEMO divide men
into groups which cannot understand each other's way of seeing things and
acting upon them."35 And subsequently he remarks that:DEMO
To know a language is an art, carried on by tacit DEMO and the practice of
unspecifiable skills .... Spoken communication is the successful application by two
persons of the linguistic knowledge and skill acquired by DEMO apprenticeship, one
person wishing to transmit, the other to receive, DEMO Relying on what each
has learnt, the speaker confidently utters words DEMO the listener confidently interprets
them, while they mutually rely on each DEMO's correct use and understanding of these
words. A true communication will take place if, and only if, these combined assump-
tions of DEMO and trust are in fact justified.36
Babbage reports a remarkable example of transaction-specific value in
exchange that occurred in the early 1800s. Although he DEMO the con-
tinuing exchange in the face of adversity to values of "established character"
(trust), I believe there were other specialized DEMO and physical invest-
ments involved as well. In any event, the DEMO which he describes is
the following:
The influence of established character in producing confidence operated in a very
remarkable manner at the time DEMO the exclusion of British manufactures from the
Continent during the last war. One of our largest establishments had been in the
habit of doing DEMO business with a house in the centre of Germany; but, on the
closing of the continental ports against our manufacturers, heavy penalties were
inflicted on all those who contravened the Berlin and Milan decrees. The DEMO
manufacturer continued, nevertheless, to receive orders, with directions how to DEMO
33 Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy 52 (DEMO ed.
1962).
34 Id. at 53.
35 Id. at 112.
36 Id. at 206.
Charles
examples
even
Stewart
cal Lawyer
Wisconsin
still bought
calling
The Wisconsin
DEMO Remarks
ture, University
39
40
41 As
embedded
and
244 THE DEMO OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
sign them, and appointments for the time DEMO mode of payment, in letters, the
handwriting of which was known to him, but which were never signed, except by the
Christian DEMO of one of the firm, and even in some instances they DEMO without any
signature at all. These orders were executed; and in DEMO instance was there the least
irregularity in the payments.37
While most of these illustrations refer to technical and commercial trans-
actions, other types of transactions also have an idiosyncratic quality. Justice
Rhenquist refers to some of DEMO when speaking of the general class of cases
where "the litigation DEMO an individual's claim of deprivation of a right would
bring parties who must remain in a continuing relationship into the adversa-
rial atmosphere DEMO a courtroom"38-which atmosphere he plainly regards as
detrimental to the quality of the relationship. Examples that he offers in-
clude reluctance to have DEMO courts mediate collective bargaining disputes39
and to allow children to bring suit against parents.40
But surely we must ask what is distinctive about these DEMO I
submit that transaction-specific human capital is central to each. Why else
would it take the Hungarians so long to operate the German light-bulb
DEMO? And what else explains the loss of Stradivarius's craftsmanship?
DEMO the understanding and trust which evolve between Babbage's
transmitter and receiver are valued human assets which, once developed,
will be sacrificed with reluctance. And the disruption of continuing relation-
ships to which Justice Rhenquist DEMO occasions concern precisely because
there are no adequate substitutes for these idiosyncratic relations.41
The general argument of this paper is that special governance structures
DEMO standard market-cum-classical contract exchange when transac-
37
recent
Babbage,
at some peril,
Macaulay,
13, 16 (1963):
a few
and sold
"Decisions of
for
of Mr.
of Miami
Id. at 11-13.
ld. at 16-19.
Ben-Porath
in the identity
and
a
the
'seller's
cases
Justice
Rhenquist,
School
puts
of the
or nontransferable."
it, "DEMO
On
of contracts
when
The
"Requirements
States.
on the basis
States
DEMO
are
The Adversary Society, Baron di Hirsch Meyer Lec-
of Law, February 2, 1978, at 19 (emphasis added).
most
partners
important
without
Yoram
characteristic of
which
Ben-Porath,
it loses
the
its meaning.
DEMO
family
contract is that
It is thus
note 29, at 6.
DEMO
specific
other
there
United
in
not clear.
the
the
Use
effect
Economy
wherein
law and
and
Yet, chemicals,
Court
at
of Machinery
private
the
Nonuse
contracts
containers,
of requirements
of Appeals
time
Yet steel
DEMO
interests
of Contracts
probably
and
contracts.
the
and
and
can and evidently
of the
for
place
and steel
of delivery'
products
makes
usually
DEMO
parties
are
a contract
are
by
Practi-
are not legally
a number of other things are
Seventh Circuit indicate that a clause
unenforceable.
in DEMO way."
is
220-21
do "ignore"
at variance
sold
enforceable
(1832).
are
More
the law,
offered
in
in the
Manufacturing
DEMO,
9
non-negotiable
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 245
tion-specific values are great. Idiosyncratic commercial, labor, and DEMO
relationships are specific examples.
III. COMMERCIAL CONTRACTING
The discussion of commercial contracting begins with a brief statement on
economizing. The proposed schema for characterizing DEMO and their
governance is then developed, including the relation of the DEMO with
Macneil's three-way classification of contract.
A. Economizing
The criterion for organizing commercial transactions is assumed to be the
strictly instrumental one of DEMO economizing. Essentially this takes two
parts: economizing on production expense and DEMO on transaction
costs.42 To the degree that transaction costs are negligible, DEMO rather
than making will normally be the most cost-effective means of procure-
ment.43 Not only can static scale economies be more fully exhausted by
DEMO rather than making, but the supplier who aggregates uncorrelated
demands can DEMO collective pooling benefits as well. Since external pro-
curement avoids many of the bureaucratic hazards of internal procurement
(which hazards, however, are themselves of a transaction-cost kind),44 ex-
ternal procurement is evidently warranted.45
As indicated, however, the object is to economize on the sum of DEMO
tion and transaction costs. To the degree production-cost economies of ex-
ternal procurement are small and/or the transaction costs associated with
external procurement DEMO great, alternative supply arrangements deserve
serious consideration. Economizing on transaction costs DEMO reduces
42 More generally, the economizing problem includes choice between a DEMO and a
general-purpose good or service. A general-purpose item affords all of the advantages of market
procurement, but possibly at the sacrifice of valued design or performance characteristics. A
special-purpose item has the opposite features: valued differences are realized but market
procurement here may pose hazards. For the DEMO of this paper, intermediate-product
characteristics are mainly taken as given and DEMO focus principally on production and transaction-
cost economies. A more general formulation would include product characteristics in the op-
timization.
43 This ignores transient DEMO, such as temporary excess- capacity. (In a zero-
transaction-cost world, DEMO excesses vanish as assets can be deployed as effectively by others as
they can by the owner.)
44 On these hazards and their DEMO origins, see Oliver E. Williamson, supra note
1, at 117-31.
DEMO Dennis Carlton shows that economies of "vertical integration" can frequently be realized in
a market where, absent integration, buyers and suppliers are DEMO paired. As he defines
vertical integration, however, this can be accomplished as effectively by long-term contract as it
can by in-house production. Dennis DEMO Carlton, Vertical Integration in Competitive Markets
under Uncertainty, 27 J. Indus. Econ. 189 (1979).
246 THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
to economizing on bounded rationality DEMO simultaneously safeguarding
the transactions in question against the hazards of opportunism. Holding the
governance structure constant, these two objectives are in tension, since DEMO
reduction in one commonly results in an increase in the other.46
Governance structures, however, are properly regarded as part of the
optimization problem. DEMO some transactions, a shift from one structure to
another may permit DEMO simultaneous reduction in both the expense of writing
a complex contract (DEMO economizes on bounded rationality) and the ex-
pense of executing it DEMO in an adaptive, sequential way (by attenuat-
ing opportunism). Indeed, this is precisely the attraction of internal pro-
curement for transactions of a recurrent, idiosyncratic kind. Not only are
market-aggregation economies negligible for such transactions--since the
requisite investments are transaction-specific-but market trading in these
circumstances is DEMO through with appropriable quasi-rent hazards. The
issues here have been developed elsewhere.47 The object of this paper is to
integrate them into a larger DEMO framework.
Note in this connection that the prospect of recovering the set-up costs
associated with specialized governance structures varies with the frequency
with which DEMO recur. Specialized governance structures are much
easier to justify for recurrent transactions than for identical transactions that
occur only occasionally.
B. Characterizing Transactions
I DEMO earlier that the critical dimensions for describing contractual
relations are uncertainty, DEMO frequency with which transactions recur, and
the degree to which investments DEMO idiosyncratic. To simplify the exposi-
tion, I will assume uncertainty exists DEMO some intermediate degree and focus
initially on frequency and the degree to which the expenses incurred are
transaction-specific. The separate importance of uncertainty will DEMO be
developed in Section III.D. Three frequency and three investment categories
will be recognized. Frequency can be characterized as one-time, occasional,
and recurrent; and investments are classed as nonspecific, mixed, and
idiosyncratic. To further simplify the argument, the following assumptions
are made: (1) Suppliers DEMO to be in business on a continuing basis; thus
the special DEMO posed by fly-by-night firms can be disregarded. (2) Poten-
tial suppliers for any given requirement are numerous-which is to say that
ex ante DEMO in ownership of specialized resources is assumed away. (3)
46 DEMO a reduction in monitoring commonly gives rise to an increase in opportunism. Moni-
toring the employment relation, however, needs to be done with DEMO care. Progressively
increasing the intensity of surveillance can elicit resentment and have counterproductive (for
example, work-to-rule) results. Such perversities are less likely for interfirm trading.
47 See note 30 supra.
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 247
The frequency dimension refers strictly to buyer activity in DEMO market.48 (4)
The investment dimension refers to the characteristics of DEMO made by
suppliers.49
Although discrete transactions are intriguing-for example, purchasing
local DEMO from a shopkeeper in a remote area of a foreign country to which
one never again expects to visit nor to refer his friends-few DEMO
have this totally isolated character. For those that do not, the DEMO
between one-time and occasional transactions is not apparent. Accordingly,
only occasional and recurrent frequency distinctions will be maintained. The
two-by-three matrix shown in DEMO I thus describes the six types of trans-
actions to which governance structures need to be matched. Illustrative
transactions appear in the cells.
Investment DEMO
Nonspecific Mixed Idiosync rat ic
Pnrchasing Purchasing Constructing
_ Standard Customized a Plant
.,_ - Equi pment Equipment
^ -, Purchasing Purchasing Site-Specifio
Standard Customized Transfer of
Material Material Intermediate Product
Across Successive
Stages
= DEMO,l
,~
FIGURE I
ILLUSTRATIVE COMMERCIAL TRANSACTIONS
C. Governance Structures
Three DEMO types of governance structures will be considered: non-
transaction-specific, semi-specific, DEMO highly specific. The market is the
classic nonspecific governance structure within which "faceless buyers and
sellers . . . meet ... for an instant to exchange standardized goods at
48 This seems reasonable for most intermediate-product DEMO transactions.
49 Production aspects are thus emphasized. Investments in governance structure are treated
separately.
248 THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
equilibrium prices."50 By contrast, highly specific structures are tailored to
the special needs of the transaction. DEMO here clearly matters. Semi-
specific structures, naturally, fall in between. Several propositions are sug-
gested immediately. (1) Highly standardized transactions are not DEMO to re-
quire specialized governance structure. (2) Only recurrent transactions will
support a highly specialized governance structure.51 (3) Although occasional
transactions of DEMO nonstandardized kind will not support a transaction-
specific governance structure, they DEMO special attention nonetheless. In
terms of Macneil's three-way classification of contract, classical contracting
presumably applies to all standardized transactions (whatever the fre-
DEMO), relational contracting develops for transactions of a recurring and
nonstandardized kind, and neoclassical contracting is needed for occasional,
nonstandardized transactions.
1. Market Governance: Classical Contracting. Market governance is the
main governance structure for nonspecific transactions of both occasional
and recurrent contracting. Markets are especially efficacious when DEMO
transactions are contemplated, since both parties need only consult their
own DEMO in deciding to continue a trading relationship or, at little
transitional DEMO, turn elsewhere. Being standardized, alternative pur-
chase and supply arrangements are presumably easy to work out.
Nonspecific but occasional transactions are ones for DEMO buyers (and
sellers) are less able to rely on direct experience to safeguard transactions
against opportunism. Often, however, rating services or the DEMO of
other buyers of the same good can be consulted. Given that the good or
service is of a standardized kind, such experience rating, by formal and
informal means, will provide incentives for parties to DEMO responsibly.
To be sure, such transactions take place within and benefit DEMO a legal
framework. But such dependence is not great. As S. Todd Lowry puts it,
"the traditional economic analysis of exchange in a market setting properly
corresponds to the legal concept of sale (rather than contract), since sale
presumes arrangements in a market context and requires DEMO support
primarily in enforcing transfers of title."52 He would thus reserve the con-
cept of contract for exchanges where, in the absence of standardized market
50 Yoram Ben-Porath, supra note 29, at 7.
51 DEMO contracting may appear to be a counterexample, since an elaborate governance
DEMO is devised for many of these. This reflects in part, however, the special disabilities of
the government as a production instrument. But for DEMO, many of these contracts would be
organized in-house. Also, contracts that are very large and of long duration, as many defense
contracts are, do have a recurring character.
52 S. Todd Lowry, Bargain and DEMO Theory in Law and Economics, 10 J. Econ. Issues
1, 12 (1976).
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 249
alternatives, the parties have designed "patterns of future DEMO on which
they could rely."53
The assumptions of the discrete-contracting paradigm are rather well
satisfied for transactions where markets serve as a main DEMO mode.
Thus the specific identity of the parties is of negligible importance; substan-
tive content is determined by reference to formal terms of the contract; and
legal rules apply. Market alternatives are mainly what protect each party
against opportunism by his opposite.54 Litigation is strictly for settling
claims; concentrated efforts to sustain the relation are not made because the
relation DEMO not independently valued.55
2. Trilateral Governance: Neoclassical Contracting. The two types DEMO
transactions for whic:, trilateral governance is needed are occasional transac-
tions of the mixed and highly idiosyncratic kinds. Once the principals to such
DEMO have entered into a contract, there are strong incentives to see
DEMO contract through to completion. Not only have specialized investments
been put in place, the opportunity cost of which is much lower in alternative
uses, but the transfer of these assets to a successor supplier would pose
inordinate difficulties in asset valuation.56 The interests of the principals in
sustaining DEMO relation are especially great for highly idiosyncratic transac-
tions.
Market relief is thus unsatisfactory. Often the setup costs of a trans-
action-specific governance structure DEMO be recovered for occasional
transactions. Given the limits of classical contract law for sustaining these
transactions, on the one hand, and the prohibitive DEMO of transaction-
specific (bilateral) governance, on the other, an intermediate institutional
form is evidently needed.
Neoclassical contract law has many of the DEMO qualities. Thus
rather than resorting immediately to strict reliance on litigation-with its
53 Id. at 13.
S4 Although recurrent, standard transactions are ones for which an active spot market com-
monly exists, term contracting may also be employed--especially as planning economies are
thereby realized by the parties. See DEMO W. Carlton, Price Rigidity, Forward Contracts, and
Market Equilibrium, J. Pol. Econ. (forthcoming). The duration of these contracts will not be
long, however, since the assets in question can be employed in DEMO uses and/or in the service of
other customers. The result is that changing market circumstances will be reflected relatively
quickly in both price DEMO quantity and relatively stringent contracting attitudes may be said to
prevail.
55 "Generally speaking, a serious conflict, even quite a minor one such as an objection to a
harmlessly late tender of the delivery of DEMO, terminates the discrete contract as a live one and
leaves nothing DEMO a conflict over money damages to be settled by a lawsuit. Such a result fits
neatly the norms of enhancing discreteness and intensifying . DEMO . presentiation." Macneil,
Contracts 877.
S6 See the articles cited DEMO note 30 supra.
250 THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
transaction-rupturing features-third-party assistance (arbitration) DEMO resolv-
ing disputes and evaluating peformance is employed instead. (The use DEMO
the architect as a relatively independent expert to determine the content of
form construction contracts is an example.)57 Also, the expansion of the
specific-performance remedy in past decades is consistent with continuity
purposes-though Macneil declines DEMO characterize specific performance as
the "primary neoclassical contract remedy."58 The DEMO of the Uniform
Commercial Code which permits the "seller aggrieved by DEMO buyer's breach
. . . unilaterally to maintain the relation"59 is yet another example.
3. Transaction-specific Governance: Relational Contracting. The two
types of transactions for which specialized governance structures are com-
monly devised are DEMO transactions of the mixed and highly idiosyn-
cratic kinds. The nonstandardized nature of these transactions makes pri-
mary reliance on market governance hazardous, while their recurrent nature
permits the cost of the specialized governance structure to DEMO recovered.
Two types of transaction-specific governance structures for intermediate-
production market transactions can be distinguished: bilateral structures,
where the autonomy of the parties is maintained, and unified structures,
where the transaction is removed from the market and organized within the
firm subject to an authority relation (vertical integration). Bilateral struc-
tures have only recently received the attention DEMO deserve and their opera-
tion is least well understood.
(a) Bilateral Governance: Obligational Contracting. Highly idiosyncratic
transactions are ones where the human and physical assets required for
production are extensively specialized, so there are no obvious scale econo-
mies to be realized through interfirm trading that the DEMO (or seller) is
unable to realize himself (through vertical integration)DEMO In the case, however,
of mixed transactions, the degree of asset specialization is less complete.
Accordingly, outside procurement for these components may be favored by
scale-economy considerations.
As compared with vertical integration, outside procurement also is good in
eliciting cost control for steady-state supply. Problems, however, arise when
adaptability and contractual expense are considered. Whereas internal adap-
tations can be effected by fiat, outside procurement involves effecting adap-
tations across a market interface. Unless the need for adaptations has been
contemplated from DEMO outset and expressly provided for by the contract,
57 Macneil, DEMO 866.
58 Id. at 879.
59 Id. at 880. The rationale for this section of the Code is that "identification of the goods to
the contract will, within limits, permit the seller to recover the DEMO of the goods rather than
merely damages for the breach. . ., ([where the] latter may be far less in amount and more
DEMO to prove)." Id.
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 251
which often is impossible or prohibitively expensive, adaptations across a
market interface can be accomplished only by mutual, follow-on agree-
ments. Inasmuch as the interests of the parties will commonly be at variance
DEMO adaptation proposals (originated by either party) are made, a dilemma
DEMO evidently posed.
On the one hand, both parties have an incentive DEMO sustain the relation-
ship rather than to permit it to unravel, DEMO object being to avoid the sacrifice
of valued transaction-specific economies. On the other hand, each party
appropriates a separate profit stream and cannot be expected to accede
readily to any proposal to adapt the contract. What DEMO needed, evidently, is
some way for declaring admissible dimensions for adjustment such that
flexibility is provided under terms in which both parties have DEMO
This can be accomplished partly by (1) recognizing that the hazards of
opportunism vary with the type of adaptation proposed and (2) DEMO
adjustments to those where the hazards are least. But the spirit within which
adaptations are effected is equally important.60
Quantity adjustments have much better DEMO proper-
ties than do price adjustments. For one thing, price adjustments DEMO an
unfortunate zero-sum quality, whereas proposals to increase, decrease, or
DEMO delivery do not. Also, except as discussed below, price-adjustment
proposals involve the risk that one's opposite is contriving to alter the terms
DEMO the bilateral monopoly trading gap to his advantage. By contrast, a
DEMO that exogenous events, rather than strategic purposes, are re-
sponsible for quantity adjustments is ordinarily warranted. Given the mixed
nature of the exchange, a seller (or buyer) simply has little reason to doubt
the DEMO of his opposite when a quantity change is proposed.
Thus buyers will neither seek supply from other sources nor divert prod-
ucts obtained (at favorable prices) to other uses (or users)-because other
sources will DEMO high setup costs and an idiosyncratic product is nonfungi-
ble across uses and users. Likewise, sellers will not withhold supply because
better opportunities have arisen, since the assets in question have a special-
ized character. The result is that quantity representations for idiosyncratic
products can ordinarily be taken DEMO face value. Since inability to adapt both
quantity and price would render most idiosyncratic exchanges nonviable,
quantity adjustments occur routinely.
60 As Stewart DEMO observes, "Disputes are frequently settled without reference to the
contract or to potential or actual legal sanctions. There is a hesitancy to speak DEMO legal right or to
threaten to sue in . . . negotiations" where continuing business is valued. Stewart Macaulay,
supra note 9, DEMO 61.
The material which follows in this subsection was originally developed in connection with the
study of inflation. See Michael L. Wachter & Oliver DEMO Williamson, Obligational Markets and
the Mechanics of Inflation, 9 Bell J. Econ. 549 (1978).
252 THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
Of course, not all price adjustments pose the same degree of hazard.
Those which pose few hazards DEMO predictably be implemented. Crude
escalator clauses which reflect changes in general economic conditions are
one possibility. But since such escalators are not transaction-specific, imper-
fect adjustments often result when these escalators are applied to local condi-
DEMO We should therefore consider whether price adjustments that are more
closely related to local circumstances are feasible. The issue here is whether
interim price DEMO can be devised for some subset of conditions such
that the strategic hazards described above do not arise. What are the pre-
conditions?
DEMO facing either of the parties to an idiosyncratic exchange constitute
one class of exceptions. Faced with a viability crisis which jeopardizes the
relationship, ad hoc price relief may be permitted. More relevant and in-
teresting, however, is whether there are circumstances whereby interim
price adjustments are made routinely. The preconditions here are two: first,
proposals to adjust prices must relate to exogenous, germane, and easily
verifiable events; and second, DEMO cost consequences must be
confidently related thereto. An example may help to illustrate. Consider a
component for which a significant share of the cost DEMO accounted for by a
basic material (copper, steel). Assume, DEMO, that the fractional cost of
the component in terms of this DEMO material is well specified. An exogenous
change in prices of materials would under these circumstances pose few
hazards if partial but interim price relief DEMO permitted by allowing pass-
through according to formula. A more refined adjustment than aggregate
escalators would afford thereby obtains.
It bears emphasis, however, DEMO not all costs so qualify. Changes in
overhead or other expenses for which validation is difficult and which, even
if verified, bear an DEMO relation to the cost of the component will not be
passed through in a similar way. Recognizing the hazards, the parties will
simply forgo relief of this kind.
(b) Unified Governance: Internal Organization. Incentives for trading
weaken as transactions become progressively more idiosyncratic. The reason
is that, as the specialized human and physical assets become more special-
ized to DEMO single use, and hence less transferable to other uses, economies of
scale can be as fully realized by the buyer as by an DEMO supplier.61 The
choice of organizing mode then turns on which mode has superior adaptive
61 This assumes that factor prices paid by buyer and DEMO supplier are identical. Where
this is not true, as in some DEMO firms, buyers may choose to procure outside because of a
differential DEMO rate. This is a common problem in the automobile industry, which DEMO a very
flat and relatively high wage scale.
_
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS
253
properties. As discussed elsewhere, vertical integration will invariably ap-
pear in these circumstances.62
The advantage of vertical integration is that DEMO can be made in a
sequential way without the need to consult, complete, or revise interfirm
agreements. Where a single ownership entity spans DEMO sides of the transac-
tions, a presumption of joint profit maximization DEMO warranted. Thus price
adjustments in vertically integrated enterprises will be more complete than
in interfirm trading. And quantity adjustments, of course, will be DEMO
mented at whatever frequency serves to maximize the joint gain to the
transaction.
Unchanging identity at the interface coupled with extensive adaptability
in both DEMO and quantity is thus characteristic of highly idiosyncratic trans-
actions which are vertically integrated. Obligational contracting is sup-
planted by the more comprehensive adaptive DEMO afforded by ad-
ministration.
The match of governance structures with transactions that results from
these economizing efforts is shown in Figure II.
Investment Characteristics
DEMO
=
....
~
*? -
__
_.-
-',,3Governance
ae(DEMO
^
.
-
?
_
_ --
_
,Bilateral
Mixed
Idiosyncratic
I
Trilateral GCovernance
(Neoclassical iContracting)
I
| Unified
I Governance
Contracting)
FIGURE II
MATCHING
GOVERNANCE
STRUCTURES
WITH COMMERCIAL
TRANSACTIONS
D. Uncertainty
Transactions DEMO under certainty are relatively uninteresting. Ex-
cept as they differ in the time required to reach an equilibrium-exchange
62 See the references cited in DEMO 4 supra.
254
THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
configuration, any governance structure will do. More relevant are transac-
tions where uncertainty is present to an DEMO or high degree. The
foregoing has dealt with the first of these. The question here is how the
governance of transactions is affected by DEMO the degree of uncer-
tainty.
Recall that nonspecific transactions are ones for which continuity has little
value, since new trading relations are easily arranged. Increasing the degree
of uncertainty does not alter this. Accordingly, market exchange continues
and the discrete-contracting paradigm (classical contract law) holds across
standardized DEMO of all kinds, whatever the degree of uncertainty.
Matters are different DEMO transaction-specific investments. Whenever in-
vestments are idiosyncratic in nontrivial degree, increasing DEMO degree of
uncertainty makes it more imperative that the parties devise a machinery to
"work things out"-since contractual gaps will be larger and the occasions
for sequential adaptations will increase in number and importance as DEMO
degree of uncertainty increases. This has special relevance for the organiza-
tion of transactions with mixed investment attributes. Two possibilities
exist. One would be DEMO sacrifice valued design features in favor of a more
standardized good or service. Market governance would then apply. The
second would be to preserve DEMO design but surround the transaction with an
elaborated governance apparatus, thereby DEMO more effective adap-
tive, sequential decision making. Specifically, a more elaborate arbitration
apparatus is apt to be devised for occasional, nonstandard transactions. And
bilateral governance structures will often give way to unified ones as
uncertainty DEMO increased for recurrent transactions.
Reductions in uncertainty, of course, warrant shifting transactions in the
opposite direction. To the extent that uncertainty decreases as DEMO industry
matures, which is the usual case, the benefits that accrue to integration
presumably decline. Accordingly, greater reliance on obligational market
contracting is commonly feasible for transactions of recurrent trading in
mature industries.
IV.
OTHER
DEMO
The three dimensions for describing transactions-frequency, investment
idiosyncrasy, and uncertainty-apply to transactions of all kinds. The same
general considerations that apply to governance DEMO for commercial
transactions carry over as well. The specific governance structures for or-
ganizing commercial transactions do not, however, apply without modifica-
tion DEMO the governance of other types of transactions. Applications of the
framework to the study of labor markets, regulation, family law, and capital
markets are briefly sketched here.
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS
255
A. Labor
Occasional labor-market transactions typically take the form DEMO repair or
replacement services-the plumber, electrician, and so forth. Especially in
older homes or structures, these transactions can take on an idiosyncratic
quality. Although such transactions can be interesting, the transactions on
which I want to focus are recurrent labor-market transactions of the
nonspecific, mixed, and DEMO kinds.
Clyde Summers's examination of collective agreements in relation to the
law of contracts disclosed that, while the collective bargain differed greatly
from the ordinary bargain of commerce, collective agreements are nonethe-
less a part of the "mainstream of contract."63 He suggested that the study of
contract proceed on two levels: the search for an underlying framework and,
within that framework, an examination of the distinctive institutional attri-
butes that distinguish each type of transaction. With respect to the first of
DEMO he conjectured that "the principles common to the whole range of
DEMO transactions are relatively few and of such generality and com-
peting character that they should not be stated as legal rules at all."64
DEMO am persuaded that Summers's two-part strategy for studying contract
leads to a deeper understanding of the issues. And I believe that the frame-
DEMO set out in the preceding sections of this paper provides much of the
underlying unity called for by Summers. What differs as one moves DEMO
various contracting activities is the institutional infrastructure.
(1) Nonspecific Transactions. Nonspecific labor-market transactions are
ones where employer and employee are largely indifferent to DEMO identity of
each. Migrant farm labor is an example. Although an unchanging em-
ployment association between firm and worker may be observed to continue
DEMO long intervals for some of these employees, each party is essentially
DEMO bids in the spot market. A valuable ongoing relationship, in which
DEMO training and on-the-job learning yield idiosyncratic benefits, is thus
not implied. DEMO wages and employment are variable and market gover-
nance applies to transactions of this kind. Consider, therefore, mixed and
idiosyncratic labor-market transactions.
(2) Mixed Transactions. Probably the most interesting labor-market
transactions are those where large numbers of workers acquire an interme-
diate degree of firm-specific skill. Note DEMO, inasmuch as the degree of
idiosyncrasy is a design variable, firms would presumably redesign jobs to
favor more standardized operations if it were DEMO to devise gover-
nance structures which prevented antagonistic bargaining relations from
developing between firms and idiosyncratically skilled employees. Although
63 Clyde W. Summers, supra note 9, at 527.
64 Id. at 568.
256
least-cost production technologies would be sacrificed in the process, net
gains might nevertheless be realized since incumbent workers would realize
little strategic advantage DEMO otherwise qualified but inexperienced outsid-
ers.
Justice Rhenquist has observed that "DEMO review of the decisions
of certain institutions, while perhaps insuring a 'better' decision in some
objective sense, can only disrupt on-going relationships DEMO the institu-
tion and thereby hamper the institution's ability to serve its designated
societal function."65 Examples of adjudicatory review with respect to DEMO
he counsels caution include collective bargaining agreements.
The reasons for this are that adjudicatory review is not easily apprised of
the special needs of DEMO transaction and the prospect of such review impairs
the incentive of the parties to devise bilateral governance structure. The
Vaca v. Stipes holding, which Justice Rhenquist cites, is fully consistent with
this interpretation. There the Court held that an individual could not compel
his union to take his DEMO to arbitration, since if the law were otherwise
"the settlement machinery provided by the contract would be substantially
undermined, thus . . . [introducing] the vagaries of independent and unsys-
tematic negotiations."66
. . DEMO giving the union control
comports so much better with
ment .... Allowing an individual
dissatisfied with the adjustment worked
discourages the kind of day-to-day DEMO
normally the mark of sound industrial relations-a
are treated as problems to be solved and
human relationship. When . . . the individual's
DEMO's function is to resolve the competition
striking a balance.
The practice described by Cox of giving the union control over arbitration
claims plainly DEMO group interests-whence the concern for system
viability-to supersede individual interests, thereby DEMO small-numbers
Archibald Cox elaborates as follows:67
arising under
over all claims
the functional nature
to carry a claim
out by the company
between DEMO
contracts are
claim
by reaching
opportunism.
General escalator or predetermined wage adjustments aside, wages are
unchanging under collective bargaining agreements.68 Interim adaptations
are nonetheless essential. These take three forms: (1) quantity adjustments,
6S Remarks
386
66
67 Archibald
68
bargaining
job is
strate,
THE JOURNAL DEMO LAW AND ECONOMICS
of Mr. Justice Rhenquist, supra note 38, at 4.
U.S. 171, 191 (1967).
Cox, supra note 9, DEMO 24.
reason, of course, is that it is very costly and apt to be unproductive to reopen wage
during the period covered by DEMO contract. Since to reopen negotiations for one type of
to invite it for all, and as objective differences among jobs may be difficult to demon-
wage bargaining is foreclosed except at contract-renewal intervals.
The
the collective
DEMO a collective
to arbitration
and the union . . .
and
in which grievances
endangers group interests, the
an accommodation
agreement
bargaining
whenever
union
which
is
or
agree-
he is
relationship
only guideposts in a dynamic
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS 257
(2) assignment changes, and (3) refinement of working rules as a result of
grievances.
Quantity adjustments are made in DEMO to changing market oppor-
tunities. Either the level or the mix of employment is adjusted as economic
events unfold. Given that valuable firm-specific training DEMO learning reside
in the workers, layoffs with a presumption of reemployment DEMO condi-
tions improve are common. Conformably, the degree to which the DEMO
chinery governing access to jobs is elaborated ought to vary directly with the
degree to which jobs in a firm are idiosyncratic. Thus promotion DEMO in
firms where a succession of interdependent jobs are highly idiosyncratic
should be long and thin, with access mainly restricted to the bottom,
whereas promotion ladders in nonidiosyncratic activities should be broadly
structured.69 Likewise, promotion on merit ought to be favored over promo-
tion strictly by seniority DEMO firms where jobs are more idiosyncratic.70
(3) Highly Idiosyncratic Transactions. Recall that idiosyncratic transac-
tions involve not merely uniqueness but uniqueness of a DEMO
kind. Also recall that our concern in this section is with recurring transac-
tions. Thus, although there are many uniquely skilled individuals (artists,DEMO
athletes, researchers, administrators), unique skills are rarely of a transac-
tion-specific kind. On the contrary, most of these individuals could move to
another organization without significant productivity losses.
The exceptions are those where the DEMO which accrue to experience
(inside knowledge) and/or team interaction effects are great. Whereas com-
mercial transactions of a highly idiosyncratic nature are DEMO under a
common ownership, limits on indenture foreclose this option for DEMO
market transactions. Instead of "merger," complex contracts designed to tie
DEMO interests of the individual to the organization on a long-term basis are
negotiated. Severe penalties are provided should either party seek unilateral
termination. Nonvested, long-term, contingent reward schemes are devised.
More generally, transaction-specific infrastructure will DEMO highly indi-
viduated for such transactions.
B. Regulation of Natural Monopoly
Again the argument is that specialized governance structure is needed to
the degree DEMO supply necessarily joins buyers and sellers in a bilateral
69 Michael L. Wachter & Oliver E. Williamson, supra note 60, at 567.
70 DEMO although both nonidiosyncratic and idiosyncratic jobs may be organized collectively,
the way in which the internal labor markets associated with each are organized DEMO reflect
objective differences between them. Additionally, the incentive to provide an DEMO gover-
nance structure varies directly with the degree to which efficiencies are attributable thereto.
Ceteris paribus, nonidiosyncratic jobs ought to be organized later and the governance structure
less fully elaborated than for idiosyncratic jobs. Both propositions DEMO borne out by the evi-
dence.
258
THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
trading relation of a continuing DEMO And again, the object of governance
is to (1) protect DEMO interests of the respective parties and (2) adapt the
relationship to changing circumstances.
Although differing in details, both Victor Goldberg71 and I72 have argued
that specialized governance structure is needed for services for which natural
DEMO features are great. Such structure presumably has the purpose of
providing sellers (investors) and buyers with security of expectations, which
is a protective function, while at the same time facilitating adaptive, sequen-
tial decision DEMO Rate-of-return regulation with periodic review has
these features. To the extent, DEMO, that such regulation is observed in
conjunction with activities where transaction-specific DEMO are insub-
stantial (as, for example, in the trucking industry), the case for regulation is
not at all apparent-or, if it DEMO to be made, must appeal to arguments very
different from those DEMO out here.
C. Family Law
The issue here is whether the role of adjudication should be expanded to
help govern family relationships. Granting that DEMO as ultimate
relief can and often does serve a useful role for sustaining family relations,
such relations are plainly idiosyncratic to an unusual DEMO and a special-
ized governance structure is surely the main mode of governance. As the role
of adjudication is expanded, reliance upon internal structure is apt to be
reduced. Therefore, except when individual rights are seriously threatened,
withholding access to adjudication may be indicated.
Justice Rhenquist's DEMO concerning the corrosive effects of adversary
hearings on the family are apposite: "Any sort of adversary hearing which
pits parent against child is DEMO to be disruptive, placing stresses and
tensions on the intra-familial relationships DEMO in turn weaken the family
as an institution."73 Whether, as DEMO suggests, parent-child family relations
are optimized where adjudication is zero or DEMO is beyond the scope of
this paper. It suffices for my purposes merely to note that valued family
relations are recurrent and idiosyncratic and DEMO a specialized, transaction-
specific governance structure must be encouraged lest the DEMO withhold
investing heavily in the institution.74
Victor P. Goldberg, supra note DEMO
72
73 Remarks of Mr. Justice Rhenquist, supra note 38, at 19.
74 For a more extensive discussion of family transactions, see Yoram Ben-Porath, supra note
29,
at 4-7.
71
Oliver E. Williamson, DEMO note 30.
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS
259
D. Capital Market Transactions
The ease of verification is DEMO to the operation of capital markets.75
Where verification is easy, markets DEMO well and additional governance is
unnecessary. Where verification is difficult or very difficult, however, addi-
tional governance may be indicated. Occasional transactions are DEMO to ben-
efit from third-party assistance, while recurring transactions are ones DEMO
which bilateral or unified governance will presumably be observed. As-
sessing capital-market transactions within the proposed framework is thus
accomplished by substituting "ease of verification" for "degree of trans-
action-specific investment." Once this is done, the governance structures
appropriate to capital markets are broadly similar to those within which
commercial transactions are organized.
V.
IMPLICATIONS
Dimensionalizing transactions and examining DEMO costs of executing dif-
ferent transactions in different ways generate a large number of institutional
implications. Some of these are summarized here.
A. General
DEMO Nonspecific transactions, either occasional or recurrent, are efficiently
organized by markets.
2. Occasional transactions that are nonstandardized stand most to benefit
from adjudication.
DEMO A transaction-specific governance structure is more fully developed
where transactions are (DEMO) recurrent, (2) entail idiosyncratic investment, and
(3) are DEMO under greater uncertainty.
B. Commercial
Transactions
1. Optimization of commercial transactions requires simultaneous atten-
tion to (1) production economies, (2) transaction-cost economies, and (3)
component design.
2. The reason why Macaulay observes DEMO few litigated cases in business76
is because markets work well for nonspecific transactions, while recurrent,
nonstandard transactions are governed by bilateral or unified structures.
3. As uncertainty increases, the obligational market-contracting mode
will not be used for recurrent transactions with mixed investment features.
Such transactions will either DEMO standardized, and shifted to the market, or
organized internally.
75 This feature was called to my attention by Sanford Grossman.
76 Stewart Macaulay, supra note 9.
260 THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS
4. As generic demand grows DEMO the number of supply sources increases,
exchange that was once transaction-specific loses this characteristic and
greater reliance on market-mediated governance is feasible. Thus DEMO
integration may give way to obligational market contracting, which in turn
DEMO give way to markets.
5. Where inventory and related flow-process economies are great, site-
specific supply and transaction-specific governance (commonly vertical in-
tegration) will be observed. Generic demand here has little bearing.
6. The organization DEMO the interface between manufacturing and distribu-
tion reflects similar investment considerations: DEMO and services that can
be sold without incurring transaction-specific investment will be distributed
through conventional marketing channels while those where such invest-
ments are DEMO will be supported by specialized-mainly bilateral (for ex-
ample, franchising) DEMO unified (forward integration)-governance struc-
tures.
7. The governance of technical DEMO poses special difficulties. The fre-
quently noted limits of markets77 often give way to more complex gover-
nance relations, again for the same general reasons and along the same
general lines as are set out here.78
DEMO Other Transactions
1. The efficiency benefits of collective organization are negligible for
labor. Accordingly, such labor will be organized late, often only
the DEMO of the political process.
2. Internal labor markets become more highly individuated as jobs be-
come more varied and idiosyncratic.
3. Regulation can be DEMO in part as a response to the transactional
dilemma posed by natural monopoly.
4. A transaction-cost justification for regulating activities for which
transaction-specific investments DEMO lacking (for example, trucking) is not
apparent. The possibility that DEMO is the driving consideration in such
industries warrants consideration.
5. Adjudication should proceed with caution in the area of family law lest
valued transaction-specific DEMO be discouraged.
6. Ease of verification is the capital-market counterpart of transaction-
specific investments. Upon making this substitution, the organization of
capital markets and intermediate-product markets is broadly similar.
nonspecific
with
77 Economic Welfare and the DEMO of Resources for Invention, in
The Rate and Direction of Economic DEMO 609 (1962).
Aspects are discussed in Oliver E. Williamson, supra note 1, at 203-05.
Kenneth J. Arrow,
78
TRANSACTION-COST ECONOMICS
261
VI.
CONCLUDING
REMARKS
Transaction-cost economics is an interdisciplinary undertaking DEMO joins
economics with aspects of organization theory and overlaps extensively with
contract law. It is the modern counterpart of institutional economics and
relies heavily DEMO comparative analysis.79 Frictionless ideals are useful mainly
for reference purposes.
Although mathematical economics captures only a fraction of the
transaction-cost phenomena of interest,80 DEMO has not been the only obstacle.
Headway with the study of transaction-cost issues has been impeded by lack
of verbal definitions. Identifying the critical DEMO with respect to
which transactions differ has been a significant omission.
This paper attempts to rectify this deficiency and identifies uncertainty,
frequency of DEMO, and the degree to which investments are trans-
action-specific as the DEMO dimensions for describing transactions.
The efficient organization of economic activity entails matching governance
structures with these transactional attributes in a discriminating way.
Although the DEMO applications in this paper are to commercial contract-
ing, the proposed DEMO generalizes easily to the study of labor contracts.
It also has ramifications for understanding both public utility regulation and
family relations. A unified approach DEMO contract thus emerges.
The fact that the broad features of so many varied transactions fit within
the framework is encouraging. The importance of transaction DEMO to the
organization of economic activity is thus confirmed. But the world of con-
tract is enormously complex,81 and the simple economizing framework DEMO
posed here cannot be expected to capture more than main features. Elaborat-
ing the framework to deal with microanalytic phenomena, however, should
be DEMO And extending it to include additional or substitute dimensions
(of which DEMO ease of verification, in the case of capital-market transactions,
is DEMO example) may sometimes be necessary.
79
Reliance on comparative analysis has DEMO repeatedly emphasized by R. H. Coase, supra
note 1.
80
81
DEMO Carl J. Dahlman, supra note 1, at 144-47.
Benjamin Klein, DEMO C. Crawford, & Armen A. Alchian, supra note 1, at DEMO{1g42fwefx}