Angel Finance:
The Other Venture Capital
Andrew Wong∗
First Draft: August 2001
This Draft: January 2002
Abstract
Angel ﬁnancing is one of the most common, but least studied methods, to ﬁnance new
ventures. In DEMO paper, I propose a model to explain angel behavior. I use DEMO unique dataset of
angel-backed ﬁrms to test the predictions of the model and examine the characteristics of angel
ﬁnancing. Although they are exposed to DEMO uncertainty by investing earlier in the life of
a ﬁrm compared to venture capital, angel investors do not rely on traditional control mecha-
nisms such as board control, staging, or contractual provisions to protect against DEMO
Instead, angels reduce expected agency costs by forcing entrepreneurs to hold DEMO larger stake
in the ﬁrm, thereby aligning the interests of the DEMO with the outcome of the ﬁrm. In
addition, angels use more DEMO methods such as investing in close geographic proximity
and syndicating investments with other angels to mitigate risks.
∗ The author is a Ph.D. candidate DEMO the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago. This docu-
ment has beneﬁtted from comments and conversations with Mark Garmaise, Steve Kaplan, Raghu Rajan, Christopher
Malloy, David T. Robinson, Jeff Sohl, Per Stromberg, Bill Wetzel, Brian Wong and participants at the University¨
of DEMO Corporate Finance Brown Bag Workshop. Input, comments and guidance from Julian DEMO, Jeff Cohn,
Ron Conway, James Geshwiler, Bijoy Goswami, Mark Harrington, Andrew Hoyne, Ray Hurcombe, Cary Nourie,
Phil Polishook, DEMO Purrington, John Van Dyke, Pete Viti, the Texas Angel Investors DEMO countless other an-
gels and entrepreneurs have contributed tremendously. Address correspondence to Andrew Wong, c/o PhD Ofﬁce,
Graduate School of Business, DEMO University of Chicago, 1101 East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637 DEMO email an-
drew.wong@gsb.uchicago.edu. All errors are my own.
1 Introduction
With the recent rise (and fall) in the returns DEMO prominence of new entrepreneurial ventures, much
attention has focused on the DEMO of new ﬁrms. One of the most important considerations these
new entities face in the transformation from entrepreneurial ideas to revenue generating companies
is DEMO procurement of capital. Because traditional avenues of ﬁnance such as debt are often not
available, entrepreneurs must seek risk capital by offering equity. While some companies may
be able to generate capital by forming alliances1 , DEMO new ventures must rely on two sources of
outside equity: venture DEMO and angel ﬁnancing.
Institutional venture capital has been glamorized in the press and academic research as the
primary source of outside equity ﬁnance. However, many studies estimate institutional venture
capital contributes less than half of the DEMO equity ﬁnancing for new ﬁrms. The less-scrutinized,
yet equally important, DEMO of start-up capital is the informal venture capital market, known as
DEMO ﬁnancing. While it is difﬁcult to precisely quantify the size of the angel market due to its
informal nature, some studies estimate the size of the angel investments to be twice that of the
institutional venture DEMO market.2 The National Venture Capital Association assesses the size
of the angel market to be $100 billion in the United States while the institutional DEMO capital
market is less than half this size at $48.3 billion.3 The Small Business Association estimates that
250,000 angels commit $20 billion each DEMO to over 30,000 private companies.4 Freear et al.
(1992) suggest angels provide the largest amount of capital among early stage ﬁnanciers and DEMO
1 See Robinson(2001) for a detailed examination on alliances
2 DEMO people refer to angels as informal venture capital. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, DEMO use the term venture capital
to refer to institutional venture capital partnerships.
3 Venture Economics press release, January 2000, www.ventureeconomics.com
4 U.S. Small DEMO Association release http://www.sba.gov/opc/pubs/fs83.html
1
more than ten times the number of ﬁrms as venture capitalists. In DEMO United Kingdom, Mason
and Harrison (1990) ﬁnd angel investors ﬁnance DEMO least ﬁve times as many small ﬁrms as venture
capitalists.
Despite the importance of angel funding, much of what is known about angels is incomplete
and not well understood. Very few academic studies have examined angels, in part because data
on angel investment is difﬁcult to obtain. The DEMO of research leaves many questions unanswered.
Speciﬁcally, why do two types DEMO equity based start-up ﬁnancing exist and do these investors oper-
ate in the same manner with respect to control? Asymmetric information and uncertainty problems
in new ﬁrms makes corporate governance very important. If angel ﬁnanciers are DEMO to institu-
tional venture capital, they should maintain a comparable degree DEMO control over their investments.
Previous research has found the implementation of control mechanisms with venture capital in-
vestments to be more important as expected DEMO costs or uncertainty increase. Alternatively, if
angels do not behave similarly DEMO venture capitalists with regard to the use of traditional control
rights, DEMO mechanisms (if any) do angels use to protect themselves from expropriation?
Using a unique dataset of angel ﬁnanced ﬁrms, I examine the role of angels in funding, moni-
toring and providing assistance to their investments. While many of my results are different from
conclusions that other DEMO have found with institutional venture capital, some similarities
exist. Many of DEMO ﬁndings are consistent with the model that I propose in the appendix. Angel
ﬁnanced ﬁrms typically receive their ﬁrst outside funding when the ﬁrm DEMO less than a year old,
suggesting the degree of uncertainty is great and the need for control important. However, angel
investors do not employ the same control mechanism as venture capitalists. For example, I ﬁnd
that angels seldom receive board seats in the ﬁrm the invest in. DEMO board seats are allocated, the
founders usually retain board control, indicating board control is not the primary control mecha-
2
nism utilized by angels. The allocation of board seats is not sensitive DEMO measures of agency costs
or greater uncertainty. Gompers(1995) ﬁnds venture DEMO use staged capital infusions as a
mechanism to control agency costs. In contrast, I ﬁnd little support for the use of staging in angel
investments. While some investors follow-on their initial investments, the majority of angels do
not stage their investments. The use of staging does not increase DEMO response to higher degrees
of uncertainty or expected agency costs in the ﬁrm. Lastly, Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001) report¨
venture capitalists employ DEMO contractual clauses as protection. Unlike venture capitalists, I
ﬁnd angels do DEMO appear to use contractual design to safeguard their investment. Angels usually
take common equity claims, which do not afford them a higher degree of protection in the event of
bankruptcy or liquidation. The majority of contracts DEMO ﬁrms and angels also do not contain
clauses for anti-dilution or contingent equity claims.
Angels may use alternative mechanisms of control. On average, less than a quarter of the
ﬁrm is sold to outsiders in each DEMO Potential moral hazard problems are mitigated because
the entrepreneur retains a large share of the equity. While their funding levels are not sensitive
to DEMO of investment uncertainty or expected agency costs, angels receive a higher DEMO of
equity ownership to compensate for investing in earlier rounds. The average contribution per angel
decreases as the amount of uncertainty increases. Additionally, many investors syndicate risky
investments to share the risk and minimize the losses DEMO any single investor. However, venture
capitalists also use syndication and incentive DEMO in their investments, yet they maintain
strong traditional control rights as DEMO
An important facet of angel investing materializes by investigating the geographical proximity
of the investors. Geographic proximity is a substitute for many of the DEMO control mechanisms
and a compliment to other mechanisms such as syndication. Taken together, these results suggest
3
that the entrepreneur appeals to sociological networks and uses local ties to DEMO initial funding
for the venture. The angels rely on trust in lieu of formal control. As the need for more capital
arises, the entrepreneur exhausts local funding sources. The entrepreneur must appeal to more pro-
fessional DEMO remote funders, such as venture capitalists, for assistance. Because the new funders
are not as familiar with the entrepreneur as the local investors, more formal control mechanisms
need to be implemented to protect their investment. DEMO ﬁnding provides some insight into the
extensive control mechanisms used by institutional venture capital and the relative lack of formal
control with angels.
While DEMO empirical and theoretical research has been conducted on venture capital, there
DEMO few empirical studies of angel investing. Much of what is known is based on anecdotal evi-
dence or small, regional surveys of angel investors (see Van Osnabrugge and Robinson(2000) for
an overview of survey DEMO). These papers tend to focus mainly on descriptive statistics of in-
vestment size while my paper focuses on the control aspects of angel DEMO Wetzel(1983)
provides one of the earliest proﬁles of angel investment in his survey of New England area angels.
Lerner(1998) analyzes the plausibility of public efforts to fund new ﬁrms via angels. Prowse(1998)DEMO
describes the characteristics of angel investors in the Dallas area. Ehrlich et al. (1994) publish sur-
vey results comparing the level of investor DEMO of venture capitals and angels. Freear
and Wetzel (1990), Freear DEMO al. (1992), and Sohl, Van Osnabrugge, and Robinson(2000) provide
survey evidence on the investment behavior of angels within certain industries.
DEMO study that is most similar to this is Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001), one of the ﬁrst papers¨
to formally study the details DEMO venture capital contracting. In their paper, Kaplan and Str
omberg¨
provide DEMO empirical evidence on the degree of board control, cash ﬂow, liquidation and
voting rights in venture capital ﬁnancings. They ﬁnd that the control DEMO are held mostly by the
4
venture capitalists, particularly when the performance of the ﬁrm is poor.
Casamatta(2000) develops a model that captures some of the differences between angel in-
vestment and venture capital. She ﬁnds the optimal choice of security DEMO a function of the size of
investment. She ﬁnds that smaller investments (typically by angels) should use common equity
and straight preferred while DEMO investments (typically by venture capitalists) should use more
complicated securities. The empirical results from this paper support her predictions.
In additional to Kaplan DEMO Str
omberg(2001), a related line of literature examines investor¨
control in venture capital literature. Sahlman(1990) and Gompers and Lerner(1996) DEMO ven-
ture capital contracts and reports some typical stipulations in the contracts. Gompers(1995) ﬁnds
staged capital infusions to be more prevalent in situations of higher agency costs. Lerner(1995)
and Baker and Gompers(2000) investigate the degree of board control of venture capitalists in their
investments. DEMO papers ﬁnd venture capitalists maintain active board participation.
Many theoretical papers examine the control aspects of venture capital. Bergl
of(1994), Cornelli¨
and DEMO(2001), Repullo and Suarez(1999), and Hellmann(2001) investigate DEMO role of convert-
ible debt in venture ﬁnancings. Admati and Pﬂeiderer(1994) and Garmaise(2000) investigate how
venture capital investors contract in asymmetric DEMO environments. Hellmann(1998) looks
at how the allocation of control rights DEMO affected by quality of replacement help. Kirilenko(2001)
argues that venture capitalists should get more control rights to compensate for information prob-
lems. DEMO such as Hart and Moore(1994), Bergemann and Hege(1998), and Neher(1999) stress
the role of staging in their theoretical models.
My results are at odds with some theoretical ﬁndings, in large part because much of this re-
search does not explicitly distinguish between angel DEMO and venture capital. As is the case
with much of the literature, it is possible the authors did not consider angel ﬁnance as a viable
5
source of start-up capital since very little is known about angels. For DEMO, Admati and Pﬂei-
derer(1994) argue investors should hold a ﬁxed fraction of equity through each investment stages.
However, my results show angels do not follow-on, meaning the the fraction of equity held by
angels decreases. Trester(1998) suggests investors should only use common equity in later stages;
I ﬁnd common equity is most frequently used in the DEMO stages of investment. Gompers(1997)
argues control rights should be assigned to investors in periods of highest asymmetric informa-
tion, such as the early in the life of the project. I ﬁnd that control rights DEMO actually retained by
entrepreneurs even though investment occurs when the ﬁrms are young. My results also do not
support the results of Neher(1999), Bergemann and Hege(1998), and Cornelli and Yosha(2001)
who advocate the staging of capital and the optimality of convertible securities. The DEMO of
many of these models rely on assumptions based on the stylized facts of venture capital investing
and did not consider angel investors as DEMO ﬁnancing alternative.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 is a brief background on angels and angel invest-
ments. Section 3 details the sample DEMO the data collection process. A brief summary of the
model is described in section 4. The empirical tests and results are described section 5. DEMO 6
concludes. In the appendix, details of the model are provided.
DEMO Angel background
The term ’angel investor’ originates from funders for Broadway shows. Today, an angel investor
refers to a high-net worth individual who typically invests in small, private ﬁrms on their own
account. Formally, angel DEMO are ‘accredited investors’ according to the SEC. SEC Rule 501
of Regulation D states an accredited investor is an individual who has a net DEMO of more than $1
6
million or an expected individual (household) yearly income of more than DEMO,000 ($300,000).
While the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer DEMO estimates that over 6 million household
qualify to be accredited investors, DEMO studies estimate of the number of active angel investors in
the United States to be between 250,000 to 400,000.5
Sohl (1999) DEMO that angels are usually cashed-out entrepreneurs who continue to yearn
for the next high-growth venture. Because angels have to perform their own due diligence, they
typically invest in ventures in the familiar industries. Prowse (1998) DEMO that angels are diverse
in background, with some being ﬁnancially sophisticated DEMO others relatively inexperienced. In
addition to making a ﬁnancial investment, some DEMO actively participate in the ﬁrm’s operations;
however, such participation varies DEMO angel. He reports that angels usually invest close to home.
Using information collected from interviews with angels, Linde and Prasad(1999) ﬁnds the DEMO
angel has a total of $335,000 invested in 4 different companies. As individual investors, angels
exhibit great heterogeneity in personal characteristics such as age, experience, and investment
preferences.
3 Sample Description
3.1 Data Gathering
DEMO investigate the hypotheses of the model, I need a sample of DEMO ﬁrms. The task is
complicated by the fact that no commercial database exists that systematically records angel trans-
actions. The angel market involves private DEMO which are not subject to public disclosure
5 Forbes November 2, DEMO and Individual Investor July 2000.
7
with very little institutional infrastructure supporting the market. Additionally, much of the market
is fragmented and unorganized. These factors make data difﬁcult to obtain.
DEMO conduct this study, I collect data through surveys and interviews with DEMO ﬁrms.
Over 800 angel-backed ﬁrms were identiﬁed via newswires, periodicals (such as Angel Investor,
press releases, angel networks, and websites (such as Red Herring’s Herringtown and Localbusi-
ness.com). Firms were asked if DEMO had received any outside funding. Angel backed ﬁrms were
contacted for information regarding all ﬁnancing received since ﬁrm initiation. In addition to ﬁ-
nancial DEMO, the ﬁrms were asked to provide descriptive information on their ﬁrm DEMO as
the number of employees, revenues (if any), and background information on the founders. Due
to issues of conﬁdentiality and competition, some respondents only provided partial responses.
Whenever possible, a founder or person responsible for investor relations was contacted for in-
formation. The ﬁnal sample consists DEMO 215 investment rounds made by angel investors in 143
companies from 1994 to 2001.
All funding rounds consisted of some ﬁnancial participation by angels, whether it was angels
only or co-investing with venture capitalists, strategic investors, or other investors such as friends
and family. For my purposes, DEMO funding conducted by ’angel venture’ funds or limited-liability
organizations acting as ’early-stage-angel’ funds are considered venture capital funds because I
only wanted investments by DEMO For example, entities such as Angel Investors LLP and
the Band DEMO Angels Fund are considered a venture fund. However, investments from individual
DEMO of Angels members are classiﬁed as angel investments.
The sample of ﬁrms has many advantages. Since entrepreneurial ﬁrms were asked for infor-
mation (instead of angels), the sample is free from the bias caused by DEMO only reporting
information from only the successful ventures. Although surveys are imperfect for the usual rea-
8
sons, the approach allowed for subjective answers from entrepreneurs on questions such as the
quality of help from outside investors. While it is impossible DEMO obtain information on every com-
pleted angel ﬁnancing due to the very nature of the transactions, every effort has been made to
make the sample as unbiased and representative as possible. The 215 ﬁnancings are a DEMO enough
sample to draw representative conclusions.
3.2 Sample Selection Issues
In this section, I discuss potential selection issues concerning my sample. The ﬁnancings are not a
completely random sample in that the data is from ﬁrms DEMO were willing to respond to inquiries
and provide conﬁdential information.
I contacted 801 companies for information and received information from 143 companies.
Of the DEMO companies in the sample, 56 companies are identiﬁed via newswires, 48 companies
from Red Herring’s Herringtown website,6 33 from angels or angel DEMO and 6 from other
miscellaneous sources.7 It is possible that the companies surveyed were more successful, having
released some information publicly. However, many DEMO the companies surveyed have since been
acquired, ceased operations, or continued to operate successfully. As of November 2001, 102 of
the companies are still operating, 9 have been acquired, 22 have ceased operations. No DEMO
have gone public in the time. I am not able to verify the status of 10 companies.
The average age of the companies when DEMO is 24.5 months (with a median of 19 months),
relatively close to the age of the companies at funding in table 1. DEMO proximity between the survey
age and the funding age should reduce selection bias problems.
6 Herringtown was a database of young start up companies DEMO by the publishers of Red Herring.
7 These include companies personally referred by angels.
9
Despite the possibilities of modest selection bias existing in the sample, the biases should not
be of great concern since I am not attempting DEMO measure performance. Instead, I am trying to
detail the speciﬁcs of DEMO investments and the role of angel investors. In this respect, the DEMO
is likely to be similar to typical angel investments.
3.3 Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents summary information for the sample. Panel A of table DEMO reports the geographical
distribution of the dataset.8 In comparison to venture capital investments, the dataset has fewer
observations in California and New England, DEMO the sample remains heavily weighted to-
ward California. For the time period of 1995-2000, Venture Economics reports slightly more than
22% of venture-capital-backed companies are located in California. A major difference between
Venture Economics and my DEMO is the high representation of ﬁrms in the southeast and an under-
representation of ﬁrms from New England. Venture Economics reports between 12% of DEMO
backed companies are located in New England whereas less than six percent of my sample comes
from New England. If angel activity is concentrated DEMO the highest areas of venture capital activity,
then the sample has minor geographical differences. However, the data geographic breakdown
falls roughly in line with AngelSociety’s Survey of angel group activity.9
Panel B shows the date DEMO company formation. Most of the companies are founded between
1998 and 2000. While it is easy to state the founding date of the company DEMO the date of legal
incorporation, many ﬁrms had other signiﬁcant events DEMO, such as the hiring an employee or
the beginning of business DEMO, before legal incorporation. I take the founding date as the
8 DEMO superconductor ﬁrm refused to give its geographical location for conﬁdentiality purposes.
9 Angel Society, January 2001
10
earliest date that I have for any signiﬁcant ﬁrm activity. Most of DEMO angel rounds were completed
in 1998-2000, with over half of my DEMO ﬁnancing rounds from 2000. While the young age
of the companies does not allow for long term panel studies, the relative youth of our companies
and the freshness of the funding is positive for many aspects. DEMO, the ﬁndings in this paper will
not suffer from survivorship bias DEMO by analyzing data from older companies. Secondly, the
companies reﬂect the DEMO state and trends in angel ﬁnancing.
Panel C divides the sample into different industries as deﬁned by Venture Economics. Most
of the sample are DEMO the ’Computer Related’ industry, reﬂecting the technology boom in the
late DEMO ’Computer Related’ ﬁrms include are internet services, internet content and design
DEMO, and business-to-business/consumer companies. This may be oversampling of one industry,DEMO
or it may represent the trend in the late 1990s to invest heavily in computer related companies, an
industry which experienced rapid growth during this time. Data from venture capital disbursements
seem to support this idea. DEMO and Lerner(2001) ﬁnd 60% of all venture capital disbursements
went DEMO information technology industries.
As Panel D indicates, the majority of the DEMO in my sample are pre-revenue. 69% (99 of 143
companies) of the ﬁrms are pre-revenue for all funding rounds. This is signiﬁcantly different DEMO
the sample of ﬁrms in most venture capital research. For example, DEMO than 40% of the ﬁrms in
Kaplan and Str
omberg’s (2001) sample are pre-revenue ﬁrms. If revenue generation is an indicator¨
of development, my analysis focuses on ﬁrms who are earlier in their life-cycle than DEMO on
venture capital ﬁnanced ﬁrms. Panel E indicates the age of the ﬁrms in the sample at ﬁrst funding.
The average age of ﬁrst DEMO is 10.5 months. Most ﬁrms that receive funding are less than 12
months old. In comparison, the average age at ﬁrst funding for venture-backed ﬁrms is greater than
one year (Gompers (1995)). If information quality is linked to age, then the uncertainty should be
11
much greater in angel-ﬁnanced than in venture capital ﬁnanced ﬁrms. Panel D DEMO E of table 1
support the idea that angels typically ﬁnance earlier stage companies.
Panel A of Table 2 shows that most of my DEMO (157 rounds) is ﬁnanced entirely by angels.
Co-investment by angels and venture capitalists accounts for less than twenty percent of all funding
rounds. DEMO indicates that angels are a different type of venture investor, not DEMO co-investors
with institutional venture capital.
Panel B of Table 2 describes the funding amounts for the ﬁnancing rounds. The median in-
vestment per investment DEMO is $1 million. Not surprisingly, ﬁrms with positive revenue or are
DEMO later stages of ﬁnancing receive greater amounts ﬁnancing, suggesting as asymmetric DEMO
tion decreases in later rounds or with observable revenue streams, ﬁnancing DEMO In rounds
having only angel participation, the mean investment is 1.28M (median of 850,000). Compared
to the results in Kaplan and DEMO
omberg(2001), the average amount of ﬁnancing provided by ven-¨
ture capitalists is twice the size of amount of ﬁnancing provided by angels DEMO for companies at
comparable stages.
Comparing the results from table 2 with data from institutional venture capital data from Ven-
ture Economics yields many DEMO between angels and venture capital. In rounds closed
between 1998 and 2000, the average round of venture capital investment is 17.95M per round.
Considering only venture capital funded seed and start-up rounds, the size of average venture cap-
ital investment remains larger than angel contributions. From 1998 to DEMO, an average of 4.77M
was received from venture capitalists by companies DEMO these startup/seed stages. The average angel
funding is 2.17M across all rounds. Panel D and E of table 2 reports angel ﬁnancing is DEMO
than venture capital fundings in comparable industries.
The difference in funding size provides some evidence that angels play a complementary role
12
to venture capital. Instead of competing with venture capitalists for ﬁrms at DEMO stages of
development, angels provide a smaller amount of funding to DEMO ﬁrms.
4 Model Implications
The model in the appendix predicts entrepreneurs will retain control rights in their investments
even with the ability to renegotiate DEMO However, certain investments may not be feasible if
the entrepreneur does DEMO relinquish control to the outside investor. In particular, if a project DEMO
quires a large investment, the only way that the investor will DEMO a project is if he receives control.
Additionally, control rights shift DEMO the outside investor as the value of liquidation increases. More-
over, DEMO the entrepreneur retains controls rights (as is the case with smaller DEMO), straight
equity will be the preferred security. Larger investments which require the ceding of control rights
will use a more complicated security similar DEMO convertible debt.
Within the context of angel investors, the model predicts DEMO smaller investments will use
straight equity. As long as the outside investors only own a small fraction of the ﬁrm, the en-
trepreneur will retain the control rights. As the ownership of the angels increase, more control will
be ceded.
The model has predictions regarding the variation in DEMO between angel and venture cap-
ital investments. As the information in the summary statistics indicate, angel investors typically
provide small amounts of capital,10 typically with less than 20% of the equity exchanged for in-
vestment, while venture capitalists typically provide larger amounts of capital for larger ownership
DEMO According to the model, venture capitalists should receive more control provisions DEMO
10 See table 1
11 See Kaplan and Stromberg(2001) for DEMO on venture capital ownership levels.¨
13
their deals. Additionally, venture capitalists often have a better ability to liquidate the ﬁrm because
of their larger network of contacts compared to angel DEMO Because of this, control rights are
more likely to be held DEMO venture capitalists rather than angels. Lastly, the model predicts a more
DEMO security with larger investment; therefore, venture capitalists should use a convertible
claim, while angels should use an equity-like claim.
5 Empirical Tests and Results
In this section, I use my sample to provide detailed evidence on the predictions of the model. In-
ferences regarding the differences in DEMO allocation of control rights between venture capital and
angel investors are drawn by comparing existing results on venture capital to my ﬁndings. Subse-
quently, I investigate the variation of the distribution of control rights within angel DEMO In
addition to the model’s predictions, I test for other determinants DEMO may determine distribution of
control rights. These factors are culled from existing literature on venture capital. In addition to
funding, venture capitalists often provide professionalization assistance. I examine whether angels
can provide the same non-monetary beneﬁts DEMO the new enterprise.
5.1 Control Rights
Many investors seek to protect their investment from expropriation through the use of control
rights. I consider three DEMO controls mechanisms used by institutional venture capital. The
ﬁrst measure is representation on the board of directors. Receiving board rights is an indication that
DEMO maintain a degree of authority over the manager. Secondly, the control DEMO investments
through staging has been documented in the venture capital literature (DEMO Gompers(1995)) as a
14
control mechanism. Staging an investment can effectively halt the progress of a DEMO venture
as capital is no longer available for the new ﬁrm. Lastly, as Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001) demon-¨
strate in venture capital DEMO, contracting mechanisms such as security choice and contractual
provisions can be DEMO methods of control. If angels are identical to venture capitalists, they
DEMO maintain similar protections, particularly in ventures where the threat of expropriation DEMO
the highest.
Many theories emphasize the role that capital providers such as venture capital provide af-
ter the investment is made. Lerner(1995) ﬁnds venture capitalists exercise control through board
representation and the active recruitment and DEMO CEOs. Kaplan and Str
omberg(2000) ﬁnd¨
many venture capitalists anticipate DEMO an active role in management and the hiring of new
management. If angel investors are similar to venture capital organizations, angels should actively
participate in the lives of the ﬁrms.
5.1.1 Board Rights
Board seats give DEMO investors the ability to affect corporate decisions. Board rights are par-
ticularly important in environments with greater uncertainty since it is not feasible to DEMO all
possible contingencies in the ex ante contract. Sahlman(1990) ﬁnds DEMO seats are typically allo-
cated to venture capitalists as part of a ﬁnancing rounds. Panel A of table 3 shows this is not the
DEMO with angel investments. Board seats are granted only in 42.5% of all funding rounds. The
likelihood of providing a board seat does not change DEMO when considering pre- and post-revenue
funding rounds. The initial round of angel ﬁnancing tends to have a slightly higher (though not
statistically signiﬁcant) DEMO of board seat allocation, although fewer than half of all ﬁrst
DEMO relinquish board seats to outside investors.
15
Lerner(1995) reports an average of 1.12 board seats are added in each venture capital round.
In panel C of table 3, an average of only 0.59 board seats are added to the board of directors DEMO a
typical angel ﬁnanced investment round. The board size in the angel-ﬁnanced ventures are much
smaller than public companies12 or venture-backed ﬁrms.13 Panel C DEMO that the average board
size of the ﬁrms is 3.71 members with a median of 4 members. Panel D reports, on average,
angels only represent 18% of the board of directors. Kaplan and Str
omberg(DEMO) ﬁnd venture¨
capitalists control between 37 to 47 % of the DEMO seats in the ﬁrms they invest in. In my sample,
insiders have the majority of board seats on 100 boards (out of 116 where I have information on
board composition subsequent to funding) which is consistent with Kaplan and Str
omberg’s (2001)¨
ﬁnding that outside board control is less common for early-stage companies. However, in venture
capital funded ﬁrms, insiders comprise the majority in only 13.9% of the boards. From table 3,
angels take a much smaller degree of control through DEMO representation than venture capitalists.
The results on boards of directors are consistent with other theories which suggest a passive role
for angels. Fama and DEMO(1983) hypothesize that the composition of board should be shaped
by DEMO need for monitoring. If the threat of managerial expropriation is high, DEMO the board will
bear a greater responsibility for oversight. Additionally, at DEMO early age of the ﬁrm, much of the
value of venture DEMO embodied in the human capital of the entrepreneurs, so the replacement DEMO the
founders would not seem to increase the value of the company.
Similarly, the need for a board seat may be determined by the need for oversight within each
company. Larger investments (and equity stakes) DEMO outsiders will increase the need for oversight.
Ventures with larger potential agency costs should be monitored more often. Firms in industries
12 See Denis DEMO Sarin(1999), Yermack(1996) or Gertner and Kaplan(1996) for evidence on public companies.
13 See Barry, Muscarella, Peavy III, and Vetsuypens(1990), Lerner(1995), Baker and Gompers(2000), and DEMO
and Stromberg(2001) for evidence on board seats and board size DEMO venture-backed ﬁrms¨
16
with higher market-to-book ratios may need more monitoring as agency costs are DEMO associated
with growth options. Tangible assets lower expected the agency costs in inefﬁcient continuation,
decreasing the need for board seats. Industry volatility should DEMO the need for a board seat
if the volatility is a measure of the uncertainty in the project. Firms with intensive R&D may
DEMO more oversight since it is likely that these ﬁrms will have more speciﬁc assets that can be
expropriated. Entrepreneurs with previous entrepreneurial history may DEMO need as much oversight
because their reputations have already been established. Finally, early rounds, when uncertainty is
the highest, should have more board seats allocated.
Table 4 reports results from the probit regressions on the DEMO determining the allocation
of board seats. Panel A examines the results for all funding rounds and panel B only considers
funding rounds composed entirely DEMO angel funders. The coefﬁcient on industry volatility has the
opposite sign as predicted and different from Kaplan and Str
omberg’s (2001) ﬁnding that DEMO
board control is positively related to industry volatility. Though the coefﬁcients on R&D are eco-
nomically large, they are not always statistically signiﬁcant. However, the coefﬁcient on the ratio
of ﬁxed assets has the opposite sign from expectation. In total, the regression provides mixed re-
sults on the predictions of the models and other theories. It appears that angels DEMO not increase
the use of board representation as a control mechanism in projects with higher agency costs or
uncertainty.
5.1.2 Staging
Empirical and theoretical DEMO have emphasized the importance of staging as a control mecha-
nism for venture capitalists. Instead of providing all the needed capital in a lump DEMO, the invest-
ment is provided in stages, preserving the investor’s option to abandon. Models such as Hart and
17
Moore(1994), Bergemann and Hege(1998), and Neher(1999) stress the importance of staging as
a control mechanism. Gompers(1995) ﬁnds that venture capitalists use staging as an important
method to control agency costs.
DEMO A of table 5 provides mixed results for the use of staging. Consecutive rounds funded
by angels only do tend to have follow on DEMO However, if the subsequent ﬁnancing round
involves venture capital participation, angels do not follow on. This ﬁnding supports the com-
plementary nature of DEMO and venture capital investment. Once the ﬁrm has been nurtured to
success, with success being venture capital investment, the angels step aside to DEMO professional
investors.14 Panel B shows that even when angels follow on, DEMO an average of 40% of investors
from previous rounds participate in the subsequent rounds.
I investigate the factors that affect the probability of staging DEMO in the probit regres-
sions in panels C and D of table 5. Similar to the predictions on board seats, investors in ventures
with high degrees of agency costs and uncertainty should have a higher probability DEMO staging their
investments. The predictions for the coefﬁcients of the independent variables are similar to the
predictions for board rights. However, the results indicate that many of the variables do not signiﬁ-
cantly affect whether angels DEMO investment. Most of the variables are not statistically signiﬁcant.
Investigating only angel ﬁnanced rounds, none of the independent variables are statistically signif-
icant although the coefﬁcient on research and development is economically large. Angels may
want DEMO wait for the product to be closer to development before committing additional funds. In
summary, staging is not a frequently used control mechanism by angels. Staging does not appear
to be used to control agency costs DEMO relieve uncertainty in investment decisions.
14 Alternatively, venture capitalists may not DEMO to co-invest with angels, thereby forcing angels aside. Evidence
for this DEMO is provided in panel C of table 11. The number of angels is signiﬁcantly lower in rounds with venture
capital co-investment.
18
5.1.3 Contractual Provisions
Angel investors may use contractual provisions as protection from DEMO More com-
plex securities may provide investors stronger protections in the event of liquidation. Contractual
clauses may give the investor additional protection from expropriation. DEMO protections in
venture contracts include ratcheting and anti-dilution agreements.
Panel A of table 6 reports the types of security used in each round. Common DEMO is the
most prevalent security, used in 34% of all rounds DEMO 39.5% of angel-only rounds. In contrast,
Sahlman(1990), Gompers(1998) and Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001) report that convertible preferred¨
is DEMO dominant security in venture capital ﬁnancing. The high usage of preferred and common
equity is consistent with the theoretical predictions of Casamatta (2000). In her model, Casamatta
ﬁnds common equity is better suited to smaller investments (such as those made by angels) while
larger investments should DEMO preferred or convertible preferred securities. Equity may be used
more often with angel investments because of the higher costs of writing a complex securities DEMO
a small investment outweigh the beneﬁts.
Panels B and C of table 6 reports regression results from probit regressions where the dependent
variable is DEMO to one if the security used is equity and 0 otherwise. Smaller investments may not
justify the use of complex securities because of the DEMO costs of implementing a more complex
security. Complex securities should be used the threat of expropriation is greater. Thus, a negative
coefﬁcient is expected for the market-to-book ratio, R & D and industry volatility. Firms that have
an identiﬁable revenue stream and entrepreneur with prior entrepreneurial experience may DEMO need
as strong a security than other ﬁrms.
The results in table 6 support the relation between funding and security choice. Large invest-
19
ment rounds use more complex securities, providing some support for the model. However, if the
size of the investment is measured by equity stake, the coefﬁcient is not statistically signiﬁcant,
lending support to the ﬁxed costs of security choice. The other independent variables do not af-
fect DEMO choice of security, indicating that the cross sectional variation in security DEMO is not
inﬂuenced by concerns with reducing agency costs or expropriation.
In addition to security choice, many investment contracts have provisions that protect and em-
power the investor. Panel D contains information on many of these DEMO clauses. Many
contracts contain a follow-on right of ﬁrst refusal provision that allows angels to participate in fu-
ture rounds to capture the potential DEMO in successful ventures. However, as table 5 shows, many
angels do not exercise this right. 26% of ﬁnancing rounds contain weighted ratchet closes DEMO pro-
tection against future rounds at decreased valuations. Full ratcheting protection was not given in
any investment round. In comparison, Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001) ﬁnd 21.9% of their sample use¨
full-ratcheting and 78.1% of their sample use weighted-ratcheting. Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001)¨
ﬁnd contingent equity DEMO prevalent in venture capital contracts. However, very few angel
contracts contain DEMO for contingent equity stakes.
Contractual protection from expropriation is not one-sided. Panel E indicates 38 ﬁnancing
rounds contain provisions that allow the ﬁrm to DEMO the stake of the angel, similar to the
call provisions explained DEMO Sahlman(1990). Many entrepreneurs cite this clause as a way to rid
themselves of ’bad apples’ or investors whose vision does not coincide DEMO that of the founders.
20
5.2 Alternative Mechanisms
In contrast to previous results on the control mechanisms DEMO by venture capitalists, I ﬁnd an-
gels do not implement the DEMO methods of managerial oversight. In particular, angels typically do
not receive DEMO seats, stage investments, or use particularly strong contractual claims to protect
their claims. The use of the conventional control mechanisms is not very DEMO to commonly
used measures of agency costs and uncertainty. Little support is found that increases in potential
agency costs and uncertainty lead to increased DEMO of protections. The puzzle remains: how do
angel investors mitigate the DEMO risks of investing at early stages?
5.2.1 Funding
This section investigates the factors affecting the amount of funding. If investors are concerned
with DEMO degrees of uncertainty, then the average contribution per investor, total funding amounts,
and number of investors will be sensitive to industry proxies DEMO uncertainty, characteristics of the
entrepreneur and management team, and the presence of a revenue stream. Intangibles factors such
as entrepreneur’s prior experience may DEMO signals to alleviate investor uncertainty. Funders
may feel more secure investing with entrepreneurs who have a previous track record. More mature
ﬁrms and larger DEMO also should have more existing information, decreasing the uncertainty with
investment. DEMO a management team or a revenue stream signals to investors that the ﬁrm has
completed the initial research and development phases. Hellmann and Puri(DEMO) ﬁnd the hiring of
a marketing and sales vice president to DEMO an indicator for product development. Another method
to protect against large potential losses it to invest smaller amounts in greater uncertainty and to
syndicate DEMO investments. Lerner(1994) ﬁnds venture capitalists syndicate early rounds as a
DEMO
method to verify their decision making processes.
Table 7 provides evidence on DEMO factors inﬂuence the amount of funding in a round. The
results on the total funds raised in the round are displayed in panel A, and the funds in angel-only
investment rounds are shown panel B. Focusing DEMO the angels-only results in panel B, post-revenue
ﬁrms actually receive less DEMO High growth ﬁrms, as measured by the industry market-to-
book ratio, receive more funding in each round. However, there is little support that any other
measures of uncertainty strongly inﬂuence the amount of funding as DEMO of the coefﬁcients are
not statistically signiﬁcant.
As evidenced by the statistics on cash ﬂow rights in table 8, the majority of residual claims
belong to management. Outside investors typically own less than a quarter of DEMO new ﬁrm. Angels
may not need a high degree of control because the threat of expropriation is minimized by the large
residual claim held DEMO the founders. The incentives of the founders are aligned with the prospects
of the ﬁrm. In comparison, Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001) ﬁnd DEMO capitalists hold a slightly¨
larger proportion of cash ﬂow rights (on DEMO 40%) in the investments that they make. Because
the incentives of DEMO entrepreneur are not as strongly aligned with the outside investors, the DEMO
for formal control may be greater. However, it is questionable whether DEMO a small decrease in
managerial ownership drastically increases the need for formal controls.
Table 9 presents estimates from two stage least squares regressions where DEMO dependent vari-
able is the equity ownership allocated to the outside investors in each round. Angels receive a
higher equity stake to compensate for DEMO extra risk of investing under greater uncertainty. The
statistically signiﬁcant and positive coefﬁcient on the ﬁrst round dummy indicates angels receive
a premium for DEMO early. Having a management team in place, an indication that the DEMO
has progressed passed the initial development stages, decreases the equity ownership DEMO
22
by outsiders. Investors in ﬁrms with more uncertainty, as measured by industry volatility, receive
more cash ﬂow rights. Greater research and development intensity leads to a decreased equity
stake for angels. These results agree with the DEMO from Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001).¨
5.2.2 Syndication
Another method of reducing risk is to syndicate investment with other investors. By syndicat-
ing DEMO, the investors may be able to share the risks and share DEMO the monitoring of the
ﬁrm. Additionally, more angels investing may signify DEMO ﬁrm has passed the evaluations of more
screeners. Syndication may act as a veriﬁcation mechanism, thus it is expected that earlier funding
rounds will have more investors.
Table 10 shows the average number of angels participating DEMO each round. On average, twelve
angels co-invest in a round. In DEMO, Kaplan and Str
omberg(2001) ﬁnd venture rounds¨
are normally syndicated with two to nine funds co-investing. While the increase in syndication
may DEMO the monitoring capacities of the angel investment group,15 venture capitalists also
syndicate their investments while maintaining more formal control mechanisms.
Panel A of DEMO 10 shows that the number of angels in each round is higher in earlier rounds.
As ﬁrms develop, later rounds and post-revenue ﬁrms receive larger average contributions per
angel. On average each angel owns between three DEMO ﬁve percent of the ﬁrm.
I run regressions to further examine the factors that inﬂuence the variation of contribution
amounts. Panels A and B DEMO table 11 shows the average contribution per angel is only affected by
early rounds, although the coefﬁcient is not statistically signiﬁcant in panel B. In panel B, angels
have a higher average contribution when a management team is in place at the ﬁrm.
15 The increased syndication may DEMO to free-rider problems as well
23
Panel C and D of table 11 provides results on the factors DEMO determine the number of angels
investing in a round. The model is an instrumental variables estimate of a poisson model, following
the 2SQML method detailed in Mullahy(1997). Using this procedure, the estimates are consistent,
but the standard errors may be positively biased using this procedure. DEMO results in panel D for
angels-only rounds indicate more investors in ﬁrms in higher market-to-book industries, suggesting
that more investors want to invest in ventures with the higher growth. Entrepreneurial experience
seems to attract more investors.
DEMO Geographic Proximity
The results on geographical proximity deserve further elaboration and may provide insight into
the investing behavior of angels. Entrepreneurs may begin their DEMO for capital by exploring
local resources. A localized bond of trust may exist between the entrepreneur and investor, making
formal control mechanisms unnecessary. Because of the strong trust and familiarity many local
investors may have with DEMO other, syndication is greater among local investors. Subsequent
larger fundings may DEMO the resources of the local investors and need to be funded by more
professional investors. Additionally, as a ﬁrm progresses, the need to DEMO services
is greater, leading the entrepreneur to turn to more professional DEMO who require more formal
control because of their lack of familiarity with the founders.
If investment size is related to the degree of uncertainty DEMO the cost of information dissemi-
nation is related to geography, the DEMO of investment should increase as the angels are closer.
Alternatively, investments DEMO by investors at a distance can be most costly (either to DEMO,
to negotiate, etc.). The results in table 7 show DEMO total funding and the angels’ contribution to the
24
round decrease when the nearest angel is less than ﬁfty miles away, supporting the second idea.
Panel B of table 11 shows the average DEMO per angel also decreases as the angels
are closer, suggesting that DEMO investors may not be as wealthy as more professional investors.
However, DEMO is offset by the increase in the number of angels who invest if they are located
closer to the entrepreneur. Lastly, from table 12 local investors provide more help given their local
proximity. However, geographical proximity may delay venture capital investment. A possible
explanation is local angels do DEMO have as large as a contact network as more professional investors.
Some additional validation for this idea is provided by examining the results on DEMO formal
control mechanisms: board seats, staging and security choice. In contrast to Lerner’s (1995) ﬁnd-
ing that close geographical proximity increases the DEMO of board representation, I ﬁnd geo-
graphical proximity has a negative DEMO on the probability of board representation in angel funded
rounds (table DEMO), albeit the results not highly signiﬁcant. The need for contractual monitoring (via
a board seat) may be reduced because of the geographic DEMO of investors. Although not sta-
tistically signiﬁcant, geographic proximity also decreases DEMO use of staging and increases the use
of equity, consistent with DEMO localized investor hypothesis.
Taken together, these results suggest many entrepreneurs begin DEMO search for capital with
local resources, relying on local ties to DEMO investment. Local angel investors may not be as
sophisticated as more professional investors, but may be more trusting.
5.4 Other Post-Investment Activities
In this section, I consider the role angels have in the success of the ﬁrm. Gorman and Sahlman(1989),
Sahlman(1990), and Ehrlich et al. ﬁnd that venture capitalist actively participate in their invest-
25
ments after funding. In addition to funding, angel investors may play an active role in profession-
alizing the ﬁrm or bringing a product to DEMO, similar to some activities that venture capitalists
provide (Hellmann and Puri(2001)). Since many angels are former entrepreneurs or industry exec-
utives, many angels may derive some private beneﬁts from assisting in the development of a new
ﬁrm.
Building the management team is an important responsibility DEMO the founders. In table 7, a
complete management team leads to DEMO funding amounts. Hellmann and Puri(2001) ﬁnd that
venture capitalists help DEMO the management team. In panel A of table 12, 23.5% of DEMO
said that angel investors assisted in identifying and recruiting members of the management team.
Kaplan and Str
omberg(2000) ﬁnd that 50% of venture capitalists expect to replace the CEO or¨
help recruit the management team. DEMO ﬁnd that angels tend to provide less assistance than venture
capitalist in recruiting top management.
Angels can provide assistance in another important area, helping to locate and secure sub-
sequent ﬁnancing from venture capital. Gorman and DEMO(1989) report venture capitalists
consider raising additional funds the most important DEMO If angels are helpful in securing ad-
ditional funding from venture capital, the time until venture funding should decrease as the number
of angels increases because of a larger network of contacts. Panel B of table DEMO presents hazard
rate duration regressions on the time until venture capital ﬁnancing assuming that the hazard rate
follows the Weibull distribution. There are 57 DEMO rounds where the subsequent round is
ﬁnanced by venture capital. I ﬁnd that more angel investors leads to a faster time to venture ﬁnanc-
DEMO This is evidence that angels can play a networking role; a DEMO number of angels leads to a
larger network of contacts and faster venture capital ﬁnancing.
Panel C of table 12 presents results from ordered DEMO regressions where the dependent variable
26
is the amount of help that angel investors provided the ﬁrm. The DEMO of help is a subjective
response from the founders, so it DEMO tainted by the usual problems with subjective responses. The
variable is separated into 5 categories with the lowest category representing ’little or no help’
DEMO the highest category corresponding to ’a lot of beneﬁcial help from angel investors.’ In all
the regressions, geography is statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level. Angels who are in closer
proximity tend to provide better assistance. DEMO with issues confronting new ventures may
require more interaction, therefore geographical DEMO may encourage more assistance. Other
variables do not appear to affect the degree of assistance.
6 Conclusion
This paper presents an examination of angel DEMO Using a hand-collected dataset, I detail the
characteristics of angel ﬁnance, from the implemented control mechanisms to the determinants of
funding levels. I DEMO that angels are not given the traditional control rights that venture capitalists
typically use. Rather, one of the primary mechanisms to control agency costs is the alignment of the
entrepreneur’s interests with those of the ﬁrm DEMO the large ownership positions. Additionally,
angels make smaller investments and increase syndication when investing in the riskier ventures.
The results suggest a difference DEMO venture capital investors and angel investors. The
summary statistics show angels fund smaller amounts than venture capital. Firms that require larger
amounts will seek DEMO capital investment, while angels may be preferred for small capital.
Closer DEMO reveals that venture capitals may not like to co-invest with angels. Angel
investors appear to nurture younger ﬁrms until the company is established enough DEMO venture
capital consideration.
27
A puzzle still remains as to why angels provide capital in highly DEMO operations with-
out much formal protection from expropriation. I suggest a geographic based explanation. Ge-
ographical proximity plays a large role in determining the DEMO amount, control, and degree
of post-investment assistance from angels. These results are similar to the networking effects for
venture capital found by Sorenson DEMO Stuart(forthcoming). Sorenson and Stuart ﬁnd close geo-
graphic proximity increases the likelihood of funding and the ease of monitoring. Additionally,
some DEMO is found that investors may receive private beneﬁts from investing. O
ther theories cannot be excluded. It is entirely possible that the returns from DEMO at early
stages may be commensurate to the risk involved. Table 9 shows ﬁrst round investments receive a
signiﬁcantly higher equity claim, enhancing the possible return for early investors. To address this
hypothesis, reliable estimates on private equity returns need to be obtained. As Cochrane(2001)
shows, private equity returns are problematic to measure.
Another explanation may be that DEMO have specialized information and have a high ability to
screen for higher quality projects. Many investors have made their fortunes in the same industries
DEMO they subsequently invest in. Industry knowledge is difﬁcult to measure and examine since the
identities of the investors need to be known. In such DEMO conﬁdential environment, the screening
ability of angels would be difﬁcult to DEMO
Lastly, issues of liquidity and exit strategy are not addressed. Since DEMO investor seeks to make
a high return from his investment, the DEMO to and method of exit may affect the funding and
contractual status between parties. These issues are left for future work.
28
Appendix: Model
A Model
A wealth constrained entrepreneur has a project with a payoff e with support [M, M]. The en-
trepreneur can exert effort at a cost,
k
, which will improve the project’s DEMO by a factor of
θ,
making the ﬁnal payoff θ e . Not exerting effort results in an expected payoff of θ e.
DEMO
M
The entrepreneur has the exclusive rights (monopoly rights or speciﬁc DEMO capital) to de-
M
velop this project, but is wealth constrained, and needs to raise funds from outside resources. The
entrepreneur is risk-neutral; her utility is only affected by her ﬁnal wealth. Risk-neutral ﬁnanciers
have funds to ﬁnance the project. In exchange for the the investment, the ﬁnancier receives a share
of the project’s outcome, α.
Assumption 1 Equity is the only security in this economy.
The ﬁnancier and entrepreneur share DEMO same beliefs regarding the probabilities, payoffs, and
cost of effort in this economy. There are three dates in the model. At the initial DEMO 0, the
entrepreneur negotiates with outside investors and the investment is DEMO if the contracting is
successful. At date 1, a liquidation opportunity, L is available. The party that holds the control
rights makes the DEMO decision. At date 2, the project is revealed a success or DEMO and the
payoffs are distributed to the contracting parties. All payoffs are in date 0 present values.
In addition to the payoffs from the DEMO, the entrepreneur enjoys private beneﬁts from manag-
ing the project. The DEMO beneﬁts accumulate to the entrepreneur only if the project is not liqui-
dated. Private beneﬁts may be on-the-job consumption, recognition for leading an entrepreneurial
29
venture or any other similar beneﬁt. B denotes the monetary equivalent of DEMO entrepreneur’s pri-
vate beneﬁts.
The contract agreed upon at date zero speciﬁes the allocation of control rights, γ, the share of
the liquidation DEMO, β, and the share of the ﬁnal payoff, given to DEMO investors in exchange for the
required investment I . Let αγ denote the share retained by the entrepreneur and 1
−
αγ equal the
DEMO given to the outside ﬁnancier. If the project is liquidated, the DEMO will receive βL
and the ﬁnancier will receive (1
−
β)DEMO . The contract cannot be made contingent on the effort of
the entrepreneur. Denote entrepreneurial control of liquidation by γ = 0, and outsider control by
γ = 1.
In the ﬁrst best scenario, effort is provided by the entrepreneur if
 θ
−
θ e
≥
k
(A-1)
If the entrepreneur must go to the outside ﬁnancier for capital, she must decide the share to
M
offer and whether or not DEMO allocate the control rights to the outsiders. In this section, the DEMO
contract agreed upon at date zero cannot be renegotiated at intermediate dates. Later sections will
investigate the ramiﬁcations of renegotiation.
Consider the regime where DEMO = 0. With control rights, the entrepreneur will not liquidate the
DEMO if the private beneﬁts are large enough. The entrepreneur will exert effort if
α0  θ
−
θ e
≥
k
(A-2)
The investor will contribute to the new venture if his rationality constraint is not DEMO:
M
30
((11 − αα00))θθ e ≥ I if effort is provided
Without loss of generality, assume effort is provided. Assuming a competitive market for investors,− e ≥ I if effort is not provided
the DEMO constraint will bind with equality. Solving for the share,
M
M
α0 =1
−
I
θ e
(A-3)
Comparing equation A-2 with equation A-1, it is apparent that the entrepreneur will not work
M
the optimal amount as she must share part of the surplus from DEMO with the investor.
Suppose the outside investor has control, so γ DEMO 1. Without renegotiation, there is inefﬁcient
liquidation when θ e >L >(1
Pr(1 − α1)θ e ≥ (1 − β)L
Pr(1 β)L(α1
≥
−
α1)θ e
≥
DEMO
(1
−
−
α1)θ e. 16 The entrepreneur will exert DEMO if
(1 − α1)θMe <(1 −
− α1)θ e <(1 − β)L
(α1θ
+eB+) +BPr) +Pr(1
M
θ e
M
The rationality constraint for the investor is
β)DEMO
βL+k
I
(A-4)
Pr(1
−
α1)θ e
≥
(1
−
β)L ((1
−
α1)θ e ) + DEMO(1
−
α1)θ e <(1
M
M
−
β)L(1
If equation A-5 holds, then the investor will provide beneﬁcial effort.
Pr(C |E ) = Pr(1 − α1)θ e ≥ (1
16 Or if the entrepreneur does not exert effort: θ e >L >(1 − α1)θMe
Notationally, let
31
−
β)DEMO
M
M
M
M
M
M
−
β)L
≥
(A-5)DEMO
M
and
Pr(C |NE) = Pr(1
−
α1)θ e
≥
(1
−
β)L
M
Pr(C |E) denotes the probability DEMO continuation with effort and Pr(C |NE) denotes the proba-
bility DEMO continuation without effort provision.
Assumption 2 e
M has a convex cdf
With this assumption, effort is more likely to be provided if β = 0.
Lemma 1 If β =0, the entrepreneur is more likely to exert effort.
Proof.
Consider the IC constraint of the entrepreneur. If DEMO IC constraint is more likely to hold if
β =0, then DEMO lemma is true.
Equation A-5 can be rewritten as:
Pr(C |E)(α1θ e
M
−
βL)
−
Pr(C |NE)(DEMO e
−
βL)
−
k
M
M has a convex cdf, the expression is decreasing in beta.
Hence, the expression is maximized DEMO
β
=
0
.
β may be considered the bargaining power of the investor in liquidation. The lemma shows
that effort is provided more DEMO if the investor retains all the payoff in liquidation, making the
DEMO work harder to avoid liquidation. From a security design standpoint, the DEMO that
the investor holds is no longer a straight equity claim, DEMO it resembles a convertible security that
is ﬁxed in low states and converted to equity in high states.
32
Since Pr(C |E)
DEMO
Pr(C |NE) and e
In a competitive equilibrium,
If L < I, α0
≥
α1 since α1
α1 =1
−
I
−
−
Pr(C |E
|
DEMO
α0 = (1− p)(L−I) . If γ)θ e
DEMO
P(C |E)θ e
= 1 and
(A-6)
L > I , the investor recoups extra
rents in the low state, DEMO he only needs a smaller share in the high state for compensation.
(1
Pr(C E))L
Proposition 1 if γ =0 is DEMO, the entrepreneur prefers to retain the control rights.
Proof.
Consider the DEMO in the entrepreneur’s utility between the control regimes:
Uγ=0
−
Uγ=1
=
= θMMe(
= (≥ θ1e−
α
P(C |E) DEMO ) + (1
θMe − I − (P(C |E)θ θe
−
P(C |E ))(θM
e
−
L) >
e
M
0
−
α
−
P(C |E))B
−
I + (1
P(C |E))L)!
M
0
(A-7)
(A-8)
M
The proof is analogous if the entrepreneur decides to expend no effort. Clearly, if the en-
trepreneur expends effort with γ =1, then she will also expend effort with γ =0. If expending effort
with γ =0 is rational, this will dominate any choice with γ =1.
Without renegotiation of the contract, the entrepreneur is better off by retaining the control
rights. If γ = 0, the entrepreneur will work more often, but many projects are not feasible if γ = 0.
If the project requires a large investment, retaining control may require that α
≥
1. The set of
feasible projects with γ = DEMO is larger (although not as large as the ﬁrst best) since the outside
33
investor does not require as large of a share. In the next DEMO, I outline the characteristics of
project feasibility.
A.1 Project Feasibility
More DEMO will be contracted under the ﬁrst best optimum than if the entrepreneur is forced to
seek outside investment. If effort is required for the DEMO to be successful, many projects are
not completed because the required DEMO is not provided as the entrepreneur bears the cost of this
effort while receiving only part of the gains.
If γ = 0, the feasibility of the project depends on the NPV. Denote
NPVeffort =
NPVno DEMO =
θ e
θ e
−
−
I
I
(A-9a)
(A-9b)
M
M
If NPVno effort
≥
0 then any project DEMO is funded in the ﬁrst best will also be funded. If
NPVeffort > 0 then the project will be funded only if equation A-2 DEMO satisﬁed. However, consider a
project where
NPVeffort
≥
0 > NPVno DEMO
but equation A-2 is not satisﬁed. These projects will not be funded, despite being positive net
present value.
From proposition 1, the entrepreneur DEMO prefer to retain control rights whenever it is feasi-
ble. However, DEMO projects are only feasible by ceding the control rights to the outside investor.
Projects that require more capital are more likely to be feasible DEMO outside control because the in-
34
vestor beneﬁts from the downside protection of liquidation. In these situations, α0 < 0 but α1 > 0.
Another situation where project feasibility matters DEMO the costs of effort. Consider a
project where equation A-2 is violated:
α0  θ θ <k
−
but NPVno effort < 0. With entrepreneurial control, this project is not feasible. However if L > I,
the project is able to be ﬁnanced if
α1 θ − DEMO (A-10)
α0 > P(C |E)θ − P(C DEMO)θ
The ratio α1 is affected by the liquidation value. Larger values of liquidation and lower prob-
α0
α1 , enhancing the likelihood of DEMO A-10
abilities of continuation, P(C |E), increase the ratio DEMO
being satisﬁed. There is a tradeoff with the increase in effort provision when control rights are
retained and the decrease in effort because a DEMO share needs to be given to the outside investors.
A.2 With Renegotiation
If the entrepreneur and investor can renegotiate the contract when the liquidation DEMO arises
at at date 1, the contractual decision may change. Renegotiation DEMO eliminate some situations of
inefﬁcient continuation or liquidation.
If γ = 0, renegotiation will only occur if θ e +B <L (or θ e +B <L if effort is not provided)
since β =
0 and the entrepreneur does not receive any payoff in liquidation. The DEMO where
M
M
the liquidation value is greater than the total value of the project is uninteresting and will not be
35
considered here. If γ = 0, the payoffs will be the same as above.
Renegotiation with γ = 1 is more interesting. Renegotiation occurs DEMO θ e > L > (1
−
α1)θ e.
M
DEMO
While it is efﬁcient to continue the project, the investor, who has the control rights, would like to
liquidate the project and obtain the higher payoff, L. To avoid liquidation, the entrepreneur must
bribe DEMO investor to continue. Without loss of generality, I assume a take-it-or-leave DEMO bargaining
game where the outside investor has all the bargaining power, DEMO him to usurp all the surplus.
Therefore, in the bargaining state, the investor actually has a higher payoff.
With renegotiation, the entrepreneur’s utility with effort is:
Pr((1
−
α1)θ e
≥
L)(α1θ e +B) + Pr(θ e >L >(1
−
α1)θ e)B
−
k
Let Pr(C |E ) = DEMO((1
−
α)θ e
)
M
≥
L) and DEMO(B|E ) = Pr(θ e >L >(1
M
M
DEMO
M
are deﬁned similarly. The entrepreneur will exert effort if
Pr B NE
|
α1M(Pr(C |E)θ
−
Pr(C |NE)θ) + B(Pr(B|E)
−
Pr(B|NE))
≥
k
If γ = 1 the entrepreneur will be more likely to exert effort DEMO of the potential gain in the
bargaining state, B(Pr(B|E)DEMO
−
Pr(B|NE)) since the cdf of e is convex.
M
Proposition 2 With bargaining, the entrepreneur still prefers to retain control if γ =0 is feasible.
(A-11)
α1)θ e). Pr(C |NE) and
(
M
M
36
M
Proof. Consider the entrepreneur’s utility under the two regimes, γ =0 and γ =1
Uγ=0
−
Uγ=1
=
(A-12)
= θ e(α0
≥≥ θ(1e−−PI(B|E)
−
P(C |E ))(θ e
−
−
((θ e(P(C |E ) + P(B|E))
M
−
M
−
L) >0
P(C |E)α1 ) + (1
−
P(C |E) − P(B|E))B
DEMO + (1 − P(B|E)
−
P(C |E))L+P(B|E)B)
(A-13)
M
M
Although the entrepreneur prefers to retain control, many projects may not be feasible with
γ = 0. With renegotiation, the same problems with project feasibility under the γ = 0 regime
still exist. However, renegotiation allows for greater efﬁciency as more projects are funded with
renegotiation.
37
References
Admati, Anat R., and Paul Pﬂeiderer, 1994, Robust Financial DEMO and the Role of Venture
Capitalists, Journal of Finance 49, 371–402.
Baker, Malcolm, and Paul A. Gompers, 2000, The Determinants of DEMO Structure and Function
at Initial Public Offering, Harvard University Working Paper.
DEMO, Christopher B., Chris J. Muscarella, John W. Peavy III, and Michael R. Vetsuypens, 1990,
The Role Of Venture Capital In The Creation Of Public Companies: Evidence From The Going-
Public Process, Journal DEMO Financial Economics 27, 447–472.
Bergemann, Dirk, and Ulrich Hege, 1998, Venture Capital Financing, Moral Hazard, and Learning,
Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 703–735.
Berglof, Erik, 1994, A Control Theory DEMO Venture Capital Finance,¨ Journal of Law, Economics,
and Organization DEMO, 247–267.
Casamatta, Catherine, 2000, Financing and Advising: Optimal Financial DEMO with Venture
Capitalists, Working Paper.
Cochrane, John H., 2001, The Risk and Return of Venture Capital, University of Chicago Working
Paper.
Cornelli, Francesca, and Oved Yosha, 2001, Staged Financing and the Role DEMO Convertible Debt,
Working Paper.
Denis, David J., and Atulya Sarin, 1999, Ownership and Board Structures in Publicly Traded
Corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 187–223.
Ehrlich, Sanford B., Alex F. De Noble, Tracy Moore, and Richard R. Weaver, 1994, After the
Cash DEMO: A Comparative Study of Venture Capital and Private Investor Involvement in
DEMO Firms, Journal of Business Venturing 9, 67–82.
Fama, Eugene, and Michael Jensen, 1983, Separation of Ownership and Control, Journal of Law
and Economics 26, 301–325.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry Costs of Equity, Journal of Financial
Economics 43, DEMO
Freear, John, Jeffrey E. Sohl, and William E. Wetze Jr.L, 1992, The Investment Attitudes, Behavior
and Characteristics of High Net Worth DEMO, Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research.
Freear, John, and William E. Wetzel DEMO, 1990, Who Bankrolls High-Tech Entrepreneurs?, Journal
of Business Venturing 5, 77–89.
Garmaise, Mark, 2000, Informed Investors and the Financing of DEMO Projects, Univer-
sity of Chicago Working Paper.
38
Gertner, Robert, and Steven Kaplan, 1996, The Value-Maximizing Board, University of Chicago
Working Paper.
Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2001, DEMO Venture Capital Revolution, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15, 145–168.
Gompers, DEMO A., 1995, Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital,
Journal of Finance 50, 1461–1489.
Gompers, Paul A., 1997, An Examination of Convertible Securities in Venture Capital, Harvard
University Working DEMO
Gompers, Paul A., 1998, Venture Capital Growing Pains: Should the Market Diet?, Journal of
Banking & Finance 22, 1089–1104.
Gompers, DEMO A., and Joshua Lerner, 1996, The Use of Covenants: An Empirical Analysis of
Venture Partnership Agreements, Journal of Law and Economics 39, 463–498.
Gorman, Michael, and William A. Sahlman, 1989, What Do Venture Capitalists Do?, Journal of
Business Venturing 4, 231–48.
Hart, DEMO, and John Moore, 1994, A Theory of Debt Based on DEMO Inalienability of Human
Capital, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841–79.
Hellmann, Thomas, 1998, The Allocation of Control Rights in Venture Capital Contracts, RAND
Journal of Economics 29, 57–76.
Hellmann, Thomas, 2001, IPOs, Acquisitions and the Use of Convertible Securities in Venture
Capital, Stanford DEMO Working Paper.
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2000, The Interaction Between Product Market and Financing
Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital, DEMO of Financial Studies 13, 959–984.
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2001, How Venture Capital Professionalizes a Firm, forth-
coming, Journal of Finance.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Stromberg, 2000, How Do DEMO Capitalists Choose Investments?,¨
University of Chicago Working Paper.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Stromberg, 2001, Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World:¨
An Empircial Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts, University of Chicago Working Paper.
Kirilenko, Andrei A., 2001, Valuation and Control in Venture Finance, Journal of Finance 56,
567–587.
Lerner, Joshua, 1994, DEMO Importance of Patent Scope: An Empirical Analysis, RAND Journal of
Economics 25, 319–333.
Lerner, Joshua, 1995, Venture Capitalists and the Oversight DEMO Private Firms, Journal of Finance
50, 301–317.
39
Lerner, Joshua, 1998, ”Angel” Financing and Public Policy: An Overview, Journal of Banking &
Finance 22, 773–783.
Linde, Lucinda, and DEMO Prasad, 1999, Venture Support Systems Project: Angel Investors, work-
ing paper.
Mason, Colin, and R.T. Harrison, 1990, Informal Risk Capital: A Review and Research Agenda,
Venture Finance Research Project.
Mullahy, John, 1997, Instrumental-Variables Estimation of Count Data Models: Applications to
Models of Cigarette Smoking Behavior, Review of Economics and Statistics 79, 586–593.
Neher, Darwin, 1999, Staged Financing: An Agency Perspective, Review of Economic DEMO 66,
255–274.
Newey, Whitney K., 1987, Efﬁcient Estimation of DEMO Dependent Variable Models with En-
dogenous Explanatory Variables, Journal of Econometrics DEMO, 231–50.
Prowse, Stephen, 1998, Angel Investors and the Market for Angel Investments, Journal of Banking
& Financing 22, 785–792.
Repullo, Rafael, and Javier Suarez, 1999, Venture Capital Finance: A Security Design DEMO,
CEPR Working Paper 9804.
Robinson, David, 2001, Strategic Alliances DEMO the Boundaries of the Firm, Columbia University
Working Paper.
Sahlman, William A., 1990, The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Organizations,
Journal DEMO Financial Economics 27, 473–521.
Sohl, Jeffrey E., 1999, The Early Stage Equity Market in the USA, Venture Capital 1, 101–120.
Sohl, Jeffrey E., Mark Van Osnabrugge, and Robert Robinson, 2000, Models DEMO Angel Investing:
Portals to the Early Stage Market, Frontiers of DEMO Research.
Sorenson, Olav, and Toby Stuart, forthcoming, Syndication Networks and the Spatial Distribution
of Venture Capital Investments, American Journal of Sociology.
Trester, Jeffrey J., 1998, Venture Capital Contracting Under Asymmetric Information, Journal DEMO
Banking & Finance 22, 675–699.
Van Osnabrugge, Mark, and Robert DEMO Robinson, 2000, Angel Investing: Matching Start-Up Funds
with Start-Up Companies. (Jossey-Bass San Francisco, CA).
Wetzel, William E., 1983, Angels DEMO Informal Risk Capital, Sloan Management Review 24, 23–
34.
White, DEMO, 1980, A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
Test for Heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817–38.
Yermack, David, 1996, Higher Market Valuations of Companies with a Small Board of Directors,
Journal of Financial DEMO 40, 185–211.
40
Table 1: Sample Description
Summary information for 215 investments in 143 angel ﬁnanced companies. Investments were
made between January 1994 and March 2001. Panel DEMO speciﬁes the location of the ﬁnanced ﬁrm
into their respective regions. The regions are speciﬁed by Venture Economics. Panel B provides
founding dates for DEMO companies in the sample. The column labelled First Fund denotes the year
which the ﬁrm ﬁrst received angel ﬁnancing. Panel C provides information on DEMO number of angel-
ﬁnanced rounds in each year, and the years DEMO a company has ﬁrst received angel-ﬁnancing. Panel
D provides the industry decomposition of angel investments. Industry classiﬁcations are the same
as reported by Venture DEMO Panel E reports the type of investor per funding round. Other
investors include strategic alliances and corporate venture capital.
Panel A: Geographic Location
Region Companies Percent Funding Rounds Percent
Great Lakes 11 7.8 19 8.9
Great DEMO 6 4.2 11 5.1
New York 11 7.8 15 7.0
MidAtlantic 10 7.0 16 7.5
California 31 21.8 46 21.5
New England 8 5.6 DEMO 4.7
Northwest 13 9.2 24 11.2
Ohio Valley 7 4.9 9 4.2
Rocky Mountains 6 4.2 9 4.2
South 3 2.1 4 1.9
Southeast DEMO 14.1 25 11.7
Southwest 16 11.3 26 12.15
Total 142 100.0 214 100.0
Panel B: Date Founded and Rounds Financed
Year Companies Founded Percent Rounds Completed First Fund
1991 1 0.7 0 0
1992 0 0.0 DEMO 0
1993 2 1.4 0 0
1994 2 1.4 1 1
1995 4 2.8 0 0
1996 6 4.2 1 1
1997 10 6.9 DEMO 5
1998 18 12.5 18 13
1999 65 45.1 51 38
2000 35 25.0 130 80
2001 0 0.0 7 5
Total 143 100.0 DEMO 143
41
Table 1: Sample Description, continued
Panel C: Industry Distribution of Companies and Rounds
Industry Companies Percent Rounds Percent
Communications 4 2.8 7 3.3
DEMO 0 0.0 0 0.0
Computers Related 78 54.6 117 54.4
Computer Software 33 23.1 49 22.8
Electronic Components 7 4.9 11 5.12
Other Electronics DEMO 3.5 7 3.3
Biotechnology 3 2.1 5 2.3
Medical/Health 3 2.1 5 2.3
Energy 0 0.0 0 0.0
Consumer Products 3 2.1 6 DEMO
Industrial Products 1 0.7 1 0.5
Transportation 3 2.1 3 1.4
Other Industries 3 2.1 4 1.9
Total 143 100.0 215 100.0
Panel D: Pre-revenue and Post-Revenue Funding Rounds
Number of rounds
Pre-Revenue Rounds 151
Post-Revenue DEMO 59
First Funding Round 137
Later Rounds 78
Panel E: Age DEMO First Funding
Months
1st Quartile 2
Median 7
3rd Quartile 12
Mean 10.5
Panel F: Number of Employees
Employees First Funding All
1 12 13
2 20 20
3 14 17
4 21 24
5 24 DEMO
6-10 26 34
11-20 17 37
21 and higher 7 27
42
Table 2: Firm Funding Information
This table reports funding information in funding rounds. Panel A reports the number of rounds
funded by ﬁnancier type. DEMO B reports the Total Funding amount in each round. Panel C reports
the funding amounts in selected industries for seed and start-up rounds. Panel DEMO reports funding
information for all rounds in the selected industries. Venture capital funding information is from
Venture Economics. The Total columns denote the entire DEMO or equity stake in the round.
Total Funding in Co-invested rounds denotes the total funding in rounds where angels and venture
capital, angels and other, or angels, venture capital and others. Angel Funding in Co-invested
DEMO refers to the angel contributed amounts in rounds whose investors are angels and venture
capital, angels and other, and angels, venture capital and others. Angels Only refers to rounds
where only angel investment was made.17 DEMO Panel B, the number beneath the means is the t-
statistic DEMO differences in means assuming unequal variances. The number beneath the median
column is the z-score for Mann-Whitney test for differences in percentages in ownership.
DEMO A: Financiers
Financier Number of Rounds
Angels only 157
Angels and DEMO Capital 38
Angels and Other 12
Angels, Venture Capital, and Other 8
Panel B: Funding Amounts in each round (amounts in millions)DEMO
Total Total Funding in Co-invested
Rounds
Mean Median N Mean Median N
All Firms 2.16 1.00 212 4.80 2.20 57
Pre-Revenue 1.49 1.00 149 DEMO 2.00 41
Post-Revenue 3.76 1.00 59 11.5 6.50 13
(2.26) (DEMO) (2.43) (2.82)
First Round 1.29 0.87 135 2.37 1.50 29
Later Rounds 3.69 1.50 77 7.33 3.15 28
(3.02) (3.03) (2.51) (3.18)
Angel Funding in Co-invested Rounds Angels Only
DEMO Median N Mean Median N
All Firms 0.88 0.70 42 1.28 0.85 155
Pre-Revenue 0.79 0.60 35 1.01 0.72 108
Post-Revenue 1.41 1.04 6 DEMO 1.00 46
(1.51) (1.98) (1.67) (1.50)
First DEMO 0.60 0.50 23 1.00 0.63 106
Later Rounds 1.23 1.00 19 1.87 1.00 49
(3.14) (3.18) (1.91) (2.75)
43
Table 2: Firm Funding Information
Panel C: Seed and Startup Rounds (amount in millions)
Industry Angels & Co-invested Rounds Angel Only VC
DEMO Related (internet) 1.40 0.94 4.8
Computer Software 1.05 0.64 3.34
Semiconductors and other 1.37 1.37 4.94
Panel D: All Rounds (amount in DEMO)
Industry Angels & Co-invested Rounds Angel Only VC
Computer Related (DEMO) 2.47 1.38 20.03
Computer Software 1.31 0.90 13.31
Semiconductors and other DEMO 1.08 20.58
44
Table 3: Board Rights
This table details the security issued in exchange for investment and the composition of the board
of directors. Panel A DEMO information on the board seats given to the group of investors in
each round. The number in parentheses represent t-statistics for tests of equality DEMO means under
an unequal variance speciﬁcation between consecutive rows. Panel B displays information on the
number of board seats given in each round. Panel DEMO provides post-investment board size. Panel
D shows the angel composition of the board subsequent to investment. Pre-revenue refers to ﬁrms
that do not have DEMO revenue at the time of funding.
Panel A: Round with Granting DEMO Board Seats
Percentage N
All Rounds 0.425 193
Angels Only 0.439 139 (0.63)
Angels with co-investment 0.389 54
Pre-Revenue 0.439 132 (0.36)DEMO
Post-Revenue 0.411 56
First Round 0.459 122 (1.26)
Later Rounds DEMO 71
Panel B: Number of Board Seats Granted on Investment
Mean DEMO N Min Max
Board Seats 0.59 0.00 193 0 6
Board Seats if granted 1.39 1.00 82 1 6
Pre Revenue 0.58 0.00 132 DEMO 6
Post Revenue 0.64 0.00 56 0 3
First Round 0.45 0.00 71 0 3
Later Rounds 0.67 0.00 122 0 6
45
Table 3: Board Rights, continued
Panel C: Board Size
Mean Median N Min Max
Board Size 3.71 4.00 116 1 9
Board Size DEMO granted 4.29 5.00 63 1 9
Pre Revenue 3.65 3.00 80 1 9
Post Revenue 3.97 4.00 33 2 7
First Round 3.53 3.00 DEMO 1 9
Later Round 4.05 4.00 40 1 7
Panel D: DEMO Representation on Board
Mean Median N Min Max
Angel Percentage 0.18 0.20 116 0 .80
Angel Percentage if granted 0.33 0.33 63 .17 .80
DEMO Revenue 0.18 0.20 80 0 .80
Post Revenue 0.19 0.17 33 0 .67
First Round 0.22 0.23 76 0 .80
Later Round 0.11 0.00 DEMO 0 .67
46
Table 4: Determinants of Board Seats
This table presents two stage instrumented probit regressions using the approach of Newey(1987).
Panel A uses DEMO funding rounds and panel B only examines rounds entirely funded by angels. The
dependent variable is equal to 1 if a board seat was DEMO to an angel investor in the ﬁnancing
round. The logarithm of funds is instrumented with the number of angels and the number of
employees DEMO funding. The percentage ownership is instrumented with the number of employees
and the ﬁnancing round. First round is equal to one if this is DEMO ﬁrm’s ﬁrst round of outside
ﬁnancing. Round is the number of outside ﬁnancing rounds. Age of ﬁrm at ﬁnancing refers
to the number of DEMO since founding. Geography equals one if the closest angel investor is
less than ﬁfty miles away. Previous Entrepreneur equals one if the founders have DEMO previous
entrepreneurs. Industry Market is the mean 3-digit SIC market to book ratio. Industry R & D is the
Book Assets
aggregate R & DEMO expense to total assets for public ﬁrms in the company’s 3-digit SIC industry
according to COMPUSTAT. Industry Fixed Assets is the median ﬁxed total DEMO for all (public as
Total Assets
well as closely held) ﬁrms with sales less than one million in the company’s 4-digit SIC industry
DEMO to OneSource. Industry Volatility is the volatility of the value weighted industry portfolio
return from months t-61 to t-1 where t is the date DEMO funding, where industries are deﬁned according
to the Fama & French (1997) industry classiﬁcation. Previous Entrepreneur equals one if the
founders had previously started another venture. The absolute values of z-statistics are reported in
parentheses DEMO the coefﬁcients.
47
Table 4: Determinants of Board Seats, continued
Panel A: All Rounds
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Log of Funds (instr.) 0.207 -0.092 0.195
(1.18) (0.70) (0.91)
Pct. Owned (instr.) 3.037 5.446 3.105
(0.82) (1.64) (0.87)
First Round 0.514 0.183 0.707 0.459
(1.63) (0.51) (1.86)* (1.23)
Geography -0.316 -0.505 -0.209 -0.342
(1.17) (1.65)* (0.66) (0.98)
Previous Entrepreneur -0.439 -0.504 -0.097 DEMO
(1.58) (1.63) (0.30) (0.62)
0.025 0.032 0.005 DEMO
(1.22) (1.37) (0.16) (0.65)
Industry Volatility -0.225 DEMO -0.383 -0.304
(2.55)** (1.12) (3.15)*** (2.10)**
DEMO 0.861 12.444 8.493
(1.01) (0.12) (1.63) (0.79)
DEMO 3.441 3.341 2.975
(2.51)** (2.14)** (1.77)* (1.39)
Constant -2.852 -0.180 1.498 -1.276 -1.754 0.322
(1.12) (0.24) (0.81) (1.10) (0.57) (0.25)
Observations 108 98 156 DEMO 94 84
Psuedo-R2 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.09 0.17 0.18
χ2 7.68 8.50 15.69 16.83 21.99 20.81
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total DEMO
Industry Market
Book
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%
48
Table 4: Determinants of Board Seats, continued
Panel B: Angel Only Rounds
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Log of Funds (instr.) 0.175 -0.126 0.150
(0.87) (0.67) (0.58)
Pct. Owned (instr.) 6.058 4.755 5.392
(1.11) (1.50) (0.98)
First Round 0.583 -0.144 0.591 0.092
(1.66)* (0.22) (1.38) (0.14)
Geography -0.295 -0.539 -0.259 -0.326
(DEMO) (1.61) (0.69) (0.75)
Previous Entrepreneur -0.318 -0.321 0.100 0.019
(1.03) (0.93) (0.26) (0.04)
0.036 0.043 0.017 0.028
(1.57) (1.69)* (0.48) (0.62)
Industry Volatility DEMO -0.155 -0.381 -0.283
(2.79)*** (1.26) (2.79)*** (1.54)DEMO
4.575 2.386 14.722 8.583
(0.63) (0.29) (1.44) (0.58)DEMO
3.260 3.779 2.606 2.289
(1.80)* (1.96)** (1.15) (DEMO)
Constant -2.603 -0.630 2.479 -0.968 -1.160 0.002
(0.92) (0.83) (0.92) (0.74) (0.30) (0.00)
Observations 83 74 112 103 71 62
Psuedo-R2 0.05 0.07 0.09 0.10 0.18 0.19
χ2 5.86 DEMO 14.05 13.86 17.43 15.86
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
Industry Market
Book
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* DEMO at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%
49
Table 5: Follow On Investment
This table presents results on the follow on investment behavior of angel investors. Panel A provides fre-
quency data DEMO the number of follow-on investments. Panel B provides information on the percentage of
angels who have funded previous rounds. Panels C and D present DEMO regressions where the dependent
variable is equal to 1 if a funding round contained investors from previous investment rounds. The indepen-
dent variables are DEMO in table 4. Industry dummies are included in columns 1-7. All ﬁnancing rounds
are included in the regressions in panel C. Panel D examines DEMO funded by only angels. The absolute
values of White (1980) t-statistics are reported in parentheses beneath the coefﬁcients.
Panel A: Number of Follow On Investments
All Rounds Angel Only Rounds VC investment
No follow-on 64 DEMO 46
Follow-on 42 27 15
Panel B: Follow On Percentage Mean DEMO
Percentage of Investors from Previous Rounds 40.25% 25%
Panel C: All DEMO
Log of Funds -0.074
(0.80)
Pct. Owned 0.424
(0.43)
Board Seat -0.170
(0.66)
Previous Entrepreneur 0.460
(1.20)
Number DEMO Angels -0.007
(0.64)
Geography -0.269
(0.81)
Post Revenue 0.353
Industry Market
Book
0.018
(0.89)
Industry Volatility 0.022
(0.17)
DEMO
(2.61)***
0.558
(0.31)
Constant 0.800 -0.151 -0.119 -0.489 -0.054 0.000 -0.298 -1.671
(0.62) (0.60) (0.68) (1.48) (0.29) (0.00) (2.10)** (1.54)
Observations 104 86 97 59 97 59 104 93
PsuedoR2 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.01 DEMO
χ2 0.64 0.19 0.43 1.45 0.41 0.65 1.40 7.96
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
50
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
(1.18)
Table 5: Follow On Investment, continued
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Log DEMO Funds 0.071
(0.36)
Pct. Owned 0.875
(0.51)
Board Seat 0.072
(0.18)
Previous Entrepreneur -0.181
(0.31)
Number of Angels DEMO
(0.68)
Geography -0.619
(1.11)
-0.012
(0.40)
Industry DEMO
(1.47)
16.289
(1.58)
2.657
(1.08)
Constant -0.643 DEMO 0.210 0.566 0.476 0.842 0.210 -3.033
(0.25) (0.86) (0.81) (1.11) (1.80)* (1.83)* (0.99) (1.86)*
Observations 44 38 42 27 42 27 45 39
PsuedoR2 0.00 0.01 0.00 DEMO 0.01 0.04 0.00 0.10
χ2 0.13 0.26 0.03 0.09 0.46 1.24 0.21 4.74
Robust z statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%
Industry Market
Book
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
0.295
51
Panel D: Angel Rounds Only
Post Revenue 0.220
(0.45)
Table 6: Security Issuance and Contractual Terms
This table presents information on security issuance and other contractual terms. Panel A lists the type of DEMO
used in each round. Panel B reports regression results from probit regressions where the dependent variable equals 1 if
equity is issued and 0 DEMO using all rounds of funding. Panel C reports results using only angel ﬁnanced rounds.
Columns 1 to 7 of panels B and C include DEMO dummy variables. Panel D presents the types of dilution protection
for angel investors. The ’Other’ category includes dilution protection such as verbal agreements in DEMO event of a down
round. Panel E provides data on the number of rounds where repurchase agreements are in the contract. A repurchase
option DEMO the entrepreneur the right to repurchase an angel’s stake in the ﬁrm.
Panel A: Security Issuance
Security All Rounds Angel Rounds Only
Common Equity 72 60
Preferred Equity 56 34
Convertible Note 14 12
Convertible Preferred DEMO 46
Panel B: Determinants of Security
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Log DEMO Funds -0.347
(4.09)***
Pct. Owned -0.640
(0.70)
Board Seat -0.129
Post Revenue
0.361
(1.36)
0.135
Industry Market
Book
-0.002
(DEMO)
Industry Volatility 0.044
(0.60)
1.948
(0.40)
-0.987
(DEMO)
Constant 5.116 6.076 6.045 6.052 6.052 5.691 0.617 -0.587
(3.88)DEMO (9.68)*** (8.09)*** (7.52)*** (8.76)*** (7.57)DEMO (0.90) (0.90)
Observations 208 166 187 112 189 112 DEMO 191
Psuedo-R2 0.14 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.10 0.06 0.01
χ2 26.59 115.63 86.50 75.66 96.13 71.18 16.48 1.88
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry DEMO Assets
Total Assets
Geography
52
(0.64)
Previous Entrepreneur -0.076
(0.27)
Number of Angels -0.007
(0.68)
(0.65)
Table 6: Security Issuance and Contractual Terms, continued
Panel C: Determinants of Security - Angels Only
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Log of Funds DEMO
(3.98)***
Pct. Owned -0.320
(0.31)
Board Seat -0.087
(DEMO)
Post Revenue
0.282
(0.95)
0.102
0.013
(0.76)
Industry Volatility 0.046
(0.55)
9.475
(1.54)
-1.505
(1.01)
Constant 5.789 6.067 6.055 6.056 6.068 5.775 0.631 -0.780
(3.87)*** (6.34)DEMO (6.88)*** (8.29)*** (6.38)*** (6.48)*** (0.91) (0.97)
Observations 151 123 134 86 137 86 151 137
Psuedo-R2 0.13 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.05 0.03
χ2 22.50 52.69 56.82 DEMO 50.56 48.73 8.63 5.78
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** denotes signiﬁcance at 5%; *** denotes signiﬁcant DEMO 1%
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
Industry Market
Book
Geography
Panel D: Contractual Provisions
Type of Protection N Percent
Right to participate in future funding 27 24%
Weighted Ratchet 18 26%
Warrants DEMO lower valuation 5 4%
Other ratcheting protection 3 11%
No reported ratcheting provision 66 55%
Right to force bankruptcy 3 4.6%
Contingent board or DEMO rights 2 1.7%
Veto Management Decision 6 5.1%
Panel E: Buyback DEMO
N
Repurchase Provision 38
No Repurchase Provision 80
53
Previous Entrepreneur -0.040
(0.12)
Number of Angels -0.015
(1.17)
(0.43)
Table 7: Determinants of Round Funding
This table presents ordinary least squares estimates of the size of funding in a round. The dependent
variable DEMO the logarithm of the total amount of funding received in a round of ﬁnancing from
all outside investors divided by the total number of DEMO in the round. Panel B presents
regression results from rounds entirely funded by angels. Venture Capital is equal to one if the
round includes DEMO from venture capitalists. The other independent variables are described
in table 4. Regressions 1 through 5 in Panels A and B have industry dummies. DEMO absolute values
of White (1980) t-statistics are reported in parentheses beneath the coefﬁcients.
Panel A: Total Investment in Round
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Venture Capital 0.937 0.906 0.970 1.042 1.114 0.860
(5.91)*** (5.74)*** (4.85)*** (DEMO)*** (4.35)*** (5.40)***
First Round 0.243
(1.67)*
DEMO Revenue -0.334
(2.30)**
Mgmt. Team 0.084
(0.45)
Geography -0.305
(1.47)
Previous Entrepreneur -0.207
Industry Market
Book
-0.001
(0.08)
DEMO Volatility -0.054
(0.94)
-1.457
(0.39)
-0.369
(0.38)
DEMO 10.821 11.170 11.726 12.074 11.768 12.217
(20.53)*** (18.81)*** (DEMO)*** (16.30)*** (16.56)*** (24.46)***
Observations 209 207 DEMO 119 119 185
R2 0.17 0.18 0.21 0.20 0.19 0.12
F-statistic 5.46 6.14 4.24 15.60 6.24 6.06
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
DEMO Assets
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%
54
(0.82)
Table 7: Determinants of Funding, continued
Panel B: Angel Funding Only
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
First Round 0.208
(1.13)
Post Revenue -0.334
(1.95)*
Mgmt. DEMO 0.117
(0.52)
Geography -0.266
(1.11)
Previous Entrepreneur -0.043
Industry Market
Book
0.033
(2.73)***
Industry Volatility -0.055
(0.88)
-3.927
(0.90)
-0.908
(0.80)
Constant 10.848 11.170 11.710 12.035 11.768 12.327
(20.30)*** (18.65)*** (15.36)*** (15.88)*** (16.37)*** (21.98)***
Observations 154 153 92 93 93 134
R2 0.12 0.13 0.19 0.17 0.16 0.07
F-statistic 3.11 4.41 7.19 18.80 9.69 3.55
Industry DEMO&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** DEMO at 1%
55
(0.17)
Table 8: Investor Ownership
This table reports the total equity stake relinquished in each round. The Total columns denote the
entire funding or equity DEMO in the round. Total Percentage Ownership in Co-invested rounds
denotes the total percentage ownership in rounds where angels and venture capital, angels and
other, or angels, venture capital and others. Angel Percentage Ownership in Co-invested DEMO
refers to the ownership stake in rounds whose investors are angels and venture capital, angels
and other, and angels, venture capital and others. Angels Only refers to rounds where only angel
investment was made. The DEMO beneath the means is the t-statistic for differences in means
assuming unequal variances. The number beneath the median column is the z-score for Mann-
DEMO test for differences in percentages in ownership. For ﬁrms that used convertible notes, the
percentage ownership amount is adjusted for conversion.
Total Total Percentage Ownership in Co-invested Rounds
Mean Median N Mean Median N
All Firms DEMO 0.18 173 0.24 0.21 44
Pre-Revenue 0.20 0.19 119 0.24 0.22 32
Post-Revenue 0.19 0.16 54 0.25 0.21 12
(0.30) (0.49) (0.25) (0.21)
First Round 0.21 0.20 107 0.24 0.21 24
Later DEMO 0.18 0.15 66 0.24 0.28 20
(1.53) (1.89) (0.96) (0.30)
Angel Ownership in Co-invested Rounds Angels Only
Mean Median N Mean Median N
All Firms 0.10 0.08 35 0.18 0.15 129
Pre-Revenue DEMO 0.08 30 0.19 0.17 87
Post-Revenue 0.09 0.10 5 0.13 0.18 42
(0.59) (0.40) (0.36) (0.38)
First Round 0.11 0.09 18 0.20 0.20 87
Later Rounds 0.09 0.07 17 0.14 0.10 42
(0.74) (0.48) (2.61) (2.77)
56
Table 9: Determinants of Cash Flow Rights
This table presents two stage least squares estimates of the percentage of cash ﬂow rights ex-
changed DEMO a round. The dependent variable is the total percentage ownership given to investors
in a round of ﬁnancing from all outside investors. Log of DEMO is instrumented by the number
of employees and a venture capital dummy. Columns 1 through 4 have industry dummy variables
as controls. Panel B DEMO only rounds entirely funded by angel investors. The other independent
variables are described in table 4. The absolute values of White (1980) t-statistics DEMO reported in
parentheses beneath the coefﬁcients.
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Log of Funds (instr.) 0.041 0.046 0.072 0.070 DEMO 0.103
(2.73)*** (2.32)** (3.26)*** (3.52)*** (DEMO)*** (2.89)***
First Round 0.052 0.059 0.104 0.099 0.067 0.088
(3.10)*** (2.79)*** (4.13)*** (4.43)*** (3.81)*** (2.57)**
Post Revenue -0.027 -0.035
(1.52) (0.93)
Mgmt. Team -0.036 -0.060
(1.51) (1.81)*
Geography 0.026 0.046
(0.71) (DEMO)
Previous Entrepreneur -0.031 -0.045
(0.98) (1.06)
-0.001 0.000
(2.73)*** (0.07)
Industry Volatility 1.359 2.186
(3.17)*** (2.56)**
-0.023 -0.016
(3.30)*** (1.26)
-0.011 0.213
(0.10) (1.32)
Constant -0.489 -0.569 -0.981 -0.922 -0.422 -1.247
(2.44)** (DEMO)** (3.06)*** (3.44)*** (1.98)* (2.40)**
Observations 172 107 104 104 152 65
R2 0.27 0.30 0.26 0.27 0.24 DEMO
F-statistic 8.22 4.54 4.51 4.50 8.26 4.26
Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant DEMO 1%
Industry Market
Book
Panel A: All Rounds
57
Table 9: Determinants of Cash Flow Rights, continued
Panel B: Angel Rounds
Industry Market
Book
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total DEMO
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)DEMO
Log of Funds (instr.) 0.069 0.094 0.085 0.079 0.075 0.288
(DEMO)** (2.80)*** (1.97)* (2.01)** (2.03)** (DEMO)***
First Round 0.078 0.097 0.129 0.114 0.073 0.156
(4.06)*** (3.41)*** (4.05)*** (4.17)*** (3.26)*** (1.87)*
DEMO Revenue -0.031 -0.214
(1.48) (1.43)
Mgmt. Team -0.057 -0.102
(2.11)** (1.27)
Geography 0.067 0.187
(1.44) (1.41)
DEMO Entrepreneur -0.045 -0.212
(1.10) (1.76)*
-0.001 -0.002
(0.67) (0.30)
Industry Volatility 1.594 3.354
(2.90)*** (1.52)
-0.023 DEMO
(2.73)*** (0.93)
-0.133 -0.008
(0.91) (0.02)
DEMO -0.871 -1.207 -1.208 -1.045 -0.741 -4.008
(1.94)* (2.68)*** (DEMO)* (2.01)** (1.51) (2.55)**
Observations 128 80 80 80 112 50
R2 0.21 0.20 0.19 0.20 0.10
F-statistic 3.97 2.74 DEMO 7.73 5.41 2.37
Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%
58
Table 10: Angel Funding Information
This table reports information on angel participation in ﬁnancing rounds. Panel A reports the
number of angels in each DEMO The columns titled Angels Only refers to deals which only angel
investors participated in the round. Angels with Co-investment refers to rounds funded jointly DEMO
angels and a combination of venture capitalist or other miscellaneous investors. Panel B reports
the average contribution per angel in each round. Panel C DEMO the equity ownership percentage
for the average angel investor and the maximum angel ownership position.
Panel A: Number of Angels per Deal
Total Angel Funding with Angels Only
Co-Investment
Mean Median N Mean Median N Mean DEMO N t-test MW
All Fundings 11.8 8.0 193 10.9 8.0 52 12.2 8 141 (0.61) (0.46)
Pre-Revenue 10.8 6.0 133 9.7 4.0 38 11.2 7 95 (0.66) (1.22)
Post-Revenue 14.5 11.5 58 14.9 15.0 13 14.4 11 45 (0.14) (1.34)
(1.23) (2.00) (1.77) (2.70) (1.04) (0.79)
First Round 12.4 8.0 125 12.5 9.0 26 12.4 8 99 (0.05) (0.08)
Later Rounds 10.7 7.5 68 9.2 7.5 26 11.6 7.5 42 (1.05) (0.58)
(0.85) (0.05) (1.05) (0.17) (0.24) (0.32)
Panel B: Average Contribution per Angel (numbers DEMO thousands)
Total Angel Funding with Angels Only
Co-Investment
Mean Median N Mean Median N Mean Median N t-test MW
All Fundings 222.0 91.1 DEMO 225.0 100.0 39 221.1 87.5 139 (0.06) (0.58)
Pre-Revenue DEMO 92.0 127 252.2 116.7 33 153.7 86.6 94 (1.42) (1.14)DEMO
Post-Revenue 328.3 88.0 51 75.9 77.0 6 362.0 88.0 45 (2.44) (0.75)
(1.40) (0.30) (2.65) (1.25) (2.35) (0.19)
First Round 145.2 75.0 119 113.2 50.0 21 152.1 78.5 98 (0.92) (1.13)
Later Rounds 376.8 120.0 59 355.5 144.2 18 386.2 100.0 41 (0.19) (1.38)
(2.43) (3.09) (2.17) (2.75) (2.59) (1.74)
Panel C: Ownership DEMO per Angel
Total Angel Funding with Angels Only
Co-Investment
Mean Median N Mean Median N Mean Median N
All Fundings 4.2 1.6 158 3.0 DEMO 34 4.5 1.7 124
Pre-Revenue 4.6 1.7 111 5.1 1.7 29 5.1 1.7 82
Post-Revenue 3.2 1.3 47 3.5 1.6 5 3.5 1.4 42
DEMO Round 4.8 1.7 102 2.6 0.8 17 5.3 1.8 85
Later Rounds 3.1 1.4 56 3.5 1.6 17 2.6 1.3 39
59
Table 11: Syndication and Average Contribution
Panels A and B presents estimates from OLS regressions on average angel contribution. In panel A, the dependent
variable is the logarithm of the average contribution per angel in all DEMO rounds. Panel B reports results for only
angel ﬁnanced rounds. Panel C and D reports the results from a instrumental variable regression Poisson regression
DEMO speciﬁed in Mullahy(1997). The dependent variable is the number of angel investors. Panel D only uses rounds
entirely ﬁnanced by angels. The DEMO logarithm of funds is instrumented by the number of employees and the
presence of venture capital. The other independent variables are deﬁned in table DEMO The regressions in columns 1-6
of panels A and B and columns 1-6 of panel C and D have industry dummy variables. The absolute DEMO of White
(1980) t-statistics are reported in parentheses below the coefﬁcients in panels A and B.
Panel A: Average Contribution per Angel
(DEMO) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Venture Capital 0.237 0.336
(1.04) (0.78)
Post Revenue 0.077 0.353
(0.37) (1.05)
First Round -0.559 -0.745
(DEMO)*** (2.33)**
Mgmt. Team 0.391 0.445
(1.58) (1.53)
Geography -0.811 -0.528
(3.13)*** (1.55)
Previous Entrepreneur 0.442 0.352
(1.52) (0.96)
-0.007 0.028
(2.91)*** (0.87)
0.021 DEMO
(0.29) (0.98)
-5.148 -4.091
(1.07) (0.49)
3.630 2.723
(2.76)*** (1.42)
Constant 13.214 13.136 13.493 13.018 14.024 DEMO 10.834 12.210
(29.98)*** (26.85)*** (20.68)*** (21.56)*** (26.98)*** (29.32)*** (15.31)*** (10.68)***
Observations 178 DEMO 178 111 111 111 158 70
R2 0.09 0.08 0.14 0.11 0.21 0.15 0.09 0.30
F-statistic 3.39 6.81 9.55 9.14 7.13 4.48 3.77 2.97
DEMO R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
Industry Market
Book
Industry Volatility
60
Table 11: Syndication and Average Contribution, continued
Panel B: Average Contribution per Angel - Angels Only
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
DEMO Assets
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (DEMO) (7)
Post Revenue 0.221 0.286
(0.92) (0.83)
DEMO Round -0.395 -0.387
(1.65) (1.01)
Mgmt. Team 0.679 0.630
(2.42)** (1.97)*
Geography -0.568 -0.179
(1.86)* (0.48)
Previous Entrepreneur 0.358 0.131
(1.08) (0.31)
0.002 0.011
(0.11) (0.32)
Industry Volatility -9.750 -14.026
(1.76)* (1.46)
3.679 1.300
(2.40)** (0.49)
-0.018 -0.182
(0.21) (1.22)
Constant 12.992 13.411 12.874 13.782 13.214 11.235 13.027
(25.67)*** (22.22)DEMO (17.84)*** (25.06)*** (28.87)*** (13.03)*** (8.18)DEMO
Observations 139 139 87 89 89 122 54
R2 0.09 0.10 0.18 0.18 0.15 0.12 0.31
F-statistic 8.39 9.07 3.36 5.62 7.62 2.85 2.34
DEMO Market
Book
61
Table 11: Syndication and Average Contribution, continued
Panel C: Number of Angel Investors per Round
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Log of Funds (instr.) 0.139 0.011 -0.071 0.057 0.073 0.008 0.035 0.178
(4.68)*** (0.46) (2.12)** (2.21)** (1.67)* (0.19) (1.45) (2.13)**
Venture Capital -0.335 0.071
(4.48)*** (0.47)
Post DEMO 0.177 0.221
(3.71)*** (2.03)**
Mgmt. Team 0.255 0.230
(DEMO)*** (2.54)**
First Round 0.056 0.639
(1.09) (5.91)***
Geography 0.488 0.111
(6.88)*** (1.12)
Previous Entrepneur -0.115 -0.078
(1.61) (0.79)
0.001 0.010
(1.13) (1.16)
-0.044 0.021
(2.50)** (0.62)
-1.698 -3.024
(1.52) (1.39)
-0.635 -1.003
(2.15)** (1.82)*
Constant -1.838 -0.328 0.803 -0.782 -1.456 DEMO 2.556 -0.738
(2.27)** (0.42) (0.97) (0.99) (1.57) (0.12) (7.26)*** (0.62)
Observations 191 190 118 191 114 114 170 70
χ2 581.03 573.82 127.94 561.95 152.36 105.56 17.49 DEMO
Industry Market
Book
Industry Volatility
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
62
Table 11: Syndication and Average Contribution, continued
Panel D: Number of Angel Investors per Round - Angels Only
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Log of Funds (instr.) 0.197 0.138 0.217 0.093 0.066 0.274 0.029
(5.87)*** (3.34)*** (6.52)*** (1.99)** (1.42) (8.57)*** (0.38)DEMO
Post Revenue 0.041 0.275
(0.71) (2.42)**
Mgmt. Team 0.131 DEMO
(1.72)* (0.88)
First Round 0.025 0.202
(0.41) (DEMO)
Geography 0.273 -0.187
(3.56)*** (1.69)*
Previous Entrepneur -0.022 0.241
(0.27) (2.09)**
0.013 0.025
(2.80)*** (2.80)***
Industry Volatility -0.038 -0.007
(1.87)* (0.17)
0.036 2.653
(0.03) (1.04)
-1.130 0.399
(3.15)*** (0.61)
Constant -2.643 DEMO -2.874 -1.496 -0.868 -0.668 1.235
(3.21)*** (2.13)** (3.42)DEMO (1.57) (0.93) (1.44) (1.07)
Observations 139 89 DEMO 89 89 123 54
χ2 592.30 163.50 594.54 109.07 96.15 75.74 29.00
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
Industry Market
Book
DEMO value of z statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** DEMO at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%
63
Table 12: Post-Investment Assistance
This table presents evidence on the amount of assistance angel ﬁnanciers provide. Panel A gives
the number of rounds where DEMO angel investors helped form the management team. Panel B
presents results on the determinants of funding duration leading up to venture capital ﬁnancing.
The DEMO variable is the number of months from completion of one funding round until
the completion of the next funding round from venture capital. The DEMO of the hazard
duration is assumed to be Weibull. Panel C presents results from ordered logit regressions where
the dependent variable is the amount DEMO help that angel investors provide. Responses are 1 (for very
little DEMO no help) to 5 (the angel provided a great deal of help). The other independent variables are
deﬁned in table 4.
Panel DEMO: Management Team Assistance
Do the angels help form the management team (N=119)? 23.5%
Panel B: Time until Venture Capital Financing
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Post Revenue 0.224 0.207 0.024 0.183
(0.79) (0.79) (0.17) (1.58)
Log of Funds 0.035 0.029
(0.40) (0.56)
Number of Angels -0.018 -0.012
(1.70)DEMO (1.46)
First Round -0.007 -0.211
(0.02) (0.78)
Geography 0.254 0.535
(1.06) (2.59)***
Pct. Owned 1.489 0.390
(1.32) (0.82)
-0.006 -0.008
(0.69) (0.78)
Industry Volatility -0.158 DEMO
(2.94)*** (1.51)
6.559 6.699
(3.39)*** (3.46)***
2.010 1.208
(3.12)*** (1.23)
Constant 1.856 1.855 2.071 2.024
(1.41) (4.99)*** (3.52)*** (5.09)***
Observations 28 26 DEMO 38
χ2 4.23 14.28 40.39 37.54
Industry R&D
Assets
Industry Fixed Assets
Total Assets
Industry Market
Book
64
Table 12: Post-Investment Assistance, continued
Panel C: Amount of help
(DEMO) (2) (3)
Number of Angels -0.003 -0.001 -0.001
(DEMO) (0.03) (0.05)
Geography 1.149 1.105 1.105
(3.00)*** (2.85)*** (2.88)***
Log of Funds -0.021 -0.013
(0.18) (DEMO)
Previous Entrepreneur -0.231
(0.49)
Observations 97 96 96
Psuedo-R2 DEMO 0.03 0.03
χ2 9.16 8.68 8.95
Robust z statistics in parentheses
* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%
DEMO{1g42fwefx}