1042-2587
© 2009 Baylor University
Does One Size Fit All?
ET&DEMO The Multiple
Organizational Forms
Leading to Successful
Academic
Entrepreneurship
Matthew S. Wood
This paper offers an integrative theory, through the use of transaction cost theory principles,
that attempts to match the attributes of university-held innovations DEMO the speciﬁc orga-
nizational form that best supports the identiﬁed attributes in innovation commercialization
efforts. Two commonly utilized organizational forms are considered: the spin-off and the
technology license agreement. Additionally, innovation transfer is conceptualized as a trans-
action and each of the organizational forms is considered an alternate DEMO mecha-
nism for the management of the commercialization transaction. It is further conceptualized
that by minimizing transaction costs, through the proper selection of the organizational
form, universities may increase the odds of successful revenue generation from their entre-
preneurial efforts. The overall goal of the paper is to DEMO our understanding of proper
organizational form-innovation attribute alignment as a key driver of innovation commer-
cialization success, so that universities and their industry partners can increase their effec-
tiveness in commercialization activities.
Introduction
Universities in many DEMO around the world are being pushed to ﬁnd alternative
sources of funding to ﬁnance daily operations and research activities. One of the more
promising DEMO for alternative funding is the commercialization of the university’s
research discoveries. As such, the role of the university is undergoing a transformation as
their missions are being extended to incorporate a greater commercial orientation. The
dual DEMO of the modern academic mission now requires universities to not only serve
society by educating students, but also to foster research that can be developed into
commercially viable products and technologies (Kirby, 2005). Not DEMO, the entre-
preneurial movement within universities has been met with both DEMO and resent-
ment as the scholarly community struggles with the ethical implications of such activities
Please send correspondence to: Matthew S. Wood, tel.: (217) 433-7912; e-mail: mswood2@siu.edu.
An earlier version of this paper DEMO presented at the 2007 annual meeting of the Academy of Management,
Philadelphia, PA.
July, 2009 929
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-6520.2009.00306.x
etap_306 929..947
(Mowery, Nelson, Sampat, & Ziedonis, 1998). Despite philosophical objections, the
entrepreneurial focus on innovation commercialization within research universities is an
ongoing and growing reality as universities in the United States, Europe, Australia, and
other developed nations face competitive funding pressures (Cano, 2007). DEMO trend is
highlighted by a recent report in The Chronicle of Higher Education, which informs
that at least two dozen universities each earned more than $10 million in ﬁscal year
2005 from licensing their rights to DEMO developed through university research
(Blumenstyk, 2007).
It would seem that the potential ﬁnancial and economic beneﬁts of university com-
mercialization activities would DEMO quite enticing to university and public policy adminis-
trators; however, university produced research is not currently ﬂowing as quickly as it
could to DEMO and innovative companies who are eager to exploit new innova-
tions. In fact, only a handful of universities consistently produce a steady stream of
commercially viable innovations, and fewer still have a successful track record of working
well with the business community in commercialization efforts (Schramm, 2006)DEMO Entre-
preneurship researchers have recognized this trend, and as a result, have explored several
issues related to the most commonly used commercialization avenues: the university
spin-off and the technology license agreement (e.g., Agrawal, 2006; Shane & Stuart,
2002). A spin-off ﬁrm is an entirely new venture created solely for the purpose of
commercializing the university’s innovation, while a technology license agreement is a
contract that gives outside entities DEMO right to commercialize the university’s innovation
(Etzkowitz, 2000). In this paper, the term innovation is used to refer to any invention, DEMO
technology, idea, product, or process that has been discovered through DEMO research
that has the potential to be put to commercial use.
The widespread use of spin-off’s and technology license agreements in university
innovation commercialization DEMO has resulted in two separate, but highly related,
streams of DEMO entrepreneurship literature, one focusing only on the technology
license form and DEMO other dealing only with the spin-off form (e.g., Agrawal, 2006;DEMO
DiGregorio & Shane, 2003; Shane & Stuart, 2002; Thursby & Thursby, 2004). The
outcome of these two distinct literature streams has been an increased understanding of
the idiosyncratic issues associated with each form. DEMO, the major disadvantage of
this approach is that many universities utilize, or have the potential to utilize, both
organizational forms in commercialization activities. Despite this limitation, a uniﬁed
model that considers the differential effects of proper organizational form selection on the
odds of commercialization success has not DEMO been introduced (Carlsson & Fridh, 2002).
Hence, the purpose DEMO this paper is to provide an integrative theory that identiﬁes trans-
action costs as a major factor in the identiﬁcation of the conditions under DEMO one
organizational form may be preferred over another for the commercialization of
university-held innovations.
The theoretical model developed in this paper is based on DEMO alignment principle that
draws heavily on Williamson’s (1981) Transaction Cost Theory (TCT) concept of asset
speciﬁcity and opportunism, as well as on the work of Zander and Kogut (1995) who
identify the attributes DEMO innovation knowledge as codiﬁability, teachability, complexity,
and system dependence. The Zander and Kogut innovation knowledge taxonomy provides
a basis for the differentiation DEMO innovations, while TCT allows the consideration of the
costs associated with DEMO in the levels of asset speciﬁcity and the threat of oppor-
tunism that are a function of the attributes of the innovation. Thus, it is conceptualized that
the knowledge associated with an innovation can be categorized DEMO to its attributes
and that these attributes directly impact transaction cost in commercialization activities. In
this way, the magnitude of transaction costs becomes a key driver in the university’s
930
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
selection of the appropriate organizational form for innovation commercialization. The
theory also DEMO the idea that the proper selection of the organizational form leads
to a reduction in transaction costs, and in so doing, increases the DEMO of commercializa-
tion success, which is deﬁned as the generation of DEMO for the focal university.
In addition to an integrative contribution, this DEMO is also needed because it
directly addresses another important deﬁciency within the literature. In a recent review of
the academic entrepreneurship literature, O’Shea, DEMO, O’Gorman, and Roche (2004,
p. 22) note that, DEMO of the studies conducted to-date are based on theories that are
actually atheoretical in nature, that is the research suggests relationships in the form of a
model without providing a consistent explanation to account for those DEMO As a
consequence, there is a need for more studies to DEMO explain, from an organi-
zational perspective, why some universities may be more successful than others.” In
keeping with this theme, the theory developed in this paper is based on the systematic
logic of transaction cost DEMO In this way, the paper represents a novel application of a
DEMO organizational theory to explain relationships unique to the academic
entrepreneurship context. The outcome of this application is not only the advancement of
academic entrepreneurship DEMO, but also salient recommendations for the increased
effectiveness of the practice DEMO academic entrepreneurship. The paper is designed to
generate insights, based on DEMO normative model, for university technology transfer units,
industry partners, commercialization-minded faculty members, and administrators. Such
insights could be of value to these individuals, allowing them to evaluate the attributes of
the innovation and associated transaction costs as an indicator of the organizational form
that will best DEMO the transfer of the innovation under development. Finally, it should
be DEMO that in the process of developing the theory, a salient group DEMO drivers that play
an important role in the commercialization of university-held innovations are identiﬁed,
as well as a set of potential organizational forms DEMO commercialization. However, I do
not pretend to have isolated all the DEMO or organizational forms that may impact
university commercialization efforts.
Organizational Forms and Innovation Commercialization
In a broad sense, the term organizational form refers to the characteristics of an
organization, or a set of organizing activities, DEMO deﬁne it as a distinct entity and also
identiﬁes it as a member of a group of similar organizations (Romanelli, 1991). As DEMO,
this paper considers two distinct organizational forms for the commercialization of
university-held innovations: the technology license agreement and the creation of a new
spin-off ﬁrm. While there are many organizational forms that could potentially be DEMO
for the commercialization of university-held innovations, this paper considers only these
DEMO forms. The rationale behind the selection of these two forms is that these forms are
widely accepted and utilized in global commercialization activities, which increases the
generalizability and practical applicability of the developed theory (DiGregorio & Shane,
2003; Etzkowitz, 2000; Feldman, Feller, & Bercovitz, DEMO; O’Shea et al., 2004; Thursby
& Thursby, 2004). Although beyond the scope of this paper, an exploration of the potential
applicability of additional organizational forms to the context of academic entrepreneur-
ship is DEMO a worthy theoretical endeavor. As such, the integrative model developed
in DEMO paper provides a foundation for the future exploration of the suitability of addi-
tional organizational forms in commercialization activities.
In the university innovation commercialization DEMO, a spin-off ﬁrm is a com-
pletely new business venture that DEMO be wholly owned by the university or created in
July, 2009
DEMO
conjunction with outside investors (Shane & Stuart, 2002; Smilor, Gibson, & Dietrich,
1991); moreover, the faculty or staff of the originating university is usually heavily
involved in new venture start-up activities (Feldman et al., 2002; O’Shea et al., 2004).
Previous research has focused on the factors that contribute to the survival and success
of DEMO start-ups. For example, Saxenian (1994) discussed the inﬂuence of the
DEMO university, while Shane and Stuart focused on the start-ups’ social ties DEMO an
inﬂuential survival factor. Similarly, Holmstrom (1989) found that agency DEMO are
less likely to become a factor in new ventures if the innovator is principally involved in
the creation of the new ﬁrm.
The DEMO research on university spin-offs provides insights regarding the advan-
tages associated with the use of this organizational form in commercialization activities.
Principle among these DEMO the form’s ability to embed the innovator’s tacit knowledge into
the ﬁrm (Santoro & Bierly, 2006). This is important because previous studies DEMO university
spin-offs (Shane, 2001) assert that the form is more DEMO to succeed with the use of
radical innovations, which are more DEMO to be highly tacit in nature. An innovation that
is highly tacit in nature would require long periods of face-to-face learning in order to
DEMO the innovation knowledge to an outside entity. The required investment in learning
by the university and the industry partner would be considered an asset-speciﬁc DEMO
ment, which makes any disruption very costly for both parties. By DEMO the inno-
vation knowledge into the ﬁrm, bilateral dependencies are greatly DEMO Therefore, the
form’s ability to effectively integrate tacit knowledge greatly reduces DEMO transaction costs
associated with the transfer of innovation knowledge. However, there DEMO limitations
associated with the spin-off form. The major limitations are the extensive resources
required, difﬁculties achieving and maintaining innovator commitment, the lack of DEMO
ing market ties, and the high-risk tolerance required (Nicolaou & Birley, 2003).
As an alternative to the creation of a new spin-off ﬁrm, many universities choose to
commercialize their innovations via technology license agreements with entrepreneurs or
existing ﬁrms (Carlsson & Fridh, 2002; Teece, DEMO). Many existing ﬁrms base growth
initiatives on rapidly changing technologies, DEMO utilization of collaboration, and the use of
property right protections, which has led to a proliferation of the technology licensing
form in knowledge DEMO activities (Kim, 2004; Kim & Vonortas, 2006; Powell, Koput,
& Smith-Doerr, 1996). The incentive for a university to sell its technology to prospective
partners is the revenue effect (Arora, Fosfuri, & Gambardella, 2001). The revenue effect
is the returns that will accrue to the licensor in the form of licensing payments (i.e., DEMO ﬁxed
licensing fee or continuing royalty fees) by licensees. The advantages, for universities, of
technology licenses is a lower level of ﬁnancial risk, greater speed to market, the ability
to form relationships with multiple DEMO, and a high potential for long term revenue
generation (Carlsson & Fridh; Zhao, 2004).
Of course, the use of the technology license agreement is not without its drawbacks.
The major limitations of this DEMO are the difﬁculties and complexities that result from
imperfections in technology markets (Arora et al., 2001). As such, the factors that impact
the success of university initiated license agreements have been recently explored
(Benneworth, 2001; Thursby & Thursby, 2004). Agrawal (2006) conducted an empirical
study exploring the effects of engaging the inventor on the success DEMO technology license
agreements. He reported that while engaging the inventor did affect success rates, less
than half the ﬁrms that obtained a university-held license were able to successfully
commercialize the innovation. Jensen and Thursby (2001) DEMO that the majority of
innovations licensed from universities are done so with the technology in a very early
stage of development. These early stage DEMO required substantial additional devel-
opment in order to be successfully commercialized. Collectively, these studies indicate
932
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
that in order for a technology license agreement to hold a high DEMO for revenue
generation, the innovation must be satisfactorily developed and the DEMO associated
with the innovation must be organized (i.e., codiﬁed) in DEMO way that makes it easily
transferable.
Transaction Cost Theory and Innovation Commercialization
The previous organizational form discussion highlights the rather limited perspective
that currently DEMO within the academic entrepreneurship domain. The majority of the
existing research explores only one organizational form and looks at how outcomes can be
improved DEMO each form’s independent domain. However, to the best of the author’s
DEMO, there has not been a focused consideration of the transaction cost DEMO
with the transfer of university-held innovations to outside entities, such as DEMO,
existing ﬁrms, or university created spin-off ﬁrms. This research gap DEMO most likely
attributable to the fact that much of the existing literature treats the differential attributes
of innovations as a black box or considers DEMO a limited set of broad level dimensions,
such as radicalness (DEMO, Nekar & Shane, 2003). If there is little or no variation in the
innovation and only one organizational form is considered, then there are no differential
transaction cost issues (all transaction cost would be the same within that form). However,
if this assumption is DEMO to more accurately reﬂect the true variable nature of innova-
tions, DEMO result is differential transaction costs both within and between each organiza-
tional form. Because the theory developed in this paper treats the characteristics of DEMO
innovation as a variable, TCT becomes the applicable theoretical paradigm and DEMO has
been chosen as a foundation for the theoretical model developed in this paper.
TCT is an outgrowth of the seminal insights of Coase (1993) who identiﬁed the costs
associated with using markets to govern economic exchanges. These insights have been
further developed through the works of economist DEMO Williamson (1975, 1981, 1991),
who emphasized that organizations seek to minimize the coordination costs accrued in
economic exchanges with other organizations. DEMO a result, the need to manage economic
exchanges, or what is commonly referred to as transactions, becomes a major determinate
of structural conﬁgurations in organizations (McKinley & Mone, 2003). A transaction is
deﬁned DEMO occurring when a good, service, or knowledge is transferred across technologi-
cally separable interfaces (Williamson, 1981). In keeping with this deﬁnition, it is con-
ceptualized that the university-industry innovation transfer is a transaction; furthermore, it
has been argued that the key dimensions along which transactions differ is the degree of
asset-speciﬁc investments required for the transaction and DEMO threat of opportunistic
behavior by transaction partners (Hill, 1990; Williamson & Ouchi, 1981).
The level of asset speciﬁcity required for transactions DEMO been identiﬁed by Will-
iamson (1981, p. 555) as “the DEMO important dimension for describing transactions.”
Asset speciﬁcity deals with problems that arise when transaction partners make invest-
ment in site-speciﬁc assets, physical assets, DEMO human assets that have a substantially lower
value outside of the speciﬁc transaction relationship (Williamson, 1975). Essentially,
asset-speciﬁc investments become sunk DEMO because they could not be as effectively
utilized outside the speciﬁc transactional context. Thus, asset-speciﬁc investments create
a dependency relationship that gives rise to a greater chance of opportunism. TCT posits
that when asset speciﬁcity is DEMO, the transaction should be moved from the market and
brought under DEMO control. In the context of university-industry innovation transactions,
this means that the drivers of asset speciﬁcity become an important consideration. Thus,
it DEMO conceptualized that the level of asset speciﬁcity required for successful innovation
July, 2009
933
commercialization is directly related to the attributes of the innovation being commer-
DEMO In this way, TCT logic suggests that the innovation commercialization process
DEMO begin with a focus on the attributes of the innovation, which DEMO the level
of asset speciﬁcity required, which in turn drives the DEMO of the appropriate gover-
nance mode (i.e., organizational form) for DEMO commercialization of the innovation.
The second key dimension along which transactions differ in TCT is the threat of
opportunistic behavior by the transaction partners (Williamson & Ouchi, 1981). William-
son (1981, p. 554) DEMO opportunism as “self interest seeking with guile.” This might
include such behaviors as lying, withholding or hiding valuable information, or other
forms of DEMO While the theory does not assume that all economic actors will
conduct themselves in an opportunistic manner, it does contend that the potential is always
present, and therefore it is a hazard that threatens the reliability of economic transactions.
It is important to note the interaction effects between DEMO speciﬁcity and the threat of
opportunism. The theory posits that the threat of opportunism is always there, but if asset
speciﬁcity is low, DEMO is not a problem because one can simply walk away from the
transaction and readily ﬁnd a new transaction partner. However, if the level of asset
speciﬁcity is high, then the exchange partners experience a bilateral dependency and the
threat of opportunism becomes much more problematic. In this DEMO, transaction-speciﬁc
investments mean that any opportunistic behavior that disrupts the transaction DEMO require
agents to engage in the difﬁcult process of reallocating assets to the next best exchange
relationship, where those assets are likely to have a much lower value. As such, TCT
argues that when asset speciﬁcity is high markets “fail” and the transaction should be
brought under ﬁrm DEMO where any disputes regarding opportunistic behavior can be
resolved by managerial ﬁat.
Differential levels in asset speciﬁcity and opportunism result in concerns over the DEMO
in which transactions are governed. Thus, TCT suggests that some transactions DEMO be
more cost effectively managed through arm’s-length purchases while others will be more
effectively handled through integration into the ﬁrm. Williamson’s (1981) original DEMO
ceptualization of TCT asserts that when asset speciﬁcity and the threat of opportunism are
high, the transaction should be conducted using hierarchical governance, DEMO means
bringing the transaction within the boundaries of the ﬁrm. Alternatively, DEMO the level of
asset speciﬁcity and the threat of opportunism are low, then the transaction should be
managed using market governance, which is DEMO use of arm’s-length transactions with
outside parties (Williamson, 1981). Since its original conceptualization, the theory has
been revised to also include a hybrid form of governance. Hybrid governance mechanisms
are ways of governing transactions DEMO are neither pure market nor pure hierarchy
(Williamson, 1991). Williamson (1991) describes hybrid governance as more elastic than
pure hierarchal governance, but more legalistic than pure market governance. An example
of hybrid governance DEMO the application of inter-organizational trust as an effective gov-
ernance mechanism for certain types of transactions (e.g., Reuer & Ariño, 2007). In this
case, the transaction may be managed through a combination of contracts and trust-based
agreements. In this way, the transaction would be managed by a hybrid form of
governance.
The application of TCT to the academic DEMO context leads to the con-
ceptualization that spin-offs and technology license agreements can be considered alter-
nate forms of governance. Admittedly, these organizational forms are neither pure market
nor pure hierarchy forms of governance; rather they more closely resemble a hybrid form
of governance. However, these two organizational forms are quite different in their ability
to govern transactions with differential DEMO of asset speciﬁcity and opportunism con-
cerns. The creation of a spin-off ﬁrm provides the university with a greater degree of
934
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
control over large asset-speciﬁc investments and related threats of opportunistic behavior.
In DEMO, the university’s use of a technology license agreement makes the oversight
DEMO control of the issues associated with large transaction-speciﬁc investments much more
difﬁcult. Thus, conceptually speaking, each of these organizational forms fall at very
DEMO ends of the governance spectrum, with spin-off’s falling closer to hierarchal
DEMO and technology licenses falling closer to market governance. Because TCT
posits that governance structures should be matched to the transaction in a way that
DEMO the cost of managing the exchange, it is further conceptualized that DEMO
innovation commercialization transaction should be managed with the appropriate gov-
ernance mechanism, which in this case is the organizational form. Following this logic,
the differential characteristics of the transaction then become the source of variance DEMO
governance structures. However, each transaction is uniquely characterized by the level DEMO
asset speciﬁcity and the threat of opportunism, which are a function DEMO the attributes of the
innovation being commercialized. Thus, the variance in DEMO governance structures
between technology license agreements and the creation of a spin-off ﬁrm is (or should
be) determined by the attributes of the DEMO and the resultant transaction cost
considerations.
Differential Attributes of Innovations
One of the key elements of this paper is the consideration of variation in DEMO
characteristics. As such, the theoretical model developed in this paper must DEMO the
key dimensions along which innovations differ. However, this is a DEMO task because
innovations have been described, operationalized, and measured along many different
dimensions in previous conceptual and empirical work (Downs & Mohr, DEMO;
Gopalakrishnan & Damanpour, 1997; Zander & Kogut, 1995). DEMO, there is no formally
agreed upon approach to the classiﬁcation of DEMO (Morris, Coombes, Schinde-
hutte, & Allen, 2007). However, the work of Rogers (1980) is often cited as a signiﬁcant
DEMO in this area. Rogers identiﬁed ﬁve dimensions on which innovations can be
described: relative advantage, communicability, observablility, complexity, and compat-
ibility. The conceptualization of these innovation dimensions was subsequently reﬁned by
Winter (1987) DEMO then adopted in a 1995 empirical study by Zander and Kogut. In this
work the authors operationalize the work of Rogers and Winter by DEMO, deﬁning,
and measuring ﬁve innovation differentiating constructs: codiﬁability, teachability, com-
plexity, system dependence, and product observability.
Zander and Kogut’s (1995) ﬁve innovation attributes have been demonstrated to play
a key role in the transfer and diffusion of innovation knowledge (Nieto & Perez-Cano,
2004; Roberts, 2000; Rogers, 1980; Kogut & Zander, 1992). DEMO, these attributes
capture many of the different aspects that other researchers DEMO used to differentiate
innovations. For example, the differentiating characteristic of radical DEMO incremental
innovations has been adopted in previous entrepreneurship and management studies (DEMO,
Damanpour & Gopalakrishnan, 2001; Nekar & Shane, 2003). DEMO the adoption of these
types of dimensions has proven to be theoretically useful, they have not been operation-
alized in a manner that provides a ﬁne grained differentiation of innovations, which is a
requirement for the theory developed in this paper. Alternatively, the Zander and Kogut
framework provides dimensions that have been operationalized in a more precise and
consistent manner. DEMO allows for a more detailed conceptualization of the variation in
innovations. The main advantage of this approach is the development of propositions that
provide DEMO only conceptual guidance, but also practical recommendations for the practice
July, 2009
935
of academic entrepreneurship. The major limitation of this approach is that there DEMO be
additional characteristics of innovations that are not captured by these ﬁve attributes.
Despite its limitations, the Zander and Kogut framework offers a method of innovation
differentiation that captures many of the salient dimensions of innovations DEMO is highly
applicable to the context of academic entrepreneurship, hence, the adoption of the frame-
work in this paper.
It should be noted DEMO the construct of product observability will not be considered in
the development of the theoretical model. The product observability construct is not a
direct DEMO of the original conceptual work conducted by Rogers (1980) or that of
Winter (1987). Rather, the dimension was developed by Zander DEMO Kogut (1995) as an
indicator of imitabilty. The degree of imitabilty was an important consideration for their
study, as it focused speciﬁcally on the transfer of knowledge associated with manufac-
tured products. In that context, reverse engineering issues are a key concern in the
dissemination of product DEMO knowledge and contribute heavily to the involuntary
transfer of knowledge. However, DEMO the academic entrepreneurship context and more
speciﬁcally the context of the issues addressed in this paper, the focus is on voluntary
innovation knowledge transfer only. Each of the other four dimensions of the framework
speak directly DEMO voluntary knowledge transfer whereas the product observability dimen-
sion focuses on involuntary knowledge transfers. In fact, Zander and Kogut (p. 79)
implicitly DEMO, “product observability is important for imitation by reverse engineering,
but DEMO not be important for voluntary capability transfer.” Another important consid-
eration is that the theory developed in this paper is not focused on manufactured DEMO
as its sole domain. Rather, it is applicable to a wide DEMO of innovations. In short, the
product observability dimension was created with DEMO speciﬁc context in mind and thus does
not generalize well. For this reason, the product observability dimension is considered to
be limited in its applicability to the academic entrepreneurship context and speciﬁcally the
theory developed in DEMO paper; consequently, it has not been considered in the develop-
ment of the theoretical model, which is illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1
TCT Based Model of Innovation Commercialization
Low Codifiability
Low Teachability
High Complexity
DEMO System Dependence
High Level of Asset
Specificity and High
Risk of Opportunism
Associated With
Commercialization
Transaction
936
High Codifiability
High Teachability
Low Complexity
Low DEMO Dependence
Low Level of Asset
Specificity and
Low Risk of
Opportunism
Associated With
Commercialization
Transaction
Spin-Off
Organizational Form
Technology License
Organizational Form
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
Innovation Attributes as Determinates of Organizational Form Selection
Codiﬁability
The ﬁrst innovation DEMO attribute considered in the model is codiﬁability.
The codiﬁability of innovation knowledge is the extent to which a given knowledge item
can be reduced DEMO information by means of numbers, formulas, drawings, or words. Based
DEMO the degree of codiﬁability, two knowledge categories have emerged: explicit knowl-
edge and tacit knowledge (Grant, 1996). The former category, explicit knowledge, is
completely articulated and decipherable. Explicit knowledge is easy to transfer to others
because it exists independent of the person. Examples of explicit DEMO transfer are
the use of accounting information or statistical reports. In contrast, tacit knowledge can
not be reduced to information and therefore can not be codiﬁed (Lane & Lubatkin, 1998).
The body of tacit DEMO includes all things that one knows how to do, but can DEMO
articulate into words. Tacit knowledge is knowledge that arises as the result of personal
experience, which makes it inherently difﬁcult to transfer. Thus, DEMO knowledge is often
transferred by actually performing the knowledge related task. Examples of tacit knowl-
edge transfer are the use of mentorship or apprenticeship DEMO
The fundamental differences between codiﬁable and tacit knowledge means that there
are very different requirements for the effective transfer of each type of knowledge.
DEMO knowledge is relatively easy to transfer and requires very little, if DEMO, face-
to-face interaction whereas tacit knowledge transfers require long periods of DEMO
contact and specialized training programs. As such, the codiﬁability of the DEMO
associated with a university-held innovation is a key determinate of the type of commer-
cialization transaction required for successful knowledge transfer. In short, the degree to
which innovation knowledge can be codiﬁed determines how easily the DEMO can be
transferred. This includes conveying the innovation knowledge to technology transfer
ofﬁces and intellectual property right granting agencies. So, in the case of a highly tacit
and difﬁcult to codify innovation, it will be difﬁcult to gain effective property right
protection that captures the nuances of the DEMO innovation and it will also be very difﬁcult
to transfer the knowledge to an outside entity. Alternatively, highly codiﬁable innovations
that are based on explicit knowledge are much more likely to receive effective isolating
mechanisms in DEMO transfer agreements. Patents, trademarks, and copyrights are
all examples of isolating mechanisms that are commonly used in the commercialization
process.
Interestingly, TCT authors have directly addressed the relationship between the effec-
tiveness of isolating mechanisms DEMO the mode of transaction governance. More speciﬁ-
cally, it has been DEMO that ﬁrms prefer market governance when isolating mechanisms
are effective and hierarchal governance when they are not (Nieto & Perez-Cano, 2004).
This DEMO that transactions involving highly tacit innovation knowledge, which results in
less DEMO isolating mechanisms, would be more effectively commercialized within
ﬁrm boundaries. The DEMO developed in this paper suggests that keeping this type of
transaction within the university’s boundaries would be achieved via the creation of a new
DEMO ﬁrm. In contrast, transactions involving innovation knowledge that is more
codiﬁable, which results in stronger isolating mechanisms, would be more effectively
commercialized outside of university boundaries. As such, the TCT-driven model devel-
oped in this paper suggests that this type of transaction would be most effectively
managed DEMO a technology license agreement with an outside party.
In addition to the isolating mechanism problem, the innovation attribute of codiﬁ-
ability also drives the level of investment required to transfer the innovation knowledge
July, 2009
937
across the interface. Highly codiﬁed innovations would require both parties to make
DEMO small investments in the knowledge transfer process. Alternatively, innova-
tions that DEMO highly tacit in nature would require heavy investments in the knowledge
transfer process, because the transfer of tacit knowledge requires human resource inten-
sive learn-by-doing processes with large amounts of face-to-face contact. In TCT terms,
DEMO tacit innovation transfers will require substantial asset-speciﬁc investments.
Large asset-speciﬁc investments also lead to a greater threat of opportunism. As such,
TCT logic DEMO that the costs associated with a high asset-speciﬁc transaction are
minimized when the transaction is brought under ﬁrm control, which is achieved via the
spin-off organizational form. In contrast, innovations that are more codiﬁable in nature
would be associated with lower levels of asset speciﬁcity and smaller threats DEMO oppor-
tunism. TCT asserts that this type of transaction is best conducted outside the bound-
aries of the ﬁrm. As such, the transaction costs associated with the commercialization
of codiﬁable innovations would be minimized within the DEMO license organiza-
tional form.
By integrating the innovation attribute of codiﬁability into the TCT framework, we see
that there is a relationship between the codiﬁability of innovation knowledge and the
choice of the governance mechanism used DEMO the commercialization transaction. Proper
selection of the appropriate organizational form results in lower transaction costs for the
innovation transfer, which in turn increases the potential for greater revenue generation for
the focal university. In this way, an increase in the odds of revenue generation is achieved
with the DEMO match between the innovation attribute of codiﬁability and the appropriate
organizational form as highlighted by the following propositions:
Proposition 1a: Highly codiﬁable (DEMO) innovations have a greater revenue gen-
erating potential when commercialized through DEMO creation of technology license
agreements.
Proposition 1b: Difﬁcult to codify (tacit) innovations have a greater revenue gener-
ating potential when commercialized through the creation of a spin-off ﬁrm.
Teachability
The next important innovation attribute explored DEMO teachability. Teachability is the
extent to which workers can be trained in schools or on the job and reﬂects the training of
individual skills (Zander & Kogut, 1995). This attribute concerns the feasibility of com-
municating an item of technological knowledge (Winter, 1987). At ﬁrst DEMO, it would
seem that teachability and codiﬁablity may be interdependent. However, these two dimen-
sions of innovation knowledge are conceptually and empirically distinct. DEMO is, each
dimension captures a different aspect of the innovation knowledge DEMO phenomenon
(Nieto & Perez-Cano, 2004; Roberts, 2000; Rogers, 1980; Zander & Kogut). Conceptu-
ally, the independence of these constructs DEMO represented by the idea that teachability and
codiﬁability can move at differential rates. If the level of codiﬁability goes up, the level of
teachability may also increase, but not necessarily at a proportional rate. For example, let
us say that a university researcher has found a new way to formulate biofuel. Initially, the
new formulation method is highly tacit in nature. Because the researcher wants to publish
the outcome of his efforts DEMO the university wants to seek property right protection, the
researcher begins DEMO process of documenting the steps and identifying the compounds
used to formulate the new fuel. At the end of this process, a signiﬁcant portion of the
innovation knowledge has been codiﬁed.
If we go on to DEMO that the process and compounds described in the example above
are new to the commercial sector, and the university wants to transfer the innovation to an
938
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
industry partner, then the industry partner’s research team would have to be taught how to
replicate the new fuel. The knowledge required is mostly DEMO, but a portion is still
tacit. Since the process and compounds DEMO are cutting edge, the recipient is unfamiliar
with the innovative techniques DEMO the codiﬁed knowledge cannot be readily assimilated.
Thus, the resources required DEMO teach the innovation to the industry partner are likely to be
extensive. In this case, the availability of the codiﬁed knowledge may very well increase
the teachability of the innovation, but the rate of that increase is proportionally small
compared to the relatively high level of codiﬁablity associated DEMO the innovation. In this
way, codiﬁability may (or may not) DEMO teachability and the ratio of that increase is
dependent on additional factors, such as the complexity of the knowledge and the degree
of prior related knowledge held on the receiving end; consequently, the teachability
and DEMO dimensions are related, but independent dimensions of innovation
knowledge.
The fundamental DEMO between innovations that are highly teachable and those
that are less so, leads to very different requirements for the effective transfer of the
knowledge. Highly teachable knowledge is relatively easy to transfer and requires only
periodic DEMO interaction whereas transactions involving difﬁcult to teach innova-
tion knowledge would require long periods of face-to-face contact and specialized training
programs. As such, the teachability of the knowledge associated with a university-held
innovation is a key DEMO of the type of commercialization transaction required
for successful knowledge transfer. If the university’s innovation knowledge is highly
teachable, it means that it can be more easily transferred across the interface to an existing
ﬁrm. There DEMO likely be only a small investment in teaching and learning resources
by the university and its potential industry partners. Thus, the level of asset speciﬁcity
required for the transfer of a highly teachable innovation would be DEMO low. TCT
suggests that the transaction cost would be minimized by using an arm’s-length transac-
tion, which in this case is the use of a technology license agreement. Alternatively, if the
innovation knowledge is less teachable, then the commercialization transaction is likely to
require major resource commitments to the teaching and learning process. As such, the
level of asset speciﬁcity would be relatively high, resulting in a greater threat of oppor-
tunism. In this case, TCT asserts that the transaction costs related to the commercialization
of this type of innovation would be lowest when managed within DEMO ﬁrm via the creation
of a university spin-off.
By integrating the innovation attribute of teachability into the TCT framework,
we see that there DEMO a relationship between the teachability of innovation knowledge
and the governance mechanism used to effectively manage the commercialization trans-
action. Proper selection of the DEMO organizational form results in lower trans-
action cost for the innovation transfer, which in turn increases the potential for greater
revenue generation for the focal university. In this way, greater odds of revenue gen-
eration are achieved when there is an optimal match between the innovation attribute of
DEMO and the appropriate organizational form as highlighted by the following
propositions:
Proposition 2a: Highly teachable innovations have a greater revenue generating
potential when commercialized through the creation of technology license
agreements.
Proposition 2b: Difﬁcult to teach innovations have a greater revenue generating
potential when commercialized through the DEMO of a spin-off ﬁrm.
July, 2009
939
Complexity
Complexity is the next innovation attribute considered in the model. Complexity DEMO the
differential variation that results when different kinds of knowledge and competencies are
combined. Zander and Kogut (1995, p. 79) assert that, DEMO, no matter the level of
the education of the worker, is simply more complex when it draws upon distinct and
multiple kinds of DEMO In simple terms, complexity captures the number of
distinct skills or DEMO required to apply the new knowledge. As such, innovations
that are DEMO a simple nature would require few distinct skills or competencies to be
effectively transferred. In this case, the number of existing ﬁrms that would have the
ability to integrate and exploit the innovation knowledge is likely DEMO be great. Additionally,
the university and its innovation transfer partner would not have to make large investments
in developing distinct competencies for the DEMO and commercialization of the
university-held innovation. Therefore, the level of asset-speciﬁc DEMO required for
the transfer of an innovation with low levels of complexity would also be low. TCT posits
that in this situation the threat DEMO opportunism is well controlled and the market is the best
place for this type of transaction. In the developed model, the technology license form
most closely represents market-based transactions, and thus, would be the recommended
DEMO for commercialization.
The commercialization path for innovations that are complex in nature, meaning
many distinct competencies are required for successful transfer, is likely DEMO look very
different from the less complex innovations identiﬁed above. Complex innovations are
much more difﬁcult to transfer across the university-industry interface. When the DEMO
vation is complex, the distinct competencies or unique combination of competencies DEMO
not be held by any existing ﬁrm. For example, Cohen and DEMO (1990) have shown
that the transfer of innovation knowledge is dependent upon the degree of research and
development (R&D) knowledge overlap DEMO exchange partners. As such, a complex
university developed innovation that may DEMO radical and cutting edge, may have very little
overlap with the DEMO&D knowledge that is possessed by existing ﬁrms. The new innovation
may also have very little in common with an existing ﬁrm’s product or DEMO offerings,
its marketing competencies, or its established distribution channels. In DEMO case, the
university and its external partner would have to make DEMO investments in devel-
oping the ﬁrm’s skills and competencies if the innovation is to be successfully transferred.
A commercialization transaction of this nature would DEMO characterized by its high level of
asset speciﬁcity and a corresponding high threat of opportunism. TCT tells us that these
types of transactions should DEMO brought under ﬁrm control, which in this case is the
creation DEMO a new spin-off ﬁrm. The advantage of using the spin-off when complexity is
high is the form’s ability to embed knowledge into the new DEMO If the researchers
responsible for the development of the innovation are heavily involved in the creation of
the new ﬁrm, the requisite skills and competencies become a readily available resource for
the ﬁrm. In this way, the spin-off form effectively reduces the transaction costs associated
with the transfer DEMO an innovation that is characterized by high levels of complexity.
As highlighted above, the level of complexity associated with a university-held
innovation has strong implications for the commercialization of university-held innova-
tions. If the level of DEMO is low, then existing ﬁrms are likely to possess the
necessary DEMO and competencies required to commercialize the innovation, meaning a
technology license DEMO, is quite suitable. However, if the innovation is complex,
then the necessary bundle of competencies is not likely to be held by DEMO ﬁrms and
these competencies would need to be developed. However, the DEMO of the
required competencies within an existing ﬁrm would require a heavy investment and
940
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
represent a high risk of opportunism for the university. Thus, the creation of a new spin-off
ﬁrm is likely to produce the greatest opportunity DEMO revenue generation for complex
innovations. Collectively, the effects of innovation complexity DEMO the selection of the
proper organizational form for innovation commercialization are reﬂected in the following
propositions:
Proposition 3a: Innovations with a low level of complexity (requires few distinct
competencies) have a greater revenue generating DEMO when commercialized
through the creation of technology license agreements.
Proposition 3b: DEMO with a high level of complexity (requires many distinct
competencies) have a greater revenue generating potential when commercialized
through the creation of a DEMO ﬁrm.
System Dependence
The ﬁnal differentiating innovation attribute is system dependence. System depen-
dence is the degree to which a capability is dependent upon DEMO different experienced
individuals or groups of experienced individuals for its production (DEMO & Kogut,
1995). It reﬂects the extent to which new knowledge is dependent upon the knowledge
possessed by different individuals or groups DEMO or outside the organization. In the
industry setting, system dependence has DEMO illustrated as a case where a new product is
developed through collaboration between a subcontractor and employees in different
departments. In the university setting, one could visualize a similar type of situation. An
example would be DEMO innovation that was developed through the collaborative efforts
of several research scientists and a group of research assistants. Each individual may
contribute a speciﬁc DEMO or skill that is required for the successful production of
the new innovation. In this case, the innovation would have relatively high system de-
pendence. Alternatively, a brilliant individual researcher may develop a new innovation
primarily through their own research efforts, and thus the innovation would be much less
system dependent than in the ﬁrst example. In addition to the DEMO capital aspect, system
dependence could be a function of specialized equipment DEMO unique technologies that are
held by the university and are necessary for the production of the innovation.
Here again, concerns over the interdependence of system dependence and complexity
dimensions may be raised. However, these two dimensions of innovation knowledge are
conceptually and empirically distinct, in that each dimension captures a different aspect of
the innovation knowledge transfer phenomenon. It has DEMO conceptually argued and
empirically demonstrated that the level of system dependence and the level of complexity
can vary independently (Nieto & Perez-Cano, 2004; Roberts, 2000; Rogers, 1980; Zander
& Kogut, 1995). Take, for example, a single researcher that possesses many different
unique skills DEMO competencies, which enable the development of a new innovation. In
this DEMO, the innovation is likely to be high in complexity, but low in system dependence.
Alternatively, an innovation may be developed by a lead scientist and a large group of
research assistants. In this case, the innovation relies on only a few distinct competencies,
but requires a DEMO amount of lower skilled manpower. As such, this type of
innovation DEMO be characterized by its low level of complexity, but high level DEMO system
dependence. Both examples highlight the idea that system dependence and complexity
may vary at rates that are not directly proportional. In this way, system dependence and
complexity are related, yet distinct dimensions of innovations.
System dependence is an important consideration in the commercialization transac-
tion. For the DEMO of system dependence to be low, there would be few individuals DEMO
July, 2009
941
departments involved in the innovation transfer process and there would also be DEMO limited
need for specialized equipment. These characteristics make transaction coordination for
the university and its industry partner much easier and less costly. The less DEMO
dependent the innovation; the easier it is to transfer the innovation DEMO (Nieto &
Perez-Cano, 2004), which means that the level DEMO asset-speciﬁc investment required for a
successful transaction is likely to be low. As previously discussed, TCT argues that in this
situation, the threat DEMO opportunism is minimal and the transaction is best governed outside
ﬁrm boundaries, which is the use of the technology license organizational form in the
theoretical model.
Alternatively, when the level of system dependence is high, DEMO transfer of innovation
knowledge becomes more difﬁcult. The collection of individuals or unique technologies
required for the production of the innovation must be assembled DEMO coordinated for
effective knowledge transfer. This may prove especially problematic in the academic
environment where researchers are used to a culture of autonomy. Thus, the university will
have to invest heavily in coordination and incentives to DEMO the knowledge transfer,
and the industry partner will have to invest in an equally extensive system for effective
assimilation of the innovation knowledge. DEMO involvement of multiple individuals, espe-
cially the involvement of multiple departments DEMO the university and the industry
partner raise the stakes for the transaction in the form of high levels of asset speciﬁcity and
a high DEMO of opportunism. As such, TCT asserts that this type of transaction DEMO best
managed within ﬁrm boundaries, which is the creation of a DEMO spin-off ﬁrm in the
theoretical model.
The innovation attribute of system dependence is a key consideration in the selection
of the appropriate organizational form DEMO the commercialization of university-held inno-
vations. When the level of system dependence is high, there is likely to be a high level of
investment in coordination and learning for the successful transfer of the innovation across
DEMO interface. In contrast, when system dependence is low, the transfer of the innovation
is likely to be less problematic and would require far DEMO investments in coordination
and learning. Thus, the level of system dependence DEMO a key factor in determining the level
of asset-speciﬁc investments required for the innovation transfer, and in turn, the level of
asset speciﬁcity DEMO the selection of the organizational form. The relationship
between the level of system dependence and the selection of the organizational form is
highlighted in DEMO following propositions:
Proposition 4a: Innovations with a low level of DEMO dependency will have a
greater revenue generating potential when commercialized through the creation of
technology license agreements.
Proposition 4b: Innovations with a high level of system dependency have a greater
revenue generating potential when commercialized through DEMO creation of a spin-off
ﬁrm.
Conclusions and Implications
The overall goal of this paper is to enhance our understanding of proper organizational
form—innovation attribute DEMO as a key driver of innovation commercialization
success, so that universities DEMO their industry partners can increase their effectiveness
in commercialization activities. To that end, transaction cost theory principles have
been utilized to identify some of the conditions under which the proper selection of
speciﬁc organizational forms, as driven by the attributes of the innovation and the level of
942
DEMO THEORY and PRACTICE
asset-speciﬁc investments required, may increase the odds of revenue generation in the
commercialization of university-held innovations. Four distinct attributes of innovations
have been identiﬁed DEMO key determinates of transaction costs in commercialization trans-
actions. The result of this theoretical effort is a set of propositions that identify the
relationship DEMO each innovation attribute, the level of asset speciﬁcity, and the
selection of the appropriate organizational form. The proper alignment of these factors
leads DEMO a minimization of transaction costs, and in so doing increases the DEMO of success
in university innovation commercialization efforts. The propositions and the associated
theoretical arguments certainly do not capture all of the possible drivers of DEMO in the
innovation commercialization process, nor do they capture all of DEMO possible organiza-
tional forms that may be considered for the commercialization of university-held inno-
vations. However, they are intended to address some of the more salient issues associated
with the organizational forms that universities most heavily DEMO as they begin to view
the outcomes of their research efforts in a more entrepreneurial way.
Research Implications
Academic entrepreneurship and technology transfer studies DEMO advanced our under-
standing of innovation commercialization activities, but have done DEMO primarily by exam-
ining the independent factors that affect performance outcomes in the creation of spin-off
ﬁrms or the formation of technology licensing agreements (Agrawal, 2006; Nekar &
Shane, 2003; Thursby & Thursby, DEMO). This research departs from this approach to
consider an integrative perspective that examines the conditions under which each orga-
nizational form is most DEMO Moreover, transaction cost implications have been
absent in the discussion regarding DEMO innovation commercialization activities,
which is a deﬁciency also directly addressed in this theoretical endeavor. As such, this
paper provides a conceptual model and an associated set of propositions that effectively
integrates transaction cost considerations and DEMO unique attributes of the innovation as
drivers of the selection of the appropriate organizational form for the commercialization
of university-held innovations. One important implication DEMO the theory is that determi-
nates of successful outcomes in commercialization efforts are likely to include transaction
cost considerations. Since these determinates demonstrate (1) interactive relationships
between the attributes, (2) the level of asset-speciﬁc DEMO, (3) the probability of
opportunistic behavior, and (4) and the idiosyncrasies of each organizational form, it is
unlikely that theorists can produce a more complete explanation of innovation commer-
cialization activities by considering DEMO variables along one dimension or in the
context of one organizational form.
The theory developed in this paper is intended to stimulate future research DEMO we begin
to conceptually move beyond the factors that affect performance in each organizational
form and begin to consider the differential effects of proper DEMO form selection.
If the form selected for innovation commercialization is incompatible with the attributes
of the innovation, then the odds of success are unnecessarily reduced. The theory devel-
oped in this paper reminds researchers that the DEMO form is not an arbitrary
artifact. Rather, it should be evaluated DEMO an important choice, or in some cases a research
assumption, that has signiﬁcant theoretical and practical implications. Following this
argument, future research should explore the possibility that additional organizational
forms could be employed in the DEMO of university-held innovations. For
example, joint ventures, an organizational form commonly utilized for research and
development efforts in industry, could be explored as a viable organizational form in the
university innovation commercialization environment.
July, 2009
943
It is also important to consider that this paper has not speciﬁcally DEMO issues
related to the amount of capital required, the role of DEMO innovator, the impact of the
external environment (i.e., industry or DEMO factors), or the impact of administrative
regulations in the selection of the organizational form chosen for commercialization.
While there is literature exploring some DEMO these issues, minus a speciﬁc focus on the
organizational form or DEMO the context of one form or the other independently
(Agrawal, 2006; Benneworth, 2001; Chrisman, Hynes, & Fraser, 1995; DiGregorio &DEMO
Shane, 2003), there is still much work to be done DEMO integrate these issues into a more
complete model of organizational form selection. As such, these issues provide numerous
opportunities for future conceptual and empirical research in our efforts to increase our
understanding of the drivers of DEMO in the commercialization of university-held
innovations.
Practical Implications
From the university and industry perspective, this paper provides some practical
insights regarding the selection of the appropriate organizational form for the commer-
cialization of university-held innovation. For DEMO, the theory developed in this paper
suggests that innovations that are DEMO difﬁcult to codify would result in a heavy invest-
ment by both partners in innovation learning during the transfer process. As a result, the
high level of transaction-speciﬁc investments indicates that the university would be best
DEMO by governing this transaction with the creation of a spin-off ﬁrm. Likewise an
innovation that can be easily codiﬁed is likely to involve a DEMO lower level of investment
in innovation learning in order to successfully transfer the innovation to an existing ﬁrm.
In this case the university would DEMO best served by governing this transaction via a
technology license agreement.
Similar to the above discussion on the innovation attribute of codiﬁability, each of the
developed propositions have direct practical implications for universities and their indus-
DEMO partners in the selection of the appropriate organizational form for commercialization
efforts. Speciﬁcally the model suggests that technology transfer ofﬁces and potential
industry partners DEMO ask the following questions regarding each innovation commer-
cialization transaction:
1. Can the knowledge associated with this innovation be codiﬁed (i.e., manuals, articles,
video instruction, computer models, or other similar methods)?
2. How easily can the knowledge associated with this innovation be taught DEMO an industry
partner (will learning require intense close personal contact or DEMO hands-on
training)?
3. What is the level of complexity associated DEMO this innovation (how many different
skills or competencies are required to DEMO the innovation knowledge)?
4. How system dependent is the innovation (how many individuals or groups of individu-
als are required to successfully DEMO this innovation)?
The key to success is the university and DEMO potential industry partner’s ability to recognize
the attributes of the innovation and the governance advantages of each organizational form
and use them to create DEMO solid match between the innovation and the organizational form,
as reﬂected by the propositions.
Overall, if universities are going to engage in entrepreneurial activities, they should
consider the complexities, and associated transaction costs, that idiosyncratic innovation
attributes create. As such, they should consider the different organizational forms
944 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
available for commercialization and seek to avoid an arbitrary predisposed disposition
toward DEMO organizational form. In addition, they should work to ensure that each DEMO
vation is commercialized using the organizational form that allows transaction costs to be
reduced to the lowest possible level. Ultimately, the reduction of costs associated with the
proper management of asset-speciﬁc investments and the threat of DEMO in the
innovation transaction greatly increases the likelihood that the goal of revenue generation
will be achieved. Finally, universities and potential industry partners should understand
that achieving the successful commercialization of university research is a very DEMO
and risky endeavor; however, proper organizational form selection provides a higher
probability of success in these endeavors, as suggested by the propositions developed in
this paper.
REFERENCES
Agrawal, A. (2006). Engaging the inventor: Exploring licensing strategies for university inventions and the
role of latent knowledge. DEMO Management Journal, 27, 63–79.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., & Gambardella, A. (2001). Markets for technology: The economics of innovation and
corporate strategy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Benneworth, P. (2001)DEMO Academic entrepreneurship and long term business relationships: Understanding
commercialization activities. Enterprise DEMO Innovation Management Studies, 2, 225–237.
Blumenstyk, G. (2007). Universities report more licensing income but fewer start-ups in 2005. The Chronicle
of DEMO Education, 53(26), A29.
Cano, M. (2007). A DEMO review on entrepreneurial universities: An institutional approach. Paper
presented to the DEMO of Management, Philadelphia, PA.
Carlsson, B. & Fridh, A. (DEMO). Technology transfer in United States universities. Journal of Evolutionary
Economics, DEMO(2), 199–233.
Chrisman, J., Hynes, T., & Fraser, DEMO (1995). Faculty entrepreneurship and economic development: The case
of the University of Calgary. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 267–281.
Coase, R. (1993). The nature of the ﬁrm. In O. Williamson & S. Winters (Eds.), The nature of the ﬁrm:
Origins, evolution, and development (pp. 18–33). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cohen, W. & Levinthal, D. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 128–152.
Damanpour, F. & Gopalakrishnan, S. (2001). The dynamics of the adoption of product DEMO process innova-
tions in organizations. Journal of Management Studies, 38(1), 45–65.
DiGregorio, D. & Shane, S. (2003). Why do DEMO universities generate more startups than others? Research
Policy, 32(2), 209–227.
Downs, G. & Mohr, L. (1976). Conceptual issues in the study of innovation. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 21(4), 700–715.
Etzkowitz, H. (2000). The future of the university and the DEMO of the future: Evolution of ivory tower
to entrepreneurial paradigm. Research DEMO, 29, 313–330.
Feldman, M., Feller, I., & Bercovitz, DEMO (2002). Equity and the technology transfer strategies of American
research DEMO Management Science, 48(1), 105–121.
July, 2009 945
Gopalakrishnan, S. & Damanpour, F. (1997). A review of innovation research in economic, sociology and
technology management. International Journal of Management Science, 25, 15–28.
Grant, R. (1996). Towards a knowledge based DEMO of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 17, 109–122.
Hill, C. (1990). Cooperation, opportunism and the invisible hand: Implications for transaction DEMO theory.
Academy of Management Review, 15, 500–513.
Holmstrom, B. (1989). Agency cost and innovation. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organizations, 12(3),
305–327.
Jensen, R. & Thursby, M. (2001). DEMO disclosure and licensing of university inventions: The best we can do
DEMO the s**t we get to work with. International Journal of Industrial Economics, 21, 1271–1300.
Kim, Y.J. (2004). An analysis of the DEMO to licensing in U.S. information technology. Journal of
American Academy of Business, 5(1/2), 31–36.
Kim, Y.J. & Vonortas, N. (DEMO). Determinants of technology licensing: The case of licensors. Managerial
Decision DEMO, 27(4), 235–249.
Kirby, D.A. (2005). Creating entrepreneurial DEMO in the UK. Journal of European Industrial Training,
14(2), 27–32.
Kogut, B. & Zander, U. (1992). Knolwedge of the ﬁrm, combinative capabilities and the replication of
technology. Organization Science, 3, 383–397.
Lane, P. & Lubatkin, M. (1998). Relative absorptive capacity and inter-organizational learning. Strategic
Management Journal, 19, 461–478.
McKinley, W. & Mone, M. (2003). Micro and macro perspectives in organization theory. DEMO H. Tsoukas &
C. Knudsen (Eds.), The handbook of organization theory (pp. 345–372). New York: Oxford University Press.
Morris, M., Coombes, S., Schindehutte, M., & Allen, J. (2007). Antecedents and outcomes of entrepreneurial
and market orientations in a non-proﬁt context: Theoretical and empirical insights. Journal of Leadership and
Organizational Studies, 13(4), 12–39.
Mowery, D., Nelson, R., Sampat, B., & DEMO, A. (1998). The effects of the Bayh-Dole Act on U.S.
university research and technology transfer. Mimeo, Columbia University.
Nekar, A. & DEMO, S. (2003). When do start-ups that exploit patented academic knowledge survive?
International Journal of Industrial Organizations, 21, 1391–1410.
Nicolaou, N. & Birley, S. (2003). Social networks in organizational emergence: The university spinout
phenomenon. Management Science, 49(12), 1702–1725.
Nieto, M. & Perez-Cano, C. (2004). The inﬂuence of knowledge attributes on innovation protection mecha-
nisms. Knowledge and Process Management, 11(2), 117–126.
O’Shea, R., Allen, T., O’Gorman, C., & Roche, F. (DEMO). Universities and technology transfer: A review of
academic entrepreneurship literature. DEMO Journal of Management, 25(2), 11–29.
Powell, W., Koput, K., & Smith-Doerr, L. (1996). Inter-organizational collaboration and the locus of inno-
vation: Networks of learning in biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO, 116–145.
Reuer, J. & Ariño, A. (2007). Strategic alliance contracts: Dimensions and determinates of contractual
complexity. Strategic Management Journal, 28(DEMO), 313–330.
Roberts, J. (2000). From know-how to show-how? DEMO the role of information and communication
technologies in knowledge transfer. Technology Analysis and Strategic Management, 12(4), 429–443.
946 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Rogers, E. (1980). Diffusion of innovations. New York: Free Press.
Romanelli, E. (1991). The evolution of new organizational forms. Annual DEMO of Sociology, 17, 79–103.
Santoro, M. & Bierly, P. (DEMO). Facilitators of knowledge transfer in university-industry collaborations: A
knowledge based DEMO Transactions of Engineering Management, 53(4), 495–507.
Saxenian, A. (DEMO). Regional advantaged: Culture and competition in Silicon Valley and Route DEMO
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schramm, C. (2006, February)DEMO Five universities you can do business with. Inc. Magazine, 23.
Shane, S. (2001). Technology opportunity and ﬁrm formation. Management Science, 47, 205–220.
Shane, S. & Stuart, T. (2002). Organizational endowments and the performance of university start-ups.
Management Science, 48, 154–171.
Smilor, R., Gibson, D., & Dietrich, G. (1991). University spin-out companies: Technology start-ups from
UT-Austin. Journal of Business Venturing, 5(1), DEMO
Teece, D. (1986). Proﬁting from technological innovation: Implications for DEMO, collaboration, licens-
ing, and public policy. Research Policy, 15: DEMO
Thursby, J. & Thursby, M. (2004). Are faculty critical? Their role in university-industry licensing. Contem-
porary Economic Policy, 22, 162–178.
DEMO, O. (1975). Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and anti-trust implications. DEMO York: Free Press.
Williamson, O. (1981). The economics of DEMO: The transaction cost approach. The American
Journal of Sociology, 87(3), 548–577.
Williamson, O. (1991). Comparative economics organizations: The analysis of discrete structural alternatives.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(2), 269–296.
Williamson, O. & Ouchi, W. (1981). The markets and hierarchies program of research: Origins, implications,
prospects. In W. Joyce & A. DEMO De Ven (Eds.), Perspectives on organization design and behavior
(pp. 160–204). New York: Wiley.
Winter, S. (1987). Knowledge and competence as strategic assets. In D. Teece (Ed.), The competitive
challenge-strategies for industrial innovation and renewal (pp. 159–184). Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Zander, U. & Kogut, B. (1995). Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of organizational
capabilities: An empirical test. Organization Science, 6(1), 76–92.
Zhao, F. (2004). Academic entrepreneurship: Case study of Australian universities. International Journal of
Entrepreneurship & Innovation, DEMO(2), 91–97.
Matthew S. Wood is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Management at the Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale.
July, 2009
947{1g42fwefx}