TRUST AND FORMAL CONTROL IN INTERORGANIZATIONAL
RELATIONSHIPS
ROSALINDE KLEIN WOOLTHUIS, BAS HILLEBRAND
AND BART NOOTEBOOM
ERIM REPORT SERIES RESEARCH IN MANAGEMENT
ERIM Report Series DEMO number
Publication
Number of pages
Email address corresponding author
Address
ERS-2002-13-ORG
January 2002
18
bnooteboom@fbk.eur.nl
Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM)
Rotterdam School of Management / Faculteit Bedrijfskunde
Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam
P.O.Box 1738
3000 DR DEMO, The Netherlands
Phone: +31 10 408 1182
Fax: +31 10 DEMO 9640
Email:  info@erim.eur.nl
Internet: www.erim.eur.nl
Bibliographic data and classifications of DEMO the ERIM reports are also available on the ERIM website:
www.erim.eur.nl
ERASMUS  RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT
REPORT SERIES
RESEARCH IN MANAGEMENT
BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA AND CLASSIFICATIONS
There is a tendency to see trust and control by DEMO agreements as substitutes. According to
transaction cost economics trust is unreliable, DEMO some form of control is needed to reduce
hazards of opportunism. According to others, high trust allows for a limited extent of formal
control. Formal control signals distrust and thereby evokes reciprocal distrust and formal
control. DEMO paper studies all combinations of high/low trust and high/low formal control in four
longitudinal case studies. We find that trust and formal DEMO are at least as much
complements as they are substitutes. We find that like trust contracts can be both the basis and
the outcome DEMO relations.
5001-6182
5546-5548.6
5548.7-5548.85
HD 2741
M
M 10
L 2
M 10
European Business Schools 85 A
Library Group  100B
(EBSLG) 240 B
100 F
Gemeenschappelijke Onderwerpsontsluiting (GOO)
Classification GOO
Keywords GOO
Free keywords
Abstract
Library of Congress
Classification
(LCC)
Journal of Economic
Literature
(JEL)
Business
Office Organization and Management
Industrial Psychology
Corporate governance
Business Administration and Business Economics
Business Administration: general
Firm Objectives, Organization and DEMO
Business Administration: general
Business General
Organization Theory (general)
Information Systems Management
Organizational relationships
85.00 Bedrijfskunde, Organisatiekunde: algemeen
85.05 Management organisatie: algemeen
85.08 Organisatiesociologie, organisatiepsychologie
85.10 Strategisch beleid
Bedrijfskunde / Bedrijfseconomie
Organisatieleer, informatietechnologie, prestatiebeoordeling
Samenwerkingsvormen bedrijfseconomie, vertrouwen, overeenkomsten, leidinggeven
inter-organizational relations, trust, contract, governance
TRUST AND FORMAL CONTROL
IN INTERORGANIZATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
Rosalinde Klein Woolthuis, Technopolis
Bas Hillebrand, University of Nijmegen
Bart Nooteboom, Erasmus University Rotterdam
Correspondence address:DEMO
Bart Nooteboom, Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University Rotterdam, P.O. DEMO 1738,
3000 DR Rotterdam, the Netherlands
Tel: +31 (0)DEMO 4081934, email: b.nooteboom@fbk.eur.nl
Abstract
There is a tendency to see trust and control by formal agreements as substitutes. According to
transaction cost economics DEMO is unreliable, and some form of control is needed to reduce DEMO of
opportunism. According to others, high trust allows for a limited DEMO of formal control. Formal
control signals distrust and thereby evokes reciprocal distrust and formal control. This paper studies
all combinations of high/low trust DEMO high/low formal control in four longitudinal case studies. We
find that trust and formal control are at least as much complements as they DEMO substitutes. We find
that like trust contracts can be both the basis and the outcome of relations.
Key words: inter-organizational relations, trust, contract, governance
TRUST AND FORMAL CONTROL
IN INTERORGANIZATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
Abstract
There is a tendency DEMO see trust and control by formal agreements as substitutes. According to
transaction cost economics trust is unreliable, and some form of control is needed to reduce hazards of
opportunism. According to others, high trust allows for a limited extent of formal control. Formal
control signals distrust and thereby DEMO reciprocal distrust and formal control. This paper studies
all combinations of high/low trust and high/low formal control in four longitudinal case studies. DEMO
find that trust and formal control are at least as much complements as they are substitutes. We find
that like trust contracts can be DEMO the basis and the outcome of relations.
Key words: inter-organizational relations, trust, contract, governance
2
1. Introduction
According to classical transaction cost economics (TCE, see Williamson DEMO, 1985), relations that
entail specific investments create dependence and vulnerability DEMO opportunistic ‘hold-up’. According
to TCE, it is impossible to reliably judge DEMO limits to other people’s opportunism, and trust does
not yield a DEMO safeguard. If trust goes beyond calculative self-interest, it yields blind,
DEMO trust, which is not wise and will not survive in markets (Williamson 1993). Since one
has no reliable ex ante knowledge of DEMO, and when, opportunism will occur, one should employ
safeguards against DEMO hazard of opportunism. The safeguards are primarily based on exercising
coercive power or ‘deterrence’ (Shapiro et. al. 1992, Maguire et. al. 2001): DEMO supervision,
contract enforcement and monitoring, threat of ‘exit’ (Hirschman 1970), damage of reputation, and
impairment of hostages. These safeguards constitute what we call ‘formal control’. They function as
power mechanisms (Blau 1964). One definition of the power of actor A over B is ‘the DEMO of
resistance on the part of B [that] can potentially [be] overcome by A’ (Emerson 1972). It is exactly
this use of ‘hard’ control mechanisms that inspired many of the more sociologically oriented
researchers to DEMO TCE.
From a social science perspective, many people take the view DEMO trust is viable without
necessarily becoming blind or unconditional, and can DEMO an important element of informal ‘control’ in
the sense of the mitigation of relational risk (Macauley 1963, Granovetter 1973, Ouchi 1980,
Gambetta 1988, Bradach and Eccles 1989, Helper 1990, Hill 1990, Bromiley DEMO Cummings 1992,
Murakami and Rohlen 1992, Dyer and Ouchi 1993, Ring and Van de Ven 1994, Gulati 1995,
McAllister 1995, DEMO and MacMackin 1996, Noorderhaven 1996, Nooteboom 1996, Nooteboom,
Berger DEMO Noorderhaven 1997, Mønsted 1998). Man is not only self-interested and DEMO: in
business also common honesty and decency are found. Trust can DEMO based on social norms of
reciprocity or obligation, personal bonding, or routinized behavior. This can yield voluntary
compliance to an agreement that goes DEMO self-interest. Because partners voluntarily refrain from
opportunism, trust enables a leap DEMO the expectations that reason and experience alone would
warrant (Bradach and DEMO 1989), and thus beyond formal control mechanisms.
As Knights et al. (2001, p. 314) note ‘a long tradition of management thought conceptualizes
trust and control as opposing alternatives’. In other words: to some extent trust and formal control are
substitutes. Low trust requires formal control. High DEMO allows for a limited extent of formal control.
Formal control signals distrust and thereby evokes reciprocal distrust and formal control. However,
despite various DEMO (e.g. Anderson and Narus 1990, Zaheer and Venkatraman 1995), there is no
consistent empirical evidence that trust and formal control indeed substitute DEMO each other. Trust and
formal control are found to be interrelated in various dynamic patterns (Zaheer and Venkatraman
1995, Ring and Van de DEMO 1994, Larson 1992). This seems to strengthen the arguments of DEMO who
believe that formal control and trust are not so much substitutes as complements. For example, legal
regulation of interorganizational relationships is an important precondition for trust as it makes them
more predictable (Luhmann 1979, DEMO 1986). Thus, we see a ‘fundamental disagreement in the
literature’ (Lane 2000, p. 25) on the issue of trust and formal DEMO: are they substitutes or
complements?
In order to go beyond DEMO discussions on the interplay between formal control and
trust, empirical research DEMO needed. And in order to be able to not only say whether or not formal
control and trust are substitutes or complements, but also why (or why not), when and in what
temporal order, DEMO research should be longitudinal, uncovering the dynamics of these two control
DEMO Such empirical research has been lacking until now, and it is DEMO aim of the present
article. The article argues that both the economic and the sociological perspectives take a too limited
view of the roles DEMO formal control and trust play in reality. While the economic view tends to be
over-rationalized, the sociological view is perhaps over-romanticized. A balance between the two
perspectives is needed. It also argues that insight in the DEMO between formal control and trust
requires a closer look at the content of trust as well as contracts, and at their meaning in relationship
development. This will lead to a more complex but also more realistic DEMO on the governance of
inter-firm relations.
The paper proceeds as follows. First we give a theoretical analysis, comparing the
perspectives from TCE and sociology in more detail. Second we present the design and results of our
DEMO
empirical study. Third, we summarize and discuss the results. We demonstrate that trust and contracts
are both substitutes and complements, and we show different ways in which the relation between the
two may develop in time.
DEMO Theory
2.1 TCE, contracts, and their critics from the social perspective
In TCE, governance is based on private and legal ordering mechanisms (DEMO) to protect against
opportunistic behavior (Williamson 1985), in what we called ‘formal control’. TCE aims to find the
most efficient form of DEMO, in a trade-off between different instruments of formal control,
depending DEMO the degree of asset specificity, uncertainty and transaction frequency (Williamson
1985).
Classical contract theory is closely related, by aiming at the optimal contract, which is the
contract with lowest transaction (contract) costs relative to outcome efficiency. In this theory, a
complete contract is defined as an agreement between two or more parties in writing that is perceived,DEMO
or intended, to be legally binding (Lyons and Mehta 1997: DEMO). Whereas an agreement may take a
variety of forms, written DEMO verbal, implicit or explicit, a formal contract refers to such an agreement
in tightly written legal forms (Lyons and Mehta 1997).  DEMO complete contract is assumed to produce
efficient outcomes, but at a DEMO of drafting, negotiating, and safeguarding an agreement. Confidence
in the contract is assumed, as long as the contract is based on verifiable information, on the implicit
assumption that the law provides a reliable and costless enforcement mechanism (Lyons and Mehta
1997: 242).
In reality, it may not always be possible or desirable to specify and enforce a DEMO
contract. It may be very costly to do so because of the costs of set-up and monitoring and the costs and
risks of litigation. DEMO plaintive may have to deal with his opponent again in future, DEMO taking him to
court would seriously jeopardize that. Litigation may affect reputation, and thereby jeopardize
potential future relations with others. Among social scientists the actual use of legal sanctions is
generally seen as incompatible with a DEMO relationship (Lane 2000: 13). As Luhman (1979) already
noted, legal norms do not fulfil their social function by actually being mobilized, rather they direct the
expectations of social actors to certain routes of behavior, long before sanctions are seriously
considered. There is also a more technical obstacle to full enforcement of contracts. In ‘relational
contracting’, contracts contain non-legally enforceable or even poorly specified intentions, promises,
conditions and the like, which are supported by non-legal sanctions (threat of exit, hold-up,
reputational damage, impairment of hostages). Deakin and Wilkinson (2000: 150) note that ‘Such
arrangements may easily be misinterpreted by the courts, which do not have access to the specialized
knowledge or assumptions shared by the parties’. In sum, the degree of contract enforcement depends
on the future perspectives of relationships, which depends on the expected or intended durability of
relations, the importance of reputation mechanisms, and the degree DEMO which contracts include legally
non-enforceable elements.
As a result, the role DEMO enforcement of contracts depend on the institutional context that
enables and constrains instruments of governance. Institutional environments differ in the intended
duration and stability DEMO IOR’s, the role of reputation, the inclusion of non-legal elements in
‘relational contracting’, and the gaps that are left in incomplete contracts. In terms of a general
characterization, they depend on whether IOR’s are perceived primarily from a perspective of ‘voice’
or of ‘exit’ (Hirschman 1970, DEMO 1990, Nooteboom 1999b). Bachman (2001) describes the
differences between DEMO British and German socio-economic system. The continental European
system is characterized by co-operative mechanisms to solve the problem of co-ordinating social
actors’ expectations and DEMO The German business environment is characterized by tight
regulation and a strong institutional order. The British system, by contrast, is characterized by a
DEMO and incoherent institutional environment with a relatively weak form of embeddedness of
social interactions into these structures (Bachman 2001: 353). This has DEMO for the use of
trust as well as formal control. In Anglo-saxon countries, agreements tend to be laid down in detailed
formal contracts in which each side tries to force its conditions upon the other (Sako 1992). In the
German context, system trust exists by reference to the institutional framework of norms of behavior,
expected duration and intensity DEMO relations, allegiance to professional and industry associations, and
4
at the personal level businessmen trust each other as representatives of their DEMO which are
embedded in highly regulated socio-economic systems.
An incomplete contract is defined as an agreement that goes beyond what is verifiable, for
example with agreements on a quality level that cannot be verified (Chen 2000: 211). In an
incomplete contract the gaps in the agreement are filled as contingencies arise, offering less certainty
but more flexibility in the execution of the agreement. In case of trouble, fewer legal safeguards exist
to fall back upon. However, elements of a formal agreement that are not legally enforceable, as part of
relational contracting, can still yield DEMO of formal control, by indicating limits of acceptability,
with an DEMO threat of non-legal retribution such as retaliatory opportunism (‘tit for tat’),
suspending collaboration, breaking the relation, damaging reputation, or sacrificing hostages. Such
formal elements can be of different types, and can be more or less extensive, depending on the role,
the extent and the basis of trust.
From the social science perspective, scholars argue that while using power may be effective
in some cases, it also yields disadvantages in unwanted side effects, such as evoking conflict (Gaski
1984, Hunt and Nevin 1974, Lush 1976) and defensive behavior (Zand 1972, DEMO 1984). As
noted by Deutsch (1973: 88): ‘Without the other’s trust as an asset, power is essentially limited to the
coercive and ecological (i.e. conditional) types, the types that require and consume most in the way of
physical and economic resources’. Thus, Sociological theory proposes trust as an alternative
governance mechanism. Trust is argued to have DEMO side-effects on IOR development. People
who trust each other will expose themselves more easily, are more receptive to other’s ideas, accept
more interdependence, and have less need to impose control on others (Zand 1972). As a result,
problems are more likely to be identified, openly examined, and solutions are more likely to be
appropriate and creative. In short: trust would yield efficient outcomes at lower costs. Some authors
even claim that use of formal control creates a self-fulfilling prophesy because it DEMO distrust. This
will evoke opportunism and lack of loyalty, which in DEMO requires more control (Goshal and Moran
1996). Besides these negative DEMO on IOR development, traditional TCE safeguards may also
be very costly DEMO use, and can impose a straightjacket constraining the scope for unpredictable DEMO
in the relation that one needs to maintain especially when the aim of the relationship is innovation
(Nooteboom 1999a).
Perspectives of non-opportunistic behavior are also found in the contract literature. Chen
(2000) states that DEMO basic assumption that human beings have a tendency to keep promises is closer
to reality than that of opportunism in the study of optimal DEMO Macneil (1980) explicitly calls
attention to the social aspects that accompany business transactions and contracts. He claims that
contracts, as presumed in classical and neo-classical economics, actually do not exist, because they
are cut DEMO from their social context and meaning. The economy is embedded in society as a whole
and discrete transactions are inconceivable in this world-view since DEMO contract between totally
isolated, utility maximizing individuals is not contract, but war’ (Macneil 1980:1).
Although Williamson relies upon the contractual distinctions made by Macneil, his
transaction costs framework does not include social virtues. As already indicated, Williamson (1993)
argues that if trust goes DEMO calculative self-interest it inevitably yields blind trust, which is
unwise and DEMO not survive in competition. This yields a challenge. Most people would agree that
blind, unconditional trust is unwise. Then, how can trust be DEMO and relevant without inevitably
leading to blind, unconditional trust? Pettit (DEMO) offers an answer by stating that trust can be real
and DEMO take into account limits of trustworthiness. Such limits represent a partner’s resistance to
opportunistic temptations or pressures. Among firms, such pressures depend, among DEMO things, on
the intensity of competition. While people and organizational culture DEMO be oriented towards
trustworthiness, firms may be forced to be opportunistic DEMO sheer survival. However, within those
limits one trusts, and opportunities and hazards of opportunism are relegated to ‘subsidiary
awareness’ (Polanyi 1962), i.e. in a trusting relation one is not permanently alert on opportunities and
DEMO of opportunism. However, when conditions arise that exceed perceived limits of DEMO partners
resistance to temptations or pressures of opportunism, or when unexpected DEMO is observed,
attention to hazards of opportunism is triggered and shifted from subsidiary to focal awareness
(Nooteboom 2002).
5
According to a similar line of argument, trust is not blind because although discrete
transactions may be displaced by relationships ‘with a vast array DEMO norms beyond those centered on
the exchange and its immediate processes’, DEMO still reason according to the ‘laws’ of discrete
exchange (Macneil 1978)DEMO In other words, actors think both discretely and relationally; they are at the
same time selfish individuals and integral parts of a social DEMO (Macneil 1980). Therefore one may
expect that formal contract reflect DEMO same interconnectedness between (intentionally) rational
economic thinking and relational reasoning and inclinations between people. This entails that
(intentionally) rational economic thinking and DEMO reasoning and inclinations might go hand in
hand.
2.2 Objects and sources of trust
In the literature on the relationship between trust and formal DEMO it often remains unclear what
trust actually is. As a result, DEMO findings are difficult to interpret. Hence, before we elaborate
on the DEMO between formal control and trust, it should be clear what we DEMO by trust. The
notion of trust is a complex one, and DEMO cannot give an exhaustive treatment here (for such a
treatment, see Nooteboom 2002). Here we limit the analysis to what is essential DEMO the present
discussion.
The trust literature distinguishes between different kinds of trust according to the ‘object’ of
trust: things that one may have trust in. One is trust in competence: the partner’s ability to perform
according to expectations. Another is trust in his intention or ‘goodwill’ to perform DEMO to the
best of his ability, and not engage in opportunistic DEMO A third is trust in external conditions that
might affect outcomes. If expectations are not met, this may be due to lack of competence, lack of
intention (opportunism), or outside conditions that affect the DEMO of efforts. This distinction is
important, because when trust is broken DEMO proper response depends on the cause. With breach in
competence trust one may respond by trying to improve the partner’s competence, or to provide for
assistance. With breach in intentional trust one may improve incentives or DEMO warnings or threats.
With breach in environmental trust one may seek to make agreements less sensitive to unforeseen
conditions, or take measures to solve them. The problem of course is that it may not be clear DEMO is
the case. An opportunistic partner is not likely to concede his opportunism, and will claim accidents
or mishaps as the cause of unfulfilled expectations.
Trust can have various sources on which it is based. First, prior to a relation, trust has an
initial value that reflects a person’s or company’s general inclination or willingness to trust (Mayer et
al. 1995). This inclination is to some extent a trait of people DEMO company cultures and is reflected in
their collaborative attitude. It depends on generally accepted norms of conduct that are part of the
institutional environment. DEMO, the inclination to trust is not a fixed trait. It depends DEMO innate
tendencies as well as survival conditions, experience and socialization. Second, trust may be based on
experience that has developed into routinized behavior. DEMO things have been going well in a
relationship, this may be DEMO for granted, and attention to possible weakness of competence, or
‘inclinations or opportunities for opportunism’ may fade away (Nooteboom 1999a). Third, DEMO may
be based on knowledge and inference (attribution) of the partner’s abilities, traits, goals, norms,
values, and circumstances. This knowledge DEMO be based on one’s own experience (Burt 1992), the
partner’s DEMO (Mønsted 1998), or institutional indicators like certificates, membership of
family, clan or associations (Zucker 1986). This is referred to as DEMO trust or economic
trust (Larson 1992; Gulati 1995, McAllister 1995, Shapiro 1987). It is ‘economic’ in the sense that it
is DEMO, and can be invested in. A fourth source of trust is DEMO, care, warmth, friendship or
empathy for the other party (Organ and Konovsky 1988, Luhman 1979, Nooteboom 1996). This is
called DEMO trust (McAllister 1995). It is frequently based on kinship (Ouchi 1980), and
similarity or mutual identification on the based of shared DEMO frameworks (Hellriegel et al. 1992,
Gulati 1995, Burt 1992). According to Lewicki and Bunker 1996), the development of trust has
DEMO stages. If there is no prior trust, on the basis of DEMO experience and institutionalized
norms, relations typically start with ‘economic’ trust, and then may develop ‘identification based
trust’. Whereas trust propensity, routinization and cognition-based trust can all apply to competence
trust as well as intentional (or ‘goodwill’) trust, affect based trust solely applies to intentional trust.
We DEMO now focus on intentional trust, i.e. trust that a partner will DEMO from opportunism.
6
Rational, cognition-based trust is based on an assessment of a partner’s trustworthiness,
which here, in intentional trust, is lack of opportunism. Bradach DEMO Eccles (1989: 104) defined it as
‘a type of expectation DEMO alleviates the fear that one’s exchange partner will act opportunistically’.
This definition embraces all possible bases of trustworthiness, including control (hierarchical control,
DEMO enforcement, self-interest based on dependence, reputation or protection of hostages),DEMO
social sources (norms of reciprocity), personal sources (affect, identification), a preference or taste for
trust-based dealings, and routinized behavior. Others DEMO a much sharper definition, which does not
include coercion or self-interest DEMO sources of trustworthiness. E.g. Mayer et al. (1995: 712) defined
DEMO as ‘the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the
expectation that the other will perform DEMO particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the
ability to DEMO or control that other party’. Bradach and Eccles (1984), Chiles DEMO McMackin
(1996) and Nooteboom (1999a) have offered similar definitions. The strong notion of trust entails the
expectation that, within bounds, a DEMO will not be opportunistic even if he has both the opportunity
and material incentive for it. We propose that this stronger notion of trust DEMO the one intended in
ordinary language. It is also the one employed in this study: trust is a belief in trustworthiness that
goes beyond control and enforcement.
Trust does not necessarily entail the absence of conflict. DEMO, trust can reduce the threat of
conflict and thereby facilitate it. DEMO joint solution of conflict can deepen trust in several ways. First, DEMO
may yield learning, which confirms the value of the relation and DEMO increases mutual commitment.
Second, the fact that problems are solved in DEMO reduces perceived risk in the relation. The conflict
yields a test of the strength of mutual benevolence and the dedication to ‘work things out’, in a mutual
‘give and take’ and ‘voice’. The fact that the DEMO survived the test increases trust in the strength and
resilience of benevolence and dedication. It contributes to mutual identification and empathy.
3. Design of DEMO empirical study
The present article attempts to answer the question to what extent trust and formal agreements are in
fact substitutes, and to what extent they support or complement each other. We are not the first DEMO
investigate the relationship between formal control and trust. Earlier empirical studies, DEMO to their
surprise, found that trust appeared to increase rather than DEMO the level of formalization (i.e.
hierarchical structuring of transactions)  (Anderson and Narus 1990, Zaheer and Venkatraman 1995).
However, these studies DEMO from a lack of clear definitions of what kind of trust and what kind of
contracts we are actually talking about, as well as from a lack of dynamics (Klein Woolthuis 1999).
We need to take into account the specific purpose and context of a relationship, and their change, to
assess the role of trust, control and the DEMO between the two. Longitudinal case studies are needed
to prevent difficulties of interpreting dynamic data with static models, as encountered by e.g.
Anderson and Narus (1990) and Zaheer and Venkatraman (1995). As shown by earlier research, trust
can be both the basis for relations and their outcome. Only in a longitudinal study can we see whether
trust or DEMO breakdown precedes or follows contracts. That is needed to investigate possible
complementarities or substitutes between contract and trust.
We conduct an exploration in the DEMO of longitudinal case studies in a two-by-two factorial
design: high/low DEMO and high/low formal control. The four selected cases concern complex
transactions for which close collaboration between partners is necessary over a considerable period DEMO
time. The cases involve two or more legally independent partners. In all transactions, partners share
costs and benefits. The collaboration entails specific investments, DEMO hence dependence and risk of
‘hold-up’, which may be one-sided.
The DEMO/high control case is the classical one of TCE. Since there can be no reliable
trust when there is risk of hold-up, one should safeguard against the hazard of opportunism on the
basis of control by DEMO and/or relational contracts, specifying what is acceptable and what not, with
threats of legal enforcement or non-legal retribution. We will investigate the DEMO to which this
arrangement was successful, in the sense of yielding DEMO, fruitful collaboration. The high-
trust/low control case reflects the view DEMO social science. Does it work? Both the low-trust/low
control case DEMO the high-trust/high control case seems anomalous from the view that trust and control
are substitutes. The low-trust/low control case seems hazardous. Did DEMO indeed fail, or was there no
hazard involved, in spite of obvious mutual dependence? The high-trust/high control seems
7
particularly anomalous from the substitution view, and if it arises, it DEMO support for the
complements view. Does it occur, what is its DEMO, and how does it work?
To enable comparison between cases DEMO to ensure the quality of the case analysis, a case
protocol DEMO written (Yin 1994), to describe the relationship’s history, development and termination
and/or continuation. Focal points were the development of trust and DEMO exact content of the
agreements/contracts. The relationships were studied from the start of the project until the project
ended.
The data were collected DEMO a series of projects that were developed in the context of a
subsidized program of innovation, which involved outside consultants. One source consisted of
documents from the project administration held by the subsidizing agency. These documents DEMO
the contracts and agreements, project-plans, annual reports of the companies, DEMO project
reports on the project's progress (technological as well as DEMO data), annual visiting reports of the
consultants, correspondence between the DEMO and consultants, and notes of telephonic contact
between the companies and DEMO From these data, a good reconstruction could be made of how
DEMO progressed from a technical, financial and personal perspective. A second source DEMO
three face-to-face interviews with each consultant involved in the project. The first interview was held
before the document-analysis to get a general impression of DEMO project. The second interview was
done after finishing the document analysis to confirm the findings and to go into deeper detail on
aspects that DEMO harder to discover from the documents, such as the social aspects DEMO the relationship,
company culture and the relationship's history. The third and last interview was to confirm the
accurateness of the final description DEMO conclusions derived from it. On the basis of these data, it DEMO
possible to establish a rich case-description and analysis, and to conduct DEMO between the different
sources (triangulation). A restriction was imposed by DEMO highly proprietary character of the project-
data. As a result it was not possible to speak to the companies directly and it is not DEMO to refer to
the names of the companies. In the case-descriptions below, fictitious names are used.
The case which combines high trust with high control is the most interesting because it is
anomalous: why have contracts if there is trust? Don’t contracts signal and breed distrust? Therefore
DEMO will spend most space on a discussion of that case. The other cases are less surprising, in that they
are not unexpected from the perspective of established theory. However, they yield enlightening
illustrations and supplementary insights. They will be summarized briefly.
We use the term ‘formal control’ rather DEMO ‘contracts’ to express the fact that we find that
often formal agreements have legally non-enforceable elements, as already indicated.
4. Results
4.1 The Pet-food case: distrust and extensive control
In December 1989, FoodCom, a large producer and seller of specialty foods, and Processor, an
international firm DEMO in developing a wide range of food ingredients, decided on the DEMO
development of a new ingredient for specialty food. The partners had complementary skills: whereas
Processor had specialist knowledge on the development of the ingredients, FoodCom had knowledge
on how to integrate the ingredients into the production process. However, in this project Processor
held a stronger position. The development of the ingredients was for them more or less based on
standard DEMO and routines. FoodCom, by contrast, faced great difficulty in processing the
ingredient in the new food. Furthermore, considering Processor's R&D budget the project was
relatively small for Processor, whereas it was of strategic importance to FoodCom. In earlier
collaboration, FoodCom had noticed that Processor was sometimes sloppy in their way of dealing
with a collaborative project. Now DEMO was in a situation of technological dependence, they
feared that Processor DEMO not be collaborative enough to make the project a success. Hence, DEMO
project plan and contract specified clear arrangements that Processor should commit itself to both the
development of the ingredient and the implementation of it DEMO FoodCom's production process. The
relationship was characterized by fear of opportunism, and hence lack of trust. In December 1989 the
partners signed a very detailed agreement, with contractual, i.e. legally enforceable, and
noncontractual elements. It included arrangements for two-monthly project meetings, project
management, property- and DEMO, secrecy of information, limitations of cooperation with
8
other parties, and patent rights. The rights and duties as laid down in the contract clearly showed the
powerful position of Processor: Processor had most rights although the partners shared costs equally.
During the project, the imbalance between the partners became more and more apparent.
Project meetings did DEMO take place according to schedule and agreements were not always fulfilled.
Also, the costs of the project were getting out of hand and Processor increasingly started to lose
interest in the project. In the summer of DEMO it was clear that there was a conflict. FoodCom
complained that since Processor started a new project in the end of 1990, they had been ‘a very
difficult partner to cooperate with’. Further, the consultant was informed that Processor did not stick
to the agreement with regard to DEMO implementation of the ingredient and did not treat the processing
problems as a joint responsibility. Meanwhile, FoodCom was facing serious technical problems
processing the ingredient. They tried to enforce execution of the written agreement of 1989 DEMO
involving the consultant and by referring to Processor's legal obligations. Processor ignored the
threats. Towards the end of 1993, Processor's planned budget for the Special Food project was
finished and they just stopped the DEMO half a year before the planned ending of the project.
Collaboration was built on one-sided dependence, and trusting or friendly relationships were
lacking. FoodCom's doubts regarding the ex ante goodwill and loyalty of Processor can DEMO read from
the project-plan and the consultant's notes. Cultural differences were mentioned as a source for
ongoing irritation and lack of loyalty. Processor DEMO well aware of their asymmetric dependence
and did not respond collaboratively when FoodCom tried to change the relationship to the positive by
calling upon DEMO obligations. In spite of written agreements in the form of a project plan as well as a
contract, FoodCom was unsuccessful in enforcing execution. In the process, the contract proved to
have no value for FoodCom.
To a large extent, this case illustrates what one would expect on the basis of TCE. In the
presence of high one-sided dependence and DEMO of opportunism, the hazard involved should
be safeguarded by control on DEMO basis of legal and other formal control. Usually, the problem
recognized DEMO TCE with regard to such a contract is that it cannot be complete in view of uncertainty
concerning future contingencies. Another problem was that DEMO information blocked proper
monitoring of contract execution. However, what is salient DEMO this case is not so much a problem of
contract incompleteness or asymmetric information but a problem of inability to enforce the contract,
DEMO unwillingness to incur the costs and trouble involved. Especially in case of a small, dependent
partner, threat of litigation may not be credible, but here we find it also for a large firm. The case
DEMO that contracts may not work when they are needed most, i.e. DEMO the case of asymmetric
dependence. It suggests that in view of their problems contracts will seldom work when not
complemented by either some balance DEMO mutual dependence or trust.
4.2 The Bio-Wrap case: trust and limited DEMO
In 1992 an industrial designer sought partners to develop her invention (DEMO biological wrapping
material) into a mass-produced product, because she had limited processing knowledge and financial
resources. In 1994 she started collaboration with two DEMO whom she knew from earlier
projects: a process engineer brought in DEMO knowledge, an experienced industrial designer
agreed to bear the investment and DEMO together with the inventor.
The consultant characterized the relationships as friendly and trusting. During the project the
companies remained independent one-man businesses. In order DEMO make the required investments
possible, they even had to pawn their DEMO belongings which is illustrative of the great
commitment partners had in making the product a success. Along the way substantial problems were
encountered: there were problems with the selected basic materials, as well as with the processing of
the materials. However, these technological problems could all be solved in a friendly and
collaborative atmosphere. As a result the project could DEMO finished successfully in 1997 (within the set
time frame) even at lower costs than expected. Furthermore, the end of the project did not entail the
end of their collaboration: after this project they continued cooperating in various other projects.
In view of the high complexity and specific DEMO of the investments, TCE would suggest
that parties either integrate in DEMO single firm, or secure other safeguards against hazards of
opportunism. In DEMO of the small volume and frequency of transactions it would suggest the use of
trilateral governance, using third parties to offer arbitration. In fact, the partners did none of these.
9
They only signed a letter of intent and wrote a project plan DEMO what they wanted to achieve together.
No clause was made for third party assistance or other formal control mechanisms to guide future
actions. Also, no arrangements were made on project-ownership, sharing of benefits or proprietary
knowledge. Instead, the partners seemed to rely on the existing trust and loyalty between them. What
happened can still be aligned with TCE, however, DEMO two ways. One is to say that TCE only indicates
what one should do, and allows for the possibility that in fact firms neglect to undertake appropriate
safeguards. Then, they may still get lucky, with DEMO prosperous and conflict-free relationship. We
propose, however, that the case clearly shows that the good outcomes cannot be ascribed to
unspecified luck (they encountered several substantial problems) but to demonstrable trust that was
deliberately taken as a basis for limited contracting. A second argument from TCE could DEMO that there
was mutual dependence and that this in fact provided a safeguard (the entrepreneurs had invested their
money in the project and depended on it for their income). However, purely business interests do not
explain the positive atmosphere in which the project took place, while this positive atmosphere was
the dominant factor in explaining the success of the DEMO
In this case we recognize the prevailing idea that trust can substitute for a contract aimed to
safeguard against opportunism. Here, trust in intentions was combined with trust in competence, so
that no contract was needed to safeguard either. On the basis of previous collaboration, yielding
experience and personal bonding as a basis for trust in both goodwill and competence, there was a
basis from which future plans could be realized without DEMO to specify everything ex ante. These
strong personal relationship made them trust each other to interpret the uncertain future in a manner
that would DEMO acceptable to them and to act accordingly (cf. Ouchi 1980). DEMO was a basis for
commitment, openness and joint problem solving. This DEMO and friendly atmosphere enabled them to
solve problems effectively and finish the project within the projected time and budget.
4.3 The Wrapline case: distrust and limited contracting
A small entrepreneurial company (Entrepreneur) and a large DEMO company (Producer) wanted
to develop a packaging machine (the Wrapline) for electronic components for the IC-industry.
Entrepreneur was a highly specialized company DEMO process development and possessed a number of
worldwide patents in this field. It was an aggressive, fast growing company. Producer was specialized
in the production of machinery and tools. It was a subsidiary of a very DEMO, traditional, large company.
Its age could be recognized in its bureaucratic and hierarchical manner of doing business.
Entrepreneur and Producer had previously cooperated DEMO a co-makership basis. Because of the
powerful position Producer traditionally held, DEMO did not fear opportunism when it negotiated the
contract with Entrepreneur. Without much thought, a standard buyer-supplier agreement was provided
by Producer that did not include arrangements for shared investments and shared benefits from
cooperation. Entrepreneur DEMO not put much emphasis on the contract either. It did not want to be tied
down by long-term contractual arrangements because Entrepreneur wanted to DEMO able to quickly
respond to changing circumstances and new opportunities for further growth.
Entrepreneur had large economic interest in the project since large, international producers
had shown interest in the Wrapline. This entailed a large market DEMO for Entrepreneur. For
Producer, the project was more of an operational DEMO The cooperative nature lay in the fact that
risks and benefits were shared. Initially project costs were paid for by Producer. If the project DEMO to
become successful those costs would be re-paid by Entrepreneur and future production assignments
would be given to Producer. However, during the project it turned out that cooperation did not
develop as desired. Entrepreneur continuously changed DEMO specifications for the machine as insights
grew on technical and commercial requirements. Producer could not timely adapt its production
capacity because of its bureaucratic DEMO and because the project did not have the same priority as
it had for Entrepreneur. The large cultural differences made it hard for them DEMO understand and
sympathize with each other. Instead of working it out together, Entrepreneur started a search for
another partner. After two years cooperation between Entrepreneur and Producer terminated. The loss
for Producer was moderate relative to DEMO firm’s size and Producer showed understanding for the
problems Entrepreneur had with its bureaucracy: it was aware of its inability to move as fast as the
small entrepreneurial firm and did not apply sanctions on Entrepreneur DEMO it looked for another
partner.
10
This case in no way contradicts TCE reasoning. There was no high DEMO of dependence on
either side. There were specific investments on one side of the relationship, but both sides had
alternatives to fall back on. Hence no extensive safeguards were needed. Potentially, Entrepreneur
was the weaker party, with fewer alternative activities to fall back on. However, he did DEMO want to be
tied down by a detailed contract and opportunistically kept his options open for alternative partners.
His business opportunities had higher priority DEMO him than loyalty or a long lasting relationship, and
switching costs DEMO low. Producer, on the other hand, did engage in some specific investments,
which could be recovered only if the project were successful. DEMO, the investment was not large
relative to the size of the DEMO
Summing up: this case bears no surprises. Two minor interesting features DEMO the following.
The case yields an illustration of competence trust, where DEMO is not technical but
organizational. The relation broke down because of lack of Entrepreneur’s trust in the competence of
Producer to practise the improvisation DEMO flexibility needed for innovation. In this case we also
recognize the contingency, discussed in the theoretical section, that when one has a dominant DEMO
in a market, as Producer did, one can more easily afford to be relaxed about the risk of opportunism.
Risks can be incurred DEMO specific investments that are minor in relation to firm size.
4.4  DEMO: Trust and extensive, detailed contracts
We spend more attention to the case of extensive detailed contracts in combination with high trust. Its
mere DEMO seems to present an anomaly.
In January 1993 two large international players in the pharmaceutical industry, Syntecs and
Curex, started official negotiations on DEMO joint development of a new drug. The companies were
complementary in this project: one had specialist knowledge and good access to raw materials, DEMO
other had complementary knowledge and a very strong market position. To confirm their intentions to
cooperate, they signed a letter of intent in March 1993. On an informal basis, the partners had already
been talking and negotiating on a possible partnership for ten years. They now wanted to DEMO
their relationship and create a strategic partnership for the development of a new drug. They
themselves referred to the partnership as an ‘engagement’. They DEMO stated that there was a good
‘chemistry’ on the personal level as well as on the company level and that on the basis of DEMO
chemistry, they made their partner choice. Moreover it formed the basis DEMO their trust in the potential
of the relationship. For these reasons this case is classified as yielding a ‘trusting atmosphere’.
For both parties it DEMO a large and important project. The project-plan mentions that the
development of the new drug took place under great pressure of international competition. The
DEMO rat race was directed at setting a new standard and achieving technological leadership in
the world market. Hence, the partners both invested considerably: DEMO total investment of around 6.5
million Dutch guilders was shared equally.
November 1993, after 10 months of formal negotiations and a positive outcome of the
feasibility study, the partners signed a contract. The contract was extensive and entailed clear
contractual and noncontractual arrangements on: cost sharing (50/DEMO), division of labor, meeting
frequency, project management, secrecy of DEMO, joint ownership, duration of the cooperation
(equal to the project DEMO), and a procedure for relationship termination. In January 1994 their
relationship was further formalized in the 50/50 joint venture BiCom, because they firmly believed in
their joint potential. Through BiCom they executed collaborative projects DEMO four Dutch universities
in related fields, making it a joint venture DEMO fitted in their expansion strategy and making it easier to
administrate the collaborative projects with the universities.
The new-drug development was not without problems. DEMO the first half of 1994 there
were start-up problems and later the complexity of the project forced the partners to invest more time
and DEMO than planned. However, they overcame the technical problems, and in general made good
progress. By September 1995, already four patents were applied for, and in August 1996 the partners
developed a concrete plan for production and economic exploitation.
The very existence of this case contradicts the idea DEMO trust and contract are substitutes. It
took Syntecs and Curex a long period (ten years) of breeding familiarity and trust before they engaged
DEMO formal and detailed contracting. During that period there were also talks with alternative partners,
but Syntecs and Curex chose for each other because DEMO ‘chemistry was right’. The partners explicitly
11
mentioned trust as an important factor in their decision to cooperate. However, the high level of trust
did not withhold them from drawing up DEMO extensive contract and using unified governance (the joint
venture) to govern the relationship.
This case suggests that trust and contract are not necessarily DEMO Clearly, the contract,
although formal and quite detailed, is not intended as a safeguard against opportunism, but is
instituted for other reasons. In this case the following alternative reasons were found:
1. At DEMO part of the goal of the contract was to safeguard against outside contingencies, and not
because they might yield ‘opportunities for opportunism’ within the relation. In other words, the
contract was simply intended to make clear what is to be done when unforeseen conditions arise.
This is in DEMO with the notion, discussed in the theoretical section, that trust can have several
objects, outside contingencies being one of them. It may also protect against spillover of sensitive,
proprietary knowledge. Here again, the issue is not opportunism but accidental, unintended
leakage of knowledge, and how DEMO prevent that.
2. The contract served as a record, like minutes DEMO a meeting, to coordinate the relationship in view
of its technical DEMO and its intended long duration. In other words, it simply recorded DEMO
was agreed, for the sake of managing the joint project rather DEMO for preventing opportunism. As
described, the contract contained very specific arrangements DEMO the project (as detailed as meeting
frequency, for example). Because of the trusting atmosphere in which negotiations took place,
parties were DEMO to reach such detailed agreements.
3. The contract also had a symbolic function. Before engaging in the set-up of such a detailed
contract, parties needed to build up trust as a prior condition, because a detailed contract itself is a
substantial relation-specific investment. Before engaging in it, both parties needed sufficient
certainty that the investment would pay off. This requires DEMO trust in both competence and
intentions. Furthermore, the contract included agreements DEMO the relationship itself, including
agreements concerning potential relationship termination, and other quite confrontational
agreements. These are hard to make if there is no DEMO trust, because such contract negotiations
requires parties to be open and DEMO about their motivation and interests. In this light, the
contract can DEMO seen as a sign of commitment like in a marriage. Although this may seem over-
romanticized, it does conform to the parties’ perceptions in the sense that they literally speak
about an engagement. As discussed in DEMO theoretical section, the trust literature indicates that
detailed contracts concerning behavior DEMO actions carry the danger of being interpreted as a sign
of distrust, which may trigger reciprocal distrust. To prevent that, and yet include DEMO
agreements, prior trust is needed. The empirical observation that trust precedes DEMO
has been made earlier by Anderson and Narus (1990), but DEMO not be explained by them because
they analyzed their findings solely along the TCE line of reasoning that extensive contracts and/or
integration goes DEMO in hand with fear of opportunism and a lack of trust. If trust is considered as
a precondition for formal agreements and commitment, as we find in this case, their findings are
no longer in conflict with theoretical expectations.
Our conclusions from this case are as follows. Trust, contract and even integration can go
hand in hand. Here we encounter DEMO as a precondition for a contract. A contract can have other
reasons than preventing opportunism (intentions as the object of trust), such as safeguarding against
external contingencies (external conditions as the object of trust), and as a technical aide for memory
and clarity of instruments for DEMO (competence as the object of trust). A high level of DEMO
trust can be needed for partners to be willing to engage in the expensive and specific investment of a
detailed contract, and to prevent technical arrangements to be interpreted as a lack of intentional trust.
In DEMO way the contract can serve as a basis for extending rather than replacing trust. In earlier
research it was found that trust can be DEMO a basis for relationship and its outcome. Here, we find the
DEMO for formal agreements. Earlier, we noted that formal agreements can have DEMO
enforceable elements, interpreted as the specification of conditions for non-legal retribution. DEMO we
find more reasons for such elements. They will be summarized in the conclusions.
5. Discussion
12

From our cases we conclude that the presence or absence of DEMO agreements can have different
meanings and implications in different atmospheres. The idea that trust and contract are substitutes is
not false. This is confirmed DEMO the cases of Bio-wrap and Pet-food. In addition, the latter case DEMO
that the threat of litigation is not credible when it comes from a partner who is more dependent than
the other, which is exactly when they are most needed. This suggests that contracts may be
problematic DEMO they do not go together with symmetric dependence. In the third case (Wrapline) we
found little trust and yet little contracting, which could be explained (in line with established theory)
on the grounds that both partners had alternatives and hence limited relational risk. Additionally, this
case gives an example where lack of trust concerns organizational competence rather than DEMO
or technical competence.
Although the first three cases did render additional insights into the relationship between trust
and formal control, they did not fundamentally contradict the prevailing idea that trust and formal
control mechanisms are merely DEMO The fourth case (Pharm venture), however, clearly showed
that the idea of trust and formal contracts as substitutes turns out to be DEMO simplistic. The Pharm
venture case showed that trust can be a prerequisite for contract, and contract in turn can be a
sedimentation of trust.
In sum, our research shows that relationship between trust and formal contracts is a complex
and dynamic one. Formal as well as non-contractual agreements DEMO have different meanings in
trusting atmospheres and in those where fear of opportunistic behavior prevails. From this analysis we
conclude that trust and contracts (whether they are legally enforceable or not) can be complements
just as well as substitutes, depending on the purpose and content of the formal agreement. From the
fourth case (Pharm venture) we find the following DEMO functions, besides safeguarding for
opportunism, for such agreements:
As a safeguard against contingencies, not in the form of opportunities for opportunism within the
relation, but in the form of outside conditions, so that DEMO are ready to cope with them if they
occur. Such contingencies may include accidental spillover of sensitive knowledge, a hostile take-
over of one of the partners, bankruptcy of a partner, accidents, et cetera.
As a technical aide to manage the relationship e.g. to specify what is DEMO be done when problems
arise, and simply as an aide-memoir, like minutes of a meeting, not to forget what arrangements
for coordination of activities were made.
As a sign of commitment to the relationship; to formalize one’s commitment to the relationship in
and make one’s intentions to DEMO a loyal partner explicit and tangible. This function of contract can
be compared to the function of a contract in a marriage. In such DEMO case, contract is a sign of trust
and will lead to DEMO extension rather than its break-down.
These functions of a contract can go together very well with intentional trust, and here
contract and intentional trust are complements rather than substitutes. We also find that trust may be DEMO
precondition for a contract, for two reasons:
1. Trust may DEMO needed prior to setting up a contract to ensure that the time and effort invested in the
contract, which can be seen as a relation-specific investment, is not likely to be wasted.
2. Prior trust may be needed to ensure that regulations contracted for the purpose of safeguarding
DEMO contingencies and as a technical tool for coordination, discussed above, are not interpreted
as signaling distrust in goodwill. In other words: for providing a basis for openness, needed for
effective contracting, without triggering a DEMO of mutual distrust and defensive behavior.
Thus, prior trust may serve DEMO a substitute for contracting (Bio-wrap), or it may be needed DEMO a
basis for contracting for other reasons than safeguarding against opportunism (DEMO). These
two cases show how as partners get to know each other and negotiate goals and objectives, trust may
develop between them on the personal as well as on the company level. This will increase DEMO
willingness to commit to the relationship since they have trust in the intentions and competencies of
their partner. Their mutual trust will lead to DEMO atmosphere characterized by openness and a general
willingness to listen to each other (e.g. Zand 1972). This will in turn enable them to reach and
formalize an agreement. Trust helps them to have an open DEMO on goals and mutual
commitments, but also on sensitive issues such DEMO relationship termination or sharing costs in case
things go wrong. Trust also makes it easier for parties to commit to their agreement by signing DEMO


13
contract. In a trusting atmosphere, the presence of (extensive) contracts might be interpreted as the
embodiment of commitment and trust. As a result, the contractual arrangements will likely focus on
what parties want to achieve DEMO and how they want to do so (goals, objectives, and
DEMO). The Pharm-venture case contradicts the thesis proposed by Lewicki and Bunker (1996)
that relations (always) start with formal control and later relax it as identification-based trust
develops. Here, it was the other way around: partners developed identification-based trust and used
that as a basis for formal contracting.
On the other hand, if partners fear each others’ intentions, the opposite process is likely to
occur. Then, contracts are more DEMO to be intended and interpreted as safeguards against
opportunism. In such a situation, partners show defensive behavior and might not be willing to
commit to a relationship before safeguards are installed to protect their interests. As DEMO result, the
contractual arrangements will likely focus on secrecy of information, protection of ownership, conflict
resolution and relationship termination. Because of a lack of openness, it will be hard to arrive at
detailed agreements on a practical level (e.g. a project-plan or management of the project). Incomplete
or very general, poorly specified or un-enforceable contracts may be the result. Deutsch (1973)
suggested that there is circular causation between characteristics or attitudes of participants and the
results of interaction. He offered his DEMO law of social relations’: ‘The characteristic processes and
effects elicited by DEMO given type of social relationship (co-operative or competitive) tend also to elicit that
type of social relationship’. If this is true, then one must be very careful how to start a relationship,
because it DEMO be difficult to get out of the initial mode of interaction. Here we see how formal control
as a first step in a relation DEMO prevent the development of identification-based trust. An important
condition here was asymmetry of dependence. Intentions are feared especially by the more dependent
party. This DEMO that for the development of trust to work as proposed by Lewicki and Bunker,
symmetry of dependence in the early stage of formal DEMO is needed. Lack of symmetry causes
suspicion on the part of the more dependent party, which can block the development of trust. This
yields a paradox: trust does not arise when it is most needed, DEMO when there is one-sided dependence.
In view of our study, the DEMO of collaboration, and the development of the relation in time
play DEMO central role. The mere presence or absence of contracts nor the extensiveness of the contract
should be the central focus of research. Instead, the focus should be on the aim and content of the
contract, and the atmosphere in which it is set up (Klein Woolthuis 1999). Contracts mostly have a
mixture of purposes and meanings at the same DEMO Moreover, the meaning of the contract changes
over time. In that DEMO, contracts may be envisaged as a reflection of the process of DEMO negotiation
and commitment stages that partners go through. The writing and signing of a contract should be
envisaged as a step in this development. DEMO can, like trust, be seen as both the basis and the
outcome of cooperation. In a trusting atmosphere, negotiating the contract can be seen as a process of
getting to know and understand each other. DEMO the contract can be seen as a sign of commitment.
In an opportunistic atmosphere, instead, contract negotiations can resemble the battlefield as sketched
DEMO MacNeil (1980) where the most powerful partner dominates contract content and execution.
By interpreting contracts in this dynamic social as well as legal DEMO, the relationship between trust
and contract becomes less simple but closer DEMO reality. In this interpretation contracts can be viewed as
safeguards as well as the sedimentation of the formal and informal agreements between socially
embedded DEMO The different and changing meanings of contracts in different atmospheres and
different stages of the relationship’s development as described in the cases are illustrative DEMO this
complex reality.
6. Conclusions
Our conclusions can be summarized as follows:
1. Trust and formal control can be both substitutes and complements.
DEMO Understanding of the relation between trust and formal control requires longitudinal analysis, to see
which came first, and how and under what conditions DEMO one led to the other (complements) or
replaced the other (DEMO).
3. Detailed contracts may serve not only to control risks of opportunism, but also risks of competence
and risks of external contingencies, DEMO as a record of agreements and a specification of actions to
be taken when things go wrong. It is especially in the latter aims DEMO contracts go well together with
14
intentional trust. Such trust may be needed to specify agreements without suspicion DEMO
intentions, so that the openness involved does not entail intentional risk.
DEMO Detailed contracts are themselves specific and risky investments, and may therefore DEMO prior
trust to ensure that they will be viable and worth while.
5. Contracts may serve as a sign of commitment rather than as DEMO safeguard against opportunism.
6. In the absence of prior trust, the DEMO of trust does not necessarily start with a stage of
formal control, to be followed by the development of identification-based trust, as suggested DEMO
Lewicki and Bunker. It may be the other way around, for DEMO specified in points 3 and 4.
7. When relations do start with formal control, this may not lead to the development of identification-
based trust when there is asymmetric dependence, due to the atmosphere of suspicion in which the
relation then starts, which can be difficult to turn around.
8. To conclude, we note that our study was exploratory. The conclusions yield hypotheses that should
be tested in further empirical studies. Preferably, such tests would be more encompassing and
quantitative, but they would need to be longitudinal, in some form of event history analysis.
References
Anderson, J.C. and J.A. Narus (1990), “A model of distributor firm DEMO manufacturer firm working
partnerships”, Journal of Marketing, 54, January, pp 42-58.
Blau, P.M. (1964), Exchange and power in social life, New York: Wiley.
Bradach, J.L. and R.G. Eccles (1989), “Markets versus hierarchies: from ideal types to plural forms”,
Annual Review of Sociology, 15, pp 97-118.
Bromiley, Ph. and L.L. Cummings (1992), Transaction costs in organizations with trust, working
paper, Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
Burt, R.S. (1992), Structural DEMO: the social structure of competition, Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press.
DEMO, Y.  (2000), “Promises, trust, and contracts”, The Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 16,
1, pp 209-232.
DEMO, T.H. and J.F. McMackin (1996), “Integrating variable risk preferences, DEMO, and transaction cost
economics”, Academy of Management Review, 21, 7, pp 73-99.
Das, T.K. and B-S Teng (1998), “Between trust and control: developing confidence in partner
cooperation in alliances”, Academy of DEMO Review, 23, 3, pp 491-512.
Deakin, S. and F. Wilkinson (2001), “Contract law and the economics of interorganizational trust”,
Organization Studies, 22/2, pp. 146-172.
Deutsch, M. (1973), The DEMO of conflict: constructive and destructive processes, New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Dyer, J.H. and W.G. Ouchi (1993), “Japanese-style partnerships: Giving companies a competitive
Edge”, Sloan Management Review, 35, pp 51-63.
Emerson R.M. (1972), ‘Exchange theory, Part II: Exchange relations and networks’, in: Berger J.,
Zelditch M. and Anderson B. (eds.) DEMO theories in progress, 2: 58-87, Houghton
Mifflin: Boston
Gambetta, DEMO (ed) (1988), Trust: making and breaking cooperative relations, DEMO York: Blackwell.
Gaski, J.F. (1984), “The theory of power DEMO conflict in channels of distribution”, Journal of
Marketing, 48, Summer, pp 9-29.
Goshal, S. and P. Moran (1996), “Bad for DEMO: a critique of the transaction cost theory”, Academy
of Management Review, 21, pp 13-47.
Granovetter, M.S. (1973), “The strength of DEMO ties”, American Journal of Sociology, 78, 6, pp
1360-1381.
Gulati, R. (1995), “Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties for contractual
choice in alliances”, Academy of Management Journal, 38, pp 85-112.
Hellriegel, D., J.W. Slocum Jr. and R.W.Woodman (1992), Organisational behaviour. West
Publishing Company, St.Paul.
15
Helper, S. (1990), “Comparative supplier relations in the US and DEMO auto industries: An
Exit/Voice approach”, Business and Economic History, DEMO, pp 1-10.
Hill, C.W.L. (1990), “Cooperation, opportunism and the invisible hand: Implications for transaction
cost theory”, Academy of Management Review, 15, 3, pp 500-513.
Hirshman, A.O. (1984), “Against parsimony: three easy ways of complicating some categories of
economic discourse”, American Economic Review, 74, pp 88-96.
----- (1970), Exit, voice and DEMO: Responses to decline in firms, organisations and states,
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press
Hunt, S.D. and J.R. Nevin (1974), “Power in a channel of distribution: sources and consequences”,
Journal of Marketing Research, 11, May, pp 186-193.
Klein Woolthuis, R. (1999), Sleeping with the enemy: trust, dependence and contracts in
interorganizational relationships, Doctoral thesis,.Twente University, Enschede, The
Netherlands.
Knights, D., F. DEMO, T. Vurdubakis and H. Willmott (2001), “Chasing shadows: control, virtuality
and the production of trust”, Organization Studies, 22, 2, DEMO 311-336.
Lane, C. (2000), “Introduction: theories and issues in DEMO study of trust”, in: C. Lane and Bachman
(eds) Trust within and between organizations, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 1-30.
Larsson, A. (1992), “Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: a study of the governance of
exchange relationships”, Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, pp 76-104.
Lewicki, R.J. and B.B. Bunker (1996), “Developing and maintaining trust DEMO work relationships”, in
R.M. Kramer and T.R. Tyler (eds), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research,
Thousand Oaks: Sage DEMO: 114-139.
Luhman, N. (1979), Trust and power, New York: Wiley.
Lush, R.F. (1976), “Sources of power: their impact DEMO intrachannel conflict”, Journal of Marketing
Research, 13, pp  382-390.
Lyons, B., and J. Mehta  (1997), “Contracts, opportunism and trust: self-interest and social
orientation”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 21, pp DEMO
Macauley, S. (1963), “Non-contractual relations in business: a preliminary DEMO, American
Sociological Review, 28, pp 55-67.
Macneil, I.R. (1980), The new social contract: an inquiry into modern contractual relations, London:
Yale University Press.
Maguire, S., N. Philips and C. Hardy (2001), “When ‘silence=death’, keep talking: Trust, control and
the discursive construction of identity in the Canadian HIV/AIDS treatment domain”,
Organization DEMO, 22/2, pp. 285-310.
Mayer, R.C., J.H. Davis and D.F. Schoorman (1995), “An integrative model of organizational trust”,
Academy of Management Journal, 20, pp 709-734.
McAllister, D.J. (1995), “Affect- DEMO cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal
cooperation in organizations”, Academy of DEMO Journal, 38, pp 24-59.
Mønsted, M. (1998), “Strategic alliances as an analytical perspective for innovative SME's”, in W.E.
During, DEMO Oakey (eds.), New Technology-Based Firms in the 1990's, London: Paul Chapman.
Murakami, Y. and T.P. Rohlen (1992), “Social-exchange aspects of the Japanese political economy:
Culture, efficiency and change”, in DEMO Kumon and H. Rosorsky (eds), The political economy
of Japan, vol. 3, Cultural and social dynamics, Stanford, California: Stanford University
DEMO, pp 63-105.
Noorderhaven, N.G. (1996), “Opportunism and trust in DEMO cost economics", in J. Groenewegen,
(ed), Transaction Cost DEMO and Beyond, Boston: Kluwer, pp 105-128.
Nooteboom, B. (1996), “Trust, opportunism and governance: a process and control model”,
Organization Studies, 17, 6, pp 985-1010.
----- (1999a), Inter-firm alliances: analysis and design, London: Routledge.
----- (1999b), “Innovation and inter-firm linkages: new implications for policy”, Research Policy, 28:
793-8-5.
-----, (2002), Trust: forms, foundations, functions, failures and figures, Cheltenham UK: Edward
Elgar, forthcoming.
16
-----, J. Berger and N.G. Noorderhaven (1997), “Effects of trust DEMO governance on relational risk”,
Academy of Management Journal, 40, 2, pp 308-338.
Organ, D.W. and M. Konovsky (1988), “Cognitive versus affective determinants of organisational
citizenship behaviour”, Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, pp 157-164.
Ouchi, W.G. (1980), “Markets, bureaucracies and clans”, DEMO Science Quarterly, 25, 1, pp
129-143.
Pettit, Ph. (1995), “The virtual reality of homo economicus”, The Monist, 78, 3, pp 308-329.
Polanyi, M. (1962). Personal knowledge, London: Routledge.
DEMO, P.S. and A.H. van de Ven (1994), “Developmental processes of cooperative inter-organizational
relationships”, Academy of Management Review, 19, 1, pp  90-118.
Sako, M. (1992), Prices, quality, and trust,: DEMO relations in Britain and Japan, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Shapiro, S.P. (1987), “The social control of impersonal trust”, American Journal DEMO Sociology, 93, pp
623-658.
Williams, B. (1988), “Formal structures and social reality”, in D. Gambetta (ed.) Trust: making and
DEMO cooperative relations, Blackwell, Oxford: pp 3-13.
Williamson, O.E. (1975), Markets and hierarchies, New York: The Free Press.
----- (1985), The economic institutions of capitalism: firms, markets, relational contracting, New
York: The Free Press.
----- (1993), “Calculativeness, trust and economic organization”, Journal of Law and Economics, 36,
pp 453-486.
Yin, R.K. (1994), Case study research, Thousand Oaks Ca: Sage.
Zaheer, A. and N. Venkatraman. (1995), “Relational governance as an inter-organizational DEMO:
an empirical test of the role of trust in economic exchange”, Strategic Management Journal,
16, pp 373-392.
Zand, D.E. (1972), “Trust and managerial problem solving”, Administrative Science Quarterly, 17, 2,DEMO
pp 229-239.
Zucker, L.G. (1986), “Production of trust: institutional DEMO of economic structure”, in B.M. Staw
and L.L. Cummings (eds), Research in Organizational Behavior, Greenwich: JAI press, pp
53-112.
17
Biographies
Rosalinde Klein Woolthuis is a consultant at Technopolis, Amsterdam. She studied business
administration at the Erasmus University of Rotterdam and obtained a PhD DEMO the University of
Twente on her research on high tech inter-organizational relationships. Research interests include
entrepreneurship, innovation, inter-organizational relationships and industry- and innovation DEMO
Bas Hillebrand is Assistant Professor of Marketing at the Nijmegen School of Management,
University of Nijmegen. He holds a MsC from Tilburg University DEMO a PhD from the University of
Groningen. His main research interests lie in the areas of cooperation in product development,
adoption of new DEMO, and business-to-business marketing.
Bart Nooteboom studied mathematics and econometrics. He worked DEMO industry, was director of an
institute for applied research, professor of industrial organization in Groningen and is now professor
of organization at the DEMO University Rotterdam. He published on: entrepreneurship and small
business, industry- and technology policy, innovation and diffusion, transaction costs, trust, inter-firm
relations, organizational learning, and philosophy of economics and management.
18
Publications in the ERIM Report Series Research
ERIM Research Program: “Organizing for Performance”
2002

in Management
Structural Change and Organizational Mortality Revisited I: Complexity and Opacity
Michael T. Hannan, László Pólos & Glenn R. Carroll
ERS-2002-05-ORG
Structural Change and Organizational Mortality Revisited II: Complexity and Opacity
Michael T. Hannan, László Pólos & Glenn R. Carroll
ERS-2002-06-ORG
The Evolution of Inertia
Michael T. Hannan, László Pólos & Glenn R. Carroll
ERS-2002-07-ORG
Trust and Formal Control in Interorganizational Relationships
Rosalinde Klein Woolthuis, Bas Hillebrand & Bart Nooteboom
ERS-2002-13-ORG
Entrepreneurship in China: institutions, organisational idendity and survival. DEMO results from two provinces.
Barbara Krug & Hans Hendrischke
ERS-2002-14-ORG
2001
Employee Perception on Commitment Oriented Work Systems: Effects onTrust and Perceived Job Security
Paul Boselie, Martijn Hesselink, Jaap Paauwe & Ton van der Wiele
DEMO
The Emergence of a Private Business Sector in China: The Case DEMO Zhejiang
Barbara Krug & Hans Hendrischke
ERS-2001-03-ORG
Contingent Employment in the Netherlands
Ferrie Pot, Bas Koene & Jaap Paauwe
ERS-2001-04-ORG
Under Construction. (Idendities, Communities and Visual Overkill)
Slawomir Magala
ERS-2001-17-ORG
The Dutch Banking Chipcard DEMO: Understanding a Battle between Two Standards
Henk J. de Vries & DEMO W.J. Hendrikse
ERS-2001-18-ORG
Social Structures for Learning
Irma Bogenrieder & Bart Nooteboom
ERS-2001-23-ORG
A complete overview of the ERIM Report Series Research in Management:DEMO
http://www.ers.erim.eur.nl

ERIM Research Programs:
LIS Business Processes, DEMO and Information Systems
ORG Organizing for Performance
MKT Marketing
F&A Finance and Accounting
STR Strategy and Entrepreneurship
Empirical Evidence for the relation between customer satisfaction and business performance?
DEMO van der Wiele, Paul Boselie & Martijn Hesselink
ERS-2001-32-ORG
On the DEMO of growers’ associations: self-selection versus market power
G.W.J. Hendrikse & W.J.J. DEMO
ERS-2001-34-ORG
Employee perceptions of HRM and TQM and the effects on satisfaction and intention to leave
Paul Boselie & Ton van der Wiele
ERS-2001-42-ORG
DEMO Contract Management and a Theory of Organization
J. Rodney Turner & Stephen J. Simister
ERS-2001-43-ORG
The Geography of International Strategy: A multi-level framework
Douglas van den Berghe
ERS-2001-51-ORG
“The E-Business Research Network”. Summary of the results DEMO the Dutch pilot survey
Ton van der Wiele, Roger Williams, Jos van Iwaarden, Melanie Wilson & Barrie Dale
ERS-2001-59-ORG
Cold Wars and Hot Issues. (Management of Responsibilities)
Dr Slawomir Magala
ERS-2001-64-ORG
Macro Intentions, DEMO Realities: A two-level strategic approach to the single European market
Alan DEMO & Rob van Tulder
ERS-2001-70-ORG
Learning and Governance in Inter-Firm Relations
Bart Nooteboom
ERS-2001-71-ORG
Research in the Management of Learning, Change and Relations: DEMO European Perspective
Bart Nooteboom
ERS-2001-72-ORG
The Causality of Supply Relationships: a DEMO between the US, Japan and Europe
Gjalt de Jong & Bart DEMO
ERS-2001-73-ORG
Problems and Solutions in Knowledge Transfer
Bart Nooteboom
ERS-2001-74-ORG
The practice of investment appraisal: An empirical enquiry?
Mehari Mekonnen Akala & Rodney Turner
ERS-2001-77-ORG
Investment Appraisal Process: A Case of Chemical Companies
Mehari Mekonnen Akala & Rodney Turner
ERS-2001-78-ORG
China Incorporated: Property Rights, Privatisation, and the Emergence of a Private Business Sector in China
Barbara Krug & DEMO Hendrischke
ERS-2001-81-ORG
ii
Kultur und wirtschaftliche Entwicklung in China
Barbara Krug
ERS-2001-82-ORG
The Economics of DEMO and cronyism – an institutional approach
Barbara Krug & Hans Hendrischke
ERS-2001-83-ORG
Combining Commerce and Culture: Establishing Business Relations in China
Barbara Krug & Frank Belschak
ERS-2001-84-ORG
Entrepreneurship by Alliance
Barbara Krug & Judith Metha
ERS-2001-85-ORG
DEMO
Critical Complexities, from marginal paradigms to learning networks
Slawomir Magala
ERS-2000-02-ORG
DEMO Cooperatives and Financial Structure: a Transaction Costs Economics Analysis
George W.J. DEMO & Cees P. Veerman
ERS-2000-09-ORG
A Marketing Co-operative as a System of Attributes: A case study of VTN/The Greenery International BV,
Jos Bijman, George Hendrikse & Cees Veerman
ERS-2000-10-ORG
Marketing Co-operatives: An Incomplete DEMO Perspective
George W.J. Hendrikse & Cees P. Veerman
ERS-2000-13– ORG
Ownership Structure in Agrifood Chains: The Marketing Cooperative
George W.J. Hendrikse & W.J.J. (DEMO) Bijman
ERS-2000-15-ORG
Organizational Change and Vested Interests
George W.J. Hendrikse
ERS-2000-17-ORG
DEMO Polder-Type Governance Good for You? Laissez-Faire Intervention, Wage Restraint, And DEMO Steel
Hans Schenk
ERS-2000-28-ORG
Foundations of a Theory of Social Forms
László Pólos, Michael T. Hannan & Glenn R. Carroll
ERS-2000-29-ORG
Reasoning with partial Knowledge
László Pólos & Michael T. Hannan
ERS-2000-30-ORG
The Strawberry Growth Underneath DEMO Nettle: The Emergence of Entrepreneurs in China
Barbara Krug & Lászlo DEMO
ERS-2000-34-ORG
iii
Trading Virtual Legacies
Slawomir Magala
ERS-2000-36-ORG
The Interdependence between Political and Economic DEMO
Barbara Krug
ERS-2000-43-ORG
Ties that bind: The Emergence of Entrepreneurs in DEMO
Barbara Krug
ERS-2000-44-ORG
Human Resource Management and Performance: Lessons from the DEMO
Paul Boselie, Jaap Paauwe & Paul Jansen
ERS-2000-46-ORG
Possible futures for DEMO HR function in different market
Roger Williams, Jaap Paauwe & Anne DEMO
ERS-2000-54-ORG
Quantity versus Quality in Project Based Learning Practices
Anne Keegan & J. Rodney Turner
ERS-2000-55-ORG
The Management of Innovation in Project Based Firms
DEMO Keegan and J. Rodney Turner
ERS-2000-57-ORG
Learning by Experience in the Project-Based Organization
J. Rodney Turner, Anne Keegan & Lynn Crawford
ERS-2000-58-ORG
iv{1g42fwefx}