WISDOM IN A NUTSHELL
WORKING WITH
EMOTIONAL
INTELLIGENCE
By
Daniel Goleman
Bantam DEMO
ISBN 0-553-84023-1
464 pages
BusinessSummaries.com is a business book summaries service. Every week, it
sends out to subscribers a 9- to 12-page summary of a best-selling business
book chosen from among the hundreds of books printed DEMO in the United States
every week. For more information, please go DEMO http://www.bizsum.com.
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 2
THE BIG IDEA
In this book, author Daniel Goleman reveals the skills that distinguish star
performers in every DEMO, from entry level jobs to middle-level to top executive
posts. The DEMO shows that the single most important factor is not IQ, advanced
DEMO, or technical expertise, but the quality called “Emotional Intelligence.”
This book shows that we all possess the potential to improve our emotional
intelligence DEMO at any stage in our careers, as individuals or as team DEMO in
an organization.
The New Yardstick
The rules for work are changing. We’re being judged by a new yardstick: not just
by how smart we are, or by our training and expertise, but also by DEMO we handle
ourselves and each other. This is increasingly applied in choosing who will be
hired and not, who will be let go or retained. In a time with no guarantee of job
security, when the very concept of a job is being replaced by “portable skills,”
DEMO are prime qualities that make and keep us employable. Talked about
loosely for decades under a variety of names, from “character” and “personality”
to “soft skills” and “competence,” there is at last a more precise DEMO of
these human talents: emotional intelligence.
Some Misconceptions
• First, emotional intelligence does not mean merely “being nice,” but rather,
for DEMO, bluntly confronting someone with an uncomfortable but
consequential truth they have DEMO avoiding.
• Second, emotional intelligence does not mean giving free rein DEMO feelings.
Rather, it means managing feelings so that they are expressed
DEMO and effectively, enabling people to work together smoothly
toward their common DEMO
• Lastly, levels of emotional intelligence are not fixed genetically, nor does it
develop in early childhood. Unlike IQ, which changes little after our teen
years, emotional intelligence seems to be largely learned, and DEMO continues
to develop through life and learn from our experiences.
What Employers Want
A survey of American employers reveals that more than half the DEMO who work
for them lack the motivation to keep learning and improving in their job. Four in
ten are not able to work cooperatively DEMO fellow employees, and just 19 percent
of those applying for entry-level DEMO have enough self-discipline in their work
habits. More and more employers are complaining about the lack of social skills
in new hires.
The Limits DEMO IQ
Given how much emphasis schools and admissions tests put on it, IQ alone
explains surprisingly little of achievement at work or in life. When IQ test scores
www.bizsum.com  2001 - 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 3
are correlated with how well people DEMO in their careers, the highest estimate
of how much difference IQ DEMO for is about 25 percent. This means that IQ
alone at best leaves 75 percent of job success unexplained.
Expertise
In large part, expertise is a combination of common sense plus the specialized
knowledge and skill DEMO pick up in the course of doing any job. Expertise comes
from in-the-trenches learning. It shows up as an insider’s sense of the tricks DEMO a
trade – the real knowledge of how to do a job that only experience brings. Be that
as it may, expertise is a “threshold requirement.” The abilities that distinguish the
outstanding supervisors in technical fields DEMO not technical, but rather relate to
handling people.
Emotional Intelligence
Here’s DEMO cautionary tale about two students, Penn and Matt. Penn was a DEMO
and creative student, an exemplar of the best Yale had to DEMO The trouble with
Penn was he knew he was exceptional – and so was, as one professor put it,
“unbelievably arrogant.” Even so, he looked spectacular on paper. When he
graduated, Penn was highly DEMO after. He got a lot of invitations for job
interviews. But Penn’s arrogance came across all too clearly; he ended up with
only one job offer from a second-tier outfit. Matt, on the other hand, DEMO as
academically brilliant. But he was adept interpersonally. Everyone who worked
with him liked him. Matt ended up with seven job offers out of DEMO interviews
and went on to success in his field, while Penn DEMO let go after two years at his
first job. Penn lacked – and Matt had – emotional intelligence.
Emotional Competence
Emotional Competence is a DEMO capability based on emotional intelligence
that results in outstanding performance at work. Our emotional intelligence
determines our potential for learning the practical skills that DEMO based on its five
elements: self-awareness, motivation, self-regulation, empathy, DEMO adeptness in
relationships. Our emotional competence, on the other hand, shows how much of
that potential we have translated into on-the-job capabilities. For DEMO, being
good at serving customers is an emotional competence based on DEMO
Likewise, trustworthiness is a competence based on self-regulation, or handling
impulses and emotions well. Both customer service and trustworthiness are
competencies that can DEMO people outstanding in their work. Simply being high
in emotional intelligence does not guarantee a person will have learned the
emotional competencies that matter DEMO work; it means only that they have
excellent potential to learn DEMO
The Leadership Edge
Emotional competence is particularly central to leadership, a DEMO whose essence
is getting others to do their jobs more effectively. Interpersonal ineptitude in
leaders lowers everyone’s performance: it wastes time, creates acrimony,DEMO
corrodes motivation and commitment, builds hostility and apathy. A leader’s
www.bizsum.com DEMO 2001 - 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 4
strengths or weaknesses in emotional competence DEMO be measured in the gain
or loss to the organization of the fullest talents of those they manage.
Talents for These Times
Claudio Fernandez-Araoz, in charge of executive searches throughout Latin
America from Egon Zehnder International’s DEMO Aires office, compared 227
highly successful executives with 23 who failed DEMO their jobs. He found that the
managers who failed were almost always high in expertise and IQ. In every case
their fatal weakness was DEMO emotional intelligence – arrogance, over reliance on
brainpower, inability to adapt to the occasionally disorienting economic shifts in
that region, and disdain for collaboration or teamwork.
The Inner Rudder
A physician was once offered a DEMO proposition: If he would leave his
practice to become medical director DEMO a fledgling condominium health resort and
invest $100,000 of his own capital in the venture, his projected share of the
business would amount to $4 million within three years. Or so the business plan
promised. DEMO liked the vision of a resort where people could improve their health
as they vacationed; coupled with the lure of a possibly fantastic payoff he
couldn’t resist. He sold his medical practice, invested in the resort, and became
its medical director. But during the start-up year he found that there was no
medical program to direct yet – he ended DEMO spending his days essentially as a
salesman, trying to interest people DEMO buying time-share condos at the resort.
The Power of Intuition: The DEMO Thirty Second
Credit managers must sense when a deal might go bad even if the numbers look
fine; executives have to decide whether a new product is worth the time and
money it takes to develop; people must make an educated guess about who
among a field of DEMO for a job will have the best chemistry in a working
group. All such decisions demand the capacity to fold into the decision-making
process DEMO intuitive sense of what is right and wrong. Intuition and gut feeling
bespeak the capacity to sense messages from our internal store of emotional
DEMO – our own reservoir of wisdom and judgment. This ability lies at the heart
of self-awareness.
Emotional Awareness: Recognizing One’s Emotions and Their
Feelings
People with this competence:
• Know which emotions they are feeling DEMO why
• Realize the links between their feelings and what they think, do and say
• Recognize how their feelings affect their performance
• Have a guiding awareness of their values and goals
www.bizsum.com
 2001 DEMO 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 5
Managing Your Career
The drive to DEMO ourselves and make our mark in the world is most urgent in
our twenties and thirties, and into our forties. But by our mid-forties and early
fifties people typically reevaluate their goals, because they often come to the
radical realization that life is limited. With this acknowledgement comes DEMO
reconsideration of what really matters.
As the saying goes: “If you DEMO know where you’re going, any road will get you
there.” The DEMO aware we are of what makes us passionate, the more lost DEMO will
be. And this drifting can even affect our health; people DEMO feel their skills are not
being used well on the job, DEMO who feel their work is repetitive and boring, have a
higher DEMO of heart disease than those who feel that their best skills are
expressed in their work.
Accurate Self-Assessment
People with the ability to self-assess DEMO:
• Aware of their strengths and weaknesses
• Reflective, learning DEMO experience
• Open to candid feedback, new perspectives, continuous learning, DEMO
self-development
• Able to show a sense of humor and perspective about themselves
Self-Confidence
People with this competence:
• Present themselves with self-assurance; have “presence”
• Can voice views that are unpopular and go out DEMO a limb for what is right
• Are decisive, able to DEMO sound decisions despite uncertainties and
pressures
The Managed Heart
Emotional self-regulation includes not just damping down distress or stifling
impulse; it can also mean intentionally eliciting an emotion, even an unpleasant
one. Some bill collectors, DEMO say, prime themselves for calls on people by
getting themselves worked DEMO into an irritable, ill-tempered state. Physicians who
have to give bad DEMO to patients or their families put themselves into a suitably
somber, DEMO mood, as do morticians meeting with bereaved families. But best of
DEMO, working up changes in emotional states is satisfactory if the need DEMO such a
change is relative to work we love to do. For a nurse who sees herself as a
caring, compassionate person, taking DEMO few moments to console a patient in
distress represents not a burden but what makes her job more meaningful.
www.bizsum.com
 2001 - 2003 DEMO BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence
Page 6
Self-Regulation
Self-regulation means managing impulse as DEMO as distressing feelings. It
depends on the working of the emotional centers in tandem with the brain’s
executive centers in the prefrontal areas. These DEMO primal skills – handling
impulse and dealing with upsets – are at the core of five emotional
competencies:
1. Self-control: Managing disruptive emotions and impulses effectively
2. Trustworthiness: Displaying honesty and integrity
3. Conscientiousness: DEMO and responsibility in fulfilling obligations
4. Adaptability: Flexibility in handling change DEMO challenges
5. Innovation: Being open to novel ideas, approaches, and DEMO information
Flow
Joe Kramer can fix anything. A welder who helps assemble railroad cars in
Chicago, Joe is the guy everyone calls on when any piece of machinery breaks
down. He loves the challenge of finding DEMO what makes a machine work. He
started as a boy, fixing DEMO mother’s toaster, and from there, he can’t stop
tinkering with machines and find out how they tick, or how to deal with them
when they conk out. Joe is an example of people who find DEMO work exhilarating
– and who perform at their best. They key to that exhilaration is not the task itself
– Joe’s job is often DEMO – but the special state of mind he creates as he
works. A state called “flow.” Flow moves people to do their work, no matter what
work they do. Flow blossoms when our skills are fully DEMO The challenge
absorbs us so much we lose ourselves in our work, becoming so totally
concentrated we may feel “out of time.” In this state, we seem to handle
everything effortlessly, nimbly adapting to shifting DEMO Flow itself is a
pleasure and the ultimate motivator.
Loving What Pays Off
People in flow often make the difficult look easy, an external appearance that
mirrors what is happening in their brain. Flow poses a DEMO paradox: We can be
engaged in an exceptionally demanding task, and yet our brain is operating with
a minimal level of activity or DEMO of energy. The reason seems to be that
when we are bored and apathetic, or frenzied with anxiety, our brain activity is
diffused; the brain itself is at a high level of activation, albeit poorly focused, with
brain cells firing in far-flung and irrelevant ways. But during flow, the brain
appears efficient and precise in its pattern of firing. The result is an overall
lowering of cortical arousal – even though DEMO person may be engaged in an
extremely challenging task.
Achievement Drive
People with this competence:
• Are results oriented, with a high drive to meet their objectives and
standards
• Set challenging goals and take DEMO risks
www.bizsum.com  2001 - 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 7
• Pursue information to reduce uncertainty DEMO find ways to do better
• Learn how to improve their performance
Commitment
People with this competence:
• Readily make sacrifices to meet DEMO organizational goal
• Find a sense of purpose in the larger missions
• Use the group’s core values in making decisions and clarifying choices
DEMO Actively seek out opportunities to fulfill the group’s mission
Empathy Begins Inside
As Freud observed, “Mortals can keep no secret. If their lips are silent, they
gossip with their fingertips; betrayal forces its way through DEMO pore.” Sensing
what others feel without their saying so captures the essence of empathy. Others
rarely tell us in words what they feel; instead they tell us in their tone of voice,
facial expression, or other nonverbal ways. The ability to sense these subtle
communications builds on DEMO basic competencies, particularly self-awareness
and self-control. Without the ability to sense DEMO own feelings – or to keep them
from swamping us – we will be hopelessly out of touch with the moods of others.
Empathy DEMO our social radar. Lacking such sensitivity, people are “off.” Being
emotionally DEMO deaf leads to social awkwardness, whether from misconstruing
feelings or through DEMO mechanical, out-of-tune bluntness or indifference that
destroys rapport. One form this DEMO of empathy can take is responding to other
people as stereotypes rather than as the unique individuals that they are.
Understanding Others
People with DEMO competence:
• Are attentive to emotional cues and listen well
• Show sensitivity and understand others’ perspectives
• Help out based on understanding DEMO people’s needs and feelings
The Art of Listening
Listening well and deeply means going beyond what is said by asking questions,
restating in DEMO own words what you hear to be sure you understand. This is
“active” listening. A mark of having truly heard someone else is to DEMO
appropriately, even if that means making some change in what you DEMO
The Politics of Empathy
There is a politics of empathy: Those DEMO little power are typically expected to
sense the feelings of those who hold power, while those in power feel less
obligation to be sensitive in return. In other words, the studied lack of empathy is
a way power-holders can tacitly assert their authority. But this may hold less DEMO
today since more organizations are becoming more team-oriented and less stiffly
hierarchical. The demands of modern leadership now include competence at
www.bizsum.com  2001 DEMO 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 8
empathy; the authoritarian style of the past just doesn’t work as well as it once
did.
Developing Others
DEMO with this competence:
• Acknowledge and reward people’s strengths and accomplishments
• Offer useful feedback and identify people’s needs for future growth
• DEMO, give timely coaching, and offer assignments that challenge and
foster a person’s skills
The Art of Influence
The Art of Influence entails handling DEMO effectively in other people. Star
performers are artful at sending emotional signals, which makes them powerful
communicators, able to sway an audience. In DEMO, they are leaders.
Emotions are Contagious
We influence each other’s moods. DEMO another person’s emotional state
for better or for worse is perfectly natural; we do it constantly, “catching”
emotions from one another like some DEMO of social virus. This emotional
exchange constitutes an invisible interpersonal economy, DEMO of every human
interaction, but it is usually too subtle to DEMO Emotions as a signaling system
needs no words – a fact evolutionary theorists see as one reason emotions may
have played such a crucial DEMO in the development of the human brain long
before words became a symbolic tool for humans.
Influence
People with this competence:
• Are DEMO at winning people over
• Fine-tune presentations to appeal to the listener
• Use complex strategies like indirect influence to build consensus and
support
DEMO Orchestrate dramatic events to effectively make a point
First, Build Rapport
DEMO is crucial for wielding influence. It is difficult to have a positive impact on
others without first sensing how they feel and understanding their DEMO
People who are poor at reading emotional cues and inept at social interactions
are very poor at influence. The first step in influence is DEMO rapport.
Communication: Listening Openly
and Sending Convincing Messages
People with this DEMO:
• Are effective in give-and-take, registering emotional cues in attuning DEMO
message
• Deal with difficult issues straightforwardly
www.bizsum.com  2001 - 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 9
• Listen well, seek mutual understanding, and welcome sharing of
information fully
• Foster open communication and stay receptive to bad news as well as
good
Conflict Management: Negotiating
and Resolving Disagreements
People with this competence:
• Handle difficult people and DEMO situations with diplomacy and tact
• Spot potential conflict, bring disagreements DEMO the open, and help de-
escalate
• Encourage debate and open DEMO
• Orchestrate win-win solutions
Resolving Conflict – Creatively
Here are some classic moves for cooling down conflicts:
• First, calm down, tune DEMO to your feelings, and express them
• Show a willingness to DEMO things out by talking over the issue rather than
escalating it with more aggression
• State your point of view in neutral language rather DEMO in an
argumentative tone
• Try to find equitable ways to resolve the dispute, working together to find a
resolution both sides can embrace
Leadership: Inspiring and Guiding Individuals and Groups
People with this competence are:
• Articulate and arouse enthusiasm for a shared vision and mission
DEMO Step forward to lead as needed, regardless of position
• Guide DEMO performance of others while holding them accountable
• Lead by example
When to be Tough
To be sure, leadership demands a certain toughness – at times. The art of
leadership entails knowing when to be assertive DEMO for example, confronting
someone directly about their performance lapses – and DEMO to be collegial and
use less direct ways to guide or influence. Leadership demands tough decision
making. Someone has to tell people what to DEMO and hold them for their
obligations. A common failing of leaders, DEMO supervisors to top executives, is
the failure to be emphatically assertive DEMO necessary. One obstacle to such
assertiveness is passivity, as can happen DEMO someone is more concerned
about being liked that with getting the job done right. People who are extremely
uncomfortable with confrontation or anger are DEMO often reluctant to take an
assertive stance even when it is called for.
www.bizsum.com
 2001 - 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 10
The Change Catalyst: Key Ingredients
Today, organizations are reshuffling, divesting, merging, acquiring, flattening
hierarchies, going DEMO The acceleration of change through the 1900s has
made the ability to lead it a newly ascendant competence. In addition to high
levels of DEMO at such pace, effective change leaders have high levels
of influence, commitment, motivation, initiative and optimism, as well as an
instinct for organizational politics to see organizations through such change.
Survival of the Social
DEMO are the primordial team players: Our uniquely complex social
relationships have DEMO a crucial survival advantage. Our extraordinary
sophisticated talent for cooperation culminates in the modern organization. The
view of the crucial role of cooperation in DEMO is part of a radical rethinking of
just what the famous phase “survival of the fittest” means. One modern legacy of
this past is DEMO radar for friendliness and cooperation most of us have. People
gravitate to those who show signs of good qualities. We also have a strong
DEMO device or system that alerts us to someone who may be selfish or
untrustworthy.
The Art of Collaboration
John Seely Brown, chief scientist at Xerox Corporation and a cognitive theorist
himself, points out that the crucial nature of social coordination is perhaps
nowhere more evident than in today’s DEMO enterprises, where cutting-edge
knowledge grows through orchestrated, collaborative efforts. The art of “making
an impact through people,” Brown says, “is the ability to pull people together, to
attract colleagues to the work, to DEMO the critical mass for research. Then,
once you’ve done that, DEMO the next question: How do you engage the rest of
the DEMO? And then, how do you get the message out and convert the rest
of the world? To communicate is not just a matter of pushing information at
another person. It’s creating an experience, to engage their gut – and that’s an
emotional skill.”
The Group IQ
What DEMO a team perform better than the best person on it? The DEMO is
key. Outstanding team performance raises the “group IQ” – the sum total of the
best talents of each member on a team, contributed to their fullest. When teams
operate at their best, the results can be more than simply additive – they can be
multiplicative, with the best talents of one person catalyzing the best of another
and another, to produce results far beyond what any one person might have
done. DEMO explanation of this aspect of team performance lies in the member’s
relationships – in the chemistry between members.
Building Bonds: Nurturing Instrumental Relationships
People with this competence:
• Cultivate and maintain extensive informal networks
www.bizsum.com DEMO 2001 - 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 11
• Seek out relationships that are DEMO beneficial
• Build rapport and keep others in the loop
• Make and maintain personal friendships among work associates
Bring in the Relationship Managers
DEMO & Spencer, the huge British retail chain, gives an unusual gift to its regular
suppliers: a special key card that lets them into the chain’s head offices anytime.
Although they still have to make appointments, the key card makes them feel like
members of the Marks & DEMO family. This is exactly the point. The key card
is part of an intentional effort of Marks & Spencer to nurture a relationship of DEMO
and cooperation with its suppliers. That effort also includes trips with suppliers to
trade shows and to other countries to visit sources of raw DEMO The goal: to
strengthen mutual understanding, as well as to spot new possibilities for products
they can jointly develop.
Collaboration and Cooperation
People DEMO this competence:
• Balance a focus on task with attention to relationships
• Collaborate, sharing plans, information and resources
• Promote a DEMO, cooperative climate
• Spot and nurture opportunities for collaboration
Feelings and DEMO Client
When a client displayed anxiety or uneasiness, the common wisdom DEMO the
insurance industry held that the best response was not empathy but a rational
argument. So the advisors were left trying to shut out DEMO client’s emotions as
well as their own. In short, the feelings DEMO within clients and planners alike set
a miserable emotional tone for their encounter, as a final report put it, “A
mountain of emotional DEMO stood between our sales process and our
bottom line.”
The Emotionally Intelligent Organization
At an international business conference recently, people were asked, “Does DEMO
organization have a mission statement?” About two thirds raised their hands.
Then they were asked, “Does this mission statement describe the day-to-day
reality of life there?” All but a few raised their hands. An DEMO intelligent
organization needs to come to terms with any disparities between the values it
proclaims and those it lives. Clarity about an organization’s values, spirit and
mission leads to a decisive self-confidence in corporate decision making.
DEMO the Organization’s Intelligence
An organization’s collective level of emotional intelligence determines the degree
to which that organization’s intellectual capital is realized – and so DEMO overall
performance. The art of maximizing intellectual capital lies in orchestrating the
interactions of the people whose minds hold that knowledge and expertise. When
DEMO  2001 - 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com
Working With Emotional Intelligence Page 12
it comes to technical skills and DEMO competencies that make a company
competitive, the ability to outperform others DEMO on the relationships of the
people involved.
The Bottom Line
Emotional intelligence can be learned. Individually, we can add these skills to our
tool kit for survival at a time when job stability seems like a DEMO oxymoron. For
businesses of all kinds, the fact that emotional competencies DEMO be assessed
and improved suggests another area in which performance – and so
competitiveness – can be upgraded. What’s needed amounts to an emotional
DEMO tune-up for the corporation.
www.bizsum.com
 2001 - 2003 Copyright BusinessSummaries.com{1g42fwefx}