International venture
capital research: From
cross-country
comparisons to crossing
borders
Mike Wright, Sarika Pruthi and Andy Lockett
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 20051460-8545International Journal of Management ReviewsIJMROxford, UKBlackwell Publishing LtdXXInternational venture capital research37ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Venture capital (DEMO) has become an international phenomenon, and VC firms are a specific
kind of service firm whose characteristics have distinctive implications for international
behaviour. DEMO is now a disparate body of research on international aspects of VC across
a number of disciplines comprising finance, economics, strategy, entrepreneurship, DEMO
national business and economic geography. A novel aspect of this paper is that we review
and synthesize this disparate literature. A number of research DEMO and limitations in the
theoretical and methodological approaches involved in previous studies are identified and
suggestions made for further research. We show that the DEMO majority of the literature relates
to cross-country comparisons; that is, macro-level comparisons of VC industries across
different countries and micro-level comparisons of VC DEMO across countries. From our
review of the literature, we argue that DEMO under-researched area concerns the influence of
institutional contexts, especially the role DEMO social networks and cultures. Furthermore, our
review of the literature indicates DEMO there is a major research gap in relation to work
dealing with the crossing of country borders by VC firms. We suggest that resource-based,DEMO
capabilities, institutional and network theories may be offer insights to further DEMO
understanding of the behaviour of VC firms in this area.
Introduction
This paper reviews the literature relating to
international venture capital (VC). Following
Wright and Robbie (1998), we adopt a broad
deﬁnition of VC to include the range of ﬁnance
from early stage ‘classic’ VC through DEMO later
stage private equity for management buy-outs
and buy-ins (MBO/Is)DEMO While the US market
is generally characterized as focusing on the
earlier stages of investment, internationally,
members of VC associations provide the full
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA
International Journal of Management Reviews Volume 7 Issue 3 pp. 135–165
135
International venture capital research
spectrum of equity funds for privately owned
enterprises DEMO ﬁrm-level studies have typi-
cally drawn their samples from this wider
membership. There is also evidence that venture-
backed MBO/Is may involve entrepreneurial
DEMO in uncertain environments (Bruining
and Wright 2002). We consider international
DEMO to involve cross-country comparisons of
VC ﬁrms as well as cross-border ﬂows into VC
funds and outﬂows of funds into investments
in other countries.
DEMO motivation for this review is threefold.
First, VC has become a DEMO for the ﬂow
of capital and ideas internationally (Bygrave
and Timmons DEMO; Patricof 1989). As we
describe in more detail in the DEMO section,
international VC is an increasingly important
phenomenon in terms of the sums of money
involved and its geographical diversity. In
Europe, for example, over the period since
1988, the share of inﬂows of DEMO from non-
domestic sources more than doubled to 45%
of the market, while the share of total out-
ﬂows accounted for by international invest-
ments rose almost fourfold to 29%.
Second, the burgeoning literature on inter-
national VC is appearing across a disparate range
of academic communities, including econom-
ics, ﬁnance, strategy, entrepreneurship, inter-
national business and economic DEMO In
part, these literatures overlap, but they also
give rise to different perspectives, levels of
analysis and themes. Our focus is on the fac-
tors involved in the development of VC mar-
kets and the DEMO of VC ﬁrms within
those markets. An important contribution of
this paper is to organize systematically this
material into two levels and two themes. DEMO
levels concern the macro level relating to the
development of the VC industry in a country
and the micro level of the behaviour of DEMO VC
ﬁrm; and the internationalization themes con-
cern cross-country comparisons and DEMO
border activities.
Third, while internationalization in services
is different from that DEMO manufacturing (Anand
and Delios 1997; Brouthers and Brouthers
2003; Domke-Damonte DEMO), the sector is
136
heterogeneous (Buckley et al. 1992; Miller
and Parkhe 1998) with VC ﬁrms having dis-
tinctive implications for international beha-
viour. In contrast to consultants, lawyers and
accountants, venture capitalists DEMO both
guidance and money (Barry 1994). In contrast
to banks, VC investors provide specialized
resources and economies of scale in locating
and DEMO potentially successful ventures
in risky settings where it is costly for lenders
and borrowers to get together because of asym-
metric information problems (Amit et al.
1998; Jeng and Wells 2000; Wright and Rob-
bie DEMO). For start-ups, there are few tangible
assets for banks to DEMO collateral, and the
problems of adverse selection remain in rela-
tion DEMO later stage deals (Robbie and Wright
1996). The information asymmetry DEMO
in VC investments are also likely to be greater
than those faced by M&A advisers involved
in acquisitions of established corporations.
Also in DEMO to banks, VC ﬁrms, especially
closed-end limited partnerships, invest for DEMO ﬁxed
term before anticipating an exit to realize their
returns. In contrast to M&A specialists whose
main focus is transaction completion, VC ﬁrms
provide a continuing relationship with their
investees involving an active value-adding and
DEMO role (Jeng and Wells 2000) that
requires specialist skills (Black DEMO Gilson
1998). Finally, VC ﬁrms render their services
in a DEMO, multi-stage sequential invest-
ment process (Hall and Hofer 1993; Tyebjee
DEMO Bruno 1984).
In reviewing the international VC literature,
we limit the scope of our analysis in three
ways. We excluded work relating DEMO the devel-
opment of ﬁnancial ﬁrms and markets more
generally, within DEMO VC may play a part.
Similarly, the general entrepreneurial litera-
ture DEMO to the behavioural and psycho-
logical perspectives of individual opportunity
recognition in which the decision to seek VC
is a choice variable is also DEMO the scope
of our review. Future reviews that focus on
these two sets of literatures may usefully
incorporate the role of international VC. The
DEMO body of single-country studies from
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
outside the US is also beyond the scope of our
DEMO
The remainder of the paper is structured as
follows. First, we DEMO summarize trends in
international VC. We then review the litera-
ture under three main themes. The second
section takes a macro-level perspective to
review DEMO factors inﬂuencing the interna-
tional development of VC markets, both at DEMO
level of cross-country comparisons and the
development of international VC industries
across countries. The third section adopts a
micro-level perspective to provide an overview
DEMO the literature on cross-country comparisons
of VC behaviour, followed by a DEMO of VC
ﬁrms’ behaviour when they cross borders. In
the fourth section, we reﬂect on the literature
reviewed to discuss research questions for
further research, appropriate theoretical per-
spectives and methodological approaches. Finally,
we draw conclusions.
Trends in International Venture Capital
The increasing importance of international VC,DEMO
noted above, has been driven by a number of
factors. First, there has been international
development of VC ﬁrms. Originating in the
US, VC ﬁrms spread to the UK and Western
Europe (Ooghe et al. 1991) and to Japan. Sec-
ond, at the same time as DEMO markets
are becoming saturated, many developing
nations have undertaken radical regulatory
DEMO, making them more conducive invest-
ment destinations as VC ﬁrms perceive DEMO
demand for investment opportunities (Gompers
and Lerner 1998). Venture capital DEMO in
Singapore, Taiwan and Hong Kong have become
well established (Kenney et al. 2002a,b,c)
while, more recently, signiﬁcant growth DEMO
occurred in other Asian countries notably
India. Third, opportunities for transnational
DEMO (Aylward 1998) by foreign VC
ﬁrms arise in countries with limited domestic
supply and can help stimulate domestic mar-
kets by creating exit DEMO in foreign
markets (Maula and Makela 2003). Fourth,
VC DEMO emerging as an important growth engine
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
in the transition of the former centrally planned
economies of central and eastern DEMO,
especially in countries such as Hungary and
Poland (Wright et DEMO 2004a). Most recently,
VC is growing rapidly in China. The variation
in the development of VC industries across
countries raises important questions DEMO
ing the causes of these developments and the
behaviour of venture capitalists in different
markets, which are increasingly interesting
international agencies such as the World Bank
and the OECD (Baygan and Freudenberg
2000; Kenney et DEMO 2002c).
The outcome of these driving factors is that
international VC inﬂows and outﬂows have
become highly signiﬁcant (Baygan and Freu-
denberg 2000; EVCA 1999). In Europe, for
example, over the period since 1988, inﬂows
of VC from non-domestic sources rose from
$0.7 billion (DEMO of funds raised) to a peak of
$22.8 billion (47.6%) DEMO 2000 and $12 billion
(44.6%) in 2003 (Table 1). DEMO respect to inter-
national outﬂows into investments, the rise has
been DEMO $0.3 billion (7.7% of investments)
in 1988 to a peak DEMO $9.5 billion (27.3%) in
2000 and $8.4 billion (28.8%) in 2003.
A more detailed analysis of the importance
of international VC by DEMO is shown in
Table 2). The importance of cross-border inﬂows
of VC is emphasized by the recognition that,
in both Europe and DEMO, half of new funds
raised come from non-domestic sources, although
in the US this ﬁgure is generally less than
10% (Gompers 2005). While not as important
in terms of funds invested, cross-border dis-
bursements still account for a signiﬁcant 25%
of VC investments in Europe and DEMO of
investments in Asia. In Europe as a whole,
29% of fund inﬂows are from outside Europe,
with a further 21% of DEMO coming from
elsewhere in Europe, but outside the particular
country to DEMO the fund relates. In contrast,
22% of funds invested in Europe are invested
elsewhere in Europe outside the originating
country, with a further 3% invested outside
Europe. In Asia, while the total percentage of
foreign fund inﬂows is about the same as for
Europe at around 50%, a much greater percentage
137
International venture capital research
Table 1. International VC in Europe 1988–2003
Year
DEMO of
funds raised
non-
domestically
($m)
Within Europe
but outside
DEMO: %
of total funds
raised
Outside
Europe: %
of total
funds raised
Amount of
funds invested
non-domestically
($)
Within region
but outside
country: % of
total funds
invested
Outside region:
% of total
funds invested
1988 706 11.2 9.1 267 4.3 3.4
1989 1883 8.0 DEMO 515 8.9 3.2
1990 1318 14.4 14.4 554 10.8 2.7
1991 964 13.0 10.0 435 6.6 2.9
1992 695 7.7 8.8 519 6.6 2.9
DEMO 648 7.2 11.7 435 7.3 3.3
1994 1746 7.0 19.9 734 11.3 2.1
1995 1001 11.6 11.2 673 9.3 2.9
1996 2241 11.4 16.7 DEMO 12.5 3.8
1997 10,163 17.3 33.5 1884 17.0 2.5
1998 9738 16.8 31.1 3355 16.8 6.4
1999 10,894 21.3 21.6 5705 17.7 DEMO
2000 22,838 20.7 26.9 9546 20.1 7.2
2001 21,205 18.4 34.6 6979 23.3 5.4
2002 13,762 21.1 28.9 6726 21.5 2.8
DEMO 12,035 16.3 28.3 8389 25.1 3.7
Source: EVCA.
comes from DEMO Asia (37%) and a corre-
spondingly smaller percentage from other coun-
tries within the region (14%). With respect to
outward investments, DEMO is a similar pattern
to Europe with the largest proportion of for-
eign investments being within the region (29%)
and only a small percentage further aﬁeld (6%).
Within both Europe and Asia, there DEMO larger
variations between individual countries with
respect to the foreign inﬂows and outﬂows of
funds. In their study of OECD countries,
Baygan and DEMO (2000) show that, in
some markets, foreign VC investment can out-
weigh domestic investment.
The importance of cross-border VC is emph-
asized DEMO comparisons with early stage invest-
ments. Considerable VC research attention is
devoted to early stage ﬁnance, yet typically
larger shares of funds are involved in cross-
border investments. In Asia, for example, 26%
of investments DEMO 2002 were to seed and start-
up projects. In contrast, 35% DEMO investments
involved cross-border deals. Similarly, in
Europe, 11% of investments in 2002 went to
seed and start-up ventures, whereas 24% of
investments were cross-border.
Macro Analysis: The Development of
International Venture Capital Markets
In this section, we focus on two bodies of liter-
ature that examine macro issues relating to the
international development of VC markets. First,
we DEMO on studies that consider the development
of VC and private equity markets across different
countries, i.e. the cross-country comparisons of
the development of VC industries. The macro
study of cross-country comparisons has been the
dominant approach DEMO investigating international
VC at the macro level. Second, we examine the
DEMO neglected issue of the process of
development of international VC industries.
Comparisons of Cross-Country
Developments
As highlighted above, the dominant focus of
research into the macro-level development of
international VC has been on differences in VC
DEMO across countries. A population ecology
perspective was adopted by Manigart (1994), who
found that the density of VC ﬁrms in a particu-
lar country has a strong effect on the founding
138
© Blackwell Publishing DEMO 2005
September 2005
Table 2. International VC in Europe and Asia
Amount Within DEMO Outside
of funds Within region Outside region Amount of but outside region: %
raised but outside % of total funds invested country: % DEMO total
non- country: % funds raised non- of total funds funds DEMO
Country domestically of total funds Outside domestically invested Outside
Europe (US$m) raised Europe Europe (US$m) Europe Europe
Austria 48 26 0 39 DEMO 1
Belgium 11 8 0 149 38 1
Czech R 21 40 0 27 71 0
Denmark 37 12 0 85 26 7
Finland DEMO 29 0 123 24 2
France 2885 32 25 195 2 1
Germany 249 13 1 760 22 7
Greece 7 3 7 31 DEMO 6
Hungary 13 100 0 1 6 0
Iceland 0 0 0 6 0.7 41
Ireland 195 65 27 27 24 1
Italy 358 DEMO 7 138 4 1
Netherlands 127 7 3 634 29 6
Norway 19 4 1 56 12 14
Poland 37 30 0 9 4 DEMO
Portugal 9 11 0 26 23 13
Romania 11 7 72 0 0 0
Slovakia 2 20 0 0 0 0
Spain 291 29 DEMO 137 6 7
Sweden 566 52 31 906 56 3
Switzerland 2 1 0 116 12 23
UK 16,575 19 44 3564 32 DEMO
Total Europe 21,682 21 29 7029 22 3
Asia Asia Non-Asia Asia Non-Asia
Australia 805 5 12 141 4 1
China 2841 23 DEMO 795 13 1
Hong Kong 23,157 22 67 9155 85 4
India 1929 19 60 116 4 1
Indonesia 61 16 24 0 DEMO 0
Japan 4133 3 18 1189 5 8
Korea 2188 7 28 469 6 2
Malaysia 397 23 26 41 7 1
New Zealand DEMO 13 0 22 9 0
Philippines 169 15 43 29 16 4
Singapore 6438 28 38 3568 64 21
Taiwan 939 5 10 780 DEMO 14
Thailand 464 14 66 15 4 1
Vietnam 99 11 76 21 20 0
Total Asia 44,249 14 37 16,341 29 DEMO
Source: European countries: European Venture Capital Association Directory 2004; Asian DEMO: Guide to Venture
Capital in Asia, 14th edition, Asian Venture DEMO Journal, 2004.
of new VC ﬁrms. Manigart also found that, when an institutional perspective. Initial work focused
populations in neighbouring countries emerge on DEMO ﬁnancial environment, in particular,
before the local VC population, legitimation for that relating to the stock market. Black and
the emergence of DEMO local population is increased. Gilson (1998) explain the presence of much
A greater contribution to our understanding stronger VC industries in stock market-centred
DEMO development of VC markets is provided systems by arguing that a well-developed stock
by papers that have used some dimension of market permits venture DEMO to exit
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 139
International venture capital research
through an IPO and that the ability to DEMO
gains in this way is critical to the existence of
a vibrant VC market. They argue that these
institutional factors are more important than
DEMO differences in the willingness of indi-
viduals to take risks. Also they point to the
importance of path dependencies in the devel-
opment of DEMO markets which make it difﬁ-
cult, for example, for bank-centred systems to
establish appropriate institutional infrastruc-
tures to support the development of VC.
DEMO and Wells (2000) and Megginson
(2004) lend some support to the Black and
Gilson argument regarding the importance of
stock markets, but ﬁnd that market capitaliza-
tion growth is not a signiﬁcant determinant of
DEMO, while government policies can have a strong
impact through setting the DEMO frame-
work. Jeng and Wells also make an important
distinction between the factors affecting the
development of early stage and later stage VC
activity, notably that IPOs are a signiﬁcant
determinant only of later stage VC DEMO
across countries. Botazzi and Da Rin (2002)
show that high DEMO activity does not necessar-
ily correspond to more IPOs.
Mayer et al. (2005) compare sources of funds
and investment activities of venture capitalists
DEMO Germany, Israel, Japan and the UK, and
ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences DEMO countries.
Venture capital investment patterns were also
found to differ across countries in terms of the
stage, sector of ﬁnanced companies and geo-
graphical focus of investments. They ﬁnd that
differences in investment patterns are related
DEMO the variations in funding sources, but that the
relations differ across DEMO Megginson
(2004) notes the importance of different sources
of funds for VC, especially pension funds
across markets in the US, Europe and DEMO
Institutional differences between countries
also affect the regional development of VC
across countries. For example, Klagge and
Martin (2004), Martin et al. (2002, 2005) and
Sunley et al. (2005) point to the DEMO
regional dispersion of VC ﬁrms in the UK
compared with Germany, DEMO reﬂect the
spatial structure of the ﬁnancial systems in the
140
two countries and which also interact with
differences in the institutional, regulatory and
corporate environment between the two coun-
tries. They suggest that a regionally DEMO critical
mass of ﬁnancial institutions, including regional
stock exchanges, and agents increases spatial
proximity between ﬁnancial intermediaries
and private ﬁrms, and provides a crystalliza-
tion point for VC ﬁrms.
The view of the importance of DEMO mar-
kets has been challenged recently by Armour
and Cumming (2004), who argue, in their
study of 15 countries covering a 13-year DEMO,
that while a nation’s level of entrepreneurial
activity and idea generation are important
determinants of VC development, the legal
environment is as important as the stock mar-
ket, that government involvement can hinder
the growth of private equity and that tempo-
rate bankruptcy laws stimulate entrepreneurial
demand DEMO VC. They suggest that their evi-
dence provides a strong case for legal reform.
The ﬁndings of this study are potentially
important for the DEMO of legal institu-
tional concepts to the development of VC
markets because, in contrast to other studies,
the above measures are directly of relevance
to VC markets. Studies that have played down
the role of DEMO factors have tended to draw
on measures relating to public markets based
on La Porta et al. (1997). Roe (2004) argues
that studies that examine corporate law world-
wide tend to over-predict its importance DEMO the
world’s richest nations and tend to underesti-
mate the importance of its enforcement in
emerging markets.
Although these ﬁndings provide some
extension of DEMO application of institutional
variables to the study of VC markets, they DEMO
not consider the potential implications of the
wider institutional environment that includes
cultural and social factors (Wright et al. 2003b).
In their study of VC in India and Israel, Nye
and Wasserman (1999) show that differing
levels of political support, physical infrastruc-
ture and cultural learning have contributed to
very different outcomes in these growing VC
markets. There DEMO also the need to understand
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
the heterogeneity within apparently similar
regions. Asia, for example, contains both
DEMO and emerging countries as well as
countries with English, Germanic and DEMO
based systems of corporate law (La Porta et
al. 1998). DEMO et al. (2005) argue that the
nature of a country’s institutional environment
inﬂuences the development of its VC industry.
Bruton et al. (2002) cite the case of Singa-
pore, where the regulatory environment cre-
DEMO by the government and its agencies has
led to a greater emphasis on high technology
start-ups than elsewhere in Asia.
Kenney et al. (2002a,b,c), examining the
differential development of VC markets in
Asia, note the importance of investment op-
portunities, exit possibilities, government initi-
DEMO (e.g. tax incentives), the development of
a technological industrial base DEMO socio-
cultural factors supporting entrepreneurship.
They also suggest that, across countries, VC
industries may develop differently where vari-
eties of VC ﬁrm with DEMO objectives are
dominant and where different ﬁnancing
instruments are available. For example, cap-
tive venture capitalists may be more interested
in developing long-term relationships and
investing in less risky later stage investments.
Independent venture capitalists may DEMO more
interested in ﬁnancial gains, corporate venture
capitalists may be more DEMO in access-
ing new technology, and public sector VC ﬁrms
may DEMO social as well as technological
objectives. Baygan and Freudenberg (2000),
in the context of OECD countries, echo some
of these points when they emphasize the
importance of the barriers to entrepreneurship
as a principal DEMO on the development of
VC markets in particular countries. They also
note the importance of a supply of capital
willing to ﬁnance risky investment DEMO the
availability of a sufﬁcient number of special-
ists with the necessary expertise to undertake
VC investment. Extending this point, country
differences within the European Union (EU)
in the development of VC may be generated
by individual government policies designed to
stimulate regional clusters of high technology
DEMO Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
industry as well as policies directly aimed at
stimulating regional VC (Martin et al. 2002).
Looking speciﬁcally at the later manage-
ment buy-out end of the VC market, Wright et
al. (1992) examine the factors inﬂuencing the
differential development of DEMO buy-
out markets in Western Europe. They identify
differences in source of transactions, infra-
structure to complete transactions and the ability
to exit transactions. Wright et al. (2004a)
adapt this model to analyse the development
of later stage private equity markets in the EU
Accession States of DEMO and Eastern
Europe. This model has also been adopted by
Wright et al. (2003a) and Wright and Kita-
mura (2003) to examine DEMO development of
the management buy-out market in Japan,
while Wright et al. (2005) compare develop-
ments in Europe and Japan.
Apart from DEMO existence of laws, the
enforcement of those laws is an important
DEMO for ﬁnancial investors. Legal enforce-
ment is probably highest in the US, interme-
diary in Europe and erratic to non-existent in
certain parts of Asia (Bruton et al. 2003). It is
expected that law enforcement will affect the
way VC ﬁrms behave. Indeed, Leeds and Sun-
derland (2003) comment that a major reason
for the problems experienced by DEMO
equity funds that entered emerging markets in
the 1990s was that the legal and regulatory
framework did not provide adequate investor
protection, and dramatic differences in ac-
counting standards, corporate governance and
exit potential created problems. Similarly, the
closure of embryonic IPO markets in Europe
that stimulated growth in VC led to a reversal
of this trend (Megginson 2004).
The Development of International
Venture Capital Industries
In comparison to the literature DEMO macro-level
cross-country comparisons, little research
attention has been devoted to focusing DEMO the
international development of VC industries;
there are, however, exceptions. Baygan and
Freudenberg (2000) suggest that VC funds
141
International venture capital research
may allocate ﬁnance beyond national bounda-
ries into DEMO where entrepreneurship,
innovation, growth prospects and expected
returns are highest. DEMO policies de-
signed to foster the demand side, notably cre-
ativity DEMO entrepreneurship, may be conducive
to attracting foreign VC.
Kenney et al. (2002a,b,c) show that inter-
national VC grew initially through the inter-
nationalization of US VC ﬁrms, ﬁrst to Europe
and then to Asia, as these ﬁrms sought new
investment opportunities (see also Gompers
DEMO). Interestingly, they note that these ﬁrms
often resorted to private DEMO and expansion
deals, as start-up opportunities were scarce.
The internationalization of DEMO activity from
Europe to the US came somewhat later, as VC
DEMO began to appreciate the more ﬂexible
environment for high-tech investment in the
US. They comment that few ﬁrms are truly
global and that most DEMO ﬁrms operating inter-
nationally are multinational or transnational.
The development of internationalization of
VC markets may be linked to limited domes-
tic opportunities for DEMO ﬁrms, cultural links
with neighbouring countries as well as the
availability DEMO investment executives with VC
expertise and local country knowledge. For
example, DEMO immigrants may return
to their home country to establish foreign VC
ﬁrms (Kenney et al. 2002a).
Internationalization into countries may be
facilitated through the development of net-
works of contacts, for example through joint
ventures with ﬁnancial ﬁrms. Wright et al.
(2003b) and Wright and Kitamura (2003) note
in the context of the private equity market in
Japan that a lack of access to networks can
pose a major barrier DEMO foreign ﬁrm entry.
Micro Analysis: Venture Capital Firm
Behaviour Internationally
In DEMO section, we focus on micro issues relat-
ing to the behaviour DEMO venture capitalists
internationally. First, we review the literature
relating to cross-country DEMO of VC
ﬁrms, which has been the dominant research
142
focus DEMO the micro level. Second, we review the
literature on venture capitalists DEMO
Cross-Country Comparisons
This section reviews cross-country variations
in the nature of VC operations. For exposi-
tional purposes, we adopt the stages in the
process of the VC life cycle from fund organ-
ization and the raising DEMO funds through the
various stages of the investment process
(Gompers and DEMO 1999; Wright and Rob-
bie 1998). Our analysis pays particular DEMO
tion both to the theoretical perspectives adopted
as well as empirical ﬁndings. Also, we focus
on studies which have compared behaviour in
different countries using common methodolo-
gies. We do not include studies of different
individual DEMO, since methodological
differences create problems of comparability.
Fund organization and fund DEMO Venture
capital ﬁrms can be organized in several ways
which affect the nature of their fund raising
and their investment behaviour, including the
types of deals sought, the degree of their
involvement in monitoring and value-adding
activities and their investment time horizon.
These different organizational forms include:
DEMO limited partnerships established
and managed by professional VC ﬁrms that
act as general partners in managing the fund
on behalf of the limited partners; captive
funds that obtain their funding from a parent
ﬁnancial institution; corporate VC ﬁrms that
are parts of trading corporations; semi-captive
ﬁrms that obtain their ﬁnance partly from
their parent and partly by raising closed end
DEMO; and public sector funds.
Megginson (2004) shows that, in the US,
VC ﬁrms primarily take the form of independ-
ent limited DEMO In contrast, in
Europe, VC funds have generally been organ-
ized more as investment companies according
to various national laws or have been DEMO
aries of larger ﬁnancial groups. As a result, in
the US, VC ﬁrms tend to obtain their funds
from institutions such as pension DEMO whereas,
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
in Europe, banks and other ﬁnancial institu-
tions are more important (DEMO and Da Rin
2002). Karsai et al. (1998) show for the tran-
sition economies of Hungary, Poland and Slo-
vakia how local legislation restricts the choice
of organizational form for VC ﬁrms.
There is DEMO work involving cross-
country studies of the issues involved in the
different forms of VC ﬁrm in terms of fund
raising and interacting with DEMO providers.
US-based work on the contractual arrange-
ments for limited partnerships (DEMO and
Lerner 1996) and UK-based research on the
monitoring of venture DEMO by their
funds providers (Robbie et al. 1997) suggests
some areas where comparative cross-country
studies may be fruitful. In the sections that
follow, we also comment on differences between
different organizational forms of VC where
DEMO have controlled for these differences.
Deal generation and screening. A number of
studies have attempted to replicate US studies
elsewhere and have then made DEMO
comparisons to ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences in
the emphasis placed on screening criteria
between countries. Compared with venture
capitalists in Europe, Canada and the Asia
Paciﬁc that base investment decisions on
fewer screening criteria, those in the US rank
nearly all screening criteria as ‘considerably’
important (Knight 1994; DEMO and Turpin
1993). As Ray (1991) notes in replicating
MacMillan et al.’s (1985) study and compar-
ing the US with Singapore, investors’ lack of
experience and learning in the former set of
countries DEMO to a narrower band of reasons
for rejecting prospective portfolio clients.
Another striking difference relates to the
greater importance of signiﬁcant market growth
in DEMO US (Knight 1994). In Asia Paciﬁc, the
tradition of opportunism and new business
creation, as well as a need to compete inter-
nationally, place a substantially greater emphasis
on whether the proposal creates a new market
(Knight 1994; Ray 1991).
There are also differences DEMO the relative
importance of criteria across developed and
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
emerging markets. Difﬁculties in assessing
managerial capabilities, together with, for instance,
short private-sector experience of entrepre-
neurs in transition economies, necessitate reli-
ance on foreign business education or work
exposure to Western business practices as
alternative signals of managerial capability
(Bliss 1999). In the Asia Paciﬁc region, per-
sonality compatibility is signiﬁcantly more
important for venture capitalists than for those
in the US, Europe and Canada (DEMO 1994).
Later studies have begun to highlight the
importance of institutional factors. The difﬁ-
cult institutional conditions of transition econ-
omies lead VC DEMO to place relatively greater
emphasis on ownership stakes and mutual
agreement about the legal structure of invest-
ments (Bliss 1999; Karsai et al. DEMO). The nature
of the capital market is signiﬁcantly more
important in the emerging markets of India and
the Asia Paciﬁc region (Knight 1994; Wright
et al. 2002) than in more developed markets.
Information, valuation and structuring. Stud-
ies, which have generally been based on ques-
tionnaire surveys, show signiﬁcant differences
in the information sources, target rates of
DEMO and valuation methods adopted by VC
ﬁrms when undertaking investment appraisals.
Financial theory, resource-based theory (RBV)
and institutional theory have been used DEMO
examine these issues.
Unlike the emphasis on outside specialists
in developed markets, the absence of well-
developed networks of intermediaries and
consultants in emerging markets necessitates
greater reliance on ﬁrms’ own expertise for
investment appraisal (Karsai et al. 1999; Ray
1991; Ray and Turpin 1993; Wright et al.
2000a). Compared with the UK and Continen-
tal Europe, VC industries in emerging markets
are characterized by signiﬁcantly greater
emphasis on information DEMO to product,
market and proposed exit timing and methods
(Manigart DEMO al. 1997, 1999; Karsai et al. 2000).
Also predominant in Japan and Singapore are
personal judgement and in-house specialists
(Ray 1991; DEMO and Turpin 1993).
143
International venture capital research
Target rates of return also vary across mar-
DEMO (Manigart et al. 2002). Consistent with
the RBV, Manigart et al. ﬁnd that early-stage
venture capitalists require a signiﬁcantly higher
return than DEMO venture capitalists when
investing in late stage ventures. Consistent
with ﬁnancial theory, they ﬁnd that buy-out
specialists require a signiﬁcantly lower return
than do other venture capitalists when invest-
ing in later stage companies. They ﬁnd DEMO
required returns are required by venture capi-
talists located in the US and UK compared
with those located in France, Belgium and the
Netherlands, which they infer is attributable to
differences in institutional, legal and DEMO
contexts, speciﬁcally with respect to the rela-
tive development of capital DEMO requiring
more frequent valuation of companies in the
former two countries. They also ﬁnd an
important inﬂuence of the venture capitalists’
organizational form in DEMO independent ven-
ture capitalists seek signiﬁcantly higher returns
than captives or public sector venture capital-
ists. Unlike in developed markets, where tar-
get rates of return are typically based on the
characteristics of a speciﬁc investment, there
is a lack of a clear correspondence between
return and investment DEMO (a proxy for risk)
in transition economies (Karsai et al. 1999).
Financial theory has been used in conjunc-
tion with institutional DEMO to examine the
methods of valuation adopted by venture cap-
italists in different markets (Lockett et al. 2002;
Manigart et al. 2000; DEMO et al. 2004b).
Since VC executives in developed markets
have greater expertise and skills to evaluate
proposals, valuation practices are more soph-
isticated. Owing to developed capital markets,
the valuation process also relies on DEMO
corporate ﬁnance theory developed in an ad-
vanced capital market context. In contrast, in
transition economies, the absence of well-
developed capital and DEMO markets and con-
cerns about the reliability of past trading
records mean that venture capitalists attach
noticeably greater importance to cash ﬂow
methods (Karsai et al. 1999; Wright and
Robbie 1996).
144
In their nine-country study covering the
US, Europe and Asia, Wright et al. (2004b)
conclude that the legal system, and its impli-
cation for capital markets, may be more
important in explaining the source of informa-
tion used than it is for the valuation methods
used. Cultural factors play DEMO important role
in the relative importance placed on informa-
tion provided by entrepreneurs and in the
business plan, and in the extent to which alter-
native external sources are sought. This sug-
gests that information sources DEMO not so
easily transferred from one context to another.
The actual sources of information that VC
ﬁrms trust may vary both between and within
DEMO systems and geographic regions. This
study did not ﬁnd that the organization form
of VC was signiﬁcantly related to valuation
method used, although there was some weak
association with the use of information from
entrepreneurs and DEMO business plans. These
ﬁndings indicate that apparently similar sys-
tems and markets may in fact be heterogene-
ous. Further analysis might usefully explore
the DEMO for such differences in a more
ﬁne-grained way that takes account of differ-
ent institutional contexts.
A parallel stream of research has made use
DEMO archival data, either through proprietary
data sets or databases that have DEMO pub-
licly available. These data sources provide
scope for more robust analyses to complement
studies based on attitudinal questionnaire data.
This research has focused DEMO corporate and
tax law environments to suggest that these
may affect the ﬁnancing structure in VC and
buy-out investments. Such differences can
affect the DEMO ability to use certain instru-
ments as well as their efﬁcacy from a tax
point of view (Wright et al. 1992). For exam-
ple, although convertible instruments are a
key feature of the US and UK VC markets,
where common law codes permit ﬂexibility in
the DEMO of new ﬁnancial instruments,
this is not the case in civil code countries
which may prohibit such instruments (Cum-
ming and Flemming 2004). Tax beneﬁts asso-
ciated with convertible securities in the US
© DEMO Publishing Ltd 2005
and the coexistence of public and private VC
in Canada and Continental DEMO may explain
differences in the use of convertible instru-
ments (Cumming DEMO). In the UK, the use of
convertible preference shares has DEMO replaced
by convertible debt following changes to the
taxation regime. For Germany, Bascha and
Walz (2001) show that VC ﬁrms rarely employ
convertible securities, which may in part be
due to legal restrictions on conversion rights
for certain legal forms under German corpo-
rate law. Lerner and DEMO (2003), in their
study of VC in developing markets, conclude
that differences in corporate and tax law affect
transaction structure. Lerner and DEMO (2005)
examine 210 private equity investments in
developing countries and DEMO that investments
in high enforcement common law countries
often use convertible preferred shares with
covenants. In contrast, in low enforcement
and civil law countries, private equity ﬁrms
tend to use ordinary shares and debt and rely
on equity and board control as a substitute for
the lack of DEMO protection.
At the same time, however, there exist
some variations within emerging economies.
In India, for example, there are restrictions on
venture DEMO in the form of a low limit of the
permissible debt–equity ratio. Leverage tends
to be higher on average for ventures in the
Philippines DEMO Korea, and lower on average
in China and Taiwan (Aylward 1998).
This research has been supported by ques-
tionnaire work that shows DEMO Central and
Eastern Europe (CEE) private equity investors
employ similarly sophisticated ﬁnancing instru-
ments and contract provisions as investors
in established markets, such as convertible
securities and the stipulation of drag-along
rights among other covenants, with the former
exceeding the relevance of such instruments
in Germany (Farag et al. 2004). These ﬁnd-
ings are consistent with theoretical considera-
DEMO highlighting the importance of ﬂexible
financial contracting practices for negating
the effects of information asymmetries, which
may be more pronounced in CEE than in
Western Europe. Furthermore, the elaborate
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
use of advanced ﬁnancial contracting schemes
underscores the development of investment
skills DEMO CEE private equity investors and
may reﬂect the ease of transfer of general
professional skills and mechanisms to new
markets (Wright et al. 2002).
For later stage investments, the relative
availability of different forms of debt may
also differentiate ﬁnancing structures between
countries; for example, in DEMO, the underdevel-
oped banking system meant that long-term
debt did not DEMO available in signiﬁcant
amounts until well after 2000 (Wright et al.
DEMO). The ability to enforce legal contracts
may also affect the nature of the ﬁnancing
structure, with VC ﬁrms likely to seek major-
ity equity stakes in emerging markets where
the rights of minority shareholders are DEMO
(Karsai et al. 1998).
Post-investment activities. Building on an
Anglo-American DEMO, agency theory is
the most commonly used theoretical lens
through which DEMO examine differences in mon-
itoring across countries. To some extent, the
DEMO behaviour of venture capitalists
represents this normative institutional per-
spective whereby incumbent ﬁrms follow pro-
fessional norms. For example, a seat on the
boards of investee companies or the right to
appoint a director at a DEMO stage and right of
access to information are present in both the
established UK market and the relatively new
markets of Singapore and India (Pruthi et al.
2003; Ray 1991). As Bruton et al. (DEMO)
explain, whereas the interactions and roles of
new entrants to DEMO industry are initially deter-
mined by economic efﬁciency concerns, later
entrants DEMO more to isomorphic forces,
tending to follow commonly held beliefs and
replicating the conduct of the originators.
Sapienza et al. (1996) adopt DEMO mixed
theoretical approach that extends an agency
perspective to include business risk and infor-
mation processing theories. They examine the
antecedents to venture capitalists’ DEMO
and ﬁnd that venture capitalists in the US
and UK expend more effort in value-adding
145
International venture capital research
activities than those in the Netherlands, al-
though the importance accorded to the various
VC monitoring and added value roles DEMO
consistent in each country. The fact that their
results best predicted the behaviour of venture
capitalists in the US, where the theories they
use were largely developed, supports the view
that theories are culturally bound.
Adopting an institutional cultural perspec-
tive helps understand the existence of differ-
ences DEMO developed and emerging markets
in respect of monitoring mechanisms and post-
investment service provision. Asian boards of
venture-backed ﬁrms are signiﬁcantly larger
than European DEMO, while the number of
insiders on Asian boards is also greater DEMO
those in the US or Europe (Bruton et al. 2005).
DEMO in the West, CEOs of VC-funded ﬁrms
in Asia are not DEMO as frequently (Bruton
et al. 2003). This is because VC DEMO the US is
structured in order to maximize returns to VC
ﬁrms, to minimize agency risk, and to maxi-
mize efﬁciency in the DEMO of the VC ﬁrm
itself. Implicit in these rationales is the belief
that VC ﬁrms and their entrepreneurial invest-
ment ﬁrms are two totally DEMO and inde-
pendent entities. The relationship between the
venture capitalist and the entrepreneur in
Asia, on the other hand, is that of a DEMO
entity. There is less need, therefore, to control
agency risk. Whereas in the West, the focus of
the board is on efﬁcient decision-making by
those who have control of the ﬁrm, Asian ﬁrms
emphasize the effort to build relationships
among the ofﬁcers of the ﬁrm and outside
DEMO Hence, as a result of the greater
emphasis on the group DEMO than on individ-
uals, agency concerns, such as exist especially
in the US, are not perceived as present in Asia
(Hofstede and DEMO 1988). Differences in beha-
viour from the US are also evident in CEE.
Evidence from Hungary, Poland and Slovakia
for instance, suggests DEMO emphasis
on keeping the position under review and on
requesting more in-depth information rather
than taking precipitous action (Wright et al. 1999).
Comparisons of the services provided by
venture capitalists in the US and in DEMO
146
markets suggest that the former are more
involved in serving as a sounding board to the
entrepreneurial team and in ﬁnancially ori-
ented DEMO (Macmillan et al. 1985), while
the latter place more emphasis DEMO making
introductions to potential customers and sup-
pliers, and assisting with DEMO plans is
relatively more important (Pruthi et al. 2003).
This DEMO because, relative to developed markets,
marketing problems coupled with the DEMO
of investors to compete effectively are rated
very highly in emerging markets (Gorman and
Sahlman 1989; Wright et al. 1999). Again, this
stresses the importance of institutional differ-
ences between countries.
Investment realization. The DEMO of dif-
ferent exit routes may vary between legal sys-
tems, DEMO obviously with respect to the
availability of stock markets. Adopting a cap-
ital markets theory perspective, Black and
Gilson (1998) argue that the highest return
exits in developed VC markets are realized
through IPOs (Black and Gilson 1998). This
is because investors in these markets possess
DEMO international resources to take successful
investments to a public listing (Murray DEMO).
Moreover, as La Porta et al. (1997) indicate,
DEMO comparison with civil law countries, com-
mon law countries have broader DEMO higher
valued capital markets. Better quality of the
legal environment in terms of strong share-
holder rights or legal protection of investors
against expropriation DEMO entrepreneurs per-
mits easier access to capital markets and ﬂow
of new companies obtaining equity ﬁnance
(Black and Gilson 1998; Wright et al. DEMO).
Venture capital ﬁrms in emerging VC mar-
kets, on the DEMO hand, have very little experi-
ence with the process of taking DEMO public
(Ray 1991). Although the development of a
second tier DEMO market is likely to enable
many growth-oriented companies at anticipat-
ing exits through IPOs, entrepreneurs in Sin-
gapore, for instance, unlike their counterparts
in developed markets, are not very comfortable
with liquidating their investments completely.
Venture capital ﬁrms in transition economies
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
such as Hungary, on the other hand, aim to
ﬂoat their DEMO in more developed foreign
markets (Karsai et al. 1997). Except DEMO the
context of the privatization process, IPOs and
capital increases through DEMO stock market
remain very rare (EBRD 1998). This is because,DEMO
despite improvements in the regulatory and
institutional framework, the non-bank sector
DEMO underdeveloped and market capitali-
zation on stock exchanges is relatively low.
Sales to strategic partners are typically the
most common form of exit, yet a number of
issues are raised about this option in different
contexts. DEMO only do acquisitions markets vary
in terms of their stage of development, but
there may be different attitudes with respect to
the sale of majority versus minority stakes,
and different regulations regarding sales to
foreigners, etc. Cumming and Fleming (2004)
adopt a legal system perspective and show
that, for the Asia-Paciﬁc region, a high legal-
ity index DEMO associated with a greater likeli-
hood of exit through IPO or trade sale but that
a high legality index is neither necessary nor
sufﬁcient DEMO the development of a successful
VC market.
Wright et al. (1993) adopt a broad contin-
gency perspective to explain the inﬂuences on
exits DEMO the buy-out segment of the VC market
in four European countries. This perspective
incorporates a range of institutional factors,
including the state of DEMO of asset
and stock markets, legal infrastructures affect-
ing the nature DEMO VC ﬁrms’ structures and the
differing roles and objectives of management
and venture capitalists.
Crossing Borders
Research focusing on issues relating to the
internationalization DEMO VC ﬁrms is the most
underdeveloped of the areas we consider. This
underdevelopment is surprising, given the
extent of cross-border investment activity by
venture capitalists noted earlier in this paper.
In this section, and consistent with the previ-
ous section, we summarize the limited work
on international investment behaviour by
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
venture capitalists following DEMO stages in the
process of the VC life cycle. Internationaliza-
tion is deﬁned as both the raising of funds by
VC ﬁrms from outside DEMO markets in which
they are headquartered and their investment
into portfolio companies outside the market in
which they are headquartered through a vari-
ety DEMO entry modes, including direct arms’
length investment and a physical presence.
DEMO organization, motivations and strategies.
Analysis of the internationalization strategies
of VC DEMO has used a mix of aggregate
archival data and case studies. With respect to
location choice, Hall and Tu (2003) suggest
that the willingness of VC ﬁrms to invest
overseas is positively related to the DEMO of the
VC ﬁrm and the investment stage of their
investees, DEMO negatively to the age of the VC
ﬁrm. Interestingly, this study DEMO that inter-
nationalization is not related to the type of VC
ﬁrm ownership.
A large-scale study of internationalization
by US VC ﬁrms by Guler DEMO Guillen (2004)
suggests that, rather than environmental
uncertainty, the DEMO to invest internation-
ally is driven by the availability of innovative
investment opportunities ideas that are per-
ceived to offer the opportunity to earn DEMO
rior returns.
Cultural differences and geographical dis-
tance may create problems in cross-border VC
investments (Meyer and Shao 1995). Venture
capitalists may attempt to replicate their
domestic mode of operation when entering
foreign markets or DEMO adapt to local environ-
mental conditions, producing isomorphism
among ﬁrms. Foreign DEMO may, however,
retain some distinctiveness as they attempt to
compete DEMO the basis of some aspect of differ-
entiation. This proposition is informed by
institutional theory, which asserts that organ-
izations seek to adopt strategies, structures and
processes that reﬂect the institutional environ-
ment through isomorphic adaptation (Zalan
2004). Zhang (2002) noted that, for foreign
investors DEMO address the high risks of investing
in China, they need to DEMO to local market
147
International venture capital research
conditions. In a recent study of VC ﬁrms DEMO
East Asia, Bruton et al. (2005) contend that
institutional features DEMO as ownership struc-
ture, family control and codes of corporate
governance DEMO the differences between
Western and East Asian VC ﬁrms’ investment
behaviour.
Based on case studies of US private equity
ﬁrms, Dixit and Jayaraman (DEMO) suggest
three models of internationalization. These are
identiﬁed as a specialized DEMO model, whereby
funds are specialized by stage of investment
and geographical DEMO, the organic growth
model, based on an integrated approach that
involves the transfer of expertise from the
domestic market, and the afﬁliate model, based
on co-investment with a local domestic partner.
Evidence from a representative survey of
37 UK venture capitalists that had internation-
alized shows that DEMO length investing (25
ﬁrms) appears to be the most popular means
of foreign market entry, followed by the estab-
lishment of branch ofﬁces (21 ﬁrms) (Pruthi
2004). There were few instances of ﬁrms
entering through acquiring stakes in existing
funds in the concerned markets (three ﬁrms)
or of joint ventures/alliances, acquisitions (two
cases of DEMO) or licensing, and franchising
was reported only once. These ﬁndings indi-
cate that venture capitalists may engage in
more than one form of DEMO presence.
This survey also showed that UK venture
capitalists that internationalized adopt both
formal and informal controls for controlling
and co-ordinating their foreign operations DEMO
that informal controls were, on an average,
rated more highly (Pruthi 2004). Among for-
mal controls, ‘direct reporting by investment
executives in foreign operation …’ was rated
most highly (mean score 5.5 on a 7 point
scale, where 7 = very important; SD 1.5), fol-
lowed by ‘investment committee membership
…’ (mean 5.1; SD 1.6) and ‘highly standard-
ized and formal reporting systems’ (mean 4.9;
DEMO 1.5), respectively. Among informal con-
trols, ‘regular telephone/e-mail contact’ (mean
6.4; SD 0.7) received the highest rating fol-
lowed by DEMO group meetings’ (mean 5.9;
148
SD 1.0) and ‘frequent overseas trips and visits
…’ (mean 5.9; SD 0.9), respectively.
An DEMO aspect of the strategy and
organization of venture capitalists entering
foreign markets concerns the skills of execu-
tives operating in that market. Beaverstock
(2004) shows that legal ﬁrms expatriate staff
to their international ofﬁces but, DEMO
ously, employ the services of ‘local’ staff to
practise local jurisdiction DEMO However, the
nature of expatriation varies according to inter-
national region. DEMO east Asia, expatriation fol-
lowed a ‘Multinational’ typology, characterized
by one-way knowledge diffusion from London
with expatriates managing overseas ofﬁces. In
contrast, expatriation in Europe and North
America reﬂected a ‘Transnational’ typology,
where knowledge DEMO developed and diffused
in a network of relationships in which expatri-
ates worked with locally qualiﬁed partners
and lawyers, and expatriates of other national-
ities, in an environment where locals, expatri-
ates of other nationalities DEMO British qualiﬁed
staff managed ofﬁces. Leeds and Sunderland
(2003) provide anecdotal evidence on the
need for locally based VC personnel who are
culturally DEMO Evidence from foreign ven-
ture capitalists in India suggests that about a
third of executives have VC experience out-
side the country and that DEMO are Indian
nationals (Wright et al. 2002). Further research
is DEMO to examine whether the different
patterns identiﬁed in respect of legal ﬁrms
also hold for venture capitalists.
Deal generation and screening. For venture
capitalists DEMO invest cross-border, there need to
be opportunities for investment in local DEMO
preneurs. However, cross-border investment
poses particular challenges for identifying
deals. Different DEMO modes suggest different
approaches to deal generation and screening
and possibly different types of deal. For example,
a physical presence in a country DEMO provide
greater integration into local networks of entre-
preneurs and intermediaries necessary to
access early stage deals. In contrast, arms’
length investment from the venture capitalist’s
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
home base may be more feasible for invest-
ments such as divestments DEMO divisions by
multinational ﬁrms.
The presence of local VC investors with
whom to partner in a syndicate may play an
important role in taking DEMO certain responsi-
bilities that may be easier to manage from a
domestic position (Mäkelä and Maula 2005;
Maula and Mäkelä 2003). These local inves-
tors need to have extensive international
social capital, that is, networks with foreign
VC ﬁrms. They are attractive to foreign inves-
tors, because they have information about the
operation of the local market, DEMO
access to deal ﬂow as well as dense networks
of contacts and familiarity with different legal
requirements. Local investors can play a cer-
tiﬁcation DEMO regarding potential investees
for incoming investors, that is identify attrac-
tive DEMO and, by being in close proximity,
may be more able DEMO provide monitoring and
value-adding activities than is possible for a
distant foreign investor, although this need may
be reduced if the entrepreneurial ﬁrm already
has expertise and where the venture’s markets
are largely international.
Information, valuation and structuring. Wright
et al. (2002) examine internationalization
issues in the DEMO VC market with respect to
information and valuation. Adopting a mixed
internationalization and institutional approach,
they compare the behaviour of foreign
(mainly US) and domestic VC ﬁrms in India
and VC ﬁrms in the US. They ﬁnd more sig-
niﬁcant differences between foreign venture
capitalists in India DEMO US VC ﬁrms than
between Indian foreign and domestic VC
ﬁrms, DEMO adaptation by foreign VC
ﬁrms as they enter overseas markets.
The ﬁnancing instruments used by VC
ﬁrms when they make cross-border invest-
ments may DEMO Cumming (2002) ﬁnds that
US VC ﬁrms investing domestically made
extensive use of convertible preferred equity
but, when they invested in Canadian-based
ventures, they used a wider variety of ﬁnan-
cial instruments. Cumming attributes this
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
difference in behaviour to institutional DEMO
ences between countries, such as differences
in attractiveness of certain instruments DEMO
purposes of taxation relief. The different ﬁnan-
cial structuring behaviour of VC ﬁrms when
they invest cross-border is an area for further
research, especially with respect to differ-
ences between common law and civil code
institutional DEMO that permit or restrict the
use of particular instruments.
Post-investment activities. Pruthi et al. (2003)
adopt a mixed agency and institutional per-
spective to examine the monitoring and value-
adding approaches adopted by foreign and
DEMO ﬁrms in India. They ﬁnd that foreign
venture capitalists were more likely to be
involved in investees at the strategic level,
while domestic DEMO capitalists were more
likely to be active at the operational level.
This ﬁnding is consistent with the arguments
of Maula and Mäkelä (2003). However, the
organization form of the VC did not have a
signiﬁcant effect (Pruthi et al. 2003).
Hurry et al. (1992) examine the monitoring
behaviour of Japanese VC ﬁrms in the US.
They show DEMO US VC ﬁrms are more likely
to have greater incentives and ability to mon-
itor investees than Japanese VC ﬁrms as they
tend to DEMO fewer investments and take
larger equity stakes. These differences, they
suggest, were largely attributable to the differ-
ent rationales for VC investment by DEMO ﬁrms
from the two countries, the former seeing
investments in terms DEMO projects that will earn
returns, while the latter view investments as
DEMO to be taken up when the investor is
ready.
With respect to value-adding behaviour,
Maula and Mäkelä (2003) in their examina-
tion DEMO VC portfolio ﬁrms observe that foreign
investors signiﬁcantly aid the internationaliza-
tion of their portfolio companies by helping
them develop a global perspective to DEMO
business. Their networks expose internation-
alizing ﬁrms to opportunities, learning and
DEMO from the pooling of resources. Value-
added contributions in foreign markets pertain
149
International venture capital research
to establishing foreign ofﬁces, recruiting
new people, DEMO foreign customers,
opening doors to business partners, conveying
knowledge of DEMO legal environment, en-
hancing credibility and providing contacts to
ﬁnanciers.
The DEMO of foreign investors in a syn-
dicate of venture capitalists can affect their
commitment to a venture when it experiences
problems. In their detailed DEMO study approach
in Finland, Mäkelä and Maula (2005) propose
that DEMO investors are likely to react
more strongly to changes in expectations the
more distant they were. However, they were more
likely to show continued commitment, despite
declining expectations from an investee if
they are more embedded in the focal country
through other investments or co-investments
with the same DEMO This also raises issues
concerning reputation risk if the foreign venture
capitalist were to withdraw from one invest-
ment. Several factors such as geographic DEMO
cultural distance, dependence of the foreign
investor on investors and entrepreneurs DEMO the
key locations of the venture, and ﬁnancial rel-
evance of DEMO venture seem to affect the com-
mitment of venture capitalists in foreign markets
(Maula and Mäkelä 2003).
Investment realization. Cross-border involve-
ment by VC ﬁrms can also inﬂuence exit
behaviour. Using a large sample of DEMO
VC-backed ventures and their exits, Jäässke-
läinen and Maula (2005) DEMO that the pres-
ence of foreign venture capitalists reduces the
informational problems related to the arrange-
ment of exits through IPOs and trade sales DEMO
foreign markets, thus increasing the likelihood
of such exits. The social DEMO and existing
contacts of foreign venture capitalists increase
the diffusion of information among potential
investors, thus enabling identiﬁcation of poten-
tial exit opportunities. In addition to these
direct ties, indirect ties through international
syndication by domestic VC ﬁrms also increase
the propensity for foreign exits. The presence
of DEMO investors also signals the quality
and legitimacy of the venture.
150
Discussion
Below, we identify a number of research gaps
and limitations in previous research and sug-
gest areas for further research.
Macro Analysis
There is DEMO growing body of work examining
the factors inﬂuencing the development of VC
markets internationally. Our review of the lit-
erature highlights theoretical and methodolog-
DEMO issues for the future of research into the
area and research opportunities.
First, in terms of theory, too much empha-
sis to date DEMO been placed on the role of stock
markets. This is particularly the case with
studies that focus on cross-country compari-
sons of VC industries. DEMO review of the liter-
ature highlights the need to consider speciﬁc
legal environments that inﬂuence VC rather
than law relating just to public companies. DEMO
under-researched area in the context of inter-
national comparisons concerns the inﬂuence
of wider environmental factors that include
social networks and cultures.
Second, in terms of method, much of the
analysis to date has, with DEMO main exception
of Armour and Cumming (2004), been static
in DEMO As with the issue of theory, this is
particularly the case DEMO studies that focus on
cross-country comparisons of VC industries.
Research in this area has used a variety of appro-
aches from qualitative analyses based DEMO
interview (e.g. Bruton et al. 2003) and archi-
val data (DEMO Black and Gilson 1998) to quan-
titative analyses using cross-sectional and
DEMO techniques (e.g. Armour and
Cumming 2004; Jeng and Wells 2000). While
qualitative analyses were appropriate to explore
the conceptual issues underlying market DEMO
opment, further research now needs to adopt
longitudinal data analysis techniques DEMO exam-
ine the changing patterns of development
across VC markets. For example, the emerg-
ence of previously underdeveloped VC and
private equity markets (DEMO and Wright
2002) creates a need for analysis of the dynamic
DEMO Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
aspects of the institutional context that may be
contributing to DEMO changes. For example,
how do VC markets respond to changes in insti-
tutional factors? This research could be under-
taken using time series analysis with data on
the trends in VC markets taken from VC DEMO
ciation directories and changes in the kind of
variables used in the studies reviewed here.
Third, the dominant focus of research at the
macro-level has been on comparing VC indus-
tries across countries. As such, opportunities
exist for scholars to produce research that is
focused on the relatively DEMO issue of
the development of international VC indus-
tries, i.e. VC DEMO country borders. We
consider, however, that the relative lack of
research into the process of the international
development of VC industries may well DEMO
the methodological difﬁculties associated with
trying to perform longitudinal research. There
is also a lack of analysis of the relative import-
ance of supply- DEMO demand-side aspects of
the international development of VC. While
there is an increasing supply of VC funds, VC
will only ﬂow to a country if there are thought
to be good investment opportunities. Further
research needs DEMO address the question: what
are the demand pull factors in different DEMO
national contexts and how can these be
matched with the supply of VC? Such work
could be undertaken using archival data relat-
ing to changes in the structure of industry, the
development of entrepreneurship, regulatory
DEMO, etc. as well as through surveys of
entrepreneurs who may be DEMO to grow
their business and/or to internationalize and
who require ﬁnance to realize these goals.
Fourth, there is a need for longitudinal
analysis to examine the research questions:
why and to what extent are DEMO factors driving
the development of different markets and
the shift from national to international mar-
kets in terms of cross-border inﬂows and out-
ﬂows DEMO funds changing? Such research will
enable a clearer perspective on the DEMO to
which the VC market is becoming a series of
developed national markets or a global one to
be obtained.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd DEMO
Micro Cross-Country Comparisons
The body of work dealing with cross-country
comparisons in the behaviour of venture cap-
italists is now adopting a more conceptually
DEMO approach than earlier studies. There is
some recognition of the limitations in the gen-
eralisability of agency and ﬁnancial theory
approaches to different contexts DEMO the deve-
lopment of an appreciation of institutional
contexts. This appears to be particularly the
case in respect of research on information and
valuation DEMO well as that relating to post-
investment activities. Research that explicitly
develops an institutional perspective, however,
remains limited. With regard to cross-country
comparisons, we suggest that there is an import-
ant need to develop an institutional perspec-
tive to understanding both the development of
VC markets and DEMO in the behaviour
of venture capitalists across markets.
Although some progress has been made in
this area, an important issue to emerge is the
requirement to consider a broad interpretation
of institutional aspects that include ﬁnancial
DEMO legal dimensions that were speciﬁc to VC
markets as well as social and cultural factors.
As with research examining the development
of VC markets, the focus on different legal
systems as the main institutional inﬂuence
addresses DEMO a limited aspect of the institu-
tional environment. There is, therefore, a need
for further research that takes a more explicit
account of DEMO and social network aspects
of different institutional environments and
which may affect the behaviour of VC ﬁrms.
In particular, while networks are an important
aspect of VC operations, and there is exten-
sive examination of the role of networks in the
entrepreneurship and single country VC liter-
ature, in our view insufﬁcient analysis has
been undertaken in terms of their DEMO
between countries. While networks are gener-
ally seen to be stronger in much of Europe
compared with the US, the emphasis in Asian
culture on networks (Boisot and Child 1996;
Orru et al. 1997) DEMO even be much stronger
(Tsang and Walls 1998). For example, the
151
International venture capital research
importance of social and particularly family
networks in DEMO Asian businesses (Claessens
et al. 2000) means that connections and rela-
tionships with potential clients are likely to be
far more important than DEMO the West. These
relationships may have implications for ven-
ture capitalists: DEMO example, in terms of sourcing
deals, the substitution of implicit relationships
for explicit contracts (Allen and Song 2002),
and the monitoring DEMO investees where boards
of directors are dominated by extended family
members. These dimensions raise interesting
research questions. How does venture capital-
ists’ use of DEMO to identify the demand
for VC from potential deals differ between
different institutional contexts? What is the
nature of the trade-offs venture capitalists
make between, for example, the skills of man-
agement and market factors DEMO screening deals
in different institutional contexts? Given that
there may be DEMO heterogeneity in the
culture and institutional environment among
apparently similar geographic regions, this
research may need to be ﬁne-grained in terms
of identifying differences in the nature of net-
works within geographic regions (e.g. within
South and East Asia) and between regions
(e.g. between Europe and South DEMO East
Asia). Bruton et al. (2005), for example, dis-
cuss the different dimensions of institutions
and cultures that might provide a DEMO basis
for operationalizing such work.
A further dimension concerns examination
of deal screening criteria. Studies have begun
to recognize the importance that venture cap-
DEMO place on trade-offs between different
criteria. Cross-country studies, however, have
paid little direct attention to how these trade-
offs may differ in different DEMO, yet dif-
ferences in the institutional environment,
including entrepreneurial expertise, organiza-
tional resources and the nature of products
and product markets suggest DEMO they may
well be important. A major research question,
therefore, DEMO how do the trade-offs that
venture capitalists make between deal screen-
ing criteria differ between countries? Estab-
lished techniques of conjoint analysis can be
152
used to undertake such analyses (Muzyka
et al. 1996).
Cross-country archival research is begin-
ning to appear that compares VC contracting
in DEMO legal system contexts (Kaplan
et al. 2005), providing a valuable DEMO
on self-report questionnaire studies. However,
work has been limited by access to records of
certain funds. Further research is needed to
answer the DEMO to what extent does con-
tracting differ between different types of VC
ﬁrms in different country contexts. There is
also a need to understand DEMO about cross-
country differences in how these contracts are
actually used in monitoring investees. Do ven-
ture capitalists in some countries place more
reliance DEMO contracts for monitoring or do
relationships play a greater role? Do DEMO
differences relate to differences between Anglo-
American and network-type countries or are
they related to different types of VC ﬁrm irre-
spective of country DEMO? Much work on
VC monitoring has been based on question-
naire DEMO The private nature of VC and
hence limited disclosure makes for difﬁculties
in using archival studies on this aspect. As the
general corporate governance DEMO has recog-
nized different governance mechanisms and
processes between countries, there DEMO a need to
address the research question as to what extent
do monitoring methods by venture capitalists
differ between countries or whether profes-
sional DEMO transcend country differences.
There is a need to construct proprietorial data
sets based on venture capitalists’ records that
address this issue.
Methodologically, work relating to cross-
country comparison concerns has traditionally
been based on mail questionnaire DEMO with
limited use made of archival data. For some
countries, it DEMO possible to obtain high response
rates and representative samples, but this DEMO
be problematical in some regions, such as
CEE and parts of DEMO In some countries, it
may be necessary to adopt different data-
DEMO approaches, such as face-to-face
interviews, where mail questionnaires are less
feasible either owing to problems with the mail
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
system or because respondents are resistant to
them. There is DEMO a need to address prob-
lems relating to comprehension of questions
across different contexts and simultaneity of
timing of administration of questionnaires.
The small DEMO of VC ﬁrms in many
emerging markets also limits the use of multi-
variate analysis techniques unless multiple
countries are considered. The private nature DEMO
VC markets means that publicly available
archival data sources are limited, DEMO
across countries and in emerging markets in
particular. This can pose problems in obtain-
ing data such as ﬁnancing structures, VC
board membership, DEMO realization pat-
terns, etc. Cross-country studies of exits of
venture-backed investments DEMO IPOs
may be more practicable because of the avail-
ability of ﬂotation prospectuses. US VC
researchers have obtained access to proprie-
tary and on-line DEMO such as Venture
Economics and Venture One. The extension of
these databases compiled by specialist infor-
mation providers such as Initiative Europe and
Thomson DEMO, over time, provide access to
appropriate archival data in Europe and else-
where. However, as these databases are not
typically designed for academic research pur-
poses, there may be a need to supplement
them with data from other sources. Relatedly,
commercial databases may also be compiled
DEMO an emphasis on timeliness, which may
mean that they are not DEMO to the stand-
ards of academic inquiry. Differential report-
ing of data between countries may also mean
that care needs to be taken in DEMO drawing
data from these sources without some cross-
checking, for example DEMO the size and stage
scope of VC ﬁrms covered is the same for
each country.
Cross-country comparison studies have
largely used common research instruments
DEMO in one country initially and adapted
where appropriate to different country con-
texts or have used comparative archival data.
Some studies have involved a DEMO of
US studies followed by an aggregate level
comparison of ﬁndings with US studies,
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
which precludes rigorous statistical DEMO
As highlighted above, a criticism of these
studies is that they DEMO not always under-
taken data collection in the different countries
covered contemporaneously. This may lead
to potential issues of comparability if institu-
tional environments DEMO over time. How-
ever, offsetting this issue, these different
points of real time provide for some reduction
in the gap between the stage DEMO development
of each market. Different data collection
methods may also be necessary where coun-
tries vary in their acceptability or feasibility
of particular approaches.
DEMO further methodological issue is that
cross-country studies have typically drawn
their samples from the local VC association
membership. Outside North America, in par-
ticular, this membership is likely to include
both classic VC providers as well as private
equity providers. Interestingly, where studies
have introduced control variables in multiple
regressions for early versus late or MBO stage
investments, the coefﬁcients on these dummy
variables has generally been insigniﬁcant (e.g.
Manigart et al. 2002; Wright et al. 2002, 2004b).
Nonetheless, research questions focusing on
cross-country comparisons of VC behaviour
may need to be more precise DEMO relation to the
particular types of activity they are address-
ing: DEMO example, investment stages. Researchers
may then need to select carefully from DEMO
VC association directories only those venture
capitalists that relate to the focus of attention
in a particular study.
Many studies have been cross-sectional in
DEMO and therefore fail to capture the dynamic
nature of VC markets and emerging VC mar-
kets in particular. There is a need for more
DEMO (i.e. repeat) survey data that iden-
tify the changing behaviour across markets.
There are some indications from different
authors that have examined the DEMO phenom-
enon at different points in time that this is an
important area. For example, Farag et al.
(2004) ﬁnd in their study of VC in CEE in
2002 that, in contrast to earlier work by Bliss
(1999), venture capitalists no longer adopted a
153
International venture capital research
very informal approach to investing. Further
research might DEMO consider whether
screening, information usage, valuation, mon-
itoring and investment DEMO behaviour
converge to developed market norms as VC
markets develop or whether it is restricted by
institutional inertia. Such work could be
undertaken by DEMO questionnaire instru-
ments that have been used in developed mar-
ket contexts and adapted for use in developing
or emerging markets.
Micro-level Crossing Borders
DEMO is evident from our review that further
research is required to examine international-
ization behaviour by venture capitalists. Also,
further aspects of the DEMO cycle of venture
capitalists’ international investment activities
need to be analysed. In addition, there is a
need to examine whether, as in the DEMO
turing sector, this behaviour varies both
according to the country of DEMO of the VC
and the country into which they enter.
An important area for further research con-
cerns the international structure of VC ﬁrms.
DEMO some may be multinational and some
transnational, there is a lack DEMO systematic evi-
dence on the predominant organizational char-
acter. Further research needs to develop a
taxonomy of how different modes relate to
different types DEMO VC ﬁrms based on different
investment objectives, resources, goals etc.
Additional analysis might also examine how
these modes are changing over time, and what
factors are inﬂuencing these changes. Relat-
edly, there is limited research on the behavi-
our of different organizational forms of VC in
terms DEMO their international raising of funds
and their cross-border investment behaviour
and whether this behaviour varies between
countries. Since there are important differ-
ences between DEMO organizational form of VC
ﬁrms between countries (Megginson 2004),
further research in this area seems warranted.
For example, how and why does the inter-
national structure differ between independent,
captive and corporate venture DEMO? Are
154
captive venture capitalists that are part of a
multinational DEMO global network of ofﬁces
developed by their parents more likely to
adopt this form of internationalization? Are
independent venture capitalists more likely to
adopt a transnational form because of the
costs involved in establishing ofﬁces? Do any
differences between captive and independent
venture capitalists reﬂect differences in the
DEMO and stages of deals being considered? Do
captive venture capitalists that DEMO
do so in a way that is constrained by or mimics
the internationalization structure of their parent,
or do they have the discretion DEMO pursue their
own structure?
In the light of the paucity of research on
internationalization by venture capitalists, an
important issue concerns the development of
appropriate conceptual frameworks for ana-
lyzing the internationalization behaviour of
venture DEMO Some appropriate frame-
works for researching the internationalization
of venture capitalists can be considered, and
research into the internationalization of other
professional services ﬁrms (e.g. lawyers) may
provide additional insights. We suggest that
there is DEMO to synthesize core elements
of the international business (IB) literature
with that relating speciﬁcally to venture capi-
talists. In particular, we consider that there is
scope for further application of TCE and espe-
cially the DEMO framework to the VC context
to help researchers to understand better the
nature and extent of international diversity,
entry mode and co-ordination and DEMO of
foreign operations by venture capitalists. Fur-
ther, core themes of DEMO RBV, which include
path dependency, and the changing nature of a
ﬁrm’s resource base over time, can facilitate a
better understanding of the dynamics of ven-
ture capitalists’ internationalization behaviour.
We elaborate in what follows.
DEMO, the dominant framework in
the study of the internationalization of ﬁrms
DEMO been the stages model. In the stage model,
ﬁrms initiate market entry through exports via
independent representatives, and then by the
establishment of an overseas sales subsidiary
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
(Johanson and Vahlne 1977, 1990; Johanson
and Wiedersheim-Paul 1990). Overseas pro-
duction/manufacturing units are established
last in order. This model, however, has been
challenged in both the IB and entrepreneur-
ship literature, DEMO an important group of
ﬁrms internationalize at an early stage in their
development (Alavarez-Gil et al. 2003; Autio
et al. 2000; Delios and Henisz 2003; Oviatt
and McDougall 1994; Zahra et al. 2000).
DEMO model provides a framework to consider
whether venture capitalists adapt their ap-
proaches to internationalization as they gain
more expertise but has shortcomings. Where
DEMO cannot be separated from con-
sumption, as in many services, and FDI and
licensing are the only available options, the
increased resource commitment involved in
adopting these modes may slow down the
process of internationalization (Buckley et al.
1992; Cardone-Riportella and Cazorla-Papis
2001; Erramilli 1991). DEMO the same time, how-
ever, where there is high interaction between
producer and consumer during service deliv-
ery, incremental internationalization in busi-
ness and ﬁnancial services is problematic.
The transaction cost economics (TCE) per-
DEMO on internationalization focuses on
efﬁcient organizational design. The resource-
based view (DEMO) is a complementary theory
to TCE for investigating issues relating to DEMO
internationalization of VC (Madhok 2002).
Whereas the focus of strategy DEMO TCE is
efﬁcient organizational design, the focus of
strategy under the DEMO is the generation and
deployment of ﬁrm-speciﬁc resources in order
to create value. As such, the RBV has become
the dominant approach to investigating inter-
ﬁrm differences in strategic management (Bar-
ney et al. 2001; DEMO et al. 1999).
The RBV, both in its equilibrium and DEMO
conceptualizations (Lockett and Thompson
2001), has attractions for understanding the
DEMO behaviour of venture cap-
italists. From an equilibrium perspective, the
RBV DEMO the idea that resource supe-
riority is critical to overcoming the inherent
costs faced by ﬁrms when they internationalize
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
DEMO 2005
(Rugman and Verbeke 2002). Second, success
in international markets cannot be realized
if the assets ﬁrms possess are not ‘speciﬁc’,
DEMO is, are widely available and can be dis-
seminated at no DEMO (Combs and Ketchen
1999). Third, the RBV focuses on the role of
resource availability in inﬂuencing the diver-
sity of markets and DEMO form in which ﬁrms
conduct international business. From a dynamic
perspective, DEMO RBV emphasizes the path-
dependent processes of foreign knowledge
absorption and diffusion throughout inter-
nationalizing ﬁrms. Here, the focus is on dis-
equilibria, DEMO resource recombinations
and responses to requirements for realignment
with the different environments faced by ﬁrms
that internationalize (Teece et al. 1997). The
following sub-sections reﬂect on issues relat-
ing to the internationalization of venture
capitalists DEMO insights from both TCE
and RBV as well as research on other types of
professional service ﬁrm.
Nature of international diversity. Venture cap-
italists DEMO possess more internationally experi-
enced personnel (or human resources) may be
better equipped to cope with uncertainty and
contemplate entry into new markets (Johanson
and Vahlne 1977). As venture capitalists need
to maintain direct DEMO contact in the
conduct of their post-investment activities,
whether monitoring investees or providing
value-added services, the need to maintain
direct contact suggests entry to markets in close
geographic proximity.
Evidence suggests that service ﬁrms (West-
head et al. 2001), and consulting ﬁrms in par-
ticular, may not undertake systematic analysis
of the international markets into which they
will DEMO (O’Farrell and Wood 1998; O’Far-
rell et al. 1995). Rather, their choice of market
may be constrained by their relationships with
clients or strategic partners, perhaps being
pulled abroad as a result of these associations.
We argue, however, that venture capitalists
may differ from these DEMO service
ﬁrms in that, while they may be called up to
DEMO existing portfolio ﬁrms to help them to
155
International venture capital research
internationalize, the central part of venture
capitalists’ internationalization is to identify
opportunities to make investments in new
portfolio companies. This DEMO a different
role for networks and social capital. Venture
capitalists that are rich in terms of resources
of internationally experienced personnel may
also be DEMO likely to possess the diverse net-
works necessary for successful entry into dif-
ferent markets (O’Farrell and Wood 1994).
They may, therefore, be more likely to enter
into markets with long-established relation-
ships, even if more distant and different
from those initially contemplated for entry
(Erramilli 1991). An important research ques-
tion is, therefore, how and DEMO do the net-
works and social capital of VC ﬁrms differ
from those of other professional service
ﬁrms? Directories of venture capitalists and
professional service ﬁrms are available inter-
nationally to identify populations on which to
DEMO such studies.
As highlighted in the macro-analysis sec-
tion, cross-country differences DEMO the nature
and effectiveness of judicially enforced laws
and government-enforced regulations (DEMO Porta
et al. 1998, 2000) as well as other institutional
factors, affect patterns of ownership and con-
trol, the development of ﬁnancial DEMO and
the valuation of corporate assets. An import-
ant research question, DEMO, is whether
venture capitalists with greater capabilities in
the processing and DEMO of information
relating to environmental conditions are better
placed to enter diverse markets than their
counterparts?
Entry mode. Exporting (indirect or direct
through agents/distributors or sales subsi-
diaries/branches), contracting (licensing and
franchising, technical agreements, service/
management contracts and co-production agree-
ments) and FDI (joint ventures (majority/
50–50/minority) and sole ventures with full
ownership and control (new or acquired
branch ofﬁces, wholly owned DEMO and
acquisitions)) represent the three generic
methods of penetrating foreign markets
156
(Buckley and Casson 1998; Buckley and
Ghauri 1993; Root 1994).
From a TCE perspective, entry mode
choice is viewed as a trade-off between con-
trol and the cost of resource commitments,
under DEMO of risk and uncertainty
(Anderson and Gatignon 1986; Buckley and
Casson 1998). Internationalizing ﬁrms select
the entry mode that maximizes long-run
efﬁciency, and a distinction is made either
between a non-integrated and a fully DEMO
grated entry mode dichotomy in classifying
entry modes (Anderson and Gatignon DEMO)
or a more ﬁne-grained approach, depending
on different levels of DEMO and control
(e.g. Delios and Henisz 2000). Brouthers and
Brouthers (2003) emphasize that, for service
ﬁrms, the transactions cost economics approach
suggests that the mode of entry will be driven
by people-oriented measures DEMO uncertainty,
that is asset speciﬁcity, behavioural uncer-
tainty and trust DEMO Service ﬁrms mak-
ing high asset speciﬁcity investments and
investing in uncertain environments are likely
to prefer wholly owned modes of entry.
The transaction DEMO approach to entry
mode determination has been criticized on the
grounds that many ﬁrms do not proactively
choose their mode of entry into international
DEMO either because they lack the resources
or are drawn into internationalization through
their links with trading partners (O’Farrell
and Wood 1998; Westhead et DEMO 2001). Fur-
thermore, we argue that the TCE approach
may DEMO be limited in its applicability to
knowledge-intensive sectors such as VC. In
these sectors, competitive advantage may be
achieved by exploiting and augmenting the ﬁrm’s
knowledge as a key resource (Erramilli 1991;
Erramilli and Rao 1993). Using a resource-
based perspective on entry modes by venture
DEMO enables the analysis of research
questions such as: are venture capitalists DEMO
attract more ﬁnancial resources from their
investors better able to establish a physical
presence through ofﬁces, for instance, in for-
eign markets? Similarly, compared with their
counterparts that are constrained in terms of
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
ﬁnancial resources, are those venture capital-
ists that are larger in fund size able to acquire
other ﬁrms and hence enter foreign DEMO
through acquisitions?
Also, venture capitalists with less human
capital in DEMO form of fewer internationally
experienced executives may require more time
to learn new roles and compete with existing
ﬁrms and well-established investee groups in
DEMO markets (Buckley et al. 1992). This
raises the following research DEMO Do lower
human capital resources deter ownership-
based entry, leading VC DEMO into investing
in foreign markets at arm’s length, without
physically establishing DEMO there?
Firms with more experienced executives may
have greater conﬁdence to gauge investee
needs, estimate costs and returns, and assess
the true DEMO worth of foreign markets
(Erramilli 1991; Hill et al. 1990; DEMO Farrell
and Wood 1994). Hence, are venture capital-
ists with DEMO experienced executives more
likely to commit larger resources to foreign
market entry and establish themselves through
some form of physical presence?
In addition DEMO resources being ﬁrm-speciﬁc,
resources may be speciﬁc to an industry and /
or speciﬁc to a location. Industry-speciﬁc
resources, however, are not necessarily location-
speciﬁc, it may be possible to transfer them
to different countries. For example, certain
professional services relating to computing,
engineering and consulting may require
proprietary knowledge that varies little with
location. Some VC DEMO may compete on the
basis of their specialist technological know-
ledge and therefore be less constrained by
location-speciﬁc knowledge and resources.
This raises the DEMO question: do ﬁrms that
compete on this basis carry out cross-border
DEMO at arms’ length as their need to access
local knowledge is relatively low? Does this
differ as between later rather than earlier stage
deals? More speciﬁcally in relation to the
behaviour of venture capitalists, further
DEMO is required to examine the deal gen-
eration activities involved in these approaches.
For example, to what extent do the arm’s
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
length versus physical location entry modes
involve different types of DEMO generation?
In contrast, in some professional services
industries there may DEMO a need to access local
knowledge. For example, lawyers and account-
DEMO operating in different countries are likely
to need to acquire knowledge about local regu-
lations and reporting mechanisms and there-
fore need to adapt DEMO local conditions (O’Farrell
and Wood 1998). Some VC ﬁrms may DEMO to
gauge local conditions about the regulatory
environment and link into networks to access
entrepreneurs involved in early stage ventures.
In this case, do VC ﬁrms adopt a high resource
access entry mode involving a local DEMO
presence or some link with local VC ﬁrms that
do have this knowledge? Chen et al. (2004)
ﬁnd that Taiwanese VC ﬁrms DEMO the
Chinese market join forces with foreign ven-
ture capitalists who have the resources and
expertise. There is limited work on this aspect,
DEMO more is required in different contexts.
Studies of internationalization by professional
service ﬁrms have developed methods and
instruments to address these issues in that
DEMO, and these may be adapted to examine
the VC context.
Finally, the choice of entry mode may be
inﬂuenced by how the VC DEMO seeking to com-
pete and the venture capitalists’ organizational
form. We argue that captive venture capitalists
may be able to draw on their parent DEMO
for more ﬁnancial and ﬁnancial-management
skills which may be less country speciﬁc and
may also be able to draw on their parent’s
international network DEMO identifying deals.
Independent venture capitalists with stronger
managerial and operational skills, DEMO are
more location speciﬁc, may be limited in their
access to DEMO and need to identify syndicate
partners for ﬁnancial resources. Thus further
research could survey captive and independ-
ent venture capitalists to seek answers to DEMO
question: do captive ﬁrms use local-resource
seeking entry modes while independent DEMO
ture capitalists use low resource access modes?
These different bases for competition may
help to explain the observed different entry
157
International venture capital research
modes by VC ﬁrms into foreign markets. Fur-
DEMO research is required to explore this issue
empirically and could be carried out using sur-
veys or interviews with senior venture capital-
ists responsible DEMO policy development.
Forms of control of foreign activities. A key
strand in the internationalization literature
concerns ﬁrms’ choice between standardiza-
tion and adaptation in DEMO conduct of interna-
tional operations (Bartlett and Ghoshal 1998).
Control DEMO subsidiary operations through tight
linkages with the headquarters brings about
adherence to parent ﬁrms’ goals or targets, thus
making performance predictable (Cray 1984)DEMO
The need to accommodate diverse perspec-
tives in multiple, new and DEMO entry modes
in different markets, however, may require
increased adaptation and responsiveness to
local market, regulatory and cultural condi-
tions and also requires multiple modes of
people management (Doz and Prahalad 1986).
Venture capitalists that are large in terms of
ﬁnancial resources may be more likely DEMO rely
upon formal reporting mechanisms (Elango
et al. 1995). Parent DEMO ﬁrms internationaliz-
ing to foreign markets, therefore, may be
expected to impose formal reporting require-
ments on their counterparts in those markets.
Particularly DEMO in foreign markets may be
the information-processing and decision-
making capabilities of experienced VC execu-
tives (Sapienza et al. 1996) based in the DEMO
market. Firms that possess more ﬁrm-speciﬁc
knowledge and experience as embodied in
their human capital may, therefore, be more
likely to require more DEMO and frequent
interaction with their counterparts overseas
(Edstrom and Galbraith 1977)DEMO The need to
overcome delays in decision-making and resolve
conﬂicts may necessitate reliance on informal
co-ordination procedures (Egelhoff 1993).
Venture capitalists that are generally small
in terms of the total number of people they
employ DEMO ﬁnd it easier to co-ordinate infor-
mally with their colleagues, without DEMO
to resort to formal procedures in the course
of decision-making. Therefore, DEMO on
158
this resource-based perspective, an important
research question concerns how DEMO
knowledge and ﬁrm size affect the nature of
co-ordination of overseas VC activities.
A key dimension of venture capitalists’
competitive advantage relates to the DEMO in
which they conduct their investment proce-
dure (Wright and Robbie DEMO). They may,
therefore, require formalized procedures to
transfer the DEMO inherent in their invest-
ment process. At the same time, however, VC
involves different types of knowledge, ranging
from strategic and ﬁnancial to operational
expertise. The need to transfer and aggregate
expertise embodied in different DEMO may call
for mutual adjustment and the use of horizon-
tal communication channels, as, for example,
through scheduled and unscheduled meetings
(Barkema et al. 2002; Grant 1996; Malnight 2001;
Van De Ven DEMO Delbecq 1976). Different stages
of the VC investment process, moreover, involve
considerable decision-making and search
processes (for deal seeking, for instance), all
of which entail uncertainty. Such uncertain
and unstructured management tasks may
increase the difﬁculty of co-ordination through
programming and standardization (Marschan
et al. 1996; Welch and Welch 1997). This
knowledge-based aspect of the resource-based
view raises the research question as to how the
need to deal DEMO different forms of know-
ledge affects the co-ordination of overseas VC
activities. As this question involves examina-
tion of detailed processes, in-depth interviews
with executives in VC head ofﬁces and over-
seas activities may be an DEMO approach.
Conclusions
In this paper, drawing on studies in econom-
ics, ﬁnance, strategy, international business,
entrepreneurship and economic geography,
we DEMO reviewed the literature relating to
international VC. We have shown that the
vast majority of this literature relates to cross-
country comparisons, at both macro and
micro levels. It is evident that major research
gaps exist DEMO relation to work dealing with the
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
international development of VC industries
and crossing of country borders DEMO VC ﬁrms.
We conclude with seven broader comments.
First, our review DEMO commented on the
research methodologies used to examine
international VC; in DEMO, the widespread
use of, and over-reliance on, cross-sectional
survey methods. DEMO suggest that there is a
need for the development, and analysis DEMO,
longitudinal data sets and an urgent need for
the development of archival data sets.
Second, and related to the ﬁrst point, our
DEMO of the literature indicates that cross-
country research (at both the DEMO and micro
level) has dominated research investigating
the international development of DEMO and
venture capitalists crossing borders. We con-
sider that the dominance of cross-sectional
work may well be correlated with cross-
country studies. As a DEMO, a shift in focus
towards investigating the development of
international VC DEMO venture capitalists cross-
ing borders should go hand in hand with a
shift towards longitudinal research.
Third, our review has taken a broad deﬁni-
tion of VC. The vast majority of research
reviewed has not differentiated DEMO dif-
ferent stages of VC investment, notably the
potential for differences DEMO early and
late stage investments. This may be because
much of the international VC literature has
drawn on the US-based literature that tends to
DEMO on new ventures and to regard later
stage investments such as management buy-
outs as part of a distinct private equity market.
Internationally, however, there are major dif-
ferences in the relative importance of early
and later stage investments and the two
aspects may typically be considered as DEMO of
the overall VC market. These differences sug-
gest variations in the factors that inﬂuence the
development of VC markets, VC investment
behaviour between markets and how ﬁrms
operate when they cross country boundaries.
For example, there may be important differ-
ences in informational asymmetries between
early and DEMO stage investments that are mod-
erated by institutional differences between
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
countries. There may also be important differ-
ences in DEMO and capability requirements
to internationalize successfully, depending on
whether a VC DEMO is focused on early or later
stage investments. To date, there DEMO limited
work that examines these distinctions. Not-
able exceptions are Jeng and Wells (2000), who
distinguish the factors inﬂuencing the devel-
opment of early and later stage VC markets,
and Farag et al. (2004), who compare the
ﬁnancial structuring, monitoring and exiting
behaviours of early and late stage VC inves-
tors in CEE and Germany.
Fourth, much of the cross-country and
crossing-border micro-level work has focused
on the behaviour DEMO venture capitalists in rela-
tion to their investee portfolio companies.
That is, research has focused on comparing
either outﬂows of funds across different coun-
tries or outﬂows of funds internationally. There
has been little micro-level research DEMO ana-
lyses issues relating to the inﬂows of funds
into VC funds either in terms of comparisons
across different countries or aspects of ven-
DEMO capitalists raising funds from different
countries. Further research is needed in this
area.
Fifth, in terms of the geographic coverage
of studies, there DEMO unevenness in terms of the
balance of countries researched. To some
extent, this is a reﬂection of the recent growth
of new markets, DEMO the number of ﬁrms in
some markets precluding quantitative analysis
of any kind. Research is now appearing on
CEE and Asian markets, but there is scope for
further development. Of particular need for
attention is the DEMO to recognize that there
may be signiﬁcant heterogeneity between
countries within a particular region so that the
grouping together of countries within a geo-
DEMO region in an attempt to address sam-
ple size issues may be problematic.1
Sixth, our review adds to understanding of
the future potential for the globalization of
VC. Gompers and Lerner (2001) note that,
DEMO recently, efforts to transplant the VC
model internationally were rare and DEMO many
recent efforts to stimulate VC have met with
159
International venture capital research
mixed success. They suggest that, for a VC
market to be successful, there is need for an
ample supply of promising new technologies,
a set of knowledgeable managers willing to
take DEMO, helpful regulatory and tax condi-
tions, and robust markets in order to exit
investments. Where successful new VC mar-
kets such as Germany, India and Israel have
developed, these have spurred cultural, eco-
nomic DEMO regulatory changes that make con-
tinuing VC success in these markets likely.
The studies cited here particularly emphasize
the need to consider speciﬁc legal DEMO
ments that inﬂuence VC and the inﬂuence of
social networks and cultures. Our review
leads us to agree only partially with the view
(see e.g. Megginson 2004) that a case for a
global market for VC and private equity is
emerging. Rather, it seems to us that import-
ant national differences remain and are chang-
ing only slowly, so that markets are likely to
remain nationally based. This has implications
for the DEMO behaviour of venture
capitalists, suggesting a need to tailor entry
strategies DEMO local market conditions.
Finally, and more generally, VC ﬁrms
present interesting avenues for developing the
IB research agenda. Recent debate has ques-
tioned DEMO longevity of the IB research agenda
(Buckley 2002), suggesting that DEMO big
research question in IB is no longer clear. He
indicates, DEMO, that the interplay of
national cultures and organizational cultures
represents a DEMO agenda with much life
left in it. These aspects may be applied to the
emergence of new institutions in the wake of
globalization. Buckley DEMO suggests that one
of the future areas of focus for IB research is
to identify trends towards and away from glo-
balization. Peng (2004) takes the debate fur-
ther by arguing that research needs to focus
more on the factors that determine the inter-
national success and failure DEMO ﬁrms. We sug-
gest that the emerging internationalization of
VC represents the development of an import-
ant new institutional form with important
implications for DEMO international prospects of
ﬁrms that are as yet little understood.
160
Note
1
The nature of this problem is illustrated in the
wider context DEMO the study by La Porta et al.
(1997, 1998) where DEMO are considerable differ-
ences between countries with apparently similar
governance system in terms of regulatory vari-
ables and yet similarities between some countries
across DEMO systems.
References
Alavarez-Gil, M.J., Cardone-Riportella, C., Lado-
Couste, N. DEMO Samartin-Saenz, M. (2003). Financial
service ﬁrms’ entry mode choice and cultural
diversity: Spanish companies in Latin America.
International Journal of Bank Marketing, 21(3),
109 –121.
Allen, F. and Song, W. (2002). Venture capital and
corporate governance. Wharton Financial Institu-
tions Center. DEMO School, University of Penn-
sylvania. WP 03-05.
Amit, R., Brander, J. and Zott, C. (1998). Why do
venture capital ﬁrms DEMO? Theory and Canadian
evidence. Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 441– DEMO
Anand, J. and Delios, A. (1997). Location speciﬁcity
and DEMO transferability of downstream assets to for-
eign subsidiaries. Journal of International Business
Studies, 28(3), 579– 603.
Anderson, E. and Gatignon, H. (1986). Modes of for-
eign entry: a transaction cost analysis DEMO proposi-
tions. Journal of International Business Studies,
17(Fall), 1–26.
Armour, J. and Cumming, D. (2004). The legal road
to replicating silicon value. Paper presented at the
Babson Entrepreneurship Conference, Glasgow.
Autio, E., Sapienza, H.J. and Almeida, J.G. (2000).
Effects of age at entry, knowledge intensity, and
imitability on international growth. Academy DEMO
Management Journal, 43(5), 909–924.
Aylward, A. (1998). DEMO in venture capital ﬁnanc-
ing in developing countries. IFC Discussion Paper
No. 36. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Barkema, G.H., Baum, J.A.C. and Mannix, E.A.
(2002). Management challenges in a new time.
Academy DEMO Management Journal, 45, 916 – 930.
Barney, J., Wright, DEMO and Ketchen, D. (2001). The
resource-based view ten years after 1991. Journal
of Management, 27(6), 525 – 642.
Barry, DEMO (1994). New directions on research in ven-
ture capital ﬁnance. DEMO Management, 23(3),
3–15.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
Bartlett, C.A. and Ghoshal, S. (1998). Managing
Across Borders: DEMO Transnational Solution, 2nd
edition. London: Random House Business Books.
Bascha, DEMO and Walz, U. (2001). Financing practices
in the German venture capital industry – an empir-
ical assessment. University of Tübingen Working
Paper, Februrary.
Baygan, G. and Freudenberg, M. (2000). The inter-
nationalization of venture capital activity in OECD
countries: implications for measurement and
policy. STI Working Papers 2000/7. OECD: Paris.
Beaverstock, J.V. (2004). Managing across borders:
transnational knowledge management and expatria-
tion in legal DEMO Journal of Economic Geogra-
phy, 4(2), 157–179.
Black, B. and Gilson, S. (1998). Venture capital and
the structure of DEMO markets: banks versus stock
markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 47, DEMO –277.
Bliss, R.T. (1999). A venture capital model for transi-
tioning economies. the case of Poland. Venture
Capital, 1(3), 241–258.
Boisot, M. and Child, J. (1996). From ﬁefs to clans
and network capitalism: explaining China’s emerg-
ing economic order. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 41, 600 – 628.
Brouthers, K. and Brouthers, L. (2003). Why service
and manufacturing entry mode choices differ: the
inﬂuence of transaction cost factors, risk and trust.
Journal of Management Studies, DEMO(5), 1179 –1204.
Bruining, H. and Wright, M. (2002)DEMO Entrepreneurial
orientation in management buyouts and the contri-
bution of venture capital. Venture Capital, 4(2),
147–168.
Bruton, G., Ahlstrom, D. and Singh, K. (2002).
The impact of the institutional environment DEMO the
venture capital industry in Singapore. Venture
Capital, 4, 197–218.
Bruton, G.D., Ahlstrom, D. and Wan, J.C.C. (2003).
Turnaround in Southeast Asian ﬁrms: evidence
from ethnic Chinese communities. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 24, 519–540.
Bruton, G., Fried, V. and Manigart, S. (2005). Institu-
tional inﬂuences on the worldwide expansion of
venture capital. DEMO Theory and
Practice, forthcoming.
Buckley, P. (2002). Is the DEMO business
research agenda running out of steam? Journal of
International Business DEMO, 33(2), 365 –374.
Buckley, P.J. and Casson, M.C. (1998). Analysing
foreign market entry strategies: extending the inter-
nalisation approach, Journal of International Busi-
ness Studies, 29(3) 539–562.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
Buckley, P.J. and Ghauri, P.N. (1993). Introduction
and overview. In Buckley, P.J. and Ghauri, P.N.
(eds), The Internationalization of the Firm: A Reader.
London: Academic Press.
DEMO, P.J., Pass, C.L. and Prescott, K. (1992). The
DEMO of service ﬁrms: a comparison
with the manufacturing sector. Scandinavian Inter-
DEMO Business Review, 1(1) 39–56.
Bygrave, W. and Timmons, J. (1999). Venture capital:
predictions and outcomes. In Wright, M. DEMO Robbie,
K. (eds), Management Buy-outs and Venture Capital:
DEMO the Next Millennium. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar, Ch. 2, pp. 38–56.
DEMO, C. and Cazorla-Papis, L. (2001).
The internationalisation process of DEMO Banks:
a tale of two times. International Journal of Bank
Marketing, 19(2), 53– 67.
Chen, R. Chen, S.-Y. and Liu, C.-C. (2004). The
entry model of Taiwan’s venture capital industry
DEMO investment in China. Mimeo.
Claessens, S., Djankov, S. and Lang, L. (2000). The
separation of ownership and control in East Asian
corporations. Journal of Financial Economics,
58(1–2), 81–112.
Combs, J.G. and Ketchen, D.J. (1999). Explaining
inter-ﬁrm cooperation and performance: toward a
reconciliation of predictions from the resource-
based view and organizational economics. DEMO
Management Journal, 20, 867– 888.
Cray, D. (1984). Control and co-ordination in multi-
national corporations. Journal of International
Business Studies, Fall, 85 –98.
Cumming, D. (2002). United States venture capital
contracting: foreign securities. Working paper.
Cumming, D. and Fleming, G. (2004)DEMO The impact
of legality on private equity markets: evidence from
the DEMO Paper presented at the EFMA
Conference, Glasgow.
Delios, A. and Henisz, W.J. (2000). Japanese ﬁrms
investment strategies in emerging markets. Acad-
DEMO of Management Journal, 43, 305 –323.
Delios, A. and Henisz, W.J. (2003). Political hazards,
experience and sequential entry strategies: DEMO
international expansion of Japanese ﬁrms, 1980 –
1998. Strategic Management Journal. DEMO, 1153 –1164.
Dixit, A. and Jayaraman, N. (2001). Internationaliza-
tion strategies of private equity ﬁrms. Journal of
Private Equity, Winter, DEMO
Domke-Damonte, D. (2000). Interactive effects of
international strategy and throughput technology on
entry mode for service ﬁrms. Management Inter-
national Review, 40(1), 41–59.
161
International venture capital research
Doz, Y.L. and Prahalad, C.K. (1986). Controlled
variety: a challenge for human resource manage-
ment in the MNC. Human Resource Management,
25(1), 55 –71.
EBRD (1998). Transition Report. London: European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Edstrom, A. DEMO Galbraith, J.R. (1977). Transfer of
managers as a co-ordination and control strategy in
multinational organisations. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 22, 248 –263.
DEMO, W.G. (1993). Information-processing the-
ory and the multinational corporation. In Ghoshal,
S. and Westney, D.E. (eds), Organisation Theory
and DEMO Multinational Corporation. New York: St
Martin’s Press.
Elango, B., Fried, V.H., Hisrich, R.D. and Polonchek,
A. (1995). How venture capital ﬁrms differ. Jour-
nal of Business Venturing, 10(2), 157–179.
Erramilli, M.K. (1991). The experience factor in
foreign market entry DEMO of service ﬁrms.
Journal of International Business Studies, 22(3),
479 –501.
Erramilli, M.K. and Rao, C.P. (1993). Service ﬁrms’
international entry mode choice: a modiﬁed
transaction-cost analysis approach. Journal of
Marketing, 57(3), 19 –38.
EVCA. (1999). Venture Capital In DEMO Zaventem:
European Venture Capital Association.
Farag, H., Hommel, U., Witt, P. and Wright, M. (2004).
Contracting, monitoring, and exiting venture
investments in transitioning economies: a compara-
tive analysis of Eastern European and German mar-
kets. Venture Capital, 6(4), 257–282.
Gompers, P. (2005). Venture capital. In Eckbo, B.E.
(ed.), DEMO of Corporate Finance. Amster-
dam: Elsevier/North Holland, Ch. 11.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J. (1996). The use of cove-
nants: an empirical analysis of venture capital
partnership agreements. Journal of Law and
Economics, 39, 463 – 498.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J. (1998). What drives
venture capital fundraising? Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 149 –192.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J. (1999). The DEMO Cap-
ital Life-cycle. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gompers, P. and DEMO, J. (2001). The Money of
Invention, Cambridge, MA: DEMO Business
School Press.
Gorman, M. and Sahlman, W. (1989). DEMO do ven-
ture capitalists do? Journal of Business Venturing,
4, 231–248.
Grant, R.M. (1996). Toward a knowledge-based
162
theory of DEMO ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal,
17(Winter Special Issue), 109–122.
Guler, I. and Guillen, M. (2004). Knowledge, institu-
tions and DEMO internationalization of the US Venture
capital industry. Paper presented at the Academy of
Management Conference, New Orleans, August.
Hall, G. and Tu, DEMO (2003). Venture capitalists and the
decision to invest overseas. Venture DEMO, 5(2),
181–190.
Hall, J. and Hofer, C. (DEMO). Venture capitalists’
decision criteria in new venture evaluation. Journal
of Business Venturing, 8(1), 25 – 42.
Hill, C.W., Hwang, DEMO and Kim, W.C. (1990). An
eclectic theory of the choice of international entry
mode. Strategic Management Journal, 11, 117–128.
Hofstede, G. and Bond, M.H. (1988). The Confucius
connection: from cultural roots to economic growth.
Organisational Dynamics, 16, 4–21.
Hoskisson, R.E., Hitt, M.A., Wan, W. and Yiu, D. (1999).
Theory and DEMO in strategic management:
swings of a pendulum. Journal of Management, DEMO,
417– 456.
Hurry, D., Miller, A. and Bowman, E. (1992). Calls
on high-technology: Japanese exploration of
venture capital investments DEMO the US. Strategic
Management Journal, 13, 85 –101.
Jääskeläinen, M. DEMO Maula, M. (2005). The effects
of direct and indirect foreign venture capital ties on
exit market selection and exit modes. Working
Paper DEMO University of Technology.
Jeng, L. and Wells, P. (2000). DEMO determinants of
venture capital funding: evidence across countries.
Journal of Corporate DEMO, 6, 241–289.
Johanson, J. and Vahlne, J. (1977). DEMO international-
ization process of the ﬁrm – a model of knowledge
development and increasing foreign market
commitments. Journal of International Business
Studies, 8, DEMO –32.
Johanson, J. and Vahlne, J. (1990). The mechanism DEMO
internationalization. International Marketing
Review, 7, 11–24.
Johanson, J. and Wiedersheim-Paul, F. (1990). The
internationalization of the ﬁrm – four Swedish
cases. Journal of Management Studies, 12, 305 –
322.
Kaplan, S., DEMO, F. and Stromberg, P. (2005). How
do legal differences DEMO experience affect ﬁnancial
contracts? University of Chicago Working Paper.
Karsai, J., Wright, M. and Filatotchev, I. (1997).
Venture capital in DEMO economies: the case of
Hungary. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
21(DEMO), 93 –110.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
Karsai, J., Wright, M., Dudzinski, Z. and Morovic, J.
(1998). Screening and valuing venture capital
investments: evidence from Hungary, DEMO and
Sloavkia. Entrepreneurship and Regional Develop-
ment, 10, 203–224.
Karsai, DEMO, Wright, M., Dudzinski, Z. and Morovic, J.
(1999). Venture capital in transition economies –
the cases of Hungary, Poland and Slovakia. In
Wright, M. and Robbie, K. (eds), Management Buy-
outs and Venture Capital into the Next Millenium.
Cheltenham: Edwad Elgar.
Kenney, M., Han, K. and Tanaka, S. (2002a). The
globalization of venture capital: the cases of
Taiwan and Japan. Mimeo.
Kenney, DEMO, Han, K. and Tanaka, S. (2002b). Adapt-
ing to strange environments: venture capital in
Japan, Korea and Taiwan. Paper presented DEMO the
2002 Annual Meeting of the Academy of Inter-
national Business, DEMO Juan, Puerto Rico.
Kenney, M., Han, K. and Tanaka, DEMO (2002c). Scattering
geese: the venture capital industries of East Asia: a
report to the World Bank. Berkeley Roundtable on
the International Economy, WP146, Berkeley, CA.
Klagge, B. and Martin, R. (2004)DEMO Decentralised
versus centralised ﬁnancial systems: is there a
case for local DEMO markets? Paper presented at
the European Science Foundation Exploratory
Workshop on DEMO Geography and European
Finance, Oxford, September.
Knight, R. (1994). Criteria used by venture capital-
ists: a cross cultural analysis. International Small
Business Journal, 13(1), 26 –37.
La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and
Vishny, R. (1997). Legal determinants of external
ﬁnance. Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1131–1150.
La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and
Vishny, R. (1998). Law and ﬁnance. Journal of
Political Economy, 106, 1113 –1155.
DEMO Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and
Vishny, R. (2000). Agency problems and dividend
policies around the world. Journal of Finance, 55,
1–33.
Leeds, R. and Sunderland, J. (2003)DEMO Private equity
investing in emerging markets. Accenture Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance, 15(4), 111–119.
Lerner, J. and Schoar, A. (2003)DEMO Private equity in the
developing world: the determinants of transaction
structure. DEMO Paper, HBS/MIT.
Lerner, J. and Schoar, A. (2005). Does legal enforce-
ment affect ﬁnancial transactions? The contractual
channel in private equity. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(1), 223 –246.
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
Lockett, A. and Thompson, S. (2001). The resource-
based view and economics. Journal of Manage-
ment. 27, 723 –754.
Lockett, A. and Wright, M. (2002). Venture capital in
Asia and the Paciﬁc Rim. Venture Capital, 4(3),
DEMO –196.
Lockett, A., Wright, M., Pruthi, S. and Sapienza, H. (2002).
Venture capital investors, valuation and informa-
tion: a comparative study of US, Hong Kong, India
and Singapore. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 4(3), 237–252.
MacMillan, DEMO, Siegel, R. and SubbaNarasimha, P.N.
(1985). Criteria used by venture capitalists to
evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of
Business Venturing, 1(1), 119 –129.
Madhok, A. (2002). Reassessing the fundamentals
DEMO beyond: Ronald Coase, the transaction cost
and resource-based theories of the ﬁrm and the
institutional structure of production. Strategic Man-
agement Journal. 23, 535 –550.
Mäkelä, M. and Maula, M. (2004), Attracting cross-
border venture capital: the role of a local investor.
Mimeo, University DEMO Helsinki.
Malnight, T.W. (2001) Emerging structural patterns
within multinational corporations: toward process-
based structures, Academy of Management Journal,
44, 1187–1210.
DEMO, S. (1994). The founding rates of venture
capital ﬁrms in three European countries (1970 –
1990), Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO(6), 525 –541.
Manigart, S., Wright, M., Robbie, DEMO, Desbrières P.
and De Waele, K. (1997). Venture capitalists’
DEMO of investment projects: an empirical Euro-
pean study. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO,
21(4), 29 – 43.
Manigart, S., De Waele, K., Wright, M., Robbie, K.,
Desbrières P., Sapienza, H. and Beekman, A.
(2000). Venture capitalists, investment appraisal
and accounting information: a comparative study of
the USA, UK, France, DEMO and Holland. Euro-
pean Financial Management, 6(3), 389 – DEMO
Manigart, S., De Waele, K., Wright, M., Robbie, DEMO,
Desbrieres, P., Sapienza, H. and Beekman, A. (2002)DEMO
Determinants of required return in venture capital
investments: a ﬁve country DEMO Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, 17(4), 291–312.
Marschan, R., Welch, D. and Welch, L. (1996).
Control in less DEMO multinationals: the role
of personal networks and informal communication.
International Business DEMO, 5(2), 137–150.
Martin, R., Sunley, P. and Turner, D. (2002). Taking
risks in regions: the geographical anatomy of
163
International venture capital research
Europe’s emerging venture capital market. Journal
of Economic DEMO, 2(2), 121–150.
Martin, R., Berndt, C., Klagge, B. and Sunley, P. (2005).
Spatial proximity effects and regional DEMO gaps
in the venture capital market: evidence from Ger-
many and DEMO UK. Environment and Planning A,
37(7), 1207–1231.
Maula, DEMO and Mäkelä, M. (2003). Cross-border
venture capital. In Hyytinen, DEMO and Pajarinen, M.
(eds), Financial Systems and Firm Performance:
Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives. Helsinki:
Taloustieto, pp. 269–291.
Mayer, C., Schoors, K. and Yafeh, Y. (2005). Sources
of funds and investment activities of venture capital
funds: evidence from Germany, Israel, Japan and
the UK. Journal of Corporate Finance, 11(3), 586–
608.
Megginson, W. (2004). Toward a global model of
venture capital? Accenture Journal of Applied Cor-
porate Finance, 16(1), 7–26.
Meyer, J.E. and Shao, J. (1995). International venture
capital portfolio diversiﬁcation and agency costs.
Multinational Business Review, 53 –58.
Miller, S.R. and DEMO, A. (1998). Patterns in the
expansion of US banks’ foreign operations. Journal
of International Business Studies, 29(2), 359–390.
Murray, DEMO (1994). The second equity gap: exit prob-
lems for seed & early stage venture capitalists and
their investee companies. International Small Busi-
DEMO Journal, 12(4), 59 –76.
Muzyka, D., Birley, S. and Leleux, B. (1996). Trade-
offs in the investment decisions DEMO European
venture capitalists. Journal of Business Venturing,
11(4), 273 –287.
Nye, D. and Wasserman, N. (1999). Patterns of VC
evolution: comparing the Israeli and Indian venture
capital industries. Journal of Private Equity, 3(1),
26 – 48.
O’Farrell, P.N. and Wood, P.A. (1994). International
market selection by business service ﬁrms: key
conceptual and methodological issues. Inter-
national Business Review, 3(3), 243 –261.
O’Farrell, P.N. and Wood, P.A. (1998). International-
isation by business service ﬁrms: towards a new
regionally based conceptual framework. Environ-
ment and Planning A, 30, 109–128.
O’Farrell, P.N., Moffat, L. and Wood, P.A. (1995).
Internationalisation by business service ﬁrms: a
methodological critique of foreign-market entry-
mode choice. Environment and Planning A, 27,
683 – 697.
Ooghe, H., Manigart, S. and Fassin, Y. (1991). Growth
164
patterns of the European venture capital industry.
Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 6(6), 381– 404.
Orru, M., Biggart, N. and Hamilton, G. (1991).
Organizational isomorphism in East Asia. DEMO Powell,
W. and DiMaggio, P. (eds), The New Institutionalism
in Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 361–389.
Oviatt, B.M. and McDougall, P.P. (1994). Toward a
theory of international DEMO ventures. Journal of
International Business Studies, 25(1), 45 – DEMO
Patricof, A. (1989). The internationalisation of
venture capital. Journal of Business Venturing, 4,
227–230.
Peng, M. (2004). Identifying the big question in
international business research. Journal of Inter-
national Business Studies, 35(2), 99 –108.
Pruthi, S. (2004). Unpublished Ph.D., Nottingham
University Business School.
Pruthi, S., Wright, M. and Lockett, DEMO (2003). Do
foreign and domestic venture capital ﬁrms differ in
DEMO monitoring of investees? Asia Paciﬁc Journal
of Management, 20(2), 175 –204.
Ray, D. (1991). Venture capital and entrepreneurial
developments DEMO Singapore, International Small
Business Journal, 10(1), 11–26.
Ray, DEMO and Turpin, D. (1993). Venture capital in Japan,
International Small Business Journal, 11(4), 39 –
56.
Robbie, K. DEMO Wright, M. (1996). Management Buy-
ins. Manchester: MUP.
Robbie, K., Wright, M. and Chiplin, B. (1997). The
monitoring DEMO venture capital ﬁrms. Entrepreneur-
ship, Theory and Practice, 21(4), 9 –28.
Rock, E. (2001). Greenhorns, yankees, and cosmopol-
DEMO: venture capital, IPOs, foreign ﬁrms, and US
markets. Theoretical Inquiries in Law (Online Edi-
tion), 2(2), Article 6, DEMO://www.bepress.com/til/
default/vol2/iss2/art6.
Roe, M. (2004). Explaining Western securities mar-
kets. In Keasey, K., Thompson, S. and Wright, M.
(eds), Corporate Governance: International Per-
spectives. London: Wiley.
Root, F.R. (1994). Entry Strategies for International
Markets. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Rugman, A.M. and Verbeke, A. (2002) Edith Pen-
rose’s contribution to the resource-based view of
strategic management. Strategic Management Jour-
DEMO, 23, 769–780.
Sapienza, H., Manigart, S. and Vermeir, W. (1996).
Venture capitalist governance and value added
in four countries. Journal of Business Venturing,
11(6), 439 – 469.
© Blackwell DEMO Ltd 2005
Sunley, P., Klagge, B., Berndt, C. and Martin, R.
(2005) Venture capital programmes in the UK and
Germany: in what DEMO regional policies?
Regional Studies, 39, 255 –273.
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G. and Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic
capabilities and strategic management. Strategic
Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533.
Tsang, E. and DEMO, W. (1998). Can guanxi be a
source of competitive advantage for doing business
in China. Academy of Management Executive, 12,
64–73.
Tyebjee, T.T. and Bruno, A.V. (1984). A model of
venture capitalist investment activity. Management
Science, 30(9), 1051–1066.
Van De Ven, A.H. and Delbecq. A.L. (1976) Determi-
nants of co-ordination modes within organisations.
American Sociological Review, 41(April), 322–338.
Welch, D.E. and DEMO, L.S. (1997). Pre-expatriation:
the role of HR factors in the early stages of inter-
nationalization. International Journal of Human
Resource Management, 8(4), 403 – 413.
Westhead, P., Wrigh, M., DEMO, D. and Martin, F.
(2001). International market selection strategies DEMO
manufacturing and services ﬁrms. Entrepreneur-
ship & Regional Development, 13, 17– 46.
Wright, M. and Kitamura, M. (2003). Management
buy-outs in Japan. Journal of Private Equity, 6(2),
86–95.
Wright, M. and Robbie, K. (1998). Venture capital
and private equity: a review and synthesis. Journal
of Business Finance and Accounting, 25(5&6),
521–570.
Wright, M., Thompson, S. and Robbie, K. (DEMO).
Venture capital and management-led buy-outs: a
European perspective. Journal of DEMO Ventur-
ing, 7(1), 47–71.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., Romanet, Y., Thompson, S.,
Joachimsson, R., Bruining, H. and Herst, A. (1993).
Harvesting and the longevity of management DEMO
outs and buy-ins: a four country study. Entrepre-
neurship Theory and DEMO, 18(2), 90 –109.
Wright, M., Karsai, J., DEMO, Z. and Morovic, J.
(1999). Transition and active investors: venture
capital in Hungary, Poland and Slovakia. Post-
Communist Economies, 11(DEMO), 27– 46
Wright, M., Pruthi, S. and Lockett, A. (2002). Inter-
nationalization of Western venture capitalists into
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005
September 2005
emerging markets: risk assessment and information
in India. Small Business Economics, 19(1), 13–29.
Wright, M., Kitamura, DEMO and Hoskisson, R. (2003a).
Management buyouts and restructuring Japanese
corporations. Long Range Planning, 36(4), 355 –
374.
Wright, M., Sapienza, H. and Busenitz, L. (2003b).
Introduction. Venture Capital, DEMO I. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Wright, M., Kissane, J. and DEMO, A. (2004a).
Private equity and the EU accession countries of
Central and Eastern Europe. Journal of Private
Equity, 7(3), 32 – 46.
Wright, M., Lockett, A., Pruthi, A., Manigart, S.,
Sapienza, H., Desbrieres, P. and Hommel, U.
(2004b). Venture capital investors, institutional
context, valuation and information: US, DEMO and
Asia. Journal of International Entrepreneurship, 2,
305 –326.
Wright, M., Kissane, J. and Burrows, A. (2005). Man-
agement DEMO: from Europe to Japan. Journal
of Restructuring Finance, 2(1), 39–54.
Yli-Renko, H., Autio, E. and Tontti, V. 2001. Social
DEMO, knowledge and the international growth of
technology based new ﬁrms. International DEMO
Review, 11, 279–304.
Zahra, S.A., Ireland, R.D. and Hitt, M.A. (2000).
International expansion by new venture ﬁrms:
international diversity, mode of market entry, tech-
nological learning, and performance. Academy of
Management Journal, 43(5), 925 –950.
Zalan, T. (2004). The secret multinationals of the new
millennium: internationalization of private equity
ﬁrms. Mimeo.
Zhang, T. (2002). Managing risks of private equity
investing DEMO China. Journal of Private Equity, 5,
40 – 43.
Mike DEMO, Sarika Pruthi and Andy Lockett
are from the Centre for Management DEMO
Research, Nottingham University Business
School, Nottingham NG8 1BB, UK.
Correspondence DEMO address: mike.wright@
nottingham.ac.uk
165{1g42fwefx}