London Business School University of LondonDoctoral Dissertation
March 1999Sam Wylie
1
Essays DEMO the decisions of investors and fund managers
Reuben and AngThis thesis is dedicated to Tracey for her support and DEMO and to our sonsus who came along in time to help finish.
2
For financial support I thank Mercury Asset Management, Salomon Brothers andBagot and Lindato many people but especially Nigel Foster, Graham Dixon, Mark DEMO, Gordon Ltd and the WM Company.  For advice on institutional arra-Jane Coffin.  ngements I am indebted
Ramaswamy.Michael Brennan, Henri Servaes, David Pyle, For advice and helpful discussions I thank Walter Torous, Mark BrittenJames DEMO, Dick Brealey and Krishna -Jones,
and Peter Spencer.I am also DEMO for valuable suggestions from my thesis examiners, Mario Levissupport and guidance.Finally, I thank my thesis supervisors Elroy Dimson and Narayan Naik for their
DEMO Wylie
Acknowledgements
The Overseas Students Research Award Scheme.  For data I DEMO John Morrell Pty
investors and institutional investors.existence of fundamental differences in the optimisation problems of DEMO thesis studies aspects of equity market outcomes that may arise from the
3
Thesis abstract
those differences for market outcomes.  The growth of delegated portfolioincentives of private investors and fund managers, and examines the significance ofThe first essay reviews what is known and unknown about the differences in DEMO
empirical studies of incentives faced by fund managers, and resultant fund DEMO in the UK and the US is firstly documented.  Thenmanagers on DEMO stock market phenomena.on the effect of differences in the incentives of private and institutional fundinvestors and fund managers are contrasted.  Finally, the essay DEMO ctrading behaviour, is surveyed.  Next, the optimisation problems faced by DEMO, the results of
onjectures
and analysed.  and Wermers measures, which DEMO be expected to biVishny (LSV 1992b) and Wermers (1995, 1999).  Invalid assumptions in the LSVsame time test the accuracy of the herding measures of Lakonishok, Shleifer andmanagers is employed to test foIn the second essay a dataset of the portfolio holdings of 268 UK equity DEMO fund r herding among UK unit trust managers and at the
managers trading the stock during a period. subsets of the data which are DEMO on the basis of stock size or the capitalisation stocks. The Wermers measure is biased toward finding herding in allUK unit trust managers is DEMO particularly in the smallest and largest marketA bootstrap reassumption, that all DEMO short sell, biases the measure towards finding herdingwhich the invalid assumptions DEMO relaxed. Thexhibit approximately zero systematic herding but are drawn from populations inmanagers trade during a period.  Nonetheless, a significant amin the smallest stocks, the largest stocks and stocks in which a small number of-sampling technique DEMO developed to create replicated datasets whiche results show that the LSVount of herding among
as the measures, are identified
number of
performance figures and an investor’s decision, each period, to either retain DEMO fireThe final essay models the relationship between a fund manager’s portfolio
manager and 2 periods from the investment horizon.  Then simulation results areseemingly irrational length of time before changing manager and shows the effect ofis resolved.  In addition, the model partially explains why some investors wait awhether to abandon the current manager, and at cost K, engage the best DEMO or more periods, after which some uncertainmanager.  The model highlights the value of the real option to delay the decision bythe fund manager.  The investor must decide on the basis of evolving informationn ty about DEMO quality of the manageral option.  A closed form n periods after DEMO the
4
provided for the case of an investor deciding solution is presented for the case of an investor decidinguncertainty over manager skill on DEMO value of that re periods after hiring and 10 periods
from the investment horizon.
____________________________________________________________________
Table of contents
Chapter 1     Introduction
Contents
5
13
DEMO
5
1.1
Theme and purpose of the thesis
13
1.2
Financial markets and the rise of delegated portfolio management
15
Contents
Table of figuresTable DEMO tablesTable of contents
ManagementChapter
1.5.4 2A comparison of the UK and US investment management industries
20
35
3129
1.4
Financial Markets and the Rise DEMO Delegated Portfolio
1.5
Overview of the funds management industry
23
1.6
Market efficiency assumptions
33
1.5.11.5.31.5.2
How portfolios are managed
1.7
The remainder of DEMO thesis
33
1.3
Herding
Delegation of portfolio managementInvestment vehicles and investment products
2523
17
2.2.22.2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2.2.1
2.2.32.3.1
The UK experience
The US DEMO of UK and UUS retirement savingsUS equity holdings by sectorS data
The rise of delegated portfolio management
37
394542
35
37
Introduction
2.2.2.2
2.3.1.1
DEMO management feesDescription of management fees
47
2.3
A review of literature on fund manager incentives
46
Hiring and firing
The flow of money to mutual fundsBoilerplate nature of feesConclusions from studies DEMO fees
The funds flow Early studies of the performanceModern studies of the performanceNoCausality in the portfolio performance Studies of fund manager employment terminationOther econometric DEMO in funds flow studiesn-linear studies of the performance– portfolio performance relationship-flow relationship-
2.3.2.7Strategic behaviour and hedging by fundWhat is known about the incentives faced DEMO fund managers? managers
2.3.1.22.3.1.3
2.3.2
2.3.2.22.3.2.12.3.2.32.3.2.42.3.2.52.3.2.6
2.4.12.3.42.3.3
Decision making
2.4.1.1
Objective DEMO
Chapter 3     Fund Manager Herding
2.5.1
A comparison of optimisation problems
Dynamic hedging by fund managersComponents of the maximisation problem
2.4
2.5
DEMO about unexplained market phenomena
2.4.1.2
2.6
Concluding remarks
Chapter 4     Tests of the Accuracy of Herding Measures
Introduction
3.2
Types of herding
DEMO
The LSV herding measure
3.4
Wermers herding measure
3.5
Concluding remarks
flow relationship-flow relationship– funds flow relationship
4.1
4.2
4.3.44.3.34.3.24.3.1
Test of the invariance DEMO in the LSV measureTest of the short selling assumption in the LSV measure
Introduction
Data
ReBootstrapping test of the Wermers measure-ordering test of the DEMO measure
4.3
Methodology
4.4
LSV measure applied to the UK dataset
106
124
4950
505051566059
7365
76757779
75
78
82
106
111
115
120
DEMO
139137136133
124
124
133
139
6
63
3.1
Chapter 5     The Pension Fun
4.5.1
4.5.2
4.7.24.7.1
The effect DEMO calculating weights with average prices
of mis-specification
Wermers measure applied to the UK dataset
d Industry
4.7
Results of accuracy tests of the Wermers DEMO
4.8
Concluding remarks and future research
5.2.85.2.115.2.105.2.95.2.75.2.65.2.55.2.45.2.35.2.25.2.1
Chapter 6     Hiring and Firing Fund Managers
5.1
5.2
Control of the fundDePension funds and DEMO economy
Introduction
Agency structure of the pension fund industRole of the trustee board ry
An overview of the UK pension fund industry
Funding levels
DEMO and performance measurementInformation available Fund managementRole of the actuary
to trustee boards
The US pension fund industry
fined benefit and defined contribution schemes
5.3.5
DEMO
A review of the finance literature on pension funds
Survivorship bias
Investment managemeFunding asset allocationDefined benefit versus defined contributionTrustee board objectives
nt decisions of DEMO boards
4.5
4.5.1.44.5.1.34.5.1.24.5.1.1
The effect of the short selling assumption
Results of the accuracy tests of the LSV measure
T he effect of the DEMO assumption
Grouping by sizeReEliminating the ‘buy from zero holding’ records- sampling from one trinomial for each periodsampling from the basic binomial distribution
6.1
Introduction
DEMO
143144146145147
7
143
170
151150
148
150
152
179178179178176175174174173172171
181
189
170
171
189
187186183182
180
4.6
5.3
6.2
6.2.26.2.16.2.2.16.2.2.26.2.2.46.2.2.3
Illustration of the value of active management
Manager with permanent DEMO to change the manager at any timeOption to change manager
A model of investors’ hiring and firing decisions
The Bellman functional equation
The structure DEMO assumptions of the model
ReferencesChapter 7     Concluding Remarks
6.3.26.3.1
6.4.26.4.1
6.4.76.4.46.4.36.4.56.4.6
6.5.46.5.26.5.3
6.5.76.5.66.5.5
Effect of the risk free rate
Testable implications and DEMO research
6.6
247
235
255
____________________________________________________________________
244
6.7
Concluding remarks on the hiring and firing model
245
6.4
6.5
6.3
Decomposition of the value DEMO delegated portfolio managementThe gammaAlternative model specification- normal posterior distribution
Proposition 1:
Proposition 2:Proposition 5:Proposition 4:Proposition 3:
Implications of a DEMO policy
Passive and active managementStationarity and equilibrium
6.5.1.26.5.1.1Simulation methodologyNature of simulationPurpose of the simulation
6.5.3.16.5.2.1
A simulation study
Uncertainty over the expected value of DEMO investor caseParameter choicesCalibration of the Montecarlo simulation
Effect of the cost of changing managerLevel of prior information
6.3.2.1
A two period model
-to-benchmark returns
DEMO
192
217213210
206
219218
226224222221223
218
229228227
232230230229
227
234233
198192198201202205
Table of tables
____________________________________________________________________
£bns)
Table 2.2 Level of financial assets DEMO by UK financial sectors (% of UK GDP) 84
Table 2.3 UK equity holdings of UK financial sectors (£bns) 86
Proportional ownership DEMO UK equity market, private versus institutional
investors (proportions sum to 100)
UK equity holdings of UK financial sectors as a % of DEMO total UK
financial assets
Net acquisition of UK equities by UK financial sectors (£bns)
UK unit trust holdings
9
Table 2.1
83
Table 2.4
87
Table 2.5
88
Table 2.6
90
Table 2.7
Table 2.8 DEMO of US financial assets held by US financial sectors ($bns) 93
Table 2.9 Level of US financial assets held by US financial sectors (% of US GDP) 94
Table 2.10 US equity holdings of US financial sectors ($bns) 96
Table 2.11 Percentage ownership of US equity DEMO, private versus institutional
investors
Table 2.12 US equity holdings of financial DEMO as a % of their total US financial
assets
Table 2.13 Net acquisition of US equities by US financial sectors ($bns)
Table 2.14 Acquisition of US equities by US households ($bns)
Table 2.15 Number of US mutual fund shareholder accounts (millions)
Table 4.1 Number of trusts reporting at each date
Table 4.2 Aggregate number of stocks held DEMO average size of trusts
Table 4.3 Average asset levels of trusts by sector
Table 4.4 Average number of stocks held in trusts of different DEMO
Table 4.5 Average number of buys and sells in representative periods
Table 4.6 Number and total market value of stocks in each log decile*
DEMO 4.7 Herding levels in UK unit trusts by LSV measure of herding
Table 4.8 Herding levels in UK unit trust sectors by LSV measure DEMO herding
Table 4.9 Buy and sell herding levels by LSV measure of herding
92
97
99
101
103
104
127
128
129
130
131
DEMO
156
157
158
Level of financial assets held by UK financial sectors (
10
Table 4.10 Herding levels by LSV measure of herding with ‘buy DEMO zero holding’
occurrences omitted
Table 4.11 Results of bootstrap replication from basic LSV binomial distribution 160
Table 4.12 Results of bootstrap replication from single DEMO/hold/sell trinomial for
each period
Table 4.13 Results of bootstrap replication from single  buy/hold/sell trinomial, for
each period, with no short selling
161
162
Table 4.14 Results of bootstrap replication from trinomial DEMO each period from
size ranked groups
163
Table 4.15
Table 4.16
Table 4.17
Table 4.18
Table 4.19
Table 4.20
Table 6.1
Table 6.2
Table DEMO
Table 6.4
Table 6.5
Herding le
x
x
vels in UK unit trusts by Wermers measure of herding
Estimated sampling distribution of Wermers measure DEMO null
conditions
x
x
identity of stocks
x
Wermers measure on datasets replicated by randomly re-allocating the
Effect of uncertainty over m
x
f
DEMO dismissal level o
Effect of uncertainty over m
x
=0
on value of active management at
Effect of level of prior information on dismissal DEMO of
Effect of level of prior information on value of active management at
Effect of K on dismissal level of
164
165
166
167
DEMO
169
232
233
233
234
234
____________________________________________________________________
Table 6.6
Effect of K on value of active management at =0
235
Table 6.7
Effect of DEMO free rate  on dismissal level of
235
Table 6.8
Effect of DEMO free rate on value of active management at
=0
236
159
Bootstrap replication from trinomials formed each period from size
x
Bootstrap replication from DEMO formed from period, size and initial
Herding levels in UK unit DEMO sectors by Wermers measure of herding
=0
r anked groups with no short selling
holding quintile groups with no short selling
Table of figures
____________________________________________________________________
11
Fund manager incentive schedule 69
Figure 2.2 DEMO in the fund manager incentive schedule 72
Figure 2.3 Level of financial assets held by UK financial sectors (£bns) 85
Figure 2.4 Level DEMO financial assets held by UK financial sectors (% of UK GDP) 85
Proportion of ownership of UK equity market, private versus institutional
investors
UK equity holdings of UK financial sectors as a % of their DEMO UK
financial assets
Net acquisition of UK equities by UK financial sectors – 8 year average
annual flows as a percentage of total equity DEMO value
Level of US financial assets held by US financial sectors (DEMO)
Level of US financial assets held by US financial sectors (DEMO of US GDP)
% Ownership of US equity market, private DEMO institutional
% Ownership of US equity market, private versus institutional, by
institutional type
US equity holdings of financial sectors as a % of DEMO total US financial
assets
Net acquisition of US equities by US financial sectors – 10 year average
annual flows as a percentage of total DEMO market value
Acquisition of US equities by US households ($ bns)DEMO
US mutual fund shareholder accounts
Ratio of household domestic equity holdings to institutional domestic
equity holdings in the UK and the US
Figure 2.5
DEMO
Figure 2.6
89
Figure 2.7
91
Figure 2.8
95
Figure 2.9
95
Figure 2.10
98
Figure 2.11
98
Figure 2.12
100
Figure 2.13
102
DEMO 2.14
103
Figure 2.15
104
Figure 2.16
105
Figure 2.1
Figure 6.1
Figure 6.2
Figure 6.3
Figure 6.4
Figure 6.5
Figure 6.6
Manager with DEMO tenure
Option to change manager in current period only
Option to change the manager at any time
Decision times
The gamma normal prior distribution
DEMO versus passive management
201
202
204
207
210
225
12
Figure 6.7
Figure 6.8
Closed form values versus Montecarlo values
Montecarlo DEMO with varying numbers of draws
237
237
Figure 6.9
Value of active management for representative investor
Figure 6.10 Variation of option value of active DEMO
238
238
Figure 6.11 Variation of value with level of sample information
Figure 6.12 Option value versus level of sample information
Figure 6.13 High DEMO over value of m
Figure 6.14 Low uncertainty over the value of m
Figure 6.15 Strong prior information
239
239
240
240
241
Figure DEMO Weak prior information
__________________________________
High cost of changing manager
Figure 6.18 Low cost of changing manager
Figure 6.19 High risk free rate
Low risk DEMO rate
Figure 6.20
241
__________________________________
242
242
243
243
Figure 6.17
13
1  The consequences of the large scale delegation of portfolio decision making
An example institutional investor each hold 4 percent of their respective DEMO in a particularby private investors and fund managers.  Suppose a private DEMO and ancan illustrate the differences in the incentives (objective function) faced
private investor the stock generates a 6 percent increase in end of DEMO wealth, instock which reastock return odirect proportion to the initial weight DEMO the stock in the portfolio.  The effect of then the fund DEMO end of period wealth is more complicated.lises a return of 150 percent over the following period.  For the
wealth will be a nonAmong many differences, the two principal differences are, firstly, that end of period -linear function of the excess-to-benchmark return of the stock
the flow of DEMO
rather than a linear sensitive to returns achieved.  manager’s end of DEMO wealth (or investment management firm value) highlya nonthough management fees generally increase linearly with the size of the fund, there is -linear relationship between a fund’s excessmoney to the fund.  Secondly, the scale of DEMO large fund can make the function of total return.  Empirical studies DEMO revealed that even -to-benchmark portfolio return and
finance literature and that practice is continued here.
1.1
Chapter 1
Theme and purpose of the thesis
DEMO UK and US financial markets.  In the equity markets of both DEMO the assetsThe past three decades have seen the rise of funds management to a central positiond by institutional investors now amount to over one DEMO of the value of the
by private investors to their chosen institutional investors, are not well understood.trades even if their information sets and initial conditions are identical.  different optimisation problems and can therefore be expected to undertake differentThey market.may be substantial; private investors and institutional investors face profoundly
The terms money manager, fund manager and institutional investor are used interchangeably in the
Introduction
1
funThe point of this example is that private investors and fund managers DEMO choose fund managers.  The effect of these differences on market outcomes DEMO  The incentives of fund managers are shaped by the way that DEMO different incentives and can therefore be expected to behave
state of knowledge of fund manager incentives is then reviewed and the importancemanagement.  The astonishing growth of managed funds is firstly documented.  Theof differences between the incentives of private and institThe first essayanalysed in the context of several unexplained DEMO market phenomena. assesses the significance of the rise of delegated portfolioutional investors are
which is analogous to k  Brown and Goetzmann (1997) form US mutual fund managers into ‘style’ groups by a method-means cluster analysis.
DEMO
is not well understrelationship between investors and their fund managers.  aspects DEMO how financial market outcomes are related to decisions that arise from the ood.  The research reported in this dissertation seeks to understand
incentives are important, we need to know whether investors can be clustered intoTo better comprehend the market equilibrium and to decide whether differences in
groups (in particular, private investors and institutional investors) which areaccuracy of herding measures.  The herding measures, suitably adjusted forsecond essay s trading behaviour marks it as separate from the rest of the market.develops and implements bootstrap methodology DEMO testing the test for the presence of herding among UK equity fund 2 The
managers.inaccuracies, are then used to
finance literature.  on hiring DEMO firing fund choosing between thousands of fund managers.  But how investors DEMO decisionsThe rise of institutional investment is the story of millions of individual investorsbetter understanding the downThe third essaymanagers has received surprisingly little attention in DEMO of fund managers’ incentive schedules and models this decision process with the aim of
2
group’because a test for herding by a group of DEMO constitutes a test of whether thedelineated by their trading behaviour.  Empirical DEMO of herding are important
management1.2
f investor behaviour in hiring and firing
The initial studies of DEMO manager incentives focused on the principalare ‘boilerplates’ with no explicit performance related component.majority of contracts between investors and mutual fund or pension fund managersactual DEMO between private investors and institutional investorsthat the optimal contract design, as DEMO by agency theory was not reflected inwithin the framework of delegated portfolio management.  However, it was foundproblem faced by investors.  The tools of agency theory were Financial markets and the rise of delegated portfolio applied DEMO developed-agent
15
.3  The great
managers.  There is now a body of work which in aggregate can help to define thethings, to chaEmpirical studies of fund manager incentives followed which sought, among otherracterise and parameterise the implicit incentives faced by fund
difference between the incentives of private DEMO and institutional investors. incentives studies.  Further, it analyses the consequences for market outcomes of thefor a paper that bringsincentive structure faced by mutual DEMO  Chapter 2, the first essay, meets the need together the DEMO of the empirical studies of fund manager
categories:  fee structures in mutual and pension funds;  the flow of funds to mutualThe empirical DEMO of fund manager incentives can be formed into three
essay includes a detailed literature reand pension funds;  and strategic behaviour and hedging by DEMO managers.  Themanner in which portfolio performance modulates the volume of money DEMO by The most significant ein this thesis.fund managers on this topic conducted in the course of the research that is presentedstrands of the literature DEMO includes observations from the many discussions with  Hedge funds, private banking services and limited partnerships are clear exceptions. lement in shaping the incentives DEMO a fund manager is theview which consolidates results from the several
3
managers.explaining seemingly curious aspects o
who have performed strongly in recent peran investment management firm.  New funds flow disproportionately to managersiods.  Consequently, the capitalised value
essay of chapters DEMO and 6.  records.  These particular phenomena are partially explained in the Hiring and Firing performance and the preference of investors for fund managers DEMO shorter trackcurious aspects, such as, the seemingly high tpeers.  The DEMO between performance and funds flow is nonof future fees is highly dependent upon performance relative to the fund manager’s-linear with some
16
olerance of DEMO investors for poor
After consolidating the examined in the framework of the optimisation problems faced by private investorsevidence on the nature of fund manager DEMO, it is
ication of the differences between the incentives of
private DEMO and institutional investors. the empirical studies and clarifand initial conditions.  The DEMO allows a critical assessment of the findings of (in which the DEMO are embedded), opportunity set, constraints, choice variables faced by members of these two grand institutional investors.  The equivalent components of the optimisation problems oups are compared; including, objective function
significantly different portfolios, which implies net trade between the groups. blueprint for ongoing research in this DEMO  private investors and institutional investors.  These conjectures are intended to form a equity markets may beThe paper concludes with conjectures about how several DEMO phenomena inin incentives, the thesis examines aspects of how a market DEMO which inHaving established what empirical studies in aggregate can say about the differencescomprised principally of private investors.  The discussion focuses on evaluation ofinvestors have a substantial role should be expected to differ from a marketand institutional DEMO have fundamentally different perceptions of risk.  In turnmanagers against the performance DEMO their peers, which ensures that private investFurthecorporate governance and different perceptions DEMO optimal risk management by firms.  they may have different dynamic hedging DEMO, different perceptions ofr, in aggregate, private investors and institutional investors DEMO choose partially explained by the differences in the incentives ofstitutional ors
1.3 Herding
market such as a rights issue.  Previous empirical members of the group, in excess of that which arises simply from artefacts of then a group of investors trading thestudies of herding have sought to
DEMO values.  However, a separate motivation for studying herding is thatdetermine whether herding by institutional investors moves asset prices away fromgroups of investors which DEMO delineated by their different trading behaviour.  Ifempirical findings of herding are DEMO that the markeschedules and solve correspondingly different portfolio choice pprivate investors and institutional investors face significantly different incentivetests of herding by fund managers represent DEMO test of that conjecture.average be more akin to each other than to members of the other group.  Empiricalshould expect that in their trading behaviour the members of each group will ont can be clustered intoroblems, then we
The obportfolio holdings data.  Currently, portfolio holdings based measures of: herding;develop a methodology for testing the accuracy of metrics which are DEMO onjectives of the second essay (chapters 3 and 4) are fourfold.  Firstly, to
existing herding measures.  Studies employing those measures have found significant methodology developed here allows an approximate calibration of such measures tozero DEMO the absence of the phenomenon being measured.  The bootstrappingportfolio performanczero.  Secondly, to apply the bootstrae; and window dressing; are simply assumed to return a value of pping methodology to test the accuracy of
suitably DEMO for estimated bias, to data drawn from a country which has DEMO even in the absence of herding.  Thirdly, to apply the herding measures,the generality of empirical herding results.  Finally, to provide a DEMO management industry comparable to that of the US; thare related fundamental DEMO of fund manager herding.  Further, to show that all of the theories have formulation of herding that encompasses each of the several theoretical DEMO in the essay there is reason to believe tlevels of herding by US pension fund and mutual fund managers.  However, ashat the measures DEMO positive ereby, extending
– but each theory simply concentrates on a DEMO aspect of the– the optimisation problems of individual fund managersthe same
same assets in the same direction at the same time.  That is, DEMO correlated across In the finance literature ‘herding’ is taken to mea
17
methodological, optimisation problem.  In meeting these four objectives the essay makesempirical DEMO of herding.  empirical and conceptual contributions to the literature on the
DEMO
do
igned to ensure that:  each re-sampled dataset exhibits zero systematic herding;
The methodology of the accuracy tests is designed to overcome DEMO obvious problemnot have a large number of datasets which were drawn independently from the samein testing the accuracy of a measure in which the DEMO is the whole dataset; we
preserved.and essential dataset characteristics that are DEMO associated with herding arethe invalid assumption that is being tested does not hold but other assumptions do;datasets are created by conditional bootstrap regroup DEMO managers over the same period.  Instead, a large number of independentis des -sampling.  The re-sampling technique
estimate of the sampling distribution of the measure under the null conditions of zero Applying a herding measure to DEMO of the bootstrapped datasets builds up an
the misestimate of the bias in the measure at the actual level of herding is available, then degree herding.  The mean of that empirical sampling distribution gives an estimate of theinaccuracy of the measure. level of herding in the actual dataset DEMO be measured and adjusted for the estimatedof mis- -calibration (the bias DEMO the absence of herding) of the measure.  In turn,
calibration is an estimate of the bias at the actual level of herding.  Once anthe
the period January 1986 to December 1993.  It was comThe dataset is comprised of the portfolio holdings of 268 UK equity unit DEMO overThere is a survivorship issue in that only unit trusts that were ‘alive’ in DecemberFund Consulting from the biannual reports of unit trust managers DEMO investors.survivorship bias is not considered a significant problem.  Two major advantages DEMO are included.  On the basis of results of previous empiramong UK DEMO managers.  Secondly, UK data is ideal for testithe dataset are, DEMO, that it contains UK data which allows the first test of DEMO by Johnson Fry Pension ical herding studiesng the effect of a
4
4 Johnson Fry Pension Fund Consulting is now a part of John DEMO Pty Ltd.
undertaking short sales.short selling constraint because all UK unit trust managers are DEMO from
dependence on the invalid LSV assumption that aThe LSV measure is found to be biased toward a finding of herding as a result DEMO itssmallest group of stocks, those outside the one thousand smallest is DEMO by this bias.  About one third of the herding found in DEMO one half of the herding found in stocks other than the very largest or verybias induced by the short selling assumption. ll managers short DEMO all stocks.
19
measure of herding.  The likelihood of incorrect inference DEMO the Wermers measure The accuracy tests demonstrate significant problems with the Wermers (1995)largest, is explained by the
of stocks and the number DEMO managers trading during the period, the estimatedis severe.  In each sno herding exists is 0.probability of the measure returning a significant level of DEMO on a dataset where for by the estimated bias of the measure.to the UK dataset, approximately one half of the level of herding found is accountedubset of the data, formed on the basis of the market capitalisation
25 or more.  When the unadjusted Wermers measure is applied
three  potential problems.  Firstly, some herding may survive the reThe accuracy tests reported here are general rather than specific tessystematic herding.  Secondly, the DEMO datasets may differ in some esthat is intended to replicate datasets drawn from managers which do not exhibitnot representative of the choices of the DEMO under conditions of no herding.characteristic from the actual dataset, so that DEMO estimated sampling distributions are nonetheless, they must be born in mind DEMO considering the results of the tests.As discussed in chapter 4, the DEMO tests are designed to mitigate these problems; Finally, some error is introduced because the number of re-sampled datasets -sampling process ts which havesential
DEMO finite.
eWhen the LSV and Wermers herding measures are suitably adjusted for theirherding is commensurate with an average of 14 of the managers buying DEMO 12 of theFor example, where 20 managers trade a stock in DEMO particular period the level ofstimated mis-calibration on the UK dataset, a DEMO degree of herding remains.
Wermers measures reveal that herding is increasing in the size of the DEMO and themanagers selling the stock.  The results from both the adjusted DEMO and adjusted
stocks.that herding appears as herding in buying of stocks rather than herding in selling ofherding is found anumber of managers trading; as predicted by herding theory.  A large amount ofmong stocks with the smallest market capitalisation and most of
5
20
adjust them The herding essay DEMO the accuracy of the existing measures of herding and seeks to precisely defined concept; which is a problem that is addressed in the essay.  Ratherimproved measure of herding.  However, in the finance literature herding is not athan propose anotthe causes of the herding, and separate and test them.  The objective of those tests being to illuminateresearch should identify predictions of the principal theoretical explanations ofexistence of herding.  for demonstrated misher measure that seeks to catch all forms of herding, future herding herding and separate the competing theoretical explanations of the-calibration.  Ideally, the essay would DEMO an
managers herding into stocks cause the price of the stocks to rise.  It is conceivablethat a large increase in the price of a stock causes institutional investors to herd intoOther herding research might test for DEMO link between herding and serial correlation in stock returns.  There is DEMO in the empirical herding literature that fun rise in d
funds to that manager, which is central to understanding fund manager incentives,has been illuminated by recent empirical studies.  Those studies take the macroapproach of modelling the effect of portfolio performance, and other variablThe relationship between a fund manager’s portfolio performanc1.4dataset, as a result of the positive flow of funds to UK unit trusts during the dataset period. The asymmetry exists because DEMO are more occurrences of manager buys than manager sells in tHiring and firing e and the flow ofes, onhe
causal link between herding and stock price momentum will have been established.  a stock price causes herding which in turn causes a rise in the stock price, then athat stock, as a result of asymmetric dynamic hedging by fund managers.  DEMO a
5
managers is determined by the decisions of individual investors.  Those individualaggregate fund flows.  In contrast, at a micro level the flow of funds DEMO and fromindustry.  toagent level decisions, on which new managers to hire and which existing managers retain, in aggregate determine the flow of funds in the investment management
It is surprising then that the finance literature DEMO so silent on how investors rationallycontracts rather than model the investor’s decision problem. between investors and fund managers.  But those studies seek to design optimalan extensive principaldecide which managers to hire or when to fire a DEMO performing manager.  -agent literature which analyses the nature of optimal contracts
DEMO
There is
decisions of individual investors, with three primary objectives.  Firstly, to model atThe third essay (chperformance and investor hiring athe decision-theoretic DEMO the relationship between fund manager portfolioapters 5 and 6) models the DEMO manager hiring and firingnd firing decisions.  Such a model may provide DEMO
or tax realisation explanations. performing managers seems to go beyond what can be explained by transaction costand still retain the bulk of funds under DEMO  The retention of poormanagers.  Empirical studies of mutual funds find that fund managers facerecent high performance but other managers may have relatively poortournamentrelated DEMO the moments of fund managers’ portfolio performance distributions.deeper understanding of how investors rank fund managers and how that ranking isSecondly, to better understand the downside of -like incentive schedules where the new money goes to managers DEMO incentive schedule faced by fund performance
The model of investor hiring and firing decisions prseparate project.  The period by period portfolio return that a manager achieves, inThe first is that investors view each manager within a universe of managers as aoceeds from two basic precepts.
excess of the DEMO return, is the payoff to the projmanager exceeds the value of DEMO current manager by more than the cost of changing highest initial value and then change managers when the value of managers (projects).  DEMO are assumed to simply choose the manager with theThere is a fixed per pound cost of initially choosing any manager or changingect of choosing DEMO manager.  the best alternative
eference
choice of the manager, the investor is two periods from the investment horizon.  AtThe investor’s decision is then modelled in two periods.  DEMO periods after the in
choose another manager at cost K, whilst DEMO that the same decision must bethat point the investor must decide whether to retain the manager or alternativelyexisting manager (project) is found.  The value function is decomposed into fourmthe value funcparts that have clear and DEMO meaning.  An important, separable component ofmanager’s ability hwhether to change managers (projects) next period, after some uncertainty over theafter the next period’s excess return information is received.  The option to decidetwo period model.  DEMO one period from the horizon.  A closed form solution for the DEMO of thetion is the option to decide whether to retain or change the manager
present value project.  project with zero value and active management is only chosen if it is a positive netexcess return in every DEMO  Therefore, the benchmark is a natural rmanagers.  Investment in the DEMO portfolio is a project which returns zero
the excess return distribution of the managers, upoThe second basic precept is that investors have initial information on the moments of are combined with the prior information and the DEMO value of the managermanager.  As the portfolio returns of the chosen DEMO are revealed over time they retain the manager, the investor’s decision DEMO naturally a Bayesian decision problem.(project) is updated.  If performance is a significant factomoments.between active portfolio managers without some initial informaNaturally, because it is hard to imagine how investors could rationally choosen which they base DEMO choice ofr in determining whether to tion on excess return
The Bayesian decision model is developed in a gammavalue of each manager (project) DEMO the solution of a dynamic programming problem. unknown parameters of the normally distributed excess return.  It is shown that themean and precision.  The DEMO has a gammaexcess return distributions of managers are assumed to be normal with unknown-normal prior distribution -normal framework.  Theover theitial
as been resolved, DEMO positive value which is formulated in the
22
model.  It is shown that the value of the embedded real option to delay the decisionSeveral propositions are then presented which represent the contribution DEMO the
performing managers for so long.  Next, the relation between the posterior precisionon chanperformance, more new money flows to managers with shorter investment records.  relation partialof the expected excess return and the option value is analysed.  It is shown that thisging managers partially explains why some investors hold on to poorly explains the empirical observation that after controlling for DEMO and
23
The model is then used to characterise the priors of investors who choose active
that in hiring and firing decisions the degree DEMO
move discussion of the choice of fund managers beyond the notion that ‘100 quarters management over passreturn.’  The model demonstratesof data are required to be 95 percent certain that a manager has positive excessnumber of comparative DEMO results are presented.certainty that a manager can ‘beat the index’ is determined endogenously.  Finally, aive management.  A further contribution of the essay is to
Delegation of portfolio managementOverview of the funds management industry
A simulation DEMO of the comparative static results from the two period model is
1.5share the fixed costs of trading assets and administering their portfolios, and reduceportfolios to professional portfolio managers.  By pooling their funds, investors canInvestors have DEMO good reasons for delegating management of their investment
and capital.the marginal costs of transaction and administration by employing specialised labour6  Moreover, certain financial DEMO are traded in units of such high value
funds that have no explicit entry or exit costs, investors who seek to ‘time’ their entry and exit frominvestors they can share the cost of entering and exiting DEMO mark Some investors may choose to delegate portfolio management because by pooling with otheret with those other investors.  In
option effects are shown to be of a magnitude that is significant economically.then presented for an investor DEMO has a 10 period investment horizon.  The real
often.the market can DEMO some of their transaction costs onto the fund’s other investors who trade less
1.5.1
6
requisite trading expertise. investment trusts, bond funds and country funds are examples of both unit size anddor require such trading expertise that ordinary investors DEMO forced to pool funds andelegate management if they wish to invest in those asset classes.  Real estate
investment management.  Financial service companies induce DEMO to delegateInvestors may also delegate management for reasons that are not closely related tor
matter of course.pension fund assets of many employees are placed DEMO pension fund managers as aadvantages on investment in certain qualifying funds.transaction services.  In addition, the tax code in both the US and the DEMO confers tax such as insurance, chequeing facilities, cash withdrawal or other consumetheir portfolio management by bundling that service with other financial products,7  In both countries the accrued
that their chosen manager has private information DEMO will generate a superiorInvestors may also choose to delegate portfolio management because they believeportfolio return.  There are a multitude of studies of the investment performadjusted returns, after expenses,  than benchmark portfolios that replicate the conclude that portfolios managed by institutional investors do not earn higher riskuptheir performance DEMO returns zero in the absence of fund manager trading based ‘add value’ because none of these studies has comprehensively demonstrated thatof the market portfolio.  Unfortunately, we are still unsure whether fund managersfund managers.  Whilst the DEMO are somewhat mixed, the preponderance of studies ance of
24
return
DEMO private information.
outperform the market portfolio after adjustment for risk and expenses.   Then thethe simple arithmetic of the market.measurement is a zero sum DEMO and some aggregate conclusions can be drawn from However, in terms DEMO returns relative to the market portfolio, performance8  Say that institutional investors as a group
7
8
Personal Equity Plans (PEPs) and personal DEMO in the UK.references.
For ins See Wylie (1997) for a discussion of the measurement of fund manager performance and furthertance 401(k) pension plans and Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) in the US, and
-institutional (private) investors must fall short of the
market portfolio return DEMO: the amount of the fund manager outreturn to the group of DEMO is managed by active managers, the more profound is this effect.  all the actively managed portfolios.  The higher the proportion of the market’s valuetrading execution costs of active managers and private investors; plus the expenses of
-performance; plus all
This simple idea helps to explain why some investors choose to pay the higher fees
available.  Investors who choose active portfolio management over passive portfolioof active management in markets where low fee, market replicating funds areexhibits semimanagement must bel–strong informational inefficiency and the average DEMO manager outieve at least one of three things.  Either, that the market-
exhibits strong informationaperforms the market portfolio after risk and expense adjustment.l DEMO where only some managers can form  Or, that the market
private information sets and the investor can at least partially identify that subset DEMO investors; such as, prodifferent average risk adjusted returns.which supports an efficient market equilibrium in which the two groups havevision of dynamic insurance between DEMO groups,
Moreover, for many investors the principal service of investment DEMO is theFor many asset classes, the choice of active over passive DEMO does not arisebecause there are no passively managed portfolios that track the market return.
rather than passive management in the UK and US equity DEMO exercise.  Noinformed allocation of funds to different asset classes which is DEMO definition an active netheless, it remains a mystery why more money DEMO delegated to active
The different types of investment vehicles available to investors reflect the1.5.2purposes of those investments.  Unit trusts and their US analogue mutual funds areadministered pension funds.  Unit trusts and mutual funds are also known as opedesigned to pool the capital of small investors, such as households and small selfended funds because the managers of the fund, with the agreement of the Trustees,Investment vehicles and investment products differentn-
9 W DEMO the average of fund manager performance is weighted by portfolio size.
25
managers.  Or, that there is a dynamic interaction between private investors DEMO
9
cash flows into and out of mutual funds but the change in DEMO price of units simplycan issue new units and redeem units to meet the demand of investors.  In this way
trust’s assets, divided by DEMO number of units on issue, plus brokerage costs, gives the refleare traded as with ordinary stocks. trusts, also known as investment trusts, DEMO listed on stock exchanges and the sharesthprice at which units can be redeemed.  The price at which units can be purchased iscts the change in market value of the underlying assets. The market value of the
DEMO
e redemption price, plus stamp duty, plus the entry fee.  DEMO contrast, closed-end
The defining characteristic of corporate pension plans is whether DEMO plan defines aMany investors work for companies that offer or manbasis upon retirement; or alternatively, defines a cbenefit that is a percentage of DEMO salary, to be paid to the employee on an ongoingontribution that DEMO a percentage ofdate an employee pension plan.
account.  Management of large DEMO benefit funds are typically delegated tothe employee’s current salary and is paid into the employee’s retirement savingsinstitutional investors who manage the fund as a DEMO (smoney for multiple corporate clients.  Smaller defined benefit investment approaches or asset classes.  Institutional investors manage pensionmanagement firms.  pooled fund will typically DEMO in unit trusts offered by the same invesother small plans to achieve the administrative savings discussed previously.  Thedelegate the management of their pension assets to managers who pool the plan with fund may be divided among DEMO institutional investors who specialise in different egregated) portfolio.  The plans generally
which again are usually invested in unit trusts and receive special tax DEMO number of investment management firms to offer their unit trusts to theCompanies offering or mandating defined contribution pension plans usually invite a contribution into DEMO unit trusts chosen by the employee.  In the US this type DEMO as the pension investment vehicle.  The firm then pays theindiviof the DEMO of money invested in mutual funds.  In the UK and US DEMO investing, in 401(k) plans, is partially responsible for the DEMO expansionduals who are not part of corporate pension plans have private pension plans definedtment
management firm Unless otherwise specified, consumption, and corporations which are providing DEMO plans for employees.otherwise spThis thesis is concerned with the decisions of investors and fund managers.  Unlessecified investors refers to the principal to whom private individuals andfund manager refers to private individuals, who are saving for futureor institutional investor or investment
27
corporations delegate their savings and pension assets DEMO  There are,Insurance firms have very large portfolios ononetheless, a number of other organisations in which portfolios are managed.f financial assets and managing DEMO
However, households and corporations do not usually choose between insuranceportfolios professionally DEMO one of the core competencies of insurance firms.products on the basis of portfolio performance of insurance and investment products.in insurance firms does not generate DEMO decisions that are the focus of this thesis.
Consequently, the management DEMO portfolios – if they do it is because of bundling
10
Hedge funds provide specialist and highly active management of funds, which is
terms of volume of assets traded and may take highly leveraged, high risk positionsessentially a private service to wealthy individuals.  They are usually very active inthe hedge fund manager.  Unlike unit trust or pension fund managers, DEMO contracts of to maximise the return to private information or arbitrage opportunities identified by
private equity, such as, leverage buy out stakes and DEMO capital positions.  Whilst part of overall delegated portfolio management.master limited partnerships DEMO essentially in a private market and are not a lof interest in terms of manager incentives and investor decisions, hedge funds andcomponents.  Master DEMO partnerships are US based investment vehicles whichedge fund managers’ with investors contain explicit performance relatedPartner is essentially the manager of the assets and receives DEMO based fees forconfer preferential tax treatment on up to 499 partners in a portfolio.  The Generalthat service.  Master limited partnerships mostly invest in DEMO risk portfolios of
h
arge
firms increased from 252 to 558 and the number of Between 1985 and 1995 the number of US mutual DEMO investment managementThere are now a huge number of fund managers vying for the funds of investors.10 The portfolio performance of insurance fund managers is DEMO readily available to households.funds increased from 1528 to
of institutional investors eager to manage their money.  (NYSE) at the end of 1996.5761.11   That compares to 2907 companies listed on the DEMO York Stock Exchange12  Corporate pension plan trustees also face a large DEMO
From choose unit trusts or pension managers that invest in equities, DEMO, real estate orcharacteristics.  Firstly, the asset class in which the DEMO invests.  Investors canan investor’s perspective fund managers are differentiated by several
DEMO
Funds are also classified by their investment objective which may include the degree small market capitalisation, contrarian, recovery, special situations and many others.in which they invest, such as, high tech or health care.bonds and DEMO asset classes.  Other funds are simply defined by the industry sectorof DEMO versus capclasses fund managers are further differentiated by the investment style of theircommodities They include growth, portfolio.  These styles are numerous, loosely defined and overlap considerably.in most every major market or region of the world.  Within these assetital growth that is sought, or the balance between equities,aggressive growth, value, general, high market capitalisation,
The terms investor and fund manager do not nearly describe all the roles fulfilled
of DEMO within the investment industry is best illustrated by example.  Take, forwithin the unit trust and pension fund industries.  The diversity of roles and the depth instance, the decision path in a defined benefit penmonthly contributions to fund the corporate pension plan.  The trustee board ission fund.  DEMO company makes
agent of the beneficiaries and the principal of the investment management firm.management firm to manage the pension fund.  Therefore, the trustee DEMO is theporWithin the investment management firm an employee is assigned the role ofthemselvethen chooses financial assets, which are issued by companies and institutions whichboard and principal of the employee fund manager.  Of course, the portfolio DEMO and previous employees of the firm.  The trustee board choosrequired to DEMO the interests of the beneficiaries of the fund, who are currenttfolio DEMO  So the investment management firm is the agent of the trustees DEMO management who ultimately choose real projects in which to investes an investment
Mutual Fund Fact Book 1996. NYSE Fact Book 1996.
1112
firms.  Further, tstand consultants who advise trustee boards on the choice DEMO investment management the pension money.   Between the trustee board and the investment management firm independent financial advisors to assist with, among other things, the choThese relationships are mirrored in the unit trust industry.  Many DEMO employmanages that trust.  Independent measurement agencies report the performance of the DEMO  The chosen investment management firm determines which of its employeesperformance measurement DEMO  he portfolio return is independently measured and reported by aice of DEMO
29
industry in terms of decisions and incentives.  managers, who choose financial assets.  In this context it is natural to study thechoices: DEMO choosing investment management firms, who choose portfoliounit trust.  The investment management industry is characterised by a series of
Active portfolio matiming; or stock selection.  Asset allocation is a decision that no investor can avoid.nagers can add value in three ways: by asset allocation; market
more specialist DEMO in each class, as do many US pension plans.  Within aninvestor makes an allocation of funds between asset classes and then chooses one DEMO many UK pension fHowever, many investors delegate this decision to a DEMO manager, as is the caseunds or investors that choose ‘balanced’ unit DEMO  Or the
when the manager believes the market return in the DEMO period will be above its long involves holding less cash and increasing the portfolio’s exposure to market riskinvestment class an investment manager can add DEMO by timing the market.  This
that will exhibit returns in the DEMO selectors, in contrast, seek to identify individual assets or sectors of the market low.  Market timers are concerned with factors that affect the market as a whole.run average, and the converse when tht period that exceed the return commensurate withe market return is expected to be historically
DEMO
How portfolios are managed
information that is idiosyncratic to the stock or sector.their exposure to priced DEMO factors.13  In this case the manager is searching for
the relationship DEMO the investor’s expected utility of wealth (or firm value) andAn optimal asset allocation is an investor specific exercise.  Itdiscount rate and the loss function associated with being uthe moments of the portfolio return distribution.  Secondly, upon the investor’s timeessentially the solution of an investor specific dynamic optimal control problem.consumption requirements (or firm liabilities) in the future.  Asset allocation isexpected market return for the next period which is conditioned on those DEMO  a relation between measurable economic variables and the market return, to obtain an Market timing is also an essentially quantitative problem.  The nable to meet anticipated depends upon, firstly,manager must model
30
Stock selection can also be purely quantitative.  Managers taking proprietary dataset in order to delineate themselves from other managers and sustainhave (or give the impression of having) either new quantitative techniques or athis approach must ke
‘fundamental’ analysis to arrive at estimates of the future returns on individuala competitive advantage.  However, most stock selecting managers undertaprivate information derived from private briefings, DEMO visits and the like.stocks.  The inputs to this analysis are publicly DEMO information and semiAnother not common.and behaviour of other management ‘game’ by trading only on the basis of an understanding of the positionspecific assets or DEMO variables and instead act strategically in the assetconceivable approach to asset management is to ignore information oninstitutional and private investors.  However, this approach DEMO -
Association, reports that 77 of its 79 members managed a DEMO of over The 1996 Fund Management Survey of the UK Institutional Fund Managers£1,500
hold derivative securities or short positions.benefit from that information if DEMO already hold the stock or the fund’s trust deed allows them to Managers are also looking for stocks that will under-perform.  But managers can only directly
13
manages 4 percent.  The investment management firms manage firms: the top DEMO manages 66 percent of the funds and the bottom quartileinsurance companies.  DEMO are separately listed or privately owned companies.  other financial services companies DEMO as investment banks, cthe largest investment management firms are the investment DEMO arms ofownership structure of the investment management firms is quite diverse.  DEMO ofbillion.  These funds are heavily concentrated in the largest investment management DEMO in unit trust funds.  The£423 billion on
the investment management firms DEMO the IFMA survey employed 62 investmenInvestment management firms are the employers of portfolio managers.  On averagea category which includes analysts, portfolio managers and DEMO desk staff.  Theinvestment management firms managed an average of 48 separate DEMO fund1.5.4The investment management industries in the two countries are similar in mostlion and unit trust portfolios A comparison of the UK and US investment DEMO industries£50 million. t staff;
31
ommercial banks and
£114
respects, DEMO it is easier to describe their differences.  Both the UK and DEMO US have
corporations to wind up their defined benefit plans, or DEMO commonly close them to large corporate pension fund sectors.  In both DEMO there is a trend forand have a greater proportion of the fund invested in foreign assets.  defined contribution plans.  UK pension funds are DEMO heavily invested in equitiesin the US where nearly one half of pension funds by investment volume are innew members, in favour of defined contribution plans.  This trend is more adva
nced
In the US, the DEMO (PBGC).  There is no analogue to the PBGC in the UK.  This mayset by a Federal Government agency called the Pension Benefits Guaranteerued pension benefits of beneficiaries are guaranteed up to a limit
which DEMO the largest investment management firms based in London in March 1996. data and wrote the report in its entirety.  The IFMA survey was sent to the 79 members of the IFMA  (Wylie 1996b)  The DEMO advised on the construction of the survey, compiled and analysed the
DEMO
behalf of UK corporate pension clients and £103
milportfolios and 18 unit trust portfolios each.  Pension fund portfolios averaged
14
pension funds are highly varied in their asset allocation.  Another stark difference inpartially explain the profound asset allocation herding of UK pension funds.  US
choose a single investment management firm which mpension fund management in the DEMO countries is that many UK trustee boardscontrast, almost always make their DEMO asset allocation choices and then choose one within constraints and manages the fund as a single portfolio.  US corporations, indesired investment style within DEMO asset class.  US pension fund management isor more managers for each DEMO class and perhaps even ofund assets.UK where five investment management firms manage over one half of all pensiocorrespondingly more specialised and management is less DEMO than in theakes asset allocation decisions ne manager for each
15
32
The most striking difference between the unit trust industry in the UK DEMO the mutual n
defined contribution plans in the US which use mutual funds as their investmenteighth of that figure.  The difference is partially explained by the larger role ofunit trusts that charge no entry fee or DEMO fee.  In the US approximately one half ofvehicles.  Another striking difference is the near absence of actively managedcharge an entry fee of less DEMO 4 percent.  Finally, index funds all domestic equity funds are no load.  Whereas few UK domestic equity unit trustsof equities listed on the NYSE, whereas UK unit trusts in total managed fund industry in the US is scale.  In 1996, US mutual funds managed $1,346 DEMO of US managed funds. market portfolio weights or track the market return less than one  UK
– form a larger proportion by– funds that replicate
putting too many eggs in one basket.managers, through mitigation of the risk of comparative performance evaluation; company securityamount to over one half of UK GDP.  Asset allocation herding may serve the interests of:  investment holders, through reduced risksguaraGovernment may be forced to act in the beneficiaries’ favour not face; and beneficiaries because if many funds become insolvent simultaneously the UKmanaged as single balanced portfolios, the interquartile range of portfolio weights allocated to UK The WM Compntee.  However, from the point of DEMO of the nation, asset allocation herding looks rather likeany’s 1995 study DEMO asset allocation herding found that among UK pension plans that a company will face contribution increases which competitors do which represents an implicit
equities DEMO only 4 percent.  This herding is not just a curiosity.  Defined benefit pension fund assets
15
1.6approaches zero.  Hence a perfectly efficient market even in the weak form is neveris perfectly efficient but rathattained.  Fama (1991) argues that the interesting question is not whether the marketexpenses. Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) DEMO the intuitive notion that as afund managers can earn risk adjusted returns that exceed the management fees andmarket approaches efficiency, to indicate that those inAs discussed previously, the choice of active management by some investors appears Market efficiency assumptionsvestors believe that the market is sufficiently inefficient thater how DEMO to efficiency it is.  However, none of thethe magnitude of the force moving it toward efficiency
efficiency of financial markets. research presented in DEMO thesis is directed toward determining the degree of
actions of some agents are consistent with those agents believing that the equity
market is substantially DEMO  It is reasonable when studying outcomes in thesubstantIn the following chapters DEMO is nowhere assumed that financial markets deviateially from efficiency.  At several DEMO it is argued or assumed that the
behaviour even if there is no objective reason to believe that those beliefs are correct.  market to make assumptions about the beliefs of agents that are consistent with their
DEMO
optimally, by ignoring the recommendations of the optimal contracting literature and DEMO taken as aentering into contracts which have no explicit performance related components.  It is thesis is This approach is consistent with the view of optimal contracting taken here.  Thenot concerned with the question of whether investors are acting subn empirical fact that pension fund and unit trust contracts DEMO not-
beliefs about market efficiency are taken as given.typically contain these provisions and no further consideration is given to the mattervestors and fund managers, in optimisation frameworks in which  their
The remainder of the thesis is set out as follows.1.7 The remainder of the thesis
decisions of inbecause DEMO is not the focus of the research.  Likewise, the thesis attempts to explain
Chapter 2  contains the first essay on financial markets and the rise of delegated
incentives; contrasts the optimisation problems faced by private and inmanagement in the UK and US; reviews the empirical literature on fund managerstitutional
34
Chapter 3investors; and presents conjectures on the relationship between differences in private phenomena.  investor and institutional investor incentives and unexplained equity market  DEMO the first part of the second essay which studies the accuracy of
Chapter 4  strengths and weaknesses of the data.  The methodology of DEMO accuracy tests ispresents the dataset employed in the study of herding and discusses the
industry is presented.of pension fund managers.  To begin, a DEMO discussion of the UK pension fund
developed as a dynamic programming problem.  Then a two period model isdeveloped and a closed form solution attained.  Propositions which summarise thesignificant results of the model are presented.  Finally, results of a simulation study
Chapter 7horizon of 10 years.of the comparative DEMO results are presented for an investor who has an investment    DEMO the contribution and meaning of the thesis.  It concludes with
a DEMO of studies that follow from the research presented here.
portfolio management.  DEMO chapter: documents the rise of delegated portfolio
reviewed.  Then the nature of herding theories and herding measures is analysed.  measures of herding.  DEMO theoretical and empirical herding literature is first
Chapter 6 Chapter 5    presents the model of investors hiring and firing deccontains the first part of the third essay which studies the hiring and firing isions.  The model is
Finally, the results of the accuracy tests are presented and discussed at length.discussed.  The herding measures are applied to a UK portfolio holdings dataset.
2.1 Introduction
35
In several branches of finance it is assumed that DEMO can be differentiated in
Chapter 2 Financial Markets and the Rise of Delegated
some fundamental way.  For example, many models assume that there DEMO informed
ynamic market equilibrium, reflect this diversity.
dendowments.  It is accepted that the portfolio choices of investors, and hence thetheir investment horizons, DEMO status, location, trading costs, risk preferences orand uninformed traders in DEMO market.  Other studies assume that investors differ by
institutional investors differ DEMO thinvestors can hold the same stock, in the same weight in DEMO respective portfolios,However, there are few studies of the market equilibrium DEMO recognise that twoand yet face radically different retheir end of period wealth.which, in totality, demonstrate that the portfolio pay  Nonetheless, there is DEMO a body of empirical studieslationships between price changes in the stock and
He uses the US Federal Reserve question of differences in the incentives DEMO by private and institutional investors.16 is way.  Cohen (1998) directly DEMO theFederal Flow of Funds
how they relate through time.  The main DEMO is that institutional investors reduceholdings after rises in the market.their holdings of US equities and private investors correspondingly increase their
aggregate holdings of US DEMO by private investors and institutional investors and -offs to private investors and data to examine the
to an institutional investor the market equilibrium is DEMO  Consequently, every time a private investor delegates the management of a portfoliothings equal, to choose different portfolios and have different hedging demands.-offs, DEMO and institutional investors can be expected, all other
The differenstate contingent DEMO on market outcomes if not for two facts.  Firstly, because they face differentce in the incentives of private and institutional investors might have DEMO
Portfolio Management
financial markets in the UK and US have witnessed a massive transit DEMO the controlSecondly, neither group haThe purpose of this essay is tof DEMO of financial assets from households to investment management firms.s an insignificant role in the market.  Since the mid 1960s, o argue that the DEMO of the control of portfolios of
36
dynamic market equilibrium.  portfolio DEMO makers may be the key to understanding certain aspects of thebecause of the fundamental differences in the incentives faced by private investorsequities represents a DEMO structural change in the markets for those securitiesand institutional investors.  Moreover, this diversity in the incentives faced by
The tables and figures at DEMO end of this chapter illustrate the rise of delegated
that documents the transition of control of equities in the UK and US; then to review investors what is known about the differences in incentives faced by DEMO and privatequestions of this chapter.Those questions are obviously of interest in their own right but are not central to themanageto delegate management of all DEMO part of their investment in equities.  Nor does themarket equilibrium.  The data does not explain why so many households have chosen data show DEMO of equity portfolios in the UK and US. The purpose is to collate dataand then discuss why those differences should be expected to impact DEMO
her the forces driving this transfer are the same in the UK and the US.
In this context, a prime motivation for studying the history of the transfer of control
-specified.
the rise of delegated portfolio DEMO on long term studies of the equity market of equities, even DEMO studying the cause of that transfer, is to do with the DEMO of ownership may be mismarket equilibrium phenomena that do not account for the changing level ofprivate investors significantly affects the market equilibrium, then tests of equityequilibrium.  If the level of ownership of equities by insti
tutional investors versus
investors in a general equ Brennan (1993) addresses the DEMO in the incentives faced by fund managers and privateilibrium framework similar to that of the CAPM.
16
2.2end of this chapter.ease of exposition, all tables and figures referred to in the text are presenmanagement to a prominent position in the financial DEMO of the US and UK.  For In this section a series DEMO tables and charts illustrate the rise of delegated portfolioThe rise of delegated portfolio management
unit trusts and insurance companies.  The into three principal sectors.  of financial intermediaries in the UK economy.  Those intermediaries can be DEMO Table 2.1 and figure 2.3 show the level of UK financial assets held by various typesdeal.  Table 2.2 and the corresponding figure 2.4 show the level of financial assets of Since 1967 the assets of financial DEMO building societies.  Other sectorsInvestment management are the household sector and the DEMO sector.  banking sectorries in the UK have expanded a great encompasses DEMO funds, comprehends UK banks
management sector has grown from 47 percent DEMO GDP in 196UK financial sectors since 1967 as percentages of UK GDP.  The investmentfor nominal GDP.  management sector in the period 1969 to DEMO was 15.7 percent versus 10.6 percentend of 1997.  The annualised geometric DEMO growth rate of the investment7 to 202 percent at the
Assets in the banking sector have grown at a marginally faster rate than those DEMO the
1967 to 264 percent in 1997 at an annualised rate of 15.8 percent.  The assets of theinvestment management sector.  They grew from DEMO percent of GDP at the end ofbanking sector include nonThe equity holdings of the investment management sector grew at 17.6 percent perinvestment management, foreign and household sectors in the period 1967 to 1997.banking in the period.  liabilities.  These figures record the growth of London as a centre for internationalin the period 1967 to 1997.  Table 2.3The total market capitalisation of listed UK equities grew at 15.4 percent per annum-sterling denominated assets, and lik shows the level of UK equity holdings in theewise for bank DEMO
2.2.1
The UK experience
ted at the
37
annum versus a growth rate of only 11.8 percentUK household sector in DEMO period December 1975 to December 1997.   for the UK equity holdings of the
to 23 percent.  Figure 2.5 illustrates the changing proportions of UK equities held by
percentage of their total financial assets.  UK pension funds have not much changed
Ideally the changes in the relative equity DEMO of institutional versus private investors would be
vestment management, foreign and DEMO
1997.  There is no straight forward way of undoing the double DEMO exceeds the total market capitalisation of UK listed equities in several years between 1967 and eillustrated in terms of the percentage of the market DEMO of the UK equity market held byequity levels series, the sum DEMO equity holdings of  the inUS in the next section.  However, DEMO of double counting in the Office for National Statisticsach group over time, as is done when describing the rise of delegated portfolio management in the
UK equity market.  Equity portfolio management is a core competency for many insurancetable 2.3 insurance companies, long term funds in particular, in DEMO hold a large portion of the   The investment management sector es.  Insurance companies are included in the investment management sector because a largeas defined here includes insurance companies.  As shown in
part of the equities managed by insurance companies are part of the assets of pooled pension DEMO managed by insurance companies or personal pension products.  Othservices.  The pension and savings related equity portfolios of insurance companies are substitutes for companies DEMO support the savings function of products that bundle savings and insuranceer equity portfolios of insurance
be noted that a part of the equity holdings DEMO insurance companies relates to rdelegation of portfolio management, which is the DEMO interest of this section.  However, it shouldportfolio management on their own behalf.  savings and those equity holdings do not represent portfolios that individual households could manage that households could otherwise undertake on their own behalf DEMO anyisk sharing rather than
7 percent, and for insurance companies (long term funds) the rise is from 14 percentsectors.the components of the investment management sector and the foreign and householdforeign and household sectors are summed, then the proportion of that sum heTable 2.4 shows that if the DEMO equity holdings of the investment management,to 57 percent.The corresponding figures for the investment management sector are a rise from 41the household sector fell DEMO 49 percent at the end of 1979 to 20 percent in 1997.cent from 1979 to 1997.  The corresponding figures for unit trusts are 4 percent to   The proportion of equities in pension funds rose from DEMO to 27ld by
38
per
Table 2.5 and figure 2.6 show the UK equity holdings of UK financial sectors as a
17
18
compani
DEMO
18
allocation was 52 percent and at year end 1997 it was 52 DEMO  The increase in the the allocation of their assets to UK DEMO over the period of interest.  In 1968 their managed rather than DEMO allocation change.  In contrast insurance companies haveproportion of equities held by DEMO funds reflects their increase in total personal pensions.  with their increased DEMO as managers of pooled pension funds and products forto 42 percent in 1997.  The increased allocation of insurance companies is consisincreased the percentage of their assets held in UK equities from 17 percent in 1967assets tent
DEMO
an annual basis from 1966 to 1997.  Figure 2.7 presents the DEMO 2.6 shows the net acquisition of UK equity holdings of UK financial sectors on  net flow of
the total year end market capitalisation of listed UK equities.  Households have been equities, averaged over eight year DEMO, to UK financial sectors as a percentage ofhighlights the massive flow DEMO equities to pension funds from the mid 1960s through net sellers of equities in all but three years in the period 1966 to 1997.  Figure 2.7
89 the annual net
er
purchases of UK equities by DEMO funds as a percentage of end of year totin time, averaging DEMO 0.9 and 1.0 percent of total market value per annum ovflow equities to insurance companies has been on a smaller scale but more consistent DEMO market value was 1.5 percent, 3.1 percent and 1.8 percent respectively.  Theto the late 1980s.  In the periods 1966the periods 1974 -73, DEMO and 1982-
al UK
-81, 1982-89 and 1990-1997.
years from year DEMO 1993.  number of holdings increased by 80 percent from 5 million DEMO 9 million in the four
level than pension funds and insurance companies.  Nonetheless, unit trust holdingsFlows to unit trusts have been consistent and DEMO in each period but at a lower
number of unit trust holdings of households, pension funds and other investors.  Thehave grown at 17.3 DEMO per annum fThe US experience rom a low base.  Table 2.7 DEMO the
Reserve’s These sectors are a subset of the financial sectors defined in the US Federalvarious US financial sectors at year end in the DEMO 1967 to end of year 1998.Tab2.2.2le 2.8, and its corresponding figure DEMO, show the financial asset levels of theFlow of Funds publication.  They are the sectors which hold a large
volume of financial assets; other than, households, noninvestment management sectorunds of both public and private organisations, plus-profit organisations, and
insurance foreign
federal DEMO agencies.  For the purpose of this section the sectors can becombined DEMO the the separate sectors.  Figure 2.9 depicts the level of financial DEMO of the differentbank sector.  Commercial banks and the savings institutions.  The  and
private pension funds hThere is a degree of double counting in tables 2.8 and 2.9.  At the end of 1998,effect is material to the discussion.For simplicity this doublheld $31 billion in mutual fund shares DEMO $112 billion in money market fund shares.  market funds and $31 DEMO in deposits with the bank sector.  Insurance companiessectors in nominal terms.  eld $564 billion in mutual fund shares, $58 billion in moneye counting is only considered in what follows where its
reported in table 2.8 DEMO at a geometric average rate of 11.0 percent per annumBetween December 1969 and December 1998 the total financial assets in the sectorsgrowth rate of DEMO sector assets is not simply the result of high asset returns inthe same period nominal US GDP grew at 7.7 percent per annum.  The 11.0 percentis derived from holdings of assets with high and low historical DEMO and periods of this period.  To see this consider the following DEMO  The percentage growth flowing in.meaning that funds flow out to meet DEMO savings objectives of investors as well asperiod must be a significant portion of the investment horizon of many investorshigh returns to financial assets and DEMO of low returns.  Moreover, a 31 yearfigure .  In
40
DEMO remain
,
The growth of total assets masks the disparity in DEMO of the different financial
19finds little support for large scale de   Poterba (1998) looks at the question of whether de
they grow DEMO and leave the workforce will lead to a reduction in asset returns.  He-cumulation in the foreseeable future.-cumulation of financial assets by ‘baby
grouped as follows.  Pension fmutual funds and money market funds, plus bank personal DEMO and estates make up
sectors.  The growth rates of the investment DEMO sector and foreign sector, at
19
those of the bank sector and insurance sectors at 8.2 percent and DEMO percent. 13.3 and 15.0 percent respectively in the period 1969 to 1998, are much higher than
apparent in figure 2.9.  In 1969 the DEMO financial assets of private pensionThe structural change in financial intermediation that has occurred in the US is also
and bank personal trusts and estates, amounted to only 35 percent of the GDP of thefunds, state and local government pension funds, mutual funds, money market fundsUSmutual savings banks DEMO credit unions increased only modestly as a percentage ofcombined financial assets of commercial banks, savings and loans institutions,.  By the end of DEMO that figure was 152 percent of GDP.21  In contrast, the
investment management exceeded less than one half that of the bank sector.  At the end of 1998, assets undermarket value of financial assets held by the US investment management sector wasgovernance and oversight of capital in the DEMO a fundamental change in the flow of savings to productive projects and the the ratio of value of assets controlled by investment managers versus DEMO sectors assets by 82 percent.  This change in US economy.
41
DEMO under institutional management.  Table 2.9 shows the level of assets in DEMO nominal growth rates it is difficult to assess the real magnitude of the growth of oduct
(GDP).  Figure 2.9 is a comparative DEMO of the same data.  It is clear from thisFederal Reserve defined DEMO as a percentage of US gross domestic prgrowth has continued through 1998.  The growth in assets under management2.9) has grown rapidly as a DEMO of GDP only since the early 1980s, anfigure that delegated portfolio DEMO in the US (the bottom five series in figure d that
DEMO in the assets of the personal sector.Funds reports the assets of bank personal trusts and estates as a separate series rather than including21 These DEMO are adjusted for the double counting discussed previously in section 2.2.2.  DEMO is the beginning date for this comparison because that is the year in which Federal Flow of
20
GDP, going from 73 percent in 1967 to 83 percent at the end of 1998.  In 1969, DEMO
20
2.2.2.1 US retirement savings
22
42
1996, $334 billion was from the 401(k) plans of private pension funds (counted here
household, tax preferred pension schemes, was at least 74 percent at the end of 1996.the investment management sector, that arise from corpora
financial assets since 1980.reflects, and at the same time may have been a cause of, DEMO high returns to US
Pension reserves, which are financial claimbillion (23 percent of GDP) at the end of 1967 to $8,770 billion (103 percent ofs of US households, have risen from $195
($643 billion).billion), life insurance companies ($1,401 billion) and the DEMO Federal Governmentpension funds ($4,355 billion), state and local gGDP) at the end of 1998.  Those 1998 household claims are the liabilities of privateovernment pension funds ($2,371
Of the $3,233 billion invested in mutual funds and money market funds at the end of
households DEMO mutual funds through Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs).  Theas part of private pension fund assets), and a further $620 billion was invested DEMO of funds invested under Keogh plans (for that is not readily DEMO  Therefore, putting the Federal Government andself employed persons) is tax DEMO
insurance company liabilities to one side, the percentage of financial assets DEMO byte, government or
Table 2.10 presents the holdings of US equities DEMO US financial sectors, including2.2.2.2 US equity holdings by sector
market by DEMO versus institutional owners.  Figures 2.10 and 2.11 depict this datahouseholds.  Table 2.11 presents the perthe end of 1998 those figures were 41 percent, 51 percent and 7 percenthouseholds, 26 percent by US institutional ingraphically.  DEMO 1969, 69 percent of the US equity market was directly held DEMO of Funds, Fourth Quarter 1998.centage of direct ownership of the US DEMO vestors and 3 percent by foreigners.  By
Source is the Federal DEMO  Warther (1995), Edwards and Zhang (1998) and Edelen and Warner (1999) find a strong
22
23relationship between flows to US DEMO funds and returns to US financial assets.
23
portfolios to institutional portfolios shows little sign of abathe change since 1969 DEMO the percentage of the US equity market held by the different managers and the rise of mutual funds and SLGE retirement funds.highlights the decline DEMO the importance of bank personal trusts and erespectively.  Figure 2.10 shows DEMO the migration of equities from householdting.  Figure 2.11 shows
a major DEMO in risk borne by the tax payers who ultimately insure those funds.The asset allocationmarket held in these funds has risen from 0.5 percent in DEMO to 10.3 percent in 1997.  in 1998 as depicted in figure DEMO  Consequently, the percentage of the US equitymoney under management.  Table DEMO displays the US equity holdings of USThis trend is not just the inevitable result of institutional investors having morethe increased demand of institutional management DEMO US equities reflects threefinancial sectortheir aggregate portfomajor trends.  Firstly, state and local government employee funds have increaseds as a percentage of their total DEMO assets.  The table shows that change in state and local government DEMO funds represents lio weight in equities from just 7 percent in 1967 to 62 percent
increased from 6.1 percent iSecondly, the percentage of the US equity market held by private pension fundsprivate pension funds.increased only slightly DEMO the period.  Such is the scale of the increase in assets DEMO despite the fact that asset allocation to US equities of private pension funds n 1967 to 14.5 percent at the end of 1998.  The increase
43
states as equity
25
Finally, a huge volume of money has flowed into US equity mutual funds in theaggregate portfolio of US DEMO funds has increased from 38 percent to 68 percent.1990s.  In the DEMO 1991 to 1998 the value weighting of US equities in the
Further, the percentage of the US equity market held by these funds has increased
means the investment management sector plus the insurance sector.
percent of DEMO US equity market came under the control of mutual fund managers.from 6.4 percent to 16.3 percent.  In just seven years in the 1990s, DEMO additional 10  Where institutional investors
State and local government employee (SLGE) funds are not insured by the US Pension Benefits
24
Guarantee Corporation (PBGC).
25
24
components of the investment management sector.  In DEMO, the figure
1977 US households have been net household sector to institutional investors.  Table 2.13 shows that in every year since dynamic process by which equities DEMO been transferred year by year from theTables 2.13 and 2.14 and the corresponding figures 2.13 and 2.14 illustrate thesellers of US equities.
44
of DEMO in five periods since 1949.  For each category of stock ownership, theFigure 2.13 captures the flows of equity ownership between the different categories
DEMO, is averaged over 10 year periods and presented in figure 2.13.  In the periodannual net flow of equities, as a percentage of the total capital194910 year period except 1979US listed equities.by US households was 2.8 DEMO of the end of year total market capitalisation ofincluding households were net buyers.  Listed corporations wershare repurchase programs.  In each of the four DEMO after 1958 households werenet sellers of US equities.  In the period DEMO listed corporations were the only net sellers of stocks, all other DEMO; a period when US corporations undertook massive-88 the average annual saisation DEMO the equitye net sellers in eachle of equities
Table 2.13 shows the transit of equities from household portfolios to mutual funds
26
ownership of DEMO funds the reduction was only exposure of US households to US equity market risk is in part offset by theaccelerating through the 1990s.  Table 2.14 however, sequities by US households was ownership of US mutual funds by US households.  In 1996 direct purchases of US-$281 billion but after accounting for house-$67 billion. hows that the reduction inhold
volume of funds DEMO by Table 2.15 and the accompanying figure 2.15 record the astonishing increase in theThe flow of money to US mutual funds accelerated through the DEMO to 1997.US mutual funds and the number of mutual fund
equities, DEMO market capitalisation, owned by US households was 58.2 percent at year DEMO 1979 falling  Figures 2.10 and 2.13 taken together pose an interesting DEMO  The percentage of US listed
to 40.7 percent at the end DEMO 1998.  In the first 10 years of that period households were DEMO sellers ofentrepreneur increases the recorded equity ownership of households.be counted as a household which is selling a newly listeresult is made possible in part DEMO the volume of IPOs in this period.  In an IPO, an entrepreneur may2.8 percent of the market to other parties.  In the next 10 years the figure averages to 1.9 percent.  This
d equity.  DEMO part of the IPO retained by the
26
market fund accounts at the end of 1997.of the 126 million full DEMO workers in the US labour force) and 32 million moneyaccounts.  US households had 119 million mutual fund accounts (nearly one for each
TherHowever, given the large fixed cost associated with active overseas investment it isinto investments of foreign private investors and foreign institutional investment.reasoe is no readily DEMO breakdown of foreign investment in US financial assetsnable to assume that a high percentage of foreign held US financial assets are
45
The UK DEMO US data suggest that the observed large scale delegation of the2.2.3position of foreign investors in US financial assets, the proportion of the US financial controlled by foreign institutional investors.  In fact, because of the now DEMO controlled by institutional investors may be understated here.Implications of UK and US data
management of equities portfolios is driven by some aspect of saving DEMO retireincomeA natural question is why private investors have chosen to save for retirementincome is a large part of the total growth of institutional equity DEMO  In both countries the growth of portfolios managed for the provision DEMO retirement through institutionally managed portfolios rather than just manage their ownment.
equities from private investors to institutional investors?  is, how has the equity market equilibrium been affected by the transfer of control ofexplain much of DEMO demand for financial intermediation in general and each of those portfolio.  DEMO information, taxes, transactions costs and administrative costs control of equity portfolios.  Although, identifying and separating changes inchanges in information asymmetry, the tax code and costs on the transfer of thefactorrelation to the volume of DEMO management of equities would be difficult.information asymintrinsically interesting but not The question of why investors choose to delegate portfolio management iss may be important DEMO  It may be possible to estimate the relative effects ofmetry and DEMO cost, and establishing their causality in
central to the question addressed DEMO this essay; which
substantial transfer of control of equities from private DEMO to institutionalThe UK and the US data discussed above shows that since 1967 there has been a
1.55 and the US ratio 1.66.  UK and the US from 1975 to 1996.  At the beginning of that period the UK ratio was sector domestic equity holdings to institutional domestic equity holinvestors in both the DEMO and the US.  Figure 2.16 shows the ratio of householddings in DEMO the
decline since then.  end 1985 to year end 1992 the DEMO ratio rose1997.  The US ratio fell to 0.8 at the end DEMO 1998.  However, during the period yearas depicted in figure 2.7.  DEMO UK ratio continued downward to 0.35 by year endyears, principally as DEMO result of pensThe UK ratio of private to institutional equity holdings fell rapidly in the next fourion fund buying of domestic equities in the DEMO, from 1.10 to 1.36.  It has been in steep
A comparison of figures 2.4 and 2.9 shows that in both the US and DEMO UK the rapid exceeded $500bn. sign of abating.  In both 1997 DEMO 1998 the net sales of equities by US householdsslightly below that of the US ratio in 1975, in 1996 it was less than one half that ofWhilst the UK ratio of private to institutional domestic equity DEMO was onlythe US and has been little changed since 1991.  The DEMO in the US ratio shows no
46
1980s.  The future path DEMO the ratio of private to institutional equity holdings in thepension plans will becoUS and UK is not clear.  We should anticipate that corporate and governmentrise of investment management assets as a percentage of GDP began in DEMO earlyme more mature in their liability structure over time.  In
which DEMO the net contribution to these funds will fall as beneficiary paymentsportfolio weight in bonds and credit market instruments, to
2.3 means the relationship between outcomes, over which an
A review of literature on fund manager incentivesincentives
agent as a result of the outcome.  This thesis is concerned with the differenceecThe term onomic agent has some control, and the associated reward which accrues to that
match asset income to a more precisely estimated DEMO stream.  expected to hold a greater increase.  Moreover, as the DEMO of their liabilities matures, pension plans can be
decisions abetween the incentives faced by private investors and institutional investors and DEMO concomitant market outcomes that arise from those differences.
one relationship between changes in the market value of the portfolio held andA simplifying aspect of DEMO private investor’s portfolio choice problem is the one-to-
consumption or dischanges in the investor’s end of period wealth.  Under reasonable assumptions about sense the incentives of the private investor are very simple.  Moreover, the samedate DEMO an uncomplicated function of the interim total returns on the portfolio.  DEMO this -saving, the value of the private investor’s portfolio at any DEMO
collection.maximise firm wealth, or a government authority, which seeks to minimise future tax basic incentive structure applies whether the investor is a corporation, which seeks to
The incentives of fund managers are more complicated.  The first component of aninvestment manager’s incentives armanagement contract between the investor and DEMO manager.  Fees are related to portfolio outcomes by the explicit clauses DEMO the investmente the management fees received each period.
fund managers.  Virtually DEMO contract includes a flat fee which is a percentage ofThere are a variety of fees levied on private investors by mutual fund and pension
DEMO have flat fees of between 43 and 56 basis points.  Halpern DEMO Fowler(1992a) studied US equity pension fund managthe value of the DEMO managed in a period.  Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishnyers and found that one half of all
For private investors managing a portfolio on their DEMO behalf, incentives are straight
ng problem is addressed in many studies, the most important of
agent’s lifetime; with the maximum attained under the assumption that at all futureand the Consumption CAPM of Breeden (1979).  which are the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model (ICAPM) of Merton (1973) dynamic programmidecision points an optimal portfolio is chosen, whatever the future time or state.  This portfolio that maximises the sum (integral) of discounted expected utilities over the
2.3.1 Investment management fees
2.3.1.1 Description DEMO management fees
47
forward.  Under reasonable assumptions, the investor can be expected to choose a
observed fees of 25 to 40  basis points for active equity manage(1991) surveyed 133 of the largest state and local government schemes.  DEMO of portfolios of
portfolios of international assets; lower for fixed income DEMO (5$250 million or more.  The fees they observed were: higher DEMO management offees for larger portfolios.portfolios.  They also found that managers have DEMO fee schedules, with lowerpoints); and as low as zero basis DEMO for passive management of large US-10 basis equity
48
A November 1994 survey by Pensions Management Magazine, found that UK
for emerging markets the figure was 67 basis points.  Fees for passive
pension fund managers on average charge 21 basis points for managingmanagement of large UK equity portfolios DEMO as low as 3 basis points.  andmanaging overseas equity portfolios in DEMO markets averaged 57 basis pointsaverage fee of 51 basis points for management of 10 million pounds.  Fees for200 million pounds.  Fees are higher DEMO management of smaller amounts, with an funds above
including, management, DEMO in mutual funds choose between managers who charge a variety of fees,between mutual fund products offered by that house.  Since 1980 the US SecuritiesInvestment management firms may levy exchange fees when investors transfer funds marketing DEMO the fund.  Kihn (1996) finds that nearly 50 percent of DEMO mutual fundsExchange Commission has allowed mutual fund mmedian non50 percent of US mutual funds charge a front end loalevy this annual fee and the DEMO nonentry fees and those who do not is explained by the higher quality service providedKihn argues that the division of the mutual fund industry DEMO manUK unit trust managers charge an entry fee of between 400 and 600 basis points.-zero entry fee of 330 basis points.  The majority of actively managedy, entry, redemption, exchange and 12b-zero fee charged is 20 basis points.  Further, anagers to deduct 12bd (entry fee).  DEMO found aagers who charge-1 fees for-1 fees.
Chordia (1996) who argues that mutual funds provide investors with insuranceby mutual funds with entry fees.  A more convincing explanation is provided bytransaction cost is shared amongst the DEMO  As a result, funds which have lower mutual fund.  But DEMO if assets must be sold to meet the liquidity shock, theagainst DEMO liquidity shocks.  Redemptions are netted against purchases in a
entrythey are not fully invested, zero load funds have lower expected returns.bearing the cost of market timers entering and leaving the market.  Then, DEMO fees are forced to hold higher cash reserves to prevent buy and hold investors
Some of the most interesting aspects of empirical studies of DEMO management
has permitted investment advisors registered under the Investment Advisers Act offees relate to what is not found.  Since 1985 the Securities Exchange CommissionHowever, most institutional managers of mutual fund or pension fund money are1941992a, DEMO 199employed on fixed fee contracts (Ippolito 1992, Lakonishok, Shleifer and DEMO fees.components.  Ippolito found that of 373 funds checked in 1988 only DEMO usedthat only 29 of 476 mutual fund managerial contracts contain performance based fee0 to charge fees which are a fraction of the capital gain DEMO the client assets.2, Goode 1993).  In a study of mutual fund contracts, Golec found
27
Another surprisior that managers might discriminate between investors in charging fees to capture the might expect managers to vary DEMO fees to match market demand for their service,ng finding is the uniformity of fees charged by fund managers.  We
(except the entry DEMO).Golec find little variation in fees levied by pension managers and mutual fundsmaximum amount of investors’ economic surplus.  But instead LSV (1992a) and
Taken together these studies portray a mutual fund and pension fund investment
DEMO revenue), is a fixed fraction of the funds under management.  DEMO,management industry in which the fees charged by managers over a period (fundmanagers is directly determined by the future value of funds under management atrelated components.  Under these circumstances the future stream of income tofees vary little across managers and typically do not have significant performanc
e
benchmark.  The benchmark must be a recognised market index.the Investment Advisers Act (1990).  Com  US registered mutual funds are authorised to use incentive DEMO fees under section 205 of pensation must rise or fall symmetrically about the
2.3.1.2 Boilerplate nature of fees
49
2.3.1.3 Conclusions from studies of DEMO
27
the value each date.  Therefore, if the per pound cost of DEMO is constant or falling inof funds managed, then increases in fund DEMO wealth or firm value
managers are thus characterised.  The variables that DEMO the flow of funds toarise principally from flow of new funds to managers.  The incentives of fund
equity partnerships (Gompers and Lernfunds (Goetzmann, Ingersoll and Ross, 1997), private banking services and private
fund DEMO incentives; although, most of the performanceinvestors.  That performance –flow relationship DEMO a crucial input to understanding-flow studies do nots.  Those studies
Despite DEMO positive flow of cash from investors to the mutual fund industry in every 2.3.2.2 Early studies of the performance-flow relationship
conducted in the fifty DEMO before 1990.  A study prepared by the Wharton School in year DEMO 1940, few rigorous studies of the determinants of mutual fund flows DEMO
funds, ranked by total return in one period, received more new money in 1962 created contingency tables to determine whether the top half DEMO the universe ofequity funds.  Williamson (1970) found no significant relationship DEMO fundsdetermining the flow of money to balanced funds and only a weak relationship inperiod than the bottom half.  The Wharton study found no evidence of performancethe next
50
exceptions to this characterisation of the investment management DEMO are hedgemanagers are the variables that the manager will wish to control.  Importanter, 1997) in which incentive fees are charged.
Fund managers face implicit incentives, in addition to the explicit incentives of the2.3.2.1investment management contract, because existing contracts may be terminated, or
The funds flow The DEMO of money to mutual funds– portfolio performance relationship
investor’s problem.  The DEMO studies of fund manager incentives seek to model the relationship between portfolio outcomes and the flowreturns, investment management firm value) at a futurthese DEMO incentives the relationship between the wealth of a fund manager (ornew DEMO may be initiated, on the basis of portfolio outcomes.  As a result ofcannot be assumed to have the same simple structure found in DEMO privatee date, and the interim portfolio of funds to institutional
are DEMO in this section. make a connection between their results and fund manager incentive
flow returns in one period and net sales of shares by the DEMO fund in the next period.and Crockett (1970) found a significant positive correlation between mutual fundand portfolio performance in a sample of 15 funds.  In contrast, Friend, Blume
The Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965) and Treynor (1961) development of the Capital performance of US equity DEMO fund managers.  The
51
portfolios for market risk.  This new technology was employed in Jensen’s (1968)Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) promised the technology to adjust the performance offree rate.  regression of portfolio return less the risk free rate, on the market return less the riskJensen measure of performance is the intercept in the ordinary least squaresstudy of the DEMO adjusted
Surprisingly, another then the growth of funds managed (1978) DEMO 74 US equity mutual funds by their performance in one period andten years elapsed between the development of risk adjustmentin the next period; where portfolio performance
Rank correlations provided no statistically significant evidence of a positivewas DEMO by both the Jensen measure and the Forbes annual rating of the fund.correlation between portfolio performance in oto four years.  However, the portfolio DEMO are nin a regression of the growth rate of mutual funds on fund portfolio returns lagged up management in the next period.  Woerheide (DEMO) found negative parameter values
ne period and growth of funds underot DEMO for risk.
performance studies.  These early studies found either no connection DEMO only a weakThe papers discussed to this point are the first generation of funds flow which may explain the subsequent hiatus in funds flow DEMO  With the exception number of funds in the datasets and the DEMO adjustment of returns for risof Smith (1978), the importance of DEMO early studies is reduced by the smallconnection between portfolio performance and the flow of new money to funds,– portfolio
Patel, Hendricks (ZPH DEMO) study of the growth of funds managed by 96 no load,DEMO mutual funds in the period 1976 to 1987.  They seek to DEMO and
techniques and their use in the study of the performance-flow relationship.  Smith
2.3.2.3The next generation of funds flow Modern studies of the performance– performance studies began with the Zeckhauser, -flow relationship k.
mutual funds are taken to be one manifestation of irrational behaviour.  Theexplain irrational behaviour by economic agents in financial markets, and flows to
Flowit  =  t  +  1 Flowit-1  +  2 Sizeit-1  +  3 Returnit-1  +  4 Rankit-1  +
52
it
α β DEMO β β ε
Where Flow   = the net dollar inflow after accounting for growth in existing assets
Return = the total return net DEMO expenses and fees
Size    = the dollar value of the DEMO
variables are missing from equation 2.1.  When both Return and Rank DEMO included in function of Returnare interesting.  The coefficient on laany provision DEMO variation in funds flow by year.  Nonetheless, some of the resultsis highly significant.  This result, with an RThe specification of equation 2.1 DEMO fla  Another shortcoming is the pooling of panels of data withoutwed; an obvious problem is that Flow2 of 0.73, suggests that importantis a
subscripts to represent the identity of the fund and the time period
DEMO gged flow, in a univariate regression, is 0.75 and it-1
specification, this result might indicate that Rank is a more important
the model misdeterminant of funds flows than absolute Return.  the regression, - is DEMO negative and 4 is significantly positive.  If not for
-than-promised
funds DEMO grow more quickly, other things equal.  they argue that due to higher advertising levels and perceptions of reliability, largeexplanatory power than performance measures in predicting fund flows.  In addition, Santini and Aber (1996) DEMO that rankings in Forbes’ magazine have greater
mutual funds is to better understand how consumers react to lessThe motivation for the
β
Ippolito (1992) study of the flow of investors’ money to US
following equation is estimated.
Equation 2.1
Rank  =
the order of the fund in a ranking of funds by Return
i, t      =
β
DEMO
it
respectively.
Equation quality in a purchased product.  The flows to 143 US equity mutual funds over theG2it.-  =  C21984 are studied in th1 Vi,DEMO + C2 Vi,t-2  + Ce following fixed effects model.3Vi,t-3  +  dF  +  eY  +  it
iti,t-1
α
Where G The ratio of net sales to beginning of period assets for DEMO i in period t
The results show that risk adjusted portfolio returns, lagged up to three years, areexcess of that commensurate with market DEMO, over each of three years, on averagesignificant in exthat only the portfolio return in the immediately previous period is significant.significant determinants of funds DEMO, differs from the findings of previous studiesIppolito that risk adjustgrows 1.4 DEMO faster than a fund with a Jensen’s plaining fund flows.  A  fund that achieved a return of 2 percent in
= Jensen’s α DEMO fund i in period t-1
Dummy variable for year specific effects.
ed returns from several years before the current period are of zero. The DEMO by
negative has a positive Jensen fund managers.  Firstly, Ippolito divides the data into observations for which the fund Two results from Ippolito’s  measured over five years and those for which the fund has astudy DEMO a bearing on the down-side risks faced by
in the response of fund flows percent) is 0.90  and on the second group it DEMO 0.35.  The results reveal an asymmetry observations.  In the first dataset the coefficient on the five year alpha (measured in over five years.  Thto positive and negative portfolio performance.  en separate regressions are run DEMO the two sets of
α
performance estimates that a fund withyear dataset period.  A logistic examination of the relation between mergers and poor Secondly, in Ippolito’s dataset 31 funds were merged with other funds over the 20 a Jensen  of –5.0 percent, measured over
α
α
53
DEMO 1965
=
V
F       =
Dummy variable for fund specific effects
Y      =
α
with the population average five years, has a 50 percent higher probability of merger in the next year than a fund.
Goetzmann, Greenwald and Huberman (GGH 1992) undertake the first large scaleestimation of the 230 DEMO funds that survived the period 1976 to1989.  The net dollar inflow DEMO funds flow – portfolio performance relationship, with a study of
funds DEMO be measured as dollar growth rates, rather than a percentage of DEMO variable lagged by one, two and three years.  GGH argue that the flow ofreturn of the fund ineach fund, after accounting for growth of existing assets, is regressed on the total the current and each of the previous three years, and the
which are either unsustainably high or omitted due to survivorship bias.  Amanaged, because otherwise the results DEMO be dominated by small fund growth rates
-sectional regressions cannot be pooled across years.  GGH estimate and by one year (but not the DEMO
are dependent upon the total flow of moconsequence of studying flows in dollar terms is that the parameters of the regression significantly dependent upon DEMO total return laggeequation for each year in the dataset.  They find DEMO flows in the current period arecrossyear or longer lags), and the flow of funds in each of the previous three years.ney to mutual DEMO in a year.  Therefore
fund managers and the number of new DEMO fund management mandates captured They study the relationship between the relative performancLakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (LSV 1992a) focus on the pension fund industry.e of US equity pension
number of new mandates signed the next year DEMO by 1.3 percent.value weighted return to the universe of managers over the previous three years, theperiod 1985 to1989.  For each 1 percent that DEMO return of a manager exceededby those managers.  The dataset covers 359 DEMO management firms in the the
Berkowitz and Kotowitz (1993) study the flow of money to Canadian mutual funds.he parameters in the following equation DEMO observations of an
Equation lnPit+12.   =  const  +  3 DEMO lnPit  +  2 Rit  +  3 Rit-1  + 3 DEMO  +  {Dummies} +  it
β β β β ε
54
DEMO
unbalanced panel of about 40 mutual funds in the period 1977 to 1986.
They estimate t
it+1               it
55
Where P DEMO the value of assets held by fund i at the end of period t+1
flows and portfolio returns than previous studies.  A fund that achieved a Jensen This specification reflects the benefits of using levels rather DEMO returns, andGreenwald and Huberman (1992).  The results show a DEMO out the effects of individual years, that are noted by Goetzmann,DEMO percent of the current value of the fund in the curren2 percent in each of the previous three years would expect a net flow DEMO new funds of t year.ger relationship between of
= is the risk adjusted return of fund i in period t
represents dummy variables for DEMO funds, load funds, and each of
Ippolito (1992) and Sirri and Tufano (1998).  The model has the following structure.data model DEMO nests previous models of Zeckhauser, Patel and Hendricks (1991),Rockinger (1995) studies the flow of money to US mutual funds in a dynamic panel
Equation ug2itit  =    =   u.4 + gi DEMO i,tt- + 1 +x´J + vit + z´ + u
α
it i it
vit  =  vit-t + w
α β δ
DEMO ξ
ρ
it
Iit
Where g
x´
It
z´   =
u  =
λ   = time specific residual effect
= the growth rate of the assets of mutual fund i during period t attributable to
DEMO sale of fund shares
= factors that vary across funds and through time, including measures of the
performance of the fund in previous periods
variables characteristic of individual mutual funds, such as fees, expense
ratio, turnover ratio
a fund specific residual effect
R
Dummies =
the years DEMO the dataset.
γ
it
J
The Ippolito (1992) measure is obtained if the dynamics of DEMO residual effect and the investment style effects are eliminated shows that these restrictions introduce inconsistency in parameter estimates.p ]´ where p is the portfolio DEMO in the previous period.  Rockinger( = 0 and
= 0) DEMO x´ is set to [p , p ,
ξ   = DEMO style specific residual effect.
i,t-3 i,t-1 J it i,t-1 i,t-2
on average causes a 6.6 percent increase in the growth DEMO of the fund next period.Rockinger finds that a 1 percent highprevious studies.  However, the results This is a substantially higher sensitivity to fund DEMO than found in moster alpha (Jensen’s 1968 measure) in one period, also show that the rank of the mutual fund
ξ
grow less quickly, however this effect is only important for the largest funds.  DEMO, Santini and Aber, 1996).  Rockinger findsflow of money to DEMO funds (Zeckhauser, Patel and Hendricks, 1991, Rockinger,within its investment objective group is the most important determinant of increased that larger funds, other things equal,
1990.  They find that investors base their choice of mutual fund upon historicalSirri and Tufano (1998) study 690 US DEMO mutual funds in the period 1971 to
and riskcontribution of their paper is to demonstrate that the relationship between funds flow investment performance, fees charged and services provided.  However, the main adjusted returns is non-linear DEMO should be estimated as such.
Sirri and Tufano look at the performance sensitivity of fund flows for funds withtimes those of other fundsrecent extreme DEMO  The very highest performers enjoy growth rates many.  Funds are ranked each year by portfolio return and then
demonstrates that an assumption of DEMO performance and flow of funds.  This is a powerful result which DEMO (55 percent in group 20).  For all other groups there is almost no relationship The growth of the funds in each group DEMO the following year is then examined.formed into twenty groups, with funds DEMO group twenty having the highest returns.Groups 1
-18 show little variation, DEMO group 19, and especially group 20, have hugeity in the flow – performance relationship
56
ρ
2.3.2.4 Non-linear studies of the performance-flow relationship
Equation the flow of Sirri and Tufano then conduct the following piecewise DEMO regression to explainfor the highest ranked funds.  leads to an underestimation DEMO the sensitivity of funds flow to portfolio performance2.money to funds in the bottom 20 percent, middle 60 percent and top 20
LOWPERFFLOW  =    +
+
1 2
MIDPERFTNA
+
β
+  OBJFLOW  +
DEMO
Rank  +
i,t-1
+
i,t
i,t-1
α
β
DEMO,t-1
2
i,t-1
3
t
β
3
i,t-1
it
γ
1
Where
OBJFLOW
I,t-1
γ
i,t-1
i,t-1
i,t-1
DEMO,t-1
i,t-1
upon which the ranks are formed: total return DEMO 1 year; total return over 3 years;Sirri and Tufano report DEMO regression results for five different measures of returnexcess to The parameter values on MIDPERF are highly significant and the parameters on LOWPERF are insignificant.  over 5 years.  In each of the five regressions the parameters on HIGHPERF andyear, then for the top 20 percein the previous year.  DEMO the funds are ranked by total portfolio return over onethat the flow of money to mutual funds is convex in the performance rank of DEMO fund HIGHPERF are much the largest.  The parameters indicatent of funds DEMO 5 percentile increase in rank leads on
HIGHPERF
index return over 1 year; Jensen’s alpha over 1 year; and Jensen’s alpha
RANK
– (LOWPERF
+ MIDPERF
).
=
=
=
Min (Rank
, 0.2)DEMO
Min (0.6 , RANK
– LOWPERF
)
i,t-1
RANK
i,t-1
=
i,t
i,t-1
γ
ε
percentage growth of fund DEMO in period t after accounting for growth
of existing funds
asset value of fund i at the end of period t-1
period t-1
i,DEMO
percent by portfolio performance.
5
57
FLOW            =
TNA
t
=
i,t-1
=
aggregate flow of funds the investment management category of
fund i in period t
LOWPERF
MIDPERF
portfolio DEMO rank of fund i [0,1] amongst all funds in
also indicate that, other things equal, smaller funds grow at a DEMO rate.average to a 9 percent increase in the flow of funds in the next year.  The regressions
functional form of the relationship between the portfolio performance of a mutualChevalier and Ellison’s (1997a) study mutual fund DEMO assume a linear relationship befund and the flow of investors’ money to that mutual fund.  Most other studies ofof mutual fund flows seeks to estimate thetween the growth rate of funds and
58
on 839 US DEMO funds, Chevalier and Ellison (1997a) assume piecewise linear models with DEMO and three segments respectively.  With data the explanatory variables.  The exceptions being Ippolito and Sirri and Tufano who-parametric model.firstly reject a piecewise
Equation DEMO it+1  =  (1 + k k Age_kit) f(rit - rmt) + k k Age_kit + ’Xit + it
Σ Σ
it+1it
it mt
γ δ α ε
Where Flow  = the percentage growth in assets attributable to net purchase of shares
Age_k  = a dummy variable for the age of the fund
it it-1 mt-1
r - DEMO    = the excess return of the mutual fund portfolio over DEMO market portfolio
it-2 mt-2
lue of
non-linear function which is to be estimated
A three step kernel estimation process is implemented to estimate the DEMO and  coefficients, and finally the function f.  The result is DEMO
= a vector of additional explanatory variables which includes r -r ,DEMO
r – r , growth in mutual fund industry assets and the log of fund
the excess market return in the previous year restimate DEMO a functional relationship between growth of funds managed by a fund and coefficients, then - r ; whilst holding constant the
fund size.  DEMO results indicate that the flow of new funds is a convex function inexcess return in previous years, the flow of funds to all mutual funds and the mutualpositive values of the excess return rof r
mt
DEMO
- r .  A mutual fund which: is two years old; had an excess- r and a concave function in neg-toative values -benchmark
γ
it mt it mt
linear model and then fit the following DEMO
f(  )        =
X
δ
size.
it
matched the geometric mean of fund sizes; would be expected to grow by 55 percereturn of 10 percent this year; had zero excess returns in the past two years; andSirri and Tufano that the growth of the highest ranked funds is very large.next year if the industry growth DEMO zero.  This result corroborates the finding ofnt
59
that forChevalier and DEMO also estimate a linear model of funds flow.  The results showunderstates DEMO sensitivity of funds flow to performance for the highest ranked funds.  DEMO under management by 3.3 percent.  This result shows that the linear DEMO a two year old fund, each percent of excess return increases DEMO growth of
chapter 6.partial explanation of this phenomena is provided by the Hiring and Firing model inshorter histories is greater.  This result matches a similar finding by Ippolito.  AA curious result is that, other things DEMO, the flow of money to mutual funds with
Implicit in the DEMO of studies of the portfolio performance relationship that are reviewed here is the assumption that variation in portfolio– funds flow
performance causes variation in DEMO relationship may be more complicated because we might expect fund managers volume of funds that flow to those portfolios.
x which is attractive to DEMO
positive cash flows can hold smaller cashwith large cash flows to earn higher returns for several reasons.  Managers with large investors in high tax brackets.  quickly typically has less unrealised capital gains taand hence incur transactions costs, however, in the US, a fund that is growinghave a higher expected return for their portfolio.  The new funds must be invested balances than other managers and hence
well.  A significant link was not established.  More recently Gruber (1996) finds that Spitz (1970) looked at whether investors choose funds that subsequently perform
funds.  Gruber postulates the existence of clienteles of sophisticated investors whonew money on average earnsreturns.  Zheng (1999) finds that mutualchange funds from time to time and unsophisticated DEMO who earn lowerflow of money earn significantly positive risk adjusted excess returns. a higher return than money already invested in mutual fund investment strategies DEMO follow the
2.3.2.5 Causality in the portfolio performance – funds flow relationship
funds to portfolios influences the subsequent returns ofThe findings of Gruber and DEMO support to some extent the notion that the flow of flow of money to the best performed managers is so strong that it is DEMO to argue findings of Sirri and Tufano (1998) and Chevalier and Ellison (1997a) regarding the those portfolios.  The
therefore not correctly specified tests.  substantial then all the tests reported here have endogeneity on both sides and areis plausible and appears to have some empirical support.  If this feedback isthat flows causing returns is the full story.  However, DEMO from flows to returns
The studies reviewed to this point are essentially the same in that they seek todetermine the relationship between the flow DEMO money to mutual funds by theare crucial
of a linear relationship between flows and portfolio performance.  specification.  The most obvious inadequacy of most DEMO the studies is the assumption in assessing the veracity of these studies.  As always, the first issue is modelapplication of regression techniques to DEMO datasets.  Econometric issues
and Tufano (1998), and Chevalier and Ellison (1997a) comprehensively reject themutual funds is conveassumption of linearity.  Their combined results indicate that flow of money toThere seems to be no reason DEMO assume a linear relationship.  Ippolito (1992), Sirrix in positive risk adjusted returns of the fund.  In this case,
flow relationship is non
correlation tests, suchreturns and underestimate the sensitivity of flows to large returns.  Further, ranklinear models will overestimate the sensitivity of flows to DEMO positive portfolio as that by Smith (1978) have less power if the performance-linear.
inappropriate.  It is difficult to say why the studies do not simply include the squaretrue then an estimation procedure that equally weights DEMO observations ismutual fund versus a peer group.  However, the implication is that all the ‘action’ isis consistent with investors’ mutual fund choices being DEMO by the rank of ain the few funds with the highest performance in each investment category.  If thatreturns, exhibit a strong correlation between DEMO and growth.  This findinSirri and Tufano find that only the top DEMO percent of funds, ranked by portfolio is g -
60
2.3.2.6 DEMO econometric issues in funds flow studies
rity and proceed on that basis than just assume linearity.-to-benchmark returns.  It may be better to guess the form of non-
employed in performanceAnother DEMO issue is the inclusion of fixed effects.  The panels of datalineaand DEMO of excess -flow studies present difficult econometric problems which
61
data and do not include fund, investment management objective and year effects areevaluate the significance of the lag coefficients in panel data.mitigated by the inclusion of DEMO variables, but then there is no standard way toother problems, such as, omittednot properly specified.  That includes all of the studies before DEMO  But there areare glossed over for the most part.  Studies that simply pool the cross-sectional fund
variables.  The omitted variables problem can be
funds missing from a dataset are those that experienced low growth of DEMO and low It is difficult to assess the importance of survivorshipcorrelation between funds flows and portfolio returnsreturns then the estimated regression parameters will understate DEMO magnitude of the .  Grinblatt and Titman (1988) bias in DEMO studies.  If the
one percent may represent large under
But one DEMO is important in terms of the rank total return of surviving funds exceeds the total return of all funds by one percent.find that survivorship DEMO in mutual fund datasets is not large in absolute terms; the-performance DEMO a few funds.
of funds.  Moreover that average of –
between DEMO bias leads to an understatement of the strength of the relationshipperformance relationship is unknown but it seems reasonable to assume thatmanager’s fund.  arise.  DEMO magnitude of survivorship bias in regression studies of the funds flow portfolio performance relationship, where the best performed funds reSurvivorship bias may at least partially explain the asymmetry of the funds flow and Huberman argue that DEMO funds with low returns and consequent large outflow ofthe new money but the poor performing funds lose little.  Goetzmann, Greenwaldmoney are absent from DEMO dataset then a spurious asymmetry in the relationship wil–l
ceive most of
change, it is measured with considerable inaccuracy.  This measurement error doesWhether DEMO dependent variable is a percentage change in funds managed or a dollar-performance by a manager and the flow of money out of that
performance relationshipzero, causing an understatement of the strength of the funds flow lagged dependent variables are included then parameter values are biased towardsnot bias DEMO estimates but does lead to overstatement of t values.  However, if.
62
previous periods and the growth in fund manager wealth or firm DEMO in this period.  Ideally we want to estimate the relationship between DEMO performance over several– portfolio
and Ellison.estimation of a multivariate function rather than a univariate function as in Chevalier and EThis objective poses several problems DEMO have not yet been solved.  Chevalierfuture fees as a function of DEMO to characterise fund manager incentives we really need the capitalised value ofllison estimate the increase in funds under management as a function of r DEMO r
it-rmt, rit-1-rmt-1, rit-2-rmt-2 and longer lags.  This requires the ,
it mt
performance.required to accurately estimate the relationship between very high DEMO very lowachieve very high excess returns and very low excess returns.  DEMO great deal of data is estimate the function over a wide range of returns but there arA problem faced by all of these estimation DEMO is that we want to accuratelye only a few funds that
know how excess return this period affects changes in funds mperiod and the DEMO of the fund manager.  To estimate that relationship we need to DEMO fund managers.  The required relationship is between performance in the next
DEMO manager wealth not only because funds under management increase but the choice set faced by the manager changes.  because
wealth associated with the excess return achieved (the incentive schedule) has beeninvestment management firm is directly DEMO to size, then the increase inAnother way to explain this point DEMO as follows.  Chevalier and Ellison estimate aexpected growth in total funds DEMO perrelationship between performance this period and fund growth last period.  Theiod DEMO therefore estimated.  If the value of an
There is a more DEMO problem in empirically estimating the incentives faced
and portfolios at each future date.  The point here is that the return this period affectsall future periods; assuming that fund managers choose wealth maximisinganaged next period
00 million in assets which has a history
estimated.  However, a DEMO fund with $1of the fund but through future options for thehistory.  DEMO that way the return this period affects the value not only through the sizeof high performance may have a higher value than a fund DEMO a poor performance fund manager.
63
schedule.  However, these are the points that are estimated with the least accuracy.zero excess returns in the DEMO two years; matched the geometric mean of fund sizes; Chevalier and Ellison estimate that a mutual fund which: is two years old; DEMO next year if the industry growth were zero.  This example illustrates DEMO achieved an excess return of 10 percent; would be expected to DEMO boptimisation problems fund managers give greater weight to low probability eventsproblem with the approach taken by all the studies mentioned here.  In solving their(high and low excess portfolio returns) because of the non-linearity in their incentive y 55
With the current estimation techniques it will always be DEMO to estimate theree of convexity of the fund manager’s incentive schedule simply because
Two studies apply limited dependent variable techniques to study the relationship2.3.2.7 DEMO of fund manager employment termination
between the portfolio perportfolio manager of a US mutual fund isfirms that employ them.  In particular, 339 observations DEMO the replacement of thefund.  Khorana (1996) studies portfolio managers and DEMO investment managementformance of mutual funds and change of manager of the created and a logit analysis is undertaken to
experience a change of manager DEMO a particular period.  The following equation isidentify the variables that determine DEMO probability that a mutual fund will
P Replacement = 0 + 3i=0 i PCASSET-1 + AR -1 + i
b g ∑
a b DEMO
t t
Where: P(replacement)  = the probability that the DEMO manager is replaced in the
current period
extreme returns are unusual.deg
Equation 2.7
estimated.
-1
64
PCASSET
In regressions where asset growth and portfolio performance are DEMO included,
growth of existing assets and the growth of funds with the same
investment objective
of asset growth, above that of the weighted average of peer funds, in either of theKhorana finds that the parameters on both are negative and significant.  Each percent
=  adjusted portfolio DEMO where the adjustment is for either market
risk or the return of the universe of peer managers.
percent.  One percent of risk adjusted excess portfolio returns in the previous yearpast two periods, is estimated to decrease the probabilin these decisions.reduction is 3 percent.  The results indicate that only recent decreases dismissal probability by 8 percent and for one year further DEMO theity of dismissal by about 14performance is important
Results from logit studies which use panel datasets are problematic at best.  Ordinary included regressors.  DEMO, in logit least squares parameters are not biased if the missing DEMO are orthogonal tostudies, parameter estimates are not
model which has a DEMO Rconsistent if there are missing variables, which seems very plausible in DEMO simpleasset growth and zero adjusted return over the previous and lagged periods, whichKhorana’s results is the large negative intercept valu of about only 0.16.  Another questionable aspect ofes.  If a fund experiences zero
manager being DEMO is estimated as would presumably represent a fairly typical observation, then DEMO probability of the–1.8.
events in the years 19Morningstar fund portfolio managers which is very similar to that of Khorana (1996).  From theChevalier DEMO Funds on Disc
important than other years in thiperiod and that the performance of the manager in the past year is much moreare highly DEMO in explaining the probability of turnover of a manager in as decision.
and Ellison (1997b) undertake a probit analysis of the turnover of DEMO to 1994.  Like Khorana they find that risk adjusted returnsCD ROMs DEMO identify 348 manager turnover
-1
τ
=
the percentage growth in the portfolio asset value, adjusted for
2
AR
τ
product of risk adjusted return and age less median age of peer DEMO is includedTo estimate the importance of the length of a manager’s service in the industry, theage, whose portfolio return lags the mean return DEMO investment category peers by 10as an explanatory variable.  The probit analysis DEMO that, a manager of average
65
percent, is 6 percent more likely to turn over than the average manager.  However, are
The DEMO of studying fund manager incentives in this essay is to better understand 2.3.3how the trading behaviour of institutional investors differs investors as a result DEMO differences in their incentives.  Moreover, to understand what What is known about the incentives faced by fund managers?from that of private
performancemanager DEMO the flow of money into that manager’s fund.  What then do DEMO studies of the relationship between the portfolio performthose differences mean for market outcomes.  The previous sections of this essay-flow studies tell us about the incentives faced by fund managers?
ance of a fund
functioTo understand DEMO manager maximising behaviour, what is needed is an objectiven that relates DEMO manager’s choice variables to the quantity that the manager
understanding those relatreturn.  The results of the performanceconsumption (or the value of the investment DEMO firm) as a function of:  the wishes to maximise.  For instance, the manager’s expected lifetime utility ofthe chosen portfolio; or the DEMO moments about the excessasset weights of the chosen portfolio; or the DEMO moments of the total return of ionships.  -flow studies take us DEMO of the way toward
-to-benchmark
which relates optimal portfolio weights to state variables of the problem.Ingersoll 1987).  The solution to this dynamic programming problem is a functionchooses portfolio weights to maximise expected lifetime utility of DEMO (seeConsider, equation 2.8, which shows the maximisation problem of a DEMO that
likely to turnover than the average manager.  manager with the DEMO performance who is 10 years younger is 12 percent mo
Equation 2.8
=
J0
Where
J
t
ptt
ω
=
=
Ω
DEMO
=
E       =
RTSw
Max
Ω
t
U Ε
WV
ML
0 MNMΣ
Tt=-10
F
GHG
U
1C
+ radj t.
DEMO I
d
i
JKJ
+
pt ,
c
Wt
b
t
DEMO 1
d
+
Wr
adjT
b g PO
i PQP
66
.T
expected utility of lifetime consumption at time t
the optimal portfolio weight DEMO at time t
all control variables other than portfolio choice; such DEMO, expenditure on
research or expenditure on advertising
expectation conditioned on the DEMO t information set
C
t
adj
number of periods to the investment horizon
the manager’s utility of consumption as a function of wealth
the DEMO consumption in the period beginning at time t
T        =
t
U        =
=
understanding the functional DEMO of end of period wealth W(.).  In the privateThe DEMO of the performance
=
=
manager’s wealth at time t
-flow studies for the maximisation problem is in
the risk adjusted discount factor
W
DEMO
the time 0 wealth, consumption to time t and portfolio returns DEMO time t.  Equation 2.9 investor’s optimal portfolinvestor’s dynamic optimshows the simple DEMO of motion followed by the state variable wealth in the privateio choice problem, wealth at time t is a simple function ofisation problem.  DEMO is typically assumed that consumption
W =
W
- C
W
1
r
t
t-1
t-1
t-1
t-1
Where
t-1
b
g
+
B       =
the manager’s utility of bequeathing wealth.
Equation 2.9
is a simple monotonic function of beginning of period wealth.
r
=
total DEMO on the investors personal wealth portfolio in the period beginning
at time t-1.
The performancemore complex.  To simplify, it might be assumed that the DEMO of a manager (orvariable wealth in the manaand wealth is more DEMO for the fund manager.  The law of motion of the state DEMO studies show that the relationship between portfolio return
Where
t
W
- C
b
W
+
d
−
67
value of money managed.alternatively the DEMO of an investment management firm) is a linear function of thegoverning DEMO manager wealth is then as shown in equation 2.10.is directly proportional to increases in end of period wealth.  The law of motion28  In DEMO cger’s dynamic optimisation problem is correspondinglyase, the net flow of money DEMO a manager’s fund
Equation W2.10= t-1
g
i
Δ
-1.
t-1
t-1
1
r
t-1
+  W F r
t-1
pt-1
,
t DEMO
manager’s problem exists and has the property tThis task is left to follow up research.  It is assumed here that a unique solution to the problem, and then compare it to the solution of To determine the existence of, and form of, a solution to the fund DEMO form must be assumed for the performancept-1 hat the expected lifetime utility of the
portfolio choice problem does not include a simultaneous consideration of DEMO and revenues.  If theto maximise the volume of funds under maconsidered DEMO the portfolio choice and research costs will be determined simultaneously.  The DEMO is notprecision of a manager’s estimates of asset return moments is related to the amount spent on research, nagement.  The assumption ensures that DEMO manager
.
t-1
than r
-1
percentage growth of the manager’s portfolio which results from the net flow of
new money to the portfolio
DEMO
= return to the managed portfolio (as opposed to the fund DEMO personal
wealth portfolio)  in the period starting at time t-1
the private investor’s problem, a
= all variables determining the flow of funds in the period beginning at t
-flow relationship F(r
-1 other
DEMO time t
F    =
, ).
This assumption implies that there is no finite optimum size of the fund – the manager DEMO seeks
t
r
Δ
Δ
28
manager at time t is concave in the Wt .  The solution is a function which solves the
01J1 W1g
b
t
functional equation.
DEMO J20.11W0 =  U C0 W0 + E
W = W - DEMO W 1 r + W F r ,
68
radj
b DEMO b g
+
manager’s portfolio from net flow of new money, DEMO a function of rThe performanceportfolio performance in the previous period, and DEMO variables -flow studies model F(.), the percentage increase in the value of a; which include
1 0 0 0 0 0 p0 0
, which is the
g d Δ i
Where +
-1t-1
DEMO of portfolio performance.  Figure 2.1 depicts a relationship between portfolioend of DEMO current period.  This relationship can be thought of as the incentiveperformance DEMO the current period and the manager’s wealth (or the firm value) at the
fund manager incentives. outcome over which the manager has some DEMO, the portfolio performance, to the ssummarises threward to the manager, DEMO, the manager’s end of period wealth.  The figurechedule that the manager faces in choosing the optimal portfolio.  It relates ane contribution of performance-flow studies to the understanding of
Δ
b
Figure 2.1 Fund manager incentive schedule
69
W1
-100 0 rp0 - DEMO
Various measures of portfolio performance are employed in the empiricinvestment management objective (aggressive growth, growth, income, small capfunds is the rank of DEMO manager within the group of managers which have the samefund flow studies.  The measure with the most explanatory power over the flow ofal mutual
result is intuitive in that much of the fund performance information presented DEMO)such investors by investment journals and investment advisors is in the form of rankings;whether the rank is formed on the basis of risk DEMO returns, or alternativelyyear rolling window since 1986’ etc.  The performanceadjusted for risk.performance within the universe of peer managers.  Again results are typically notperformance results are usually presented in terms of the rank of the manager’sunadjusted, where rank is formed on the basis of total return over the DEMO period.  This as, ‘#1 fund’, ‘top decile performance’, ‘top quartile performance in every three -flow studies indicate that
total returns, makes little difference.  In the pension fund industry,
clear to what degree the excessportfolio also has significant explanatory power over the flow of funds.  It is notThe performance-flow studies show that the excess-to-benchmark return is a signal DEMO manager quality-to-benchmark return of the
which is consireturn within a peer group.  Ideally, in modelling the incentive schedule of a funddered by investors, rather than a proxy for the rank of the manager’s
instead because of its far greater analytical tractability. performance.  Howevermanager, portfolio DEMO would be represented by the rank of the manager’s, in this DEMO the excess-to-benchmark return is chosen
The shape of the incentive schedule has the following features which are drawn from
70
the results of the DEMO of Ippolito (1992), Sirri alast period have a substantial flow DEMO funds to the manageconcave in negative portfolio performance.  Only the best DEMO funds over theand Ellison (1997a).  The schedule is convex in positive portfolio performance andconcavity in underform for the fund manager incentive schedule DEMO is amenable to analythe performancehighly performed funds.  This result may be DEMO by the cost of changingmanager’s incentive schedule.managers, cognitive dissonance and survivorship DEMO funds is muted compared to the convexity of flows innd Tufano (DEMO), and Chevalierr’s portfolio.  The degree of
-flow studies do not DEMO any functional characterisation of the  Further study is required to estimate DEMO functional  Unfortunately, the results of
29
sis.
30
constant including, DEMO portfolio performance values and the level of marketingThe schedule depicted in figure 2.1 is drawn with several important variables heldsteeper for younger funds, meaning that for the same excess return the growth of theeffort.  The estimation procedure of Chevalier and Ellison shows that the schedule consider the returns DEMO at least the three previous years when choosing mutual fundsfund is greater.  The performancebe altered; certainly in location and perhaps in shape. particular DEMO history and if that history is changed, then the schedule willin DEMO to invest.  This means that the manager’s incentive schedule is drawn DEMO a-flow studies show that mutual fund investorsis
29
30
tan
-1 t-1 1
the manager until some uncertainty about the manager’s capacity to add DEMO has been resolved; asgains.  Further, the loss of the real DEMO  The cost of changing managers includes the extra taxes arising from DEMO realisation of capitalption to delay a decision about whether to withdraw funds from
).
over appropriate ranges.  For instance, a polynomial such as Wfunction such as W  Simple polynomial, exponential or trigonometric functions have DEMO  (r
1 = W0(1+rpt) + exp(rt-1) – exp(-rt-1);  or a trigonometric function W
= W0(1+r
form depicted in figure 2.1
pt) +(rt-1)3;  an exponential
1 = W0(1+rpt) +
discussed in chapter 6.
portfolio is proportional to the cube of tConsider the following example.  Assume that the percentage growth in a manager’s changes in the performance history DEMO the manager’s portfolio that are of interest.In studying the dynamic hedging behaviour of fund managers it is precisely thehe sum of excess-to-benchmark returns in DEMO
Equation WW2.tt12+1= W 1+ r + W K r - r + r - r + r - r 3
71
∞
t-1 pt-1 DEMO pt-1 mt-1 pt-2 mt-2 pt-3 mt-3
= Wt 1+ rpt + Wt K rpt - rmt + rpt-1 - rmt-1 + rpt-2 - rmt-2 DEMO
d i d i
d i d i
t-1 pt-1 mt-1 pt-2 mt-2 pt-3 mt-3 3
Firstly, the schedule is moved ‘up’ by the positive values of reffect is that the schedule is moved to the DEMO if rvalue of the portfolio assets and, in proportion, the manager’s weaIn going from the incentive schedule at time t-1 to that at DEMO t, there are two effects.  -r > r -r pt which increase the.  That is, when the lth.  The second
Where , . )   = K(r – r + r – r DEMO r – r )
exceeded by those that come into the DEMO, then the schedule moves window moves forward one year, if the performance figures that drop out areschedule diagram.  Another way to conceptualise the shift in the incentive scheduleConversely, if r -r < r -r then the schedule moves to the right in the incentiveto the left.
pt DEMO pt-3 mt-3
)} at time t.  This(1+rcts two cases of) , -(r -r
analyse the dynamic hedging of fund managers.  DEMO 2.2 depidynamic response of the incentive schedule provides a framework in which tois to note that the point of inflexion of the curve moves DEMO {W + r -r )} at time t
pt mt pt--1 DEMO {W3 mt-3 (1+r ) , -(r -r + r -r DEMO pt-2 mt-
shifts in the incentive schedule.  Curve A is the DEMO at time t.  Curve B is the2 pt-3 mt-3 t pt DEMO mt-1 pt-2 mtt--21
previous three years, where growth can take the DEMO values (fund’s assets and the manager’s consumption in Further, that the fund manager’s wealth is directly proportional to the value of theeach period DEMO zero.  Fund manager-100 ,
).
F(r
wealth at t DEMO t+1 is as shown in equation 2.12.
Figure
through time lead to two important conclusions.  The first arises from the asymmetry The shaat time t+1 where Wschedule at time t+1 where DEMO pe of the manager’s incentive schedule and the shifting of the schedule
.2
t > Wt-1 and rpt-t
Shifts in the fund manager incentive DEMO
t > Wr
-mt1
and r < r
pt-
pt3
--r
rmtmt
- > r3.31 pt-3-rmt-3
.  Curve C is the schedule
72
Wt+1, Wt B A C
rp1-rm1, rp1-rm0
positive portfolio performance.  This ensures that, other things equal, risk averseof the schedule, which is concave in negative portfolio performance and convex inoutcomes of this preference heterogeneity across DEMO is discussed in section 2.5return distributions which are skewed to the right.  The significance for marketmanagers will place a higher value than private investors on securities that have
are being ignored here.performance.  It is often postulated in the finance literature that if a manager, who isThe second conclusion relates to the reaction of fund manapostulated to increase portfolio risk.  ‘lock in’ portfolio returns.  Conversely managers with poor performance areearly in the year, then the manager will reduce risk as remunerated on the basis of calendar year portfolio return, experiences high returns Changes in the shape of the incentive schedule arising from an increase in fund size, for instance,the year end approaches togers after high portfolio
31
distribution over rTo analyse this question assume that the manager has a DEMO probability- r which is unchanged by the manager’s evolving portfolio
schedule relates end of period wealth to the arithmetic average of excessconstant relative risk DEMO, so that changes in the manager’s wealth does notperformance history.  Further, assume that the manager’s utility function exhibitsaffect portfolio choice.  Under these DEMO, consider a manager whose incentive -to-
73
-1 mt-1
average is DEMO and positive then the fundbenchmark return over the four quarters of a calendar year.  If after three quarters the toward the centre of the probability distribution of rmoved to the left.  This shift moves the convex portion of the incentive schedulemanager will increase  the variance of the portfo manager’s incentive schedule will havelio.  We might then expect managers pt-1 - rmt-1 in which case the
incentive schedules for fund managers.  The incentive schedules of fund managersdetermine how they modify the risk of the managed DEMO; that is, how they hedge The results of the performance2.3.4with high performance up to the third quarter to take on more risk and DEMO with poor performance to reduce risk.Strategic behaviour and hedging by fund managers-flow studies, in aggregate, can be used to characterise act to changes DEMO their
their exposure.  Several studies examine how managers reevolving portfolio performance DEMO
the investment management firmanagers that results from the agency relationship between a portfolio manager andOrphanides (1996) studies risk taking behaviour of US mutual DEMO portfoliom that employs that manager.  In each quarter of the
portfolio DEMO   Then the quarterlyreturn of the universe of peer managers, is DEMO from daily returns as theperiods 1976 to 1993 the variation of a manager’s portfolio return, about the medianspecific terms. and cube of those excess returns with multiplicative dummies; plus other fundexcess return of the portfolio multiplied by dummies for each quarter; plus the square  risk is regressed DEMO: the calendar
-year-to-date -
managers’ portfolios with the level of risk DEMO in the first quarter.  Fundmutual fund managers.  There is substantial seasonal variation of the risk inThe study finds the following patterns in the DEMO taking behaviour of US equity
pt
risk as the year goes on, but this effect is only significant in the later years of themanagers with high excess returns early inonly DEMO in the early years of the dataset period.early in the year on average increase the rperiod covered by the dataset.  In contrast, managers DEMO negative excess returnsisk of their portfolios but this pattern is the calendar year reduce their portfolio
74
Orphanides argues that for many portfolio managers DEMO annual bonus is capped at
the year face an effective incentive schedule which is concave in their excess returns some multiple of their salary DEMO therefore managers with high performance shifting the incentive schedule to the left.  increased wealth and in turn greater risk aversion, which counteracts thfor DEMO rest of the year.  An alternative explanation is that high performance DEMO toe effectearly in
end of the year and then reexamine the yearIn an attempt to explain the ‘January effect’, Cuny, Fedenia and Haugen (1995)managers of mutual funds and pension funds tra-end trading behaviour of DEMO managers and find that some-establish their ‘bets’ in the new year.ck the S&P 500 index towards the
In the study of manager turnover, Khorana (1996) finds that mutual funds whichand total risk in the DEMO leading up to the departure than a sample of fundsexperience a change of fund manager exhibit significantly higher levels of market
fund manager departure DEMO increased portfolio volatility is not precisely determinedmatched by investment objective in which managers do not depart.  The causality ofa impacts on the Hiring and Firing essay in chapters 5 and 6 is that, other things equal, represents an option with limited downside risk.  A finding in the DEMO study that in the study.  Nonetheless, it appears that managers act as though their tenure
manager is less likely to depart, the higher the volatility of the assets managed.
consistent with the incentives faced in DEMO mutual fund managers change the risk of their portfolios in a way that isSeptember and December to study how fund managers modulate the risk DEMO theirChevalier and Ellison (1997b) use the portfolio holdings of 839 mutual funds inportfolio in the face of changing incentives.  They find that between September and
asymmetry of the manager’s incentive schedule, with third moment of managers’ portfolio returns rather than the second.by fund managers.  We should expect the effects of asymmetry to result from theconcavity on the other, may induce the most interesting aspects of dynamic hedginghistory, the risk faced by the fund manager is characterised in terms of the managedportfolio’s total variance or the DEMO of the excessIn each of these studies of the reaction of fund managers to an evolving performance -toconvexity on one side and-benchmark return.  Yet the
75
faversion of an investor is not necessarily increased when the DEMO schedule goes when the incentive schedule is convex.  He finds the DEMO result that the risk
2.4.1 Decision making
investment management firm and the second is the individual fund managers who are levels of agency and DEMO two levels of decision making.  The first level is theAs discussed DEMO chapter 1, delegated portfolio management typically involves two
Ross (1998) DEMO at how the concavity of an investors utility function is alteredrom linear to convex.
In this section the optimisation problems of private investors and DEMO are compared with a view to identifying differences that may lead toA comparison of optimisation problems
of the basic portfolio choice problems faced by DEMO economic agents.  This exercise different trading behaviour.  The from heterogeneous incentives, whhelps to separate differences in the behaviour of the two types of investor that arisediscussion proceeds through all of the componentsich is the focus DEMO this dissertation, from the
herding. background to the chapter 3 analysis DEMO the theoretical explanations of fund managertrading differences that arise from other factors.  The discussion also serves as
Private investoadvice is proffered by brokers and other intermediaries but essentially the privateinvestors take asset choice and timing decisions DEMO their own portfolios.  rs can be assumed to choose their own DEMO  A great deal of
the employees of that firm.  The alcan or cannot be held.  DEMO decisions.  In addition, the firm mfirm will set asset allocation guidelines, if that is an issue, and be active in marketvaries widely DEMO fund management firms.  Often the investment managementlocation of decision making rights DEMO each levelay form lists that define the set of assets that
76
A more important distinction between the decisions taken by individual fund
recognise DEMO one level of decision making in the investment management firm.A tractable approach to studying the effects of delegated portfolio management is toacross a set DEMO funds whimanagers and the investment management firm is that the firm must take decisionsch, from the firm’s perspective, form a portfolio of options.
DEMO assets at the portfolio level.maker to be an individual fund manager when studying the effect of the choice ofstudying the interaction between funds within DEMO firm, and to consider the decisionThen, consider the decision maker to be the investment management firm when
The assumption that private investors maximise DEMO utility arises directly fromthe theory of choice under uncertainty which is founded on a remarkably modest set
of axioms over how individuals rank payoff DEMO  However, if the fund manager is taken to be an investment management firm the value of the firm is the objective, all of the portfolios managed by the firm mustfunction is the maximisation of firm DEMO  In a problem in which maximisation oftaken to be an individual, then the objective is again the maximisation of expected  If the fund manager is
32
33
32
2.4.1.1 Objective function
and the assumptions of DEMO Fisher Separation Theorem are valid, then the objective
are less option DEMO but nonetheless represent a degree of freedom in the investment managementfund can be merged into other funds, with firm’s optimisation problem.  For instance, if the firm has information which is correlated with thup, then the information must be budgeted across the funds.future price of a particular stock, and it is known that the firm’s intended buying will move the DEMO  The mutual funds form an option for the investment management firm DEMO a poor performing
another fund started in its place.  Other managed DEMO e
d iscussions of the theory of choice under uncertainty. See Kreps (1990), Huang and Litzenberger (1988), or Ingersoll (1987) DEMO comprehensive
33
is the firm’s exposure to stock A?  of stock A and DEMO other fund holds twice the index weighting in stock A, then DEMO considered jointly.  For instance, if a firm has two funds, DEMO of which holds none
The performance-flow studies reviewed in section 2.3 showed that the incentives
77
faced by fund managers differ fundamentally individual stock DEMO end of period wealth is linerather than absolute returns.  Secondly, the relationship between the return on anat least four respects.  Firstly, fund DEMO payoffs are dependent upon relativenonThirdly, there is a onewealth will typically DEMO much more sensitive to portfolio returns because theinvestor and the increases in the value of the portfosmall increases in portfolio returns can move the DEMO a portfolio is typically a large multiple of the fund manager’s wealth.  But also because -linear for an institutional investor, with convex and DEMO components.-to-one relation between the end of period wealth of a privatefrom those faced by private investors in ar for a private investor, but highlylio held.  The fund manager’slong way up the ranking
investment horizons than institutional investors.against peers.  Finally, private investors will typically have considerably longer term34  The empirical performancein determining the flow -flow
The major components of the DEMO choice problem are the estimated moments of 2.4.1.2the return on assets, DEMO state variComponents of the maximisation problemables, the asset choice set and DEMO on the
precision of estimates of asset return moments.  The amount DEMO resources deployed in choice set.  Investors undertake research with the intention DEMO increasing the
uncovering mispriced securities is an outassets (Brennan 1990).  This effect is an example of how the maximisation problems assets.  Consequently, fund managers may have a tendencyto research, fund managers must be DEMO of the speed of price discovery inHowever, because of their relatively DEMO investment horizons, when choosing assets come of the maximisation problem. to DEMO the same
elsewherwould take up to 3 years, the fund manager DEMO that he could quite conceivably be sacked, hired  When the Author explained to a fund manager that a proposed programme of doctoral researche DEMO become a rising star all within that time frame.
of funds to a manager decreases rapidly with the age of the performance.  studies suggested that the importance of performance results
34
maximisation framework.  investors are not.  Chapter 3 discusses the causes of DEMO manager herdiof fund managers are linked in a way that the maximisation problems of privateng in a
78
The important state variables for both DEMO are asset prices and investor wealth.dimension of portfolio return history entering the problem, except through wealth.  and past portfolio weight choices.  The private investor’s problem does not have this history enters the problem as a DEMO variable which iThe fund manager’s problem is slightly different in that the portfolio performances a function of past asset prices
managers can synthesise the DEMO to stock options by dynamic trading strategies.value securities with convex payoff schedules such as stock options.  Of course such sales are prohibited and the stock is not already held.  since information that a stock’s price will fall is of little value to a manager if shortThe constraint on DEMO selling may affect a manager’s search for miconstrained by a prohibition on holding derivative securities or selling assets short.The asset choice set in the DEMO choice probletoFund managers who have an incentive schedule which is convex in positive excess-benchmark returns and concave in negative excessm of many fund managers DEMO securities ark returns, will-
choices were consistent with the choices of DEMO prudent person.  Many investmentIn both the US and UK, courts hold fund managers to a ‘prudent person rule’.  Bythis rule fund managers must be able to demonstrate exler stocks, which are less efficiently priced, DEMO it not -poste that their portfolio
The rise of delegated portfolio management represents a major change in the2.5composition of decision makers in the market.Conjectures DEMO unexplained market phenomena  How might we expect a market in
institutional DEMO are absent?  In considering outcomes in financial markets, such which DEMO investors have a dominant role to differ from that in which
for the prudent person rule.researching the returns of smalprofessionals believe that fund managers DEMO deploy more resources on
consideration to who controls the ownership of the assets.  as asset price dynamics or the pricing of assets, the finance literature gives little
In this section several equity market anomalies are considered in the light of DEMO flow from an understanding of the rise of delegated portfolio management.eportfolio manHowever, when reviewing the results of existing research the rise of delegatedxpressed here are intended to form the basis for ongoing research.  Future researchagement should also be carefully considered.  Many of the most
fund managers is fundamentally different from that of private investors then theseallowance for that changstudies span DEMO period in which the structure of the market is changing, but DEMO nowhich the control of 28 percent of the US equity market has passed from privateinvestors to institutioninfluential empirical studies in finance span a part DEMO all of the period (1967al investors and foreign investors.  If the trading behaviour of-1998) in
fund managers on the basis of portfolio performance.  The best measure ofof peer managers, but excessperformance appears to be DEMO rank of the manager’s total re-to-benchmark returns are an adequate proxy for the35  However, we should expectturn within the universece of the excess
DEMO).
return to zero by holding the benchmark portfolio.investable benchmark portfolio, DEMO manager may reduce the variananalytically intractable rank variable.  Where performance is DEMO relative to anstrategy would reveal that the manager has no information (DEMO and Gorton 199managers to trade even if they have zero information simply because a buy and hold
manarisk to nearly zero by holding the DEMO weighted portfolio of the universe of managers.  Some  If the manager is measured relative to a universe of peers then the manager can DEMO performance gers who work for large investment management firms consider their effective remuneration class.
2.5.1The performanceDynamic hedging by fund managers-flow studies reviewed in section DEMO indicate that investors evaluate e.
79
average portfolio of the all firm’s managers within the relevant assetbenchmark to be the ‘house return’.  In that case the manager can hedge by holding the weighted
findings and considerations DEMO the previous sections of this essay.  The ideas
35
choose portfolio weight vectors that differ from the index and reflect the DEMO of In solving the portfolio choice problem in continuous time fund managers will
Thethe manager’s private information in each asset and the incentive schedule DEMO hedge band the manager’s portfolio performance history evolves, the manager willvector DEMO the vector of manager ‘bets’ against the index.  As the price DEMO evolves difference between the benchmark vector of asset weights and the manager’sy trading to a new portfolio weight vector.
80
To simplify, consider the following situation.  Assume that a manager knows with
36  The difference DEMO portfolio insurance for fund managers
return then the manager will be dismissed, whiccertainty that if the portfolio return is more than x percent below the benchmarkbenchmark portfolio (Brennan 1993).  and for private investors is DEMO for fund managersinsurance problem.wealth to zero.  In this stylised scenario, the manager has a classic discrete portfolioh entails a fall in end of DEMO
those bets to maximise end of period expected utility conditional upon the excessThe manager will choose a vector of bets at the beginning of DEMO period and then alter  the risk free asset is the-to-
none DEMO stock Y and therefore has a 2 percent bet against stock Y.  Manager B’spreferences that exhibit constant absolute risk aversion.  Manager A initially DEMO and is not traded except for liquidity purposes.information on all other stocks.  The rest of their portfolio is held in indexinitial portfolio initially capitalisation that is 2 percent of the index.  Then consider two managers that faceheterogeneous informthe incentive schedule described above and are identical in every respect DEMO their benchmark return not falling below ation signals for stock Y.  DEMO that the managers have riskholds 4 percent in stock Y.  The DEMO have zero–x.  Now consider a stock Y which has a market
DEMO effect of delegated portfolio management.  the market being divided into portfolio DEMO and non  See Grossman and Zhou (1996) for an equilibrium DEMO of the market outcomes that arise from -to-benchmark returns.Their portfolio insurers are insuring against low total-insurers.  However, they are not examining
36
returns DEMO than low excess
return by 200 percent.  Then, assuming that managers’ expectations over future DEMO The price vector evolves over the period and the return of stockmanager A will sell all other stocks in index proportion and buy stock DEMO  returns are unchanged, how will the managers react?  To dynamically hedge,dynamically replicate the option on stock Y.  manager B will sell the riskless asset, the market index, and take a larger bet DEMO Y to Y exceeds the index Likewise,
significantly, then to DEMO profound result of this ‘thought experiment’ is that when stock prices risethen manager B would be inducedynamic hedging.  If the price of stock Y was to fall sharply rather than rise sharply,whether they bet for DEMO against the stock.  Moreover, there is an asymmetry to thisFirstly, DEMO large changes in a stock’s price induce fund managWhat market phenomena could this manager dynamic hedging effect explain?stock because of the short sales DEMO that most managers face.  lly hedge, all managers are induced to buy the stock,d to buy the stock but manager A cannot DEMO theers to trade in the same
81
testable implication is that more herding should be found in larger stocks.  Thatdirection then we should expect to see fund manager herding in those stocks.  Themanagers have the largest bets.  That implication will be tested in ongoincontrolling for size, herding DEMO be greater in those stocks in which fundbe correct for UK unit trust managers.  A second testable prediction is that afterhypothesis is tested in detail in the herding essay of chapters 3 a
nd 4 and DEMO shown to g research.
price creates price pressure, then we should DEMO to see serial correlation in stockSecondly, if the fund managers herding DEMO stocks that have changed significantly in 37  The testable implication is DEMO the
prices.  This effect has been widely observed.that is held by DEMO investors.correlation in stock prices is monotonically increasing in the prolargest bets.  DEMO and Starks (1997) find that, after conditioning for size, daily serialeffect should be greater in large stocks and stocks in which fund DEMO take the
portion of a stock
37  See, for instance, DEMO and Titman (1993) or Lo and MacKinlay (1990).
should expect the dynamic hedging demand for stocks to be met by DEMO investors Finally, consider who is on the other side of these DEMO hedging trades.  We
accounting for fees, expenses and traditional risk factors.who are concerned with total retusurprised to see that fund managers underthe performance DEMO fund managers versus index benchmarks we should not beinvestors provide this dynamic insurance to fund managers, then when we measurerns and not excess-perform-to-benchmark returns.  If private  the benchmark even after
portfolio management.  In the first section the massive transfer of tThe purpose of this essay is to DEMO the importance of the rise of delegated2.6financial assets in the UK and US is documented in a series of tables and figures. Concluding remarks DEMO control of
82
flow of funds to managers who have achieved high relative performance iThe essay then brings together results from a large number DEMO empirical studies of the faced by private investors.  by fund managers.  Those incentives are significantly different from the incentivesperiods.  It is shown that these fund flows characterise the incentives that are facedn previous
are all DEMO to trade in the same direction.  Odynamic herding, namely, that DEMO large changes in prices occur, fund managersare discussed.  The most important observation results from a thought experiment on Finally, the effect of the differences in incentives for unexplained market phenomena f course, the subsequent shift in price
Nonetheless, we should expect to see fund manager herding abets against the index and those managers meet some of the hedging demand.arising DEMO price pressure undoes the hedging effect for managers who had smallhedging of pay-offs that are different to those faced by private investors.rising from dynamic
DEMO serial correlation in stock prices.  Secondly, the provision of dynamic iTwo other interesting results then follow.  Firstly, dynamic hedging may be a DEMO further research.performance of fund managers.  These three concepts will be the DEMO of hopefully private investors to institutional investors may partially explain the undernsurance by -
Table 2.1
131211
171514
24232120433834
13011480615496
198173159
232246434328276
495404
11
32543
1087
DEMO
403534
4448635448
97967562
196919681967
197219711970
1976197519741973
197919781977198219811980
198519841983
846354
168139111
198819871986
19901989199319921991
Source: Office for National
267228211
303394813823443
87
1412211610129
423530
11
21
31243
201512865
423632
4658966455
11392
Statistics – Financial Statistics
158132
Pension
Level of DEMO assets held by UK financial sectors (£bns)
Unit trusts –
DEMO
Insurance
long
funds
98
151312
28242018464035
12210375625487
193162142
222190280265247
138301297
282219
534034
1361082001671458875
590604411332233480
817729704
10311014121111531011
1943153614811286
funds
-term –
companies
long
Insurance
other DEMO
funds
-term
Building
societies
Banks
83
19951994
657544509443
19971996
678550
Table 2.2
Level of financial assets held by UK financial sectors (% of UK GDP
1970196919681967
19731972197119751974
197819771976
198119801979
198419831982
198719861985
199019891988
433630
545547
DEMO
Unit trusts
1994199319921991
S ource: Office for National Statistics
60667664
Pension DEMO
171816
1721201512
212016
252321
companies
232
243212222
272726
27262225
2320
242322
–
353129
4841364242
48606955
8674
986
1189
14151110 70
201816 Financial Statistics
543
DEMO
Insurance
funds
-term
– companies
33
44544
55
66
896
1098998
121311
other
long
Insurance
funds
- than
term
–
Building
222019
24232324
2422
DEMO
322927
383734
43374041
4444184142
societies
Banks
65585146
1011021058269
10999
130101
185158147
172183165
197192193176187173
247207210
)
84
1995
837372
19971996
Figure 2.3
Source: Office for National Statistics Figure 2
1500200025003000
10005000
.4
Level of financial assets held by UK financial sectors (% of UK GDP)–
Financial Statistics
Pension funds
200250300350400450500
15010050
Building societiesBanks
term fundsInsurance DEMO – longthan long term fundsInsurance companies – otherPension funds
Unit trusts
Level of financial assets held by UK financial sectors (£bns)Building societiesBanks
Insurance companies -other than long-term fundsInsurance companies -Unit trusts
85
35004000
Source: Office for National Statistics – Financial Statistics
long-term funds
0
19701967
197919761973
1991198819851982
DEMO
% of UK GDP
1976197319701967
198519821979
19911988
19971994
£ billion
Table 2.3
Pension funds
UK equity holdings of UK financial sectors (£bns
Unit trusts
term funds
companies
Insurance
– long-
Foreign1
Household
sector2
21
DEMO
197319721971
19751974197619781977
198119801979
198419831982
1513739
282418
654836
212438643
199019891988
Sources: Office DEMO National Statistics 19941993199219911995
11710682
219251202174257
43503330
59
443
686
211611
10469
171511
362822
595643
404525
12912296
142158126
96 199 145 125114156151
The ONS series DEMO the equity holdings of the foreign sector begins in 1979
198719861985
340
276
11
12
262922
8768
32
43
818867
– Financial Statistics
283223
DEMO
nana
nana
nanana768
158
554032
295165
1191288866
nana
nana
314538686154212530na
124146118
169246190
The ONS series on the equity holdings of the household sector begins DEMO 1975
1997
)
86
Table 2.4
197619751974
197919781977
19821981198019841983
198719861985
199019891988
19931992199119951994
2110
232624
29283432
323132
DEMO
343536
452
4544
6544
66
76
Source: Office for National Statistics DEMO
776
19971996
Pension
investors (proportions sum to 100)Proportional ownership of DEMO equity market, private versus institutional
funds
Unit trusts
companies
Insurance - DEMO o
institutional
f UK
Foreign
Household
sector
87
- longfunds141312-term
1417
18171918
1617
1918
investors
2221
– Financial Statistics  2423
39na
414845
5148495754
545253
586059
636357616261
10nanana6786
111310
131715149
241817
6176
525549
454435403
3537
2932202223
20212022
DEMO
Table 2.5
UK equity holdings of UK financial sectors as financial assets
DEMO funds
Unit trusts
long
companies
Insurance
-term funds
--
19681967196919721971197019741973197719761975
1981198019791978
19831982198419861985
44444244
4443475049
19931992199119901987 4747525350
Source: Office for National Statistics
19891988
52
5244495654473146444246
– Financial Statistics
8886848187837079746772
687071
60515754
51545655505352545247
19172023211821272419
272526
29283135333428
363437354039384241
1995
DEMO
52515049
19971996
5551
a % of their total UK
88
Figure 2.5
10060708090
4050102030 Households
Note:  The ONS series on the DEMO holdings of the foreign sector begins in 1979. Figure 2.6
financial assetsUK equity holdings of UK financial sectors as a % of their total DEMO
1008090
506070301020
Source: Office for National Statistics 1967 1977
– Financial DEMO
1997
Pension funds
Unit trusts
- long-term fundsInsurance companies
institutionProportion of ownership of UK equity market, private versus al investors
89
long-term fundsInsurance companies --Foreign
Pension fundsUnit trusts
0
Source: Office for National Statistics – Financial Statistics
40
0
1987
% of total financial assets
19771975
19831981197919871985
199319911989
DEMO
% Ownership
Table 2.6
19671966
19691968970
197319721971
1975197419761977197978
198119801982198519841983198719861991199019891988
1993199219951994
Source: Office for National Statics
--
0.260.20
0.430.250.38
0.260.660.56
1.330.061.151.591.571.48
2.012.322.574.413.881.888.384.167.867.910.942.27
-14.930.370.577.146.883.21
Net acquisition of UK DEMO
Unit trusts
Pension funds
0.050.130.190.08
0.060.080.07
0.240.010.040.120.010.02
-3.571.741.880.880.721.410.161.110.510.250.030.03
0.625.735.813.43
0.150.08
0.090.110.05
0.160.390.38
0.190.060.180.420.750.62
0.950.811.362.261.260.892.782.278.485.643.262.68
11.148.923.396.176.734.03
-
0.020.110.03
0.140.110.07
-0.180.150.230.510.530.08
-3.393.583.442.703.466.320.753.441.180.060.370.06
10.4617.273.739.159.438.10
0.020.05
– Financial DEMO;   Datastream
7.964.94
companies longInsurance funds
es by UK financial sectors (£bns)
-term
-0.120.08
-----0.070.210.150.030.550.230.350.33
-0.540.460.40
-----0.040.611.370.030.350.68
-----10.332.563.900.743.542.305.59
-2.426.17
--2.249.986.377.70
–
Foreign
DEMO
sector
90
19971996
Figure 2.7
Net acquisition of UK equities by UK financial sectors annual DEMO as a percentage of total equity market value–
8 year average
91
Source: Office for National Statics – Financial Statistics;   Datastream
3.5
DEMO
0.51.51
-0.5-10
Unit TrustsPension funds
Foreign-- Long-Term FundsInsurance CompaniesHouseholds
-1.5
% of Total Equity Market Value
1974-81
1982-89
1990-97
1966-73
Table 2.7
UK unit trust holdings
Net purchases of units trust shares  (£bns)
Number of unit trust holdings (mns)
Year
1971197019691968
DEMO
197719761975
1981198019791978
198419831982198719861985
199019891988
2.32.42.2
2.22.3
2.12.22
1.81.71.82
2.21.83.42.625
4.64.84.9
199319921991 4.44.55
Source: Office for National Statistics – Financial Statistics
Total Funds (£bns)DEMO
1.21.30.8
1.82.31.9
3.52.51.0
5.95.03.9
15.111.736.332.120.37.8
46.358.241.695.663.955.1
157.7131.9112.691.8
92
nana
0.10.2nana
0.50.10.2
1.41.50.66.35.22.5
0.43.91.8
9.10.62.86.98.3
19951994
6.66.198
10.210.0
19971996
Table 2.8
19681967
pension Private funds
11198
4843
5144
na
na
4
DEMO
685625
8878
institutions; and $564bn in mutual fund shares.  Insurance comSource:  The US Federal Reserve Flow of Funds$31bn in mutual funds.  Foreign investors held $343bn in US currency and deposits at US banks. Includes DEMO banks, savings and loan associations, mutual savings banks and credit unions. Before 1969, ‘B Money market funds came into existence in 1973. Note that at the end of 1998 private pension plans held $58bn in DEMO market funds; $31bn with savings SLGE is ‘State and Local Government DEMO Personal Trust & Estate’ is not separated from ‘Bank & Depository Institutions.’
1995199819971996
2352433137053155
1032104119131152168197223261305350399477524609767920536069818588
234420941715
362629892342
13341049891
panies held $112bn in money market DEMO and
12631055842
305236723418
606770736553
415254104660
432
195927552193
1518
1853
745
775
2828
5812
3466
5
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
DEMO
1990
1992
1994
1993
1991
1989
1987
1985
1983
1981
1979
1977
1975
1973
1971
1969
1262
1375
1572
1860
1584
1328
1207
124
DEMO
178
275
351
504
658
861
801
530
413
297
244
180
147
114
116129412568
484755
5947354743464652627760
14771375136112246427501480608590770993
186220180114576nanananana2444
603560232242291335314493425535540
138159185182193215245248264166115613213029379
670661306358404444414522515608630
325358409458518581646702780316301274252237868
2563242310951260158714101901176320762208948
DEMO
54535178341237794150477344484856492947994955
2062202683193904375165415961591521277029499
290527051178157613552009188521632336816974
Level of US financial assets held by US financial sectors ($bns)
1
retirement
funds
SLGE
2
Mutual
funds
Money
market
funds3
trusts and
personal
estates
Bank
companies
Insurance
- life &
other
institutionsdepository Banks and
5
Foreign
93
1
Table 2.9
196819671972197119701969
12151312
5765
6555
nanana
1413na
4
25242426
2341383522
7583797673
DEMO
institutions; and $564bn in mutual fund shares.  Insurance companies held $112bn in money market funds aSource:  The US Federal Reserve Flow of DEMO SLGE is ‘State and Local Government Employee.’ Money market funds came into existence in 1973. Note that at the end of 1998 private pension DEMO held $58bn in money market funds; $31bn with savings
$31bn in DEMO funds.  Foreign investors held $343bn in US currency and deposits at DEMO banks. Includes commercial banks, savings and loan associations, mutual savings banks and credit unions. Before 1969, ‘Bank Personal Trust & Estate’ is not separated from ‘Bank & Depository Institutions.’
1995199819971996
34514641
17161412111110666767777899
282622
433731
161312
DEMO
434240
152135117
838179
645854
nd
243
313833
21
26
10
11
39
105
80
48
5
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
DEMO
1992
1994
1993
1991
1989
1987
1985
1983
1981
1979
1977
1975
1973
12
15
15
18
20
22
29
27
27
31
29
DEMO
29
23
17
16
15
15
13
191919
23322222233
10101011111316212136
na0000023675
77798999966
1210109
898988
1010101099999889
2223232323232425232222
2831303332353537372426
2933333539404648353435
6565657271818592924859
8585858484818385848484
9495958591817978798790
1416171719171820111315
2731293535373742412123
pension DEMO funds 1
Level of US financial assets held by US financial sectors (% of US GDP)
Money
funds 2
Mutual funds
funds 3
trusts and estates
-
life & other
investors
institutions
5
market
personal
DEMO
companies
Insurance institutional
Total of
depository
Banks and
Foreign
94
retirement SLGE
1
Figure 2.8
15000200002500030000
10000
400350250300
150200
100500 Source:  The US Federal DEMO Flow of Funds
Level of US financial assets held by US financial sectors ($bns)ForeigndepositoryBanks andBank personalothercompanies - life &Insuranceinstitutions
Mutual funds fundsMoney DEMO and estates
depositoryBanks andBank personal trustsothercompanies - life &Insuranceinstitutions
Mutual funds DEMO market
fundsPrivate pensionfundsSLGE retirement
95
35000
50000
fundsSLGE retirement
Figure 2.
Source:  The US Federal Reserve Flow of Funds9 fundsPrivate pension
Level of DEMO financial assets held by US financial sectors (% of US GDP)DEMO
and estates
1969196719731971
197919771975
198519831981
19891987199519931991
% of US GDP
1997
19691967197519731971
198119791977
198719851983199319911989
19971995
$ billions
Table 2.10
19681967
pension Private funds
6151
46
4046
199219931995199419911990198919881987119851984198319821981198019791978197719761975197419731972197119701969986 1238 754 DEMO
Source:  US Federal Reserve Flow of Funds SLGE is ‘State and Local Government Employee’.
12
US equity holdings of US financial sectors ($bns)retirement funds SLGE
618967 15 49 106na 37
651
31
2232186414911081081251241501752342182833503594944995074855935627488089389969475
Before DEMO, ‘Bank Personal Trust & Estate’ is not separated from ‘Bank & DEMO Institutions’.
19971996
225
53444739229630022017015012010222016243030333744486090977
15921306543956
1
Mutual
607401309233251188182161114414052382634373232354237497481
252320191470710
funds
trusts and
18121723419020717215616417114615213412513511310410010910712489887692
167538401249
2
personal
estates
Bank
companies
2428
11010513113714555455549546478789226283442
160190178271250358329450950746559
life & DEMO
Insurance - Households
682815
112814181382814598637543550675903810870984914587573373499
16401964179529202578299032213995628053334528
Foreign
2630
170126393443404265487664969627272435
1110198176276251329299398373528916657
US listed value of equitiesMarket
835996
10421514116014031588182518891220988949979298508416378468
1006127462319276331153537383254584866833162406258
1295915438
96
1998
Table 2.11
pension Private funds
199219931995199419911990198919881987119851984198319821981198019791978197719761975197419731972197119701969986 156 9 12
Source:  US DEMO Reserve Flow of Funds data
21
investorsPercentage ownership of US equity market, private versus institutional
7
funds 110
1
5
trusts and estates
- life &
investors
1996 10121312131515151618192021181816151615151615899 9 11
SLGE is ‘State and Local Government Employee’.
19681967
1415
retirement
22188887655554333333332
10109
SLGE
Mutual
455576776765443333334444
101615
funds
DEMO
personal
0
1010111011121011101111
998
88766
3333265545
2
Bank
companies other
54333665555566655566
6556655555
Total of US Households
6766686982515856586159596360585552504952505351515353
484145
Insurance institutional3030282614383736343536324143444042353639
4441445149473940413940
Foreign
33333644444444555556667766
677
DEMO
1997
Before 1969, ‘Bank Personal Trust & Estate’ is not separated DEMO ‘Bank & Deposi
1998
Figure 2.10
60%80%
20%40%
Figure                      Source:  The US Federal Reserve Flow of Funds20%.11
DEMO
40%60%
Source:  The US Federal Reserve Flow of Funds
% Ownership of US equity market, private versus institutional
98
Foreign
HouseholdsinvestorsUS institutional
Other
institutional type% Ownership of US equity market, private versus institutional, by
DEMO
trusts & estatesBank personalothercompanies - life &InsuranceMutual funds
100%
20%
fundsPrivate DEMO retirement
0%
19711969
1975197319791977
198319811987198519911989199719951993
% Ownership
1969
1977
198919871985198319811979
1997
% Ownership
197519731971
199519931991
Table 2.12 pension funds
assetsUS equity holdings of financial sectors as a DEMO of their total US financial
Private
retirement
SLGE
Mutual funds
personal
Bank
companies
Insurance -
Foreign
99
2
Source:  The US Federal Reserve DEMO of Funds1993199419961995
4752
403637353840414244434146424342454442525961545455
504745
625650
1
686355
433830
221816
201615
19681967
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
DEMO
1989
1987
1985
1983
1981
1979
1977
1975
1973
1971
1969
414243
funds
79
18232523222222222330242722171412
2830313632323938384243
9183
74797970706768626466818889858590
6046383838384340404844
estates trusts &
58595554535550515248556469686768na
4841384039383634272925
2
life and other
1110
10121311101112111213141814111112
111211101011121214149
3322
12161613111113121314212624272934
1213141313151414141412
1 SLGE DEMO ‘State and Local Government Employee’.
1997
Before 1969, ‘Bank Personal Trust & Estate’ is not separated from ‘Bank & Depository Institutions’.
1998
Figure 2.12
8090
100
6070
304050
1020
Source:  The US Federal DEMO Flow of Funds
1969
1978
1988
1998
assetsUS equity holdings of financial sectors as a % of their total US financial
100
Bank personal DEMO & estates Mutual funds SLGE retirement fundsPrivate pension funds
ForeignotherInsurance companies - life and
0
% of total financial assets
Table 2.13
19681967
197719761975197419731972197119701969 5.34.12.6
7.37.1206
19921993199519941991199019891988198719861985 5.9 41.3 87.4
Source:  DEMO US Federal Reserve Flow of Funds21
pension Private funds
2.51.8
------1.81.20.42.20.40.92.43.71.8
13.7---5.93.52.81.60.61.8
1996 --10.630.814.9---12.638.95.66.90.24.41.7 29.3 100.8
SLGE is ‘State and Local Government Employee’.
19791978
DEMO
-
13.39.8
16.4
4.8
21.917.3-7.1
12.1
5.4
8.9
4.1
7.5
8.1
6.3
1.8
4.6
4.84.6
Net acquisition of US equities bretirement funds SLGE
1.8
DEMO
31.213.231.828.62.9242121
44.365.753.552.2
1.30.7
2.1
3.7
2.6
3.1
3.7
2.4
3.4
3.2
1
Mutual
59.848.514.426.920.210.3-1.216
115.3143.5166.8193
funds
personal estates trusts & Bank
8.10.80
-6.64.47.41.89.6
---0.40.20.92.27.24.95.98.2-6
DEMO
--45.972.3-----55.217.3-0.51.64.85.28.68.85.237
y US financial sectors ($bns)
Foreign
Households
companies Insurance DEMO life & other
2
2.32.11.3
2.66.56.85.71.41.42.31.93.64
3.5
4
5.55.14.4-
-17.6-12.72.88.40.22.4
87
15.837.162.935.312
95.218
1.62.10.7
0.70.82.42.80.23.11.31.30.91
4.2
-
3.74.83.45
10.417.9--4.4152.9169
20.964.216.6
-0.95.6
42.5
11
---15.74.4
DEMO
----12.124.145.166.622.617.33.64.3-7
-111.2
-------111.2159.8132.5281.523.687.933.355.684.3-26
-513.9-192
-10.65.5
-500
corporationsListed
2.92.5
---------13.714.215.712.64.46.35.26.57.8--53
7.6
--10.472.6-14.526.7
102.665.957.26598
--
-137.7105.437.776.924.63.5
178.4797
101
1997
Before 1969, ‘Bank Personal Trust & Estate’ is not separated from ‘Bank & Depository Institutions’.
1998
Figure 2.13
-0.51.50.5-1210
-2.5-1.5-3.5-3-2
annual flows as a percentage of total equity DEMO valueNet acquisition of US equities by US financial sectors –
10 year average
102
Private pension fundsMutual funds fundsSLGE retirement
Source:  The US DEMO Reserve Flow of Funds
and estatesBank personal trustsForeignlife & otherInsurance companies -
Listed corporationsHouseholds
% of Total equity market value
1969-781959-68
1989-981979-88
1949-58
Table 2.14
Direct purchases
Acquisition of US equities by US households ($bns)
Net purchases
Purchases made through mutual funds
103
Source: Investment Company Institute, Mutual Fund Fact Book 1996Figure 2.14
19851984
1991199219941993
-----10311413412832
--281206156
21412597
-
--1096731
of table 2.13 which is derived from the more authoritative DEMO Federal Reserve Flow of Funds data.Note:  The data series of the net purchase of equities by US households in this table does not DEMO match that Acquisition of US equities by US households ($ bns)DEMO
100200300
-1000
-300-200
1986
1988
1990
1989
1987
-12174
--1121230
-
124-1032201448591035
---103108
---10012412187218
-11069
19961995
Direct purchases
Net purchasesfundsthrough mutualPurchases made
Year
-400
DEMO: Investment Company Institute, Mutual Fund Fact Book 1996
19851984
198819871986
19901989
1994199319921991
19961995
$ billions
Table 2.15 Number of US mutStock and bond fundsual fund shareholder accounts (millions)n/a 1
Source: Investment Company Institute, Mutual Fund Fact DEMO 1996197419761978198019821984198619881990 11911101430364090579878 13321416182325240015
Figure 2140160.15 US mutual fund shareholder accounts
Money market funds
19721970Year
100120
406080
Source: Investment Company Institute, Mutual Fund Fact DEMO 1996
20
0
104
fundsMoney marketfundsStock and bond
1992
Money market funds came into existence in 1973.
19961994
1
1970197619741972
1984198219801978
19881986
1992199019961994
Number DEMO accounts (millions)
Figure 1.21.41.61.82.16
0.20.40.60.8
equity holdings in the UK and the USRatio of DEMO domestic equity holdings to institutional domestic
105
UKUS
Source:                The US Federal Reserve Flow of Funds DEMO for National Statistics –
Financial Statistics
2
1
0
19771975198319811979
198919871985
1997199519931991
Ratio
3.1 Introduction
106
investors behave differently from private investors.  Previous empirical studies offinancial assets?  A principal reasonWhy do we care whether fund managers DEMO in their purchases and sales of is that herding is evidence that institutional
Fund Manager Herding
their different trading behaviour.that the market can be DEMO into groups of investors which are delineated byHowever, a separate motivation DEMO that empirical findings of herding are evidencesame direction at the same time, move asherding have sought to determine whether institutional investors, by trading DEMO theset prices away from ‘fundamental’ values.
38
Suppose a private investor and a fund manager each hold 4 percent of theirsimple example can illustrate DEMO major difference between them Private investors and institutional investors seem to be two such distinct groups.  A- incentives.
stock; because even though management DEMO generally increase linearly with thehighly sensitive to returns achilarge fund can make the manager’s end of period wealth (or investment firm value)benchmark return and the flow of new money to the fund.size of the fund, thea period.  For the private investor the stock contributes a 6 percent increase to end of respective portfolios inThe effect ofperiod wealth, in direct proportion to the initial weight of the stock in the portfolio.complicated.  Firstly, it will be non the stock return on the fund manager’s end of period wealth is more a particular stock which realises a return DEMO 150 percent overeved.  -linear relationship between a fund’s excess-linear in the DEMO  Secondly, the scale of abenchmark return of the-
re is a non to-
38
40
Chapter 3
39
(1995, 1999), Kodres DEMO Pritsker (1995).
Tufano (1992), Zeckhauser, Patel and Hendricks (1991).
A condensed version of this essay exists as a working DEMO Wylie (1996b). See Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1992b), DEMO, Titman and
Wermers (1995), Wermers
39 See Orphanides (1996), Chevalier and Ellison (1997a), Khorana (1996), Rockinger (1995), Sirri and
different incentives from those of private investors they can be expected to DEMO point of this example is that since institutional investors face fundamentally
the existence of groups of investors that differ in their investment and tradingdifferently.  It is surprising then that finance theory does not put more emphasito DEMO representative investor is simply the increase in value of the portfolio held behaviour.  Most portfolio management and investment theory assumes that the gaininvestor.  DEMO, for example, the investor in the CAPM or the informed trader in wthe financial assets held.becathe Kyle model of market microstructure.  Clearly neither are institutional investorshich implicitly assumes that the representative investor is not an DEMO their end of period wealth changes in direct proportion to the total return ons on-
107
their trading behaviour.  The manner in which such groups interact with each otherTo better comprehend the market equilibrium we need DEMO know whether investorscan be clustered into groups (such as private investors DEMO institutional investors) by
st of whether the group’s .
trade between DEMO arising from dynamic insurance of the differenmay be central to understanding phenomena such as: overshooting in asset prices; net trading behaviour is significantly DEMO from that of the rest of the marketthat a test for herding by a group of investors constitutes a teaggregate provision of insurance.  In this context the importance of herding studies is and differences in investment DEMO of the groups as a result of net trade andt risks they face;
do not act solely on the basis of their private DEMO,Herding by a group of investors is generally taken to mean that individual investors but instead, give some
42
precedence in their decisionare assumed in the existing literature to be found predominantlof herding, such as correlated information signals or relative performance evaluation, characteristics of a group of investors that are identified by herding theory as causesand consequently the members of DEMO group act in concert.  Empirical studies havefocused on herding among fund DEMO, rather than other groups o Brown and Goetzmann (1997) form DEMO mutual fund managers into ‘style’ groups by a method Brennan (1993) addresses this issue in the CAPM framework.-means cluster analysis.-making to the decisions DEMO other members of the group,y in institutionalf investors.  The
41
DEMO is analogous to k
41
42
available on the trading behaviour of other groups of investors.investors rather than DEMO investors.  Moreover, as a practical matter little data isthe The Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (LSV 1992b) measure of herding is based ondegree to which investors in the group trade on the same side of DEMO market, as
108
Wermers (GTW 1995) find stronger evidence of DEMO by US mutual fundof herding among US equity pension fund managers, DEMO more herding in smallcompared to that which would be expected by pure chance.  LSV find weak evidence market capitalisation stocks . Using the LSV measure, Grinblatt, Titman and
managers in stocks that are traded by DEMO numbers of managers in a period.
ty market in 1997.
They find very large levels of herding for some subsets of the data.  measure to study herding by foreign investors in the Korean equimanagers trading the DEMO in a period.  Choe, Kho and Stulz (1999) use the LSVUS mutual funds, but little variation in the herding level with the number of
between the portfolio weight changes of two randomly formed subWermers (1995) develops a different measure of herding based on the correlation-groups of the
measures substantial levels of herding, which increases with the number of fundsinvestothat institutions herd intrading.  Kodres and Pritsker (1995) examine herding in the futures market and findexplain a large part of the changes in DEMO positions.  rs.  The Wermers measure applied to the GTW mutual fund data also their holdings of futures contracts, but the herding does not
found evidence of herding by institutional investors that was consistent with ‘overshooting’ DEMO institutional investors and the returns of securities before and after the measured period.  HeCrockett (1970) study of mutual funds which found, for DEMO brief period studied, that managers buyreported large monthly net trade, in some stocks, between the group of institutional investors and themonthly trades of 229 institutional investors between January 1968 and September 1969.  Theyrest of the market.  Klemkosky (1977) exselling of stocks that had recently peaked in price.prices; the herding was manifested in net buying of stocks that had recently risen in price and net Empirical studies of the existence of DEMO manager herding began with the Friend, Blume andamined the relationship between DEMO net trades of a group of of stock
43
Wermers (1999), using 20 years of US mutual fund data finds evidence of herding by
stocks that were previously bought by successful managers.  Kraus and Stoll (1972) examined the
43
groups of investors whose trades are significantly corrThe studies of LSV, GTW and Wermers suggest that herding measures can identify:(positive serial correlations in the portfolio weight changes of a single group) andwhich this herding occurs; and intertemporal effects such as feedback tradinggroups).  Measures of herding DEMO to have a broad application in studies of thecascades (positive serial DEMO rest of the market by their trading behaviour.groups of fund managers, DEMO mutual fund managers, can bdynamic equilibrium of the market.  A clear finding of the empirical studies is that-correlations in portfolio weigelated; the types of stocks inht changes between twoe separated from
In order to obtain DEMO expected value of zero in the absence of herding the LSV andshown in the next sectionWermers measures are constructed with strong implicit assumptions.  However, as some of these assumptions are not sustained in real
Further it is assumed that when a manager trades a certain stock in a DEMO, the exdatasets.  It is counterfactually assumed that all managers may short sell all stocks.the manager must invest during the period. on either the DEMO initial weight in the stock or the amount of new money thatante probability of the manager buying rather than selling that stock is not DEMO
The primary purpose of this study is to determine whether the empirical herding
hether the measures substantially overstate the level of herding present.
wsignificant DEMO of herding where no herding exists.  Or if herding does exist,DEMO  That is, whether those measures find a statistically and economicallyliterature is well founded by testing whether the principal measures of herding are
independent DEMO of trading decisions, drawn from a group of investors, that isIdeal data for a test of the accuracy of herding measures would be DEMO large number of
would create an estimate of the sampling distribution of the herding measure underknown to exwould allow estimatesconditions of zero herding.  The herding measurements on the independent  datasetsherding.  A feasible alternative approach is DEMO start with an actual dataset of the netherding, and secondly, the expected value of the herding measure in the absence ofhibit no herding.  Applying the herding measure to each such dataset
of, firstly, the DEMO of a false positive finding of
109
which exhibit approximately zero systematic herding.
period January 1986 to December 1993, is employed to test In this study a dataset of the portfolio DEMO of 268 UK equity unit trusts, in theare formed by reherding DEMO of LSV and Wermers (1995).  The required zero herding datasetsdatasets as much of the essential characteristics of the actual dataset as possible,DEMO bootstrapping, are designed with the objective of maintaining inwhilst still eliminating DEMO systematic herding.  To separate the effect of differenttechniques are implemented to DEMO datasets in which the different invalidinvalid assumptions on the accuracy of the herding measures, various retrades of a group of inv-sampling from the actual dataset.  The reestors, and from it, randomly create independent datasets-sampling techniques,the accuracy of the-samp the newling
number of funds that trade the DEMO during the period.  The measured level ofherding is higher for the DEMO and the largest market capitalisation stocks.  For the of 20 managers DEMO on one side of the market.period, the level of herding is DEMO with an average of between 13 and 14subset of the data where 20 or more managers traded the stock over the paThe LSV measure DEMO first applied to the actual dataset, inaccuracyassumptions are relaxed.  .  DEMO significant amount of herding is found which is incrwithout adjustment foreasing in therticular
110
which is implicit in the LSV measThe first accuracy test DEMO the effect of the invalid short sales assumptionThat is, when short DEMO is ruledaverage level of herding which is positive and large in certain categories of stocks.short selling and approximately zero systematic herding, the LSV measure finds an out the LSV measure is not calibrated to zero.  ure.  On 1,000 datasets, constructed to exhibit no
managers can sell DEMO short. much of the herding found can be attributed to the false LSV assumption that all fund For stocks that lie, in market capitalisation, between the largest and smallest stocks,assumption.  Nonetheless, the herding levels found in the UK dataset exceed the 95smallest market capitalisation stocks is DEMO to the LSV short sellingpercentile of the sampling distribution Moreover, about DEMO third of the herding found in the in every major subset of the dataset.  th
mutual fund managers finds a surprisingly strong level of herding in some DEMO of The Wermers measure, when applied to the actual trading decisions DEMO UK equity
formed into two value weighted portfolios, in the subset DEMO the dataset where 15 orthe data.  For example, when the funds are randomlyweight changes in the portfolios is 0.24.more managers trade a stock DEMO a period, the sample ‘correlation’ between divided into two groups and
DEMO
mers measure is similarly tested by transforming the data to
herding in the actual dataset.  Nonsubstantially biased towards finding herding and severely overstates the level ofand where more than 10 managers trade a stock in a DEMO, the Wermers measure iseliminate systematic herding.  To test for the effect of misThe accuracy of the Werobservation is undertaken.  Rcorrelation, bootstrap reagain DEMO  distribution, the hypothesis of no herding among the UK equity unit trust managers is measure to the actual dataset are compared to the DEMO zero herding sampling-sampling of the portfolio weight changes in eachesults from 200 replications show that, for large stocksetheless, when the results of applying DEMO Wermers
-specification of the test for
With this study of outside the US, the results of the empirical herding literature are made more general.  herding among equity mutual fund managers in a large market
trading of largest andHerding is found where a large proportion of the managers trade DEMO stock, and in their  smallest stocks.  The foundation of the DEMO herding
measures under the null assumption of no herding is estimated empirically ratherliterature is strengthened because in this study the distribution of the herdingthan DEMO assumed. Finally, the tof fund manager performance, window dressdistribution of other measures based upon portfolio holdings data, such as, measuresof trading decisions DEMO easily be adapted to empirically estimate the samplingechniques developed here for re-sampling datasets
A natural approach to the analysis of herding is to begin DEMO the individualinvestors’ decisions to trade and then search for forces that align or polarise theiractions to create the aggregate effect of herding.  Fund managers face a stochastic
3.2
Types of herding
ing or performance persistence.
every period.  The manager seeks to maximise an objective function, such DEMO optimisation problem which we can assume for simplicity is solved oncefirm, DEMO choosing stocks from the choice set, subject to constraints such as DEMO shortexpected utility of end of period wealth or the value of the investment management
112
stock returns, which along with initial conditions are the inputsales.  The information set of the manager is processed to estimate the moments of to the objective
performance evaluation of managers causes the portfolio DEMO the objective function of another manager, which in turn may lead DEMO positiveings of one manager to  relative
d by other
which derive DEMO a part of the manager’s optimisation problem.There are several explanations for the existence of fund manager herding, each offunction.    Firstly,
principals, a consensus decision is taken to be a stronger signal of quality DEMO awhen the quality of managers’ decisions are assessed, then for tmanagers.  managers, may choose to ignore some private information and herd with the otherdepend on returns which are measured relative to the return on assets DEMO decision.  Maug and Naik (1996) show that a manager whose DEMO same payoff to the
overlap in their information sets.  Models by DEMO (1990), Froot, SSecondly, positive correlation of the trading decisions DEMO managers can arise fromcharfstein,
valuing private information investors consider the probability that the informationStein (1992) and Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam and Titman (1994) recognise that when estimates of stock return moments from partially correlated  private information sets.  effect may lead managers to research the same stocks and therefore derive theirwill be incorporated into the price of the asset within DEMO investment horizon.  This
Hirshleifer and Welch (1992) provide the seminal DEMO for herding theories based on trades of those other managers who are perceived to be informed.  Bikhchandani,Thirdly, managers may augment their information DEMO with inferences from the
categor Devenow and Welch (1996) comprehensively review herding theory and provide a similarisation of herding theory.
44
correlation between DEMO trades of managers.  Scharfstein and Stein (1990) argue that
44
strategies.based on public information, such as momentum, contrarian or earnings surprisethe DEMO public information.  In particular, they may follow the same strategiesinformationlocal conformity.  Banerjee (1992) applies these ideas to explain herding as anal cascade.  In addition, fund managers may take decisions on the basis of
DEMO information sets.  In contrast, if herding arises from informationalMathematievaluation then the portfolio weight changes of individual managers should beequations 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 below.  If herding arises from relative performancepositively correlated witcal definitions of herding implied by the herding theories are set out inh the changes of DEMO other managers after conditioning on
Equation Equation Informational cascade 33..12
itj
itu
t
Relative performance evaluation
corr
Δ
w , Δw
I
>
0
Equation 3.3
Correlated information
corr Δw
Δw
itjj
it
, Δw
Δw
DEMO
it
′
′′
,
I
tt
I
, Δw
, Δ
DEMO
′′
it
w
′
corr
Δ
w
itjj
,
w , DEMO
ititu
corr
corr
Δ
it
Δ
w
u
I
t
>
DEMO
=
0
> 0
≤ 0
(3.2b)
(3.3a)(3.3b)DEMO
113
information, the correlation should be zero.weight changes of individual managers DEMO be unconditionally correlated with the correlated information sets are the sole explanation of herding, then the portfolioaggregate changes of the remaining managers but, DEMO managers and other managers thacascade then positive conditional correlation should be found only betweent are perceived to be informed.  Ifer conditioning on the shared
(3.2a)
ittju
i
itu
Where Δw   =
Δw   =
itu
Δw DEMO  =
t
w ′′  = the change in portfolio weight of the sub group of managers perceived to be
uninformed (excluding manager ), in stock , in period
There are, however, other means by which the trading of fund managers may become of the
= the DEMO of managers’ information sets for stock  to the end of period DEMO
correlated, which are apparent when herding is considered in a framework DEMO herding.  Firstly, changes in the opportunity set faced by managers can induceportfolio choice problem of individual managers, but are not generally considered to
fund managers on average hold more than the market weight in larger DEMO, asthem to trade in the same direction.  Consider for example small stocks.  Becauseinstitutional investors.small stocks get larger there is a net flow of these stocks from private investors to  These trades are clearly correlated across managers.
stock rises sufficiently, the stock moves into the domain of income managers whoAnother exproblem faced by imay then buy the stock in concert.  Secondly, changes in the scale of the optimisation previous period receive more of the new money in the current period, and thereforemanagers who hold those stocks which realised high abnormal positive returns in the have a DEMO need to buy.  Ion average trade in the same direction.weights by DEMO the new money in stocks that they already hold, then they DEMO is dividend yield.  When the yield of a previously low yieldingndividual DEMO may lead to correlated trading.  Fundf these managers maintain their existing DEMO
45
Changes in the issued capital of a stock are another form of variation in the
4645
j i j tj i i i DEMO t
114
the change in portfolio weight of manager j, in DEMO i, in period t
the change in portfolio weight of the DEMO group of managers (excluding
manager ), in stock , in period
the change in portfolio weight of the sub group of managers perceived DEMO be
informed (excluding manager ), in stock , in period
Wermers calls this a scale effect. See Lakonishok, Shleifer, Thaler and Vishny (1991)
Δ
I
(other than portfolio change information).
46
managers’ opportunity set.  IPOs, seasoned equity issues, stock repurchases,
effects of other capital changes can be routinely undone.buyFortunately, in portfolio holdings data observations surrounding equity issues, stockdelistings etc., generate positively correlated trading DEMO is an illusion of herding.-backs, capital payouts and birth and death DEMO stocks can be ignored, and the
decisions of individual managers may DEMO ofTo summarise, correlated trading arising from the polarisation of the trading DEMO types.  Firstly, managers making
115
performance evaluation or informational cascade.  DEMO, positive correlationtheir decisions on the basis of other managers’ decisions because DEMO relativesets.  These sources of correlated trading are considered to be herding DEMO theybetween managers’ decisions as a result of overlapping prtheir trading decisions.  DEMO, correlated trading arises fromresult from managers’ cognisance of the actions of DEMO managers when makingin accurate measures of herding.  managers.  These effects are not considered to be herding and must be controlled for changes in DEMO characteristics of stocks and changes of scale in the holdings of someivate or public information  the market artefacts of
From an experimenter’s perspective, DEMO manager’s portfolio choice decision for each
which is unknown.  Portfolio holdings DEMO record these realisations in panels ofstock, in each period, is the realisation of a stochastic process, the exact form ofeach fund at that date.  The task in measuring herding is to test for independence ofdata, one for each date, which show how many shares in each DEMO were held by
3.3the trading decisions of managers whilst controlling for effects that are not herding,, then to summarise the degree of joint DEMO
held or sold by manager denoted here by buy, holdThe LSV DEMO measure or sell.x  The basic unit of data is a stockj , which records whether stock j .  From the experimenter’s perspective, the probabilitynagers’ portfolio choice decision for ai, in period -period-manager observation,t, DEMO either bought,
stock to an ordered categorical variable, which takes DEMO of three outcomes; eitherLSV simplify the task by transforming the ma
DEMO
Wermers employ non parametric methods for this purpose.between the trades of the managers in the group.  The herding measure of LSV andand if independence is rejected
money that the manager must invest.other managers; the manager’s initial holding in the stock; and the amount of newvariables, including: the manager’s information set; the obsedistribution of this trichotomous variable may be conditioned by several otherrved trading decisions of
x in
116
period t.  That is, DEMO Xthe outcome of a Bernoulli trial.  LSV further assume that Prob(DEMO on the occurrence LSV consider only those observations where the outcome is a buy or a sell.  This = sell), denoted here by ptional on a trade occurring, the probability that the outcome is of a trade reduces the observed trading direction to, is a constant, DEMO , for any random variable  t itj is
itj = buy  Xitj = buy
j itj
a buy (the propensity to buy) DEMO the same for the trading of all managers, in all stocks,DEMO
it t
Bernoulli triain any one period.  It is further assumed DEMO, in the absence of herding, each of thethe number of managers who trade stock ls is independent of all other trials.  Under these assumptions, if ni in period , and b is the number of

managers who buy the stock, then b is the outcome of a random draw from a
it
binomial distribution with probability parameter p DEMO dimension n .
it it
significant cross sectional variation in this proportion is found, then the null of noproportion of those who trade that stock, has the same vherding the expected number of managers who buy a stock in a period, as aThe LSV test of herding rests upon the following proposition.  In the absence of, in period , DEMO measured as follows.t
Equation H3.lsv4 = it
nb - - nb -
it it t itit t
t
is the sample estimate of the DEMO parameter pis the expectation operator t, where t = ibit/ init.

r Ε  r 
 
Where E
ρ ρ DEMO Σ
i
t
t alue, p , for all stocks.  If
it
herding can be rejected.  The herding in stock

stockoverall herding statistic HThe value of either buying or selling.  The estimated variance of the herding statistic in onestock-period, VarH b /nit - , is easily calculated from the values of b , n and
H lsv = Tt 1 t itt
This magnitude will be large if DEMO trading of managers is polarised in the directionof buys to trades and the expected value of that ratio under the null of no herding.
DEMO
t
ρ 
is the magnitude of the difference between the observed ratio
lsv is simply the average of the herding statistic over allit DEMO t.  The
iN1 HN
ρ
∑ ∑
t
=
=
Where
DEMO
N
3.6
is the number of stocks considered in the period t
T
is the number of periods.
VarH
=
T1
VarHN
lsv
T
DEMO
it
2
2
t 1
i 1
3.6.  Hypothesis testing is DEMO straightforward.  Under the LSV null, this statistic is approximately normally distributed (by theLindberg-Feller version of the Central Limit Theorem) with variance as DEMO equation
this measureThe several different sources of herding predicted by herding theory are captured bysets of indpositive correlation between the trades of the managers, then the variance of bgreater than the null condition variance of nividual DEMO are correlated, then the expected value of b.  If relative performance evaluation or informational cascade inducep (1-p ).  Otherwise, if the DEMO
t
= ∑ =
t
t
t
is is
it
it
it

Equation
-periods of interest.
117
3.5
it
∑
it
managers trading in one direction will be found.  conditioned on that information.47  In each case unexpectedly large numbers of
estimation error need not go to zero as we average Hnegative values of (not applicable.  Moreover, because of the absolute value opertwo reasons.  Firstly, HHowever, the LSV measure should be expected to find herding population counterpart pt tit-.  Therefore,  is calculated using the sample quantity  pt ) can lead to positive bias in H[Hit ] is not zero, which means that the CLT is  across stocks and dates.  ation, both positive and where none exists for  rather than its
t
; meaning that the
ρ
have occurred and the random outcome of interest is whether the manager DEMO orSecondly, the LSV measure starts with the observations where a trade DEMO known to
it
stock is also known.  Therefore, it is implicitly assumed that all manageralternatively sold the stock in the period.  But the beginning of period holding in thezero, the manager’s decision is not a random outcome sell all stocks because otherwise in those observations where the DEMO holding is it must be a buy. s can short
to be no more than the number of managers who initially hold the stock.  In terms of the distribution of bthe LSV measure is calculated assuming DEMO binomial distribution of b the short sales constraint imposes a left truncation.  In contrast, .  Therefore, on
cases where some managers have DEMO initial holdings, the short sales constraintmust be buys, so the measure must return a nonreal datasets drawn from groups of managers, few if any of whom can undertakeof the managers who trade in a stock-period DEMO hold the stock then all the -negative value.  However, in otherit trades
the distribution of bof herding, because the truncation reduces the overall probability mass in the tails ofcan lead to an expected value of DEMO LSV measure which is negative in the absenceit.
47
48
118
ρ
Ε
it
The short sales constraint restricts the number of ‘sell’ occurrences DEMO a stock-period
short sales, the expected value of the LSV measure DEMO no longer be zero.  If none
likewise manifested as changes in DEMO undertake short sales if such trades are foreshadowed in the fund prospectus. Changes in the characteristics of stocks, such as the transition of small stocks to large stocks are UK unit trust managers are prohibited from DEMO short sales.  US mutual fund managers may e expected value of DEMO
48
it,
Two other reasons that the distribution of bdistribution, even in the absence of herding, are apparent. M does not have the assumed binomialanagers whose weight in
a stock is already comparatively large at the beginning of DEMO period are more likelyempirical studies show that mutual fund managers who have manager poor performing managers.  We might therefore expect that plength in section 2.3.  They therefore have a higher propensity to buy stocks thanrelative to their peers receive more of the new money to manage, as discussed atthe manager’s initial holding in the stock and the manager’s liquidity need DEMO buyj buys rather than sells stock i in period t, is DEMO by both the size of recent high performance itj, the probability DEMO
119
manager or initial holding.stocks.  Tests of the dataset strongly reject DEMO hypothesis of no variation in p by
itj
it t, makingit DEMO no
ion.  The question can be addressed by
When the propensity DEMO buy varies by initial holding and/or across managers, b
smaller DEMO in the assumed binomial distribution.  The direction and size of a DEMO,extreme values more likely, but theinduced by the assumptions on short DEMO and the variation in pwith the invalid assumptions relaxed. estimating the sampling distribution of Hinitial holding, is an empirical quest variance of the distribution may be larger or
itj by manager and
period covered by the DEMO (the dataset is described in chapter 4).  The null hypothesis that psame for all managers at any particular date is rejected at DEMO 95 percent significance level in  To test for variation in p DEMO managers, the value of p is estimated for each manager in DEMO but is the
49 t t
periodperiods.  For-manager
two of 90 DEMO  To test for variation in phypothesis of no variation in peach DEMO group, the observations are foobservations for which the initial holding of DEMO stock is positive are grouped by stocklevel in all 90 periods.90 reporting periods and the value of pmanager’s portfolio.  Retaining the quintile marker, DEMO full set of observations are regrouped into the  by initial holding DEMO the stock is rejected at the 95 percent significance rmed into quintiles by the initial weight of the stock in thet is calculated for DEMO quintile in each period.  by the initial holding of managers, stock- The null
t
-
t
it
to sell than other managers, because of mean reversion in portfolio weights.   Further,
longer binomially distributed. DEMO distribution of b is not centred on p
lsv under the null hypothesis of no herding
49
t
3.4 Wermers herding measure
correlation in each period.  Wermers randomly divides the fund managers inof herding the aggregate changes in portfolio weights of the DEMO subgroups have zero 50  The value-weighted vector of portfolio weightswing idea. DEMO
of each group is formed for each of the T+1 reporting dates.  These vectors are thendataset into two groups, A and B.correlation of DEMO weight changes of the two groups.Wermedifferenced to give T vectors of portfolio weight change for each group.  Thers measure of herding is the average over the T periods of the sample
expressed in equation 3.7, where the change in stock estimates the cosine of these angles and compares DEMO average to zero.  This idea is groups in any period should DEMO an expecte
Δ
Wermers uses stratified random sampling to divide the two groups, controlling for families of funds estment objective.
T1
and the invintention of reducing the standard error ofdenominator terms and then apply this average DEMO the scaling factor for all periods (with the stated I simply DEMO the cosines as in equation 4.  Wermers, however, prefers to DEMO theT1 the estimate), as shown in equation 4a.
Hw = t i ( wwAitA2)( w )w (4a)
itB B 2 DEMO
t i it i it
( )
Δ Δ
∑
∑
DEMO a group of investors are randomly divided into two subgroups, then DEMO the absenceWermers (1995) develops a herding measure which is based on the follo
120
There is a powerful geometric intuition for the measure.  Starting with group A, the
on the unit simplex.  There are DEMO such points mapping out the path taken by group A vector of portfolio weights at any time t vector for that period.  The same is true for over time.  The vector between any two sequential points is the portfolio changeis a point in the n dimensional asset space,DEMO B.  Under the null of no herding
It follows that the DEMO of the angle between the portfolio change vectors of the two the direction of the portfolio change vectors of groups A and B should DEMO unrelated.d value of zero.  Essentially, Wermers
t itj.    It DEMO assumed by Wermers that thei’s weight in group j, in period
DEMO expectation of all portfolio weight changes is zero., is w T DEMO the number of periods.
51
50
51
∑  ∑ ( Δ ) ∑ ( Δ ) 
Equation H3.W7 = )( w ) 2
measure.  Consequently, as with the LSV measure, the accuracy of the WermersWermers shows the conditions under which this measure is equivalent tow the LSV
T1 w( w
121
itBitB
itA
t i i itA
21
( Δ )
2 )DEMO
i
Δ
( )
diof the accuracy of the measure by DEMO derivation of the mean of the samplingmeasure may rely upon assumptions that are not sustained in real datasets.  A studystribution under various assumptions is infeasible for several reasons.  Most
( Δ ) ∑ ( Δ
importantly, the portfolio weight change observations ( w , w ) are drawn from
However, it iprobability distributions the form of which are unknown and not easily modelled.stock.stock, including size, and by the beginning of period DEMO of each group in theperiod.  If short sales are prohibited then DEMO distribution from which the portfolioobservations whconfines the portfoweight changes are drawn are left censored.  Geometrically, the short sales constraint   The distributions also DEMO data truncation because of the omission ofs clear that these distributions are conditioned by characteristics of theere one or both of the groups do DEMO trade the stock during thelio weight vectors to the first quadrant of the asset space.
itA itB
Δ
retains the useful intuition of a DEMO where the cosine of the angle between the portfolio changes is ongood reasons for choosing equation 4 rather than equation 4a as the measure.  Firstly, equation 4this case the cosine terms which are averaged in equation 4 can only range fIt is standard practice to average ratios in DEMO work to reduce the effect of outliers.  However, in equation 4a the terms in the time series average are clearly notrom -1 to DEMO  There are
Wermers measure is calculated as per equation 4.  tindependent because they share the same denominator, so straightaverage zero.  Secondly, in 52-values calculated from time series standard errors is not appropriate.  Therefore, DEMO th-forward hypothesis testing based on is paper the
∑
∑
∑
Δ
weight changes of group A on the portfolio weight changes of group DEMO and the initial holding of group homoscedasticity in all periods for both groups A and B.  Further, in regressions of the po Tests DEMO  cross-efficient on the initial holding of group A is significant at DEMO 1 percent level.
-sectional heteroscedasticity in the portfolio weight changes rejected the null of
rtfolio
52
A, the co
weights.  Portfolio weight changes over a period result from both changes in theAnother potential problem is the use of average prices in calculating portfolioChanges DEMO the price vector shift the portfolio weight vectors of groups A and B andnumber of shares held in each stock, as desired, but DEMO from changes in prices.
122
separate quantity and price effects in weight changes derived from portfolio holdings changes in portfolio holdings vectors of both DEMO are recorded at discrete time points.  Changes in the price vector DEMO inducesimple average of beginning and end of period prices, are chosen DEMO this purpose but other choices would be equally valid.  HowevTherefore, the use of midmeasure in the absence of herding.both the beginning and end DEMO period portfolio weight vectors.  Midherding.  To mitigate this problem Wermalso the market portfolio in related directions; which may create an illusion ofers uses the same price vector to calculateer, it is not possible to cleanly-
prices, the
-prices may lead to a positive mean for the Wermers
–
, which may be correlated.
The inaccuracy in the Wermers measure DEMO from mis of mid-prices can be determined empirically -specification of the
considered herding, such as, fund managers with new money scaling up theirThe DEMO and Wermers measures may also record correlated trading that is notmay significantly bias the measures toward It is argued in this chapter that invalid DEMO in LSV and Wermers measuresA test for herding by a group of investors amounts to a test of whet3.5be differentiated from the rest of DEMO market by it’s trading behaviour.  The herdingmeasures of LSV and Wermers DEMO capture the correlated trading of fund managerscorrelated information theories.  herding; which are, relative performance evaluation, informational cascade; andthat is postulated by the three principal theoretical explanations of tConcluding remarks finding herding where no herding DEMO that group can he existence of
constructed to exhibit zero systematic herding.by estimating the sampling distribution of the measure on datasets that aremeasure of DEMO, and from the use
stocks becoming large stocks, for instance). portfolios, or correlated trading DEMO from changing characteristics of stocks (small
assumptions on the acThe next DEMO employs the LSV and Wermers measures to test for herding among curacy of these measures.
123
a group of UK unit trust managers and DEMO tests of the effects of the invalid
124
4.1among UK of herding measures using UK data.  Chapter 3 motivated the study of herdingThis is the second of two chapters which comprise DEMO essay on tests of the accuracyequities.  from the rest of the DEMO equity market on the basis of their behaviour in trading UKIntroductionunit trust managers as a test of whether those managers can be delineated
Tests DEMO the Accuracy of Herding Measures
methodology for testing the accuracy of metrics which are based on portfolioThis chapter fulfils three of the four purposes DEMO this study.  Firstly, to develop asuitably adjusted for accuracy of existing herding measures.  Thirdly, to apply the herding measures,holdings data.  Secondly, to apply the bootstrapping methodology to test theestimated bias, to data DEMO from a country which has an
January 31, 1986 to December DEMO, 1993.mutual funds, as contained in semiThe primary data for this study is a record of the portfolio holdin4.2 Data -annual reports to investors DEMO the period  For a fund to be classified as an UKgs DEMO 268 UK equity listed
on the London Stock Exchange.  All other DEMO required for the study, includingequity mutual fund it must have more DEMO 90 percent of its holdings in stocks prices, marketa detailed deSchool’s DEMO Share Price Database (LSPD).  Dimson and Marsh (1983) provides scription of the LSPD.-values and capital changes are taken from the London DEMO
53 The portfolio holdings data for this study was provided by John Morrell and Associates of London.
Chapter 4
the generality of empirical herding DEMO investment management industry comparable to that of the US; thereby, extending
53
fund appears in the dataset, two snapshots of portfolio holdings are recorded.  UKThe dataset contains semester data, meaning that for each full year DEMO which ainvestors each year, and so they declare their portfolio holdings DEMO either a January fund managers choose the two calendar months in which they report treporting cycles and these cycles overlap.  The 268 funds (DEMO is, 268 mJuly cycle or a February description of the data.fund DEMO managed by 99 separate investment management firms.  The average size of DEMO million.  Tables 4.1 to 4.6, at the end of this section, provide a further
- August cycle, etc.  Each fund manager falls into one of six anagers) are o their-
125
each month between January 1986 and December 1993 inclusive.  These panelson a particular date.  DEMO dataset is composed of 96 panels of data, being one forThe DEMO unit of variation in this study is a manager’s holding in a particular stock
Of those records, 685 could not be matched to the LSPD dataset and wererecord 237,185 non95 records of stocks holdings of DEMO than 100 shares were deleted because they werconsequently excluded.  There were DEMO,469 ‘cash’ records which were deleted.  The-zero portfolio entries across all DEMO, periods and managers.
e
(leaving a holding
-periods that coincide
sells.  These
were consolidated into a single holding.  2,151 occurrences, of a single stock appearing more than once in a single portfolio,unlikely DEMO help extend our understanding of herding by UK fund managers.  Thenbought
DEMO zero).  In this process of determining the directioincreased adjusted to DEMO that basic changes to the opportunity set of fund managers,(from DEMO positive initial holding), held, decreased n of trades, the dataset has been
(from an initial holding of zero),tial dates were DEMO toor sold
with equity issues, stock buyresulting from capital changes of DEMO, are not measured as herding.14,741 such occurrences.  Finally, stockstock DEMO and scrip issues on prices and number of shweights that are calculated for this purpose in the LSPD.  Stock-backs or capital payouts are deleted.  There wereperiods that cover ares held are reversed usinga period that begins orThe effects of
buys, 42,774 increases, 78,369 holds, 32,982 decreases, and 39,287 10,708 such occurrences.  What remains DEMO 234,689 records comprised of 41,774ends within six months of the birth or death of a stock are also removed.  There were -
Next, the portfolios of each manager at sequendetermine whether a particular stock was
with a zero holding in a stock figures do not include the DEMO of a manager beginning and ending a period– the vast majority of observations.
conceivabThe dataset includes UK equity mutual funds that existed in December DEMO  It ismerger of other funds.  With a dataset of portfolio holdings of 274 US equity mutual the survivors are more likely to have DEMO strategies that led to termination orherding by mutualIt therefore appears that survivorship bias is not an important issue in studies ofsame whether or not DEMO dataset includes only funds that survived the entire period.funds over ale that studying only the survivors creates an illusion of herding because 10 year DEMO, Wermers finds that the herding results are much the fund managers.
DEMO
by fund managers.  Unfortunately, large datasets on the transactions of fundEmpirical tests of herding require data on the purchases and sales of financial DEMO
of mutual fund managers are differenced to reveal the net transactions over eachis not captured. partially or wholly reversed within the reporting period then DEMO completperiod.  The net transactions proxy for the actual transactions.  Obviously if a trade is managers are not readily available.  Instead the beginning and end of perie transaction od holdings
Beginning date of
3131
Table 4.1 shows the number of trusts reporting DEMO each of the 96 overlapping sixAverage
Apracross reporting cycles with the largest number of trusts in the Mar
years of the dataset.  Moreover, DEMO is variation in the numbmonth periods of the dataset.  The dataset DEMO more portfolio reports in the later -Oct cycle.
er of funds reporting-Sep cycle and the
Table
313131313131------JanJanJanJulJulJul------878988888789
3131313131313131--------JanJanJanJanJulJulJulJul--------9092919391909293
period
-
4
-Jan
Jul
.1-
DEMO
86
Number of trusts reporting at each dateJan
221820
273025
333132
32332347
302631
373933
434044
4344
474042
525349
5656
545756
443940
485047
4949
49484747
DEMO
17
-July
Feb
21
37
22
-Aug
Mar
Reporting cycles
49
45
27
34
-Sep
Apr
33
34
-Oct May-Nov
373031
394037
424241
40373635
DEMO
Jun-Dec
262023
313429
3635
36383835
30
1618
Total
206173187
234246220
259253258
258253253248
224
127
133149
2124
Beginning daof period4.2 Aggregate number of stocks held and average size of DEMO Total number of stocks held 927
3131313131-----JanJanJulJulJul-----9291939293
1,068992952
1,2101,1371,161
1,2011,2341,207
Table 4.2 shows that the total value DEMO the stocks held by the unit trusts recorded in
the dataset increasdataset is representative of UK equity unit trusts in that it records more DEMO half ofcorresponding figures for the dataset are their assets in UK equities and are therefore not classified as UK equity unit trusts.  Moreover, DEMO are unit trusts that hold UK equities but have less than 90 percent of the UK equitiesbillion poundsyear end in the period 1967 to DEMO  At year end 1985 the UK unit trusts held of chapter DEMO shows the total market value of UK equities held by all UK unit trusts at  in UK equities and at year end 1993 the figure was  held by UK unit trusts in the period January 1986 to Dec 1993.ed by over a factor of four from the first DEMO the last date.  Table 2.3 £6.5 billion and £28 billion.  Hence the£50 billion.  The£11
13,67313,46811,9027,953
18,85017,46914,681
19,98216,69918,299
17,265
149187206173
246234220
259258253
53736569
777567
776572
DEMO
31313131----JanJanJulJul----86878887
313131313131------JanJanJanJulJulJul------898890899190
Average
by trusts
1,2231,2201,210
1,2941,279
1,140
924
Total assets of
20,73121,48421,636
28,17524,DEMO
(£mn)
trusts
6,521
Number of
253258248253
224
reporting
trusts
DEMO
assets of trusts Average (£mn)
828384
1147598
49
128
31-Jan-86
Table
313131313131------JanJanJanJulJulJul------888789889089
31313131313131Average-------JanJanJanJulJulJulJul-------93919092919392
Beginning date of 313131-Jan-87
period
-
-
4
Jan
DEMO
.3-
-86
86
Average asset levels of trusts by sectorGeneral
(£mn)DEMO
121122113
147172130147141160
167230142199168
Growth
(£mn)
3646
395041
455139434246
5170476052
35
DEMO  (£mn)
606613
676755636663
100656783
53
48
Companies Small
3331302235
291923
2728413430
129
182416
the most in size over the period.  but at different portfolio size of each of the sectors increases over the period DEMO by the dataset,Table reports trust asset values for the main trust sectors in the dataset.  The average
rates.  The General sector portfolios DEMO much the largest and increase
Beginning date of
313131--JanJul--8687
Average
Table
313131313131------JanJanJanJulJulJul------888789889089
313131313131------JanJanJulJulJulJul------919093929193
period
-Jan
4.4
-86
DEMO number of stocks held in trusts of different sectorsGener
72 al
8072
838181
7979
78808077
83808781
5349
61
6057
Growth
55
51495153
5451
58585954
DEMO
636062
585757
60606158
64616561
Income
63
Companies
687170
546861
58616053
75637763
Small
51
130
Table 4.4 shows the average number of stocks held in DEMO portfolios of trusts in thesuggestive of heaover the period covered by the dataset.  The average number of stocks held isexception of income trusts the average number of stocks in the portfolios increaseddifferent investment sectors over the DEMO covered by the dataset.  With the
vily diversified portfolios.
31-Jan-92
Table
Table 4.5 shows the average number of buy and sell occurrences DEMO portfolios in the
ect the larger size of those portfolios and the larger number of stocks held by
year in the total number of DEMO  However, the tables show more trades in thethem.  reflacross the DEMO with more trades in the General sector portfolios, which maysecond half DEMO each of the years than in the first half.  There is DEMO some variationdifferent sectors for the even years in the dataset.  There DEMO not much variation year to
Beginning date of 3131-Jul-86
31313131----JanJanJulJul----88908890
3131--JanJul--9292
period
-Jan
4.5
-86
Average number of buys and sells in representative periodsdirectionTrade DEMO
BuyBuySell
BuyBuySell
BuyBuySell
Sell
Sell
Sell
322529
272526
292831
28
23
31
2120
231822
2523
20
20
24
232125
241923
282228
20
25
292127
DEMO
221620
25
19
24
General
3225
1829
Growth
2418
1720
Income
2719
1726
Companies
2925
Small
1823
131
Table Stock size 4.6 stocks# of Number and total market value of DEMO in each log decile*31-Jan(£mn)-86 stocks# of 31-Jan(£mn)-88 stocks# of 31-Jan(£mn)-90 stocks# of 31-Jan(£mn)-92
132
1 10 DEMO,39158,287 108 82,64231,046 108 103,62838,068 108 137,96561,705
10(S/10)*The first decile contains the 10 largest DEMO  Otherwise the cut off for decile n is calculated as 2346578 (n-1)/9 where S is the total number of stocks listed at that date.157284152687488 33,51026,69729,48528,92623,98617,646 15828649152687 53,29138,DEMO,81946,98538,31429,657 16530015279050 47,27152,04545,50056,54936,02125,536 15227514278546 69,73270,28263,23667,66247,44916,36931,736
514930 10,8294,DEMO 939518 19,8418,967 994545 15,1646,772 892495 5,944
accuracy tests of the LSV herding measure.  The table entries demonstrate that theTable 4.6 reports descriptive statistics for the size deciles that are employed in DEMO
For this reason the deciles are formed on the basis of the log ofmarket value of UK listed stocks is heavily concentrated in the DEMO largest stocks.dataset.  The number of stocks in each of the log DEMO is fairly stable over the period of the than a more conventional division into 10 groups with an equal number of stocks. the size DEMO rather
decile
109
4.3.14.3 Test of the short selling assumption iMethodology
positive herding values where DEMO herding exists.  Moreover, the sampin measuring herding among managers that face a short selling constraint; returningIt is argued in chapter 3 that the LSV measure of herding may be significantly biased n the LSV measure DEMO distribution
condition.  LSV herding measure on the trading of the managers DEMO interest under thtractable.  An alternative is to empirically estimate a sampling DEMO of theof the herding measure under the null condition of no herding is not analyticallyapproximated by a reThe required sampling distribution, under the null of no herding, can be-sampling approach.  An ideal re-sampling method would DEMO
no herding.  Then zero herding datasets would be refrom which each DEMO following properties.  Firstly, it would deduce the exact trinomial distributioasymptotic form.LSV measure to form a sampling distribution which is arbitrarily close to its-period-manager DEMO was drawn, under conditions of-sampled and measured by the
the estimated DEMO will not capture all of the distinguishing characteristics ofThere are three impediments to obtaining this ideal.  Firstly, and most importantly,we cannot be DEMO that the reherding.  Some systematic herding may survive the process of DEMO thetrinomial distributions and re-sampling from them.  Secondly, with a finite dataset-sampled datasets are completely free of systematic
133
e null
this case).sampling DEMO which is decreasing in the number of rethe actual datathe managers and stocks of interest.  Therefore, when comparing the LSV results on(unknown) extent, we are not comparing apples with apples.  Finally, there is reset to the estimated zero herding sampling distribution, to some-
sampled datasets (1,000 in-
sampling distribution wathe estimated sampling distribution, the shortcomings DEMO the process by which theof the zero herding sampling distribution.  When DEMO the LSV test results toWhat is proposed here is a general test of the LSV measure, using an approximations estimated must be considered.  DEMO, there are
procedure that is presented here is designed to highlight the effects of DEMO reasons to think that the LSV measure is biased and the re-sampling
and that the propensity to buy is not conditioned by a manager’s DEMO holding of the problems.  The problems relate to specific astock.  To highlight the effect of those invalid assumptions the zero herding reassumptions.this way DEMO control is imposed to arrive at an estimate of the effect of the invalidsampling distribution is estimated with and wissumptions; that managers can short sell
134
thout those assumptions in place.  In-
correlation.  eliminate with DEMO herding elimination requirement, there are two sources of herding tocharacteristics of DEMO actual dataset that are not associated with herding.  Startingis eliminated, and secondly, thThe two principal requirements of the reat the re-sampling procedure are, firstly, that herding -sampling preserves the essential
stock values, or because of a scale effect (managers with new money replicatingManagers’ trades may be correlated because of correlated signals regarding future– unconditional correlation between managers’ trades DEMO conditional
existing portfolios) or because of changing stockcharacteristics) the correlation is zero.  Conditional correlation exists even afteridentity of the managers with new money, or the identity of stocks with changingcascade.correlation may arise from comparative performance evaluation or informationalconditioning on those three sources of conditioning informaconditioning on this DEMO (the correlated signaltrade directions are drawn.  This correlation is unconditional because afterbigger) or other information that conditions the trinomials from which the managers’  characteristics (small stocks getting s about future returns, or thetion.  DEMO
of a stock Both sources of correlation must be eliminated by the rei, during period -sampling.  Unconditional correlation is more problematic.  -t, DEMO manager j.  Each such stock-sampling procedure.  Webuy, sell, hold ,DEMO
sampled is the trade direction, X the independence-period-manager
itj
∈ { DEMO
The basic unit of data to be recan be confident that conditional correlation will be eliminated by of the draws in the re
and taking the proportion of buy observations as the probability of a DEMO, andPobservation is replaced by a draw from an estimate of the DEMO distribution,estimated by forming the buy/hold/sell observations of the actual datasitj(xitj ) that would prevail in the absence of herding.  The trinomial distributions areet into groups
is
135
unconditional correlation if the conditioning DEMO averages (integrates) to anlikewise for hold and sell probabilities.  This DEMO will only eliminaterevisited in the results section.with conditioning information that is associated with herding.  This conceptcriteria used to form groups (dates, stock size, initial holding levels) not be correlated expected value of zero over DEMO observations in the group.  It is therefore crucial that
preserve essential DEMO and to relax the invalid assumptions.  In the test ofThe purpose DEMO grouping the observations before estimating the trinomials is to
the short selling assumption three levels of grouto 31 December 1986, and so on.  DEMO next criteronce.  The first period is 31 January 1986 to 30 DEMO 1986, the next is 31 July 1986divided into the 15 six DEMO periods within which each trust reports its holdingsin the largest stocks and the number of trades is commensurately larger in thoseare divided into size DEMO  The market value of UK stocks is heavily concentrated 10(S/DEMO)decile include the 10 largest stocks.  The cutformed by the log DEMO the size rank of the stock, with the requirement that the DEMO(n-1)/9  where n is the decile and S is the totaping are imposed.  Firstly, the data is ia is size.  In each period the stocks -off for the other nine deciles isross groups, the size deciles are
stocks.  To even out the number of observations ac
date.
l number of stocks listed at that
The period and DEMO criteria generate 150 groups.  These criteria are intended toThe third criteria DEMO that all stocks that have preserve characteristics of the actual dataset that are not associated with herding.an initial holding of zero are placed in DEMO
an estimated probability of ‘sell’ observations that is zero by construction.  DEMO and zero initial holdings.  This control of the presence of the DEMO sampling distribution is estimated with and without this third grouping intorelaxing the invalid assumption that all manaseparate group.  The trinomials estimated from the zerogers undertake short selling.  The zero-initial-holding groups have
selling assumption on the accuracy of
Test of the invariance assumption in DEMO LSV measure
136
4.3.2across stocks and managers in any one period.  DEMO propensity to buy is defined asherding the propensity of managers to buy rather thanIt is explicitly assumed in the construction of the LSV measure DEMO in the absence of buy buy sell sell, denoted  p , is invariant
j
manager’s initial holding in a stock or, separately, DEMO identity of the manager. the propensity to buy strongly reject tp = P (X = )/[P (X = ) + P (Xhe assumptions that p = )].  Chi square tests of invariance of  does not vary with a
It is reasonable to assume that theThe DEMO of variation in pweights of managers.  We might expect that managers DEMO high initial holdings have tj itj itj itj itj j with a manager’s initial holding in a stock is tested here. re is mean DEMO in the portfolio holdingsitj itj it is no longer binomiallyitj it
initial holdings in a stock is anit/n
distributed.  The mean and the variance of the distribution of bWhen the propensity to buy varies by DEMO in propensity to buy.  Whether extreme values of bempirical question.rather than DEMO likely by variation in managers’ l holding, b
it is affected DEMO theit are made more
The effect of the invariance assumption is tested by imposing another level of
manager combinations that comprise the group are DEMO from that group’s-
holdings that is positive is less than 5 then all nongroups.  One for zero initiaare assigned to the middle quintile.  DEMO period/size group is then divided into sixbefore, trinomials are estimated DEMO each group and the trade direction of the stockholdings of the stock are ranked estimated trinomial.  periodgrouping to include the initial holding level.  DEMO each stock- l holdings and five for the initial holding quintiles.  DEMO formed into quintiles.  If the number of initial-zero holdings in that DEMO period -period the non-zero initial
observation within a group.  This can DEMO achieved by fitting a probit estimation to the could be incorporated by estimating a trinomial distribution for each individualThe effect of variation in pitj DEMO manager identity is not measured here.  The effect
the LSV herding DEMO an estimate of the effect of the short
i
it
lower propensities to buy than managers with lower initial holdings of the stock.
done, the dummy variables for many of the managers were found to be highlycategoribut not all of thinsignificant, thus calling into question the validity of the estimation.  Omitting some cal observations of buys, holds and DEMO within the group.  When this wase managers is unsatisfactorily arbitrary.  The effect of variation in p
137
4.3.3by manager is likely to be DEMO similar to the effect of variation by initialholding.  Therefore, variation by manager was not tested, and grouping rather thanBootstrapping test of the Wermers measuremation was employed to estimate the effect of variation in pitj by DEMO
during a period is conditional on the manager’sThe probability distribution of a manager’s change in a stock’s portfolio weight initial holding in the stock.  The most
short sales are prohibited; in which case negative changes in portfolio weight haveextreme case is where the manager has no initial holding DEMO a particular stock andzero probability.  However, the Wermers measure herding.  DEMO determine whether the short sales constraint results in a Therefore, the DEMO need not have an expected value of zero in the absence ofmeasure on a dataset which is constructed to have no systematic herding, whichin the Wermers measure we require an estimate of the sampling distribution of DEMO weight changes of two groups of managers has no sample mean term.of correlation between thesignificant bias
sales constraint prevails.  Again, the sampling distribution DEMO created by a cycle ofmaintains the essential characteristics of the actual dataset, and for which the short
observation is replaced by a random draw from an empirical estimate of itsmanager
In the Wermers measure the basic DEMO measure, in this case the Wermers measure.portfolio weight in stock i DEMO manager j during a period of data, denoted t
transforming the DEMO by bootstrap reobservation).  To transform the dataset, the portfolio weight change of each-sampling and then applying the herding (a stockwitj , is the change in-period-
manager observations which contain a stock among the 2,DEMO largest stocks at thebeginning of the period, is first divided into DEMO groups by the marprobability distribution P j( witj ).  To DEMO Pitj( witj ) the set of stock-period-
Δ
ket capitalisation
Δ DEMO
holding.  probit esti
it
j
of the stock.  Firstly, each DEMO is allocated a rank on the basis of the size of
it
and the smallest of the stocks considered, a rank of 2,000.  the stock at the beginning to the period, with the largest DEMO allocated a rank of 1The observations which at
holding of the stock is positive or zero at the beginning of the period.  per group.  Each of these 146 groups are then divided into two groups by whether the ranks per group.  The next 1,800 largest stocks are dividedgroups by their rank.  The next 180 largest stocks are divided into 36 groups the beginning of the period contained one of the 20 DEMO stocks are formed into 20  into 90 groups - 20 ranks DEMO five
138
To randomly transform the dataset, the portfolio weight change DEMO each observationlio
replacement, from the same group of observations.  This replacement procedureis replaced by the portfolio weight change of an observation drawn randomly, withpositive.  weight change after conditioning on stock size and whether the initial holding isconstitutes a draw from the estimate of the probability distribution of DEMO portfo
portfolio weight changes of managers is eliminated by the independence of theAs discussed in the previous section, the conditional correlation between thewitj) DEMO the
conditioning information regarding correlated signals on future stock returns, stockof DEMO test and/or use of average prices to calculate portfolio weights.  DEMO changes and manager performance is averaged to zero across thechance or from features of the herding measure itself; in particular, misdraws.  The unconditional correlation is eliminated in estimating Pns in each group.  In that case any measured correlation arises either fromitj-(specification
The empirical estmeasurement.  The bootstrapping literature provides little guidance on the minimumis constructed by undertaking 200 repetitions DEMO the cycle of transformation andimate of the sampling distribution of the Wermers herding measure
200 or more replications is generally considered adequate for an DEMO of thestandard error of the sampling distribution.number of replications foraverage of 90 sample correlationsthat the sampling distribution is approximately normal.  See Efron and Tibshirani (1993) adequate estimates of the sampling distribution.  However,  we can rely on the central limit theorem to ensure54  Because the Wermers measure is the
54
Δ
4.3.4
Re-ordering test of the Wermers measure
is found results from mThe DEMO test of the Wermers measure does not tell us whether any bias that is-specification, as opposed to the use of mid-prices, in
In DEMO stockbeginning of the particular perigroup of 10 stocks, where size is DEMO market capitalisation of the stock at theanother stock which is drawn, DEMO replacement, from a stock in the same sizeranking, and then for any one managtransformation takes 10 stocks in one period where the stocks DEMO adjacent in sizethe data rather than rewhich accentuates the effect of using midcalculating portfolio weights.  To separate the effects, a transformation is undertaken DEMO by randomly swapping the stock identities between the observations.  -period-manager observation DEMO stock identity is replaced with that ofod.  This transformation involves rearrangement DEMO and attenuates other sources of bias.
-sampling.  Thinking of the data DEMO terms of stocker the 10 observations in those stocks are-periods, the
DEMO LSV measure applied to the UK dataset
-ordering and application of the Wermers measure to the re under these conditions is created by-ordered
139
DEMO trading by the managers in those stockThis transformation is an averaging process which reduces the occurrence of highly-periods.  In that way any effect from
repeated reof the sampling distribution of the measureeffect of changes in prices (rather than weights) is accentuated.  Again, an estimateconditioning of the probability distribution of portfolio changes is attenuated and thedataset.
Table 4.7 reports the DEMO of applying the LSV herding measure to the dataset of268 UK eqtrade in a stockand subsets of the observations formed on the basis of DEMO number of managers whouity mutual fund managers.  Results are reported for DEMO entire dataset,
pension funds and US mutual funds respectively.  results DEMO also reproduced from the LSV (1992b) and Wermers (1999) studies of US largest stock at t-he beginning of the period has a DEMO equal to 1).  For comparison,period and the market capitalisation DEMO of the stock (where the
with the number of managers trading DEMO 6.9 percent when 20 or more managers trade For the entire UK dataset the level of herding is 2.6 percent.  The herding figure rises
of managers to trade also causes them to herd.  The avethe stock in a period.  These results suggest that whatever causes a large proportiondataset, of the propensity to buy (pthe funds over the period.  When p = 0.58 and the number of managers trading is 20, ) is 0.58, reflecting the strong flow of money into rage, over DEMO periods in the
more managers sell.  Where more than 10 managers DEMO a stock in a period, the3.6 percent for the equivalent stocklevel DEMO herding found in the UK dataset is 3.3 percent.  Wermers finds DEMO figure ofThis finding broadens the generality of previous results on herding in mutual funds.of herding in UK unit trusts is similar to that found DEMO US mutual funds by Wermers.  -periods in the US mutual fund DEMO  The level
if the group of managers forms a large component DEMO the total market then themanagers is a small part of the total market then prices may change littthat reduce the managers’ net trading demand.  If the funds managed by the group of demand can be equilibrated DEMO trade with the rest of the market and/or price changes align the trades of a group of fund managers must act more strongly DEMO thoseFor herding to be a fund manager driven phenomenon, the pofund DEMO behaviour.  The trading pressure created by the managmanagers than other investors, so that the rest of the market (and prices) react to DEMO forces thatle.  Otherwise,
55
polarised demand of fund managers may DEMO resolved largely by price changes.
that pPrice changes resulting from the aggregate demand of managers reduce the forcesUK).  Given a neherding where fund managers are a large part of the market (as is the case in thereason it would be surprising if we were to find a DEMO degree of fund managerolarise the managers’ demand, creating a negative feedback DEMO
gative feedback effect of price changes, the herding figure of 6.956  For this
55
56
140
a herding figure of 6.9 percent or DEMO arises if 14 or more managers buy or 12 or
t
t
parties to it, then herding could exist with no net trade between the UK stock market is more concentrated in the largest stocks.  per period is greater in the studies on US data, the reporting by US fund mamarket.  However, in the UK dataset there are few DEMO of managers herding in one direction If herding arises because one manager undertakes a large trade and other managers are counter The comparison between DEMO UK and US results is not direct.  The number of managers DEMO and the rest of the
nagers is quarterly and the
and their net trade being in the other direction.
is apparent.price changes, thchanges resulting from the polarising forces acting on managers from other causes of percent is surprisingly large.  Moreover, since it DEMO be impossible to separate pricee importance of studying these forces in terms of correlated trading
the smallest stocks.  Amongst the five largest stocks by market capitalisation theTable 4.7 shows that the highest levels of herding are DEMO in the largest stocks and herding found is 6.2 percent.  LSV DEMO studying US pension fund managers’ tradesleves a figure of 6.2 percent for the quintile of smallest stocks amongst stocks thatl of herding is 4.1 DEMO  Amongst stocks outside the 1,000 largest, the level of
find a level of herding of 6.1 percent among the quintile of smallest DEMO  Wermers herding is increasing among the very largest stocks.  do not breafind that herding is increasing with market capitalisation of stocks.  However, DEMO traded by 5 or more US fund managers in a period.  DEMO and Wermers do notk down the largest quintile of US listed equities to see whether the
141
mostly concerned about the trades of other DEMO herding results from relative performance evaluation, then managers should be in DEMO stocks which have the
Further, if herding is explained by managers DEMO on shared information then wemost weight in the performance benchmark (unless DEMO are small cap managers).levels of herding among the smallest stocks by market capitaliHowever, there is little in the theoretical explanations of herding that predicts highby more analysts and there is more information on large stocks DEMO the public domain. might again expect more herding in larger stocks, DEMO larg
sation.e stocks are followed
investment management objective.  Herding is low DEMO these categories for stockTable 4.8 reports the results of testing for herding among managers with the samethat relative performance evaluation causes herding, so that managers who arethan the overall level of herding.  The UK results are consistent with the hypothesismanagers with the same investment management objective are simply DEMO at theeach other than with other managers.  However, an alternative explanation is that the measured againsmanageperiods where a small number of funds trade.  In the UK data, when the number ofrs trading is 10 or more, the herding in the investment categories is highert the same investment category benchmarks herd more strongly with -
to market ratio.  same time to changing characteristics of stocks, such DEMO price earnings ratio or book
The stockstockis on the buy side.  DEMO is, most of the herding is managers herding into stocks rather DEMO than out of them.  Moreover, this is particularly true of smaller stocks.  For stocks-periods are those where (b/n(b/n--periods can DEMO divided on the basis of buy or sell herding.  Buy herdingp )<0.  These results indicate that over the whole dataset, most of herding -pt)>0, and likewise sell stock-periods are those
-side and DEMO herding levels is much smaller.
142
Thisbreaks down as 5.2 percent on the buy side and only 0.7 percent on the sell side.the same DEMO the 2.6 percent level of the whole dataset.  However, that 2.7 percentdithe largest stocks and stocks where a large number of managers trade DEMO a period thethe 1,000 largest the buy side herding is 12.1 percent and sell side is 1.2 percent.  For fference between buy dichotomy is even more acute amongst the smallest stocks.  For stocks outside
their holdings of these stocks but then reduce their holdings with less conformity.  ItThese results suggest that managers herd when buying into small stocks or DEMO
although it seems unlikely that a scale effect creates the stark difference in buy andis also cstocks breaks down to 3.7 percent on the DEMO side and 8.1 percent on the sell side.   a differensell herding among the smallest stocks.  Amongst the smallest stocks Wermers findsonsistent with a spurious finding of herding arising from the scale effect,t result.  His finding of 6.2 percent herding among the smallest quintile of
The results DEMO tables 4.7, 4.8 and 4.9 indicate that herding is episodic in DEMO it is
caused by shared information since the arrival of information is also intermittent.  Instronconstant otherwise.  trust mcontrast, comparative performance appraisal is ever present.  Herding by UK unitgly increasing in the number of managers trading. This suggests that herding isanagers is higher in the extremes of market DEMO, but relatively
dependennumbers of managers trade we should note that the DEMO is intrinsicallyWhen interpreting results of the LSV measure across subsets where differentt on the number of managers trading.  To illustrate, consider a dataset
DEMO
outside the 100 largest, the aggregate level of herding is 2.7 DEMO, which is much
= 0.5, then in
a stockcontaining 100 managers who always trade in the same direction.  If p10 of the 100 the figure is 25 percent.- managers trade then the figure is 37 percent, and if only 2 trade then  So for a given level of correlation among the trades of
period where all 100 managers trade the LSV measure is DEMO percent.  If only
4.5 Results of the accuracy tests of the DEMO measure
143
is expected.  By managers, some increase in the level of herding with the number of managers trading comparing the level of DEMO found in the actual dataset to an
The purpose of t4.5.1estimate of the empirical sampling distribution, this effect can be accounted for.without, the DEMO sales assumption relaxed.  of the LSV measure under the null conditions DEMO no herding, firstly with, and then,The effect of the short selling assumptionhe tests reported in this section is to estimate a sampling DEMO 57
First consider another, specific, test of the effect of the short selling constraint.  Since
siknown to have traded a stock in the period but the initial holding was zero, we could the short selling problem is associated with observations where the manager isthe initially positive holding DEMO or sold the stock in the period.  only observations where the DEMO bought from an initially positive position, leftmply eliminate those data points.  We would then start with a dataset that included
holding’ observations removed DEMO reported in table 4.10.  The results arewhole dataset.  The results substantially different to those in table 4.7 which report the LSV measure on DEMO resultsthat exclude buys from a zero holding.  However, examination of the herding at the of applying the LSV measure to the UK dataset DEMO the ‘buy from zeroseem to indicate much higher levels of herding in trades
bit The LSV measure for one stock period is  /nit , the second term in this equation is decreasing in nH = nbit.it - - nb - .   For a given value of
itlsv DEMO it t
r Ε r
t
4.5.1.1 Eliminating the ‘buy from zero holding’ records
57
individual stockspurious.  -period level rather than averages shows that these results are
4.9 shows that of the 25 stockthe stock over long periods of DEMO; decreasing or increasing their holding butelimination of the buy from zero DEMO buying from an initial holding of zero.  So for the largest DEMO,The problem is as followfrom an average across periods of 0.58 to an average of 0.39.  This reduction creates observations of buying and selling but it does greatly change pthe illusion of high levels of herding DEMO the ls.  For the largest stocks many managers hold a position DEMO in which 30 or more managers trade, 18 are on g DEMO does not greatly change theargest stocks.  For example, table which is reduced
144
t
from zero holding records there are 11 stockthe buy DEMO and 7 on the sell side.  Table 4.10 shows that after DEMO the buytrade.  Of those 11 stockof stockobservations where managers buy are DEMO numerous enough to increase the number-periods that are buy-periods, 9 are DEMO  --perioside herding and 2 are sellds in which 30 or more DEMO  The
Because the omission invalid short sales assumption.  There are two other good reasons for pursuing a redifferent stock periods, it is not a suitable means of estimating the effect of theof buy from zero DEMO records has a different effect on-
Firstly, in addition to estimating DEMO caused by problems with the LSV measure, wepurpose we need a DEMO distriwant to know whether zero herding can be rejected at the 95 percent level.  For thatsampling approach rather than just eliminating the buy from zero holding records.bution rather than just a measure on a reduced
measure DEMO the entire dataset is desirobservations.  So a means of estimating the DEMO and compensating for that bias, in adataset.  Secondly, the most DEMO results might be in the buy from zero holding
The first step is to estimate the sampling distribution of the LSV measure by simplyredrawing DEMO an estimate of the binomial distribution for each stock-period.  For
dataset DEMO a draw from a Bernoulli distribution with parameter then constructed by replacing each observation, in which a trade occurs in the actualeach date the value of p was estimated as t = ibit/ init.  Re-sampled DEMO are, being the
t
ρ Σ Σ
ρ
4.5.1.2 Re-sampling from DEMO basic binomial distribution
able.
t
measure to 1,000 replicated datasets are reported in table 4.11.  estimated probability of a buy in that period.  The results of applying the LSV
The expected value of the LSV measure is not zero, even in this simple binomial setup for the following reason.  The value of of the stockresults.  The bias caused by systematic errors in estimating pbecause of the absolute value operations in equation 3.4.  We might expect that thisestimate is unbiased but contains errors.  The effect of those errors is systematic-periods.   For the stock- percentilperiods where a large number of managers DEMO,   in equation 3.e of the sampling distribution exceeds 1 4 DEMO an estimate of p is small for all subsetst.  That -
DEMO next step is to estimate the trinomial distributions which are the probabilitydistributions of the trade directions of the managers under conditions of no4.5.1.3 Re-sampling DEMO one trinomial for each period
15 separate groups.  One group for DEMO six month period in the dataset, with the first systematic herding.  For this purpose all observations in the dataset were formed into included.manager’s DEMO holding was zero and no trade was made during the period areportperiod being January 31, 1986 to June 30, 1986.  Each manager reports their
folio holdings no more than once in each period.  Observations where a
In each group the proportion of buy/hold/sell observations give DEMO estimatedtrinomial of its group.  The LSV is applied and the process DEMO repeated 1,000 times.trinomial of those events.  Each observation is then DEMO redrawn from the
conditions of no herding, with and without short DEMO in the replicated datasets.  comparison of the estimated samplingwhere it was DEMO  Therefore, the results in tables 4.12 and 4.13 give adivided into one group for observations where the initial holding was zero and thosereported DEMO tables 4.12 anSummary statistics of the sampling distribution that is estimated in this way ared 4.13.  For table 4.13 each of the 15 period groups was
distribution of the LSV measure under null
145
t
percent.and DEMO the smallest stocks, the 95effect will be small in large datasets DEMO that expectation is born out in the table 4.11
th
ρ
t
95Table 4.12 reports sampling distributions with means of approximately zero.  Thestock’ panel shows that a finding of 2.7 percent herding in the five largest DEMO has effect of errors in estimating pthese spurious results among the larges percentile values are all small except  or it may be another effect that has been overlooked.t stocks is not clear.  It may be the systematic for the largest stocks.  The ‘size rank of
important.  The DEMO distribution of4.5.1.4large and small stocks.  preserved.  In particular differences inimportant characteristics of the managers and stocks of the actual dataset are notGrouping by DEMO st is 7.7 percent and 8.2 percent.   the probability of ‘hold’ occurrences between the average level of herding in stock periods th percentile DEMO the sampling distribution th
A further level of grouping is introduced to capture the effect of size on the
146
most of the aggregate DEMO capitalisation of stocks and most of the trades in theconstraint that the first dataset.  Instead, deciles are formed from the log of the DEMO rank of stocks with thestocks are divided probability distributions from which trade directions are drawn.  In each period thelargest stocks (see table 4.6)DEMO  Consequently, if groups were formed on the basis ofcapitalisation of stocks on the London Stock Exchange is highly concentrated in thesize deciles, then the fithe methodology section.into deciles by their market capitalisation rank.  The marketrst decile would encompass roughly the 200 largest stocks,decile (of largest stocks) contains 10 stocks as described in
assumed and table 4.15 shows results where that assumption is relaxed.  With thefrom applying the LSV measure to 1,000 datasets which were reTables 4.14 and 4.15 show summary statistics DEMO the sampling distribution createdperiod/size/initial holding groups.  Table 4.14 shows DEMO results where short selling is
-sampled from the
th
a 5 percent probability even if the managers do not systematically herd.  What causes
9.4 percent.  The corresponding mean and 95where 20 or more managers trade has a mean of 7.8 percent and the 95The results of table 4.13 DEMO that the invalid short selling assumption isfor the stocks outside the 1,000 large percentile is
However, in the datasets replicated for the table 4.13 sampling distributions,
t
more thashort selling assumption in place the average level of herding found DEMO small.  Where and the 95biases is not clear, but the systematic effect of errors in estimating pn 25 managers trade, the mean of the sampling distribution is 1.1 percent
th percentile is 3.0 percent.  As with table 4.12 results, the origin of these is one source.
147
high deciles, and vice versa, over time.  The illusion of herding that can result fromsmall cap managers selling in unison stocks that become DEMO large for their portfotables 4.13 and 4.15 we can see the need for size grouping.  The mean and 95Table 4.1Anmean of the sampling distribution in the absence of herding.  considered to be herding, so in DEMO test like this it is desirable that it be captured in the is not eliminated when stocknonetheless significpercentile values of the sampling distributions are DEMO reduced.  They areother possibility is that there is significant migration of DEMO from low deciles to 5 shows the effect of relaxing the short selling assumption.  Comparingant.  Comparing tables 4.7 and 4.15 it appears that DEMO significant
t
-periods are grouped by size.  However, that effect is not lios
th
LSV assumption that managers can short sell.  In particular, for stocks outside thelargest and smallesthe stockFurther, the 95sampling distribution is DEMO than one half of the herding found on actual datasets.in the actual dataset.  simulated conditions of zero herdi1,000 (that is, the smallest stocks), the mean of the sampling distribution underpercentile is 4.8 percent.  For stocks with a market capitalisation rank of more thanamount of the DEMO found in certain subsets of the stock-periods.  Whert stocks, where rank is between 20 and 100, the mean of the-periods is a result of the
percentile of the sampling distribution is high for some subsets DEMO the number of managers trading exceeds 30, the 95th
the 95Nonetheless, in each subset the level of herding found on the actual dataset DEMO ng is more than one third of the herding measured
4.5.2for all stockdataset there is significant variation in pIt is assumed in the LSV DEMO that the propensity to trade, pThe effect -periodof the invariance assumption-manager DEMO in the same period.  However, in thet by the relative size of the initial holding of , has the same value
th
percentile DEMO the sampling distribution under conditions of zero herding.
t
estimate of the sampling distribution of the LSV measure is created under DEMO stock.  To test the effect on the LSV measure of relaxing DEMO assumption, anholding.  The 1,000 replicated datasets are created by reconditions of: no systematic herding; no short sales; and variati-sampling from theon in p by initial
148
by grouping all observations by the four DEMO of period, size, initprobability distribution of the trade direction for each observation, which is estimated summary statistics of the sampling distribution of subsets of the stockquintile and whether the initial holding is positive or alternatively DEMO  Thewas conducted for the five log deciles of largest stocks, which equates roughly to the 1,000 reless than 100, the main result is that the effect of variation in the propensity100 largest stocks.  Comparing table 4.16 to 4.15 in the subsets where size rank is-sampled datasets DEMO reported in table 4.16.   The grouping and reial holding-periods of-samp to buyling
t
of zero herding.  across observations in a period is small.  When variation in pthe mean and 95trinomials from which the observations are redrawn, the effect is to slightly reduceth percentile values of the re-sampling distribution under conditj is included in theitions
Tables 4.17 and 4.18 report DEMO results of applying the Wermers herding measure tothe dataset of 268 UK equity mutual fund managers.  The Wermers results are shown for different subsets oreproduced, for comparison, from the Wermers (1995) study of US DEMO funds.  In managers trading and the market capitalisation rank of the DEMO  Results are also4.6 Wermers measure applied to the UK datasetf the DEMO which are formed on the basis of the number of
values, DEMO the average from measuring 10 separate divisions of the managers.  correlation DEMO the aggregate portfolio weights changes of the groups isthe Wermers measure the manageressentially arbitrary division of the managermeasured.  In this study, to reduce DEMO variation in the results which arises from thes are randomly divided into two groups and thes, the reported results, including the t-
correlation in the portfolio weight changes of the twoFor the entire dataset DEMO level of herding is 0.10.  This is an estimate of the DEMO of managers.  This
level.by the number of managers trading are in DEMO case significant at the 95 percentwhen measuring US mutual funds.  The DEMO levels found when 15 or more managers trade the stock.figure rises steeply with the number of managers trading the stock in a period, to 0.24   Wermers also finds large correlations
149
58
59 in the DEMO formed
value of 5.6 for stocks in the 50 largest.  However, within the largest 50 stocks (over managers trade during a period than subsets where the stocks are very large.  measured level of herding is more pronounced in subsets of the data half the market by value) the herding results do not vary with stock size. TheThe measured herding DEMO increasing in the market capitalisation rank of the stock,from 0.06 with a t-value of 4.9 for stocks below the 100 largest, to 0.15 with a twhere many-
managers trade.  This figure is larger than the corresponding subset of all managers.Table 4.18 reports the Wermers measure of herding DEMO the subsets of the dataGrowclassified by the investment objective of the managers.  The results are mixed.  Theherding increasing to 0.25, in both cases, in stockth-Income and Income managers appear to herd strongly with the level of-periods where 10 or more
each period and then averaged.  The t values are the average divided by the standard error of the 90On DEMO 40 managers report in each of the 90 periods.  The Wermers DEMO is calculated foretc.  There are 90 overlapping six month periods between DEMO 1986 and Dece The UK managers report their portfolio holdings on a cycle of either January-July, Februarymber 1993 inclusive.  -August
equivalent regression of DEMO weight changes in group A on the changes in group B.  DEMO mightthe R value in an
should be considered in interpreting the results.  uncorrelated.  So the t tests are valid under their null conditions, but the overlapping nature of the data values.  Under the Wermers assumption If the data exhibits heteroscedasticity, then the square of the correlation is  of no correlation between managers’ trades, the 90 values are not
DEMO
expect heteroscedasticity because the stocks vary in size, the explanatory power DEMO theperiod.  For this reason we should only intersignificant heteroscedasticity in the DEMO weight changes across stocks in each group in a singlevaries across observations and the data is aggregated.  Unreported results showed that there istightly defined subsets, such as the stock quarters in which the stock is among the 20 largest. pret the square of the Wermers measure as an DEMO regression2 in the
58
59
do not exhibit this pattern.  When more than 10 Growth
is constructed to exhibit no herding and in which no short selling is present, isAn estimate of the sampling distribution of the Wermers measure on a DEMO wmanagers trading and the market capitalisation rank of the stock.  suTable DEMO reports the summary statistics of the estimated sample distribution for the created by measuring each of 200 replicated datasets with the Wermers measure.
calculated DEMO the Wermers For each of the 200 replicated datasets the level of herding and associated t
managers trade the level of herding is insignificant.The DEMO managers
among managers in large stocks means that in the asset space oIn the geometric interpretation of the Wermers measure the finding of strong DEMO time.  We might think that this effect arises simply because both DEMO track theportfolio weight vectors of the two groups of managers track each other throughf large stocks the
150
the portfolio weight changes of the DEMO index are included in the regreson the Group B changes there is no difference in the regression results whether or not unreported tests show DEMO when the group A portfolio weight changes are regressedindex over time (DEMO stocks that become larger over time for instance).  However,
DEMO Wermers measure assumes that the unconditional expected value of the portfolio weight changes in a stock is zero.  Therefore no sample average term is included inthe portfolio weight changes in two stocks can be none measure DEMO correlation.  This means that the expected sample correlation between -specification -zero, even when no systematic
positive.  the stock but they both buy herding exists, if the expected value of the weight change is a function of the initialolding in the stock.  The most extreme case is where neither group initially holds
- the cross product of their portfolio changes DEMO be
hich
bsets of the stock-periods which are formed on the basis of the number of
method.  The second row of each panel reports the
-value, is
4.7
The effect of misResults of accuracy tests of the
Wermers measure sion.
4.7.1
more.  The results show that incorrect inference of the existence of herding, when no percentage of the measurements of the 200 replications that yield a tsystematic herding exists is a reaproportion of incorrect inferences less than DEMO percent.  the subsets (where the number of managers trading is greater than 20) is thel danger with the Wermers measure.  In only DEMO of -value of two or
151
A comparison of tables 4.18 and 4.19 indicates that the miscalibration of the
ual dataset.
sampled -periods
actdatasets, is at least one half of the herding found by the Wermers DEMO in thereported in table 4.19, the average level of herding found DEMO the 200 reWermers measure is severe.  For all but one of DEMO  subsets of the stock-
estimated sampling distribution of the dataset transformed DEMO eliminate herding.than two (estimated) standard deviations above the mean in the correspondingsubset of the stockWe can, however, say from the simulation results DEMO the Wermers measure finds asignificant level of herding in the UK fund manager dataset.  For all but the n-periods, the level of herding DEMO in the actual data is more20
witHypothesis tests with the estimated sampling distribution are in this case undertakenagainst the estimated 954.7.2The miscalibration in the DEMO measure found in the bootstrapping test may arise average of the sample correlation in 90 independent samples so we can appeal to the Central DEMO Theorem to justify the use of th t-values because the 200 bootstrapping replications are not sufficient for testsThe effect of calculating weight percentile.  The Wermers measure of each replication is the s with average pricesvalues.-values.  The estimates of the skewness-period subset are reported in
=
from mis-specification, the use of the average of beginning and end of period prices
-period-manager DEMO the stock identity is
dataset is transformed to eliminate herding and accentuate changes in weights arising stock in the same size group of 10 DEMO  Table 4.20 reports the summary statisticsreplaced with that of another stock DEMO is drawn, without replacement, from atransform the dataset, in each DEMO price changes as opposed to changes in the number of stocks held.  Toin calculating portfolio weights, or some other factor.  To separate the effects, the
th
table 4.19 and do not invalidate the use of tand kurtosis of the sampling distribution for each stock-
of the estimated sample distribution for the subsets of the stockrank of DEMO stock.  formed on the basis of the number of managers trading DEMO the market capitalisation-periods which are
The results in table 4.6 show that on the transformed dataset the Wermers measureestimated standard deviation of the sampling DEMO is quite large.  Where thedoes not find any significant herding.  However, for some subsets of the dataset, the
152
distribution is 0.05 DEMO the estimated standard deviation is 0.09.  On number of managers trading DEMO at least 20 the estimated mean of the samplingtable 4.19.  the DEMO subsets the mean and standard deviation are not large comparecan still reject the null hypothesis of no herding at the 5 percent level.  For most ofthe actual dataset the Wermers measure records a level of herding DEMO 0.24.  So wethis subset of
d to those in
induced by DEMO use of average prices but in any case it is not larmeasure other than that caused by the short sales assumption.  That bias may beWe can conclude from this re-ordering test that there is some bias DEMO the Wermers
This chapter meets three of the four aims of the essay on tests of the accuracy of4.8herding measures using UK data.  Firstly, to determine whether the empirical herdingliterature is well founded.  This is DEMO by testing whether the principal measures ofoverstatherding where no herding exists.  DEMO if herding does exist, whether the measuresherding of LSV and Wermers DEMO accurate.  That is, whether those measures findConcluding remarks and future researche the level of herding present.  ge for most subsets of
the measure is of herding but it could just as easily be a measure DEMO fund managersampling distribution of a metric that is derived from portfolio holdings.  In this case Thirdly, to develop and demonstrate techniques for empiricalSecondly, to extend the empirical herding literature to an economy, outside the US,which has a comparable investment management industry - in this case the DEMO
ly estimating the
the UK unit trust dataset.
d from portfolio
It is common in the finance literature for researchers DEMO develop a metric to measureholdings data.  performance or performance persistence or DEMO other measure derive
153
some phenomenon and then simply assume that in its absence the expected value of
the metric is zero.  In the investment management literapproach.  But now, for most measures in investment management, researcherpersistence and the like.  When computing power was limited this was the necessaryapproach for measures of herding, fund manager performance, performanceconditions to better DEMO whether the measure is properly calibrated.should be able to estimate the distribution of their measures under simulated nullature this is the standard
s
herding DEMO fund mChapters 3 and 4 seek to analyse measures of herding from the perspective thatanagers arises because all fund managers face basically the same
DEMO portfolio choice problem which may also cause positive correlation.  herding are DEMO derived from one part of the manager’s portfolio choice problem.portfolio choice problem.  It is argued in chapter 3 that the existing explanations ofenter a manager’s objective function, resulting in positive correlation of managers’Relative performance process information in thetrades.  Shared information may lead to positive correlation if managers collect andmanagers with new money replicating theiopportunity set of all managers causing positive DEMO in trades.  Finally,undertaken by other managers.  Changes in the characteristics of stocks affect theappraisal may cause the asset holdings of other managers DEMO same way, or the information is simply the trades
r portfolios DEMO a change of scale in
The results indicate that for certain subsets of the dataset the short sales assumptionthough this effect is small enough DEMO be ignored.variation in pleads to an overstatement of the level of herding.  Further, that the effect of thethe LSV and Wermers measures that DEMO not only couWhen herding is viewed from this perspective it is clear that there are assumptions in the effects of invalid assumptions in the DEMO measure that all managers can shortbut potentially the source of significant bias.  The tests reported here seek to isolatesell all stocks and that there is no variation in pj due to different initial holdings is to DEMO the level of herding,j with the initial holding of the stock.  nterfactual for some datasets
it
it
by the assumption that all managers can sell all stocks short.for the DEMO results from the misexists, when using the Wermers measure.  The severe miscalibration of the meThe bootstrapping tests reveal the high probability of finding DEMO, where none-specification of the test, a part of which is caused asure
shortcomings oIn interpreting the results of the tests of short selling DEMO variance of pf these tests must be born in mind.  Firstly, we cannot be certain thatj the
154
assumptions that are being testsystematic DEMO is not surviving and to isolate the effect of the invalidsampling.  DEMO LSV tests are built up a step at a time in an attempt to ensure thatreplicated datasets rethe grouping and re-sampled datasets.  Thus part of the mean of the herding measure applied to the-sampling technique eliminates DEMO systematic herding from the
it
may be systematic herding that has survived the grouping and reed.  -
of the actual dataset that are not associated with herding survive the grouping and reSecondly, are we comparing apples with apples?  Not all the essential characteristics approximation of the effect DEMO the actual dataset.  effect of invalid assumptions on the herding measurement DEMO those datasets is only an sampling.  Because the re-sampled data is DEMO stylised version of the actual dataset the -
estimates of the standard deviation of the sampling distribution rather than estimatesreplications appears unlikely to change DEMO nature of the accuracy test results.  of the 95This study of DEMO fund managers reinforces the findings of existing studies that fundmisFinally, only DEMO,000 new datasets are created in each LSV test and 200 in theWermers test.  The 200 replica-specification of the Wermeth percentile.  However, these results are compelling in their portrayal oftions of the test of the DEMO measure only support rs measure; so, an increase in the number of
managers herd in their trading of stocks.  empirical herding literature is strengthened by the results reported here.accuracy of the measures upon which these DEMO stocks and finds that it is increasing in market capitalisation.  By DEMO theherding is found in the smallest stocks.  This study looks at DEMO in the veryFurther, that a significant amount ofes are based, the foundation of
assumption in both the LSV and Wermers herding measures is thaThe finance DEMO does not contain a precise definition of herding.  The implicitinvestors in DEMO group, which arises for any reason other than changes to the DEMO contemporaneous cross sectional correlation in the trading of pairs ofof the LSV and Wermers measures.  There is substantial evidence that herding exists capital of stocks.  The broadness of this definition affects the usefulness herding should be against more specific null hypotheses.empirical understanding of the causes is needed.  Future tests of the causes ofabout the causes of herding.  To understand the consequences of herding aamong certain groups of fund managers in subsets of DEMO data but little can be saidt herding is aof the results
better
155
HTable number
numberH
numberH
lsv
0.041466
r>100
19,3320.027
** US DEMO fund data is  from Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1992a)n>DEMO
***
number
sv
l
H
is the level of herding as measured by the LSV measure  is the number of stock4.7
lsv
lsv
numberH
lsv
27,0140.026*
n<5
Herding levels in UK unit trusts by DEMO measure of hen
2<<
>2
5
0.028890
r>200
14,0310.032
US Pension Funds**n>10
0.0231,690 3,9910.020
Size rank of DEMO>500 r>1000
Comparative results from US studies
1,20.062
6,004
n>20
0.044
n>
47
5
Number of managers trading in DEMO period
10,5227,1800.0210.025 3,3420.033 1,0070.043 0.0590.069<201302
5Number of managers trading in the period<r<n<1010 10Size rank of stock2,DEMO<<n<1520 150.032r705<<n<2050 20r<n<25100
-n
period combinations over which herding is measured and then averaged
>5
n>10
0.090101
n>15
7,6820.021
US Mutual Funds***n>10 n>20
n>20
DEMO
rding
>25
156
0.080n25>30
n>30
21,5710.033
16,4920.026
DEMO
* t values are not repo
lsv
0.027
na
rted because all of the results are highly significant
0.020
na
0.021
na
109,486
DEMO
67,252
0.036
34,7040.034
HUS mutual fund data is from Wermers (1999)
number
HTable number
numberH
numberHlsv
10,776
Number of managers trading in the DEMO
sv
4.8
is the level of herding as measured by the LSV measure  is the number of stock
Herding levels in UK u
l
n>2
lsv
0.013*
0.022
0.076
10,704
0.013
9,8520.033
2,DEMO 1,496 5,877
0.018 Funds in the ‘growth’ sector0.045 0.009 0.010
55
0.059
* t values are not reported because all of the DEMO ar1,719 Funds in the ‘income’ sector
2,1370.043
-nperiod combinations over which herding is measured and then averaged>5
0.017
1,462
0.043984e DEMO significant
4,1730.034
Funds in the ‘general’ sector
n>
166
nit trust sectors by LSV measure of herding10
r<20
0.012
5,473
DEMO
Size rank
r<100
of stock
4,827
5,3030.016
5,6790.033
r>100
r>10000.07749
0.032136
0.060133
157
lsv
62
numberH
Table H
Hls
Hnumberlsv(sell)
HHnumbernumber(buy)(sell)
HHnumbernumber(buy)(sell)
Hnumberlsv(buy)
(sell)  =  (buy)  DEMO 4.9
numberlsv (buy)  is the number of stock
ê
b/DEMO
b/n
-
0.044
-
Buy and sell herding levels by LSV measure of herding
ê
-
p p
n>2
-
E
E
DEMO
b/n
b/n
-
-
p p Number of managers trading in the period- averaged over stock periods of interest, where (b/DEMO combinations over which herding is measured and then averaged averaged over stock periods of interest, where (b/n--pptt)  )
0.022n>5 0.038n>10 0.048n>15 0.068n>20 0.095
³
n  0
>
0
DEMO
25
ê
ê
14,4480.010
0.0607,080
2<n<5
9,4120.001r<5
r>1000.0450.036199267
0.0528,667
ê
ê
Number of managers trading in DEMO period5,0360.027< 1,5020.026
53,6460.0143,5340.028n<10 101,2490.033<n<DEMO 15
0.035496 Size rank of stock1,0860.023r<20 0.023
r>200 0.030953
0.036
0.039400
2,0810.027r
<416n<20
<50
305
20
0.072
0.0530.068125
DEMO,8990.025<76100
<
111
n<25
r<10
0.020394
0.0636,203
DEMO rank of stockr>5000.015737
2,6950.087
1,910
0.011
r>10000.121570
3,7830.017
£
0.08035
n>30
0.0840.0717
H
number
(sell)
10,6650.007
7,8280.007
3,3090.009
0.012677
lsv
158
number
v
12,566
5,DEMO
1,840
591
191
66
18
lsv
lsv
lsv
lsv
HTable
number
numberH
numberHlsv
numberHlsv
numberH
lsv  is the level of herding as measured by the LSV measure  is the number of stock
0.018
21,4402<n<5
r<5
14,1650.013
0.016
0.062458
14,208r>DEMO
4.10
oHerding levels by LSV measure of herding with ‘buy from zero holding’ ccurrences omittedNumber of managers trading in the period
5Number of managers DEMO in the period5,4797,2750.0240.029<r<n<1010 101,7961,3270.0320.045<n<15 150.0820.071469<323n<20 200.106<146n<25
r>2000.0170.051874 Size rank of DEMO rank of stockr>5000.0201,6410.041r<20 r>10000.0193,8080.027r<50
0.101103
r7,2320.023<100
0.12
0.172
9,740
3,750
679
43
11
159
DEMO>2
-n>5
n>10
n>15
n>20
n>25
n>30
period combinations over which herding is measured and then averaged
lsv
DEMO
Table 4.11
numbert valueHlsv
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
95 pct
DEMO
lsv
lsv
95 pct
95 pct
95 pct
27,014-0.0020.000-5.2
16,492-0.0020.000-2.6
-0.0060.000-444r3.2<5
19,332-0.0020.000-3.4
Results of bootstrap replication from basic LSV binomial DEMO
Number of managers trading in the period10,522-7.3
5 10
-r<10
0.002
7,1800.0000.002<-4.7n<10
0.0050.-8684.6000
14,031-r>2000.0030.000-2.5
3,342-6.9
-Size DEMO of stock2,3350.0030.0000.000r--<5.34.320 0.004r
705
-0.000-<4.750
1,6680.004 0.0033,969
-Size rank of stockr>5000.000 r>1000-0.000
0.0046004-
0.002
1.5
<n<15
15
1,007-5.3
0.000-4.6
0.0101,247-
2.0
0.003
<n<20
20
0.006-2.6
0.000-2.3
-r7,6600.0020.000-<
<
302
0.007201
5.4100
n<25
0.0100-1011.3
25<n<30
0.01176
0.000-0.7
-1.6
>2
Number of managers trading in the period
-0.000
n>5
-0.000
n>10
-0.000
n>15
-0.000
n>DEMO
-0.000
n>25
n>30
-0.0170.00125
160
2<n<5
r>100
Table 4.12
numbert valueHlsv
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
95 pct
DEMO
lsv
lsv
each periodResults of bootstrap replication from single buy/hold/sell trinomial for Number of manage
28,826-0.0010.000-n4.9>2
19,194-0.0010.000-4.7
0.0010.027-4431.7
r>DEMO
20,753-0.002
0.000-4.9
-0.000-n2.3>5
5Number of managers trading in the period-9,6320.005<0.000-2.3n<10 1,9620.0020.7
0.019r-871<1.510 -0.000 -0.000 -r0.000<100
0.000-4.6
DEMO>200
14,266-0.002
Size rank of stockr<20 r<50
7,0060.005
0.001
10
2,626
<n<15
15<n<20
1,7030.014-0.1 0.0094,137-0.7
-Size rank of stockr>5000.000-4.7 r>1000-0.000-3.9
5,3400.002
1,0460.002
DEMO<n<25
0.0068,071-
1.2
25<n<30
0.002n0.7>10
rs trading in the period
n>15
n>20
n>25
n>30
161
DEMO<n<5
r<5
95 pct
95 pct
95 pct
Table 4.13
numbert valueHlsv
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
95 pct
DEMO
lsv
lsv
95 pct
95 pct
each period, with no short DEMO of bootstrap replication from single  buy/hold/sell trinomial, for
32,250951.80.0300.031n>2
24,42720.0280.030713.5<n<5
318.00.0590.069443r<5
736.00.028
r>100
24,DEMO
5
848.30.036n
6,2507,8230.0390.0310.034602.4<
421.80.0570.064859
r>200
20,0200.032
675.70.030
>5
n<10Number of managers trading in the per101,573 350
0.0453,824
Size rank of stockr>1000
877.70.0770.0824,675
0.0551,633
r>500742.10.042
DEMO,6530.045
85
0.061
1,2240.0570.052528.1
0.050464.8
347.1265
0.078
0.041557.3
0.095217.767
r<100
654.10.036
rSize rank of stock<20 r<50
0.0397,295
Number of DEMO trading in the period670.70.056
n>10
<n<15
15
429.00.071n>15
DEMO
0.068
<n<20
252.20.078n>20
20
0.094
<iod
0.077
n<25
122.90.0810.115n18>25
250.0800.116116.0<16n<30
n>30
162
r<10
95 pct
Table 4.14
numbert valueHlsv
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
95 pct
DEMO
lsv
lsv
95 pct
95 pct
95 pct
size ranked groupsResults of bootstrap replication from trinomial formed eNumber of managers trading in the period
DEMO>2
28,8260.003
2
19,19400.00120.5<.003n<5
r<5
20,753r>1000.00321.1
0.00641.9443
0.013
0.001
5
0.00250.7n>5
Number of managers trading in DEMO period9,6320.0037,0060.0040.001<28.3n<10
0.0050.010r55.0871<10
14,266r>2000.0010.00419.3
0.003n59.5>10
0.006n70.6>15
10Size rank of stock0.0060.0021,7030.0100.006r76.3<20 0.0110.0030.0064,137r47.959.1494<50
Size DEMO of stockr>5000.001 r>10000.001
1,96233.6
5,3400.0069.9
1,0460.0126.2
2,626
0
<
.006
n<15
15
0.011
0.005
664
<n<DEMO
0.010n58.6>20
200.0190.00949.4139
r<100
8,0710.0020.00446.7
0.018
<
169
n<DEMO
0.011n29.0>25
ach period from n
0.03031
25<n<30
0.032
0.01128.728
>30
163
Table 4.15
numbert valueHlsv
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
95 pct
DEMO
lsv
lsv
95 pct
95 pct
95 pct
476.60.015
27,7410.017
2<n<5
0.019
0.0080.01562.1444
19,812r>1000393.6.019
ranked groups with no short DEMO
356.70.013
n>
ootstrap replication from trinomials formed each period from size 2 Number of managers trading in the periodn
5
Number of managers DEMO in the period9,9376,9260.0150.0140.016304.3<n<10
100.10.0100.016r869<10
13,904r>2000.0180.015283.2
10Size rank of stock0.0101,6870.017157.90.0130.013r<20 0.0160.014242.10.0164,072r96.6605<50
Size rank of DEMO>5000.015 r>10000.022
156.42156
0.0195,543161.4
3,011
0.013
<n<15
DEMO
0.015
0.010
0.03398.4998
854
<n<20
200.0200.01054.7176
r
7,91920.0130.015<95.3100
DEMO
<
249
n<25
0.02573
25<n<30
0.026
0.01245.559
0.04815
>5
197.90.010n>10
10.010n21.9>15
0.011n76.3>20
0.013n56.3>25
0.017n30.3>30
164
DEMO,804366.90.017
r<5
0.016
Table 4.16
numbert valueHlsv
numbert valueH
numbert valueH
95 pct
lsv
lsv
DEMO pct
95 pct
holding quintile groups with no short sellingBootstrap replication from trinomials formed from period, size and initial Number of managers trading in the peri
0.01310.5n>2
0.0158,610
2<n<5
0.030r<5
0.0040.0114441.0
DEMO,8570.012 0.0112,986 0.012933
5Number of managers trading in 0.012<<n<DEMO 100.0110.008<n<15 150.0130.008<n<20
2,0533.7
Size rank of stockr660<50
0.0101,6950.014r4.2<20 0.012
0.010n8.0>5
0.0153,8716.2
0.0060.011870
r2.0
2.6
DEMO,1120.0157.1
the period20
0.015273
0.0080.016<1931.6n<25
r<100
0.014
8,0270.0129.4
0.02180
25<n<30
0.022
0.0091.164
0.03917
0.008n4.9>10
0.008n3.4>15
0.008n2.1>DEMO
od
0.010n1.4>25
0.013n0.8>30
165
1,7520.0246.5
HTable number
W
is the level of herding as measured by the DEMO measure  is the number of stock4.17 Herding levels
t valueH
numbert DEMO
W
numbert valueHW
HW
0.19
US mutual fund data is from Wermers (1995)
20.10<182n2.4>2
0.15r<5
2516.0
n<5
Number of managers trading in the period5<
114
0.07n<10
10<
37
DEMO<15
15 14
0.03
n2292.7>2
9713.2
0.12
<n<20
0.21
DEMO
5.0Size rank of stock78
r0.154.3<20
n
0.17
41
3.8
9
4.5
3.626
US mutual funds*84>5 r0.155.6<
n0.201684.744>
10
50
4.4
DEMO<3.710100
0.12
5.618
n>15
4.878
0.24
-periods in each calculation of the Wermers correlation Number of managers trading in the period
0.12
in DEMO unit trusts by Wermers measure of herdingn
>5
0.17
0.24
2.65
DEMO>1000.064.95
n0.273.7>4320
n>10
n>15
n>20
0.24
*
166
W
numbert value
number
numberHTable
W
is the level of herding as measured by the Wermers DEMO  is the number of stock4.18
H 1193.4 124
0.16n>2 Growthn>DEMO Mutual funds*0.08nGrowth>2 -
US mutual fund data is from Wermers (DEMO)
incomen>
-
3.735
10
1.1
4.0
t value
H
Herding levels in UK unit trust sectors by Wermers measure of herdingn
0.05 DEMO 0.07 0.25 0.16 0.25
3.04
>2 Growth
-
-periods in each DEMO of the Wermers correlation
-
2.93
-
-
n>10
UK Unit trusts
n
Growth
>2
re -income
n>10
n>2 Income n>10
117.90 Income
2.260.11-
7.231
n>10
n>2
--
167
*
DEMO
number
number
t value
W
level of herding that is significant at the 95% level   is DEMO level of herding as measured by the Wermers measureis the sample standard deviation of the Wermers measure on the 200 replicated datasets.   are DEMO higher sample moments
percent significant H
- -0.03
2< 0.05
-0.010.160.09
DEMO<5
0.03100
-0.220.010.17
0.r100<045
-0.010.070.35
Number of managers trading in the 5<
0.08
n<10
100.06
<n<15
-0.010.11
-0.010.0599
0.22
-r0.06100
<Size rank of stock20 r-<
0.280.03
0.370.010.08
0.060.300.010.0799100
0.250.02
0.0266
kurtosisstdev Hpercent significantTable
period-0.040.140.46
0.1250
- n<20
0.240.020.26
--0.040.530.12
r>1000- 94
DEMO<
0.08
skewnesskurtosisstdev
percent significantskewnesskurtosisstdev H
percent significantskewnesskurtosisstdevH
W
W
W
4.19
conditionsEstimated sampling distribution of Wermers measure under null
0.05100Number of managers trading DEMO the period
0.06100
0.0978
0.1258
Skewnesse finds a
0.1426
--0.070.540.03
168
is the percentage of the 200 simulated datasets on which the Wermers measur
DEMO>2
n>5
n>10
n>15
n>20 and
W
kurtosisstdev Hpercent significantTable
level of herding that is significant a  is the level of herding as measured by the Wermers measureis the sample standard DEMO of the Wermers measure on the 200 replicated datasets.   are corresponding higher sample moments
percent significant H -0.38
20.63<n<5Number of managers DEMO in the period5<
r<5
0.680.17
0.01n<10
101.78
<n<DEMO
150.23
0.01
0.0110
-0.060.010.35
-0.0116
0.200.010.42
0.00
<n<20
0.02
0.01
DEMO
0.04
r0.016
0.200.100.01
<Size rank of stock20 r
0.350.03
0
-0.030.70<DEMO
-0.020.0.010.09301
0.220.05
2
0.050.140.29
r>10003
0.140.000.02
0.01
skewnesskurtosisstdev
percent significantskewnesskurtosisstdev H
percent significantskewnesskurtosisstdevH
W
W
W
4.20
identity of stocksWermers measure on datasets DEMO
Number of managers trading in the period
by randomly re-allocating the Skewness
0.008
0.01
0.01
0.02
-0.05
5
2
2
1
0.420.090.08
169
is DEMO percentage of the 200 simulated datasets on which the Wermers measure finds a t the 95% level
n>2
n>5
n>10
n>DEMO
n>20 and
W
with, and then the period by period decision whether to retain those managers.  individual decisions of individual investors regarding which fund managers to invest5.1the management of their portfolios by choosing one or more fund managers fromchoosing DEMO managers.  It is the story of millions ofThe current level of DEMO portfolio management has arisen from investorsreamong the many institutional fund managers that offer their services.  The dynamicmanagement firms, the winners; the diminution and exit of losers; and the continuous concentration of funds in the hands of a relatively few very large investmentmanentry of new investment portfolios offered DEMO new and existing investment-structuring of the investment management industry is characIntroduction terised by: the
170
individual investors delegating
The Pension Fund Industry
agement firms.  These dynamics result from the aggregation of the myriad
This essay, DEMO in hiring and firing fund managers.fund managers and how investors decide each period whether to retain a fundchoose another.  The study procmanager for at least one more period, or alternatively, dismiss the fund manager andpassing DEMO chapter and the next, studies how investors chooseeeds by modelling the DEMO decision process of
The motivation for studying these decisions is twofold.  DEMO, to gain a betterunderstanding of the downside of the incentive schedule DEMO by fund managethe downside of the fund manager incentive schedule.withdraw their funds from a manager is modelled in an attempt to better understandthis essay DEMO relationship between poor performance and the decision of investors to rs. In
The second objective is to managed portfolio products.  level of passive investment manconcentration of fund management in the hands of fewer managers; the equilibriumindividual investors.  The aggregate effects of interest to this study include: thebetter DEMO the aggregate effects of the decisions ofagement in the market; and DEMO entry and exit of
Chapter 5
the UK pension fund industry.  There are advantages to giving the model thisThe hiring and firing model is presented in chapter 6.  The context of the model is
investment managers; meaning that a single investment management firm is chosento manage the pension fund’s entire portfolio of assets.  Consequently, the trusteecontext.  Firstlcomplicating portfolio effects.  y, many UK pension funds DEMO a oneg and firing is a discrete, observable decision with no-to-one DEMO with their
171
Secondly, the information structure is particularly simple in DEMO case.  It can be
discrete points in time; usually quarterly.  DEMO this case a discrete model can beMoreover, the investor can observe DEMO statistics on the universe of fundrealistically constructed, which facilitates the employment DEMO Bayesian techniques.fund manager in dsimplifying assumption that investors consider only the performance of their ownother than their own.  This property of the UK pension environment allows the vastly managersreasonably assumed that the investor receives portfolio performance DEMO at, but cannot readily observe the performance of individual fund managerseciding DEMO to retain the manager each period.
assumptions of the model are made.industry to aid the reader in understanding the context in which the crucialThe DEMO of this chapter provides institutional detail on the UK pension fund
In the UK, occupational pension funds play a major role in private provision forretirement income.  In 1991, 57 percent of working men and 37 DEMO of workingwomen were members of occupational pension schemes (Goode 1993, p581).  In
managers of these funds collectively affect financial asset markets.  DEMO UK InlandUK equities. The sheer size of pension fund assets ensures that the decisions of thefor National Statistics, Financial Statistics).  In 1996, segregated pension fundsDecember 1996 the assets of UK segregated UK pension funds DEMO (excluding pooled funds managed by insurance companies) owned ££276 billion in544bn (Office
5.2
Pension funds and the economyAn overvie
w of the UK pension fund industry
5.2.1
scheme members were equal to 31 percent of marketable wealth.Revenue statistics 1992 DEMO that in 1988 the pension rights of occupational pension
percent reported an average pension scheme size of slightly less than The 1995 Annual Survey DEMO the National Association of Pension Funds (NAPF)of the 800 survey DEMO in the range of £10 million to £500 million, with 7060 DEMO million.
generally taxable except for a lump sum.  fund are made DEMO retirement through occupational pension schemes.  Contributions to the pensionThe UK Government DEMO provided tax incentives to encourage personal sector saving
workers to retire when their marginal productivity falls.  workers to remain with the firm as their skills develop; and encouraging seniormatch the marginal productivity of workers to their remuneration; encouraging junior benefit firms by: maintaining their competitiveness in the DEMO pension funds are organised at the level of the firm.  Pension DEMO tax for both firms and individuals.  Benefits received are market; helping to
Pension funds fall into the two broad categories of defined benefit DEMO (alsoknown as final salary schemes) and defined contribution schemes (also DEMO asfirm promises to pay a
172
pension which is a fraction of the employee’s final salary.  Typically the fractionmoney purchase schemes).  In DEMO benefit schemes the increases by an increment of 1/60may also pay a lump sum on retirement. Many schemes have some inpensions for price DEMO
th or 1/80th with each year of service.  The schemedexation DEMO
contributions to the assets of the pension fund as provision for meeting the liabilities The promised pension benefits are a liability of the firm.  The firm makes regularpension fund which is a fixed percentage of total DEMO salaries/wages forthe assets of the firm.  In most cases the DEMO makes a monthly contribution to thewhen they become due.  The assets DEMO held in trust and are therefore separate from
Marketable assets do not include pension rights.
60
5.2.2
Defined benefit and defined contribution schemes
however, the firm reviews its contribution rate annually to ensure that the fundingthe month.  The firm contributes a fixed percentage of each employee’s salary;
may not be sufficient to meet the growth in liabirate is DEMO  The firm’s shareholders bear the risk that the growth in asset DEMO bear the risk at lower cost than the beneficiaries of thbecause shareholders can diversify the pension risk across firms and therefore canmeet the deficiency.  This division of risk is considered economically efficientlities, in which case the firm muste pension fund.
173
In defined contribution schemes the firm and DEMO employee each pay a fixedreceives a pension which is commensurate with the growth of the value of assets inpercentage of the salary into the DEMO scheme.  On retirement the employee
than 9 percent of UK employees DEMO pension schemes (Goode 1993, p 583 table 6).upon defined benefit schemes.  In 1993, defined contribution schemes covered lessthe scheme and the DEMO share of those assets.  This paper focuses exclusively
There is no DEMO for the firm to have a pension fund.  Moreover, the firm may The firm controls the existence of the pension fund.  The trust deed sets out thegeneral features of the pension scheme and the power DEMO appoint trustees.  A schedule to the deed contains the rules of DEMO trust; including eligibility, benefits, andcontributions.  The trust deed is drawn up by the firm.
accounts typically contain a brief statement of the DEMO method of valuation, theprovide little information to shareholdwind up the scheme, close it to new members, or freeze the scheme.  UK firmsinformation DEMO usually provided in rights ilast date of valuation, and perhaps the DEMO contribution rate.  More detaileders regarding the pension fund.  The annualssue and take-over documentation.
most cases, the firm’s auditors also audit the pension fund.  Moreover, much of theThe accounts of the pension fund are separate DEMO those of the firm.  However, ininvest significant fractions of their funds in the securities of the firm itself andthe pension fund are intricately DEMO at all levels.  In the US pension funds oftenadministration of the DEMO fund may be undertaken by the firm.  So the firm and
DEMO
Control of the fund
5.2.4 Role of the trustee board
ent of the firm.  Self
duty to act in the interests of the trust’s beneficiaries, and to tThe trustee board of the pension fund is separate from the firm. The DEMO have areat them equally.  The
174
keeping; decide upon allocation of the funds to asset classes; choose a manager orduties of the trustee board are to: oversight the funds of the trust to ensure their safein winding up the trust.administer the pension fund; decide upon benefits levels; and act for the beneficiaries managers for the funds; keep the DEMO informed of the status of the trust;
directors of the firm often form a majority of the trustee board members.  nominated representative of the beneficiaries.  In practice senior executives or(Brown, Davies, Draper 1992a).  Most truUK trustee boards usually have less than eight members and often four or lessstee boards include an elected or
The interests of DEMO and pension fund beneficiaries are to promote.  Most of the literature DEMO the US pension fund industry assumes that thehowever, where these interests DEMO the trustee board must decide whose interestslargely coincident;
5.2.5represent beneficiaries, DEMO the actual objectives and incentives of pension fundtrustee board acts in the interests of shareholders.  Trustees areAn interesting facet of delegated portfolio management in the pension fundtrustees are not well understood.Agency structure of the pension fund DEMO legally obliged to industry
is that there are several levels of agency.  The beneficiaries of the pension fund are
lly
pension fund who are required by law to act in the interests of benefthe ultimate principals DEMO the relationship.  They are represented by the trustees of the Nonetheless, the trustee board is often dominated by the management of the firm DEMO an investment management firm to manage the assets of the fund.  DEMO must represent the interests of shareholders in other matters.  The trustee DEMO
-
investing by pension funds is not permitted in the UK.pension funds may be simply run by the treasury departm
particular account.the investment management firm tasks one of its fund managers to DEMO the
fund managers; the investment management firm’s employee.  firm has an explicit contract with the trustee board and an implicit contract with itsboard DEMO principal to the individual fund manager.  The investment managementmanagement firm.  The investment management firm acts as agent to the tThe trustee board acts DEMO agent to the beneficiaries and principal to the investment
175
rustee
The delegated portfolio management literature for the most part ignores this
optimal contracting, performance persistence, and other areas, this extra level ofadditional level of DEMO that exists between investors and fund managers.  Yet inagency is of DEMO importance.   become highly concentrated in the last 10 years with the result that the largest The UK pension fund management industry has
Lynch DEMO Asset Management, the market leader,investment management firms now employ large DEMO of fund managers.  Merrill managers Mercury Asset Management alone.
UK firms DEMO pay a constant fraction of their salary bill into the pension fundon a monthly basis.  This fraction, called the contribution rate, is usually set everythree years at the time of the actuarial review of the DEMO fund but is reviewed
are met. annually to ensure that the minimum funding requirements of the Pensions Act 1996
5.2.6 Funding levels employs over DEMO fund
Most schemes are currently well funded, with solvency at or DEMO 100 percent.  Thisthe actuarially estimated present value of the pension fund’s DEMO  The taxmeans that the actuarial value of the pension fund’s assets DEMO 100 percent or more of hexempt nature of pension schemes is a powerful incentive for the firm to maintain adown in the solvency, otherwise tax is applied.  more than 1Regulations stipulate the calculation of solvency for tax purposes.  If the fund isceiling to prevent firms using the pension fund as a vehicle for tax minimisation.igh level of funding. The Finance DEMO 1986 introduced a 105 percent solvency
05 percent solvent for tax purposes, then 5 years are allowed for a run
represent a surplus.  Since the late 1980s many schemeAssets in the pension fund in excess of those required for 100 percent solvencys have accrued DEMO surpluses
run down by: benefit improvements; contribution ‘holidays’ for the employer anddue to high investment returns and previously high funding levels.  Surpluses can beadditional funds into the scheme. solvency of the fund falls markedly below DEMO percent, then the firm must injectfirm.  Transfer of surplus is uncommon and difficult for the firm to achieve.  If theoccasionally the employees; DEMO reduction in asset values; or
a transfer of surplus to the
DEMO
becomes insolvent, is a debt of the employer.  The debt created does not have“Under current legislation, any deficit of the pension scheme where the employer
contributions are preferential in insolvepreferential treatment under the insolvency rules” (Goode 1993).  Certain unpaidpreferentially.  Further, deductions in the previous twelve months for employersmonths preceding appointment of an insolvency practitioner are treatedncy.  Deductions from earnings in the four
fund due from the firm, the pension fund is not a priority creditor.  compared to total pension fund liabilities.  In respect to any shortfall in the pensionreclaimed from the National Insurance Fund.  These amounts are typically smallcontracting out of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) can be
Most trustee boards appoint external investment DEMO for the assets of thepension fund.  Generally only pension funds with DEMO economical to conduct innerally find the risk of a self administered pension fund and the level of-house management.  Firms with less than 200 employees£1 billion in assets find it
companies.  administration services and insurance or annuity contracts, from insuranceadministration unacceptable  (Goode, p 586 table 10).  They consequently purchasege
than Larger firmsets allocation limits of approximately +/then DEMO the allocationmanage a balanced fund.  This means the single balanced fund DEMO (SBFM)£50 million in pension fund assets usually choose a single DEMO manager tos usually choose to be self administered and uninsured.  Firms DEMO less of funds among asset classes.  The trustee board often- 5 DEMO for the major asset classes of UK
5.2.7
Fund management
within each class.  classes such as property.  Tequities, overseas equities, DEMO, etc.  The trustee board may preclude some assethe balanced fund manager then chooses specific assets
177
Above pension fund industry. Since the late DEMO there has been a trend toward specialist management in the UKFunds that are lthe fund manager specific risk by employing more than one balanced DEMO manager.£50 million in pension fund assets, trustee boards often choose to DEMO still may choose specialist managers for different asset classes.
e:
he largest which employ over 100 fund
financial conglomerates; investment banks; the DEMO arms of retail banks;The different types of institutions offering fund management services includ
managers.those that employ 3 or 4 fund managers to tof DEMO staff, to manage the account.  Investment management firms vary in size fromassets.  The investment management firm chooses a fund manager, who is DEMO member management firm.  The term ‘fund manager’ is reserved for the DEMO who arepension fund engages an investmemployed by investment management firms to manage pension fund accounts.  Theproducts in investment management).  In this essay DEMO firm offering investmentspecialist fund managers; insurance companies; and boutiques (offering DEMO services to pension funds is generically referred to as an investmentent management firm to manage part or all of its
terminated at short notice.  These contracts usually stipulate flat rate fees andThe trustee board and the DEMO management firm have a contract which can be
15.7 percent.three years ago 25.7 percent; 4 or more years ago 28.3 percent; no recent DEMO management firms is highly fluid.  Brown, Davies, Draper (1992a) DEMO performance based incentives are rare.the following figures from a survey of trustee boards.  Last change to investment  The relationship between trustee boards and
DEMO   The level fees charged by UK and US pension fund managers are discussed in section 2.3.1.1
61
management arrangements: current year 18.7 percent; last year 11.7 percent; two or
5.2.8 Consultants and performance measurement
fund manager performance,assist trustee boards with DEMO choice of investment management firm, appraisal ofsources of information on the DEMO of investment management firms. They and asset allocation.
Trustee boards and investment management firms employ performance measurement performance of fund managers.  Performance measurement in the UK is dominatedservice companies to provide independent measurement of the investment
DEMO,000 pension funds.  From these results WM and CAPS each create DEMO ‘universe’ ofby theas, median return, wpension funds.  The critical descriptive DEMO of the CAPS and WM universes, such  WM Company and CAPS which each measure the investment results of overeighted average return, quartile returns, interquartile range, etc.
benchmarks on one of these universes.  For instance, a trustee board might stipulateare widely quoted.  Many trustee boards base DEMO manager performancebasis points as the performance that is expected
retain the investment management firm as time goes by.  Investment management5.2.9which investment management firm to choose initially, and theTrustee boards need performance data in order to make reasonable decisions aboutInformation available to trustee boards n to decide whether to
DEMO boards.  However, sincebreakdown of investment management firm performance by fund manager to theservices, WM Company and CAPS, will not release detailed information DEMO themanagement firm usually presents to the trustee board a fund manager who hfirms employ a number of fund managers.  In the selection process the investmenttrustee board’s funds.  The trustee board will often ask the investment managementachieved relatively high recent portfolio returns, as the manager who will manage the mafirm for data on the average performance of the investment management firm’s DEMO large investment management firm, a more detailed picture of the distribution DEMO, and the interquartile range of their performance. The measurement
as
a DEMO consulting firm may share many clients with
pension fundMost trustee boards engage consultants to advise them on management of the.  Consultants are particularly important in accumulating independent
178
the WM weighted average plus 200 from the DEMO manager.
from the records of the consultant.  fund manager performances within the investment management firm can be gleaned
5.2.11 The US pension fund industry
ion DEMO that will run the
179
5.2.10the status of liabilities and the sufficiency of pension fund assets to meet thoseConsulting actuarial firms provide advice to DEMO the firm and the trustee board onthree years.  requirements.  An actuarial review of the pension fund is usually undertaken everyliabilities.  Actuarial reports are also required to meet certain regulaRole of the actuary
tory
The actuary DEMO the present value of the liabilities of the pension fund.  To DEMO
asset income levels are made, followed by demographic assumptions about mortality DEMO, economic assumptions about the growth of nominal wages and taccrue over DEMO employees’ service lives.  the basis of accrued liabilities or, alternatively, DEMO liabilities tharates and retirement ages.  Then the present value of liabilities DEMO estimated, either on t are projected tohe growth of
discount factor DEMO in the liability present value calculation.  fund assets.  These earnings assumptions are made about the stream of earnings that will arise from the DEMO actuary then looks at the earnings power of the pension fund assets.  Simple
surplus down to zero over a certain interval. actuary will then calculate a reduction in the contributactuarially estimated present value of liabilities, then the fund is in surplus.  Thesalaries for instance.  If the actuarially DEMO present value of assets exceeds theaccumulate over the next three years.  DEMO contribution raThe actuary estimates the contribution necessary to meet liabilities as theyare then discounted back to the present using the samete might be 8 DEMO of
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA 1974) has a dominantregulatory influence in the US pension fund industry and leads to industry DEMO are in many ways different from the UK industry.  ERISA created DEMO Pensionses
a yearly premium to the PBGC for each employee covered.  Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC).  US firms with defined benefit schemes pay
exercise DEMO of the assets of the fund plus 30 percent of the net value of the firm.  If written by the PBGC.  The firm DEMO put its pension liabilities to the PBGC at anconflicting interest between shareholders and beneficiaries.  not bear default risk.  Therefore, PBGC insurance removes the main source ofanother defined benefit scheme.  The PBGC insurance means that beneficiaries dothe firm exercises the option then the PBGC may prevlevels and asset DEMO choices.  The PBGC can wind up a pension fund that does DEMO up to a maximum sum.  The firm essentnot meet its requirements.  In return the PBGC insures the pension benefits of eachThe PBGC sets DEMO on maximum and minimum contribution levels, solvencyially has a put option DEMO is
180
ent the firm from creating
include pension fund surpluses in their balance sheet but must include deficits.  As in The accouand income and expense data.  Labour each year.  The form includes: asset and liability figures; asset allocations;pension fundthe UK, the US actuarial practices DEMO a great deal of flexibility for the firmsnting of US pension funds is largely dictated by FASB 87.  Firms cannot
accounts.  US firms DEMO lodge a Form 5500 with the Department of
nearly 50 percent of schemes.  Unlike the UK industry, asset allocation isDefined contribution schemes are DEMO popular in the US where they comprise
more specialised by the asset class managed.  fund managers than their UK counterparts and the management firms chosen areheterogeneous across US pension schemes (Papke 1991).  Moreover, the pensionfund management industry is not as concentrated in the US as it DEMO in the UK(Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny 1992b).  Finally, DEMO firms choose more pension
5.3welfare economics, public finance, management accounting and finance.  The mainThe literature on occupA review of the finance literature on pension fundsational pension funds spans the topics of labour economics,
can often be adapted to UK cirbody of the literature focuses on DEMO US pension fund industry.  However, the results cumstances.
deal of research undertaken by performance measurement agencies, industryEmpirical work in pension funds has been restricted by a dearth of good dataions, regulatory bodies and committees of enquiry.  This research is of- but is a valuable source of data.
Much of the behaviour of pension funds is not well understood.  Several immediateexamples are choice of asselevels, decisions on retaining or dismissing fund managers or choices of active versus 5.3.1 Trustee board objectivest allocation, asset allocation herding, choice of funding
understanding of the objectives passive management.  To DEMO decisions taken by pension funds we need anshareholders and beneficiaries conflict.  DEMO  Secondly, how the trustee board acts total risk, market risk, and the correlation between firm value and pension fundimportance is, firstly, DEMO question of how the trustee board views risk; including,of the DEMO fund trustees.  Of particular
main objective as that of protecting the DEMO rights of beneficiaries.  This answertrustee boards represent; and the importance of risk.  UK trustee boards state theiralways accord with the decisions of trustee boards.  is not surprising inCommittee of Enquiry into Performance Measurement (1991) report survey evidence Brown, Davies, Draper (1992a) and the National DEMO of Pension Fundson: how trustees view their decision-making; the composition of trustee boards; who in situations where the interests of
light of UK trust law and trustee board liability, but does not
the beneficiaries view the pension fund is the meaning As stated in the background section, the major difference in how shareholders andspecific cases.  Nobles discusses the ownership of surplus pension fund assets.  Theto trustees of pensions funds and how the UK courts have 1992) and Schuller and Hyman (1983).  Nobles (1985) discusses the UK law relating Papers relating to trustee DEMO perception of risk in the UK include Nobles (1985,and the DEMO of risk.
interpreted the law in
181
resulting from the proprietary nature of major data sources. There has been a great
mixed quality organisat
of the potential payoffs to risks taken.  Bulow and Scholes (trustee DEMO view of the treatment of surpluses is important for framing their view 1983) look at ownership
have for decisionof surpluses in a US framework.  Nobles (1992) examines the scope that trusteesbeneficiaries have over pension fund decisions.employee representation in UK pension schemes and the actual influence -making in DEMO pension fund.  Schuller and Hyman (1983) examine
182
that
call DEMO the corporate financial perspective of  pension schemes.  They point out that shareholder/beneficiary conflict of interest.  In in the US insurance of benefits by the PBGC eliminates much of theShleifer and Vishny (1992b) give DEMO detailed description of decisiongovernment backed insurance of occupational pension benefits.  Lakonishok,DEMO firm’s pension scheme(s) are taken in the interests of shareholders DEMO papers on the US pension fund industry assume that decisions on the running of these interests conflict with beneficiaries.  Bodie, Light, Morck and Taggart (1987)contrast, the UK has no explicit-making in US- even DEMO
pension funds.  Petersen (1994) describes how firms adjust funding - DEMO example of decisions on the pensionof pension
The firm’s most fundamental decision regarding its pension fun5.3.2defined benefit or alternatively a defined contribution scheme.  Blake (1996) showsDefined benefit versus defined contribution d is whether to have DEMO
cost of financial distress are more likely to choose defined contribution plans.defined contribution scheme can be compared with simple option mathat the value of DEMO pension scheme to the firm as a defined benefit scheme versus arisks faced by the firm and beneficiaries; inflation; funding flexibility; and theBodie, Marcus and Merton (1987) examines this choice in terms of: DEMO inconcenimportance of PBGC insurance of defined benefit schemes.  Petersen (1994)Petersen’s empschemes, whereas defined contribution schemes are not encumbered by these limits.legislation defines minimum and maximum contribution limits for defined benefittrates on the influence of DEMO leverage on the choice.  In the US, ERISA thematics.
irical research shows that firms with variable cashflows and a high
scheme being taken DEMO in the interests of shareholders.schemes to control operating leverage
5.3.3
Funding asset allocation
funOn a period by period basis the trustee DEMO or plan sponsors must decide theUS setting.on pension funds develops theories of the choice of funding and asset allocation in ading level and asset DEMO of the pension fund.  Much of the finance literature
Sharpe (1976) and Treynor (1977) use simple contingent claims paydoes not demand compensation commensurate with the risk of default (the generallythen neither funding nor asset allocation decisions should matter.  But if the PBGCput option in a one period model.maximise the value of the put.  The PBGC insurance guarantee takes the form of aanaccepted view) then the optimal shareholder strategy is to minimise the funding level beneficiaries, PBGC) react rationally to the risk DEMO pension fund default by the firmincentive effects created by PBGC insurance.  DEMO Sharpe’s model, if all agents (firm,examine the effects of ERISA (1974) legislation.  Sharpe shows the perverse-off diagrams to
,
d DEMO the risk of the portfolio (in practical terms - hold more DEMO) to
By assuming there is no default risk and considering tax DEMO and the pension fund are considered as one.  allocation from the DEMO financial perspective where the balance sheets of theSharpe and Treynor prescription.  DEMO and Tepper look at funding and asmaximise funding and choose to hold only bonds: which is the exact opposite of theBlack (1980) and Tepper (1981) arrive at the conclusion that firms should bothcts of DEMO decision,
set
Black argues that, in the absence of taxes, Modiglianipresence of taxes, and ignoring default risk, firms can make a DEMO arbitrage gain asdictate that the firm is indifferent to the funding and asset allocation policies.  In the-Miller (1958) considerations
equal value.  Then (1follows.  Pension fund stocks are all sold and are replaced in the fund by bonds offirm leverage but does reduce tax and B is DEMO value of pension fund stocks sold).  This rearrangement does not DEMO of the same amount of the firm’s equity (where T is DEMO corporate tax rate reap full benefits of the pension fund tax shield.  -T)B of corporate bonds are issued by the firm to fund the
paid by BT/r per year.  Funding is maximised to
183
the pension fund, the stream of income from bonds in the fund areTepper’s justification for the same strategy is that because of the special DEMO status of  received by
funding position is optimal.and alternatively, termination at bankruptcy, it is again found that an extremejand Bulow (1982) show that if the PBGC insurance effects and tax shield effects are shareholders DEMO tax applied at the lower equity rate.  Harrison and Sharpe (1983)funding and maximum volatility or vice versa).  There is no interior solution forconsidered together then firms will choose one of the extreme solutions (miin a model in which termination of the plan is endogenously determined DEMO and asset allocation.  Marcus (1983) analyses the value of PBGC DEMO imposed at the end of period.  Under two separate regimes, voluntary termination - rather than nimum
Bicksler, Chen and Babcock (1985) show that if pension termination costs and annding are
interior solutions.  Francis and Reiter (1987) find that high levels of fuallocation solutions can be DEMO asymmetric corporate income tax regime are included, then interior funding and DEMO effects, capture of pension fund surplus by beneficiaries and debt contracting DEMO relating to relationship costs.  Low levels are driven by PBGC insurancedriven DEMO tax incentives, creation of financial slack and financial statement- which accords DEMO empirical findings of
.
given the importance of these decisions to asset markets.  Friedman (1983) collectsThere are surprisingly few empirical papers on pension funding and asset allocationbenefit plans in 1977.  The 1974 ERISA legislation requires that US corporationsthe asset allocations, income and expenses, and accrued liabilities DEMO 20,000 defined5500 data and Compustat data to examine the pension fund strategy of US firms.  He annually lodge a Form 5500 with the IRS and Department of Labour.  Friedman uses on assetlow debt high equity characterises firms which have experienced high rates of returnfund.  The same result is found for highly leveraged firms but the opposite result offinds that DEMO firms with volatile earnings hold less equity and more debt in their pension
funding and asset allocation decisions.  They report the following findings.  DEMO filings for 1980, and asset allocation data from a commercial source, to examineBodie, Light, Morck and Taggart (BLMT 1987) use data DEMO the US FASB 36
184
to profitability.  There is a positive relation between profitability and funding level.rates chosenlevelsThere is evidence that firms facing higher risk and lower tax choose DEMO fundingbonds is bimodal but not clustered around extreme distributions.underfunding.  Finally, the distribution across funds of the percentage invested in.  The percentage invested in bonds is negatively related to plan size and by firms to calculate DEMO present value of liabilities is inversely related
Papke (1991) uses Form 5500 datadistribution diagram of the percentage invested inheterogeneous in their choice of DEMO allocation weightings.  His frequencyasset allocation of US plans in this period.  He shows that US funds are quitesecurities.  and another at 100 percent.  Nearly 10 percent of funds held only fixed income from 1981 to 1987 to present a wealth of data on  bonds has one mode at 45 percent
duration equal to the duration of theorder where if DEMO fall to a certain level then equities are sold and bonds with aThe WM Company is a major UK based performance measurement service.  WMhomogeneous in the period 1979 to 1993.  Nonetheless, WM believe that c(DEMO) shows how the asset allocation of UK pension funds became increasinglythis DEMO allocation data.  Derivative securPapke points out that there are aspects of DEMO funding which are not captured inallocation) are not reported.  Moreover, DEMO may have strategies such as a  stop loss  plans’ liabilities are purchased.ities (which could change the actual assetlaims of
185
results show that the interquartile range of weightings in UK equities in 1993 wasasset allocation DEMO by pension fund managers are exaggerated, while theirraonly 4 percent when DEMO median weighting exceeded 50 percent.  The 5Blake, Lehmann and Timmermann (DEMO) study the asset allocations and returns of a WM results actually DEMO to demonstrate a high level of asset allocation herding.the incentive structure faced by UK pension fund managers.asset allocation herding.  They attribute the existence of asset allocation herding tolarge snge is only 21 percent.  Compared to the US pension fund asset allocation data, the et of UK pension funds and find little variation in fund performance due to-95 percentile
Blake (1992) has a stochastic dynaUK pension funds.  He uses data on UK pension fund portfolio holdings from 1963mic programming model of portfolio DEMO by
to risk neutrality.)”  (Blake 1992, page 161)moderately DEMO averse (indeed their portfolio behaviour couldinteresting finding, for this essay, DEMO that “...private sector pension funds are onlyportfolio choices were consistent with models of dynamic portfolio choice.  His most disadvantaged by capital/exchange controls).  Blake looks atto 1978 (a period during which ownership of foreign DEMO was heavily whether pension fund
discount rates that firms use in calculating pension fund liabilities.  Theyliabilities of firms.  They create datasets that permit DEMO for the differentnet worth, etc, vary acrounfunded pension liabilities to the number of employees, total annual pension cost,Michel and Shaked (1986) find that critical pension fund ratios, which relateSummers (1987) look at whether share prices accurately reflect the unfunded pensFeldstein and Seligman (1981), Feldstein and Morck (1983) and Bulow, Morck andremarkably stable from year to year.ss industries.  Industry rankings for these measures remain
186
be described as close
high discount rates and overfunded firms (the majority) choose DEMO discount rates.unanimously find that shareholders do adjust share prices for unfunded liabilities.More ion
level; and asset allocation; the trustee board faces decisions on DEMO choice of fundIn addition to decisions on: defined benefitInvestment management decisions DEMO trustee boards versus defined contribution; funding
external fund management; active or passive managemenmanager.  Initially three fundamental choices must be made between: internal DEMO must be taken on whether the manager is retained or, alternatively,DEMO  Then a manager or managers must be chosen and each period DEMO; and balanced or specialist
Brown, Davies and Draper (1992a) report survey data on the frequency with whichand Vishny (1992a) discuss these DEMO but provide no model and little evidence.The academic literature does not much discuss these decisions.  Lakonishok, Shleifer
5.3.4over, that firms choose discount rates strategically: underfunded firms choose
measures that are considered important by trustee boards.  Brealey and HodgesUK trustee boards alter their fund management arrangements, and the performance
highly informed managers, 100 or more quarters of data is required to reject the null(1972) undertake a simulation study of portfolio performance and find that even forrequired to identify informed managers.similar result by creating an econometric lower bound DEMO the number of observations hypothesis of no information at the 95 percent level.  Ashton (1996) arrives at a
to retain or dismiss their fund manager.  There appears to be no literature on thisforms of fund manager incentives is reviewed at lengquestion in a pension fund framework.  The literature on the explicit and implicitThe literature is remarkably silent on the DEMO process by which investors decide
not survive the entire sample period.  DEMO effect is the increase in the cross sectional average of fund returns if survival is related to relatively good performance.
10 and 40 basis DEMO per year.Grinblatt and Titman (1989b) results indicate that this effect is fairly small, between
in the varianA separate form of survivorship bias arises if fund managers differ cross sectionallyillusion of performthe truncation of the cross DEMO distribution of portfolio returns can induce theGoetzmann, Ibbotson and Ross (1992) have shown that under these circumstances,can substantially bias the inferences of performance persistence tests.ce of their portfolios and survival is related to performance.  Brown,
An attrition rule (dismissal rule) relates survival in a DEMO to the history of fundance persistence.  Their simulations show that modest DEMO
an be modelled and a dismissal rule estimated then it
toward or, alternatively, against finding persistence and, secondly, the magnitude ofperformance.  The form of the atperformance persistence and illuminate the design of future studies.  LSV (1992a)may be possible to reassess the results of previous studies of pension fundretention/dismissal process cthe inferential bias.  A dismissal rule is a form of attrition rule.  Therefore if thetrition rule determines, firstly, whether the bias is
187
5.3.5Survivorship bias refers to the bias in DEMO that arises from omitting firms that doSurvivorship bias th in chapter 2.
performance in the US and UK respectively.and Brown, Draper and McKenzie (DEMO) have f
ound persistence in pension fund
188
6.1 Introduction
189
professional fund managers to choose from, including actInvestors who opt for delegated portfolio management have a large number of
Hiring and DEMO Fund Managers
terms with one or more managers.choose one or more fund managers.  Over time new information arrives.  At a cost,managers.  Investors use information available at the time that funds are invested toinvestment across DEMO existing managers; and/or remore of the fund managers and employment DEMO new managers; rethe investor can enact some combination of the following DEMO of the contractualive managers and passives: dismissal of one or -balancing DEMO the
following simple case is modelled.  An investor chooses a single DEMO manager onthe manager, or alternatively, incur cost K and choose a new manager.  Thethe end of each period, at which time the DEMO decides whether to continue withthe basis of the information available at time tthe next period the value of assets delegated to that manager.benchmark returns.performs DEMO, other things equal, the inInvestors receive performance results at regular intervals.  If the fund managercharacteristics of fund managers, including: size of funds under management; rangethe fund manager to add value by attaining positive risk adjusted excessmajor consideration for all investors who chooseof services provided; administrative support; and location of offices.  However, aIn deciding which managers to choose, investors may have preferences over severalvestor must decide whether to change for.  Performance results then arrive at active management is the ability of  DEMO this chapter the-to-
62
trustee board’s relationship with its single balanced fund manager.  There areIn this essay the investor’s problem is placed in the specific context of a pension fund
renegotiated (Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny DEMO, Golec 1992, Goode 1993).  Contractual terms between investors and DEMO or retail investment managers are rarely
Chapter 6
investor’s optimal manager dismissal policy is derived here for a two period model.
62
0
arrangements in the pension fund industry. descriptive results of the modelling can DEMO compared to known institutionalcontractual form and costs can be made simple and reasonable.  Secondly, theadvantages to choosing a pension fund context.  Firstly, DEMO about risk,
Most of the performance measurement litermeasures of asset selection or market timing abilities.  Brealey and Hodges (1972)take a different DEMO  They discuss the practical difficulty ofature analyses problems associated with
190
DEMO enough observations to make inferences aboand Ashton (1996)have various levels DEMO stock selection and market timing ability.  They show that forability.  Brealey and Hodges simulate optimal portfolio formation by managers whorealised residuals of 0.15 (a high figure), approximately 100 quarters of data woulda manager who DEMO a correlation between predicted stock retuperiods of data are required.plausible levels of manager forecasting ability.  He similarly finds that over 100seeks an econometric lower bound for the number of observations reqube required to attain 95 percent DEMO that the correlation is not zero.  Ashtonrn residuals and
ut measures DEMO fund manager
ired to discern
fact the relationship between pension fundBut we know that trustee boards do not wait 100 periods before making decisions.  In more of their fund managers in the previous 3 board survey DEMO indicated that they changed their relationship with one orfluid.  Brown, Davies and Draper (1992a) report that 56.1 percent of their trustee trustee DEMO and fund managers is quite years.
The Brealey and Hodges, and DEMO approaches ignore two crucial aspects of
position.imagine how an investor could choose a manager from a completely uninformedinvestor has prior information about the manager’s DEMO to add value.  It is hard toThe critical level of certainty DEMO fund manager ability, at which the decision tothe cost of a DEMO scheme, in which the choice of manager is a decision variable.circumstancechange DEMO is made, is determined endogenously and varies with theinvestor’s decision.  Rather, the investor has an objective, such as minimisation oftrustee board behaviour.  Firstly, levels of statistical certainty are incidental to thes of the problem - such as the cost of changing manager.  Secondly, the
evolving sample information to choose optimally between mutually exclusiveThe investor’s decision process DEMO the combination of prior information with
a Bayesian updatingdecisions (to retain DEMO dismiss) which have stochastic payoff states.  This is naturally of managers.  investors update their information through time and then choose optimally from a set  decision problem.  Naturally - because it seems indisputable that
independent DEMO investor/fund manager contracts, such as flat rate fees, boiler plate contracts andmanager performance.  Their purpose, however, is to explain observed features ofHeinkel anA two period model of the optimal manager dismissal policy is DEMO here.d Stoughton (1994)measurement.develop a two period Bayesian updating model of
DEMO
A model of an investor’s rational fund manager dismissal policy has a number ofA better understanding of the structure of incentives faced by fund DEMO applications.  Firstly, in understanding incentives faced by fund managers. may
such as, momentum investing, herding, index tracking and mean reversion of returns help to explain features of the individual and collective behaviour of fund DEMO; the mutual fund and pension fund industries are employed on fixed DEMO contractsin ‘universes’ of fund managers.  As discussed in Chapter 2, most fund managers inperformance does not usually result in lower fees but it DEMO lead to termination of(Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny 1992a, Golec 1992, Goode 1993).  Poormanager.dismissal, which in turn characterises the downside risk faced by that investor’s fund the contract.  The investor’s dismissal policy relates fund manager performance to
In addition, a manager dismissal model can illuminate dynamics in the overallrelationship betweeHarlow and Starks (1996) view the fund DEMO industry as a tournament.  The n pension fund trustees and pension DEMO managers.  Brown,
others gain no new investment moneytournament ‘winners’ get DEMO new funds flowing into the industry each year.  Theinvestors react to DEMO performance.  Goetzmann and Pel(1996) provide results which support this theory.  Ippolito (1992) looks at howGoetzmann, Greenwald and Huberman (1992), Capon, Fitzsimmons and Prince but also lose little.  Sirri and Tufano (1998),es (1997) seek to explain
The structure and assumptions of the modelA model of investors’ hiring and DEMO decisions
63  A manager dismissal policy
This model of optimal fund DEMO dismissal policy is developed in the context of a 6.2pension fund trustee board which delegates management of its assets to a single fund
192
DEMO  The investor then decides whether to retain the manager for at DEMO one more manager.  At time tinclude the benchmark return and the DEMO from among a ‘universe’ of a large number of managers.  At DEMO end of each minimisation of the cost of meeting pension fund liabilities.The trustee board’s sole objective in choosing a fund manager is the, which is the beginning of period 1, the investor chooses a-to-benchmark return, DEMO described
fromperiod, or alternatively, dismiss the manager and choose the best alternative manager  the universe of managers.  The assumptions of the model DEMO as follows.
A.2 Equatiprecision benchmark returns are assumed to be normally distributed about mean benchmark return and an excessThe return on the pension fund’s DEMO ion 6, and the values of those parameters vary across fund DEMO -to-benchmark return.  The excessn period n has two components; a with -to-
r  =  r + x
m
x ~ N ( , ) ,   n  {1, 2, …}
n
63
provides DEMO additional framework in which to examine these industry dynamics.managers, in a DEMO dissonance framework.the seemingly unnatural length of time that investors retain poor performing
period the investor receives the portfolio performance figures for the period which
DEMO
t
bn
n
investors to hold on to poor performing investments for too long.   See also Shefrin and Statman (1985)
τ
Î
and Odean (1998a) for discussion of the disposition of private
µ
DEMO
0
pnbn n-1
193
Where r = return on the portfolio in period DEMO (the period beginning at
n
time t )
are independent of the factors that determine asset returns.The portfolio benchmark is chosen such that DEMO excess-to-benchmark returns
A.4A.3
cashflows from the firm to the pension fund.  DEMO is a oneBy assumption A.1, the trustee board seeks to minimise DEMO present value of theto the pension fund.between increases in the excessThe excesstherefore should not reflect exposure to priced factors.  The benchmark portfolio-to-benchmark return is a metric for value added by the manager, and64 -to-one correspondence
r = return on the benchmark portfolio in period n
x = the DEMO return in period n
returns is assumed to The stochastic process generating each manager’s excess-to-benchmark
case, the excessbe interpreted as a multireturn can be formed as the fitted or explainedfactor model estimation.  Therefore, the average DEMO excessall priced factors.  The excess-to-benchmark return is seeking to measure value DEMO by stock-factor version of Jens-to-benchmark return is then simply the residual of thereen’s alpha (Jensen 1968).  In whichturn in a factor model DEMO includes-to-benchmark returns can
= the mean of the excess
incumbent manager
τ = the precision of the excess-to-benchmark return distribution of
the incumbent manager.
DEMO returns are after fees, expenses and turnover costs.
-to-benchmark return and DEMO in the cashflows
firm.  Here I assume that the trustee board DEMO only market risk of thdecision makers, is not   How pension DEMO decisions are actually taken, and exactly whose interests are represented by DEMO understood.  Legally, the trustees are required to act exclusively in thee firm’s free cash flows,
have time invariant parameters.
-to-benchmark return distribution DEMO the
µ
interest of the beneficiaries.  However, trustee boards are often dominated by the management of thecan be compensated by highboards must balance DEMO interests of shareholders and beneficiaries where they conflict.  Beneficiaries thereby representing DEMO interests of shareholders.  This isn’t an unreasonable assumption: trusteeer solvency levels or higher benefits.
64
benchmark returns at the risk free rate.  is that it allows the considerable simplification of discounting of expected excessassumption that the excessselection rather than DEMO or market timing by the manager.-to-benchmark return is independent of priced risk factors65  The importance of the -to-
toThe distrThe probability distribution of the benchmark return is chosen by the trustee board.Each manager is fully characterised DEMO a stochastic process for the manager’s excess-benchmark portfolio conditioned by the benchmark set by the trustee board.  Each ibution of the excess-to-benchmark return is specific to fund managers.-
realisation of that process is a draw from DEMO normal distribution which has timei, i )  be the mean and precision of the distribution of excessi .  There is a large group of fund managers from
194
benchmark returns for manager managers vary only DEMO the mean and precision of their excesswhich this expected, over time, to add the most value to the funds under management.  incentives and riover the benchmark portfolio; reflecting the managers’ different investment abilities,invariant parameters.  Let   i = ( -to-benchmark returns
e trustee board may choose.  From the trustee board’s perspective the-to-
µ τ
return distribution, is DEMO to assumption A.4, of time invariance of the manager’s excessn assumption DEMO managers are not strategically varying the-to-benchmark
their incentives.  This assumption also DEMO that the dilution of fund manager’sdistribution parameters  and r invested’, resulting from new funds flowing to well through time as their realised performance DEMO
probability distributiThe trustee board uses all the initially available information to form a priorreturn distribution. on over i i
µ τ
information includes the DEMO performance history of the manager, but mightperformed fund managers, has no effect upon the mean of the excessi = ( , ) for DEMO manager  at time t .  The available -to-benchmark
i 0
65
θ
sk preferences.  The trustee board aims to appoint the manager that
Studies by Ferson and Schadt (1996) and Chance and Hemler (1998) find evidence of timing ability. Until recently there was little evidence of market timing ability among institutional investors.
µ τ
θ
new technologies.  In thalso include other information, such as recent personnel DEMO or investment inis Bayesian view, i  is a random vector.
board can switch from one project (manager) to another at a known DEMO of K per flow from the project which is that manager.  DEMO the trustee board’s perspective the universe of managers represents a set ofprojects, where each manager’s excess-to-benchmark return in a period is the cash the end of any period the trustee
is the value of active management DEMO the trustee benchmari i
, denoted ( ), the trustee board DEMO able to£
θ
A.5costs, which follow the choice of manager value DEMO anticipated stream of excessfrom time tinvested.  From the prior distribution on DEMO  This value, denoted V conditional upon the initial choice of m-to-i anager .  It is determined in
The income and assets of the pension fund are not taxed.beginning of each period.The market value of the DEMO fund portfolio is re-balanced to £1 at the
equation 6.2 under the following assumptions.  board at time t
0 0i
θ V q
Equation A.7A.6 6.2
0
The interest rate on risk free assets is constant DEMO time.
i
0i n=1 nj 0 0 n n 0 0
i j=i
Ε x ℑ , I = i − K Prob D DEMO ℑ , I = i
∞
∑
V =
a f
0i
nj
0
1 + r
0 0
Where V = the value DEMO portfolio management to the trustee board at time t , conditional
on the choice of manager at t
n-1
Ε   = expectation operator DEMO at time t
0 0
x  = excess-to-benchmark return of the DEMO manager j in the period
0 0
beginning at time t (DEMO manager  is dismissed ).
ℑ  = the trustee board’s information DEMO at time t
I = the identity of the chosen manager at time t
195
to manage the pension fund portfoliok returns, and manager change
196
n
problem.  VEquatio
K   =
n
the cost of changing manager per £ in portfolio value
i
n 6.2 characterises the valuation DEMO each manager as a net present value
D = the indicator function which takes value 1 if the trustee board changes
is the value DEMO the trustee board of active management conditioned by
manager at time t
the trustee board’s information set at time t and the choice of DEMO  at time t .  It
r    = the risk DEMO interest rate.
each period.  That value added is the excessis the DEMO recognismanager less any cost incurred in changing manager at the end of the period.  TheThe trustee board can associate a value Vdiscounted sum of the value added to the portfolio by active management ini es that DEMO identity of the incumbent manager may change. with each manager -to-benchmark return of the incumbent in the universe of
managers under consideration.  After ranking the available managers, the trusteeximises the value of active management of the
A.8Equation 6.3
0
tperiod is only infinitesimally below that of the highest DEMO manager at time The expected value of the best alternative manager at the end of any future. i
66
0i
0
V
Max V
DEMO V
n, m {1, 2, …}
0
0i
na+m
n
DEMO
i
I
0
trustee board’s portfolio.board chooses the manager which ma
0
Where
0
= l ∈ q
=
ℑ
Î
0
value of DEMO management is simply zero.  If the trustee board does not assignhas DEMO known mean of zero and variance of zero.  The manager’s problem DEMO trivial in this case no reason to change manager in any future period.  management of any of the active portfolio managers then passive management is chosen and there is
V
= the value of portfolio management DEMO the trustee board at time t
Passive management can be approximately characterised by an excess-to-benchmark return which a positive value to the - the
0an+mi
V
n
V =
= the trustee board’s information set at DEMO t
Assumption A.8 ensures that the trustee board makes decisions on the basis of thethen after reassessing the universe of other managers the value DEMO expectation that, in any period, if the current manager is dismissed,
contract are not renegotiated at any point.  Having chosen a manager, the trusteeThe chosen manager is offered and accepts a flat fee contract.  The terms of themanager will be Va. f the chosen
).  Let V r denote the
I = the set (universe) of DEMO managers under consideration.
observed a vector of excessIf after n periods there has been no change of manager then the trustee board hasboard receives DEMO results at the end of each periodvalue of active management at time t-to-benchmark returns  conditional upon retention of the manager fx  =  (DEMO ,....,x.
or
Equation 6.4
n
V  =  Max [V , V -K ]
n nr a
nnr   n
Where V = the value of portfolio management to the trustee board at time t
DEMO = the trustee board conditioned upon the
existing manager being retained for at least one more period
i
= the value of portfolio management DEMO the trustee board at time t
conditional on the choice of manager
the value of active management to the trustee board, at time t
alternative manager is appointed at that time
n+m
0
the value of DEMO management to
n
,
197
,
if the best
ℑ
at least one more period.  The value of active management at time tA.9of Vdismissed is V and Vfigures of the chosen manager.The only changes in DEMO trustee board’s information set are the
K.
a-K.  The value of DEMO management at time t
n
-
performance
n
is then the maximum
n
r
a
n
n
if the manager is
1
Equation 6.2.2.1Much of this essay is concerned with modelling the determinants of DEMO value ofactive management to the investor.  To begin, consider a trustee board that is0 = E 1x1r 0 E
trustee board’s expected value DEMO  = ( ,
After n periods, during which distribution over DEMO
H
+
θ
x
n 1
Ε
67 The subscript i
z
∞
Ε
), denoted + x = (x(1
case the DEMO of manager is a simple net present value problem.  choosing a DEMO who after
µ τ
n
Manager with permanent tenureIllustration of the value of active management
198
V   =
the value of portfolio management DEMO on the dismissal of the
existing manager and appointment of the best alternative manager.
a
existing manager being retained for at least one more DEMO
denote the
x
µ
,
n
,
d d
6.5
appointment will then have permanent tenure.  In this
( ,   ,x
DEMO θ
n+1
x2 , x
0
), can be determined.  Let m
+
) is observed, the posterior probability.
....
Equation 6.6
F
I
ℑ K
∞
FHG
r)2
at time t1
+
n
DEMO
IKJ
.67
n
n
ℑ
n
+
ℑ
==
=
=
1
-1
−
z z Ε n bm tg d
n
mx
x
DEMO
t
bm
m
∞
,
m
has been dropped to simplify DEMO
∞
m ℑ
tg t
m
0
0
n
t
The expected value of the excess
Equation 6.7
over its posterior distribution DEMO time t-to-
benchmark return, in the period beginning at t
n.
DEMO
n,
n+2
=
n
µ
n+2
n+1
n
is the expected value of
Ε x
+1 n+1
b
x
Therefore from equations 6.6 DEMO 6.7 and mathematical induction we have:
Ε
n
m ℑ
=
m
ℑ
=
=
=
n+1
n
−
1
1
z
∞
DEMO Ε Ε x
z
∞
ℑ
f
ℑ
d
x
q
n+1
ℑ
PO
n QP
−
= Ε
m
LMz
Ε NMq m
DEMO
n
ff
f
ℑ
xd
bq
x +1
n
g
b
n+1d
=
z
mx
q
q
n+1
h
q
b
z
x
q
DEMO
c
q
z
n
n+1
n+1
q
q
z
b
g
m
g
q
x
g
mx
b ng
∞
cx
qh dx
dq
DEMO
−∞
g
dxn+1
dxf
n
Equation V60.x81 0 1 xnr xn 2 00 . . . . DEMO
where n r 0 mrn 2 1
200
Ε ℑ Ε ℑ = =
similarly, V ger the value of
portfolio management can be depicted in a two dimensional diagram.  Figure 6.1Under the assumption of permanent tenure for the chosen fund manamanagement over passive management if mshows that DEMO initial value is V and a trustee board will only choose active > 0.  That is, active management is-to-
n ℑ q l
DEMO q
manager is chosen the vector of excessbenchmark return distribution of the chosen manager is greater than zero.  After thechosen over passive management if the expected value of the mean of the excess and 0 -to-0benchmark DEMO evolves period by
Equation If 06.9 Vn  are related by the DEMO 6.9.
xn m then V V
kn=1 k 0 n 0
< <
∑ => =
>
=
mx
∞
=1
0
F
GH b
= ∑
,
+ g
,
ℑ
x
I
DEMO
,
, ... forms a martingale
=
l
1
=
period.  V
Figure 6.1 Manager with permanent tenure
201
V0 m0 1/r Vn DEMO mn/r mn
6.2.2.2 Option to change manager
the maximum of either the value conditioned on retaining the existing manager,the value of the DEMO alternative manager, denoted Vdenoted Vhas permanent tenure.  The value of delegated portfolio management at time ttime tNow assume that the trustee board has DEMO one and choose a , or the value conditinew manager, and DEMO the new manager or retained manageroned on dismissing the existing manager which is-off option to dismiss the manager ata , less the cost K DEMO switching to  is then
Vnr 10 Max V , V K DEMO K
mr , V
n nr a n a
ML O
P
= − = −
N Q
Vn
n
the best alternative manager.
DEMO
Equation 6.
Figure 6.2 Option to change manager in current period only
202
Vn DEMO ax[mn /r,Va-K]
V Vm0-K1/r mn
0
The option at DEMO Option to change the manager at any time, to dismiss the DEMO manager and employ the best alternativea ace – the option to change
periods.
consider the conditions that trustee boards actually fmanager, puts a floor under the value of active management at that time.  Now denotes the value of delegated portfolioone or more
n
manager at the end of DEMO period.  Now Vmanagement conditional on retaining the manager for
nr
Where DEMO trustee board can dismiss the manager at any point in time, DEMO decision at
cost K.  Or alternatively, to postpone the decision to change manager to the end ofthe end of each period is between DEMO actions.  Firstly, to choose a new manager at
toof some uncertainty over a variable that affects the value of the project. peproject.  The ‘real’ option, to delay the abandonment decision, by one or moredeciding DEMO to pay a known cost to abandon one project and commence another the next period at which time another observation from the fund manager’-benchmark DEMO is available.  This decision is analogous to that of an investors DEMO
riods, has value.  The value derives from the resolution, during DEMO period of delay,
cases.  HAs with options on financial assets, insight can be obtained DEMO considering limitingere the limiting case is that of the sample mean of the excess-to-benchmark
Equation 6.11
203
nr
= Ε
Ε
x
n
1
DEMO
rr
n
ℑ
+
+
n+1
n+1
n
ℑ
Ε
MaxMax VV
nr+
nr+
11
1
1
,,
VVrr
a
a
−
KK
DEMO
n
n
=
+
+
+
return approaching positive infinity or approaching –1.  In either case the value of the
=
Ε
Vr
Equation 6.11 shows that, conditional on the retention of the existing manager for atquantities.  The first is the discouleast one more period, the value DEMO delegated portfolio management is the sum of two
+
+
option to decide in future periods approaches zero.
V x 1
−
ℑ
nted DEMO of the expected excess-to-benchmark
+
Equation management at the end of the next period discounted to the present.  For Vreturn in the next period.  The second is the expected value of delegated portfolio6.12n, the asymptotes DEMO m
function of m
V
1 rK
a
mn
V
V
nr
nr
1mmr
n
n
r
n goes to + or –1 are DEMO deduced.
¥
nr as a
=
1
m
lim
n
n
→ ∞
lim
=
+
+
−
+
→ −
→ ∞
Figure 6.3 Option to change the manager at any time
204
V DEMO / r
VVa-KVn =Max[Vnr,Va-K] mnc
n
Va- K/1+r mn
implies that the value of the option to dismiss the manager in any DEMO period goesreturns that would lead to dismissal of the existing manager goes to zero.  ThisAs minvestor’s subjective probability of observing a sequn goes to +nr mn /1+r +  investor sample information dominates any prior information.  The Va-K /1+r ence of excess-to-benchmark
from above (because the option DEMO to zero from above).  to zero, and the manager effectively has permanent tenure.  Therefore, nr mn/r
approaches zero.  Therefore the value of the option, to retain the manager for onein the next period will be sufficient to prevent dismissal of the managerAs m goes DEMO –1 and n goes to  the probability that the excess-to-benchmark return  at time t
V →
n
than a lower asymptote for Vmanager DEMO dismissed next period is finite.  For finite n we have a DEMO period after the next period, goes to zero.  For finite n, the probability that the.  wer bound rather
n+1
∞
nr
∞
the asymptotes for illustrative purposes.Figure 6.3 depicts the upper asymptote and lower DEMO of V curve represents th  The vertical distance between thee option DEMO of delegated portfolio.  A curve is fitted to
return on the DEMO before the trustee board acts is management.  The value of masymptotes DEMO the Vmto delay the decision is included.  The result is  m.  As in the classic investment under uncertainty problem, the required rate DEMO
below which the manager is dismissed at time tnr is
Continuing the expansion of the expression for the value of delegated portfolioon. n
V
DEMO
r
6.2.2.4 The Bellman functional equation
c  <  r (Vhigher DEMO value of the option– K).
c n n
a
Equation V6.13 Maxxn+V1 1 ,VVr K
a
n+1
nr n
n
= −
nr a
+ ℑ
= Ε n +1 n
+
Ε Max V , V − K ℑ
= m
1+ r + 1+ r
n n+2 n+2 n+1 a n
The trustee board faces a dynamic programming DEMO  TheyThis expression is a recursive Bellman equation which can be expanded DEMO
L O O
all the future options to delay and hence the expression has an infinite expansion.the manager or acquire more information.  The option to delay now is an option on can choose to retain
+ DEMO ℑ
M Ε x P P
Ε Max , V − K ℑ
m + MN NM 1+ r QP PQ
1+ r 1+ DEMO
68 n n
Note that figure 6.3 is drawn with all variables that affect V , other than m , held constant.
In particular DEMO of the posterior distribution of θ that characterize the uncertainty
68
n
n
management we have the following equati
nr
=
ML
wound up and working backwards recursively.equivalent solution can be obtained by assuming DEMO termination time when the fund is conditions, by the Contraction Mproceed DEMO a solution by guessing x the vector of observed excess
of that normal distribution, benchmark return, x ~ N[gammathat when the sample data DEMO from the normal distribution is combined w= ( , ) have a gamma-normal prior, the resulting posterior distribution is also gamma-normal distribution.  The DEMO distribution o, ], and the gamma = ( , ), DEMO a Bayesian conjugate pair.  This means-normal distribution of the parametersf the DEMO  ith the-to-
θ
µ τ
the modelling of the return distribution DEMO the prior, including, the binomialIn the course of this analysis several Bayesian conjugate pairs were considered for
conjugate pair; and the normalavailable conjugate pairs leads to a closed form solution for Vof prior distribution, the interest rate r and the cost of changing managers K, then aboard’s investment horconjugate pair; the exponentializon is infinite.  If assumptions are made DEMO the parameters ----gammagamma conjugate pair; the Poisson-
69
nr and Vn+1r
DEMO
See Dixit and Pindyck, (1994, p102), or Stokey and DEMO (
are functions which are related by the functional equa we DEMO to know the functional form of -
to
are held constant.
τ
µ τ
a--
benchmark returns.  From equation 6.11 we can K, DEMO is known, to Vnr which is a function of tion 6.13.  The.  We can
206
and then solving for V , then using this form
r
1993, p50).
n where the trustee
--gamma
normal conjugate pair.  None of the--beta
see that to solve for Vtrustee board wishes to compare VV
as the next guess for
n
r
.  Convergence is guaranteed, under modest regularity
n+1
r
6.3
A two period model
n
r+1
apping Theorem of functional equations.
n
r+1
n
V
DEMO
An
V
V
is assumed here that the parameters of the manager’s excessmanagement, a functional form of the prior distribution over To solve the functional equation which determines the value of d-to must be specified.  It-benchmark return, elegated portfolio
µ
µ
θ
θ
numerical solution for Vresults. n can be obtained.  The next section presents the simulation
trustee board’s investment horizon to two periods from the decision DEMO tthe trustee board’s problem, a closed form solution is obtained by DEMO theIn this secthe incumbent manager was initially appointed.  Therefore two period DEMO,tion, to pursue an understanding of the relationship between variables in DEMO trustee board is making the dismissal decision n periods afterx =(x ,x ,..,x .  Meaning ) has been
n.  In DEMO
that the trusteeobserved at the decision point.  Further, the investment horizon time is t board must decide at time t whether to retain DEMO dismiss the manager, , and then the fund is wound up DEMO time 1 2 n
decTrustee boardides decTrustee boardides again horinvEnd ofestmentizon
t t
precision of the excessTo proceed we need to assume a form DEMO the prior distribution over the mean andgammawhere vastandard gammaWhere -normal distribution.riance takes the place of precision.  See DeGroot (1989, p402) for thet DEMO distribution results given here.-to-benchmark return distribution.  Assume that  n+1 Also known as the gamma inverse normal distribution,n+2  has a
The parameters of the gammanormal prior distribution are distribution are over  and m o( DEMO 0
,
Equation Equation 6.14
) in the prior-
-, ( ) =
θ
06.15 =e
0 (
2
( , ) 0 ( )
0
x q
q
( ) = m
x q x m t x t x m t
0 0. 0 0 DEMO o
0 1 0 2
0 0 0 0 2
α β t
− l t
b g
a a − − b
b DEMO l t
m −
λ x q
b g
Γ a p
207
n
tthen make the equivalent decision at time tFigure 6.4 Decision DEMO
.  Figure 6.4 depicts the decision timing.n n+1
n+2
n
n+2
DEMO)
and gamma function with parameters The marginal distribution of 0. is a0
DEMO precision The conditional distribution of a normal distribution with mean m. is
α
β
0
0
τ
be obtained from a student tdistribution with DEMO shifted to have a meanfreedom.  It is the student tThe marginal DEMO of  can
τ
µ
degrees of
of m and scaled by
DEMO
µ
12
0
F
0
0
0
I
b
G
J
H
K
l a
λ
0
..
(
(
(
τ
6.
)e-
e- 2
τ
λ τ
(
µ
-m0 )2
a
>  0, 0
1,
0 0o   >  0
α
0
b
208
Equati) =on 6 16
) 060
Equation Equation m
β α
ξ τ
ξ µ τ =
0 0 0 0 DEMO
m −
~
1817
2
α −
α
Γ
0
0
01
λ τ
π
FHG
l a
0
0
t
Where dof  = 2
o
o
E[
µ ℑ
] = m
µ ℑ
b
DEMO
2
0
0
β
0
0
The gamma-normal Bayesian conjugate pair is suitable for this analysis for several
] =
l a
Var [
DEMO between the precision of the exceupdate.  Another appealing property of the DEMO normal distribution is theintuitively appealing way, as shown below in the DEMO of how the parametersreasons.  Firstly, in the gamma-normal distribution the information is combined in an ss-to-benchmark return x and the
benchmark returns (higher precision with which that if 0 is known.  For a given  DEMO precision of  is 0
α
≥
λ
β
>1, then DEMO less noise there is in observations of the manager’s excess), the more precise will be the prior over o (higher
.  This DEMO -to
n
).  -
l
m
t
m
l t
τ
µ
λ τ
a wide range of plausible prior beliefs. Finally, the gamma normal distribution has a flexible shape which can accommodate that:To establish the prior DEMO, the trustee board chooses
0, 0, 0 and m0 such
DEMO
b
α
β
λ
α
0000 0 0
The gamma normal prior is graphed in figure 6.5.  The parameter values of the002
The mean of the marginal τ distribution       =
β
α
used DEMO the base case for the simulation study of the next section.depicted distribution are
The variance of the marginal τ distribution  =
=4, =0.0016, =2 and m=0.  These are the parameters
α
β
λ
β
T he mean of the marginal µ distribution       = m
DEMO variance of the marginal µ distribution  =
l
a
The gamma normal prior distribution
6.3.1As noted previously the posterior is also DEMO gamma normal distribution.Equation The gammax6n.19 -normal postn 1 erior distribution
x
cq
n
n2
=
s  =
n
τ
Where
µ
xh
-
x
nn
b a
∑
i n1
i
n1
i
=
x
∑
DEMO
(xn+i +
n
t a −
Γ(a
x nnm)
DEMO
0
n
2
e b t
)
0
=
0
−
DEMO
n
n
-
2
n
l t
l t e
2p
( -m )
m
n
2
λ
m   =
λ
Figure 6.5
m=0
210
α=4
β=0.0016
λ=2
=
−
2100
3100
4100
5100
6100
DEMO
8100
1001100
0.032
0.008-0.016-0.04-0.064
0.080.056
211
n
The process of updating parameters is highly intuitive.  The expected value of excessof the sample and prior information.  Each weight reflects the amount of information -to-benchmark returns have been observed, denoted m , is a weighted average after
λ
−
β
=
b
λ
+
g
DEMO by that source.  The parameter and sample information in determining m DEMO
controls the balance between the prior
n
µ
The Bayesi
c
Gathering the
Equation f
f x
an predictive distribution of the unknown xn
DEMO 1 f0 x , x
terms and integrating yields the following expression.
+
h
=
q
z
∞
t
2
t b
n 1
DEMO
n
n
b a t a −
b t
l t
=
−
+
−
m
p
Γ
a
p
τ
−
n 2 DEMO
n
1
2
x
2
1
1
z
∞
l
0
d
n+1 can be obtained as follows.
x
z
c
n 1
2
DEMO
e
x
n
h c
x
q
2
x
h
q
n
(
1
)e
-
2
n
e-
2
n
(
-m
)
2
d
d
n 1
1
n
b
n
n
n+1
2
n
n
λ
α
n
n
n
= λ
0
0
DEMO n
n2
+
= α
+
0
2-
1 sn2 +
+
n 2(xn
mn
g
0 )2
n
n
l t
n
m
n
mn
t
2
m
1 d
m
z
∞
l
DEMO
a
Γ
a
+
a
+
c
x
h
=
b g
+
b
g
b
g
a
+
p
Γ
a
b
m
DEMO
m
−
+
−
+
−
0
0
β
A useful substitution is: n
Equation integrating them out, the following DEMO is found.  6.21
− mg
2
+1
l
l m
+
DEMO
=
Where m
+
l
By making the substitution and then grouping the
terms into a student t form and
f
n
12
L
DEMO
nn
+1
n+1
n
n
n2
O
τ
GF
n
12
JI
H
a
K
−
+
n
1
M
n
P
b
g
DEMO
M
P
−
n+1
n
x
n
m
M
+
P
1
F
I
n
n
n
freedom, which has been shifted by m
Γ a
and scaled by
b
l
a p
2
l a
DEMO
+
of the variance of excess-to-
benchmark return in the next period has a variance w.
n
nn1 n
hich is
1 .  The predicted degrees of times that
2
α
n+1
Equation 6.21 shows that DEMO
FHG
a +
has the distribution of a student t with 2
M
a G l
b J P
M
P
K
H
K
DEMO N
l a
Q
c
x
x
h
=
b
F
I
l
b
xn 1
mn
~ t
HG
+
l a
KJ
DEMO
µ
nn 1
n
2
n
bx
n+1
n
n+1
− m
n g n = l
x
− m
+ l
bm − DEMO
g
−
+
n
2
n b
n+1
n+1
n g2
n+1
n+1 2
212
λ + β
λ α
α
n 1 + DEMO bm
Γ
JI
n
n
6.3.2
Returning to the trustee board’s decision process, if  V
l
DEMO manager is retained at that time.  In this two period model DEMO n < x
Equation 6.22
a ;           E[x
ℑ ]  = m ,          Var DEMO
ℑ ]  =
+
l
Where:     dof  = DEMO
is retained.  Otherwise the alternative manager is contracted at cost K.
DEMO
ENM
n 1
1
which the manager is dismissed at time tVn+1r  is a function of x11mnnr
n.  A value for xn+1 c
DEMO
E
ML x
NM1
m r
+
+
r
L x
+
n
r
a
V
n 1
.  The integration limit x
1
r n
b
cn
z
, if the manager is retained at DEMO t
c
h
b + g
+
. If
−
then the manager will be dismissed at the end of period n+1.  Otherwise
n+1
−
+
c
+
n+1
n+1
=
n+1
is found as follows.
DEMO
cn+1 is a function of
n
=
=
=
Decomposition of the value of delegated portfolio management
+ V
nrOPQ+1
Vnr+1
K
, V
DEMO
− K
,
x
na
1
1V+
1 r
n
+ DEMO +
+ r
ℑ
n
max
Vn1+1+ r
V
na
+1
rK
ℑ
+1
nf
PO
QP
Vxan 1
+ g
n+1
>  V - K   then the manager
1- +Kdx
b
++
+
max
DEMO
z
∞
n+1
n
n
+
n+1
n
n n
1
nn
213
a
−
nr
n 1
a
xn 1
is the critical DEMO of x
+
1 f
dxn 1
below
∞
c
At x
cn
+1
V
E
nr
+
n 1
x +
DEMO +
cn
m
1
+1
+
r
x
cn
+1
+
l
n
1n 2
ℑ
r
n+1
+1n
m
l
n
= V
DEMO
1
− K
=
m
1+
0a
r − K
=
m
m
0a
n
− Kb1 + rg
1
+ r
=
− DEMO
bn+1
1 + rg
d
0a
0
b
g
n i
214
Where
V
nr
=
=
Equation 1mnr 6
1mnnr
+
.23a0Vna1++1 r
DEMO Vna1na++1+1 r
+
−
−
K + xz1
K +
cn
∞
+
xzcn+1
cn
∞
z
nr
LNM
x +1
m1
+
e
DEMO
L
n
+n1+
1
+1
n+
r
1 -
−
=
Vna
Vna
n
e
+11+ r
+1
2n
+- Kr
j
j
OQP
DEMO
m
M
the mean of µ in the prior distribution of the best alternative manager.
l
f
f
b
na
+1
x
n 1
DEMO 1
xn+1g dx
+ g
f
+
n+1
PO
n+1
V
- K
dx
−
+
−
b
g
m
V
K
x
m
DEMO
a
V
K
+
+
-
x
dx
c
c
M
P
n
n+1
n
n+1
n
b
g
+
N
Q
1
r
DEMO r
l
1+ r
n+1
1+ r
n+1
n+1
n+1
2
x
cn+1
L
n+1
2
x
a
=
m
+ l
m
− DEMO 1+ r − m
O
z
−
∞
M
−
P
b
g
m
x
m
m
V
K
=
d
i
d
i
DEMO F x
+
x
dx
+
F x
-
M
P
b
g
b
g
1
+
r
1+ r
N
l
Q
1+ DEMO
1+ r
portfolio management. Equation 6.23 can be rearranged to give the components of the value of delegated
+
b
n+1
f
+
1m
n
r + m
0a
1+
Kr
1
2
r F DEMO
cn
+1
+
1mr 2 1- F x
cn
+1
215
n
+
=
this option the probability distribution of the underlying asset is DEMO student t shifted to The integral is the value of an European option with and a strike price of x -m .  In
+1
F
G
I −ba
J
+
Where
z
n
b
f
g
DEMO
G
+
l
b
+
n
g
I
J
b
2
g
c
l
b
g
cn
b
−
g Γ a
Γ
+
DEMO g
a
m
pa
l
a
GG
G
+
c
a
GF
−
l
+
I
JJ
J
period.management conditional on the incumbent being DEMO for at least one morerearranging yields the following decomposition of the value of delegated portfoliohave a mean of m and scaled to have a DEMO
Vnr cx , s2n , n = 1 n 2 n+1a0 n 2 n n+1 n
h
+m+1
r
r 1
c
+
n
DEMO
−
a
Kr
a 2
n 1
+ f
1
n
c
tn+1
h +
xca
h
f
1
1
r
b
H
e
DEMO x
n
b
J
g
H l a
.  Integrating and
DEMO
cn+1
n
K
+1
n
1
m+
r
f2
1
F x
n
−
c n+1h
n+1 1+ r
−
b
2 x
+
DEMO
b
g
x
g emn
+1
j
+
n
+
l
H
l
a −
K
a −
the distribution function of xn+1
the DEMO mean of observed excess-to-benchmark returns
a
b
n
n0.5
+
g
2
e
n 1
j
n+1
b
n
1
2x
nn
+1
n DEMO n2
1
n
0.5 dxn+1
s    =
sample variance of DEMO returns
n        = the number of periods since DEMO of incumbent
manager
∞
l
n
Equation 6.24
FHG
l
l
n
b
n
a
IKJ
F(   )  =
n2
=
n
nr and
upon retention of the manager for at least another period DEMO four components:be interpreted as follows.  At time tcompares this value DEMO VTo determine whether to retain the manager the trustee board calculates Vparameters of the best alternative maa-K.  Where Vnager, with  the value of active management conditionala is calculated using the x = sn = n DEMO 0.  Equation 6.24 can
0a, 0a, oa and
0a
216
DEMO The discounted expected e1 xcess return next period.n n
ii. changing manager at the end of next period, times the probability of that event.The discounted expected excess return in the second period conditional upon
µ λ DEMO α
m+nr
iii. that event.retaining the manager at the end of the next period, times the probability ofThe discounted expected excess return in the second period conditional upon
iv.
0a 2 cn 1
Ka1 + rf DEMO + h
a
f
1 + r
m+ r 2 1 F x
period’The value of the option to decide whether to retain or DEMO after the next1 s excess return information is received.n cn 1
n+1 11 n n
g − c + h
r 2 (n 1 n 1) t 2 x
n 2 cn 1
JI
l b
FG
+
a f H K
a − +
l + l DEMO −
2
−
m
b
returns;  sV r  is a function of :  ments are DEMO 2 the sample variance;  n the number of observations.  Only DEMO first twoxn the sample mean of the observed excess- as might be expected from a prior distribution based -to-benchmark
6.3.2.1deciding at time tThe two DEMO model of  investors’ hiring and firing decisions has the investorAlternative model DEMO, two periods from the investment horizon, whether to retain or
217
again decide whether to retain the (possibly new) manager or choose DEMO is given by equation 6.24.management conditional upon retaining a manager that has been employed for nmanager for the last period.  As shown in equatialternatively dismiss the manager.  One period later at time ton 6.24 , at t the investor must
n
n+1
n the value of active
An DEMO set up is for the investor to have a different choice at tgranting the then incuactive management at tbest alternative manager who will have DEMO tenure.  In this model the value of mbent manager permanent tenure DEMO alternatively choosing the, between
Vnr xn , s2n , n = DEMO mr 0a1 rKr F xcn+1 r m1 n r 1 F xcn+1 + r 1 r1 n 1 n1 t 2
The value of DEMO manager at time tNonetheless, the models are qualitatively alike.  In section 6.5 results of a simulation
b + g b + g b DEMO g l H l ba − gK
a −
n+1
of the hiring and firing model are presented.  The simulations are for an investor’s
n cn+1 n+1
hence.  The longer the horizdecision on whether to dismiss the manager where the investment horizon is 10 years there is no DEMO investmenstudy is conducted only for the model where, at the end DEMO the investment horizon,decision today.  Since equations 6.24 and 6.25 are DEMO similar in form, the simulationt.on, the less important are the terminal conditions to the
i
at which the investor is indifferent between retention DEMO dismissal of , denoted x
i d
n
+1
n
n
n
−
+ d
2 x
i
is higher in equation 6.24 than DEMO by
i
F
G
l
+
−
+
b
I
J
K.
d
cn
+1
n
upon normal and gamma functions.sample mo
n
Equation DEMO
n, conditional on retaining the existing manager is: n+1
d
λ
6.4
α
x0
n
, β
0
, λ
0
, m
DEMO
2
The parameters of the prior distribution over θ.
fund manager dismissal supports the following propositions.  upon fund manager dismissal decisions.  The two DEMO gammaThe comparative statics of these variables can provide insight into various influences
If the vector of reported excess6.4.1are sufficient to determine VProposition 1: . -to-benchmark returns is
only know the number of performancethe Bayesian nature of DEMO decision process.implies that the value process is Markovian rather than path dependent, because ofthose observations to attain the value of active management after n periods.  It alsoThe result implies that, conditional upon a gamma observations DEMO the first two moments of-normal prior, trustee boards need
, s
, n
The state variables of the dynamic programming
problem faced by the trustee board.
This follows directly from equation 6.24 and the value rule DEMO x = (x , ......,x = Max [V), then DEMO , s , Vn2 and n -K] .
n
nr
a
n
1
n
The constants which are exogenous to the trustee
board’s decision DEMO
-normal model of
Implications of a dismissal policy
218
parameters, constants DEMO state variables.The trustee board’s valuation of portfolio management after n periods is a function of
n
k, r
the manager’s excess return.The value of active management is non decreasing in DEMO over the expected value of 6.4.2 Proposition 2:
denoted xIf the investor retains the manager for period n+1, then there is a unique value of x ,
V ≥ s = b
d sm
, for which the investor is indifferent between retaining or dismissing the s DEMO in
m
l a
manager at the end of that period.  DEMO 6.24 can be rearranged to expresn+1 n+1
Equation VIf x6nr.26ccnn++11 1m+nmr nn thenV1a r K n+1 1 r 2 x +1 xxn+1 - xxcn+1 DEMO xxn+1 dxdxn+1
VIf x mr then1mr
cn
>
1m+ 11
z
DEMO
−
b g
r
e j
= + + −
x
b g b g
r n n c
+ l +
c
n DEMO 2 n+1 n+1 n+1 n+1
n+1
with a strike price at xIn the first expression the integral term represents the value of a European DEMO option
n+1 -
, over an asset, the value of which DEMO a t distribution with
z
b g
=
option.  Since it DEMO well known that these option terms second expression the integral term represents the value of the corresponding put
n n+1n+1 u2
functions of that DEMO we know that:variance of the value of the underlying asset and since none of the other terms areare strictly increasing in the
l DEMO
where
x
219
-to-
benchmark return after observing
= (x , DEMO,x )
2n
2
n
n
n
n
c
<
1
n
is the variance of the expected excess
an option form.
0
DEMO
1
at the strike date, which is one period hence.  In the
g
e
j
l
+
∞
b
mean m and variance
DEMO
+ b
g
f
c
+
nr n+1 2
2n n nr a
n+1
220
and -to-benchmark returns DEMO measured
is increasing in l sm , the variance of x
The uncertainty over the expectation of the excesscombine to represent the uncertainty over DEMO value that the manager can add to theby the variance of  DEMO is a function of , .  These parameters therefore
V
≥ DEMO since V = Max V , V − K
d sm
uncdelegated portfolio.  The value of active management is increasing in thisertainty.
n n
β α λ
This proposition partially explains two questions arising from empirical DEMO into (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998) and others, that fund managers can returnis found by Ippolito (1992), Brown, Harlow, Starks (1996), Goetzmann and the flow of investors’ funds to and from investment management groups.  Firstly, itPeles
outflows of money.  These results have been explained in terms of high switchingpersistently poor performance relative to DEMO peers without experiencing largetolerate has no obvious full explanation in the literature.perceived costs of changing manager, the poor performance that some investorscosts, including DEMO tax costs of realising capital gains.  Nonetheless, relative to
some uncertainty over the manager’s quality.  As in a real options framework, therecognises DEMO a delay in the decision to switch managers may allow resolution ofinitiated.new project (the worse the manager’s performance) before the new project ismore DEMO that can be resolved by delay the higherThe framework for analysing investors hiring and firing decisions presented here is the required return to the
DEMO history equates to less prior information, which in this model iperformance DEMO is greater than equivalent managers with longer histories.  Amanagers, the growth rate of the funds managed by managers with shorterlower value for Secondly, this proposition partially explains an observation of Chevalier and Ellison(1997a).  They found that after controlling for size0.  The greater uncertainty of the expected value of the excess and for the performance ofs captured by DEMO -to-
l
V
d
n
m
rate.  more valuable to investors who discount excessbenchmark returns of the managers with shorter performance records makes them-to-benchmark returns at the risk free
221
DEMO managers entering (and exiting) the fund management industry is large A final point relates to the entry of fund managers to the industry.  The number ofparticularly in the mutual fund industry.  This observation may be partially exp, the expected excess return for managers new to thelained
by the uncertainty about since investors have the option to sack the manager DEMO low cost and choose another,industry.  Because investors are more uncertain DEMO the new fund managers, andrelatively unknown managers may have a comparative DEMO -
The value of active management is non decreasing in the shape parameter 6.4.3 Proposition 3:normal prior distribution or the sample variance of DEMO excess return of the
observations.gamma-
µ
0
V 0 , V 0
b
s
This is trn ue because2nn Vn 0 , and s2 DEMO V only through the expression
2 00x n n
n2 1 s 0 0 n0 -nm
d ≥ d ≥
d b d
2
DEMO n2
n 0
d
2u 0 2
≥ b
s m
0
result has significance for active managers who deliberately track the market index.The DEMO of active management is non decreasing in the sample variance.  This
DEMO g
GF
JI
l
−
+
b
+ H K
l
s =
+
F I
-to-benchmark returns ibenchmark returns, s
wclose to zero but it also reduces the sample variance which in turn reduces Vhowever, index tracking decreases the variance of their excessIndex tracking can assure that DEMO sample mean of excessmanager that replicates the benchmark portfolio may be more likely to exceed xhich decreases V and in turn increases x .  -to- .  A
KJ
gHG
l + a +
nrcn+1;
nr cn+1
0
b
increase the trustee board’s valuation.  This idea is closely related to the Dow andIn this framework managers have an incentive to inject noise into DEMO return toinformation will undertake noise trading so that their lack of information is notGorton (1997) noise and volume argument.  They argue that managers with no
V
V
222
< 0
,
0
k
r
n
n
manager can be expressed as:From equation 6.226 the value of DEMO management conditional on retaining the
¶
¶
¶
V
1m+
r
1mr
≤
11
r
¶
x
- x
f x
dx
nr
n
DEMO
x
c
cn+1
n+1
n+1
n+1
2
n+1
2
n+1
-
Since
V
na
+
K K
0 ,
xK
+1
z e
n+1
1
r
j b
0
g
cn
1
=
+
+
Vn
DEMO
K
d e
0
b + g
and theref
j
l
ore
−
b
V
+ g
K
n
d
0
∞
b
l
DEMO
g
cn
<
= −
+
<
The value of active management is decreasing in K, the cost of changing managers, 6.4.4 DEMO 4:
revealed in the short term.
and not increasing in r the risk free interest rate.
=
Similarly,
d
d
<
d
investment management industry competes with passive investment management forexternalities for their industry DEMO they increase costs of changing manager.  The active tive investment managers DEMO create
<
≤
d
d
d
d
funds.  If investors can only estimate an industry value of K, rather than a manager
x r+1
K(
d
n+1 )
<
0
d
A consequence DEMO this result is that acVr
d
−
l
<
nr
0
DEMO
and therefore
d
Vr
n
0
management.thereby the value of active management to investors is decreased relative to DEMO value, then the externality may lead to higher costs of changing DEMO and
For example, when a portfolio is passed from a dismissed DEMO to a newlyomponent of the cost of
223
decreasing in the investor’s estimate of this cost.  to minimise this cost, but the value DEMO active management to an investor is strictlychanging manager.  Because of the DEMO of attribution managers have little incentiveholdings is typically not attributed to either the old or new manager.  For largeappointed manager, the costs of DEMO to the new manager’s preferred portfoliopension funds this unattributed cost may be the largest c
presents a testable implication of this model.  In a large universe of managers, theThe relationship between the value of active management and the riskless rate simply
volume of sample information, measured by n.management and either the volume of prior information, measured by There is not a simple monotonic relationship between the value of activenumber of investors switching DEMO, over any short period, should be increasing 0, or the
DEMO 0
2 n 0 0 0 nr
2 n nr
l
> m  and  s > b  then  ¶ V > 0
DEMO l ¶ n
0 0 0 0
b ¶ V
then  < 0
x < m  and  s <
nr
a l DEMO n
¶ V ≤
0
¶ n ≥
6.4.5
Proposition 5:If
x
in r.
the prior mean.  The weights are  is a function of n DEMO n2.   is a weighted average of n and  the sample DEMO  and x > m then an
Vincrease in n puts greatn DEMO weight on the sample data.  The same reasoning applies ton n DEMO respectively.  If xn n 0
sshifting weight to sample information increases DEMO and 0 .  If the sample mean and variance are consistent DEMO high value then
224
µ σ µ
r.  Both the sample DEMO and
λ
µ
rtant.
λ λ
0 0 n
variance are impoThis result characterises the simple idea that a larger number of observations of
DEMO
distribution is also an important determinant of the manager’s value to the investor.However, investor’s prior expectation of the manager’s average excessperformance is good news for managers whose performance has exceeded theuncertainty over the mean of the DEMO excess-to-benchmark return.-to-benchmark
λ
the uncertainty overreasoning applies to If more sample information increases the posterior expected value of  is ambiguous.  Note that the DEMO, but decreases
6.4.6 Stationarity and equilibrium0
then the effect of n DEMO V because 0 and n enter the expression for Vnr symmetrically.
n
m
m
benchmark returns are stationary.  However, the assumption implies that DEMO fund-to-
ic response.
The fund manager will learn about the trustee board’s prior over the fund manager’smanager does not react strategically as the vector DEMO performance results evolves.a strategmanager will use an informed assumption about the trustee board’s prior to formulate that are set; and the ongoing contact with the trustee board.  Presumably the fundexc
l
ess return through: the DEMO fund manager selection process; the benchmarks
cn+1 represents the size of DEMO ‘bets’ that the manager can
c  Many pension fund management mandatesction DEMO xcn+1.  A
afford to take.  If a manager has a given level of information on the future realisation A manager’s estimate of xof DEMO asset price, then the quantity of that asset held will be DEMO funportfolio return of less than xmanager can take bets on specific assets and at the same time insure against a
n+1.
0
0
n
DEMO
It is assumed here that the processes that generate the fund manager’s excess
l
Figure 6.6 Active versus passive management
225
V
mAInitial value ofanagect ive DEMO n
mnc
V =Max[mVnn r,Va-K]
n
VV-K Vanage(0,0)s ive
mPas ment
r
dynamically adjusting the holding of the benchmark portfolio DEMO individual assets preclude the purchase of derivative securities.  Instead, the manager can hedge byas discussed in chapter 2.  -
The parameter stability assumption implies the existence of performance persistence.  There is not much evidence of performance persistence isevere methodological problems in handling survivorship bias and risk aBrown, Goetzmann, Ibbotson and Ross 1992).  Performance persistence studies face(Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny 1992a, Brown, Draper and Mn the pension fund DEMO
cKenzie 1997 anddjustment.
see a migration of pension funds from poor managers to good managers over time.If the excess return distributions of managers are DEMO, then we might expect tomanagement firms.  This observation is consistent with a degree of stationarity.  mandates have become concentrated in the hands of the most successful investmentIn the UK pension fund industry over the last DEMO years, pension fund invest
ment
a
n
In the framework of this paper a passive manager can be6.4.7 Passive DEMO active managementindex = ( , )  = (0,0).    V0index = 0 characterised by
226
determinesPassive management provides a calibration of the value of active management.  This sets a lower bound on V their choice between active and passive management.-K of -Kindex.   Each trustee DEMO assessment of Va-K
management even if they do not expect othough mThe trustee board depicted in figure 6.6 initially chooses active management even0 < DEMO  This illustrates the point that a trustee board may choose activen DEMO to choose a manager with positive
µ τ ⇒
of the market then they must believe that they have higher than average ability tomanagers DEMO do beat the market for longer.  If the trustee board has DEMO rational view manager who will beat the market  management do not DEMO have to believe that they will on average choose a.  Under DEMO conditions of this model trustee boards which choose active- they just have to believe that they can hold on to
choose a manager with DEMO high 1992b, Brown, Draper and McKenzie 1996).average have lower returns than passive managers (Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishnyof a financial assLittle is DEMO about the factors that determine the fraction of the total capitalisation et market that is under passive management.  The figure must be.  This DEMO because over time active fund managers on
they will go to passive managemanother active manager as the best alternative to their current manager; otherwiserise to the equilibrium.  Since 1986 the pension fund industry in the UK has seenpassively managed funds rises, V(institutional or private).  Trustee DEMO which believe that  VStiglitz 1980).  However, the literature says DEMO else.  The framework presentedless than 100 percent to permit the rational DEMO of prices (Grossman andhere partially characterises ent when they change manager.  As the volume ofa increases (in a Grossman Stiglitz world) - DEMO
µ
the equilibrium between passive and active management-K > -K will see
a index
θ
a
µ
both a slow drift of pension fund mandatesof the average returns of DEMO active management and passive management sectors. to passive management and a narrowing
a young wtrustee boards the investment horizon is often the duration of DEMO liabilities: which for However, investors typically have horizons longer than two years.  In the case ofThe two period model developed in section 6.3 yields a closed form solution for the6.5value oA simulation studyf active management DEMO in turn yields the propositions of section 6.4.orkforce may be several decades.
227
closed form nature of solutions or the gamma The model cannot DEMO extended by increasing the horizon without giving up either the – normal Bayesian structure of the
model.  A simpler Bayesian model may have a closed form, presented.management for a trustee board with an investment horizon solution.  In this section the results of numerical solution of the value of activetoo abstract to be of interest.  The alternative to a closed form solution is a numerical but such a model may be of 10 DEMO are
There are three objectives in this study.  Firstly, to estimate the size of the option
70
option effects exist but does not DEMO that they haveeffects for investors with longer horizons.  The two period DEMO indicates thatof these comparative static results.propositions of section 6.4.  Thirdly, to determine the economic significance of eachSecondly, to confirm the direction of the comparative static results set out in the economic significance.
The numerical solution DEMO the testable implications of the model with data.  However, simulation is values amounts to a simulation study of the model.  That is not a substitute forf the model of hiring and firing for differing parameter
DEMO investment horizon in their simulation studies. My discussions with pension fund consultants indicated that 10 years is often chosen as the time to
6.5.1.1 DEMO of the simulation
70
Equation 6.5.1.2 Nature of simulation6.27
The simulation proceeds by numerically solving the DEMO equation.
m
m
2
e formation of interesting testable implications
228
0
0
0
0
2
n
n+1
n+1
0
0
0
0
before DEMO with the task of collecting data for empirical testing.  useful and DEMO to guide th
the best alternative manager is calspecify the prior distribution and the exogenous economic variables.  The value ofThis is a discrete functional equation in V(.).  The chosen values of
+
=
x
1+ r
culated as V(0, 0 ,0), the initial DEMO of the
+ r
1
existing manager.  Recall that it is DEMO here that the value of the best alternative
−∞
is the values of V(.) at the points:space of points (manager is DEMO with time.  A solution is a value of V(.) at each point in the state , s , n).  In this simulation the approximation to the full solution
n    =sn2 = 0.0000, 0.0002,…...,0.0098n2
for anlonger horizon might be appropriate.  However, the number of computations in thetables presented in this section.  The simulations compute the value of V(estimated in each simulation.  Those values are the source of data for the graphs andTherefore, the value investor who has an investment horizon of 10 years.  For some situations a of active management at 20 x 200 x 50 = 200,000 points arex , sn2, n)
α
β
λ
x, s , n a , b , l ,
+∞
z Max V(xbx
, r, K)
g, s bx
g, n +1 a , b , l ,
,
, r, K) , V(0,DEMO
0
0
,
0, 0)
0
, m k, DEMO
- K
0,
V(
m
x =
1, 2, 3, ……., 20-0.100, -
0.099, ……, 0,…….0.098, 0.099
case we know frsimulation increases as the square of the number of DEMO to the horizon.  In anyqualitatively similar for larger horizons.om the Bayesian DEMO of the model that the results will be
horizon is one period.  InThe simulation can proceed to a solution by solving for V(6.5.2where mSimulation methodology is the expected return from the best alternative manager over DEMO one that case  V( x71, s , n) = Max [m /(1+r),(mx , sn2a, n) where the-K(1+r))/(1+r)]
times to reach the ten year horizon solution.  values for the two period horizon.  Then the simulation iterates back another eightperiod.  Having solved for the one period values, the simulation can step DEMO aa n2 n 0
In each iteration for each of the 200,000 cells, the integreach cell calculation a large number of independent draws are made from the student evaluated.  In this study, Montecarlo estimation DEMO the integral was employed.  Forvalues of the excessto the law of DEMO numbers to estimate the expectation of V(.) over the possiblecorresponds DEMO the draw is found and the values are averaged.  This method DEMO distribution of x that relates to that cell.  The valueal in DEMO 6.27 must be in the next period that
Two elements of the Montecarlo simulation are central to its accuracy.  Firstly, therange of the DEMO calculated and the distance between those points.number of draws in evaluation of the integral. solution from the two period model.  quantities the Montecarlo simulation values can be calibrated against the closed form  To determine suitable values for these 72  Secondly, the
229
71
72
period and use DEMO 200,000 values from the one period problem to calculate the
6.5.2.1 Calibration of the Montecarlo simulationn+1-to-benchmark return in the next period.
0
are DEMO the range of cells and Vof years is 16 times greater.  DEMO Outside the range the value is estimated by the upper asymptote for high sample mean values which a-K for the low sample mean values DEMO are outside the range of
The number of computations required in the simulation if the reporting periods are quarters instead
For the two period horizon case, the value of V(closed form equation of 6.24 and the Montecarlo method.  The results of thisx , sn2 , n) was calculated by both the
and Montecarlo values are cocalibration are depicted in figures 6.7 and 6.8.  Figure 6.7 shows that the closed form draws were made in the Montecarlo estimation.  these results are for the two period horizon model.  Draw = 5000 records that 5000Figure 6.8 depicts the value of the option component of Vas it DEMO with the sample mthe number of draws in the Montecarlo estimation technique.  The results suggest-incident.  In the legend to that figure hor=2 means DEMO
6.5.3.1The values of distribution.  In this simulation the parameters were chosen DEMO the following basis.  0, tive investor case0
Values of a = 4 and b
of t of 2500 in the prior.
0
0
DEMO choicesRepresenta
b
n+1
=0.0016 were chosen to give an expected value
2.
A prior degree of freedom in the t distribution of x
0
DEMO
73
= E (t)
The choice of a also determines DEMO variance of t which is a /b
0
0
=  dof
information in forming the posterior distribution.  The choice of
of 4 was chosen.
a
b
00
0
a
a
,
73
n
and m determine the slope and location of the prior
Determines the weight that DEMO given to prior information versus sample
l
0
l
0
230
ean.  The different lines show the effect of increasing
0
r (part DEMO in equation 6.24),
l
= 2
the Montecarlo method.that the DEMO of cells (200,000) is large enough and 1,000 draws is sufficient for
0
non trivial improvement in confidence in the simulation DEMO T his calibration also permits very accurate de
corresponds to a representative investor whose prior information is
equivalent to two observations (years) of DEMO information.
In this simulation the representative investor is given a prior expected
m of 0.
m
value of
-bugging of the simulation program which DEMO a
– 6.12 depict the value of active management to the representative trustee DEMO
benchmark returns.  It shows that V(In particular the figure demonstrates DEMO the value of dismissed is decreasing in the sample variance.  x DEMO , n) is increasing in the sx at which the manager DEMO approaches when theample variance.
representative trustee board for different values of the sample variance of excessemployed for 3 years.  Figure 6.9 shows the value of active management for theboard when the investment horizon is 10 years DEMO the investment manager has beFigures 6.9 en
, s to-
231
Figure 6.9 shows the low and high asymptotes which Vsample mean o6.10 shows DEMO difference between Vrepresents a part of the value of the option to delay the decision to dismiss thef excess-
to-benchmark returns is low or DEMO respectively.  Figure Figure 6.10 shows that part of the option value DEMO
manager by one or more periods. an increasing function of soption to change managers stills exists after a new manager is chosen..  Much of the option value is captured by V
r and the asymptotes.  This difference because the
n2 a
Figure 6.11 exhibits the relationship between V DEMO the number of observations of
the excessdecreasing function of n.  That DEMO value is increasing in the level of uncertaintythe height of Vbetween the volume of sample information and the value of active management.  The position of the asymptotes is dependent upon n.  N-to-benchmark return.  Clearly there DEMO not a single monotonic relationshipr above the asymptotes (the option value DEMO captured in Vonetheless, figure 6.12 shows that ) is a
nr
DEMO , which is decreasing in n.
n a
m
uncertainty over Tables 6.1 and 6.2 and figures 6.13 and 6.14 depict DEMO effect of the level of6.5.4 Uncertainty ov.  In the simulations for DEMO the expected value of excess
on the value of active management.  DEMO variance of  and keeping the initial degrees of freedom (his sub-section the effect of varying -to-benchmark returns) and the weight was is
232
n 2
studied by varying The middle row of each of the DEMO cases presents data for the representative) constant.
x
n n
m DEMO
0 0
b
s = s
0
m m
l a
representative investor the minimum value of on prior information (investor, as discussed DEMO the previous section.  Table 6.1 shows that for theat which the DEMO is dismissed at
b a
the decision date is decreasing in s0.0002 and s 2 = 0.0050.  n2 .  The value falls 50 DEMO points between s =
indifferent between retention or dismissalFor higher and lower values of uncertainty over , that is, high uncertainty over the value of  is decreasing in , will accept a lower sample .  DEMO with high
values of mean of excessimportant effect of varying -to-benchmark returns before dismissing the manager.  Another
x
0
m
is to shift the value of the alternative manager and and s when
x
0
which DEMO the value of active management for different values of hence the value of active management.  This is particularly apparent in table 6.2
2
b
b m
Table 6.1 Effect of uncertainty over  on dismissal level of
= 0.
0 n2
s
m
b
s =0.00020.005 s =0.00100.005Sample variances DEMO s =0.00500.000
n2 n2 n2 n2
m
--0.0060.003 --0.0080.004 --0.0100.005 --0.0120.008
00
b = 0.0064
0
b = 0.0016
b = 0.0004
2
l
DEMO, table 6.1 shows that the critical value of x at which DEMO investor is
n2
, this range is much the same.
n
Table 6.2
000 0.0101 0.0036
Simulation results are presented in tables 6.3 DEMO 6.4 and figures 6.15 and 6.16 where 6.5.5
= 0.0064
Level of prior information
0.0134
0.0022
-
= 0.0016
b
b = 0.0004
parameters DEMO constant.  Higher values of weight to the prior information in the DEMO of the posterior distribution.  Theweight on the prior information versu
x
DEMO
s sample information is varied, with other
x
critical value of
DEMO the value of active management is strongly decreasing in the weight put on priordismissal is decreasing in the weight placed on prior information.  Moreover at 6.3 Effect of level of prior information on dismissal level of
DEMO
0
x
for which the investor is indifferent between retention and=0
information.
Sample variance
l
0
s =0.0002-0.008
s =0.0010
s =0.0024
s =0.0050
DEMO
= 4
Effect of uncertainty over
sn2
n2
-0.0040.003
n2
0.0125
-0.009
0.0426
=0.0002
sn2
0.=0.00100425
-0.0020.004
Sample variance
m
on value of active DEMO at
sn2
n2
0.0154
--0.0000.0110.005
n2
0.0204
-0.014
0.0456
=0.0024
sn2
0.0483
--0.0020.008
=0.0050
x=0
233
l
= 2
l
= 1
b
are DEMO with giving more
Table 6.4 Effect of level of prior information on value of active DEMO at sn2=0.00020.00400.0101 0.0125 0.0154 0.0204 x=0
sn2=0.00100.0043Sample variancesn2=0.00240.0075 sn2=0.00500.0106
234
0
6.5.6
00 0.0283 0.0327 0.0377
Tables 6.5 and 6.6 and figures 6.17 and DEMO depict the effect of the cost of changing Effect of the cost of changing manager
= 4
l = 2
l = 1
value DEMO active management is falling in the cost of changing manager.  However, the fund manager on the value of active management.  It is clear from table 6.6 that the
Table 6.5 suggests, as expectlikely it is that a change is required, the larger the effect of K on V(.).  increase in cost of changing is increasing with the sample variance.  Thus, the more6.6, the results suggreduction in value is less than the increase in cost.  Comparing the columns of tableest that the ratio of decrease in value of active management toed, that investors will accept a lower value of x before
Table changing manager when DEMO cost of changing manager is higher. 6.5 Effect of K on dismissal level of  sn2=0.0002--0.0030.010 sn2=0.0010--0.0040.012Sample variancesnx2=0.0024--0.0050.013 sn2=0.0050--0.0080.015
K=0.04
K=0.02
K=0.01 0.001 0.000 -0.001 -0.004
l
0.0271
Table 6.6 Effect of K on value of active management at x
DEMO sn2=0.00100.00310.0125Sample variancesn2=0.00240.00670.0154 s=0n2=0.00500.00990.0204
Effect of the risk free ratex
235
K=0.02
Tables 6.7 and 6.8 and figures 6.19 and 6.20 depict the effect of DEMO cost of changing
K=0.01 0.0217 0.0228 0.0266 0.0308
6.5.7higwill accept lower values of fund manager on the value of active management.  Table 6.7 indicates that investorsh.  The future payoffs to switching managers is lower when interests rates are
is less valuablincreased interest rates at a sample mean of DEMO  In this framework active management higher.  However, the value of DEMO management is strongly decreasing withe when interest rates are high but nonetheless investors have lessbefore dismissing a manager when interest rates are
Table incentive DEMO change managers.6.7 Effect of risk free rate  on dismissal level of  sn2=0.0002-0.008 sn2=0.0010-0.009Sample variancesn2=0.0024-0.010 x sn2=0.0050-0.012
r=0.20
r=0.08 -0.003 -0.004 -0.005 -0.008
r=0.02 DEMO -0.001 -0.003 -0.007
K=0.04
Table 6.8
r=0.20
r=0.08
r=0.02
Effect of risk free rate on value DEMO active management at
sn2=0.00020.02100.0101
0.0029
0.0032
sn2=0.00100.02270.0125
Sample variance
0.0056
sn2=0.00240.02880.0154
0.0078
sn2=0.00500.03500.0204
x=0
236
Figure 6.7
mn
-0.06Horkr
o
o
o
Closed form values versus Montecarlo DEMO
= 1=0.0016= 4= 3 -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 -0.010 0
= 0.08= 2= 0.02= 5000-0.05
b
l
a
Draw
Figure 6.8
HorkmDrawr
oo
o
DEMO
a
n
-0.06
l
-0.04-0.03-0.02
-0.07-0.06-0.05
= 4= 3
Montecarlo accuracy with varying numbers of draws
= 1= 0.0016= 2= 0.08 0.02
= 5000
DEMO
0.00250.0030.002
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
0.00050.00150.001
-0.01 -0.0005-0.0010 0
237
0.01
Mean
0.02
montecarlo Sn2 = 0.002low assymtotehigh assymtoteVa -k
closed form Sn2 = 0.010montecarlo DEMO = 0.010closed form Sn2 = 0.002closed form Sn2 = 0.050montecarlo Sn2 = 0.050closed form Sn2 = 0.024montecarlo Sn2 = 0.024
200 drawsclosed form Sn2 DEMO 0.0245000 draws2000 draws1000 draws500 draws
0.01
Mean
0.02
-0.08
Figure 6.9
DrawHorkmr
oo
o
b
a
n
l
-0.025
-0.02
Value DEMO active management for representative investor
-0.025
l
-0.02
-0.015
-0.01
0.040.060.080.1
-0.005 -0.04-0.020.020 0
0.005
0.01
Figure 6.10noo
DrawHorkmr o
a
b
= 4= DEMO
-0.06-0.08-0.1
Variation of option value of active management
= 5000= 2= 0.0016= 10= 0.02= 0.08
-0.015
0.0250.02
0.0150.01
= 2= 4= 3
= 5000= DEMO 0.02= 0.08
= 0.0016
-0.01
-0.005
0.0050
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.015
238
0.02
0.025
high assymtoteVa - Klow assymtoteSn2 = 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010Sn2 DEMO 0.0002
Sn2 = 0.0050
Mean
Sn2 = 0.0050Sn2 = 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010Sn2 = 0.0002
0.02
0.025
Mean
Figure 6.11
n
sm
DrawHorkr
o
o
2
o
-0.025
a
b
DEMO
-0.02
Figure 6.12
n
sm
DrawHorkr
o
o
2
o
a
b
l
= 4= 0.0024
= 5000= 2= 0.0016= 10= 0.02= 0.08
-0.025
DEMO
= 2= 0.0016= 0.0024
= 5000= 10= 0.02= 0.08
= 4
Variation of value with level of sample information
0.120.080.1
Op-0.015tion value versus level DEMO sample information-0.01 -0.005 -0.020.0160.0180.060.040.020 0 0.005 0.01
0.0120.0140.0060.0080.01
-0.015 -0.01 -0.005-0.0020.0020.0040 0 0.005 0.01
0.015
0.015
239
0.02
0.02
0.025
Va - K
n=2n=1n=10n=5n=3
DEMO
n=5n=3n=2n=1
n=10
Mean
0.025
-0.04
Figure 6.14
n
= 4= 3
DrawHorkmr
oo
o
b
a
High DEMO over value of 0.080.120.1
-0.015 0.040.06
= 0.0004Low uncertainty over the value of
= 1000 0.1
0.040.060.08
l
m
= 2= 10= 0.02= 0.08
DEMO
-0.02
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005 -0.06-0.04-0.020.020 0
-0.08-0.1
0.005
= 4= 3
= 1000= 2= 0.0064= 10= 0.02= 0.08
Figure 6.13
nm
DrawHorkr
o
o
DEMO
a
b
l
-0.025
-0.02
-0.01
-0.005 -0.04-0.020.020 0
-0.08-0.06-0.1
m
0.005
0.01
0.01
0.015
0.015
240
0.02high assymtoteVa - K
Sn2 = 0.0002low DEMO = 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010
Sn2 = 0.0050
0.025
0.02
Mean
0.025
Sn2 = 0.0002low assymtotehigh assymtoteVa - KSn2 = 0.0050Sn2 = 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010
DEMO
Figure 6.15
nm
DrawHorkr
o
o
o
a
b
l
= 1000= DEMO 4= 3= 0.0016= 10= 0.02= 0.084
-0.025
-0.025
Figure 6.16n
DrawHorkmr ooo
a
b
l
= 4= 3
-0.02
-0.02
= 0.0016Weak prior information
DEMO 1000
-0.015
-0.015
-0.01
-0.01
Strong prior information
0.150.1
-0.050.050
-0.15-0.1
0.080.040.060.02
-0.005 -0.020
-0.08-0.06-0.04
-0.005
0
0
= 1= 10= 0.02= 0.08
0.005
DEMO
0.01
0.01
0.015
0.015
241
0.02 0.025
Sn2 = 0.0050
0.02
0.025
Mean
high assymtoteVa - KSn2 = 0.0050Sn2 = 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010Sn2 = DEMO assymtote
high assymtoteVa - KSn2 = 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010Sn2 = 0.0002low assymtote
Mean
Figure 6.17
n
DrawHorkmr
oo
o
b
a
= 2= 4= 3
DEMO 1000= 10= 0.04= 0.08
= 0.0016
High cost of changing manager
0.1
0.040.060.08
0.005
-0.025
l
-0.02
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005 -0.020.020 0
-0.08-0.06-0.04-0.1
Figure DEMO
n
= 4= 3
Low cost of changing manager
-0.025
DrawHorkmr
oo
o
b
a
l
= 1000= 2= 0.0016= 10= 0.01= 0.08
-0.02
DEMO
-0.01
-0.005
0.040.060.080.1
-0.020.020
-0.06-0.04-0.08-0.1
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.01
0.015
242
0.02
0.025
high assymtoteVa - KSn2 = 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010Sn2 = 0.0002low DEMO
Mean
Sn2 = 0.0050
0.02Va - K 0.025
Sn2 = 0.0010Sn2 = 0.0002low assymtotehigh assymtote
Mean
Sn2 = 0.0050Sn2 = 0.0024
-0.025
a
b
l
o
-0.02
-0.015
-0.01
F igure 6.20    Low risk free rate
nm
DrawHorkr
o
o
o
a
b
l
DEMO 1000
= 2= 4= 3= 0.02= 0.0016
-0.025
-0.02
-0.015
-0.01
Figure 6.19    High risk free rate
nm
DrawHorkr
o
o
= 10
= 1000
= 2= 4= 3= 0.20= 0.0016
0.15
0.050.10 0
-0.05-0.1
DEMO
-0.15
0.150.050.1
-0.005 -0.050 0
-0.15-0.1
= 10= 0.02
0.005
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.01
0.015
243
0.02high assymtoteVa - K 0.025
Sn2 = 0.0050Sn2 DEMO 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010Sn2 = 0.0002
0.02high assymtoteVa - K 0.025
Sn2 = 0.0050Sn2 = 0.0024Sn2 = 0.0010Sn2 = 0.0002
Mean
Mean
low assymtote
low DEMO
Implicati6.6 on 1   Other things equal, investors will more highly value investment
managers that have shorter observable investment histories because investors’
Testable implications DEMO future research
244
µ
Implication 2   investigate the hazard function of mutual funds using semiThe -
to-
sample mean of the manager’s excess DEMO at the date ofbenchmark returns.  Lunde, Timmermann and Blake (1998)DEMO
-parametric technique.
2
n
.
flow studies can guide the design of the model of portfolio flows.  The secondthe literature on the strengths and weaknesses of existing fund manager performancefund managers.  In that estimation one of the explanatory variables would be the ageThe first implication requires an estimation DEMO a model of the flows of new moneof the fund, or DEMO proxy for the level of investors’ prior uncertainty over the-to-benchmark return distribution.  The discussion ofy to -
the mean of excessimplication, regarding the DEMO of performance preceding dismissal, can be testeddirectly by regression of performance DEMO dismissal on the proxy for uncertainty over
dismissal will be decreasing in sample variance because Vimplication is the sample data version of the second DEMO the implications above.Again a direct test from pension fund data should be feasible. is increasing in sn .  This
The model of investors hiring and firing decisions that is presented here has aimplications of the model DEMO UK pension fund data in future research.number of testable implications.  It DEMO my intention to confront a subset of these
observable investment histories.  DEMO, we can expect to see that, of the pensionTherefore, other DEMO evaluation of active management is increasing in uncertainty over the value of qual, more money will flow to managers with shorter
data.  Both DEMO are available in the US and the UK.  dismissed.  These implications could be tested using pension fund or mutual fundobservable investment histories sustain DEMO managers which are dismissed by trustee boards, managers with shorterr levels DEMO performance before being
which impose low costs of changing manager will be higher.  The observable costsOther things equal, the volume of money managed by managers
Implication 3   Implicationthe charges of UK unit trusts and US mutual funds is DEMO  The test involvesexplanatory variables is level of entry and exit charges.  estimating a model of the asset size of different unit trusts.  In that model one of theof changing manager would include redemption charges of DEMO fun 4   The sample mean of the manager’s excess return at the date ofds.  Data on
245
capitalisation stock manager.  transaction costs DEMO the portfolio changes associated with a change of largearising from a chanasset classes might proxy for the cost of changing manager.  The portfolio changesdismissal will be decreasing in the cost of changing manager.  In this case, differentge in small capitalisation stock manager will create larger
changing managers.  DEMO implications can be tested crossincreasing in the level of the riskless rate of interest and decreasing in the costs ofsectionally and across
The model DEMO hiring and firing of pension fund managers and the associated6.7simulation study are motivated by a desire to understand how the decisions ofinvestors, regarding which fund manager to choose and whether to retain thatmanager, affect Concluding remarks on the hiring and fir-ing model
manager incentives is cruciaportfolio performance results.  As argued in chapter 2, an understanding of fundcan help us to understand the downside risk that fund managers face from poorpositive value of DEMO option to delay the decision to dismiss the manager.  substantially.  In the model presented here, that observation is may be sustained before the volume of funds under management decreasesEmpirical studies find that significant poor underthe DEMO in asset markets.  Investors’ decisions on dismissall in studying the market DEMO  -performance by fund managers
explained by the
Implication 5   The DEMO of new funds that flow to passive managers will be
time using UK unit trust or US mutual fund data.
four components, one of which is the option to decide next period, rather than thiIn the two period model, the value of active DEMO can be broken down intounceoption value is not trivial.  The simulation DEMO out the crucial role of the level ofdismissed.  For a longer DEMO these values would be commensurately larger.  points in tprior level is DEMO 500 basis points in the value of the manager, and 110 DEMO simulation the difference between a high prior level of uncertainty and a lowmanagement to an investor with an investment horizon of 10 periods shows DEMO thisperiod, whether to dismiss the manager.  The simulation of the value of activertainty over the expected value of the manager’s excess return distribution.  In
s
he sample mean of excess-to-benchmark returns before the manager is
DEMO  who are approaching performance levels at which investors are consideringtoThis level DEMO uncertainty over -benchmark returns, which has implications for the incentives of DEMO managers is also increasing in the sample variance of excess-
cost of changing managers with a sensitivity of less than one.  The model alsoIndividual managers who have performed poorly do not have the same incentives asbalance DEMO the total volume of fundspotentially provides insights into the role of the cost of changing manager in theThe model highlights the role of the DEMO of changing manager in the decisions ofinvestors.  The simulation shows the DEMO of active management decreasing in the under active versus passive management.
with these costs.decreasing in the cost of changing manager, there is a negative externality associated manager.  Since the value of active management, unlikehighly performed DEMO to minimise the costs to their investors of changing passive management, DEMO
246
µ
that we expect the decisions taken by private and institutional investors to DEMO this and explain outcomes observedifferences in the decisions of private investors and fund managers are substantialfinancial market outcomes.  The research presented here demonstrates that thedifference.  In turfundamentally different in at least one way managers.  It DEMO cThis thesis is concerned with the decisions of private investors and institutional fund n, we expect the difference in those decisions to be reflected inontended here that private and institutional investors ared in financial markets.
247
DEMO they face different incentives.  Further,
Concluding Remarks
managers is the DEMO starting point of all microeconomic analysis The organising principle for this study of the decisions of investors and their fund- the
management essay, the questions are: how large is delegated portfolio management?; maximisation problem faced by economic agents.  In the rise of delegathese differences?by private investors and fund managers?; and what can be explained by studyingabout the DEMO between the incentives, and hence optimisation problems, fhow did the rise of institutional fund management come about?; what do we knowted portfolio
DEMO
the differences in incentives are important: if we believe that privaIn DEMO accuracy of herding measures essay, the questions proceed from the view DEMO, then how do we test that belief?  A body of DEMO literature finds thatinstitutional investors form two groups that are fundamentally different in theirhow do we know that the measures of herding are accurate?  DEMO generally, how do fund managers form a herd separate to the DEMO of the market (private inmanagers to the behaviour of managers in DEMO comparable markets?accurate; and can we generalise the findings of studies DEMO herding by US fundwe test whether any particular measure which is derived from portfolio holdings iste investors andvestors), but
mean for the downside DEMO the incentive schedule faced by fund managers?; what is it performance of managers wabout investors’ decisions and fund managers’ incentives: how can the portfolioThe hiring and firing of fund managers essay, is motivated by unanswered questionsho are fired be characterised?; what does the attrition rule
Chapter DEMO
manager underthat makes investors choose to delegate portfolio management when the averagemanagement DEMO?firing decisions of investors aggregate to create observed dynamics in the investment -performs obtainable market indexes?; and how do the hiring and
control DEMO a laThe contribution of the first essay is an analysis of the significance of the transfer ofrge part of the financial asset market from DEMO to institutional
248
from households to professionally managed portfolios.  It is DEMO to bring out in investors.  The first point addressed is the DEMO of the transfer of financial assetsclear termdoes this mean for financial markets?’intermediation in the US and UK.  The figures themselves beg the question ‘whats what a massive change has occurred in the control of assets DEMO financial
Once the data is presented it becomes clear what is driving the shift to delegated
institutional investors.  The transition of household ownership of US equities from 69 portfolio management in the US, the growth in pension money managed bythree structural ownership changes.  State and local government employee fundspercent of the market in 1969 to 41 percent at year end DEMO is explained lamarket as their assets grew to 28 percent of GDP and their US equity allocation grew have taken their holding of US DEMO from near zero to over 10 percent of the1998.  held 4 DEMO of the US equity market in 1983, 7 percent in 1990 DEMO 16 percent infrom 6 to 14 percent of the US equity market in the same period.  US mutual fundsto rgely by
62 percent, DEMO 1967 and 1998.  Private pension fund holdings have increased
been recognised DEMO  As far as I can tell, the possible misportfolio management is important.  If the level of institutional ownership affectsFor researchers of financial asset markets, the historical perspective of the rise ofstudies market outcomes then it should be recognised that important empirical financespan the period in which the DEMO of institutional ownership is changing-specification of these studies has not
incentives.  DEMO papers that relate to fund manager incentives are first identified from The first essay then analyses what is known and not known about fund DEMO
psychological issues of rationality, cognitive dissonance and reaction tdisparate parts of the literature.  Some evidence is drawn from studies that addresso quality
conflicting results from the studies of funds flows are subjected to two tests.  Firstly, shocks, but nonetheless provide analysis of the flow of funds to DEMO  Theincentives.  for the thesis.  This analysis characterises what is known DEMO fund managerin the framework of the fund manager’s optimisation problem.  This DEMO a crucial step that the econometrics of the study is sound and secondly, that the results m
ake sense
, or firm value,
performance as it is convex in high performance. to fund rank or DEMO excessThe incentive schedule of a fund manager relates end of period wealththat there is little gain to portfolio performance that is only slightly betterconvex DEMO outreturn ranking.  The schedule is not symmetric in that funds can DEMO poorpeer fund managers.  The rewards of new money flow to managers DEMO the highestwealth (y performance and not lose much money.  The relationship between end of periodaxis) and relative portfolio performance (x axis) is not as concave in poor-performance and concave in under-to-
benchmark return of DEMO manager.  The schedule is-performance.  The schedule shows than that of
The incentive schedule of a private investor is a linear relationship between portfolio DEMO return, or excessunderstood in terms of the incentive schedule.  Firstlymanagers.   There are two immediate implications of this difference that can bepositive excess DEMO and concave in negative excess operator is linear, the utility function DEMO wealth is concave and wealth is convex inwishes to maximise the expected utility of wealth  E[u(w{rthe essential difference between the incentives of private investors and fund-to-benchmark return, and end of period wealth.  Therein liesreturn., assume that a fund manager
pt-rmt})] .  The expectation
Under these circumstances fund managers will value assets with positive skewness.
upon past performance DEMO the fund.   This statement is a simplification because the location of the inflexion point of the schedu In fact managers will have a DEMO for all positive values of all the odd moments, 1
74
DEMO, 3rd, 5th,….
75
249
The testable implications of this conjecture are manifold and can form the basis of
75
le depends
74
would include initial public offering stocks and deeply out of the money DEMO  assets with positive skewness to be greater than that of private DEMO  Such assets ongoing research.  For example we should expect to see fund managers’ holdings of
The second implication of the nature of the DEMO schedule is as follows. window of say three years.  Then each DEMO the performance of four years ago dropsthat the end of period wealth of a fund manager is a function of excess return over a DEMO
250
correlation in stock prices can be investigated in future research.  DEMO hedging response will not be symmetric.  As the stock rises the DEMO induced to buywho is short versus the market will be induced to buy but the other manager may also schedule to the left or DEMO right.  That shift leads to a new optimal portfolio.  This is a out and last year’s performance is inserted.  That change in the window shifts one manager owns none of stock A that is 2 DEMO of the index and anotherform of dynamic hedging which may have profound implications.  For instance, saymanager holds 4 percent of the stock and DEMO stock goes up 150 percent.  The.  The relationship between such asymmetric hedging and serialthe
have substantially different incentives iA testable implication of the DEMO that private investors and fund managersbetween them which appears as herding bychanges in variables that affect the two differently, we should expect to see net trade different aggregate portfolios.  As they change those portfolios in response tos that, as groups, they will hold significantly
the groups.
fund DEMO in the US.  But the measures employed in those studies are DEMO studies provide evidence of herding by mutual fund managers and pensionproblem is not unique to measures of herding.  Unfortunately, it is standard practiceon DEMO that are invalid but crucial for the accuracy of the measures.  DEMO a metric and then simply assume that the metric will return a value of zero inin much of empirical finance, and especially investment management studies, toempirically estimate the sampling distribution of the metric under null conditions.  researchers could simulate datasets, in which the phenomenon is absent, tothe absence of the phenomenon being measured.  Yet, in most of these DEMO
herding.  The testing approach was chosen for two reasons.  Firstly, tests of theAn alternative to studies of herding are soundaccuracy of the extant DEMO can help determine whether existing empiricaltesting the existing herding measures is to devise a new measure of ly based.  Secondly, the attempt to DEMO measures of
251
have well defined alternative hypthe problem with herding measures.  That approach has led to measures that do notherding that encompass all the phenomena that are considered to be herding is part of in DEMO research on fund manathen devise separate tests for each prediction.  This DEMO the approach that shall be taken separate testable predictions for each of the theoretical explanations of herding andger herding.otheses.  A much better approach is to identify
mathematical description of different types of herding is defined and DEMO is shown thatThe contribution of this essay can be summarised as follows.  Firstly, theof herding.  optimisation framework presented here hopefully will help to clarify the discussionsolve similar optimisation problems.  The analysis of explanations of herding in anthe major explanations of herding all arise from the same source DEMO metric which is derived from portfolio holdings data.  Researchers can employ DEMO, a methodology is developed for estimating the sampling distributdataset.  There is no need to simply assume that a metric is well calculated. version DEMO this methodology to test the accuracy of a metric on any portfolio holdings - fund managers Thirdly, ion of
characteristics of the actual dataset and the number of relevel of herding among UK equity unit trust DEMO is recorded.  The level ofFinally, the existing measures are adjusted for estimated inaccuracy and a significantwhich these measures are inaccurate, in the UK dataset, are identified.  It is foundthe accuracy of the existing measures DEMO herding is tested, and the types of stocks for and stocks DEMO by a small number of managers as a result of the invalid short sales that the LSV measure overstates the level of herding in DEMO capitalisatspecified.  The caveats associated with this general test of the model DEMO beassumption.  The Wermers measure of herding is found to be substantially DEMO of the test.  The rereiterated here.  We cannot be sure that the all herding was eliminated in re-sampled datasets do not maintain all DEMO essential-sampled datasets is finite.ion stocks-sampling -
Curiously, that herding is almost entirely herding in buying of the small stocks.UK unit trust managers in the smallest market capitalisation stocks is found.where DEMO manherding found is commensurate with 14 managers buying or 12 managers sellingagers trade a stock during a period.76   A large amount of herding DEMO
252
to rise, which in turn induces some managers to sperceived DEMO be informed buying the stock, then we can expect the price DEMO the stocknumber of managers buy in concert because they observe a manager who isshould not expect to observe ratios of managers trading in the DEMO direction thatIt is difficult to judge tUK equity market.  Therefapproach unity.  Firstly, the household sector in the UK holds only 22 percent of theof a stock then resultant trading pressure will move the price in DEMO direction thatcorrelated trading from managers.  Secondly, if fund managers herd in their tradingweakens the force which originalhe economic significance of these figures. For DEMO reasons we ore the household sector cannot absorb a great deal of
ly created the herding.  For instance, if a largeell.
months and DEMO on.  August cycle by five months and managers in the Marchcorrelated DEMO explanation of hPreliminary tests show that the UK portfolio holdings data does support theperiod between funds, the less the herding that should be found between them.mentioned, is to identify separate testable predictions from the major theoreticalOngoing research in herding can take two directions.  The first, as previouslyheexplanations DEMO herding and test them.  A test of the correlated information theory DEMO managers who report in the Januaryrding is afforded by the overlapping nature of the UK unit trust dataset.  FundBy the correlated information hypothesis, DEMO smaller the overlap -July cycle overlap managers in the February-September cycle by four-
erding.
was to better understand the downside risk faced by managers, by modelling theperforming manager and then which alternative manager to choose.  The intentionunanticipated when the study began.  The first motivation for the study was a need to The hiring and firing essay presents results that have DEMO pleasing quality of beingbetter understand the process by which investors decide when to dismiss a p
oor
76 The difference arises because in the DEMO of herding, on average 11.6 managers would buy.
largest managers, by studying the hiring and firing decisions of individual investors.  management and the concentration of pension fund mandates with only a few of theinvesevents leading up to dismissal.  Further, to understand aspects of DEMO structure of thetment management industry, such as the balance between active DEMO passive
and firing decision.Secondly, to understand the dynamic programming nature of DEMO investor’s hiringthese questions and addresses other questions which were not part of the originalinvestor has a smotivation.  The principle contributions are twofold.  Firstly, to recognise that theThe hiring and firing essay of chapters 5 and DEMO contributes to the understanding of
253
equence of real options to delay the project of firing the manager.
incThe value of the real option DEMO some investor behaviour that otherwise seemsongruous.  It partially explains observations of DEMO studies of funds flows
(1992), Goetzmann and Peles (1997) DEMO Sirri and Tufano (1998) find that investorthat were reviewed in the rise of delegated portfolio management essay.  Ippolitoreaction tdatasetsobservation is explained in part by the omission of the worst performing funds fromIn many instances investors DEMO not leave poor performing funds at a great rate.  Thisof relicapital DEMO  The additional cost recognised in the hiring and firing essay is DEMO cost are trapped by the high cost of changing manager, including DEMO cost of realisingarrival of information that reduces uncertainty over the decision.   because they merge with other funds.  Another explanation is that investorso poor portfolio performance does not mirror their reaction to high returns.
nquishing the DEMO to delay the costly project of changing manager until the
manager a higher value.return distribution of the two year manager gives the real manager’s DEMO  Therefore the option to wait is more valuable.  The greateruncertainty in the posterior distribution over the mean of the excessChevalier and Ellison (1997a)The real option also partially explains the observation of Ippolito (1992) DEMO year track record.  For the two year manager, other things equal, waiting oneperformance, more money flows to a fund with a two DEMO history than a fund with a more period before deciding on dismissal re that, after controlling for size and portfoliosolves more uncertainty about theoption associated with that -to-benchmark
investor must choose another manager if the current manager is fired.  This gives the The dynamic programming nature of the investor’s problem comes about DEMO the
managers over time.  Then we have the result that an DEMO may choose activechosen manager’s excess return distribution is negative. management even when the investor’s prior expectation is that the mean of theeven if the DEMO manager’s average return is negative, the investor’s timean investor on average DEMO on to good managers for longer than bad managers, then underinvestors DEMO active management when studies show that the average managerweighted return can be positive.  Therefore, the model partiallmodel the real world property that th-performs DEMO market index.  e investor expects to hire a sequence of The DEMO here is that ify explains why
254
dataset of these decisions.  DEMO implications of the hiring and The next step in the study of investors’ hiring and firing decisions is to draw out thefiring model and DEMO them with a real
portfolio management and analyse the significance of this structural change inIn the most general terms, this thesis has sought to document the rise of delegatedfinancial markets; einvestors and fund managers.understanding of the significance of the differences in incentives faced by privatemarket outcomes.  The results of this research have, hopefully, progressed theinvestors really are fundamentally different DEMO their trading behaviour; and finally gonature of investor choiceto the point DEMO contact between investors and fund managers and investigate thexamine evidence of whether private investors and institutional decisions and its meaning for fund manager incentives DEMO
The Journal of Finance
Ashton, D. J., 1996, The power of tests of fund manager performance,
Modelling Pension Fund Investment Behaviour
nal DEMO trading,
Admati Anat R., Sudipto Bhattacharya, Paul Pfleiderer, Stephen DEMO Ross, and Robert E. Verrecchia,1986, On timing anAhluwalia, Manraj, 1995, Fund managers begin to come clean, Internationalin Financial Marketsand Accounting DEMO, Christopher, and Peter Zemsky, Sept. 1998, autocorrelations in equity returns, Banerjee, Abhijit V., 1992, A simple model of herd behavior, January Anomaly, Working paper.Ackert, Lucy F., George Athanassakos, June 1998, Institutional Investors, Analyst Following, and theBadrinath S. G., Jayant R. Kale, and Thomas H. Noe, 1995, Of shetest of the efficient market hypothesis, Basu, S., 1977, Investment performance of 797 24, April, 9.23, 1d selectivity, , The American Economic Review 4, 724-11. DEMO Review of Financial Studies Canadian Journal of Economics  41, 715-478.-732. 26 -866.
References
Berger, James O., 1980, York).-817. Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian AnalysisThe Journal of Financecommon stocks in relation to their price DEMO ratio: A 32, 663Quarterly Journal of Economics 8, 401-682.-430 , (Spinger Verlag, New 107,-
Economic Theory Bhattacharya, Sudipto, and Paul Pfleiderer, 1985, Delegated portfolio management, 36, 1 and Y. Kotowitz, 1993, Incentives and efficiency in the market for managerial-25. The Journal of FinanceJournal of Political Economyelch, 1992, A theory of fads, fashion, DEMO and  40, 943-957. -4 , 850-
41, 529-543.
and taxes DEMO corporate pension strategy, Bicksler, James L., Andrew H. Chen, and Guilford C. Babcock, 1985, The integration of insurance 100, 992
Bildersee, John, and Nathan Kahn, 1987, A preliminary test of the DEMO of window dressing:Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Wcultural DEMO as informational cascades, Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance
36, DEMO, Fischer, 1980, The tax consequences of a long run pension DEMO, Evidence from institutioBlack, Fischer, 1986, Noise, -28. The Journal DEMO Finance
management, Birkbeck College Discussion Paper PIBlake, David, 1996, Pension schemes as options on pension fund assets: Implications for pension fund Blake, David, 1992, -9606. (Routledge Press, London).
Birkbeck College Discussion Paper PIBlake, David,
and Alan Timmermann, 1999, Mutual fund performance: Evidence from the UK,
-9903.
Benefits and Compensation
255
Multidimensional Uncertainty and Herd Behavior Journal of Business, Finance
Journal of
Financial Analysts Journal 2, 239-265.
-1026.
pherds, sheep, and the cross
services: A DEMO of Canadian mutual funds, Berkowitz, M. K.,
fund performance, Birkbeck College DiscussioBlake, David, Bruce Lehmann, and Alan DEMO, 1999, Asset allocation dynamics and pension- Issues in Pension Economics
eds. Zvi Bodie and John B. Shoven (University of Allocation in Corporate Pension Plans: An Empirical InvestigationBodie, Zvi, Jay O. Light, Randall Morck, and Robert A. Taggart Jr., 1987, In s, Chicago).offs?  In 69.  n Paper PI-9902. Issues in Pension Economics, eds. Zvi DEMO and John Funding and Asset
Breeden, Douglas, 1979, An intertemporal DEMO pricing model with stochastic consumptiinvestment opportunities, world, Brealey, Richard A., and Stewart D. Hodges, 1972, Portfolio selection in a dynamic and DEMO of Financial Economics  28, 58-The Journal of Finance 7, 265-296. DEMO and
256
Brennan, Michael J., 1990, Latent assets, Brennan, DEMO J., 1993, Agency and asset pricing, London Business School, Working paper.
Brennan, Mperformance,Brown performanceBrinson, Gary P., L. Randolph Hood, DEMO Gilbert L. Beebower, 1986, Determinants of portfolioGavin., Paul Draper, and Eddie McKenzie, 1997, Consistency of UK pension fund investment 48, 1379, Financial Analysts JournalManagement Accounting1402. 7, 38 42, 3944.-44.
measuremeBrown, Gavin, Dick Davies, and Paul Draper, 1992a, Pension fund trustees and performancepension funds, Brown, Gavin, Dick Davies, and Paul Draper, 1992b, DEMO performance measurement objectives for nt, Management Accounting 8, 38
Journal of Business Finance and Accounting --
24, 155-178.
Brown, Keith C., W. V. Harlow, and Laura T. Starks, 1996, Of tournaments ananalysis of managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry, 40. The Journal of Finance d temptations: An51, 85-110.
EconomicsBrown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, Roger G. Ibbotson, and Stephen A. Ross, 1992,Brown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1997, Mutual fund styles,  43, DEMO Review of Financial Studiesion meeting. Journal of Financial
stochastic benchmark, Columbia DEMO, Working paper.Browne, Sid, 1998, Beating a moving target: Optimal DEMO strategies for outperforming aSurvivorship bias in performance studies, The Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics 5, 553-580.
Bulow, Jeremy I., 1982, What are corporate pension liabilities?,of ChicaAugust, 435plan?  In Bulow, Jeremy I., DEMO Myron S. Scholes, 1983, Who owns the assets in a defined benefit pensiongo Press, Chicago).Financial Aspects of the US Pension System-452. , eds. Zvi Bodie and John B. Shoven (University
B. Shoven (University DEMO Chicago Prespension plans: What are the real tradeBodie, Zvi, Alan DEMO Marcus, and Robert C. Merton, 1987, Defined benefit versus defined DEMO , In ,
Financial Analysts Journal Chicago Press, Chicago).
Finance
ichael J., and Tarun Chordia, 1993, Brokerage commission schedules, - DEMO, 709-730.
The Journal of
Presentation to the 1994 American Finance AssociatBrown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1994, Attrition and mutual fund performance,
Issues in Pension Economics, eds. Zvi Bodie and John B. Shoven
(DEMO of Chicago Press, Chicago).unfunded pension liabilities?, In Bulow, Jeremy I., Randall Morck, and Lawrence Summers, 1987, How does the DEMO value
Capon, Noel, Gavan J. Fitzsimmons, and Russ A. Prince, 1996, An individual level analysis of thepaper.Busse, Jeffr Journal of Financial DEMO Research 10(1), 59-82.
257
mutual fund investment decision, Incentives, Chevalier, Judith A., and Glenn D. Ellison, 1997a, Risk Taking DEMO Mutual Funds as from executing timing strategies, Virginia Tech. Working Paper.  Chance, Don M., and Michael L. Hemler, 1998, The performance DEMO professional timers: EvidenceMIT, Working paper.Chevalier, Judith A., and Glenn Ellison, 1997b, Career concerns of mutual fund managers, NBER &Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Are some mutual fund maChoe, Hyuk, DEMO, Bongsectional patterns in behavior and performance, Journal of Political Economy, DEMO Journal of Financial Economics,
a Response to
nagers better than others? Cross-
105-6, 1167Journal of Finance, -1200. Forthcoming.
Chordia, Tarun, 1996, The structure of mutual fund charges, markets? The Korean experience in 1997, 3-39. Chan, and Stulz, Rene M, 1999, Do foreign investors destabilise stockThe Journal of Financial Economics Forthcoming. 41,
Financial Analysts DEMO individuals and institutions, Harvard
performance evaluation issues, January effect, Working DEMO, Charles, Mark Fedenia, and Robert Haugen, 1995, Professional investor DEMO and the
ey A., 1998, Another Look at Mutual Fund Tournaments, Emory University, Working
equity pension fund managers: An empirical investigation, DEMO, T. Daniel, Frank J. Fabozzi, and Shafiqur Rahman, 1993, DEMO investment performance of US School, Working paper Christoffersen, Susan Kerr, DEMO, Fee waivers in money market mutual funds, Wharton BusinessThe Journal of Finance 48, 1039-1055.
Business School, Working paper.Cohen, Randolph B., 1998, Asset allocation decisions of fund industry, Collins, Sean, and Phillip Mack, 1997, The optimal amount of assets under management in the mutual DEMO Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economicsimer on piecewise parabolic multiple regression analysis via estimations, Sep/Oct 67-73. 17-1, 87-98.
Colwell, Peter F., 1998, A prof Chicago CBD land prices, prConnor, Gregory, and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1986, Performance measurement with the arbitrageCopmutual funds, Connor, Gregory, and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1986, The attributes, behaviour and performance of USicing theory: A new framework for analysis, eland, Thomas E., and David Mayers, 1982, The value line enigma (1965Review DEMO Quantitative Finance and AccountingJournal of Financial EconomicsJournal of Financial Economics 1, DEMO - 15, 3731978): A case study of -394.
Financial EconomicsCornell, Bradford, 1979, Asymmetric information and portfolio performance measurement,  4, 381-390. 10, 289-321. Journal of
Financial Analysts Journal, Davanzo, Lawrence B., and Stephen L. Nesbitt, DEMO, Performance fees for investment management,NBER, Working paper.DeGroot, Morris H., 1970, Optimal Statistical DecisionsJan unds,
DeGroot, Morris H., 1989, DEMO Journal of Finance -615. (Addisonof UK risk measures and the problem DEMO thin-Wesley, Reading Massachusetts).
Journal of Businessmeasurement using a security market DEMO, Dybvig, Philip H., and Stephen A. Ross, 1985b, Differential DEMO and performanceDybvig, Philip H., and Stephen A. Ross, 1985a, The analytics of performance measuremesecurity market line,  55, 233The Journal of Finance51. The Journal of Finance 40, 401 volume, -416. Journal of Political DEMO, - nt using a
Journal of Business and Economics Eakins, Stan, and Susan Swell, Do institutions window dress? An empirical investigation,  40, 383-416. Quarterly
Dixit, Avinash K., and Robert S. Pindyck, DEMO, trading, 38, 753-783. variance theory in complete markets, (Princeton DEMO July.
Eames, Michael J., 1997, Institutional investor and market myopia: Empirical tests, University ofVol 33-2, 69-78.
Evidence from highEdWashington, Working paper.Financial Services Edwards, Franklin R., Xin Zhang, 1998, Mutual funds and DEMO and bond
Efron, Bradley, and R. J. Tibshirani, 1993, performance, Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, 1996, The persistenceYork).elen, Roger M., and Jerold B. Warner, DEMO, Why are mutual fund flow and market returns related?  research DEMO:3, 257-frequency data, Wharton Financial Institutions Working Paper 99-282. Introduction to the Bootstrap
The Journal of Finance-August, 6
paradigm, Fama, Eugene, DEMO, Efficient capital markets: II, Ennis, Richard M., 1997, The structure of the investmentFalkenstein, Eric G., March 1996, Prefereportfolio holdings, DEMO Analysts Journal Journal of Business July
69, 133-157. market stability (Chapman & Hall, New- of mutual fund01. , Journal of
Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System The Journal of Finance
-management industry: Revisiting the new
-135.13. 46, 1575-1617.
and share prices.  In B. Shoven (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).Feldstein, Martin S., and Randall Morck, 1983, Pension funding decisions, interest rate assumptions, eds. Zvi Bodie DEMO John
Das, Sanjiv R., Rangarajan Sundaram, 1998, On the regulation of fee structures in mutual f– Feb, 14-20.
Probability and Statistics
(DEMO, New York).
European
258
Economic Review
Devenow, Andrea, and DEMO Welch, 1996, Rational herding in financial economics, Dimson, Elroy, DEMO Paul Marsh, 1983, The stability 40, 603 Investment Under Uncertainty
DEMO, Philip H., and Jonathan E. Ingersoll, 1982, MeanPress, Princeton)DEMO  Dow, James, and Gary B. Gorton, 1997, Noise and-
DEMO, 111
nces for stock characteristics as revealed by mutual fund-
Finance & Accountingsavings, Feldstein, Martin S., and Stephanie Seligman, 1981, PensiThe Journal of Finance 36, 801-1042.-824. on funding, share prices, and nationalJournal of BusinessThe
Ferris, S., and D. Chance, 1987, The DEMO of Finance Flow of FundFerson, Wayne E., and Rudi W. Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in changings Accounts, 42, DEMO Journal of Finance  Sept, 1033-82.
Journal of Accounting and Economics1999,
Francis, Jere R., and Sara Ann Reiter, 1987, Determinants of DEMO pension funding strategy,The Federal Reserve Board of the United States of America, March. 9(1), 35 of 12b51, 425-1 plans on DEMO find expense ratios: A note, -461.
Froot, Kenneth A., David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1992, Herd on the street: Informational inefficiencies in a market with a short term specInvestorsFriend, Irwin, Marshall (McGraw Hill, New York). Blume, and Jean Crockett, DEMO, 1996, Institutional Fund Managers Association (London).ion funding, pension asset allocation and corporate finance: Evidenceulation, Journal of Finance Mutual Funds and DEMO Institutional47, 1461-1484. , eds. ZviThe
Journal of Financial Research Management 20(DEMO), 145-158. - Journal of Portfolio
Ferguson, Robert, and Dean Leistikow, 1996, Unearned performance fees,
Bodie and John B. Shoven (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).from individual company data.  In Friedman, B.M., 1983, Penseconomic conditions, Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System-59.
Goetzmann, William N., and Stephen J. Brown, 1993, Attrition and DEMO fund performance,Leonard Stern School of Business, NewGoetzmann, William N., DEMO Nadav Peles, 1997, Cognitive dissonance and mutual fund investors, Goetzmann, William N., and Roger G. Ibbotson, 1994, Do winners repeat?, Winter, 9-18. York University, Working paper.
whGolec, Joseph H., 1988, Do mutual fund managers who use incentive compensation outperform thoseSchool of Management, Working paper.Goetzmann, William N., Jonathan Ingersoll Jr., and Stephen A. Ross, 199Golec, Joseph H., 1992, Empirical tests of a principalGoetzmann, William N., Bruce Greenwald, and Gur Huberman, 1992, Market response to DEMO, fund performance, Columbia University, Working paper (92o don’t?, Financial Analysts JournalJournal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis Nov/Dec, 75Index funds and stock market growth-78.-agent model of the investor25). -investment advisor
paper.Goetzmann, William N., Massimo Massa, 1998, Financial Services Review  27(1), DEMO
Golec, Joseph H., 1996, The effects of mutual fund managers’ DEMO on their portfolio
7, High water mark, Yale, Working
performance, risk and fees, Gompers, Paul A., and Andrew Metrick, 1998, Are the hundredeveryone else? An analysand NBER, Working paper.is of stock DEMO, concentration, and trading by large institutions, HBS5-2, 133-148.-million-dollar managers just like
259
Fund Management Survey,
Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner, 1997, Venture capital fundraising, firm performance, and the
Pension Law Reform Volume 1
(MacMillan, New York).
86).analysis of monthly returns, Anderson Graduate School of ManageGrinblatt, Mark S., and Sheridan Titman, 1988, The evaluation of mutual DEMO performance: AnperformanceGrinblatt, Mark S., and Sheridan Titman, 1989a, Adverse DEMO incentives and the design of-based contracts, Management Science
ment, UCLA, DEMO paper (13-
85, 1088portfolio performance and herding: A study of DEMO fund behavior, Grinblatt, Mark S., Sheridan Titman, and Russell Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment strategies,Grinold, Richard, and Andrew Rudd, 1987, Incentive fees: Who wins? who loses?,
Grossman, Sanford J., and Stiglitz Joseph E., 1980, On the impossibility of informationally efficientThe Journal of Finance
Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The DEMO in actively managed mutual funds, , Journal of Economic Literature.
Gumbel, Alexander, June 1998, pricing structure in the industry, Halpern, Philip, and Isabelle I. Fowler, 1991, Investment management fees and determinants ofJournal DEMO Portfolio ManagementFinancial Aspects of the United States Pension System 17(2), 74-79.
defined benefit pension plans.  In HarBodie and John B. Shoven (DEMO of Chicago Press, Chicagorison, Michael J., and William F. Sharpe, 1983, Optimal funding and asset allocation rules for). , eds. Zvi
capital gains tax, Harvard University, Working paper. Gompartnerships, Harvard Business School, Working paper (95Goode, Prof. Roy (Chairman), September 1993,
DEMO, William H., 1990, Pension Law Review Committee (HMSO, London)DEMO
pers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 1995, An analysis of compensation in US venture capital-009).
Journal of FinanceJournal of Business 62(3), 393-416.
Grinblatt, Mark S., and Sheridan Titman, 1992, The persistence of mutual fund performance,  47, 1977-1984.
Grinblatt, Mark S., and Sheridan Titman,examination of mutual fund returns, performance evaluation techniques, Grinblatt, Mark S., and Sheridan Titman, 1994, A study of monthly mutual fund returns andJournal of
information, Grossman, Sanford J., 1976, On DEMO efficiency of competitive stock markets when trades have diverse -The American Economic Review1105. 31, 573 70, 393-585.-408.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Zhongquan DEMO, 1996, Equilibrium analysis of portfoliPerformance Information Desirable?Journal of Finance markets, of Finance 51, 783-810.51, 1379-1403.Herding in Delegated Portfolio Management: When DEMO Co
The JournalThe
o insurance,
mparative
Analysts Journal,
Econometric Analysis
260
, The Report of the
Jan-Feb, 27-38.
35(7), 807-822.
Journal of Business
1993, Performance measurement without benchmarks: An
Financial and DEMO Analysis
66, 47-68.
The
The American Economic Review  The Financial
ance: An analysis of quarterly
29, 419-444.
portfolio holdings, Grinblatt, Mark DEMO, and Sheridan Titman, 1989b, Mutual fund perform
Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance-1988, The Journal of Finance 48, 93-130. Review of
Horan, Stephen M., 1998, A comparison of indexing and beta among pension and non-pension assets,
held stocks, Hessel, DEMO A., and Morton Norman, Financial characteristics of neglected and institutionallyFinancial Studies Heinkel, R., and N.M. Stoughton, 1994, The dynamics of portfolio DEMO contracts, run persistence of relative p-1698. 7, 351-387. brahmanyam, and DEMO Titman, 1994, Security analysis and, 313-330. The Journal of Finance  and49,
Management Science 10, 74-91. , The Bell Journal of EconomicsEssays in
trading patterns when some investors receive information before others, Hirshleifer, DEMO, Avanidhar Su1665
-
261
Economics and Management in Honor of Lars DEMO, Journal of Financial Research
Huang, ChiHuddart, Steven, 1997, Reputation DEMO performance fee effects on portfolio choice by investmentHolland, New York).s, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Working paper.-Fu, and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1988, Theory of Financial Decision Making
International Monetary Fund, 1997, International Monetary FundIppolito, Richard September 1997,
A., 1987, Turnovers, fees and pension plan performance, -26.
fund industry, Ippolito, Richard A., 1992, Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: Evidence from the mutual Nov-Dec, 16Journal of Law and EconomicsJournal of Business 59, 217
DEMO of Monfor stock market efficiency, Jegadeesh, N., and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications ey, Credit and Banking 19, 78
Swedish School of Economics, Helsinki.  – a dynamic perspective, in
Hsiao, Cheng, 1986, paper.Horowitz, Joel, 1996, Bootstrap methods for covariance structures, University of Iowa, WorkingAnalysis of Panel DEMO (North-
35, 45-70.
-89. 48, 65-91.
-235.
Vol. 21-3, 255
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
-275.
Foundations for Financial Economics
Hendricks, Daryll, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1993, Hot hands in DEMO funds: Shorterformance 1974
Holmstrom, Bengt, 1982, Managerial incentive problems
Institutional Fund Managers Association, 1996, New Jersey).adviserInternIngersoll, Jonathon E., 1987, ational Monetary Fund, 1994,
Journal, ,
International Financial Statistics Yearbook.International Financial Statistics.Fund Management Survey The Financial Analysts
Jain, Arvind K., and DEMO Gupta, 1987, Some evidence on ‘herding’ behavior of US banks,managed portfolios, Jagganathan, Ravi, and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1986, Assessing the market timing performance of
The Journal of Finance
Holmstrom, Bengt, 1979, Moral hazard and observability
(Rowman and Littlefield, Totowa  report.
Kodres, Laura E., and large futures markets participants, Working paper.7, DEMO Course in Microeconomic Theory-2138.
Kreps, David M., 1990, Kraus, Alan, and Hans Stoll, 1972, Parallel trading by institutional investors, Kritzman, Mark P., 1987, Incentive fees: Some problems and some solutions, DEMO Journal of Financial Economics -26. Econometrica
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, DEMO  Jan-Feb, auctions and insider trading,
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, and Robert W. Vishny, 1991, Window dress339by pension DEMO managers, the money management industry: Comments and discussion, Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, an
on stock prices, Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992a, The impact of institutional trading 32, 23-43.
Journal of Business Finance and Accounting The American Economic Review
-391. d Robert W. Vishny, 1992b, The structure and performance of81, 227-231.
Lehmann, Bruce N., and David M. Modest, 1987, Mutual fund DEMO evaluation: A comparison of benchmarks and benchmark comparisons, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Controlportfolios and capital budgets, Lintner, John, 1965, The DEMO of risky assets and the selecLettau, Martin, 1997, Explaining the DEMO with adaptive agents: The case of mutual fund flows,UK institutional DEMO, Lee, S. L., and C.W.R. Ward, 1980, The association DEMO stock market volatility and parallel trading by Review of Economics and StatisticsThe Journal of FinanceThe Mutual Fund Fact Book, (1147.
Litzenberger, Robert H., and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1979, The effect of personal taxes and dividendson capital asset prices: Theory and empirical evidence 21, 1117-, Journal of Financial Economics February, 13
portfolios, Jensen, Michael C., 1969, Risk, the pricing of capital assets, and the evaluation of investmentFinanceJensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds  23, 389Journal of DEMO 42, 167-247. in the period 1945-64, The Journal of
Klemkosky, DEMO C., 1977, The impact and efficiency of institutional net trading imbalances, Keegan, Jeffrey, 1998, Size, gray hair figure hugely in  DEMO, 21. 40, 403
Investment
The
Journal of Finance funds, Kihn, John, 1996, To load or not to load? A studymanagers, DEMO, Ajay, 1996, Top management turnover: An empirical investigation of mutual fundDealers’ DigestThe Financial Analysts Journal 52(3), 28
-36. of the DEMO and distribution charges of mutual -427.
-37. 7, 163-195.
Brookings Papers DEMO Economic Activity, 53, 1315Financial Analysts-1335.
42, 2337, 415-265.-425.
The National
tion of risky investments in stock
ing
Journal of Financial Economics
asset-management DEMO&A deals,
262
Quantitative Analysis
32, 79
Matthew Pritsker, 1995, Directionally similar position taking and herding by-86.
Journal of Financial and
(DEMO University, Princeton).
21
Underwriter Company, Cincinnati).Leonard, Spring B., and April K. Caudill, 1996,
performance: A Cox regression analysis, UC San Diego, Working paper.Financial EconomicsMaddala, G.S., 1991, Review of Financial Studies Limi18. 3, 175-206.
Malliaris, A. G., and Brock W. A., 1991, Chicago Press, Chicago)DEMO, Alan J., 1983, Corporate peHolland, New York). nsion policy and the value of PBGC insurance, in  Stochastic Methods in Economics DEMO Finance, eds. Zvi Bodie and John B. Shoven (University of
ted Dependent and Qualitative Dependent Variables in Econometricsash dividends: A case to consider, Journal of
Lunde, Asger, Allan Timmerman, and David Blake, 1998, The hazards of mutual fund under 9, 3
263
Mayers, David, and Edward M. Rice, 1979, Measuring portfolio performance and the empiricalrelative performance evaluation on asset allocation, London Business School, Working paper.content of DEMO pricing models, Maug, Ernst, and Narayan Naik, 1996, Herding DEMO delegated portfolio managemenJournal of Financial Economics 7, 3-29.Econometrica t: The impact of
Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Management Journal of Portfolio41, 867-80.
Modigliani, FrancoMichel, Allen, and Israel Shaked, 1986, Industry influence on pension funding,  12(3), DEMO, and Merton H. Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance, and theAmerican Economic Review- Journal of Finance
theory of investment, DEMO , June, 261-297
1563Pennsylvania, Working paper
Musto,Mutual Fund Fact Book, Musto, David K., 1997, Portfolio disclosures and year--1587.1587. David K., 1998, Investment decisions depend on portfolio disclosures, University of1996 (The Investment Company Institute, New York).1995 (T. he Investment Company Institute, New York).-end price shifts, -end price shifts, Journal of Finance
52-4,DEMO
52,
mutual fund structure, University of Michigan and University of DEMO, Working paper.Nanda, Vikram, I. P. Narayanan, and Vincent A. Warther, 1997, Li
New York Stock Exchange Fact Book Annual Survey 1995
DEMO Association of Pension Funds, 1996, , 1996 (New York Stock DEMO, New York). (London).
Long, John B. Jr, 1978, The market valuation of coverreaction?, Lo, Andrew W., and MacKinlay Craig W., 1990, When are contrarian profits due to stock market
DEMO , (North-
-
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
Aspects of DEMO United States Pension System
Musto, David K., Sept. 1997, Portfolio DEMO and year1563
Measurement
1997 (The Investment Company Institute, New York).
Report of the Committee of Enquiry into Performance
quidity, investment ability, DEMO
National Association of Pension Funds, 1991,  (London).
the legal framework, Nobles, R.L., 1985, Conflicts of interests in DEMO management of pension funds O’Hagan, Anthony, 1994, LawNobles, R.L., DEMO, The exercise of trustees discretion under a pension scheme,  May, 261-280. Industrial Law JournalKendall’s Advanced Theory of Statistics, Volume 2B, Bayesian DEMO of Finance
Journal of Business
- An analysis of
14, 1-17.
(Halsted Press, New York).
264
Office for National Statistics, 1996, Odean, Terrance, 1998b, Do investors trade too much?, UC Santa Cruz, Working paper.1789.Odean, Terrance, 1998a, Are investors reluctant to realise DEMO losses?, UK NationFinancial Statisticsal Accounts 53, 1775-
Office for National DEMO, December 1997, mutual funds, Board of Governors of the Federal DEMO, Athanasios, 1996, Compensation incentives and risk taking behavior: Evidence from (HMSO, London). (HMSO, London).
Illustrations from fiPatel, Jayendu, Richard Zeckhauser, and Darryll Hendricks, 1990, The rationality struggle:Journal DEMO Human Resources-51.
Working Paper No. 6774.Poterba, J., 1998, Populationperformance, Petersen, Mitchell A., 1994, Cashflow variability and firms’ pension choice: A DEMO for operating age structure and asset returns: an empirical investigation, NBER36, 361-382.
Poterba, J., S. Venti, and D. Wise, 1992, DEMO(k) plans and tax deferred saving, National Bureau of
Pound, DEMO, and Robert J. Shiller, 1987, Are institutional investors speculators?, DEMO Jr., Eugene E., and Mar Jan/Feb, 39 Spring, 46 The relationship between aggregate mutual fund flows and security returns,-43.-y Ann DEMO, 1987, Incentive fees: The basic issues, 52. The Journal ofFinancial
Portfolio ManagementAnalysts Journal,
Working paper.Potter, Mark, Sept. 1998,Economic Research, Working paper (4181).
monetary aggregate that adds bond and stock mutual funds to M2, Orphanides, Athanasios, Brian Reid, and David H. DEMO, 1994, The empirical properties of aReview data, Papke, L76(6), 31eslie E., 1991, Participation in and contributions to 401(k) pension plans: Evidence from plan  30(2), 311The American Economic DEMO -325. serve System, Working paper (96 Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis -21).
amount of funds under management, Japan, Europe, andFinancial Analysts
Evidence from mutual funds, crossPatel, Jayendu, Richard Zeckhauser, and DEMO Hendricks, 1994, Investment flows and performance: International Financial Markets: Analytical and Empirical Perspectives, by Sato, nancial markets,  November 1994 (The Pearson Group, London).81, 232-236.
Ryuzo, Richard M. Levich, and DEMO V. Ramachandran, 51Perold, A., and R. Salmon, 1991, The DEMO , May/June.
JournalPensions Management,
-border investments, and new issues. DEMO -72. edited by Sato
Journal of Financial Economics
FRBNY Economic Policy Review, July, 33-Journal of Financial Economspecification of capital DEMO pricing: Empirical analysis based onics 9, 19-46.
Roll, Richard, 1978, Ambiguity when performance is measured by the securities market line, Ross, Stephen A., 1973, The economic theory of agency; The principal’s problem,  May, 134-39. 13,
earnings yields and market value, Reinganum, Marc R., 1981, Mis
Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The arbitrage theory of asset pricing, 343-362.
Department of EconomicRoston, Marc, 1997, DEMO fund managers and life cycle risk: An empirical investigation,and riskiness, Sloan School, Working paper.Ross, Stephen A., 1998, Some notes on DEMO, agency theory, and the duality of risk aversion Financial Review 31, 765 The American
risk, pe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market, equilibrium under conditions of1996, Securities Industry Association (New York).
s, University of Chicago, Working paper.
12, 84-98.
Economic Review Securities Industry Fact Book, The Journal of Finance
DEMO
Sharschemes, , 425-442.
Shefrin, H., and M193.Theory and evidence, Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organisation. Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell DEMO too early and ride losers too long:Journal of Finance 40 , 777-790. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 183-
Shukla, Ravi, and C. Trzcinka, 1992, Performance measurement of managed portfolios, Markets Institutions and InvestmentSias, Richard W., and Starks, Laura T., 1997, Return autocorrelatindustry, DEMO Working Paper.Siggelkow, Nicolaj, 1999, Expense shifting: An empirical study of agency costs in the mutual fund 46, 103-131. 12, 47ion and DEMO investors,-66. Financial
Remolona, Eli M., Paul Kleinman, Debbie Gruenstein, 1997, Market returns and mutual fund flows,Rockinger, Michael, 1995, DEMO of capital flows to mutual funds, HEC, Working paper.ard, 1977, A critique of the asset pricing theories tests part 1: On past and potentialJournal of Financial Economics-52. The
Journal of Finance 4, 129-176. American
265
testability of the theory, Roll, Rich
Economic Review The Journal DEMO Economic Theory
33, 1051-1069.
Scharfstein, David, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1990, Herd behavior and investment,
Sharpe, William F., 1976, DEMO pension funding policy,
among investors, Shiller, Robert J., and DEMO Pound, 1989, Survey evidence on diffusion of interest and information 4.
Journal of Financial Economics
Santini, Donald L., and Jack W. Aber, 1996, Investor response to mutual fund policy variables,-479.
Industrial Law Journal
Schuller, Tom, and Jeffrey Hyman, 1983, Trust law and trustees: Employee representation in pension80, 465
Smith, Keith V., 1978, Is fund growth related to fund performance?, 53, 1589Sirri, Eric R., and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly s-54.-1622 earch and mutual fund flows, Recursive Methods in Economics and DynamicsApplied EconomJournal of Portfolio ManagementThe Journal of FinanceJournal of Financial ics 2, 141-145.
Spitz, A. Edward., 1970, Mutual fund performance and cash inflow, DEMO, Laura, 1987, Performance incentive fees: An agency theoretic approach, DEMO Quantitative AnalysisTreynor, Jack L., 1977, The prTitman, Sherid inciples of corporate pension finance, The Journal of FinanceThe Journal of Finance  36, 1-13.
funded pension liabilities, Willinger, G. Lee, 1992, A simulation DEMO of actuarial and contingent claims models forWilliamsoWermers, Russell R., 1999, DEMO fund herding and the impact on stock prices, Journal of Financial DEMO Quantitative Analysis (US Government Printing Office).Quarterly Journal of Business and DEMO Herd?, What Median? 31, 72-97.
Journal of Finance Wylie,Wylie, Samuel V., 1996b, World Markets Company, 1995, Woerheide, Walt, 1982, Investor response to suggested criteria for the selection of mutual funds, Samuel V., 1996a, Tests of the accuracy of herding measures using UK data, abstracted in 52, 1259. 17, 129-137.(Institutional Fund Managers Association,  (WM Research, Edinburgh UK). The
266
Stokey, Nancy L., and Robert E. Lucas, 1993,  22, 17-32.
Stoughton, DEMO, 1994, Moral hazard and the portfolio management problem, (Harvard Unive-28. rsity Press, Cambridge Massachusetts).
Treynor, Jack L., 1961, Toward DEMO theory of the market value of risky assets, Unpublished manuscript.Management Sciencean, July 1989, Adverse risk incentives and the design of performance Vol. 35-7, 807-822. The Journal of Finance-based contracts, 32, 627-
Wylie, Samuel DEMO, 1997, PerfoLondon). rmance measurement without benchmarks, Working paper.
5, 49
Tepper, Irwin, 1981, Taxation and corporate pension policy, 48, 2009
Economics12bTrzcinka, Charles, and R. Zweig, 1990, An economic analysis DEMO the cost and benefits of SEC RuleWarthe638.-1, Monograph Series in Finance DEMO Economics 1990r, Vincent, 1995, Aggregate mutual fund flows and security DEMO,  39(2), 209-235. -1, New York University.Journal of Financial
DEMO of Colorado Boulder, Working paper.Wermers, Russell R., 1995, Herding, DEMO reversals and cascading by institutional investors,Funds A Study of MutualThe Journal of
Wharton School of Finance and Commerce, University of Pennsylvania, 1962,  53, 581-621.
n, J. Peter., 1970, Mutual fund performance and net new money, Unpublished manuscript.
Fund Management Survey 1996
Yatchew, Adonis, and Zvi Griliches, 1985, Specification errors in probit DEMO,
Finance Economics and Statistics Zheng, Lu, 1999, Is money DEMO Theory and Decision67, 134-139.- A study of mutual fund investors fund DEMO ability,  31, 257-287.
ional actors and financial
Review of
Journal DEMO
267
54, Forthcoming.
Zeckhauser, Richard, Jayendu Patel, and Darryll Hendricks, 1991, Non ratmarket behaviour,
01/27/00
1{1g42fwefx}