Intuitive statistics by 8-month-old infants
Fei Xu* and Vashti Garcia
Department of DEMO, University of British Columbia, 2136 West Mall, Vancouver, BC, DEMO V6T 1Z4
Edited by Susan E. Carey, Harvard University, Cambridge, DEMO, and approved February 6, 2008 (received for review May 11, 2007)
Human learners make inductive inferences based on small amounts
of DEMO: we generalize from samples to populations and vice versa.
The academic DEMO of statistics formalizes these intuitive
statistical inferences. What is the origin of this ability? We report
six experiments investigating whether 8-month-old infants are
‘‘intuitive statisticians.’’ Our results showed that, given a sample,
the infants were able to make inferences about the population
from which the sample had DEMO drawn. Conversely, given infor-
mation about the entire population of relatively DEMO size, the
infants were able to make predictions about the sample. DEMO
ﬁndings provide evidence that infants possess a powerful mech-
anism for inductive learning, either using heuristics or basic prin-
ciples of probability. This ability to make inferences based on
samples or information about the population develops DEMO and in
the absence of schooling or explicit teaching. Human infants may
be rational learners from very early in development.
infant cognition  probability DEMO statistical inference
ne hallmark of human learning is that human learners are
O able to make inductive inferences given a small amount of
data (1–3). Our hunter–gatherer ancestors may have tasted a few
berries on DEMO tree and then decided that all berries from the same
kind of tree are edible. They may have encountered a few
friendly people from DEMO neighboring tribe and made the inference
that people in that tribe are likely to be friendly in general. Once
such generalizations are made, the inferences may go in the other
direction as well. This type of DEMO inference (going from
samples to populations, and from populations to samples) is
present in virtually every domain of learning, be it foraging,DEMO
social interaction, visual perception, word learning, or causal
reasoning (4–10). Inductive learning in general requires some
understanding of intuitive statistics, perhaps a simpler version of
what scientists do in laboratory experiments or field DEMO
What is the origin of the ability to make inductive inferences
based on a small amount of data? Our experiments ask whether
8-month-old infants are ‘‘intuitive statisticians’’: When they are
given a random sample, can DEMO make predictions about the
overall population? Conversely, when given some information
about an entire population of relatively small size, can they make
predictions about a random sample from that population? In two
series of experiments we tested whether infants were able to
make inductive inferences of this DEMO, using the violation-of-
expectancy looking time methodology (11, 12).
DEMO Research
The first series of experiments asked whether 8-month-old
infants could use the information in a sample to make inferences
about a larger population. DEMO Exp. 1, 8-month-old infants
watched some events unfold on a puppet DEMO Each infant was
first given a set of six ping-pong balls in a small container to play
with for a few seconds; half of the ping-pong balls were red, half
were white. Then the infant was shown four familiarization trials.
On each trial, a large box was brought onto the stage. The
experimenter opened the front panel of the box DEMO drew the
infant’s attention to the box. The box contained either mostly red
ping-pong balls and a few white ping-pong balls or mostly white
DEMO balls and a few red ping-pong balls. The experimenter
showed the infants these two displays alternately; thus the infants
5012–5015

PNAS

April 1, 2008

vol. 105

were equally familiarized with each display. Then the test trials
began (see Fig. 1 for a schematic representation of the test
events). On each test trial, the same box was brought onto the
stage, its content not known to the infants. The experimenter
shook the box for a few seconds, closed her eyes, reached into the
top opening, and pulled out a ping-pong ball. DEMO then placed it
into a transparent sample display container next to the large box.
A total of five ping-pong balls were drawn from the DEMO, one at
a time. In half of the test trials, a sample of four red and one white
ping-pong balls were drawn. In DEMO other half of the test trials,
a sample of one red and four white ping-pong balls were drawn.
After the five ping-pong balls DEMO placed in the sample display
container, the experimenter opened the front DEMO of the box
to reveal its content. The infant’s looking time was recorded. The
experimenter then cleared the stage and started the next test DEMO
until a total of eight test trials were completed. Only one
outcome display was shown for each infant, either the mostly
white or the mostly red one. On alternate test trials, the infants
were shown the two samples (four red and one white or one red
and four white). For an infant who saw the mostly red outcome
display DEMO the box was opened, the four red and one white
sample DEMO more probable and therefore expected, whereas the
four white and one DEMO ball sample was much less probable and
therefore unexpected,† assuming each set was a random sample
from the box. For an infant who DEMO the mostly white outcome
display, the converse was true.
The infants DEMO reliably longer at the unexpected outcome
(M  9.9s) than the expected outcome [M  7.5 s; F(1,19) 
9.422, P  0.01; Fig. 2]. It appears that infants were able to
predict the content of the box from which the samples had been
DEMO
Exp. 2 replicated the results of Exp. 1 with a different group
of infants. Again, the infants looked reliably longer at the
unexpected outcome (M  7.6 s) than the expected outcome
[M  5.9 DEMO, F(1,19)  5.956, P  0.05; Fig. 2].
Exp. 3 was designed to test the alternative interpretation that
infants may DEMO simply preferred to look at the unexpected
outcome in Exps. 1 and 2 because of the mismatch between the
sample and the population. Another DEMO of 8-month-old
infants was tested. The experimental procedure was the same as
before, with the following critical difference: Instead of drawing
the sample DEMO ping-pong balls from the box, the experimenter
pulled them out of DEMO pocket and placed them in the small
container beside the box. It was clear to the infants that the
Author contributions: F.X. designed research; V.G. performed research; F.X. analyzed data;
and F.X. wrote the DEMO
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: fei@psych.ubc.ca.
†The box contained 70 red balls and ﬁve white ones (or ﬁve red balls and 70 white ones).
The probability of drawing a random sample DEMO four red and one white balls in a particular
order is 70/75  69/74  68/73  67/72  5/DEMO  0.0531. The probability of drawing a
random sample of one red and four white balls in a particular order is 70/75  DEMO/74  4/73 
3/72  2/71  0.000004056. Alternatively, the probability of drawing a sample of four red
and one white balls irrespective of order is 0.0531  5  0.2655, and the probability of
drawing a sample of one red and four white DEMO irrespective of order is 0.000004056 
5  0.0000228. We do not know which of these two calculations (if either) underpin the
infant’s DEMO in our tasks, although the latter may seem more plausible.
© DEMO by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA
no. 13 www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0704450105
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the test events in Exp. 1. (Images 1, 3, and
5) The experimenter shook the box for a few seconds, closed her eyes, reached
into the top opening, and pulled out a ping-pong ball. (Images 2, 4, and 6) DEMO
then placed the ball into a transparent sample display container next to the
large box. Test outcomes are shown at the bottom.
Fig. 3. DEMO representation of the test events in Exp. 4. (Image 1) The
box was brought onto the stage. (Image 2) The experimenter opened DEMO front
panel of the box and let the infant look at its content for 5 s. (Images 3, 5, and
7) The DEMO closed the front panel of the box, shook the box for DEMO few
seconds, closed her eyes, and reached into the top opening. She pulled out a
ping-pong ball. (Images 4, 6, and 8) She placed the ball in the transparent
sample display container next to the large box. Test outcomes are shown at the
bottom.
sample did DEMO come from the box because the experimenter did
not look into the top of the box and she did not reach in to pull
DEMO the ping-pong balls. The results showed that the infants
looked about equally at the matched outcome (M  9.1 s) and
the mismatched DEMO (M  9.0 s; not significant).
The first series of experiments (Exps. 1–3; Fig. 2) showed that
8-month-old infants were able to use the information in a sample
to make inferences about a DEMO population. Their looking time
pattern could not be explained by any intrinsic preferences for
the outcomes.
The second series of experiments asked whether 8-month-old
DEMO were intuitive statisticians in the converse direction: Can
they use the DEMO about a population to make predictions
about a sample drawn from it?
In Exp. 4, 8-month-old infants were asked to use the base rate
of red and white ping-pong balls in the box to predict DEMO of
two samples was more probable. That is, they were given DEMO base
rate information of the population. The setup was the same as
in the first series of experiments. As in Exp. 1, infants were first
given a few ping-pong balls to play with for a few DEMO,
followed by four familiarization trials. Then the test trials began
(DEMO Fig. 3 for a schematic representation of the test events). On
each test trial, the box was brought onto the stage. The exper-
imenter opened the front panel of the box and let the infant DEMO
at its content for 5 s. The box contained either mostly red or
mostly white ping-pong balls. Then the experimenter closed the
front panel DEMO the box, shook the box for a few seconds, closed
her eyes, and reached into the top opening. She pulled out a
ping-pong ball and placed it in the transparent sample display
container next to DEMO large box. She repeated this sequence until
a total of five ping-pong balls had been drawn from the box. On
alternate test trials, she pulled out either four red and one white
ping-pong balls or one DEMO and four white ping-pong balls. After
all five balls were placed in the sample display container, the
infant’s looking time was recorded. The experimenter cleared
the stage and started the next test trial until a total DEMO four test
trials were completed. If the infants could use the base rate
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
DEMO
0
Fig. 2.
Xu and Garcia
Expected
Unexpected
Expt. 1 Expt. 2 Expt. 3
Mean looking times for Exps. 1–3 with standard error.
PNAS
DEMO
April 1, 2008

vol. 105

no. 13

5013
DEMO Looking Times (s)
PSYCHOLOGY
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
DEMO
0
Expected
Unexpected
Expt. 4 Expt. 5 Expt. 6
Fig. 4.
Mean looking times for Exps. 4 – 6 with standard error.
information about DEMO population to make predictions about the
sample, they would find half DEMO the samples much less probable
and therefore unexpected. Suppose an infant was shown a box
with mostly red ping-pong balls, she would expect a random
sample from the box to consist of mostly red ping-pong balls. DEMO
converse was true for an infant who was shown a box with mostly
white ping-pong balls.
Infants looked reliably longer at the unexpected sample (M
11.1 s) than the expected sample [M  8.1 s, DEMO(1,19)  4.856, P 
0.05; Fig. 4]. That DEMO, the infants had used the base rate
information provided at the DEMO of each test trial to predict
which of two samples was more probable.
Exp. 5 replicated the results of Exp. 4 with a different DEMO
of infants. Again, the infants looked reliably longer at the
unexpected DEMO (M  7.8 s) than the expected sample [M 
5.6 s, F(1,19)  4.706, P  0.05; Fig. DEMO
Exp. 6 was a control study similar to Exp. 3, testing DEMO
alternative interpretation that infants may have simply preferred
to look at the unexpected outcome in Exps. 4 and 5 because of
the mismatch between DEMO sample and the population, even
though the population (i.e., the DEMO of the box) was not
shown at the end of the DEMO trials. Another group of 8-month-old
infants was tested. The procedure was the same as that of Exp.
4 except that the ping-pong balls were DEMO out of the exper-
imenter’s pocket and not out of the box. Infants looked about
equally at the matched outcome (M 7.8 s) DEMO the mismatched
outcome (M  7.2 s; not significant).
The second series of experiments (Exps. 4–6; Fig. 4) showed
that 8-month-old infants can use base rate information about the
population to make inferences DEMO which of two samples is
more probable. Their looking time pattern could not be ex-
plained by any intrinsic preferences for the test outcomes.
DEMO infants’ performance in these studies is impressive given
the short familiarization on each trial. The infants made a
connection between the sample and the DEMO quickly, and
the looking time patterns suggested that they shared adults’
DEMO about how random samples should be related to larger
populations. It is even more impressive that the infants were able
to succeed in the DEMO series of experiments when the memory
demand was high; they remembered DEMO content of the box and
made predictions about the samples drawn from it. Again, the
looking time patterns suggested that the infants shared adults’
intuitions about how to use information about the population to
make predictions DEMO the samples.
5014

www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0704450105
Previous statistical learning studies with infants have focused
mostly on how infants can use frequency or transitional proba-
bility DEMO to find larger, meaningful units from the input,
e.g., segmentation of the speech stream into potential words or
sequences of visual shapes (13–15). Our experiments focus on
how infants can make use of DEMO small amount of data to make
inductive inferences about larger populations, DEMO conversely, to
make inferences from populations to samples, much like the kind
of inference tasks all human learners face regularly in everyday
life.
DEMO questions remain open. First, what is the computation
that underlies the DEMO performance in these experiments? At
least two possibilities are consistent with DEMO current findings.
One possibility is that infants had computed probabilities of the
samples and used them to predict which of the outcomes was
more DEMO Another possibility is that infants had expected
the sample to be related to the distribution of the population in
a qualitative way. This may DEMO a version of the representativeness
heuristic (16). One way to DEMO these two alternatives is to
contrast a 4:1 sample and a 5:0 sample; the former provides a
better distributional match, whereas DEMO latter is more probable.
A recently published paper (17) using a different methodology
with 12-month-old infants suggests that by the end of the DEMO
year infants may be able to estimate probabilities in making
predictions about future events. It remains to be seen whether
younger infants are also DEMO to do so.
Second, the current studies did not distinguish between DEMO
infants viewing the display as consisting of red and white
individual objects (a discrete variable) or areas of red and white
color patches (a continuous variable). The results may be
described as infants being DEMO to sampling discrete objects
or sampling from a continuous region. The continuous variable
alternative seems unlikely for two reasons. One is that the infants
DEMO given some red and white ping-pong balls to play with
before the experiment, so unambiguous evidence was provided
that objects were to be presented. The other is that the literature
on number discrimination in infants suggests DEMO with large
numerosities ( 3 or 4), infants were not DEMO sensitive to
continuous variables such as overall area, brightness, and den-
sity; instead they were able to respond in various tasks based on
numerosity (18). Nonetheless, further empirical work may ad-
dress this DEMO more directly by using balls of different sizes.
Third, one important DEMO in a statistical inference task,
using probability or heuristics, is DEMO assumption of random
sampling. It is only under conditions of random sampling that the
inference is warranted. If the learner has evidence that she DEMO not
receiving a random sample from the population, she can no
DEMO use the statistical information in the sample to make
guesses about the overall population.
Recent studies in our laboratory suggest that 11-month-old
infants are DEMO to sampling conditions. Infants were ran-
domly assigned to three conditions. One condition was similar to
that of Exp. 1, and we replicated the basic results with this age
group. The second condition was one in DEMO the infants were
given evidence that the random sampling assumption had been
violated. The experimenter first expressed a preference for one
type of ping-pong DEMO, say red ones, by showing the infant a
small container with both types of ping-pong balls (red and
white) and selectively picking DEMO only the red ones and placing
them in another container. On the test trials, the experimenter
looked into the box while pulling out the ping-pong balls, i.e., she
had visual access to the content of DEMO box. If infants were
sensitive to the fact that the random sampling assumption had
been violated, their looking times should no longer be predicted
by which sample was more probable given the content of the box.
DEMO their looking times should be predicted by whether the
sample was consistent with the experimenter’s preference or not.
That was exactly what we found; infants looked longer when the
Xu and Garcia
Mean Looking Times (s)
experimenter pulled out a sample that was inconsistent with her
expressed preference, regardless of the content of the box. In the
third condition, the experimenter expressed a preference but she
was blindfolded during the sampling process. DEMO infants were
able to integrate these two sources of information, and DEMO
looking times were once again predicted by the content of the
box (F. Xu and S. Denison, unpublished data). These results
suggest DEMO infants engaged in a rather sophisticated form of
statistical inference in this task, and their looking time patterns
on the test trials were not simply a matter of matching the sample
to the overall population in DEMO of distribution.
The present studies provide evidence that early in develop-
ment infants are able to use a powerful statistical inference
mechanism for inductive DEMO They can make generaliza-
tions about a population based on a sample, and conversely, they
can make predictions about a sample given information DEMO a
population. This ability for performing intuitive statistics devel-
ops early and in the absence of schooling or explicit teaching. It
may be the DEMO of later acquisition of statistical principles, in
both the course of DEMO an understanding of scientific
inquiry and learning about probabilistic reasoning and statistics.
This inference mechanism is likely to be present in many
domains, and it allows human learners to acquire knowledge and
skills rapidly and accurately. DEMO remains to be seen how general
this inductive learning ability is and whether we share it with
nonhuman animals (19, 20).
These DEMO bear on two debates on the origins of human
knowledge and reasoning. First, we have demonstrated that
8-month-old infants are able to make inferences from samples to
populations, and vice versa, suggesting that such abilities DEMO not
entirely the result of formal education. Human beings may be
rational learners from very early in development. Second, some
cognitive scientists have suggested that ‘‘children are scientists’’
in how they represent clusters of concepts and DEMO their
knowledge structure changes over time (21–23). One way to DEMO
this claim is to investigate whether children’s learning mecha-
nisms are qualitatively similar to those inference mechanisms
used by scientists. Here, we provide some evidence that early in
development infants are intuitive statisticians and the statistical
DEMO mechanisms they use may be qualitatively similar to
the mechanisms used in scientific inquiry.
Methods
Infant Experiment. Subjects. All infants were recruited from the DEMO
area. They were all full term, and their ages ranged from DEMO months, 15 days to
8 months, 15 days. Half were boys, and half were girls.
General procedure. While sitting in a high chair all infants watched the events
unfold on a puppet stage. The parents DEMO next to the infants and faced away
from the stage. They were instructed not to look at the displays during the
study. An experimenter DEMO a light blue cape sat behind the stage. The
1. Hume D (1739/1978) A Treatise of Human Nature (Clarendon, Oxford).
DEMO Quine WVO (1960) Word and Object (MIT Press, Cambridge, DEMO).
3. Goodman N (1955) Fact, Fiction, and Forecast (DEMO Univ Press, Cambridge, MA).
4. Nisbett RE, Krantz DH, Jepson C, Kunda Z (1983) The use of statistical heuristics in
everyday inductive reasoning. Psychol Rev 90:339 –363.
5. Markman E (1989) Categorization and Naming in Children (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
DEMO Xu F, Tenenbaum JB (2007) Word learning as Bayesian inference. DEMO Rev 114:245–272.
7. Yuille A, Kersten D (2006) Vision DEMO Bayesian inference: Analysis by synthesis? Trends
Cogn Sci 10:301–308.
8. Tenenbaum JB, Grifﬁths TL, Kemp C (2006) Theory-based Bayesian models DEMO inductive
learning and reasoning. Trends Cogn Sci 10:309 –318.
9. Gigerenzer G (1989) The Empire of Chance: How Probability Changed Science and
Everyday Life (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK).
10. Oaksford M, Chater N (1998) Rational Models of Cognition (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
11. Onishi KH, Baillargeon R (2005) Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?
Science 308:255–258.
12. Spelke ES, Breinlinger K, Macomber J, Jacobson K (1992) Origins of knowledge. Psychol
Rev DEMO:605– 632.
13. Aslin R, Saffran JR, Newport EL (1998) Computation of conditional probability statistics
by human infants. Psychol Sci 9:321–324.
DEMO and Garcia
stage was lit, and the rest of the room DEMO dark. Each infant was ﬁrst given
three white and three red ping-pong balls to play with for a few seconds. The
experimenter picked up DEMO ping-pong ball and handed it to the infant. The
ping-pong balls were taken away, and the familiarization trials began. Each
infant was shown a set of four familiarization trials and eight (or four) test
trials. DEMO looking times were recorded. Each trial ended when the infant
looked away for 2 consecutive s. A video camera below the stage focused on
DEMO infant’s face and recorded the entire session. An observer sat in a corner
of the testing room, watched the infant on a TV monitor, and recorded the
looking times by depressing a computer key. A computer program was used
to record the looking times. The observer had no DEMO of the order of
the trials. A second observer coded the data from the video, and interobserver
reliability averaged 92%.
The box was divided into three compartments. The front compartment was
ﬁlled with 70 red ping-pong DEMO and ﬁve white ones; the back compartment
was ﬁlled with 70 DEMO ping-pong balls and ﬁve red ones. These compart-
ments were separated by two pieces of white cardboard to create a middle
compartment where the DEMO were placed. The front and back of the box
were decorated identically. Thus the infants could not tell whether the box
contained mostly red DEMO mostly white ping-pong balls from inspecting the
front of the box. The middle compartment was created to ensure that the
correct sample was drawn DEMO time. When the sample was drawn from
the box, it appeared DEMO be drawn from a big box ﬁlled with ping-pong balls.
Adult Rating Study. Subjects. Sixteen adults (mean age 26.7, ranging from 19
to DEMO years; eight males and eight females) rated the test events shown to
infants in Exp. 1; 16 adults (mean age 23.1, ranging from 18 to 54 years; eight
males and eight females) rated DEMO events shown to infants in Exp. 4. None of
the adult participants were aware of the purpose or the design of the
experiments.
Procedure. DEMO adult was given a rating sheet with instructions. They were
told that the video clips were ﬁlmed for a study being done with young
DEMO, and we wanted to get their reactions. There were no tricks. DEMO
were asked to watch each event and rate the test outcome ona1to7 scale (1
being ‘‘not at all unexpected’’ and 7 being ‘‘very unexpected’’). They were also
asked an open-ended question (‘‘what do you think this study is about’’) at the
end of the study.
Results. For the test events in Exp. 1, the average rating for the expected
outcome was 2.3 and the average rating for the unexpected outcome was DEMO
[t(15) 4.1, P  0.001]. For the test events in Exp. 4, the average rating for
the expected outcome was 2.5 and the average rating for the unexpected
outcome was 4.7 [t(15) 3.2, P  0.005]. One adult mentioned probability
in answering the open-ended ﬁnal question; everyone else simply said ‘‘I don’t
know’’ or the equivalent.
For naı¨ve adults, the test events in Exps. 1 and 4 elicited clear responses
in terms of how expected or unexpected they were. Interestingly, adults did
not seem to have guessed the purpose of the experiments upon DEMO
reﬂection.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank members of the University of British Colum-
bia Baby Cognition Laboratory for assistance in data collection; Stephanie
Denison, Kathryn DEMO, Anjula Joshi, Laura Kerlin, Mijke Rhemtulla, and
Henny Yeung for helpful discussion, and two anonymous reviewers for con-
structive comments on an earlier version of the manuscript. This research was
supported by grants from DEMO National Science Foundation and the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (to F.X.).
14. Saffran JR, Aslin RN, Newport EL (1996) Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants.
Science 274:1926 –1928.
15. DEMO NZ, Slemmer JA, Johnson SP (2002) Visual statistical learning in infancy:
Evidence for a domain-general learning mechanism. Cognition 83:B35–B42.
16. DEMO A, Kahneman D (1974) Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Science 185:1124 –1131.
17. Teglas E, Girotto V, Gonzalez M, Bonatti L (2007) Intuitions about probabilities shapes
expectations about the future DEMO 12 months and beyond. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
104:19156 –19159.
18. Xu F, Spelke ES (2000) Large number discrimination in 6-month-old infants. Cognition
74:B1–B11.
19. Gallistel R (1990) The Organization of DEMO (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
20. Hauser MD, Spalding B (2006) Wild rhesus monkeys generate causal inferences about
possible and impossible DEMO transformations in the absence of experience. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 103:7181–7185.
21. Kuhn T (1962) The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago).
22. Carey S (1985) Conceptual Change in Childhood (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
23. Gopnik A, DEMO A (1996) Words, Thoughts, and Theories (MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA).
PNAS  April 1, 2008  vol. 105  no. 13  5015
PSYCHOLOGY{1g42fwefx}