European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
www.elsevier.com/locate/dsw
DEMO non-additive decision-aid for venture capitalists
investment decisions
Andrew Zacharakis a,*, DEMO A. Shepherd b,1
a Babson College, Arthur M. Blank Center DEMO Entrepreneurship, Babson Park, MA 02457-0310, USA
b Leeds School of DEMO, Campus Box 419, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309-0419, USA
Received 12 September 2001; accepted 6 October 2003
Available DEMO 14 January 2004
Abstract
The current study uses theory from the resource-based view of strategy to hypothesize that VCs use non-additive
decision policies when DEMO their investment decision. A policy capturing experiment ﬁnds that VCs do indeed use
non-additive decision policies. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that interactions between leadership experience and other internal
resources, and between leadership experience and environmental muniﬁcence, DEMO venture capitalists decision-
making. Although venture capitalists always prefer greater general experience in leadership, they value it more highly in
large markets, when DEMO are many competitors, and when the competitors are relatively weak. Previous DEMO
experience of the venture s management team may substitute for leadership experience. Building on these results, we
tested a main-eﬀects-only decision-aid and a decision-aid that included interaction terms (non-additive) and found that
both outperformed VCs DEMO decisions.
 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Leadership experience; Venture capitalist; Non-additive decision policies; Decision-aid
1. Introduction
Venture capital (VC) is an important source of
equity for those new ventures that revitalize the
economy. In a study of all ﬁrms that received VC
between DEMO and 2000, it was found that VC-
backed ﬁrms created one DEMO of every nine jobs and
these ﬁrms also accounted for over 11% of the
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-781-239-4497; fax: +1-781-
239-5005/4178.
E-mail addresses: zacharakis@babson.edu (A. Zacharakis),
dean.shepherd@colorado.edu (D.A. Shepherd).
DEMO Tel.: +1-303-492-2062.
0377-2217/$ - see front matter  2003 Elsevier DEMO All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2003.10.028
countrys GDP (NVCA, 2002). It is well worth
asking then, what factors aﬀect VCs decisions (DEMO
pienza and Korsgaard, 1996). VCs choose to invest
in those DEMO that they believe have the potential to
generate high returns. Resource-based view (RBV)
suggests that new ventures possess speciﬁc resource
endowments that may lead to superior performance
(Amit and Schoemaker, 1993; Barney, 1991)DEMO In
short, ﬁrm resources can provide the basis for
competitive advantage DEMO enables ﬁrms to earn
rents. As such, VCs can evaluate a DEMO po-
tential by examining its resource assets.
Fundamental to the resource-based perspective
is the belief that those resources and capabilities
674
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
that are valuable, rare, costly to imitate, and non-
substitutable become core competencies and serve
as a source of the DEMO s competitive advantage over
its rivals (Barney, 1991). Resources and capabilities
lead to a competitive advantage, however, only
when a strategy DEMO chosen and implemented that
allows the ﬁrm to best exploit its core competencies
in the external environment (Amit and Schoe-
maker, 1993). DEMO, the strategic leadership of
the top management team (the ability to anticipate,
envision, maintain ﬂexibility, and empower others
to create strategic DEMO) is important to achiev-
ing above average returns (Ireland and Hitt, 1999).
For example, the team may be able to leverage
DEMO technology to establish a longer lead-
time over potential entrants thereby earning higher
rents (Shepherd and Shanley, 1998). Or, the team
that has greater market experience should be able
to best position the company DEMO take advantage of
the opportunity. The basic premise is that entre-
preneurship is as much about opportunity recog-
nition as exploiting the opportunity. Thus, we ask
whether strategic leadership is equally critical to
VCs investment assessments DEMO all situations and if
not, whether a decision-aid that includes non-
DEMO relationships can help improve a VC ﬁrms
investment decision.
This paper examines how VCs evaluate entre-
preneurs leadership experience, a ﬁrm resource
that can lead to a competitive advantage, in con-
junction with other important criteria for predict-
ing new venture success. We then construct a
decision-aid and DEMO its performance. In doing so,
we shed light on the managerial decision of
investing a VC ﬁrms resources and oﬀer a decision-
aid DEMO guide this complex investment process. 2 By
constructing decision-aids the managers of VC
ﬁrms have the opportunity ‘‘to enhance the degree
of conformity and DEMO between the evolution
of the decision-making process and the value sys-
tems and objectives of those involved in the pro-
cess’’ (Roy, 1990, p. 324) and those values and
objectives most desirable for the ﬁrm. This aim is
2 These objectives are consistent with those of OR-DA:DEMO
‘‘seeking essentially to give scientiﬁc authority to decisions of a
purely managerial nature’’ (Roy, 1993).
achieved when a ﬁrm s decision-aids can DEMO its
VCs make better decisions ‘‘in the presence of
ambiguity, uncertainty, and an abundance of
bifurcations’’ (Roy, 1990, p. 324).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2
develops hypotheses based upon the RBV DEMO the
ﬁrm. Speciﬁcally, we propose that VCs place
considerable weight on DEMO entrepreneurs leader-
ship experience, but place more weight on leader-
ship DEMO it complements other ﬁrm resources and
when the market is muniﬁcent. Section 3 discusses
the ‘‘policy capturing’’ research method used in
this study, the sample, and the survey instrument.
We develop a reﬁned decision-aid that leads to
improved performance over and above VCs own
assessments. Section 4 reviews DEMO results in light
of the strategy literature and our understanding of
VCs decision-making. Concluding comments are
given in Section 5.
2. Conceptual framework
How DEMO people acquire strategic leadership
abilities? While the process is complicated, we do
know that the amount of experience people have
aﬀects the strategic DEMO they make and the
models they use to make those decisions (DEMO and
Tyler, 1991). The cognitive science literature sug-
gests that DEMO is a good proxy for expertise
(Choo and Trotman, 1991; DEMO, 1985), meaning
that experienced decision makers in a given task
DEMO indeed employ better decision processes than
do less experienced ones (Nosofsky, 1987). Simon
(1985) argues that it takes 10years to achieve
DEMO,000 chunks of knowledge,’’ which often add
up to superior decision performance. Further-
more, as individuals become more experienced
with respect to a particular task, they learn to fo-
cus attention primarily on the key dimensions
(Choo and Trotman, 1991) and create categories
of information based on a deep structure that in-
volves more, stronger, and richer DEMO between
concepts (Frederick, 1991).
Complementary resources may increase the
value of leadership experience, such that this
bundle of leadership and resources are more
valuable, durable, scarce, and diﬃcult to imitate
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (DEMO) 673–689
than each resource by itself. Bundling the re-
sources creates DEMO ‘‘strategic asset’’ which may lead
to sustainable economic rents assuming it matches
the needs/desires of the market (Amit and Schoe-
maker, 1993)DEMO Amit and Schoemaker (1993) assert
that the creation of strategic assets is a boundedly
rational process. Entrepreneurs bring together re-
sources in unique DEMO based upon their
interpretation of the environment. The bundle is
durable to the extent that it is a function of the
ﬁrms unique resource DEMO and to the extent that
the market continues to value the bundle. Firm
speciﬁcity increases scarcity––it is diﬃcult to
recreate a competitive advantage. We DEMO that
leadership experience is more beneﬁcial to the ﬁrm
in the presence of these resources.
Just as complementary resources increase total
value, resources that are substitutable for each other
decrease total value (Amit and Schoemaker, DEMO).
Firms accumulating complementary assets may
develop economies of scope (Dierickx DEMO Cool,
1989).In essence, thecostofaddingcomplementary
resources becomes progressively less on DEMO per re-
source basis, but if the resources are substitutes, the
ﬁrm incurs the full cost of resource acquisition. The
VC decision-making literature DEMO that valu-
able new venture resources include leadership
experience, proprietary technology, market famil-
iarity and previous start-up experience (MacMillan
et al., 1985; Muzyka et al., 1996), but does not
consider whether these resources are complemen-
tary or substitutable. Most of the previous VC
decision-making literature DEMO the criteria inde-
pendently––as main eﬀects (e.g., MacMillan et al.,
1985; Muzyka et al., 1996; Zacharakis and Meyer,
2000). It appears that environmental conditions
also signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the eﬀectiveness of
leadership (Pettigrew, 1987); but again the VC
decision-making literature does not suﬃciently
consider whether environmental conditions provide
the context for leadership and may serve DEMO a
moderator of the eﬀects of experience on decisions.
2.1. Proprietary technology and leadership experi-
ence
The resource-based model proposes that pro-
prietary technology DEMO lead to a competitive
675
advantage when it helps a company neutralize
threats and/or exploit opportunities (is valuable);
is not possessed DEMO others (is rare); is diﬃcult and
costly to imitate; and has no strategic equivalents
(is non-substitutable) (Mata et al., 1995)DEMO But
ownership of proprietary technology is not suﬃ-
cient. It is often diﬃcult to protect a products
proprietary nature as competitors can hire away
DEMO individuals, reverse engineer the technology
and so forth. Leaders must enable DEMO organiza-
tions to exploit the technology in the market
(Ireland and DEMO, 1999; Mata et al., 1995). The
opportunity to exploit DEMO technology in-
creases the ﬁrms options, or strategic degrees of
freedom. DEMO is when strategic degrees of freedom
are high that choosing the ‘‘best’’ course of action
has the greatest impact on new venture success
(Porter, 1980; Quinn, 1980). Thus, strong leader-
ship and proprietary DEMO are complemen-
tary resources:
Hypothesis 1. VCs value general leadership expe-
rience more when the technology is more pro-
prietary.
2.2. Market familiarity DEMO leadership experience
Intangible resources such as knowledge are
considered valuable and a potential source of
competitive advantage. In particular, knowledge
generated from market familiarity provides a good
indication of the entrepreneur s ability to cope
with DEMO market circumstances (Roure and
Madique, 1986). The more deeply entrepreneurs
understand the market, the better they are at
anticipating converging trends and opportunities,
as well as competitor moves and threats. Com-
bining market DEMO with leadership experi-
ence enables the new venture to develop and
execute an eﬀective strategy. Leadership experi-
ence and market familiarity are complementary;
DEMO they increase the value of the resource
bundle by making it more rare and more diﬃcult
to imitate (Amit and Schoemaker, 1993).
DEMO 2. VCs value general leadership expe-
rience more when the teams market familiarity is
high.
676
2.3. Start-up experience and leadership experi-
ence
VCs also value previous DEMO with start-
ups (MacMillan et al., 1985). Serial entrepreneurs
better understand how to organize start-ups
(Wright et al., 1997). By DEMO nature, new orga-
nizations experience conﬂict and confusion in
recognizing the DEMO that need to be performed
and allocating people to those tasks. Entrepre-
neurs with start-up experience understand these
issues and have likely developed strategies DEMO re-
solve them. Stuart and Abetti (1990) found that
managerial experience in previous ventures had the
most signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on subsequent
start-ups. DEMO et al. (1997) found that 75% of
55 UK VCs preferred to invest in serial entrepre-
neurs because of their wider management experi-
DEMO, demonstrated motivation, and proven track
record.
However, other research calls DEMO question the
value of past start-up experience. Birley and
Westhead (1994) investigated 408 new businesses
and found no evidence to suggest that new DEMO
nesses established by ‘‘habitual’’ founders with
prior experience in business venturing are partic-
ularly advantaged compared to inexperienced
entrepreneurs. In addition, Wright et al. (1997)
ﬁnd that VCs did not report serial entrepreneurs as
performing any better than ﬁrst time entrepreneurs
did. Why this apparent discrepancy between
DEMO? There are a number of possible explana-
tions. First, ‘‘experienced entrepreneurs... may
attempt to repeat actions that were successful in an
earlier venture DEMO new circumstances that are quite
diﬀerent (Westhead and Wright, 1998). Second, an
entrepreneurs motivation to succeed may lessen,
particularly if their previous venture was successful
(Starr and Bygrave, 1992). Third, serial entrepre-
neurs may not recognize their own limitations
(Wright et al., DEMO). Thus, as a main eﬀect, start-
up experience is ambiguous. However, general
leadership experience may enhance the power of
previous start-up experience making it scarcer,
more durable, and more diﬃcult to imitate than
either factor separately. Thus, we argue that start-
up experience complements general leadership
experience.
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
Hypothesis 3. VCs value leadership experience
more when DEMO team also has previous start-up
experience.
2.4. Environmental conditions and leadership expe-
rience
Some environments are complementary to
leadership experience, while others act as substi-
tutes. An environment that can support sustained
growth by a particular DEMO is described as
‘‘muniﬁcent’’ (Castrogiovanni, 1991; Goll and
Rasheed, 1997). Castrogiovanni (1991) distin-
guishes among three kinds of muniﬁcence: (DEMO)
capacity, or market size (Child, 1972), (2) DEMO of
market growth (Dess and Beard, 1984), and (3)DEMO
opportunity, or resource availability in excess of
industry usage (Castrogiovanni, DEMO). Highly
competitive environments indicate low levels of
resource availability beyond industry usage and
therefore low muniﬁcence (Castrogiovanni, 1991).
For example, population ecologists argue that
populations have a carrying capacity that is fully
utilized DEMO there are not enough resources to
support the entry of new competitors and still
support those already in the industry (e.g., Brittain
and DEMO, 1980; Lambkin and Day, 1989). The
VC decision-making literature DEMO consistent with
the muniﬁcence construct in that VCs view mar-
ket size, growth, and competition as key attri-
butes to consider in making DEMO investment
decision (MacMillan et al., 1985; Muzyka et al.,
DEMO).
Hrebiniak and Joyce (1985) assert that the
external resource dependence and other environ-
mental inﬂuences, together with leaderships role
in competitive positioning and organizational de-
sign, jointly aﬀect organizational performance. In
a situation where muniﬁcence (benign environ-
ment with low external threats [Hrebiniak and
Joyce, DEMO) is low and, consequently, competitive
forces are high, the ﬁrm is highly dependent upon
the environment, and therefore a leaders strategic
choices are severely limited (Hrebiniak and Joyce,
1985; Lawless and Finch, 1989). However, where
muniﬁcence is high and competitive forces are low,
there are multiple means of achieving desired
outcomes (Hrebiniak and Joyce, 1985), and
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (DEMO) 673–689
677
therefore a strong leader has more opportunity to
inﬂuence DEMO company s ultimate success (Goll and
Rasheed, 1997).
We would therefore expect that VCs would
place greater importance on leadership experience
in DEMO that are more muniﬁcent. We
propose that the environment is more muniﬁcent
when the target market is large and its projected
growth rate is DEMO Large markets likely have
longer operating history. Hence, the problems
ventures DEMO likely to face are understood and
easier to identify. In such a market, strong entre-
preneurial leaders can use this information to
make decisions that lead to superior performance.
Less accomplished leaders may not interpret the
DEMO as eﬀectively. Growing markets, on the
other hand, are forgiving. One or two bad deci-
sions can be learning points. Thus, eﬀective leaders
can have a greater impact in muniﬁcent environ-
ments. If a new DEMO can capture 5% of a large
market, it can derive signiﬁcant DEMO often without
incurring the ire of other market participants. And
if the market is growing, new entrants typically go
after new customers rather than those of their
competitors. In a small market, venture growth is
constrained not only by market size but also by
competitor awareness. Thus, a leaders decision
eﬀectiveness is similarly constrained. 3 Thus,
Hypothesis 4. VCs DEMO general leadership expe-
rience more for markets that are (a) larger, and (b)
faster growing.
Hypothesis 5. VCs value leadership experience
DEMO when competitors are (a) fewer and (b) rel-
atively weaker.
2.5. A non-additive decision-aid for venture capital-
ists
VCs often rely on DEMO feel’’ when making the
investment decision (Khan, 1987), which may
make the decision prone to biases (Shepherd et al.,
3 A possible alternate explanation is that the room for error
is less in DEMO growing markets and therefore leadership
experience would be more valued.
2003; DEMO and Meyer, 2000). Biases and
heuristics inhibit optimal decisions (e.g., Hogarth
and Makridakis, 1981). The availability bias, for
example, DEMO encourage decision makers to recall
past successes rather than failures (Dawes DEMO al.,
1989). Therefore, a VC is apt to assess DEMO success
of a current venture prospect by how similar the
current prospect is to a past success. If the venture
under consideration uses the DEMO technology, or
has the same lead entrepreneur, such available
information may bias the VC to overlook other
information that suggests the current venture DEMO
likely to fail. Likewise, a VC utilizing a satisfying
heuristic might DEMO new venture proposals when
the minimum requirement for any one criterion is
not met, even if all other remaining factors are
substantially higher than the minimum require-
ments. As such, the VC may eliminate potentially
proﬁtable investments from further consideration
because of a heuristic rule (s)he is using to keep the
task manageable.
A decision-aid that decomposes the decision
DEMO its component parts helps the VC focus on a
series of smaller decisions, thereby minimizing the
gestalt process of the ‘‘gut decision.’’ Zacharakis
and Meyer (2000) found that a main eﬀects deci-
sion-aid outperformed VCs DEMO making the screen-
ing decision. The current paper extends previous
work into VC decision-aids by asking whether a
non-additive decision-aid might further improve a
DEMO decision. Some decision-making scholars
have argued that main-eﬀect models capture the
majority of the variance (e.g., Louviere, 1988;
Slovic and Lichtenstein, DEMO). However, since
VCs focus on identifying high potential ventures
(those ventures that can generate returns in excess
of 50%) we argue that even a marginal improve-
ment in explained variance may have a dramatic
DEMO on the VC s success in ‘‘picking
winners’’ and therefore the VC ﬁrms return on
investment. We now explore the use of models as
DEMO and then compare the performance
of these decision-aids to the performance of the
VCs from which it was created.
A common type of decision-aid DEMO expert in-
put to deﬁne important criteria; such models are
called DEMO models (Dawes and Corrigan,
1974; Fischhoﬀ, 1988; Slovic, DEMO). Bootstrap
678
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
models aim to capture the experts cognitive sys-
tem, including both the criteria and relative
weights actually used by VCs in DEMO decisions.
Equal weighting models are a simpliﬁed version of
bootstrap models and aim to capture the criteria
used by VCs but assume that each DEMO is of
equal importance to the judgment being made. A
number of studies across a variety of decision
contexts have found that each of DEMO statistical
models outperforms actual decision-makers (Ca-
merer, 1981; Dawes, 1971; Osherson et al., 1997;
Lyness and Cornelius, 1982; Libby DEMO Libby,
1989). For example, Einhorn (1974) found that DEMO
bootstrap model outperformed expert pathologists
in predicting a patient s survival from cancer based
on nine histological cues.
We propose that bootstrap models have DEMO
potential to increase a VC ﬁrms return on
investment by improving a VCs decision accuracy.
Bootstrap models do this because they are con-
sistent, they are not biased by a non-random
sample, they optimally weight information factors,
and they reduce the decision-makers cognitive
load (Camerer, 1981)DEMO Zacharakis and Meyer
(2000) developed an equal weighted model as a
decision-aid for evaluating VC proposals. Their
model outperformed VCs in diﬀerentiating be-
DEMO those proposals that would generate returns
and those that would fail. We argue that if VCs use
the non-additive relationships proposed above,
then DEMO performance of a decision-aid can be
improved by constructing a decision-aid that
incorporates these non-additive relationships.
Thus,
Hypothesis 6. (a) The main-eﬀects-only DEMO
aid will outperform VCs own assessments. (b) The
non-additive decision-aid will outperform VCs
own assessments.
judgments based on a set of attributes from
DEMO the underlying structure of their deci-
sions can be decomposed by means of hierarchi-
cal linear modeling (HLM). This method allows
the researcher to examine how the respondent
processes non-additive relationships (Hitt and
Barr, DEMO), without relying on the respondents
(generally inaccurate) introspection (Fischhoﬀ,DEMO
1988).
3.2. Research instrument and experimental design
To identify the pertinent attributes, we asked
VCs outside the sample of the study (primarily
DEMO based in Chicago and New York) to provide
actual investment decision DEMO, complete
with business plans. From these plans, the lead
researcher extracted information factors of inter-
est, providing the entire list, with a DEMO of
each factor, to a colleague unfamiliar with the
business plans. DEMO judges then independently
coded all appropriate attributes. Value ranges
given to each attribute allowed it to be compared
across proﬁles (Stewart, 1988). DEMO attributes of
the new ventures management team (general
leadership experience, market familiarity, and
experience with start-ups), values are deﬁned as
averages for the whole management team. When
possible, we used concrete values (e.g., market
size), but representative distributions are appro-
priate for subjective attributes (Stewart, 1988). For
the two subjective information factors (proprietary
technology DEMO competitor strength), we used a
ﬁve-point scale from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest).
Overall, inter-judge reliability was 87.5%. Based
on DEMO s (1952) report that inter-judge reli-
ability typically ranges from 66% to 95%, we deem
our coding reliable.
3.3. Sampling plan, survey DEMO, and sample
3. Research method
3.1. Policy capturing
This study uses DEMO capturing, a technique
that requires respondents to make a series of
DEMO sample for this experiment was 41 practic-
ing VCs from three entrepreneurial ‘‘hotbeds,’’ (1)
the Colorado Front Range (primarily the Denver/DEMO
Boulder metro area), (2) the Silicon Valley in
California, DEMO (3) Boston. The Colorado and
California data was collected in 1995 and the
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (DEMO) 673–689
679
Boston data was collected in 1998 using the same
DEMO 4 The typical VC in the sample was
male (90%), DEMO years old (range 29 to 72;
s.d. ¼ 11.7), DEMO a master s degree (most likely in
business), and had DEMO a VC for 9 years (s.d. 6.6).
The typical ﬁrm DEMO which the VC worked had
$215 million under management (range $2 DEMO
to $5 billion; s.d. ¼ $323 million), employed 14
investment DEMO (range 1–65; s.d ¼ 16.6),
focused primarily on early DEMO ventures, had
been in business for 13.3 years (range 1–32;
s.d. ¼ 7.8), and invested $4.1 million per venture
(s.d. ¼ 3.9). This sample is relatively representative
of the US VC community DEMO a whole, although
slightly biased towards the more successful, well-
known ﬁrms. For example, 7 of the 10top VC
ﬁrms that invest in early stage deals, as rated on 10
metrics, are represented in DEMO sample (Aragon,
2001) and the sample ﬁrms tend to be larger
($215M versus $155M for population [Venture
Economics, 2000]).
3.4. DEMO variables, levels, and dependent
variable
The experimental design required each VC to
assess 50randomized ventures on eight attributes
(see Appendix A for a sample proﬁle). To sup-
plementthe20actualventurescenarios,weuseda
random case generator from Policy DEMO software
package (Executive Decision Services, 1991),
which creates a DEMO number of statistically
derived cases. MANOVA veriﬁes that the statisti-
cal cases are from the same population as the ac-
tual cases. The independent DEMO have equal
variance between real and generated cases and the
multi-variate means are equivalent. Furthermore,
a consulting expert VC identiﬁed those cases that
DEMO not feasible (i.e., combination of cue values
that rarely occurs in reality). Infeasible scenarios
4 We conducted a post hoc test that DEMO a dummy
variableforthecollectiondates(0for1995and1for1998)and
found that the results did not diﬀer substantially from those
reported below. This suggests that the decision policies of DEMO
VCs who participated in 1995 did not diﬀer substantially from
those that participated in 1998.
were dropped from the sample of potential can-
didates.
DEMO of the original proﬁles were replicated to
allow a test–retest measure of reliability. The
independent variables (attributes assigned to the
venture scenarios) were DEMO from previous
studies (e.g., Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984; MacMillan
et al., 1985). The eight attributes were leadership
experience (average number DEMO years of experience
the management team has in leadership positions),
DEMO technology (on a ﬁve-point scale
ranging from no protection to extremely DEMO
proprietary protection), market familiarity (mean
number of years experience team DEMO in market),
start-up record (mean number of past start-up
experiences for team members), market size (total
revenues for most recent year), market growth
(percentage growth in revenues over last ﬁve
years), number of competitors (number of direct
competitors), and competitor strength (DEMO
concentration of market on a ﬁve-point scale
ranging from a few dominant competitors to an
emerging market). The instructions speciﬁed that
all attributes DEMO included in the experiment were
to be presumed constant across all venture pro-
ﬁles.
Rate of return is an appropriate dependent
variable for VCs DEMO (Roure and Keeley,
1990). Therefore, the dependent variable for this
experiment is the VC s assessment of how likely
the venture DEMO to succeed, as measured on a seven-
point Likert Scale anchored DEMO ‘‘10· or more on
investment’’ and ‘‘complete loss of investment.’’
The more assessments each participant com-
pletes, the higher the reliability and stability of the
results yet too many proﬁles may tire the judge and
limit DEMO A rule of thumb is to have a
minimum of ﬁve proﬁles for every attribute being
tested (Executive Decision Services, 1991). Five
DEMO times eight attributes equals 40cases. In
addition, we had ﬁve repeated DEMO to assess re-
sponse reliability. We rounded the number to 50
proﬁles. Fatigue is unlikely to be of concern in this
experiment. First, the number of attributes in each
treatment was relatively low (Hitt et al. (2000) had
30proﬁles with 14 attributes), and the mean time
DEMO to complete the experiment was less than 30
minutes. Second, the DEMO of the proﬁles was
680
randomized for each experiment, and the results
were consistent across individuals. Third, individ-
uals were relatively consistent in their responses
(test–retest reliability DEMO 72% is comparable with
Shepherds (1999) 69%).
3.5. Building a non-additive decision-aid
To test Hypothesis 6 we need to construct a
main-eﬀects-only DEMO and a non-additive
decision-aid. First, a main-eﬀects-only aid uses the
eight DEMO attributes and the aggregate stan-
dardized coeﬃcients derived from our sample of
VCs.
Y ¼ b1ðleadÞþ b2ðfamÞþ b3ðstart-upÞþ b4ðpropÞ
þ b5ðsizeÞþ b6ðgrowÞþ b7ðcompÞ
þ DEMO;
where lead is the leadership experience, fam,
market familiarity, start-up, start-up record, prop,
proprietary technology, size, market size, grow,
market growth, comp, number of competitors,
strength, competitor strength.
The second decision-aid is based on a non-
additive model using DEMO eight attributes and lead-
erships interaction with each other attribute.
Y ¼ b1ðleadÞþ b2ðfamÞþ b3ðstart-upÞþ b4ðpropÞ
þ b5ðsizeÞþ b6ðgrowÞþ b7ðcompÞ
þ b8ðstrengthÞþ b9ðlead  DEMO
þ b10ðlead  start-upÞþ b11ðlead  propÞ
þ b12ðlead  sizeÞþ b13ðlead  growÞ
þ b14ðlead  compÞþ b15ðlead  strengthÞ:
Themodelsaretestedonthose20cases(outof
DEMO) that were based on actual ventures and that
received funding and DEMO a measurable outcome.
Seventy percent of the actual cases were successful
(DEMO a realized return on investment [ROI] of
15% or greater [Dean and Giglierano, 1990]), 30%
of the ventures resulted in an ROI of less than 15%
or complete loss of investment. Considering that
the 70/DEMO ratio veers from the norm of most VC
portfolios where approximately 40–60% provide a
favorable return (Timmons, 1999), we also tested
the DEMO against a distribution of actual cases
that included 50% success and 50% failure leaving
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
us with 12 actual cases. We excluded those DEMO
with the highest ROI (retaining the six success
cases closest to DEMO 15% success breakpoint) be-
cause this represents a more conservative test DEMO
discriminating success from failures. 5 Failures
weredummycoded0andsuccessesdummycoded
1.
The models predictions coincided with the se-
ven-point Likert scale used as the dependent var-
iable. DEMO the model s prediction ranged from 4.5 to
7, it was DEMO as a success. Failure predictions
ranged from 1 to 3.49 and neither success or failure
ranged from 3.5 to 4.49. Predictions of success
were DEMO coded 1, predictions of failure were
dummy coded 0, and predictions of neither success
nor failure were not included in subsequent anal-
yses.
DEMO determine decision accuracy, the VCs pre-
dictions were compared to the DEMO outcome,
either a success or a failure. VCs predictions were
recoded from a seven-point scale to success, fail-
ure, or neither success DEMO failure. Predictions of
success were operationalized by scores of 5, 6, and
7, predictions of failure by scores of 1, 2, and 3,
predictions of neither success nor failure by a score
of DEMO Each prediction was scored a 1 if it matched
the actual outcome and 0if it did not. We calcu-
lated the accuracy rate as DEMO ratio of total predic-
tions correct to the total number of predictions.
This procedure was repeated for each VC and for
each model.
We DEMO compared the accuracy rate for the
main-eﬀect model with the accuracy rate of each
VC. If the main-eﬀect models accuracy rate was
higher than DEMO particular VC then we recorded a 1
and if it was lower then we recorded a 0. The
number of ties were recorded but DEMO used in
subsequent analyses. A chi-squared test was used
to test whether the main-eﬀect model more often
outperformed the VCs. The same procedure and
DEMO was used for comparing the accuracy of the
non-additive model with all VCs.
5 Using only 12 cases did not change the accuracy of DEMO
non-additive model (60%). The main-eﬀects model improved by
5% (45–50%) and the mean for the VCs actual decisions
improved by less than 1%.
Table 1
Intercorrelation matrix
Mean (sd) 1
2345 678
681
1. DEMO 3.96 (1.66) 1.000
2. Market familiarity 11.52 (7.92) 0.221 1.000
3. Leadership experience 6.82 (4.60) 0.166 0.165 1.000
4. Start-up experience DEMO (1.35) 0.100 0.147 0.156 1.000
5. Proprietary technology 2.68 (1.46) 0.095 0.120 )0.255 0.095 1.000
6. Market size 723.68 (649.38) 0.188 0.146 )0.045 0.297 0.038 1.000
7. Market growth 36.50 (26.94) 0.122 0.085 0.073 0.241 )0.021 0.323 1.000
8. Number of competitors 5.74 (DEMO) )0.211 )0.171 )0.003 0.217 )0.076 0.090 0.323 1.000
9.Strengthofcompetition DEMO(1.91) )0.220 0.073 )0.257 )0.058 0.163 )0.096 0.072 0.198
DEMO ¼ 1900.
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational DEMO 162 (2005) 673–689
4. Results
Table 1 provides an intercorrelation matrix and
speciﬁes the mean and standard deviations for
each variable. The experiment DEMO 50obser-
vations per VC and therefore 1900 observations
for the sample. While this means that there are a
large number of degrees of freedom DEMO the sub-
sequent analysis, there may be autocorrelation
because the assessments DEMO these 50observations
are nested within individuals. HLM accounts for
variance among individuals such that the 1900
observations can be considered independent––this
technique is well DEMO for analyzing nested data.
We generated both a main-eﬀects-only model and
a non-additive model, the results of which are
displayed in Table 2. 6,7
Presented in the top section of Table 2 are the
coeﬃcients (from HLM of standardized values),
and corresponding standard error, t DEMO and
levels of signiﬁcance for the main-eﬀects-only
6 We also ran regression analysis for each individual using
mean centered variables. We found an aggregated DEMO R2 of
0.62 and that multi-collinearity was unlikely to have impacted
the regression results (all VIFs were under 3 which is well below
10––the rule of thumb for acceptable VIFs).
7 We tested for diﬀerences DEMO decision policies among the
sample of VCs. Age and VC experience were a priori the
demographic variables mostly likely to distinguish between
decision policies. DEMO included these two level two variables in a
HLM analysis to determine if those that are older or more
experienced had a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent DEMO policy than
those that were younger or less experienced. We did not ﬁnd
any signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
Table 2
VCs assessment policies
Coeﬃ- Standard t DEMO
cienta error
Main-eﬀects model
Market size 0.20 0.06 3.413
Market growth 0.23 0.04 5.39
Proprietary technology 0.02 0.04 5.26
Market familiarity 0.22 0.04 5.01
DEMO experience 0.20 0.04 4.95
Start-up experience 0.02 0.04 0.521
Number of competitors )0.34 0.04 )8.66
Strength of competition )0.30 0.06 )4.52
Intercept DEMO 0.09 46.51
Full model
Market size )0.03 0.08 )0.416
Market growth 0.30 0.11 2.82
Proprietary technology 0.17 0.05 3.08
Market familiarity 0.29 0.06 DEMO
Leadership experience 0.41 0.12 3.48
Start-up experience 0.20 0.08 2.47
Number of competitors )0.49 0.07 )6.79
Strength of competition )0.10 0.09 )1.03
DEMO · size 0.27 0.07 3.88
Leadership · growth )0.10 0.12 )0.83
Leadership · prop. tech. 0.01 0.08 0.112
Leadership · familiarity )0.13 0.09 )1.56
Leadership · start-up )0.22 0.07 )3.01
exp.
Leadership · competitors 0.24 0.09 2.58
Leadership · strength )0.30 0.10 )3.05
Intercept 3.96 DEMO 46.51
p
*** p < 0:01.
a All variables were standardized and group centered.
model. This indicates that VCs prediction of
success is DEMO for those ventures with more
n ¼ 1900.
** < 0:05.
682
leadership experience (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.20; p < 0:01),
more proprietary technology (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.20;
p < 0: 01), greater market familiarity (coeﬃcient ¼
0.22; p < 0: 01), faster market growth (coeﬃcient ¼
0.23; p < 0:01), larger market (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.20;
p < 0:01), and fewer (coeﬃcient ¼)0.34; p < 0:01)
and weaker (coeﬃcient ¼)0.30; p < 0:01) com-
petitors. It appears DEMO VCs do not signiﬁcantly
use start-up experience (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.02; p >
0:05).
The coeﬃcients, and corresponding standard
error, t -ratio and level of signiﬁcance for the non-
additive model are presented DEMO the lower section
of Table 2. In the non-additive model, the DEMO
cant variables are leadership (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.41;
p < 0: 01), proprietary technology (coeﬃcient ¼
0.17; p < 0:01), market familiarity (coeﬃcient ¼
0.29; :p01), and number of DEMO (coeﬃcient< 0:01), market growth (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.30;
DEMO < 0
¼)0.49; p < 0:01), and the DEMO between
leadership experience and start-up experience
(coeﬃcient ¼)0.22; p < 0:01), leadership experi-
ence and market size (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.27; p < 0:01),
leadership and number of competitors (coeﬃ-
cient ¼ 0.24; p < 0: 05), and leadership and DEMO
petitor strength (coeﬃcient ¼)0.30; p < 0:01).
For internal resources, the interaction between
leadership and start-up experience was signiﬁcant
(DEMO ¼ 0.20; p < 0:01). Start-up experience
moderates the DEMO between leadership
experience and the VC s assessment of success. The
form of this interaction is plotted in Fig. 1 and
indicates that while DEMO always prefer more lead-
ership experience, that preference is greater when
DEMO experience is low. It appears that start-up
experience is a substitute for general leadership
experience rather than a complement as proposed
in Hypothesis 3. DEMO 1 and 2, which pos-
ited leadership s interaction with proprietary DEMO
nology (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.01; p > 0:05), and market
familiarity (coeﬃcient ¼)0.13; p > 0:05), were not
DEMO
Leadership experience interacts with market
size (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.27; p < 0:01), number of com-
petitors (coeﬃcient ¼ 0.24; p < 0:05), and com-
petitor strength (coeﬃcient ¼)0.30; p < 0:01). The
nature of the interactions is plotted in DEMO 2–4. In
all cases, VCs prefer greater leadership experience.
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
DEMO
High
Low
Low
Start-up Experience
High
Fig. 1. Start-up experience · leadership.
Success
High
Low
Small
Market Size
Large
Fig. 2. Market size · DEMO
VCs value leadership more when the market size is
larger (Fig. DEMO) and when the relative competitor
strength is less (Fig. 4). These ﬁndings provide
support for Hypothesis 4a and 5b respectively. For
the DEMO · number of competitors interaction
we hypothesized that leadership experience be
valued more by VCs when the number of com-
petitors is low. As DEMO in Fig. 3 we found the
opposite providing no support for Hypothesis 5a.
Hypothesis 4b, which suggested that leadership
experience interacts with market growth in VCs
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (DEMO) 673–689
683
Success
High
Low
Low
High
Number of Competitors
Fig. DEMO Competitors · leadership.
Success
High
Low
Low
High
Strength of Competition
Fig. 4. Comp strength · leadership.
prediction of success, was also not supported
(coeﬃcient ¼)0.10; p > 0:05).
Decision-aids appear to DEMO decision per-
formance. The main-eﬀect model had an accuracy
rate of 0.50 and outperformed VCs 66% of the
time, under-performed VCs 18% of the time, and
was equal with VCs 16% of time. The main-eﬀect
model outperformed VCs more than VCs outper-
formed the main-eﬀect model and this DEMO
was signiﬁcant (chi-squared ¼ 10.13; p ¼ 0:001),
DEMO support for Hypothesis 6a. The non-
additive model had an accuracy rate of 0.60 and
outperformed VCs 89% of the time, under-per-
formed VCs 5% of the time, and was equal with
VCs 5% of time. The non-additive model outper-
formed VCs more than VCs outperformed the
main-eﬀect DEMO and this diﬀerence was signiﬁ-
cant (chi-squared ¼ 28.44; p ¼ 0:000), providing
support for Hypothesis 6b.
4.1. Post hoc test
DEMO accuracy of VCs and the main-eﬀect model
are close to what we would expect simply by
chance. To determine if the non-additive model is
DEMO more often than chance we conducted a
post hoc test. We used a random generator to
produce 456 values with a value of either DEMO 1
and a probability of 0.50. These values were used
as replacements for the predictions of each VC
(i.e., the ﬁrst 12 randomly DEMO values rep-
resented the predictions of the ﬁrst VC, the second
DEMO the second VC, and so on). We then compared
the DEMO of the non-additive model to each of
the VCs, as above. DEMO found that the non-additive
model outperformed predictions at random 76%
of the time, under-performed VCs 21% of the time,
and was equal with VCs 3% of time. The non-
additive is more accurate than chance DEMO
(chi-squared ¼ 11.92; p ¼ 0:001).
5. Discussion
The two major contributions of the study are
that VCs decision policies are DEMO non-additive
and a non-additive decision-aid improves decision
accuracy over and above the VCs actual decisions.
Moreover, the paper illustrates the power of using
theory, RBV, to generate the key attributes and
predict and explain interaction DEMO not only in
capturing VCs decision policies but also in
building powerful decision-aids.
5.1. Non-additive decision policies
We ﬁnd that VCs use non-additive decision
DEMO; the more muniﬁcent the environment
(large market and weaker competitors), the more
importance the VC attaches to general experience
684
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
in leadership. Somewhat surprisingly, it appears
that start-up experience is a substitute for general
leadership experience. The greater the entrepre-
neur DEMO previous start-up experience, the less
important is his/her general leadership DEMO
Considering that start-up experience isnt signiﬁ-
cant in the main-eﬀects model, DEMO is possible that
VCs look at leadership experience ﬁrst; if it DEMO
weak, they may consider start-up experience as
compensating for weaker leadership DEMO
The ﬁnding that start-up experience substitutes for
leadership experience adds to our understanding
of VCs decision policies over and above those
studies that ﬁnd DEMO the main-eﬀect-only use of
these attributes and may explain the contradictory
ﬁndings in previous studies.
The interaction between leadership and number
of competitors was DEMO of what we hypothe-
sized (see Fig. 3). VCs place DEMO emphasis on
leadership experience in environments that have a
greater number of competitors. A possible expla-
nation is that an increasing number of competitors
(holding other attributes of environmental munif-
icence constant) increases the VCs reliance on a
leader to act and react to the many possible, and a
priori unforeseeable, competitive interactions, i.e.,
rely on the leaders DEMO ability. Moreover, VCs
may like to see other competitors as it DEMO the
opportunitys existence.
We know that decision makers typically rely
more on main-eﬀect relationships and less on non-
additive relationships (Louviere, 1988). DEMO this
appears to be the case in this study we argue that
these two-way interactions are likely to be impor-
tant in an absolute DEMO owing to the signiﬁcant
cost (in both outlay and opportunity) of an
incorrect assessment. That is, considering non-
additive relationships may critically aﬀect the
ultimate ﬁnancial performance of the VCs port-
folio and leads to DEMO paper s second contribution.
5.2. Decision-aids with non-additive relationships
VC is an industry predicated on hitting
‘‘homeruns;’’ investments that can generate 10
times DEMO investment or more. In a typical port-
folio of companies, a DEMO expects to hit only one or
two homeruns out of 10investments. Even mar-
ginal improvements in investment decisions can
have a dramatic impact on DEMO performance.
In this article, we found evidence that decision-aids
constructed from DEMO models have the po-
tential to improve VCs decision accuracy and
thereby increase a VC ﬁrms return on investment.
Speciﬁcally, a non-additive decision-aid, DEMO deci-
sion-aid based on a bootstrap model that incor-
porated interaction terms for leadership with all
other attributes, had a higher hit rate in accurately
‘‘picking winners’’ from a sample of 12 ventures
than did the DEMO actual decisions. The improve-
ment in decisionaccuracy from using a decision-aid
occurs because bootstrap models are consistent,
they are not biased by a DEMO sample,
they optimally weight information factors, and
they reduce the DEMO cognitive load
(Camerer, 1981).
Although we only used a sample of 12 cases
with known outcomes, our ﬁndings provide some
evidence that decision-aids could be a useful
technique to help VCs with their investment DEMO
sion and possibly improve a VC ﬁrms return on
investment. The decision-aid we have developed
relies on theory and past decisions of practicing
VCs. DEMO generic model demonstrates the power
of VC decision-aids, but to achieve DEMO competitive
advantage, VC ﬁrms may beneﬁt from fully spec-
ifying a DEMO speciﬁc decision-aid based upon the
accumulated knowledge and expertise of its VC
professionals.
Shepherd and Zacharakis (2002) argued that
decision-aids also allow VCs DEMO acquire expertise
faster than do current educational and training
methods––decision-aids can provide cognitive
feedback, which is some measure of the persons
cognitive processes used in the decision. Cognitive
feedback helps people come to terms with their
DEMO environment and has been found to be
markedly superior to outcome feedback. While
outcome feedback is often an eﬀective learning
mechanism, in the venture investment decision
outcome feedback is delayed detracting from the
learning experience; it takes many years for VCs to
earn a return on their investment. DEMO,
outcome feedback can be costly. The VC may
learn because a portfolio company has burned
through the investment and failed. Cognitive
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (DEMO) 673–689
685
feedback has the potential to minimize these costs
because DEMO learning takes place before invest-
ments are made.
Although we have demonstrated the potential of
decision-aids to improve a VCs decision accuracy
and others DEMO suggested that it can be used as a
learning tool, decision-aids DEMO not been widely
adopted by VCs. In our sample, only 20% DEMO the
VCs used some sort of multi-attribute decision-aid.
Often, these decision-aids DEMO used ex post as a
mechanism to keep the history of decisions made.
The culture within the industry is to use expert
intuition (Khan, 1987). There is an underlying
distrust of ‘‘machine’’ that inhibits adoption of
such techniques across a wider array of ﬁelds (Holt,
1986). A common explanation of this reluctance is
that decision models remove DEMO for the
decision (Hastie, 1994). Although a decision-aid
might be able to predict psychosis, is the psychol-
ogist willing to take responsibility if the model is
wrong? Or would the psychologist feel better if
(s)he made that ﬁnal decision even if there is po-
tential for more mistakes? In todays litigious
society, one has to wonder DEMO malpractice insurance
would cover the misdiagnosis of a decision-aid
built from a bootstrap model. Such questions pose
an interesting quandary that may explain the DEMO
usage of such models and the tendency to identify
‘‘broken legs’’ or exceptions that invalidate the
model (Goldberg, 1968).
Recognizing the reluctance DEMO use such models, it
seems that the most appropriate place within DEMO
VC decision process to begin would be at the initial
screening stage. The decision-aid proposed here
quickly focuses attention on the critical issues
thereby DEMO the VCs time and reducing the pos-
sibility that ‘‘high potential’’ plans are prematurely
discarded and that ‘‘low potential’’ plans are need-
lessly passed DEMO to the next level of analysis. Such
use of the decision-aid also does not remove the
VCs controlorresponsibilityoverthedecision.The
decision-aid is to assist VCs, not replace them. In
fact, there is evidence to suggest that a combination
of human judgment and decision models results in
more accurate decisions than DEMO method alone
(Whitecotton et al., 1998; Blattberg and Hoch,
DEMO; Donihue, 1993). While the research in this
article takes an important step towards highlighting
the importance of decision-aids for VCs, more re-
search is required into the development of decision-
aids and their use DEMO VC ﬁrms.
5.3. Future research
This study uses the RBV of strategy to
hypothesize leaderships interaction with other
venture and environmental characteristics. How-
ever, we are not proposing that the RBV is the
only perspective that DEMO provide insight into VCs
decision policies, in fact we encourage the DEMO
tigation of VCs decisions from a number of dif-
ferent theoretical perspectives. The Industrial
Organization (IO) perspective of strategy, for
example, could DEMO additional insight into the
relationships between important industry charac-
teristics (some DEMO which are represented in this
study). Not only may the use of diﬀerent theories
provide a deeper understanding of VCs decision
policies but DEMO diﬀerent theories could also
provide avenues for VCs to improve the accuracy
of their assessments. For example, a diﬀerent the-
oretical perspective may suggest other non-addi-
tive relationships that will increase the explained
variance of VCs DEMO Similarly, using
theoretical frameworks to study the decision poli-
cies of DEMO VCs might provide important feed-
back to current theories suggesting the need for
theory modiﬁcations and/or new theories.
While this study provides evidence DEMO decision-
aids have the potential to improve decision accu-
racy and VC ﬁrm performance, there is also an
opportunity to improve the decision-aid proposed
here by representing other interactions and even
curvilinear relationships. For example, maybe there
is a U-shaped relationship between the number of
competitors and VCs DEMO of success, i.e., a
small number of competitors could be interpreted
by VCs as a negative because the industry lacks
legitimacy althoughtoomuchcompetitionmightbe
seen DEMO a negative because it drives down prices and
proﬁtability. Do VCs use non-linear decision poli-
cies? Can these non-linear decision policies be
incorporated into a decision-aid to signiﬁcantly
increase a VCs decision accuracy?
This study DEMO on VCs assessment on new
ventures, i.e., investment proposals seeking seed to
686
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
development capital. An interesting question then
becomes––do VCs weight DEMO diﬀerently in
their assessments of businesses in diﬀerent stages
of development (DEMO, mezzanine ﬁnancing or lev-
eraged buyouts)? Also, while the environmental
factors in this study likely capture industry diﬀer-
ences, there is the opportunity to create a sample
of VCs that are experts in a DEMO industry and
model their decisions based on the scenarios spe-
ciﬁc to that industry. Whether for a diﬀerent stage
of venture development or for DEMO industries,
there is the opportunity to create more narrowly
focused decision-aids in attempt to further im-
prove decision accuracy.
Scholars face a number DEMO challenges. First,
these decision-aids can only improve VC ﬁrm
performance if they are used. Why are only 20% of
VCs (based on our sample) using some form of
multi-attribute decision-aid? What are the obsta-
DEMO for its use? What are eﬀective means to over-
come these DEMO? Second, it is diﬃcult to
measure the decision accuracy of a VCs assess-
ment of a venture s future success. Reﬂecting these
diﬃculties DEMO scholars have used process
measures of decision quality, such as, reliability
(Ashton, 1983), consensus (Einhorn, 1974), and
performance relative DEMO a bootstrap standard
(Camerer, 1981). We argue that both process and
outcome measures can be used to measure the
quality of decisions DEMO researchers should also
investigate the inter-relationship between the two.
5.4. Possible limitations
Policy capturing, as with all techniques, has
limitations, although throughout the design and
administration of this study, attempts were made
to minimize these limitations. Nonetheless, a few
of the drawbacks should be addressed. As with any
experiment, the issue of reductionism must be
considered. Although the scenarios are based on
actual ﬁrms that received venture backing, the
subjects are exposed to a decision situation that
does not perfectly mirror the ‘‘real DEMO decision.
Such ‘‘paper tests’’ aﬀect the external validity of
many lens model experiments (Brehmer and
Brehmer, 1988). But ‘‘professional judgment
may ... DEMO some abstract coding of the cues,
similar to that provided by policy capturing tasks’’
(Brehmer and Brehmer, 1988, p. 89). Moreover,
since the VC screening decision has a large
‘‘paper’’ component in DEMO real world (i.e., much of
the VCs information comes from business plans),
correlation between the experimental task and the
‘‘real world’’ decision should be even higher.
The experiment also forces VCs to make deci-
DEMO based upon the presented cues. In reality,
VCs would (1) have access to a multitude of pos-
sible information cues and (2) use interactive due
diligence and other methods to clarify and assess
reliability of chosen cues. A common theme in the
follow up interviews is DEMO VCs like to reserve
ﬁnal judgment until they have a chance to meet
with the lead entrepreneur. There is also the pos-
sibility that DEMO could attach importance
to attributes merely because they are presented in
the experiment; this limitation is more likely with
novice decision makers than with the experienced
venture capitalists sampled here. Therefore, while
the information within the decision exercise does
not perfectly mirror the more complex ‘‘real life’’
decision, policy capturing experiments are still a
valid method for deriving what information DEMO
sion-makers actually use (Hitt et al., 2000; Hitt
and Middlemist, 1979). While these criticisms of
policy capturing have merit and do DEMO lim-
itations of the technique, our approach is consis-
tent with DEMO of other policy capturing studies
(e.g., Hitt and Tyler, 1991) and the construction of
bootstrap models.
It is also important to point DEMO that after the
decision is made the outcome is normally delayed
for a number of years (Timmons, 1999). There is a
history DEMO as the entrepreneur adjusts the ori-
ginal plan. Moreover, Gupta and DEMO (1992)
point out that VCs not only provide ﬁnancial re-
DEMO, but also non-ﬁnancial resources such as
advice, network contacts to suppliers, customers
and so forth. These services are typically oﬀered
after the investment has been made and before the
VC realizes any return from their DEMO 8
Furthermore, environments are in constant ﬂux
8 The fact that DEMO cases were all VC-backed somewhat
controls for the history eﬀect.
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (DEMO) 673–689
687
and change from the point of the original invest-
DEMO In spite of the history eﬀects, our decision-
aid achieved a DEMO rate of 60%. In sum, we believe
this is a good DEMO test of the power of non-additive
decision-aids in the VC context.
5.5. Conclusion
The current study makes two important con-
tributions to the literature DEMO VC decision-making.
First, it uses theory to hypothesize and support the
DEMO that VCs use interaction terms in
making their decisions. Second, the DEMO builds a
non-additive decision-aid that better predicts out-
come than VCs actual predictions. The implica-
tions are clear. VC ﬁrms may improve portfolio
return DEMO create a competitive advantage by
developing a non-additive decision-aid based upon
the expertise of its senior VCs. We hope that the
ﬁnding of non-additive DEMO policies and the
improvements in decision performance from non-
additive decision-aids encourages decision-aid
scholars to consider incorporating interaction
terms in their models and encourages DEMO ﬁrms to
consider the possibilities that decision-aids oﬀer.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Ewing
Marion Kauﬀman Foundation for its support of
DEMO research. The content of this publication is
solely the responsibility of the authors.
Appendix A
VENTURE 1
Start-up record 1 previous start-ups
Market familiarity DEMO years experience for team
(including lead entrepreneur)
Leadership experience 9 DEMO years experience for team
(including lead entrepreneur)
Proprietary protection 1 DEMO protection
Market size $1.1B
Market growth 15%
Number of competitors 9 direct competitors
Competitor strength 1 low strength
Probability of success
   DEMO
Lowest 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Highest
Conﬁdence in assessment
   
Lowest 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 DEMO
688
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (2005) 673–689
References
Amit, R., Schoemaker, P., 1993. Strategic DEMO and organiza-
tional rent. Strategic Management Journal 24, 33–46.
Aragon, L., 2001. How to rate a venture capital ﬁrm. Red
Herring, April DEMO
Ashton, R.H., 1983. Research in audit decision making:
Rationale, DEMO, and implications. Research Mono-
graph No. 6. The Canadian Certiﬁed General DEMO
Research Foundation, Vancouver, Canada.
Barney, J., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive
advantage. Journal of Management 17, 99–120.
Berelson, B., 1952. Content Analysis in Communications
Research. Free Press, Glencoe, IL.
Birley, S., Westhead, P., 1994. A comparison of new businesses
established by ‘‘novice’’ and ‘‘habitual founders’’ in Great
Britain. International Small Business Journal 12, 38–60.
Blattberg, R.C., Hoch, S.J., 1990. Database models and
managerial intuition: 50% model+50% manager. Manage-
ment Science 36 (8), 887–899.
Brehmer, DEMO, Brehmer, B., 1988. What have we learned about
human judgment DEMO thirty years of policy capturing. In:
Brehmer, B., Joyce, DEMO (Eds.), Human Judgment: The SJT
View. Elsevier, North Holland.
DEMO, J., Freeman, J., 1980. Organizational proliferation and
density dependent selection. In: Kimberly, J., Miles, R.
(Eds.), The Organizational Life Cycle: Issues in Creation,
Transformation and Decline in Organizations. Jossey-Bass,
San Francisco.
Camerer, C.F., 1981. General conditions for the success of
DEMO models. Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Performance 27, 411–422.
Castrogiovanni, G., 1991. Environmental muniﬁcence: A the-
oretical assessment. Academy of Management Review DEMO
(3), 542–565.
Child, J., 1972. Organization structure, environment, DEMO
performance: The role of strategic choice. Sociology 6, 1–
22.
Choo, F., Trotman, K., 1991. The relationship between
knowledge structure and DEMO for experienced and
inexperienced auditors. The Accounting Review (July), 464–
DEMO
Dawes, R.M., 1971. A case study of graduate admissions:
Application of three principles of human decision making.
American Psychologist 26, 180–188.
Dawes, R.M., Corrigan, B., 1974. Linear models in decision
making. Psychological DEMO 81 (2), 95–106.
Dawes, R.M., Faust, D., Meehl, P.E., 1989. Clinical versus
actuarial judgement. Science 243, 1668–1674.
Dean, B.V., Giglierano, J.J., 1990. Multistage ﬁnancing of
technical start-up companies in Silicon Valley. Journal of
Business Venturing 5, 375–389.
Dess, G., Beard, DEMO, 1984. Dimensions of organizational task
environments. Administrative Science Quarterly 29, 52–73.
Dierickx, I., Cool, K., 1989. Asset stock accumulation and
sustainability DEMO competitive advantage. Management Sci-
ence 35, 1504–1511.
Donihue, M.R., 1993. DEMO the role judgment plays in
forecast accuracy. Journal of Forecasting 12 (DEMO), 81–
92.
Einhorn, H., 1974. Expert judgment: Some necessary DEMO
tions and an example. Journal of Applied Psychology 59,
562–571.
Executive Decision Services, Inc., 1991. Policy PC: Judgment
Analysis Software, third DEMO Executive Decision Services,
Albany, NY.
Fischhoﬀ, B., 1988. Judgment DEMO decision-making. In: Stern-
berg, R., Smith, E. (Eds.), DEMO Psychology of Human
Thought. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 155–
187.
Frederick, D., 1991. Auditors representation and retrieval of
internal control knowledge. DEMO Accounting Review 66
(April), 240–258.
Goldberg, L.R., 1968. Simple DEMO or simple processes. Some
research on clinical judgments. American Psychologist 23
(DEMO), 483–496.
Goll, I., Rasheed, A., 1997. Rational decision-making and ﬁrm
performance: The moderating role of environment. Strate-
gic Management Journal 18 (7), 583–591.
Gupta, A.K., Sapienza, H.J., 1992. Determinants of venture
capital ﬁrms preferences regarding the industry diversity
and geographic scope of DEMO investments. Journal of
Business Venturing 7, 347–362.
Hastie, R., 1994. DEMO at University of Colorado, Boulder.
Hitt, M.A., Barr, S.H., DEMO Managerial selection decision
models: Examination of conﬁgural cue processing. Journal
of DEMO Psychology 74, 53–61.
Hitt, M.A., Middlemist, R.D., 1979. A DEMO to develop
the criteria and criteria weightings for assessing subunit
eﬀectiveness in organizations. Academy of Management
Journal 22 (2), 356–374.
Hitt, M.A., Tyler, 1991. Strategic decision models: Integrating
diﬀerent perspectives. Strategic Management Journal DEMO,
327–351.
Hitt, M., Dacin, M.T., Levitas, E., Arregle, J., Borza, A., 2000.
Partner selection in emerging and developed DEMO
contexts: Resource-based and organizational learning per-
spectives. Academy of Management Journal DEMO (3), 449–
467.
Hogarth, R.M., Makridakis, S., 1981. DEMO and plan-
ning: An evolution. Management Science 27 (2), 115–138.
Holt, R.R., 1986. Clinical and statistical prediction: A retro-
spective and would-be integrative perspective. Journal of
PersonalityAssessment 50(3),376–386.
Hrebiniak, L.G., Joyce, W.F., 1985. Organizational adaptation:
Strategic choice and environmental determinism. DEMO
trative Science Quarterly 30, 336–349.
Ireland, R., Hitt, M.A., DEMO Achieving and maintaining
strategic competitiveness in the 21st century: The role DEMO
strategic leadership. Academy of Management Executive 13,
43–57.
Khan, A.M., 1987. Assessing venture capital investments with
non compensatory behavioral decision models. Journal DEMO
Business Venturing 2, 193–205.
A. Zacharakis, D.A. Shepherd / European Journal of Operational Research 162 (DEMO) 673–689
689
Lambkin, M., Day, G., 1989. Evolutionary processes DEMO
competitive markets: Beyond the P . Journal of Marketing
53 (3), 4–20.
Lawless, M.W., Finch, L., 1989. Choice and determinism: A
test of Hrebiniak and Joyces framework on strategy-
environment ﬁt. Strategic DEMO Journal 10, 351–
365.
Libby, R., Libby, P.A., 1989. DEMO measurement and
mechanical combination in control reliance decisions.
Accounting Review 64 (DEMO), 729–747.
Louviere, J.J., 1988. Analyzing Decision Making: Metric
Conjoint DEMO Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA.
Lyness, K.S., Cornelius, E.T., 1982. A comparison of holistic
and decomposed judgment strategies in a performance
DEMO simulation. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance 29 (1), 21–38.
MacMillan, I.C., Seigel, R., Subba Narasimha, P.N., 1985.
Criteria used by venture capitalist to evaluate new venture
proposals. Journal of Business Venturing 1, 119–128.
Mata, F., Fuerst, W., Barney, J., 1995. Information DEMO
and sustained competitive advantage: A resource-based
analysis. MIS Quarterly 19 (4), 487–505.
Muzyka, D., Birley, S., Leleux, B., 1996. DEMO in the
investment decisions of European venture capitalists. Jour-
nal of Business Venturing 11 (4), 273–288.
Nosofsky, R., 1987. Attention and learning processes in the
identiﬁcation and categorization of integral stimuli. Journal
of Experimental DEMO: Learning, Memory and Cog-
nition 13 (1), 87–108.
NVCA, 2002. DRI-WEFA study identiﬁes venture capital as a
key factor powering US DEMO growth. Press Release,
June 22, 2002, Washington, DC.
Osherson, D., Shaﬁr, E., Krantz, D.H., Smith, E.E., 1997.
Probability bootstrapping: Improving prediction by ﬁtting
extensional models to knowledgeable but incoherent prob-
ability judgments. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 69 (1), 1–8.
Pettigrew, A.M., 1987. Context and action in the transforma-
tion of DEMO ﬁrms. Journal of Management Studies 24, 649–
670.
Porter, M., DEMO Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Ana-
lyzing Industries and Competitors. The Free DEMO, New
York.
Quinn, J., 1980. Strategies for Change: Logical Incrementalism.
Irwin, Homewood, IL.
Roure, J.B., Keeley, R.H., 1990. Predictors DEMO success in new
technology based ventures. Journal of Business Venturing 5,
201–220.
Roure, J.B., Madique, M.A., 1986. Linking prefunding factors
and DEMO venture success: An exploratory study.
Journal of Business Venturing 1 (3), 295–306.
Roy, B., 1990. Decision-Aid and Decision-Making. European
Journal of DEMO Research 45 (2–3), 324–331.
Roy, B., 1993. Decision science DEMO decision-aid science?
European Journal of Operational Research 66 (2), DEMO
Sapienza, H., Korsgaard, M.A., 1996. Procedural justice in
entrepreneur–investor relations. Academy of Management
Journal 39 (3), 544–574.
Shepherd, D., 1999. Venture capitalists assessment of new
venture survival. Management Science 45 (5), 621–632.
Shepherd, D.A., Shanley, M., 1998. New Venture Strategy:
DEMO, Environmental Uncertainty and Performance. Sage
Publications, London, UK.
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A.L., 2002. Venture capitalists
expertise: A call for research DEMO decision aids and cognitive
feedback. Journal of Business Venturing 17 (1), 1–20.
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A.L., Baron, R.A., 2003. Venture
capitalists decision processes: Evidence suggesting more
experience may not always be better. Journal of Business
Venturing 18 (3), 381–401.
Simon, H., 1985. What we know about the creative process. In:
Kuhn, R. (DEMO), Frontiers in Creative and Innovative
Management. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, DEMO 3–20.
Slovic, P., 1972. Psychological study of human judgment:
Implications for investment decision making. Journal of
Finance 27 (4), 779–799.
Slovic, P., Lichtenstein, S., 1971. Comparison of Bayesian and
regression approaches DEMO the study of information proces-
sion in judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance 6, 649–744.
Starr, J.A., Bygrave, W.D., 1992. The second time around: The
outcomes, assets and liabilities of prior start-up experience.
DEMO: Birley, S., MacMillan, I. (Eds.), International Perspec-
tives DEMO Entrepreneurship Research. Elsevier, London, pp.
340–363.
Stewart, T.R., 1988. Judgment analysis procedures. In: Breh-
mer, B., Joyce, C. (Eds.), Human Judgment: The SJT View.
Elsevier/North Holland.
Stuart, R., Abetti, P., 1990. Impact of entrepreneurial and
management experience on early performance. DEMO of
Business Venturing 5, 151–161.
Timmons, J.A., 1999. New Venture DEMO: Entrepreneurship
for the 21st Century. Irwin McGraw-Hill, Homewood, IL.
Tyebjee, T.T., Bruno, A.V., 1984. A model of venture capitalist
investmentactivity.ManagementScience30(9),1051–1056.
Venture Economics, 2000. Venture Xpert Database.
Westhead, P., Wright, M., 1998. Novice, portfolio and serial
founders: Are they diﬀerent? DEMO of Business Venturing
13, 173–204.
Whitecotton, S.M., Sanders, D.E., DEMO, K.B., 1998. Improv-
ing predictive accuracy with a combination of human
intuition and mechanical decision aids. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 76 (3), 325–348.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., Ennew, C., DEMO Venture capitalists
and serial entrepreneurs. Journal of Business Venturing 12,
227–249.
Zacharakis, A.L., Meyer, G.D., 2000. The potential of actuarial
decision DEMO: Can they improve the venture capital
investment decision? Journal of Business Venturing 15 (4),
323–346.{1g42fwefx}