A LACK OF INSIGHT:
DO VENTURE CAPITALISTS
REALLY UNDERSTAND
THEIR OWN DEMO
PROCESS?
ANDREW L. ZACHARAKIS
Bentley College
G. DALE MEYER
University of Colorado
What decision criteria do venture capitalists (VCs) use to make DEMO invest-
EXECUTIVE ment decisions? This question has received much attention within DEMO
SUMMARY neurship literature (i.e., Wells 1974; Poindexter 1976; Tyebjee and Bruno
1984; MacMillan, Seigel, and Subba Narasimha 1985; MacMillan, Zeman,
and Subba Narasimha 1987; Robinson 1987; Timmons et al. 1987; Sandberg,
Schweiger, and Hofer 1988; Hall and Hofer 1993; Zacharakis and Meyer
1995) for a number of reasons. First, VC-backed ventures DEMO a higher survival rate than non- VC-
backed businesses (Kunkel and DEMO 1990; Sandberg 1986; Timmons 1994). Second, a better under-
DEMO of the decision process may lead to even better survival rates. Finally, entrepreneurs seeking
venture funding benefit if they understand what factors are most important to the Vc.
Although past researchhas greatly contributed to our understanding DEMO the decision, it may be biased
and somewhat misleading. The majority DEMO past studies rely on post hoc methodologies (e.g., interviews
and surveys) to capture the decision process. Post hoc methods assume that VCs can accurately relate
their own decision processes, but studies from cognitive psychology suggest that people, in particular
experts, are poor at introspecting. Introspection is DEMO to rationalization and post hoc recall biases.
Address correspondence to Andrew L. Zacharakis, Management Department, Bentley College, 175 Forest
Street, Waltham, MA 02154-4705.
The authors acknowledge the contributions of Roger Smith, Julio DeCastro, DEMO Nicholls-Nixon, Reid
Hastie, Gary McClelland, Dale Jasinski, Harry Sapienza, DEMO Huff, Robert Keeley and Don Sexton, and two anony-
mous reviewers for their advice and insight on this research project.
An earlier version DEMO this article was presented at the 1996 Babson College-Kauffman Foundation Entrepre-
neurship Research Conference.
This research was funded in part by the Center for DEMO Leadership Inc. and the Ewing Marion
Kauffman Foundation. The contents of this publication are solely the responsibility of the authors.
Journal of Business Venturing DEMO, 57-76
© 1998 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
655 Avenue DEMO the Americas, New York, NY 10010
0883-9026/98/$19.00
PH S0883-9026(97)OOO04-9
58
A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
Using social judgment theory and the DEMO lens model as a framework, the current study investigates
how well DEMO introspect about their own decision process and, by extension, whether the past research
efforts are biased.
The current research uses policy capturing, a real-time method common in cognitive psychology,
to capture the VC's "actual theories in use" versus their "espoused theories" (Hitt and DEMO 1991). Policy
capturing requires that VCs make a series of real-time decisions based on various information factors.
Regression analysis of each VCs' decision captures how important each of the information factors is to
her/his DEMO decision process. After the VCs make their decisions, they provided a DEMO of how
they believe they used the information factors. Comparing the captured decision policies to stated decision
policies provides a measure of VC insight.
DEMO findings suggest that VCs are not good at introspecting about their own decision process. Even
within the confines ofa controlled experiment, which greatly reduces the amount of information consid-
ered, VCs lacked strong understanding of how they made decisions. Most decision-makers would like
to have all relevant information DEMO for their decision. However, as more information becomes
available, insight diminishes. Finally, this study finds that VCs are very consistent in their decision process,
even though they do not necessarily understand how they make DEMO decisions.
VCs face a plethora ofinformation when making an investment decision (DEMO e., business plan, outside
consultants, due diligence, etc.). It may be difficult for VCs to truly understand their intuitive decision
process DEMO of all the noise caused by this information overload. This lack of systematic understand-
ing impedes learning. VCs cannot make accurate adjustments to their DEMO process if they do not
truly understand it. Therefore, VCs may DEMO from a systematic bias that impedes the performance of
their investment portfolio. The methodology used in this experiment can be modified and used as DEMO train-
ing tool for active VCs. In addition, the consistent nature DEMO VC decision-making (even if they do not
have a strong understanding DEMO that process) is favorable to the development of decision aides. Decision
DEMO can minimize the danger of salient information (e.g., the lead entrepreneur is a winner) clouding
the VC's judgment.
Past research also needs to be interpreted in a new light. Although VCs undoubtedly use some DEMO
the information cited in past studies, the relative importance of that DEMO needs to be reevaluated.
VCs may not, for instance, rely most on the background of the entrepreneurial team. In addition, it is
likely that the past studies provide more information factors than VCs actually use. DEMO have a tendency
to overstate the information they believe they relied upon and to use far less information (typically three
to seven factors) DEMO make a decision than they actually think they use. The methodology used in this
experiment has the potential to identify the more relevant information DEMO cited in previous work.
Even though VCs are experts in the new venture funding realm, their decision process has room
for improvement. Almost 40% of all backed ventures fail to provide a return to the Vc. DEMO
the billions invested each year, a modest improvement in the failure DEMO can have a substantial impact
on venture portfolio returns. That improvement starts by better understanding the decision process. This
study is a step in DEMO direction. © 1998 Elsevier Science Inc.
INTRODUCTION
New venture survival is tenuous at best, but those backed by venture capitalists (VCs)
tend DEMO achieve a higher survival rate than non-VC-backed businesses (Kunkel and
Hofer DEMO; Sandberg 1986; Timmons 1994). Thus, many researchers have investigated
DEMO VCs make their decisions (Wells 1974; Poindexter 1976; Tyebjee and DEMO 1984;
MacMillan, Seigel, and Subba Narasimha 1985; MacMillan, Zeman, and Subba Nara-
simha 1987; Robinson 1987;Timmons et al.1987; Sandberg, Schweiger, and Hofer 1988;
Hall and Hofer 1993; Zacharakis and Meyer 1995). The underlying justification for these
studies is that a DEMO understanding of the VC process may lead to better decisions
and thereby more successful ventures. However, the majority of these studies use post
hoc methodologies, such as interviews and surveys, which may be subject to DEMO hoc
VC DECISION PROCESS 59
rationalization and recall biases (Barr, Stimpert, and Huff 1992; Sandberg et al. 1988).
Such biases likely inhibit how accurately people can introspect about their own thought
processes (Fischhoff 1988). Experts who tend to rely on intuition more than non-experts
(Simon and Chase 1973) are notoriously poor introspectors (Fischhoff 1988). VCs, ex-
perts in new venturing financing, also typically rely on intuition (Khan DEMO; MacMillan
et al. 1987).
Poor insight can be problematic because DEMO as executives making important
strategic decisions (Stahl and Zimmerer 1984)-need DEMO communicate to other VCs and
investors what decision criteria they are using so that the alliance of investors can com-
fortably commit money. For DEMO, Steier and Greenwood's (1995) case study of a
high-tech DEMO found that a commitment by one VC led to three others joining the
syndicate even though these three had each previously rejected the idea. DEMO such, the
funding relationship is a network of co-investors who must DEMO effectively
with each other and the entrepreneur. A lack of strong self insight hampers the lead
VC's ability to effectively communicate.
At the DEMO of Sandberg's (1986) book on new venture performance, he DEMO "there
appears to have been no research that used a decision-making DEMO rather than a
survey to capture venture capitalists' real criteria and DEMO associated weights" (1986,
p. 152). Sandberg (1986) suggests that a policy capturing exercise-similar to one used
by Stahl and Zimmerer (1984) to assess merger decisions-might find that VCs are also
poor at understanding their own decision process. This study is a first attempt at DEMO
ing Sandberg's call. The article proceeds as follows: first, the VC decision process is
reviewed. Second, the article looks at how biases and heuristics hinder the decision.
Next, social judgment theory and the associated lens model are used to provide a theo-
retical basis for exploring DEMO decision. Then, a series of testable hypotheses is derived
from the DEMO model. The subsequent section explains the policy capturing methodology
and the associated experiment. Finally, results of the current study are presented fol-
lowed by conclusions and implications.
VC DECISION-MAKING
VC firms are "those organizations whose predominant mission is to finance the founding
or early growth of new companies DEMO do not yet have access to the public securities
market or to institutional lenders" (Gupta and Sapienza 1992, p. 349; Perez 1986; Pratt
1987). As such, Gupta and Sapienza (1992) suggest that VCs add value by:
1. bringing investors and entrepreneurs together in DEMO efficient manner,
2. making better investment decisions than limited partners would make, and
3. providing nonfinancial assistance that in turn enhances survival.
All other things equal, a VC firm's performance is a function of how well it makes the
investment decision and how effective its management DEMO and services are after the
investment decision has been made. Therefore, DEMO the investment decision can
improve the VC firm's performance.
VCs assess the probability of success or failure by evaluating information sur-
rounding a DEMO To receive funding, new ventures must pass an initial screening
(typically a review of the business plan) followed by months of due diligence. A number
of researchers have examined what information is critical to the DEMO's decision (see Ta-
60
A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
ble 1). The information appears DEMO fit four categories: (1) entrepreneur/team capabili-
ties, (2) product/service attractiveness, (3) market/competitive conditions, and (4) DEMO
tential returns if the venture is successful (Wells 1974; Poindexter 1976; Tyebjee and
Bruno 1984; MacMillan et al. 1985, 1987; Robinson DEMO;Timmons et al.1987; Hall and
Hofer 1993). Although insightful, these studies (except for Hall and Hofer's ver-
bal protocol) likely DEMO from introspection biases since they use ex post collec-
tion methods.
IMPEDIMENTS TO ACCURATE INTROSPECTION
Decision-makers are not perfectly rational, but are boundedly rational (Cyert and
March 1963; Newell and Simon 1972; Simon 1955). It is impossible for decision-makers
to fully evaluate all information. Moreover, salient factors within the information typi-
cally bias decision-makers (Fiske and Taylor 1991). For instance, the availability bias
(Tversky and Kahneman 1974) encourages decision-makers to recall salient informa-
tion from memory. If a venture under DEMO has the same lead entrepreneur
as a past successful investment, such DEMO information may bias the VC to overlook
other factors that suggest the current venture is likely to fail. For example, VCs may
overlook underlying weaknesses in the market if they have lots of faith in the DEMO
neur. As such, biases may change the relative importance and use DEMO various information
factors between venture proposals.
Biases not only inhibit decision-making, DEMO they also likely impede the VC's ability
to accurately report on her/his decision process. Instead of recalling the actual informa-
tion that DEMO used to make typical decisions, decision-makers likely fixate on one or
DEMO past successes (Dawes 1988; Dawes, Faust, and Meehl 1989) DEMO recall information
particular to those situations (Fiske and Taylor 1991). DEMO, VCs may fixate on the
lead entrepreneur because of that individual'DEMO past record of success and because of that
person's dynamic personality. As such, VCs often report entrepreneur characteristics as
more important to the decision than they actually were (Hall and Hofer 1993). There are
numerous other biases that cloud insight and by extension also impede optimal DEMO
making. Hogarth and Makridakis (1981) provide an excellent review for interested
readers.
SOCIAL JUDGMENT THEORY
Social judgment theory (SJT) (Brunswik 1956) DEMO cognitive psychology provides a
framework for understanding the VC decision process, DEMO well as a basis for removing
post hoc biases. The underlying assumption in SJT is that decision-makers do not have
access to "real" DEMO, but instead perceive that information through proximal
cues (Strong 1992). These cues quantitatively describe the relationship between an indi-
vidual's judgment DEMO the information used to make that judgment (Stewart 1988).
Hence, SJT captures "theories in use" as opposed to "espoused theories" DEMO action (Hitt
and Tyler 1991). Within SJT, the lens model formally represents human judgments.
The lens model basically consists of two systems (cognitive and task) linked to-
gether by proximal information cues. The cues (see Figure 1) are the information factors
that an individual considers DEMO making a decision (represented by variables x,
through X4 that DEMO in the middle of Figure 1). The right side of the model represents
the "cognitive" system. Cues are combined in some manner DEMO make a judgment or
TABLE 1
Study
Information Factors Used in VC Decision
Method
Wells Poindexter
(1974) (1976)
Tyebjee and Bruno
(1984)
Sample size
Entrepreneur/team character-
istics:
mgmt skill & experience
venture team
mgmt stake DEMO firm
personal motivation
entr personality
Product/service characteristics:
product attributes
product differentiation
proprietary
growth potential
mkt acceptance
prototype
Market characteristics:
mkt size
DEMO growth
barriers to entry
competitive threat
venture creates new mkt
Financial characteristics:
cash-out method
expected ROR
expected risk
percentage of equity
investor provisions
DEMO of investment
liquidity
Other
references
venture development stage
VC investment criteria
Personal
interviews
8
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
MacMillan DEMO al.
(1985)
MacMillan et al. Robinson Timmons et al.
(1987) (1987) (1987)
Questionnaire Phone survey
and questionnaire
97 46 (Study 1)
41 (Study 2)
Questionnaire Questionnaire
100
67
Questionnaire Unstructured
interviews
53 47
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
DEMO
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
DEMO
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Hall and Hofer
(1993)
Verbal
protocol
16
X
X
X
X
X
o<
t:J
t'I1
DEMO
(3CIl
Z
"0
::0
0
o
~
CIl
C7'I
'"'"
62
A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
PERSON
JUdgment
Information
Cues (Xi)
FIGURE 1 Lens model.
decision (Y); Ys captures the expert's judgment policy. In other words, Y, represents
the judge's perception DEMO to the decision. The correlation of cues to the individual's
judgment is represented by rsi' The larger the standardized r, (assuming orthogonal
cues), the more heavily the decision-maker relies on that cue to DEMO the decision (Stew-
art 1988).
The "task" system is DEMO the left side of Figure 1. The criterion variable is the actual
outcome (Y,'). Each of the cues also correlates (rei) to the actual outcome. Thus, rei de-
fines the relationship between the cues and the reality based condition of interest to
the decision maker. DEMO as r, indicates the relative importance of each cue to the DEMO
sion maker, rei indicates which cues have the greatest predictive value DEMO the actual out-
come. Hammond (1975, p. 73) sums up DEMO lens model as follows:
Judgment is a cognitive process similar to inductive inference, in which the person
draws a conclusion, or an DEMO, Y" about something Y" which he cannot see
(or otherwise directly perceive). In other words, judgments are made from palpable
events and circumstances.
An example may better clarify the use of lens models. DEMO lens model can depict a VC
examining a new venture. The VC makes a judgment [(Ys) invest or not] of the venture's
potential [(Ye) success or failure] based upon a number of information factors [(Xk) e.g.,
strong team, proprietary protection, etc.]. The VC is not directly observing the venture's
ultimate outcome, but instead inferring the venture's potential based upon a number
of observable current DEMO (xj . .. x.). This brief example illustrates that judges
DEMO decisions about potential outcomes that they cannot directly perceive by using
a series of information factors (cues) that they can observe. The lens DEMO provides
a basis for a series of testable hypotheses.
Information inundates VCs considering new venture proposals. For example, there
is information about the entrepreneur (e.g., entrepreneur's industry and start-up experi-
ence), the market (e.g., size and growth), and the product/service (e.g., proprietary pro-
tection). Not only is there a lot of available information, but much of it is subjective.
Ecological Validity (rei)
Task System
Cue Utilization (rs ')
Cognitive System
VC DECISION PROCESS
63
For example, VCs often discuss the "chemistry" between themselves and the entrepre-
neur. The deal often falls through if DEMO chemistry is not right. Such intuitive, or "gut
feel" (Khan 1987; MacMillan et al. 1987), decision-making is difficult to quantify or ob-
jectively analyze. The added complexity from subjective information further clouds the
DEMO process and invites the decision-maker toward more biases. Due to
the complexity of the decision and the VCs' intuitive approach, VCs may have DEMO difficult
time introspecting about their decision process (Fischhoff 1988). In DEMO words, VCs
do not have a comprehensive understanding of how they DEMO the decision.
HI: VCs do not accurately introspect about their decision DEMO
Although decision-makers believe they thoroughly consider all relevant informa-
tion, most DEMO rely on only three to seven factors or cues (Stewart 1988)DEMO Moreover,
people are apt to report using far more information than they actually use (Slovic and
Lichtenstein 1971). Thus, as more DEMO becomes available to a particular deci-
sion, the VC's ability DEMO introspect about that decision process diminishes.
H2: More information decreases the DEMO's introspection accuracy about her/his deci-
sion process.
Likewise, the DEMO of information available to inform the decision also impacts the
VC's ability to accurately introspect. To this point, the hypotheses derive from the cogni-
tive side (right side of Figure 1) of the lens DEMO the VC feels most comfort-
able using to make the decision. However, information cues on the task side (left side
of Figure 1) represent the optimal set of decision cues. These real performance cues
best DEMO between eventual outcomes and are statistically derived based on past,
actual ventures. Nevertheless, the optimal set of cues may not fit the VC's intuitive un-
derstanding of what to consider in the VC decision. DEMO optimal cues may not be in
the form or experience with which the VC is familiar or comfortable. Since intuition
interferes with introspection, using the optimal cues may increase the VC's understand-
ing of her/DEMO decision process and yield more accurate insight. In other words, the DEMO
miliarity with the nature of each optimal factor may cause the VC to consciously exam-
ine each factor independent of the other factors. As DEMO, VCs who use optimal
information cues in a controlled experiment should DEMO better than those who
use only intuitive cues.
H3: Using optimal DEMO factors increases the VC's introspection accuracy
about her/his decision process.
If VCs do not have a clear understanding of their intuitive decision DEMO, an
interesting question may be whether they are even consistent in DEMO that process. In
other words, does the inherent complexity, or the many potential biases, or the intuitive
nature of most VC decision-making negatively affect the VC's consistency in applying
her/his decision process? Although decision-making consistency may vary over time
(Brehmer and Brehmer 1988), it is likely that VC decision-making is relatively consis-
tent in the short DEMO In other words, the VC is likely to judge investments in DEMO
the same manner from one week to the next. However, if DEMO VC's decisions are com-
pared from one year to the next, consistency might be altered because new criteria are
used to judge venture potential. If the decision process is inconsistent in the short run,
DEMO inconsistency would impede systematic attempts to understand that process. More-
over, DEMO is important that key decision-makers be able to accurately communicate their
64
A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
decision criteria so that others involved DEMO the decision process can concur and validate
that decision (Stahl and DEMO 1984). Just as lack of insight deters successful commu-
nication, DEMO decision processes would also hamper communication. If, how-
ever, lack of insight does not result in inconsistent decision-making, then the decision
process can be studied and hopefully improved. In their study of 42 executives making
DEMO and acquisition decisions, Stahl and Zimmerer (1984) found that the DEMO
are internally consistent (R2 = 0.8), even though they lack DEMO into their decision
process. Likewise, VCs are likely internally consistent.
H4: ves are consistent in applying their decision policies.
METHODOLOGY
The hypotheses propose DEMO VCs do not have a strong understanding of their decision
process. Therefore, the current design captures each VC's actual decision process and
then compares it to the VC's stated decision process (how VCs believe they make deci-
sions). The VCs receive several pieces of information DEMO 50 potential investments.
The exercise requests that the participants evaluate the ventures as they would during
the initial screening stage of an actual decision DEMO judge whether the venture will likely
succeed or fail. Regression analysis of the VC's 50 decisions captures the actual decision
policy. In addition, the VCs provide a weighting scheme of how they believe they used
DEMO information by splitting 100 points among each presented information factor. The
VC's weighting scheme can be formulated into a regression equation of the DEMO's be-
lieved or stated decision policy. Comparing the VC's actual decision policy and stated
decision policy gives an indication of his/her DEMO insight. The following paragraphs fur-
ther detail the methodology.
Decision Experiment
The experiment is administered on a notebook PC brought to the VC's DEMO; such con-
venience likely increases participation. Unlike the majority of past DEMO that uses
ex post interviews, the policy capturing methodology elicits the DEMO's decision policy
real time. The experiment does not rely on the VC's conscious efforts to accurately
introspect. As such, this methodology eliminates the threat of recall and rationalization
biases (Barr et al. 1992; DEMO et al. 1988). Additionally, policy capturing experi-
ments enable greater DEMO and are conducive to quantitative statistical tests (i.e., re-
gression and ANOVA).
Sample
The sample for this experiment is 53 practicing VCs DEMO two entrepreneurial "hot-
beds," (1) the Colorado Front Range (primarily the Denver/Boulder metro area) and
(2) the Silicon Valley in California. Two of the 53 participants were removed (one be-
cause the PC crashed during the exercise and the other because he did DEMO wish to con-
VC DECISION PROCESS
65
TABLE 2
VC Demographics
Variable
VC Firm Demographics:DEMO
Stage of investment
Size of VC firm
Age of firm
Number of associates
Industry requirements
Geographic focus
Average funding per venture
Type of VC DEMO
Average number of investors
per venture
Individual VC Demographics:
Age
Gender
Education level
Education type (number of
VCs with degree in field)
Tenure with firm
Other VC experience
Other relevant experience
Description
Percentage:
DEMO
Start-up
Early growth
Expansion
Decline
Dollars under investmant control
(in millions)DEMO
Years since founding
FT equivalents actively involved in
venture funding decisions
Percentage of portfolio in high tech-
noJogy versus low technology
State (1) DEMO (2) National (3)
International (4) None (5)
Dollar amount (in thousands)
Independent/private, bank affiliated,
corporation DEMO, non-
affiliated SBIC
0,1-3,4-5, >5
Range
0-100
0-100
DEMO
0-60
0-40
1-2000
1-32
1-35
0-100
1-4
50-50,000
All
0->5
Mean
SO
21.6 21.214
35.7 21.926
22.8 15.324
18.5 17.809
1.5 6.136
DEMO 316.196
14.0
5.4
7.890
5.033
81.4 24.977
2.4
.753
3304.6 7031.198
independent
2.5
1.525
Measured in years
Years of education with a high school
DEMO = 12; 4 yr college degree
= 16, etc., College, Gradute, etc.
Business
Engineering
Liberal Arts
Science 8
Number of years with current firm 1-25
Years
Number of years working (including
years as VC)
29-72
50 males
3 females
14-22
17.8
.977
44
23
17
DEMO 6.104
0-19
5-49 22.5
46.5
10.366
2.3 4.239
10.341
tinue past the first few decisions). Table 2 further delineates the demographics of
the DEMO
Procedure
The experiment follows a two-step creation process: (1) identify DEMO cues that
are valuable to the investment decision and (2) create decision cases for the VC to judge.
The number of cases and DEMO is interrelated (Stewart 1988). The more cases each partic-
ipant DEMO, the higher the validity of that person's judgment policy. Unfortunately,DEMO
too many cases may tire the judge and limit participation. Stewart (DEMO) suggests that
35 cases is typically sufficient to accurately capture the DEMO's decision policy. Another
rule of thumb is to have a minimum of five cases for every cue that is being tested (Stew-
art 1991).
66
A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
A policy capturing exercise that uses DEMO the identified information factors from
previous research (see Table I-approximately 25 DEMO in aggregate form) would be
untenable. To achieve an appropriate case-to-cue DEMO, the VCs would have to evaluate
over 100 cases (5 cases/cue * 25 cues = 125). Evaluating 100 cases would increase DEMO
required time to complete the exercise and might tire each participant thereby reducing
the experiment's validity. Additionally, such an increased time requirement might dis-
courage VCs from participating in the exercise altogether. Furthermore, several of the
identified cues are probably highly correlated with each other. High multicollinearity
DEMO affects policy capturing methodology (Stewart 1988). Finally, most people,
including experts, typically use only three to seven information cues (Stewart DEMO), so
a smaller set of cues is valid. For the above reasons, the number of cues used in the
exercise in a subset of all possible cues.
In order to use a manageable set of DEMO, cue frequency across studies and reported
importance within each study are DEMO as a criterion for a particular cue's inclusion in the
experiment. Additionally, cues that are highly correlated with other cues are removed
(DEMO, Patton, and Green 1988), retaining the cue that is deemed most important in
the literature. A consulting expert VC also verified that DEMO retained cue was more im-
portant. Although the list is not exhaustive, it is more probable that the identified cues
in this study include unimportant factors rather than exclude important factors, because
experts typically identify far more cues than they actually use (Stewart 1988).
Decision cases are created once the pertinent cues have been identified. Coopera-
tive VCs outside DEMO study's sample (primarily VCs based in Chicago and the East DEMO)
provided actual cases. Robert Keeley provided additional cases based upon one of his
previous studies (Roure and Keeley 1990). A stipulation for using the cases was that
the entrepreneur, venture, and any associated DEMO or individuals remain unidentified.
Such a provision does not impede this study in any way. Identifying the venture or entre-
preneur might bias the DEMO' decisions. For example, the knowledge that an en-
trepreneur has achieved substantial success in the past might lead the subjects to view
that DEMO case favorably. Products also are not identified, because many of the
DEMO cases included products identified with unique firms. Moreover, identifying the
product DEMO also narrow the available sample size. A VC may be hesitant to make
a decision about a biotechnology firm if (s)he specializes in computer disk storage. For
the same reasons, financial cues are not included in this experiment. Different VCs use
different hurdle rates.
Value ranges given DEMO each cue allow it to be compared across cases (Stewart 1988)DEMO
Concrete values are used (e.g., market size) for cue values DEMO possible, but purely
representative distributions are appropriate for subjective cues (Stewart 1988). A uni-
form coding system allows consistent coding across the DEMO plans used in building
the experiment.
The lead researcher pulled information factors from the business plans. Although
there is a potential threat that the DEMO included in the plan is inaccurate (which
would carryover into the DEMO), Roure and Keeley (1990) find that VCs rarely
need to make "intense" corrections. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that the business
plans are accurate. To insure interjudge reliability, a colleague also coded all appro-
priate cues. The lead researcher provided the second coder with DEMO entire list and de-
scription of the information factors of interest. He then coded two business plans. Over-
all interjudge reliability equates to 87.5%. DEMO (1952) reports that interjudge
VC DECISION PROCESS
67
TABLE 3
Variable
MANOVA Results between Actual and DEMO Cases
Cochran's C
Market familiarity
Leadership ability
Start-up record
Team completeness
Proprietary protection
Product superiority
Time to development
Market size
Market growth
Direct DEMO
Competitor strength
Buyer's concentration
Multivariate tests of significance
p = 0.173
P = 0.813
P = 0.154
P = 0.854
P = 0.945
DEMO = 0.817
P = 0.762
P = 0.123
P = 0.813
P = 0.369
P = 0.274
P = 0.499
Pillais
Hotellings
Wilks
Box'DEMO M
Wilks
0.731
0.731
0.731
0.367
0.353
Multivariate tests of homogeneity
p = 0.182
P = 0.817
P = 0.152
P = 0.857
P DEMO 0.946
P = 0.821
P = 0.774
P = 0.142
P = 0.817
P = 0.382
P = 0.287
P = 0.509
reliability typically DEMO from 66 to 95%. As such, the coding is deemed fairly DEMO
A technique to further decrease multicollinearity while maintaining strong external
validity is to combine actual and statistically derived cases. A random case generator
from DEMO PC software package (Stewart 1991) creates a manageable number of statis-
tically derived cases. MANOVA verifies that the statistical cases are from the DEMO pop-
ulation as the actual cases (see Table 3). The DEMO variables have equal variance
between real and generated cases and the multivariate means are equivalent. Further-
more, a consulting expert VC identifies those cases that are not feasible (i.e., combina-
tion of cue values that DEMO occurs in reality). Unfeasible cases are dropped from the
sample of potential candidates.
The final design allows the VCs to use four to DEMO cues (depending upon the treat-
ment) and judge 50 cases. The independent variables are the decision cues available
within each treatment. The dependent DEMO is the VCs' assessment of how likely
the venture is to DEMO as measured on a 7- point Likert scale anchored by 1 (DEMO
likely to fail) and 7 (highly likely to succeed). The participants are divided into three
groups (see Table 4). Group one uses the information cues associated with a base cogni-
tive model as DEMO from literature (see Table 4). The cues are from studies (primarily
Tyebjee and Bruno 1984; MacMillan et al. 1985, 1987; Robinson 1987; Timmons et al.
1987) that rely on post hoc methods. DEMO, these studies basically rely on introspection
by the VC as to DEMO are the most important decision factors. Group two uses more
cues than either the first or third groups to assess whether more information changes
DEMO decision process (see Table 4). Specifically, group 2 cues include the five used by
group 1 VCs plus three more commonly cited DEMO the literature. Groups 1 and 2 use
cues corresponding to the cognitive side of the lens model (see Figure 1). Group 3 uses
the information factors that best distinguish between successful and failed new ventures;DEMO
these cues correspond to the task side of the lens model (DEMO Figure 1). The current
study uses task cues derived by Roure and Keeley (1990). The regression equation for
each of the three possible treatments is as follows:
68
A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
TABLE 4
Experiment Treatment Variables
Base DEMO Cues
(Treatment 1)
1. Market familiarity-average
number of years of DEMO
ence in market/industry for
team
2. Leadership ability-average
number of years of manage-
ment experience for team
3. Proprietary protection-
level of protection DEMO
because product/service or
process to deliver product/
service is unique and diffi-
cult to imitate
4. Market size-market reve-
nues for most DEMO year
5. Market growth-% over
last several years
Additional Cognitive Cues
(DEMO 2)
Same five cues as base
cognitive cues treat-
ment plus:
6. Relevant track record-
number of past start-up
experiences for team
DEMO Competitors-number
of direct competitors
8. Competitor strength-
five point scale from
high strength (large rela-
tive market share) to
low (numerous small
market share com-
petitors)
Task Cues
(Treatment 3)
1. Completeness of team-percentage
of key positions which were filled
at the time of the DEMO major (over
$300,000) outside funding
2. Product superiority-how product
compares to existing products
3. Time to development-number of
months from initiation of DEMO
ment to the initial sale as forecast
in business plan
4. Buyers concentration-measures
the number of potential customers
in the target market during the
DEMO two years of sales
Base Cognitive Cues Model
Y = a + b, (mktfam) + b2 (lead) + b, (proprietary) DEMO b, (mktsize)
+ b, (mktgrw)
Additional Cognitive Cues Model
Y = a + b, (mktfam) + b2 (lead) + b, (proprietary) + b, (mktsize)
+ b, (mktgrw) + b, (start-up) (competitor) + b, (strength)DEMO
+ b,
Task Cues Model
Y = a + b, (complete) + b2 (product) + b, (devtime) + b, (buyer)
RESULTS
The policy capturing experiment provides many interesting insights. In general, VCs
have a difficult time introspecting about their decision process. As such, past research
needs to be cautiously interpreted. The following paragraphs further explore the results.
All 51 VCs demonstrate statistically significant policy equations at DEMO 0.01 level
or better. Adjusted R-squares vary from 0.35 to 0.85 for the VCs' policy equations. Table
5 details how important each information cue is to the VC decision for both her/his
actual and stated DEMO policies. The next section discusses these results further as
they relate to each of the hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1, which suggests that VCs do not understand their decision process,
receives mixed support (see Table 5-Treatment 1). By visually examining the weights
and respective ranks for each cue, it appears that VCs in Treatment 1 have a strong
understanding of DEMO decision process. The rank order is generally the same, although
two DEMO (proprietary protection and market growth) are reversed between the actual
VC DECISION PROCESS
69
TABLE 5
Cues
Comparison of Actual Decision Policy DEMO Stated Decision Policy
Actual Decision Policy
SD
Rank
Stated Decision Policy
Mean
Mean
SD
Rank
Cognitive cues (Treatment 1):
Entrrream
Mkt familiar DEMO 0.1361
Leadership 0.2954 0.1314
Product
Proprietary 0.3488 0.1460
Market
Size 0.1556 0.1277
Growth 0.2875 0.1853
Additional cognitive cues (Treatment 2):
Entr/Team
DEMO familiar 0.2145 0.1297
Leadership 0.1786 0.1557
Start-ups 0.0897 0.0615 .
Product
Proprietary
Market
Size
Growth
Competitors
Strength
Task cues (Treatment 3):
Entr/DEMO
Complete
Product
Superior
Dev time
Market
Concentrate
1
3
2
5
4
5
7
8
0.1989 0.1665
6
0.2632
0.2221
0.3133
0.3037 0.1389
0.1504 DEMO
0.1467 4
0.0898 l
2
0.2320 0.1139
2
0.8071 0.0820
0.2038
1
0.1413 3
0.1456 0.1264
4
22.80
19.50
6.420
6.917
18.95 6.395
17.90
DEMO
6.711
7.150
1
3
4
5
2
14.12 5.988
16.71 6.789
8.29 5.181
10.71 5.861
15.29 6.371
15.53 4.976
9.47 3.676
9.88 4.973
4
DEMO
8
5
3
2
7
6
19.91 15.667
2
46.14 18.949
18.86 10.045
1
3
15.07 9.385 4
decision policy and the stated decision DEMO However, studying whether the actual
decision policy or the stated decision DEMO explains more variance of the VC's ac-
tual decision is a more rigorous test of VC insight (Summers, Taliaferro, and Fletcher,
1970-see Table 6). Within Treatment 1, the actual decision policy explains 13% more
of the variance than the stated decision policy. This difference DEMO that the actual
decision policy captures the VC's true decision policy better than the VC does. In other
words, VC understanding isnot perfect. Nonetheless, the strong rank order correlation
between the actual and stated decision policies suggests relatively good insight.
Hypothesis 2, which suggests that more information decreases VC understanding,
receives support. A comparison of each VC's DEMO decision policy with her/his stated
decision policy (see Table 5-Treatment DEMO) indicates that understanding may be low.
The rank order between the DEMO and stated decision policies is very different. VCs
are relying heavily on number of competitors and competitor strength (actual decision
policy), yet they don't believe that to be the case (number of competitors and competitor
strength rank as the sixth and seventh most important out of DEMO eight factors presented
in the VC's stated decision policy). VCs in Treatment 2 also believe that they are using
leadership much more DEMO than they are (ranked as most important in stated decision
policy DEMO is actually seventh out of eight in actual decision policy). Perhaps even more
70 A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
TABLE 6 Median Variance Explained of DEMO Decision by Actual Decision Policy (ADP)
and Stated Decision Policy (SDP)
Cognitive Cues Additional Cognitive Cues
(Treatment 1) (Treatment 2)
Median Median Change in Median Median Change in
r' for r' for explained r2 for r' for explained
ADP SDP variance AOP DEMO variance
0.5937 0.4630 0.1307 0.5869 0.3359 0.2510
Task Cues
(Treatment 3)DEMO
Median Median Change in
r2 for r2 for explained
AOP SOP variance
0.7107
0.5190 0.1917
striking is that the VCs within Treatment 2 seem DEMO understand their actual decision
policy even less than their peers within Treatment 1. In Treatment 2, the VCs' stated
decision policy explains 25% DEMO variance than their actual decision policy [versus only
a 13% drop in Treatment 1 (see Table 6)]. More information greatly diminishes VC
understanding of their actual decision policy.
Hypothesis 3, which suggests that VCs using an optimal set of information factors
can better introspect about their decision DEMO than those using an intuitive set of cues,
receives conditional support. Although the rank order between the actual and stated
decision policies is DEMO, the order of magnitude on the most important factor is
quite DEMO (see Table 5-Treatment 3). In the stated decision policy, VCs typically
rate product superiority 2.3 to 3 times more importantly than the DEMO factors. How-
ever, in their actual decision policy, product superiority is 3.5 to 5.5 times more impor-
tant than the other factors. Within DEMO 3, the decrease in explained variance is
19%, which is also greater than the decrease in Treatment 1 (see Table 6). However,
VC understanding is greater than those VCs in Treatment 2 (19% versus 25%). Thus,
VCs are more aware of their thought DEMO using optimal cues conditioned upon the
number of intuitive cues they use. Since VCs typically rely on far more than the four
to eight DEMO provided in this experiment-whereas optimal models rarely exceed three
to seven cues (Stewart 1988)-VCs using optimal cues should have better under-
standing.
Hypothesis 4, which suggests that VCs are consistent in applying their decision poli-
cies even if they do not consciously understand that policy, receives support. Multiple
R from the regression analysis of each individual gauges consistency (see Table 7). It
appears that VCs across treatments are very consistent DEMO applying their actual decision
policies. The very high Multiple R within Treatment 3 is likely a function of the over-
whelming reliance on the DEMO superiority cue. A series of repeated cases also tests
consistency (see DEMO 7). VC assessments within +/- 1 of their initial success assessment
on the Likert Scale are considered consistent. As Table 7 illustrates, VCs are consistent
on approximately four out of five repeated cases on DEMO These results suggest that
YCs are very consistent in applying their actual decision policies.
TABLE 7 VC Consistency of Applying Actual Decision Policy
Base DEMO Cues
(Treatment 1)
Additional Cognitive Cues
(Treatment 2)
Multiple R
Portion of unreliable responses
on repeated cases
0.7876
0.7876
1.115
1.3/DEMO
Task Cues
(Treatment 3)
0.8639
1.1/5
VC DECISION PROCESS
71
INTERPRETING RESULTS OF POLICY-CAPTURING
EXPERIMENTS
Although policy capturing DEMO real-time, unbiased capture of VC decisions, it does
have some limitations. As with any experiment, reductionism is an issue. The subjects
participate in a decision situation that does not perfectly mirror the "real-life" decision.
DEMO "paper tests" affect the external validity of many lens model experiments (Breh-
mer and Brehmer 1988; Strong 1992). Nevertheless, policy-capturing experiments are
a valid method for deriving what information decision-makers actually use (Stewart
1993). Although such "paper" experiments have been criticized, Brown (DEMO) finds
that under even the most contrived cases, the decisions reflect actual decisions. More-
over, since the VC decision has a large "DEMO" component in the real world (i.e., much
of the VC'DEMO information comes from business plans), correlation between the experi-
mental task and the "real-world" decision should be even higher.
The experiment also DEMO VCs to make decisions based upon the presented cues.
In reality, DEMO would (1) have access to a multitude of possible information cues and
(2) use interactive due diligence and other methods to clarify DEMO assess reliability of
chosen cues. The experiment, for example, gives participants the relative strength of
competition on a 5-point scale. This cue is DEMO distillation of several information points
within the business plan. Whereas VCs would normally distill and evaluate these ele-
ments for themselves, the experiment does it for the VCs. As such, the assigned value
for competitor strength (and other subjective cues) possibly differs from the value VCs
would DEMO Furthermore, the participating VCs are not privy to these other informa-
DEMO factors. Thus, they may be less confident in assessing the impact DEMO competition
than might otherwise be the case. In an actual evaluation of a business plan, VCs could
use other elements to hedge their assessment of competition thereby increasing their
confidence in how to interpret competition. For DEMO, a VC might judge competition
to be a critical decision criterion DEMO (s)he sees that (1) there are numerous com-
petitors, (2) some of the competitors are very large, (3) the competitors are known to
fiercely retaliate against new entrants, etc. The fact that the experiment presents a com-
bined subjective cue impedes such adjustments DEMO may lead to a systematic over/under
weighting of subjective cues.' DEMO, insight is likely greater in this controlled ex-
ercise than it DEMO in the information-laden, noise-filled actual decision environment pre-
cisely because of DEMO the noise surrounding each criterion.
The experiment also eliminates the interactive due diligence that typifies the deci-
sion. A common theme in the follow-up DEMO is that VCs like to reserve final judg-
ment until they have a chance to meet with the lead entrepreneur. In essence, meeting
with the entrepreneur adds more data points. As such, the real-life decision has far more
informational noise than the experiment. As the results suggest, more information im-
pedes insight. In the experiment, the VCs had at most eight cues. It is easy to imagine
how hundreds of cues would DEMO confuse understanding.
The fact that VCs had to use the cues given within the experiment and that there
was not an opportunity for interactive DEMO diligence somewhat diminishes the study's
external validity (as is often DEMO case in controlled experiments). However, considering
these results in conjunction DEMO the results gleaned from verbal protocols (Hall and
Hofer 1993; Sandberg et al. 1988; Zacharakis and Meyer 1995) add a deep richness DEMO
I Thanks to a reviewer for highlighting this potential experimental bias.
72 A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
previous survey results. Specifically, verbal protocols provide a sense of (1) how VCs
read and assimilate information DEMO a business plan, (2) why they use certain informa-
tion DEMO make a decision, and (3) how they use that information. DEMO the results
of the current study in light of past verbal protocol studies gives researchers a sense
of how VCs pull together information to DEMO subjective assessments (i.e., competitor
strength). Whereas verbal protocols provide a first glimpse at self insight, policy captur-
ing allows a more rigorous and controlled examination of self insight in that the experi-
ment captures DEMO VC's actual and stated policies.
DISCUSSION
This study suggests that VCs do not have a strong grasp on their decision-making pro-
cess, especially as the decision becomes information laden. Thus, past studies that pro-
vide a laundry list of factors may be biased in that they list DEMO multitude of factors that
have a relatively small influence on the decision. Slovic and Lichtenstein (1971) assert,
for most decisions, that three information cues typically account for 80% of the variance;
one cue DEMO explains 40% of the variance. The multitude of available information
factors surrounding the actual investment decision likely hinders VC decision-making.
Nisbett and Wilson (1977) suggest that poor insight is a function of "ease of access";
people cannot easily access that part of the brain dealing with DEMO criteria pro-
cessing. As such, post hoc studies may not provide DEMO much prescriptive value as they
could because they hide the most important factors with others that create noise. Previ-
ous ex post studies might DEMO not only VCs, but entrepreneurs as well.
Understanding decision criteria are DEMO only important for VCs, but also important
for entrepreneurs seeking venture DEMO Using criteria identified in previous ex post
studies to prepare for the solicitation of venture backing might be a mistake. For exam-
ple, many ofthe ex post survey studies (Wells 1974;Poindexter 1976; Tyebjee and DEMO
1984; MacMillan et al. 1985, 1987) would lead entrepreneurs to DEMO that personal
and team characteristics are the most important criteria, but DEMO study coincides with
Hall and Hofer (1993) in that the entrepreneur factor does not appear that important.
Market characteristics might be better determinants DEMO who gets funding and who does
not. Thus, entrepreneurs that spend DEMO of their time and effort presenting the team,
while neglecting other factors, may not obtain funding.
Information necessary to the decision is not of equal importance. George Doriot,
a pioneer in the VC industry, notes that "a grade-A man with a grade-B idea is better
than a grade-B man with a grade-A idea" (as cited in Sandberg DEMO). It is evident from
this quote that VCs do not view all cues as equally important; they do not receive equal
consideration. Notwithstanding the VC's ex post assessment that the entrepreneur is
the most DEMO consideration (Wells 1974; Poindexter 1976, Tyebjee and Bruno
1984; MacMillan et al. 1985, 1987), this study derives the actual importance of each pre-
sented cue in the VC's decision process. Although the DEMO do not have complete free-
dom in choosing which information cues they wish to use within the experiment, the
relative importance of each cue is interesting. Specifically, each VCs' actual decision
policy, as represented by a standardized regression equation, indicates how much weight
the respective VC places on each information cue.
Table 5 presents the frequency, by experiment treatment, with which each factor
is most influential, second most influential, etc., to the VC's decision. Within Treatment
1, proprietary protection is DEMO important, closely followed by entrepreneur/team
VC DECISION PROCESS
73
characteristics (see Table 5). Market factors (DEMO size and market growth) are the
least important. Within Treatment 2, market factors (especially competition cues) are
the most important with market DEMO and product factors following (see Table 5).
Finally, VCs in Treatment 3 exclusively view product superiority as the most important
factor. Buyer DEMO (a market factor) is least important. In summary, the type
DEMO information available influences the VC's decision process. When certain information
is available, it causes VCs to shift their attention (i.e., the addition of competitor infor-
mation in the additional cues treatment causes the focus DEMO shift to market factors from
entrepreneur/team factors). In addition, DEMO information seems to shift the impor-
tance from the entrepreneur to the market. Such a finding suggests that the entrepreneur
is critical when the DEMO does not have much information about the market. However,
if the VC is confident in the market, the entrepreneur is not too important. Such a finding
is congruent with those of other real time experiments (Hall and Hofer 1993; Zacharakis
and Meyer 1995). Thus, the DEMO results point to biases in post hoc studies that suggest
entrepreneur characteristics are typically most critical to the investment decision. It ap-
pears that DEMO policy capturing experiments might provide further identification
ofthe more important information factors. Considering the lack ofVC insight, the policy
capturing methodology holds much promise for prescriptive advice to VCs (and by ex-
tension, to entrepreneurs)DEMO
Implications for VCs are numerous. First, VCs may want to re-examine DEMO impor-
tance of the entrepreneur. Since the current study and Hall and Hofer's (1993) study
suggest that entrepreneur factors are not as DEMO as believed, relying on meetings
with the entrepreneur to judge the DEMO's capabilities could be dangerous. Triv-
ial factors (i.e., height, DEMO, etc.) might bias the VC, The entrepreneur's per-
ceived DEMO might generate more weight than is appropriate. "I stopped the deal
DEMO I did not think we would work well together" or vice DEMO Judging entrepre-
neurs on how well their personality fits with the VC's personality opens a cauldron of
potential mistakes. How well can a DEMO get to know an individual in one or even
10 meetings? DEMO example, people place inordinate importance on personal appearance
when conducting job DEMO (Borman 1991). Likewise, attractive entrepreneurs may
be more likely to receive financing. However, the link between appearance and entre-
preneurial qualifications is dubious, at best. First impression biases impact hiring deci-
sions, yet DEMO not correlate very strongly with ultimate success (Borman 1991). Thus,DEMO
it may be wise to screen the potential entrepreneur on her/his paper record. This is not
to say that once a venture passes DEMO screening stage that the VC and entrepreneur
should not meet. Post-screening meetings enhance venture success by clarifying expec-
tations and jointly evaluating entrepreneur/team DEMO' The VC and entrepre-
neur can then take remedial action to DEMO the probability of a successful launch.
Second, VCs face a plethora DEMO information when making an investment decision
(i.e., business plan, outside DEMO, due diligence, etc.). The noise caused by this
information overload may impede insight into the intuitive decision process. This lack
of systematic DEMO hinders learning. VCs cannot make accurate adjustments
to their evaluation process if they do not truly understand it. Therefore, VCs may suffer
from a systematic bias that impedes the performance of their investment portfolio. The
methodology DEMO in this experiment can be modified and used as a training tool for
active VCs. In addition, since VC decision-making is very consistent (DEMO if they do
'Thanks to a reviewer for suggesting the article DEMO between pre- and post-screening meetings.
74
A.L. ZACHARAKIS AND G.O. MEYER
not have a strong understanding of DEMO process), decision aides can be developed to
minimize the danger of salient information (e.g., the lead entrepreneur is a winner)
clouding DEMO VC's judgment. Unlike the current study, policy capturing can be DEMO
mized toward an individual VC or a VC firm; policy capturing DEMO include financial and
product factors that were removed from this study. Thus, VC firms can use this method-
ology to aid individual VCs by helping them understand and improve their decisions.
Third, the study implies that formalizing VC intuition may help them improve their
decisions because it allows DEMO action. One simple method of formalizing intu-
ition is to use a checklist, or scorecard, of how ventures measure on key criteria. Only
DEMO of the participating VCs queried in follow-up interviews use some sort of factor
checklist. Checklists provide a basis for VCs within the firm to DEMO the lead VCs
analysis and, by extension, examine whether certain salient factors are creating a bias.
Over time as certain funded ventures succeed DEMO others fail, checklists allow VCs to
assess the validity of their DEMO criteria and make corrections. In fact, several of those
VCs that DEMO a checklist did so after they made an investment decision. In other words,
the VC made the decision on an intuitive basis and DEMO, after funding the firm, the
VC went back and completed the checklist. Such a history of investment decisions allows
VCs to learn what DEMO and what does not. It is much more difficult to discern the
critical factors if the VC never formalizes the decision process, especially considering
post hoc recall and rationalization biases.
Finally, this study demonstrates the strong theoretical basis that SJT and the lens
model provide to the VC DEMO Although many of the early studies focus on decision
criteria, few DEMO it to a theoretical framework. In fact, Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) ac-
knowledge a lack of theory behind their work. SJT provides that basis not only for the
current study, but also for previous studies.
If VCs do not have a strong understanding of their decision process, they cannot
systematically work to improve it. Forty percent of VC investments (Ruhnka, Feldman,
and Dean 1992) fail to provide a satisfactory DEMO, even though VCs are experts. The
value of this study and DEMO capturing is that it may better identify the important factors
for both VCs and entrepreneurs. This study will, hopefully, encourage VCs to step DEMO
and reevaluate their decision-making. Moreover, the results of such techniques can DEMO
used to build decision aides that can further improve VC decision-making (DEMO
1995). Any improvement in understanding (which ultimately leads to improved DEMO
sion-making) can have a huge economic impact for both the VC DEMO and their
funded ventures.
REFERENCES
Barr, P.S., Stimpert, J.L., and Huff, A.S. 1992. Cognitive change, strategic action, and organizational
renewal. Strategic Management Journal 13:15-36.
Berelson. B. 1952. Content Analysis in Communications Research. DEMO, IL: Free Press.
Borman, W. 1991. Job behavior, performance and effectiveness, in M. Dunnette and L. Hough, eds.,
Handbook of DEMO and Organizational Psychology. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologist
Press, pp. DEMO
Brehmer, A., and Brehmer, B. 1988. What have we learned DEMO human judgment from thirty years
of policy capturing. In B. Brehmer and C. Joyce, eds., Human Judgment: The SJT View. North,
Holland: Elsevier.
Brown, T.R. 1972. A comparison of judgmental policy equations obtained DEMO human judges under
natural and contrived conditions. Mathematics Bioscience 15:205-230.
VC DECISION PROCESS
75
Brunswik, E. 1956. Perception and the Representative Design of Experiments. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Cyert, RM., DEMO March, J.G. 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall.
Dawes, RM. 1988. Rational Choice in an DEMO World. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jova-
novich.
Dawes, R.M., Faust, D., and Meehl, P.E. 1989. Clinical versus actuarial judgment. Science 243:
668-1674.
Fischhoff, B. 1988. Judgment and decision-making. In R Sternberg and E. Smith, eds., The Psychology
of Human Thought. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 155-187.
Fiske, ST., and Taylor, S.E. 1991. Social Cognition. New York: Random House.
Gupta, A.K., and Sapienza, H.J. 1992. Determinants of venture capital firms' preferences regarding
the industry DEMO and geographic scope of their investments. Journal of Business Ventur-
ing 7:347-362.
Hall, J., and Hofer, e.W. 1993. Venture capitalists' decision DEMO and new venture evaluation. Jour-
nal of Business Venturing 8(1):DEMO
Hammond, K.R 1977. Social judgment theory: Application in policy formation. In M. Kaplan and S.
Schwartz, eds., Human Judgments and Decision Processes DEMO Applied Settings. New York: Aca-
demic Press, pp. 1-29.
Hammond, DEMO 1975. Social judgment theory: Its use in the study of psychoactive DEMO In K. Ham-
mond and e. Joyce, eds., Psychoactive Drugs and Social Judgment: Theory and Research. New
York: Wiley, pp. 69-105.
Hitt, M.A, and Tyler, B.B. 1991. Strategic decision models: Integrating different DEMO Strategic
Management Journal 12:327-351.
Hogarth, RM., and Makridakis, S. DEMO Forecasting and planning: An evolution. Management Sci-
ence 27(2):115-138.
Khan, A.M. 1987. Assessing venture capital investments with noncompensatory behavioral decision
models. Journal of Business Venturing 2:193-205.
Kunkel, S.W., and Hofer, e.W. 1990. Why study the determinants ofnew venture performance: A litera-
ture review and rationale. Presented at Academy of Management meetings, San Francisco.
Lewis, DEMO, Patton, J.M., and Green, S.L. 1988. The effects of information choice and information
use on analysts' predictions of municipal bond rating changes. The Accounting Review
63(2):270-282.
MacMillan, l.C, Zeman, L., and Subba Narasimha, P,N. 1987.Criteria distinguishing unsuccessful ven-
tures in the venture screening process. Journal of Business Venturing 2:123-137.
MacMillan, I.e., DEMO, R, and Subba Narasimha, P.N. 1985. Criteria used by venture DEMO to
evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing 1:119-128.
Newell, A, and Simon, H.A 1972. Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, DEMO: Prentice-Hall.
Nisbett, R.E., and Wilson, T.D. 1977. Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental pro-
cesses. Psychological Review 84(3):231-259.
Perez, Re. 1986. Inside Venture Capital: Past, Present, and Future. New York: Praeger.
Poindexter, E.A 1976. The efficiency offinancial DEMO: The venture capital case. Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation. New York: New York University.
Pratt, S.E. 1987. Overview and introduction to the venture capital industry. In S. Pratt and J. Morris,
eds., Pratt's Guide to Venture Capital Sources, 11th edition. Wellesley, MA: Venture Economics.
Robinson, RB. 1987. Emerging strategies in the venture capital industry. Journal of Business Ventur-
ing 2:53-77.
Roure, J.B., and Keeley, RH. 1990. Predictors of success in new technology-based ventures. Journal
of Business Venturing 5:201-220.
DEMO, J.e., Feldman, H.D., and Dean, T.J. 1992. The "living dead" phenomena in venture capital
investments. Journal of Business Venturing 7(2):137-155.
Sandberg, W.R 1986. New Venture Performance. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
76
AL. ZACHARAKIS AND G.D. MEYER
Sandberg, W.R., Schweiger, D.M., DEMO Hofer, C.W. 1988. The use of verbal protocols in determining
venture DEMO' decision processes. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice Winter:8-20.
Simon, H.A 1955. A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics 69:99-118.
DEMO, H.A, and Chase, W.G. 1973. Skill in chess. American Scientist DEMO(4):394-403.
Slovic, P., and Lichtenstein, S. 1971. Comparison of bayesian and regression approaches to the study
of information procession in judgment. DEMO Behavior and Human Performance
6:649-744.
Stahl, M.J., and Zimmerer, DEMO 1984. Modeling strategic acquisition policies: A simulation of execu-
tives' acquisition decisions. Academy of Management Journal 27(2):369-383.
Steier, L., and Greenwood, R. 1995. Venture capitalist relationships in the deal structuring and post-
investment stages of new firm creation. Journal of Management Studies 32(3):337-357.
Stewart, T.R., 1993. Notes on the validity of judgment analysis. DEMO paper.
Stewart, T.R. 1991. Policy PC: Judgment Analysis Software Reference Manual. Albany, NY: Executive
Decision Services.
Stewart, TR. 1988.Judgment analysis: Procedures. DEMO B. Brehmer and C. Joyce, eds., Human Judgment:
The SJT View. North, Holland: Elsevier.
Strong, K.c. 1992. A cognitive model of downstructuring strategy. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Boulder, CO: University of Colorado.
Summers, D.A, Taliaferro, J.D., and Fletcher, D.J. 1970. Subjective versus objective DEMO of
judgment policy. Psychonomic Science 18:249-250.
Timmons, J.A 1994. New DEMO Creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st Century. Homewood, IL:
Irwin.
Timmons, J.A, Muzyka, D.F., Stevenson, H.H., and Bygrave, W.D. 1987. Opportunity recognition:
The core of entrepreneurship. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 109-123.
DEMO, A, and Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science
185:1124-1131.
Tyebjee, TT, and Bruno, AV. 1984. A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management
Science 30(9):1051-1056.
Wells, W.AI974. Venture capital decision-making. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Pittsburgh, PA:
Carnegie DEMO University.
Zacharakis, AL., and Meyer, G.D. 1995.The venture capitalist decision: Understanding process versus
outcome. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 465-478.
Zacharakis, A.L. 1995. The venture capital investment decision. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Boulder, CO: University DEMO Colorado.{1g42fwefx}