Journal of International Business Studies (2007) 38, 691 – 708
& 2007 Academy of International Business All rights reserved 0047-2506 $30.00
www.jibs.net
Venture DEMO decision policies across
three countries: an institutional theory
perspective
Andrew L DEMO,
Jeffery S McMullen2 and
Dean A Shepherd3
1Babson College, Arthur DEMO Blank Center for
Entrepreneurship, Babson Park, MA, USA;
2Hankamer DEMO of Business, Baylor University,
Waco, USA; 3Kelley School of DEMO, Indiana
University, Bloomington, USA
Correspondence:
AL Zacharakis, Babson College,
Arthur M Blank Center for Entrepreneurship,
231 Forest Street, Babson Park,
MA 02457, USA.
Tel: þ 1 781 239 4497;DEMO
Fax:E-mail: Zacharakis@Babson.eduþ 1 781 239 4178;
Received: 30 September 2003
Revised: 22 May 2006
Accepted: 19 November 2006
Online publication DEMO: 7 June 2007
Abstract
This paper examines the influence of economic DEMO upon venture
capitalists’ (VCs) decision policies. We conducted policy-capturing experiments
on 119 VCs across three countries, representing distinct economic institutions
(US, mature market economy; South Korea, emerging economy; and China,
transitional economy). Results show that VCs in rules-based market economies
(US) rely DEMO market information to a greater extent than VCs in emerging
economies (DEMO), and Chinese VCs (transitional economy) weight human
capital factors more heavily than either US or Korean VCs. Findings suggest
that, although professional institutions may dictate which information
is included in VC decision policies, the extent to which that information is
emphasized is determined partly by the DEMO institution in which the
decision-maker operates.
Journal of International Business Studies (DEMO) 38, 691 – 708.
doi:10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8400291
Keywords:
venture capital; institutional theory; entrepreneurship; decision-making
Introduction
The way that managers understand their environments and solve
problems depends, in part, on the economic institutions DEMO which
they are embedded. Concerned with scarcity and hence competi-
tion for resources (North, 2005: 1), economic institutions represent
the ‘rules of the game’ that provide incentives and reduce
uncertainties in assessing the costs DEMO transacting, such as the costs
of protecting rights and policing and DEMO agreements (North,
1990). As economies become increasingly complex, the need for
economic institutions to evolve from relationship-based systems
that prefer personal DEMO to rules-based systems that favor
impersonal arm’s length transactions has become more acute. For
example, as property rights are created and enforced, there DEMO a
shift in the costs of transacting that favors rules-based systems
over relationship-based systems, owing to a comparative advantage
of scale that accompanies the impersonal exchange of rules-based
systems (World Bank, 2002). As a DEMO, many transitional
economies have abandoned the central planning of communism
through DEMO therapies (e.g., Russia and Poland). Other states,
typically referred to as emerging economies, have sought to
develop their economies through a more gradual movement
692
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
toward increasingly market-based policies (e.g.,
South Korea and Thailand).
Because these various economic institutions
DEMO the incentives of human exchange differ-
ently, one might expect their DEMO to use
different information when formulating their deci-
sions. However, research DEMO venture capital has
found that venture capitalists (VCs) around the
world use similar decision factors (Knight, 1994;
Rah et al., 1994). At first, this appears to imply that
economic institutions play a purely passive role in
constraining the choices of economic actors.
Further consideration, however, suggests that the
use of similar decision factors does not necessarily
imply that decision-makers in general, and VCs in
particular, rely upon DEMO in the same way.
For example, American and Korean VCs may DEMO
that information about the market and human
capital should be considered, DEMO Americans may
emphasize market information whereas Koreans
pay relatively more attention to information about
the entrepreneur, or vice versa.
The purpose of this paper is to determine whether
such differences in decision policies exist (i.e.,
differences in the use of, and/or emphasis on, certain
decision DEMO in making an assessment or judg-
ment) and, if so, DEMO they can be explained by
differences in the political-economic institutions of
different countries. We expect that investment
decisions will be institutionally dependent, so that
VCs from mature market economies will give more
weight to market-oriented information DEMO VCs
from emerging or transitional economies will be
more likely to favor human capital information that
suggests the entrepreneur is trustworthy and cap-
able. DEMO reason that the weak enforcement of
property rights, typifying many relationship-based
DEMO, enhances the importance of transaction
costs in VC evaluations of venture DEMO
opportunities. As a result, aspects of human capital
can be a DEMO proxy of an entrepreneur’s access to
networks and his or her social influence, given that
experience and reputation are indicative of the
entrepreneur’s capabilities and trustworthiness
(McKnight et al., 1998; Gill et al., 2005) and firms
seek to partner with such well-regarded individuals
and organizations (Powell, 1990; Uzzi, 1997; Das
and Teng, 1998). In contrast, in a society character-
ized by strong property rights enforcement, the
DEMO of transaction costs may pale in com-
parison with concerns about transformation costs.
Consequently, VCs in rules-based systems may be
expected to emphasize market information relative
Journal of International Business Studies
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
DEMO human capital information, viewing the latter as
necessary but insufficient to DEMO creation and
realization of value.
To test our hypotheses, we conducted DEMO
capturing experiments on 119 VCs across three
countries. Because Bruton et al. (1999) suggest that
VC firms reflect local institutional forces, we
sampled VCs from countries in three distinct
economic institutions (US, mature market DEMO;
South Korea, emerging economy; and China,
transition economy). Specifically, we assume that
VCs in the US operate within an economy that
possesses rules-based institutions, as opposed to
VCs in Korea and China, who operate within
economies that are characterized by relatively more
relationship-based institutions. In doing so, we
make two important contributions.
First, venture capital DEMO an important
source of funds for managers to grow their firms,
and is a key driver of economic growth (Reynolds
et al., DEMO); understanding VCs’ decision policies is
a step towards explaining why some firms receive
venture capital and why others do not and by
extension DEMO nature of an economy’s growth. The
VC literature implies that VCs from different
countries use the same criteria to assess the value
of potential DEMO companies (Knight, 1994; Rah
et al., 1994). Although we acknowledge that VCs are
relatively homogeneous in the criteria they use,
DEMO are likely to be heterogeneous in the way that
they use these criteria as part of their decision
policy. Based on our model derived DEMO institu-
tional theory, we expect that institutional influ-
ences of a DEMO explain, in part, heterogeneity in
VCs’ decision policies.
Second, institutional DEMO offers an appealing
explanation for differences in individuals’ beha-
viors across countries, but remains a challenging
theory to test empirically (Scott, 2001: DEMO). Al-
though this study faces some of these challenges,
many are mitigated by the use of an experiment
that holds constant potentially DEMO attri-
butes of the environment, and captures the way
that individuals DEMO decisions. Capturing the way
that people make decisions is important in a test
of institutional theory, because North (1990: 107)
suggests that ‘[w]e cannot see, feel, touch, or even
measure institutions; they DEMO constructs of the
human mind.’ Experiments, and particularly policy
capturing, represent a promising step towards
testing models derived from institutional theory.
This article DEMO as follows. First, we provide
a brief overview of the VC DEMO in each of
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
the countries under study. Next, we examine how
rules-based institutions in a mature economy may
influence decisions DEMO from relationship-
based institutions in an emerging country and in a
transitional country. Then, we describe our research
method and detail the results. Finally, we discuss
the results and offer some concluding comments.
Venture capital by country
United States venture capital industry
The US venture capital industry is DEMO largest
and oldest. Emerging after World War II, the
first modern-day DEMO capital company was
American Research and Development Corporation
(Bygrave and Timmons, 1992). The industry
remained relatively small until the 1980s: in 1982
the industry had committed over $1 billion to
portfolio companies (Bygrave and Timmons, 1992).
The industry experienced rapid growth in the 1990s,
culminating in the dot-com frenzy of 1998–2000,
where VC investments ‘topped DEMO at over $100
billion invested in over 5000 different portfolio
companies in 2000 (Neck et al., 2003). Although
the industry is currently DEMO fraction of its peak ($20
billion in 2005), it is DEMO an important driver of the
entrepreneurial sector in the US (Neck DEMO al., 2003).
South Korean venture capital industry
The South Korean DEMO capital industry can be
characterized by two types of venture capital firm:
new-tech business financing companies, and start-
up financing companies (Rah DEMO al., 1994). In 1984
there were only four venture capital DEMO in total
(Rah et al., 1994), but by the end of 2000 there were
four new-tech business financing companies and
148 start-up DEMO companies (KVCA, 2003).
Generally similar in their basic functions, DEMO
financing companies focus on equity investment,
whereas new-tech business financing companies
focus primarily on loans. The total investment by
VCs and their managing DEMO has grown by almost
1000% since 1990, to US$5.8 billion at DEMO end
of 2000 (KVCA, 2003). Combined with the funds
pooled by financial institutions and conglomerates
including VCs, the total capital available for ven-
ture investment exceeds US$8.5 billion (KVCA,
2003). Activity dropped in 2001 to US$4 billion
(Reynolds et al., 2002), but DEMO US$5.3 billion in
2005 (KVCA, 2006). Ninety percent of all invest-
ments are equity-based (KVCA, 2003), and 80% of
the DEMO companies are less than 3 years old
(KVCA, 2003).
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
693
Chinese venture capital industry
Venture capital is DEMO relatively new phenomenon in
China (Folta, 1999). China’s rapidly growing eco-
nomy has led to an increasing need for, and use of,
private equity. Owing to government regulations
and policies, all but a few of the VCs are based
offshore, primarily in Hong Kong, DEMO support
offices in the major Chinese cities (e.g., Shanghai,
Beijing, Shenzhen; Folta, 1999). In 1992, new
regulations created China DEMO Investment Funds,
which allow non-Chinese VCs to invest in Chinese
portfolio companies (Bruton and Ahlstrom, 2003).
As a result, foreign venture capital firms and
corporate venture capital subsidiaries of large
non-Chinese corporations are DEMO in China
(Bruton and Ahlstrom, 2003). Most of the activity
has been to investments in expansion and later
stage opportunities within state-owned DEMO
(Folta, 1999). Although the Chinese domestic-only
venture capital industry is small, at $150 million
(Reynolds et al., 2002), it reached US$1.5 billion in
2005 (Ernst & Young, Venture One, 2005). Over
one-third of all private equity in Asia is invested in
China (Bruton and Ahlstrom, 2003).
Relationship-based vs rules-based
Institutional theory encompasses many different
theories of action (Powell and DiMaggio, 1991),
ranging from sociological conceptions of symbolic
action to economic conceptions based upon
rational choice DEMO (Scott, 2003). Although
many of these approaches have merit, DEMO
of the VC venture-screening process seems to favor
the economic perspective, DEMO emphasizes
intentionality and explicit decisions (Powell and
DiMaggio, 1991). According to this view, institu-
tions are ‘humanly devised constraints that
structure human interaction’ (North, 1990: 3).
These constraints are a combination of formal
rules, informal constraints, and their enforcement
characteristics. Formal institutional constraints
DEMO regulatory structures, agencies, laws,
courts, professions, interest groups, DEMO public
opinion (Oliver, 1991), whereas informal institu-
tional constraints are typically considered to be
embedded in language, physical artifacts, and
beliefs (North, 2005). Together these formal and
informal constraints, which have DEMO over
time, provide the structure that people impose
upon their lives (North, 2005). Thus, in their efforts
to reduce uncertainty, people construct elaborate
beliefs about the ‘reality’ of the political-economic
system – ‘beliefs DEMO are both a positive model of
Journal of International Business Studies
694
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
the way the system DEMO and a normative model of
how it should work’ (North, 2005: 2).
The question then becomes: ‘What institutions
are at work DEMO shaping how VCs process informa-
tion and make investment decisions?’ Given that
VCs around the world share an industry that can be
traced DEMO relatively few steps to a common source in
the US, the DEMO itself can provide an
institutional source of convergence that encourages
decision-makers to engage in actions that lead to
isomorphism (cf. DiMaggio and Powell, DEMO). In
fact, research into VC investment decision factors
supports this DEMO For example, Knight (1994), as
well as Rah et al. (1994), found that VCs around the
world use similar decision factors to predict which
new venture investment opportunities will succeed.
Such findings suggest DEMO the VC profession exerts
considerable pressure upon VCs to employ similar
models of venture success, regardless of potentially
contradicting institutional pressures presented by
differences in country-specific institutions, such as
culture or economy. Thus, as new DEMO around the
world attempt to reduce the uncertainty of a new
task, employ best practices, and avoid costly errors
in judgment, they choose to copy a ‘proven’ recipe
by relying upon the types of information DEMO by
Americans to screen new venture investment
opportunities.
Relying upon the same information, however,
does not necessarily imply that this information
means the same thing, or that it is relied upon to
the same extent by VCs across countries. Institu-
tions are typically thought to emerge from, and
evolve through, transactions (North, 1990).
Because each country has its own unique config-
uration of sociocultural, political, and economic
institutions (Lasserre and Probert, 1994), the costs
of transacting vary by country as a function of trust
(Fukuyama, 1995). ‘[R]isk is at DEMO heart of how
people do and should think about trust but that risk
varies distinctly as the form of the relationship
varies’ (Sheppard and Sherman, 1998: 422). Thus
the costs of transacting reflect an DEMO of the
risk associated with trusting others within a society.
In deciding to invest, VCs must consider two
relationships: their relationship with the DEMO
neur; and that entrepreneur’s various relationships
with stakeholders. The VC relies DEMO the entre-
preneur to generate a significant return, yet it is
DEMO for the VC to directly assess or monitor the
entrepreneur’s behavior. Owing to the entrepre-
neur’s ability to withhold – consciously or unin-
tentionally DEMO information that is relevant to the VC
Journal of International Business Studies
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
investment decision (Barry, 1994; Gompers, DEMO;
Sapienza and Korsgaard, 1996), the VC is exposed
to DEMO in the forms of indiscretion, unreliability,
cheating, abuse, neglect, and self-esteem, but is
authorized to remedy violations of trust owing to
the clear hierarchy that emerges as the VC becomes
a shareholder, a member of the board of directors
(Baker and Gompers, 2003), DEMO holder of super-
majority voting rights. Therefore the exposure to
risk that comes from this first relationship suggests
that human capital issues are highly DEMO to all
VCs, and that VCs will look for attributes that
DEMO that the entrepreneur is deserving of the
VC’s trust.
In contrast, DEMO importance of the second type of
relationship that the VC must consider – that is, the
entrepreneur’s relationships with its stakeholders –
would appear to be significantly dependent upon
the relative strength of institutional protections
against DEMO (untrustworthy) behavior
(Williamson, 1985). Peng (2003) delineates bet-
ween transactions that are relationship-based and
those that are rules-based. Relationship-based trans-
DEMO are personalized exchanges between two
parties who know of and trust each other (North,
1990). Although relationship-based transactions
reduce exposure to opportunism (Williamson,
1985), they also constrain the number of transac-
tions that a company can cost-effectively maintain.
This can become inefficient when there DEMO potential
for new relationships that could better maximize
revenue or minimize costs. In fact, Peng (2003)
argues that, as third-party enforcement increases
and transactions become less susceptible to oppor-
tunistic behavior, economies hit an inflection point
and move towards market-based economies that
favor rules-based transactions, defined as ‘imperso-
nal exchanges with third-party enforcement’ (Peng,
2003: 280)DEMO
Any attempt to evaluate information in an effort
to predict the likelihood of a venture’s success
would appear to depend significantly on whether
rules-based DEMO relationship-based transactions are
the norm within the economy. For example, the DEMO
is characterized by a mature market economy
that is built upon formal legal and regulatory
regimes. Accordingly, it operates primarily through
a rules-based logic of arm’s length transactions.
The primary objective of US VCs is to DEMO the
highest return possible to their limited partners
so that the VCs can raise subsequent funds
(Wasserman and Robinson, 2000). Even though DEMO
decision factors that VCs consider will impact on
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
return, studies find that VCs place more weight on
market factors in the investment-screening stage
(Hall and Hofer, 1993; Knight, 1994; Zacharakis and
Meyer, 1998). As markets become more efficient,
profit potential diminishes at a faster rate DEMO to
the increased threat of imitators (Schumpeter,
1934). Thus DEMO must consider information that
communicates how big and robust that profit
potential is. Accordingly, market information, such
as market size, market growth, DEMO technol-
ogy, the number of competitors, and competitor
strength (how DEMO might react to new entrants),
becomes relatively more important than DEMO
about opportunistic behavior. Thus, even if inves-
tors in rules-based economies DEMO necessarily
ascribe market information greater absolute value
in predicting success, US DEMO decision-makers can
be expected to rely upon market factors more
than their counterparts in countries that are less
rules-based. Accordingly, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 1: When making investment deci-
sions, VCs in strongly rules-based economies (US)
will rely upon one or more market factors (market
size, market growth, proprietary technology,
number of competitors, and competitor strength)
to a greater extent than VCs in less rules-based
economies: (DEMO) Korea and (b) China.
On the other end of the DEMO spectrum are
countries in emerging or transitional economies.
Emerging and transitional economies1 (e.g., those
transitioning from centrally planned to market
economies) tend to encourage a focus on the
person – that is, entrepreneur (Peng, 2003). Trust
in the entrepreneur is necessary to compensate for
the DEMO of a strong rule of law (Chang and Hong,
2000; Peng and Luo, 2000). For example, China’s
weak rule of DEMO increases the importance of
partnering with those whom one knows to avoid
issues of adverse selection and moral hazard
(Bruton and Ahlstrom, 2003)DEMO Similarly, South
Korea has strong chaebol groups, defined as ‘gather-
ing[s] of formally independent firms under the
single common administrative and financial con-
DEMO of one family’ (Chang and Hong, 2000: 429).
These DEMO play an important role in
reducing opportunism, lowering transaction costs,
DEMO simply allowing a business to operate effec-
tively. In other words, DEMO strong network of relation-
ships is necessary to reduce the entrepreneur’s
direct and the VC’s indirect exposure to risks that
are associated with the DEMO of untrustworthy
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
695
behavior – which increases as institutions that
protect against it weaken.
Although a strong form of DEMO
theory would suggest that VCs transact only with
people they know directly, such a bounded poten-
tial population would greatly reduce deal flow and
access to quality investments. Thus VCs in non-
rules-based countries need to DEMO the trustworthi-
ness of entrepreneurs, which may be gleaned from
the DEMO human capital, such as informa-
tion about leadership, start-up experience, DEMO
market familiarity. As trust becomes an increasingly
important element for entrepreneurial effective-
ness, human capital information becomes increas-
ingly communicative of the amount of risk to
which VCs must expose themselves to accrue the
desired return. DEMO arises from beliefs about the
other party’s competence and predictability
(McKnight DEMO al., 1998) – beliefs that are influenced
by assessments of human capital. In other words,
entrepreneurs with a stronger, documented track
record are more likely to have been effective in
managing their networks (working with those
currently in their networks and expanding their
networks to grow DEMO businesses). Thus the
stronger a person’s human capital in management
skills, the more likely it is that they possess strong
social capital. This information is incorporated into
the costs that are used in the VC’s DEMO
calculus when choosing whether and in whom to
invest. However, human DEMO information does
more than communicate to the VC that the
management of the prospective venture invest-
ment opportunity has the necessary contacts to
function DEMO a relationship-based economy; it also
conveys that management can be trusted. DEMO
example, a VC reported on one investment in a
Chinese portfolio DEMO in which the entrepre-
neur of the portfolio company took the money and
ran, disappearing without a trace (Bruton and
Ahlstrom, 2003). Batjargal and Liu (2004) studied
158 Chinese VC decisions and found DEMO VCs
focused strongly on human capital factors to
mitigate transaction risks of opportunistic behavior
as well as transformative risks of proven ability to
execute DEMO the opportunity. Chinese VCs also have
little faith in the reliability of reported information
about the company, because accounting and audit-
ing practices deviate greatly from international
norms (production vs asset valuation) (Bruton and
Ahlstrom, 2003).
The Chinese government is liberalizing the
economy quickly, but DEMO trepidation (Bruton
Journal of International Business Studies
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
696
and Ahlstrom, 2003). Although the government
encourages venture capital as a means of sustaining
growth, it is concerned about losing control over
privatized and new entrepreneurial start-ups.
DEMO et al. (2000) note that Chinese VCs face
hostility because government officials fear that
private enterprise damages the foundation of
Chinese ideals. Private DEMO is seen as a threat
to the livelihood of government employees (DEMO
feld, 1998). This hostility manifests itself in the
form of DEMO, regulations, and redistributions of
wealth (Ahlstrom et al., 2000). Thus episodic
influence (government officials are often on VC
boards) may DEMO with the screening process.
Government officials may seek to have investments
made into ventures that they favor. However, such
influence may be unstable as increasing discipline
in the form of anticorruption laws increases,
moving China DEMO the inflection point of a
rules-based economy (Peng, 2003). Before this
inflection point is reached, we would expect
Chinese VCs to make their decisions based more
on human capital information.
Korean VCs face other DEMO pressures that
motivate them to focus on the entrepreneur more
than on market factors. Specifically, chaebols
address relationships among the companies. VCs
may be inclined to invest in other related firms
(cross-subsidization) owing to the DEMO
pressure of the chaebol (Chang and Hong, 2000).
Again, DEMO encourages Korean VCs to focus more
on human capital factors.
In summary, decision-makers in less mature
economies view human capital information as
relevant not only to transformation costs (i.e., more
experience equals a better-run company) but also to
transaction costs (i.e., more experience means a
better DEMO and less exposure to opportunism).
Thus we expect that the positive relationship
between experience and success will be more
important to VCs operating DEMO emerging and transi-
tion economies than to VCs operating in rules-based
economies, as reflected by the degree to which this
information is relied upon in assessing the like-
lihood of success. Accordingly, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 2: When making investment deci-
sions, VCs in emerging economies ([a] Korea) and
VCs in transition economies ([b] China) will rely
upon one or more human capital factors (leader-
ship, market familiarity, and start-up experience)
to a greater extent than VCs in rules-based
economies (US).
Journal of International Business Studies
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
DEMO vs emerging economies
In the last 20 years, several nations have DEMO
abandoned or have begun gradual transitions away
from centrally planned economies. As countries
start to liberalize, they become more open to
outside influences. For instance, Chinese VCs are
influenced by their affiliation with offshore part-
ners in Hong Kong (Folta, 1999) and the US. New
regulations, DEMO as the China Direct Investment
Act, which allow non-Chinese VCs to DEMO
directly into Chinese companies (Bruton and
Ahlstrom, 2003), expose local VCs to the practice
of outside VCs (e.g., US VCs).
DEMO and Luo (2000) suggest that rapid economic
growth may accelerate the institutional transition
from relationship-based to rules-based by intensify-
ing interaction with outside DEMO who are
indoctrinated in systems that are characterized
by rules-based transactions. This, coupled with the
fact that China started its liberalization in the
last 20 years under a zeitgeist of globalization
and capitalistic superiority, suggests that the
Chinese VC industry has enjoyed conditions
that have reinforced reliance upon DEMO
more common to institutions that favor rules-
based transactions. In contrast, DEMO Korea’s VC
industry emerged in 1961 when Park Chung Hee
staged a coup, promising to ‘end starvation’
(Economist, 1990). Pursuing an export-oriented
growth policy in which the government combined
protection and correction to keep DEMO and
international prices roughly in line, Korea
blended rules-based and relationship-based DEMO
tions into a system that resembled mercantilism
more than capitalism (Cumings, 1984). For
instance, Korea pursued a reform package that was
implemented in the early 1960s and which
involved ‘monopoly rights for certain firms, usually
linked explicitly to export performance’ (Cumings,
1984: 27). DEMO production in chaebols,
‘Korea, Inc.’ emerged (Mason, 1980), DEMO relation-
ship-based transactions grew to characterize the
functioning of the Korean economy. Thus we
expect that, relative to Chinese VCs, Korean VCs
are DEMO likely to focus upon human capital and
less likely to rely upon market information when
making investment decisions. Accordingly, we
hypothesize:
Hypothesis 3: Chinese VCs will rely (a) more
heavily on one or more market factors and (b) less
heavily on one or more human DEMO factors
than Korean VCs.
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
Research method
Policy capturing
This DEMO uses policy capturing, a technique that
requires respondents to make a DEMO of judgments
based on a set of decision factors from which the
underlying structure of their decisions can be
decomposed by means of hierarchical DEMO mod-
eling (HLM). This method allows the researcher to
examine DEMO respondents’ decision policies (Hitt
and Barr, 1989), without relying on the respondent’s
(generally inaccurate) introspection (Fischhoff,
1988). A VC’s decision policy refers to the decision
factors that are used in their DEMO of
potential portfolio companies and how these
factors are used. Judgments that VCs make regard-
ing ‘how good,’ ‘how satisfactory’ or ‘how attrac-
DEMO a particular potential portfolio company
might be on a particular factor are its part-worth
utilities or ‘weights’ for the levels of that factor.
Research DEMO and experimental design
To identify the pertinent decision factors, we asked
DEMO outside the sample of the study (primarily VCs
based in Chicago DEMO New York) to provide actual
investment decision scenarios, complete with busi-
ness plans. From these plans the lead researcher
extracted information factors of DEMO, providing
the entire list, with a description of each factor, DEMO a
colleague unfamiliar with the business plans. Both
judges then independently coded all appropriate
decision factors. Value ranges given to each deci-
sion factor DEMO it to be compared across profiles
(Stewart, 1988). For decision factors of the new
venture’s management team (general leadership
experience, market DEMO, and experience with
start-ups), values are defined as averages for DEMO
whole management team. Where possible, we used
concrete values (e.g., DEMO size), but representa-
tive distributions are appropriate for subjective
decision factors (Stewart, 1988). For the two sub-
jective information factors (proprietary technology
and competitor strength), we used a five-point scale
from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest). Overall inter-judge
reliability was 87.5%. Based DEMO Berelson’s (1952)
report that inter-judge reliability typically ranges
from 66 DEMO 95%, we deem our coding reliable.
We control for a number DEMO factors in our
directions to the participants, such as stage and
DEMO focus, the VC’s existing portfolio and invest-
ment location (see the Appendix). The instrument
was presented in the VC’s native language. For DEMO
Chinese and Korean samples, the instrument was
Andrew L Zacharakis et DEMO
697
translated into the native language and then back-
translated into English to ensure accuracy.
Sampling plan, survey method, and sample
To test DEMO hypotheses under the parameters
established by institutional theory as it relates to
relationship-based and rules-based economies, we
needed to identify VCs from countries that repre-
sented different points along the continuum
between relationship-based and rules-based econo-
DEMO The US is characteristic of a highly mature
economy, and falls DEMO the end point of rules-
based economies. Furthermore, the US has DEMO
oldest and most established VC industry in the
world, and is DEMO benchmark by which other VC
industries can be compared. China and Korea, on
the other hand, represent to varying degrees
relationship-based economies. They DEMO chosen
because of their relatively similar culture (Confu-
cius-based traditions), DEMO differing governing sys-
tems. Moreover, the lead author had access to DEMO
in each country, allowing for a direct replication
(aside from translation) of the decision policy
experiment. The following paragraphs give further
details of the samples within each country.
The US
The sample for this experiment DEMO 31 practicing
VCs from three entrepreneurial ‘hotbeds’:
" the Colorado Front Range (primarily the Denver/
Boulder metro area);
" Silicon DEMO in California; and
" Boston.
It is notoriously difficult to secure DEMO participation
in academic research. We relied on a well-placed
industry participant to write an introductory letter
to secure participation. As we interviewed VCs, we
would ask them to refer others. In total, 73 US VCs
participated in a larger experimental study that had
three separate treatments that differed DEMO the
amount of information viewed. The 31 reported
in this research viewed eight decision factors,
including human capital and market-based factors.
VCs in DEMO other treatments viewed fewer factors.
The Colorado and California data were collected
in 1995, and the Boston data were collected in 1998
using the same instrument (the decision policies
did not differ between regions or between time
periods of data collection (Po0.05)). The typical VC
in DEMO sample was male (90%), 45 years old
(s.d.¼11.5), had a master’s degree (most likely in
business), and had been a VC for 9 years (s.d.¼6.6).
Journal of International Business Studies
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
698
The typical firm for DEMO the VC worked had $232
million under management (range $2 million DEMO $5
billion; s.d.¼$393 million), employed 16 invest-
ment professionals (range 1 to 65; s.d.¼28.4),
focused primarily on early stage ventures, had been
in business for 13.3 years (range 1 to 32; DEMO),
and invested $3.5 million per venture (s.d.¼3.7).
This sample is relatively representative of the US VC
community as a whole, although slightly biased
towards the more successful, well-known firms. For
example, seven DEMO the 10 top VC firms that invest in
early stage deals, DEMO rated on ten metrics, are repre-
sented in the sample (Aragon, 2001), and the sample
firms tend to be larger ($232 DEMO vs $155 million
for population; Thomson VentureXpert, 2000).
South Korea
The South Korean sample consisted of 49 practicing
VCs, all from Seoul, which comprised representa-
tives from 16 different firms (out of a DEMO of 148
Korean VC firms). The sample was contacted by a
Korean professor and another Korean expert, who
was a member of the KVCA. Data were collected in
2001–2002. The typical VC in the sample DEMO male
(94%), 35 years old (s.d.¼3.5), had a college degree
(most often in engineering, but closely followed by
business), DEMO had been a VC for 5 years (s.d.¼4.8).
The typical DEMO for which the VC worked had
$32 million under management (s.d.¼$120 DEMO
lion), employed nine investment professionals
(s.d¼14.1), focused primarily on DEMO stage ven-
tures, had been in business for 2.7 years (s.d.¼2.8),
and invested $1.3 million per venture (s.d.¼0.8).
The sample DEMO fairly representative of the popula-
tion as a whole. The average fund size is a bit
smaller ($32 million vs $39 million), which can be
attributed primarily to some large outliers that
aren’t included in DEMO sample. For example, the
largest fund in Korea – the Korean DEMO Infrastruc-
ture Fund at over $527 million – is not in the
sample.
China
The Chinese sample consisted of 39 practicing VCs:
21 DEMO Beijing and 18 from Shenzhen, which
represents two of the three DEMO for venture
capital in China (Batjargal and Liu, 2004). The data
were collected prior to seminars conducted by one
of the authors DEMO affiliation with Bright China in
November 2000 (Beijing) and March 2001 (Shenz-
hen). These VCs represented 21 firms, which is 11%
DEMO the total of 180 active VC firms in 2001 and 31%
of the firms in the two sampled cities (Batjargal and
Journal of International Business Studies
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
Liu, 2004). The typical VC in the sample was male
(97%), and 36 years old (s.d.¼5.6); half had a
college degree, and half had an DEMO graduate
degree (most often in engineering, but closely
followed by business) and had been a VC for 1 year
(s.d.¼1.2). The DEMO firm employed 33 invest-2
ment professionals (s.d¼29.2). The average fund
DEMO was $55 million vs the country average of $30
million. However, DEMO we remove the large firms
employing more than 80 VC professionals, DEMO
average was $26 million suggesting our sample
firms were somewhat smaller than the population
as a whole.
As can be seen from descriptions of DEMO sample, at
the individual level there was disparity between
individuals in DEMO years of experience with
venture capital. This experience difference could
represent an alternative explanation to institu-
tional influences. Therefore we controlled for VC
experience DEMO the analysis that follows.
Independent variables, levels, and dependent
variable
The experimental design required each VC to assess
50 randomized ventures on eight DEMO factors
(see Appendix for the directions provided to the
respondents, and a sample profile). The eight
decision factors were identified from the DEMO
(e.g., Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984; MacMillan et al.,
1985, 1987), resulting in a list of over 100 possible
decision factors. To narrow the list down to a
manageable number for conducting the DEMO
ment, we selected those variables that were deemed
the most important DEMO the prior research, eliminat-
ing those that were highly correlated with DEMO
other (which reduces problems of multicollinear-
ity), and finally employing DEMO consulting expert VC
to verify that the selected factors were indeed
important and representative of the actual decision
process.
The eight decision factors were:DEMO
" leadership experience (average number of years
of experience the management DEMO has in
leadership positions);
" proprietary technology (on a five-point scale
ranging from no protection to extremely high
proprietary protection);
market familiarity (mean number of years of
experience the team has in the market);
start-up record (mean number of past start-up
experiences for DEMO members);
market size (total revenues for most recent year);DEMO
"
"
"
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
market growth (percentage growth in revenues
over the last 5 years);
number of competitors (number DEMO direct com-
petitors); and
competitor strength (relative concentration of
market DEMO a five-point scale ranging from a few
dominant competitors to an emerging market).
The instructions specified that all decision factors
not included in DEMO experiment were to be
presumed constant across all venture profiles.
The dependent variable for this experiment is the
VC’s assessment of how likely the DEMO is to
succeed, as measured on a seven-point Likert scale
anchored DEMO ‘10 $ or more on investment’ and
‘complete loss of investment.’ Rate of return has
been deemed an appropriate dependent variable for
VCs’ decisions (Roure and Keeley, 1990).
The more assessments each participant com-
pletes, the higher the reliability and stability of
the results; yet too DEMO profiles may tire the judge
and limit participation. A rule of thumb is to have a
minimum of five profiles for every decision factor
DEMO tested (Executive Decision Services, 1991).
Five cases times eight decision factors equals 40
cases. In addition, we had five repeated cases to
assess response reliability. We rounded the number
to 50 profiles. Fatigue is DEMO to be of concern in
this experiment. First, the number of DEMO
factors in each treatment was relatively low (Hitt
et al., 2000, had 30 profiles with 14 decision
factors), and the mean time taken to complete the
experiment was less than 30 min. Second, the order
of the profiles was randomized for each experi-
ment, and the results were consistent across
individuals. Third, individuals were relatively con-
sistent in their responses (test–retest reliability of
72% is comparable with Shepherd’s (1999) 69%).
"
"
"
Limitations
Policy capturing, as with DEMO techniques, has limita-
tions, although throughout the design and admin-
istration of this study attempts were made to
minimize these limitations. Nonetheless, a few of
the drawbacks should be addressed. As with any
experiment, the issue of reductionism must be
considered. Although the scenarios are based on
DEMO firms that received venture backing, the
subjects are exposed to a DEMO situation that
does not perfectly mirror the ‘real life’ decision.
Such ‘paper tests’ affect the external validity of
many lens model experiments (Brehmer and Brehmer,
1988). But ‘professional judgment may y involve
Andrew L DEMO et al
699
some abstract coding of the [decision factors],
similar to that provided by policy capturing
tasks’ (Brehmer and Brehmer 1988: DEMO). Moreover,
because the VC screening decision has a large
‘paper’ component in the real world (i.e., much of
the VC’s information DEMO from business plans),
correlation between the experimental task and the
DEMO world’ decision should be even higher. There-
fore, although the information DEMO the decision
exercise does not perfectly mirror the more com-
plex ‘real life’ decision, policy-capturing experi-
ments remain valid methods for deriving what
information decision-makers actually use (Hitt and
Middlemist, 1979; Hitt et al., DEMO). Although these
criticisms of policy capturing have merit, and
do DEMO limitations of the technique, our
approach is consistent with that of DEMO policy-
capturing studies (e.g., Hitt and Tyler, 1991).
Results
DEMO experiment provides 50 decisions (level 1 data)
per VC, and therefore 1550 observations for the US
sample, 2450 for the Korean sample, and 1950 for
the China sample. Although this means that there
are a large number of degrees of freedom for the
subsequent analyses, there may be autocorrelation,
because the decisions on each set of 50 DEMO
are nested within individuals. Because decisions
within an individual may be more similar to
decisions across an individual, assumptions of
independence may be violated, rendering ordinary
least squares regression an inappropriate technique
for this analysis. HLM accounts for variance among
individuals such that all observations are indepen-
dent. DEMO, HLM provides the opportunity
to control (e.g., Tomlinson et al., 2004) and test for
individual differences (e.g., Kristof-Brown et al.,
2002). Specifically, we controlled for individual
differences in venture capital experience while
testing whether institution explained variance in
decision policies.
First, we generated a model for each of the
samples – one each for the DEMO, China, and Korea.
Then, we tested whether differences in decision
DEMO across VCs could be explained by the
institution in which they are embedded, control-
ling for venture capital experience. In other words,
controlling for VC experience, does institution
significantly explain variance in decision weights
(DEMO size and sign of coefficients for each decision
factor)?
Presented DEMO Table 1 are the models for each
country – the US, DEMO, and Korea. For each model
Journal of International Business Studies
700
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
Andrew L Zacharakis et DEMO
Table 1
VCs’ assessment policies
Coefficienta
USA China Korea
Standard
error
t-ratio Coefficientb
Standard
error
t-ratio Coefficientc
Standard
error
t-ratio
Market size 0.201 0.059 DEMO 0.156 0.036 4.354* 0.195 0.027 7.257*
Market growth 0.232 0.043 5.392* 0.324 0.051 6.381* 0.173 0.035 4.997*
Proprietary technology 0.199 0.038 5.255* 0.197 0.043 DEMO 0.258 0.037 7.047*
Market familiarity 0.220 0.044 5.005* 0.347 0.033 10.647* 0.193 0.033 5.939*
Leadership experience 0.203 0.041 4.945* 0.420 0.048 8.723* 0.220 0.048 DEMO
Start-up experience 0.023 0.044 0.521 0.096 0.033 2.934* %0.027 0.029 %0.911
Number of competitors %0.337 0.039 %8.662* %0.308 0.035 %8.911* %0.270 0.025 %10.973*
Strength DEMO competition %0.291 0.064 %4.524* %0.437 0.055 %7.950* %0.327 0.034 %9.639*
Intercept 3.959 0.085 46.513* 4.149 0.080 52.044* 3.994 0.080 50.136*
Model
Variance explained 0.490 DEMO 0.528
Intraclass correlation 0.092 0.078 0.169
N 1550 1950 2450
aStandardized and group centered. n¼1550.
bStandardized and group centered. n¼1950.
*cStandardized and group centered.Po0.01. DEMO
we report the variance explained in VCs’ assess-
ments by the decision policies, intraclass correla-
tion, and the decision policies as represented by
DEMO (standardized) for each decision factor
and their corresponding standard error, DEMO, and
levels of significance. The decision policies of VCs
from each DEMO consistently explained approxi-
mately 50% of the variance in return on investment
assessments (49% for the sample of US VCs, 50%
for the DEMO of Chinese VCs, and 53% for Korean
VCs), which is DEMO with other conjoint
studies.3 The intraclass correlation indicates the
degree of dependence among decisions within
individuals (Bryk and Raudenbush, 1992), which
is DEMO for the model of US VCs, 0.078 for the
model of DEMO VCs, and 0.169 for the model of
Korean VCs. The decision DEMO for Chinese VCs
significantly used all eight decision factors, whereas
the DEMO policies for US VCs and Korean VCs
used seven decision factors (DEMO decision policies
did not significantly use start-up experience in their
assessments of return on investment).
How do the decision policies of VCs from DEMO
country differ from the policies of VCs from the
other countries? DEMO indication of these differences
can be inferred from Table 1; but DEMO those
differences significant? HLM allows us to investi-
gate the interaction DEMO an institution effect (level 2
data) on VCs’ decision policies. A comparison
between US, Chinese, and Korean VCs is displayed
in Table DEMO Column 1 of Table 2 indicates the
decision factors and model statistics. The next three
columns report distinctions between the samples of
VCs from DEMO US and Korea, and the next three
between the samples of DEMO from the US and
China. The three columns for each distinction
represent the intercept (which is the mean assess-
ment controlling for the level 2 variables), venture
capital experience (which is a level 2 variable used
as a control), and country (which is the level 2
variable used to capture institutional influences).
We now investigate each distinction.
DEMO model for the sample of VCs from the US and
Korea explains 50.7% of the variance in assessments
(level 1 variance). The coefficients for the intercept
indicate that this group of VCs significantly use
seven DEMO the eight factors (start-up experience is
not significant). Whereas a DEMO intercept
coefficient indicates that a higher level on the
factor is considered to be desirable, a negative sign
indicates that a higher level on the factor is
considered to be less desirable by VCs. Of the DEMO
market information variables (market size, market
growth, proprietary technology, number of compe-
titors, and strength of competitors), three were
relied upon more heavily by US VCs – market
size (coefficient¼0.215; Po0.05), DEMO growth
(coefficient¼0.163; Po0.05), and number of
was relied upon more heavily by Koreancompetitors (coefficient¼%0.160; Po0.05), one
Journal of International Business DEMO
Table 2
Comparison of VCs’ assessment policiesa
US (dummy coded 1)/DEMO
Korea (dummy coded 0)
US (dummy coded 1)/
DEMO (dummy coded 0)
China (dummy coded 1/
Korea (DEMO coded 0)
701
Intercept VC
Country Intercept VC
experience
experience
Country Intercept VC
experience
Country
Market size 0.224*** %0.009** 0.215** 0.178*** %0.003 0.088 DEMO %0.004 %0.053
Market growth 0.211*** %0.005 0.163** 0.279*** %0.003 %0.050 0.242*** 0.004 0.160**
Proprietary technology 0.235*** 0.005** %0.151** 0.198*** 0.005* %0.069 0.234*** %0.004 %0.081
DEMO familiarity 0.233*** 0.009*** %0.051 0.284*** 0.011*** %0.291*** 0.266*** 0.011 0.186***
Leadership experience 0.218*** 0.006 %0.084 0.313*** 0.005 %0.303*** 0.306*** 0.011 0.241***
Start-up experience 0.017 DEMO 0.150** 0.060** 0.003 %0.114 0.027 %0.001 0.119**
Number of competitors %0.317*** 0.004 %0.160** %0.322*** %0.001 %0.018 %0.289*** 0 %0.031
Strength of competition %0.366*** %0.007* DEMO %0.365*** %0.015*** 0.388*** %0.379*** %0.002 %0.112*
Intercept 3.935*** 0.005 %0.188 4.055*** %0.004 %0.133 4.055*** 0.015 0.224*
Model
Variance explained 0.507 0.447 0.510
Intraclass correlation DEMO 0.085 0.118
N 4000 3500 4400
aAll variables were standardized and group centered.
***Po0.01; **Po0.05; *Po0.10.
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
DEMO L Zacharakis et al
PVCs (proprietary technology: coefficiento0.05), and one was insignificant (strength of¼%0.151;
competitors). Thus US VCs emphasize market-based
factors to a greater extent than their Korean VC
counterparts, providing support for Hypothesis 1a.
Although the sample of US VCs also placed
greater DEMO on start-up experience
(coefficient¼0.150; Po0.05), the variable was not
significantly used by VCs from either country.
Therefore it is not relevant to DEMO test. Moreover,
there was no significant difference in human-
capital-related variables such as market familiarity
or leadership experience. Therefore we did not find
DEMO for the hypothesis that VCs in Korea rely
more heavily on human capital factors than US VCs
(H2a not supported).
Because we are interested in the moderating role
of institution (the level 2 variable) DEMO than its
direct effect, we are interested in the proportion of
DEMO explained in the weights of each decision
factor rather than the variance by the level two
variables directly on the assessment of likely
success. DEMO those factors used significantly differ-
ently by the two samples, country (and venture
capital experience) explains 11.1% of the variance
in weights for market size, 5.7% for start-up
experience, 4.4% for market growth, 4.0% for the
number of competitors, and 3.7% for proprietary
technology.
The model for the sample of VCs from the US and
China explains 44.7% DEMO the variance in assess-
ments (level 1 variance). The coefficients DEMO the
intercept indicate that this group of VCs signifi-
cantly uses all the decision factors in their overall
decision policy. Controlling for VC experience DEMO
based on the country model (column six), VCs from
the DEMO place less weight (relative to VCs from
China) on market familiarity (coefficient¼%0.291;
Po0.01), leadership experience (coefficient¼%0.303;
0.388;Po0.01), DEMO strength of competition (coefficientPo0.01). For those factors that were used¼
DEMO differently by the two samples, coun-
try explains 34.4% of the DEMO in weights for
market familiarity, 23.6% for leadership experience,
and DEMO for strength of competitors. These
findings do not support Hypothesis 1b that US
VCs rely more heavily on market factors, but we do
find that Chinese VCs rely more heavily on two
of the human capital DEMO – market familiarity
and leadership experience – providing support for
Hypothesis 2b.4
The model for the sample of VCs from China and
Korea explains DEMO of the variance in assessments
(level 1 variance). The coefficients DEMO the intercept
indicate that this group of VCs significantly uses
seven of the eight criteria (excluding start-up
experience). Controlling for VC experience and
based on the country model (column nine), VCs
from China place more weight (relative to VCs from
Korea) on market growth (coefficient¼0.160;
Po0.05), market familiarity (coefficient¼0.186;
Po0.01), leadership experience (DEMO;
Journal of International Business Studies
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
702
Po0.01), start-up experience (coefficient¼0.119;
Po0.01), and strength of competition (coefficient¼
%cantly differently by the two samples, country (and0.112; Po0.10). For those criteria used signifi-
venture capital experience) explains 17.4% of the
variance in weights for market familiarity, 13.8%
for start-up experience, 10.3% for leadership experi-
ence, and 6.1% for market growth. The findings
support Hypothesis 3a that Chinese DEMO relied
more heavily upon market growth than their
Korean counterparts, and DEMO VCs rely more
than Korean VCs on such human capital criteria as
market familiarity, leadership experience, and start-
up experience (H3b is not supported).
Discussion and conclusion
Through the lens of institutional theory, we
examined whether economic institutions influence
how VCs use information. Consistent with prior
DEMO, we found that VCs from different countries
use the same information DEMO in their screening
decisions, but it appears that economic institutions
influence DEMO degree to which these VCs rely upon
different types of information. Therefore, even
though a shared profession may, through norma-
tive pressure, lead VCs across countries to use the
same information, differences in economic institu-
tions may introduce variation regarding which
information is relied upon most heavily.
DEMO expected that judgments of investment
potential would be institutionally dependent, so
DEMO VCs from mature market economies would
give more weight to market-oriented information
whereas VCs from emerging or transitional econo-
mies would be more likely DEMO favor human capital
information. We reasoned that the weak enforce-
ment of property rights, which typifies many
relationship-based economies, would increase the
risk DEMO trusting other parties and thereby enhance
the importance of transaction costs in the evalua-
tion of VCs’ new venture investment opportunities.
As a result, VCs facing higher risks would focus on
aspects of human capital, such as the networks and
social influence that often accompany experience.
In contrast, we argued that, in a society character-
ized by strong property rights enforcement, the
importance of transaction costs would diminish in
comparison with concerns about transformation
costs. Consequently, VCs in rules-based systems
were expected to emphasize market information
relatively more than human capital information,
viewing the latter DEMO necessary but insufficient for
the creation of value.
Journal of International Business Studies
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
Consistent with this argument, we found that US
VCs weighed market information more heavily
than Korean VCs in DEMO venture screening process
(Hypothesis 1a), supporting the notion that the DEMO
is indeed more rules-based than Korea. We can
depict each country’s relative position on a Carte-
sian plane with rules-based on the y-axis and
DEMO on the x-axis (see Figure 1).
Thus, because US VCs place greater emphasis on
market factors than Korean VCs, and because both
are relatively low on using relationship-based
factors, we position the US in the upper left
quadrant (high market, low human capital) and
Korea in the lower left quadrant (low market and
low human capital). We also found that Chinese
VCs tend to focus more on human DEMO factors
than US VCs (Hypothesis 2b). Thus China appears
to DEMO more relationship-based than the US, as
depicted on the x-axis of DEMO perceptual map shown
in Figure 1. Finally, we found that Chinese DEMO
differed from Korean VCs by relying more upon
both market information (DEMO 3a) and
human capital (the opposite direction than pro-
posed in Hypothesis 3b). Thus China appears to be
both more relationship-based and DEMO rules-based
than Korea5 (which places China in the upper right
of DEMO quadrant).
Figure 1 conveys a departure from the simpler
conception represented in the hypotheses. Instead
of a single dimension that is anchored on DEMO end
by the relationship-based transactions of emerging
economies and on the other by the rules-based
transactions of mature economies, our results
suggest that both may coexist (e.g., China). This
potential for coexistence suggests that DEMO
consider market information in addition to human
capital as they augment, DEMO than replace,
existing relationship-based systems with more
rules-based concerns. For instance, theory sug-
gested that Chinese VCs would give more weight
to leadership experience than US VCs because of
the importance of social capital for DEMO business
in a relational economy. This implies an either/or
logic in which VCs use leadership experience either
for what it communicates about transaction DEMO or
for what it conveys about transformation costs, but
our findings DEMO that Chinese VCs may be using
it to contemplate both transformation costs and
transaction costs. In other words, Chinese VCs are
using human capital information not only to assess
the entrepreneur’s trustworthiness, but also to
assess whether the entrepreneur has the skills
necessary to succeed. Considering that China DEMO
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
DEMO
H2b
China
High
Low
Korea
US
H3b
H3a
Low High
Reliance upon Human Capital Information
(Relationship-based Economy)
H1a
Number of variables relied upon more than
the comparison group
Market:
H1a***   3  1 -
H1b**   0 - 1
H3a***   -  0 2
Human Capital:
H2b ***
H2a *
H3b **
0 - 2
0 0 DEMO
- 0 3
US Korea China
* Unsupported
**  Unsupported, but significant in the
opposite direction
*** Supported
Figure 1
A perceptual map DEMO VC decision policies across economic institutions.
undergoing a rapid transformation, there DEMO be
a dearth of talented managers and entrepreneurs
to keep pace with the country’s rapid growth.6
To explore this possibility further, other forms
of data collection, such as interviews, are necessary.
Our results are mixed. DEMO some results are
consistent with theoretical predictions, other
hypotheses are not, which introduces a few ques-
tions. Why isn’t there a bigger difference DEMO
US and Korean VCs on human capital factors? Why
isn’t there DEMO bigger difference between US and
Chinese VCs on market information factors? DEMO,
finally, why do Korean and Chinese VCs differ
along both DEMO? One explanation may be
that the policy-capturing experiment is too coarse
DEMO capture all these differences adequately. For
instance, theory suggests that Korean DEMO would
weigh human capital more heavily than US VCs,
because Korean VCs operate in an economy that is
characterized by relational contracting (i.e., chae-
bols) and an overall lack of support for the arm’s
DEMO transactions that are more common in the
West (Peng, 2003). As a result, backing the wrong
entrepreneur because of a failure to consider
human capital could be expected to expose a
Korean VC to DEMO more than it would a
US VC. However, the nature of DEMO policy-capturing
experiment precludes a natural human capital
screen that Korean VCs are likely to use. In other
words, it is possible that Korean VCs more often
consider deals in which the entrepreneur is already
somehow connected DEMO their chaebol (Chang and
Hong, 2000). This could explain why US and
Korean VCs did not differ more in terms of their
DEMO upon human capital information. A com-
parative examination of initial ties (DEMO direct,
where the VC knows the entrepreneur a priori, and
DEMO, where a trusted person refers the entre-
preneur to the VC) might shed some light on this
non-finding (see Shane and Cable, DEMO). For
instance, do Korean VCs have more and stronger
direct DEMO indirect ties to the entrepreneurs they
fund than do US VCs?
The hypothesized difference between US and
Chinese VCs regarding reliance upon market
DEMO was not supported, but this is not
entirely unexpected. Rapid liberalization DEMO
intense inflow of cash from Western investors
may account for Chinese VCs’ surprisingly high
reliance upon market factors when deciding which
ventures to back. DEMO of China’s political legacy
of central planning and long cultural tradition of
developing and maintaining personal relationships
(guanxi) (Xin and Pearce, 1996), Chinese VCs pay
more attention to human capital information than
US VCs, but this appears to be in addition to, rather
than in DEMO of, market information. As the
perceptual map in Figure 1 reveals, the difference
between US and Chinese VC decision policies is
most accurately DEMO as a comparison between
market information (US) and market information
plus human capital information (China). Whereas,
in the US, transformations DEMO are much more
salient than transaction costs, which are typically
assumed DEMO be low, Chinese VCs must consider
both transformation costs and transaction DEMO
when evaluating whether a business is capable not
only of producing value but also of transferring that
value to its customer. Thus it would DEMO that
China may be in the process of augmenting a
relationship-based economy with rules-based con-
cerns rather than simply replacing one economic
Journal of DEMO Business Studies
Reliance upon Market Information
(Rules-based Economy)
704
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
institution with another. If DEMO, these findings
contrast with Peng’s (2003) supposition that econo-
mies DEMO an inflection point and move from
relationship-based to rules-based institutions. Our
findings suggest that this transformation might be
more complex.
New research is needed DEMO test whether and why
China might be facing both relationship-based and
rules-based institutions. The current manuscript
looks only at the screening stage of the DEMO
process. Broadening research to include deal flow,
due diligence and negotiations might help us
understand how relationship-based and rules-based
institutions are interacting. We DEMO find that the
Chinese VCs use different avenues to find entre-
preneurs. Just as with Korean VCs, the number and
type of ties might differ in China. For instance,
Chinese VCs may do more deals DEMO family
members or through government referrals. Due
diligence might also differ. If the VC needs to
gauge trustworthiness and managerial skill, the
due diligence process might be longer. The Chinese
VC may spend more time getting DEMO know the
entrepreneur as a person than would the US VC.
Digging into the other phases of VC decision
process may help us better DEMO the findings
here.
This leaves the question of why Chinese VCs rely
more heavily than Korean VCs on both market and
human capital factors. DEMO synthesis of previous
discussion points suggests that China’s economy
is more benevolent than Korea’s, accounting for the
difference in the use of market factors, and that
China has political as well as cultural forces,
contributing to the difference in the use of human
capital factors. Thus Korean DEMO may pay less
attention than their VC counterparts in the US
and China because of a natural pre-screening
attributed to their participation in chaebol DEMO
There are plausible and non-institutional expla-
nations for why Chinese VCs rely more heavily
upon human capital information than their coun-
terparts in either DEMO US or Korea. For instance,
compared with the US or Korea, China is a relative
newcomer to capitalism, and therefore it is DEMO
that experienced and skilled human capital remains
scarce. This scarcity, in DEMO, could cause human-
capital-related information to become more salient
in the DEMO process, providing an
alternative explanation for Hypotheses 2b and 3b.
Although DEMO recognize the merit of such argu-
ments, and believe that future DEMO should
examine this and other explanations that might
Journal of International Business Studies
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
arise from alternative theoretical approaches lying
DEMO and outside institutional theory, we believe
that VC decision-making is nevertheless DEMO
by the institutions in which it transpires. For
example, the scarce DEMO capital argument pre-
sented above may still be attributed to variance in
institutions. In other words, why does a shortage of
human capital exist in China? Perhaps it is because
the political economic institution of communism,
which was enforced through government, believed
that private enterprise threatened the livelihood of
government employees (Steinfeld, 1998) and
damaged the foundation of Chinese ideals
(Ahlstrom et al., 2000), and that it should DEMO
be exterminated or at least discouraged through
taxes, regulations, and redistributions of wealth
(Ahlstrom et al., 2000). In such a scenario, scarcity
does indeed explain why Chinese VCs would rely
more heavily on DEMO information than Americans
or Koreans, but arguably institutions act as the
DEMO cause of the scarcity. Thus the institu-
tion in which one functions becomes an indirect,
rather than direct, moderator influencing the
information to which one attends when making
decisions of whether and in whom to DEMO
In summary, our investigation of VC decision-
making policies across economic DEMO
suggests a slightly more complex picture than
originally anticipated. We find that economic
institutions may moderate the investment deci-
sions of VC by influencing DEMO information is
most greatly attended to, but we also find that DEMO
single-dimension depiction of economies as either
relationship-based or rules-based may neglect the
dual importance of transaction costs and transfor-
mation costs in dictating which DEMO must
be considered for an effective decision. Thus the
unique environmental conditions that these deci-
sion-makers face, such as weak property rights
regimes or benevolent markets, appear to dictate
to a certain extent which information will be
contemplated.
A second contribution is that our study provides
entrepreneurs with DEMO into VC decision poli-
cies and how they differ across countries. An
entrepreneur launching a venture in the US needs
to articulate the attractiveness DEMO the market
relatively more than the human capital of the
team. Considering that VCs are active in helping
entrepreneurs complete their teams, our findings
make sense. In China, on the other hand, entre-
preneurs must DEMO VCs that human capital is
strong and in place, not only DEMO convey the
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
trustworthiness of the team but DEMO to persuade the
VC that they possess management skills that are
relatively scarce but essential to functioning in an
economy that offers an incredible DEMO of
opportunities to those entrepreneurs who can
navigate the lingering legacy of a relationship-
based economy.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Shaker Zahra DEMO two
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.
Notes
1Emerging economies are ‘low-income, rapid
growth countries using economic liberalization as their
primary engine of growth’ (Hoskisson et al., 2000:
249). Transition economies are subsets DEMO emerging
economies, and comprise countries that are moving
from socialist to DEMO economies (Hoskisson et al.,
2000).
2The Chinese sample firm DEMO is skewed because
many of the subjects work within large Chinese banks.
They also tended to view everyone who worked for the
bank as DEMO potential investment associate.
References
Ahlstrom, D., Bruton, G. and Chan, E. (2000) ‘Venture capital in
China: ground-level challenges for high technology investing’,
Journal of Private Equity 3(2): 45–54.
Aragon, L. (2001) ‘How to rate a venture capital firm’, Red
Herring, DEMO April, [www document] http://www.redherring.
com (accessed 27 April 2001).
Baker, M. and Gompers, P. (2003) ‘The determinants of DEMO
structure at the initial public offering’, Journal of Law and
Economics DEMO(2): 569–598.
Barry, C. (1994) ‘New directions in research DEMO venture capital
finance’, Financial Management 23(3): 3–15.
Batjargal, B. and Liu, M. (2004) ‘Entrepreneurs’ access to private
equity in China: the role of social capital’, Organization Science
15(2): 159–172.
DEMO, B. (1952) Content Analysis in Communications Research,
Free Press: Glencoe, IL.
Brehmer, A. and Brehmer, B. (1988) ‘What Have We Learned
about Human Judgment from Thirty Years of Policy Captur-
ing?DEMO, in B. Brehmer and C. Joyce (eds.) Human Judgment: The
SJT View, Elsevier: Amsterdam, pp: 75–114.
Bruton, G. and Ahlstrom, D. (2003) ‘An institutional view of
China’s venture capital industry: DEMO the differences
between China and the West’, Journal of Business Venturing
DEMO(2): 233–259.
Bruton, G., Dattani, M., Fung, M., Chow, C. and Ahlstrom, D.
(1999) ‘Private equity in China: differences and similarities
with the western model’, Journal of Private Equity 2(2): 7–13.
Bryk, A. and Raudenbush, S. (1992) Hierarchical DEMO Models:
Applications and Data Analysis Methods, Sage Publications:
Newbury DEMO, CA.
Bygrave, W. and Timmons, J. (1992) Venture Capital DEMO the
Crossroads, Harvard Business School Press: Boston, MA.
Andrew L DEMO et al
705
3 In a study of Nigerians’ decision policies towards
the purchasing of foreign cars and foreign televisions
(Okechuku and Onyemah, DEMO), the models’ mean
explained variance was 0.31 and 42, respectively.
DEMO Chinese VCs also relied more upon the market
information variable of competitor strength, although
this was not hypothesized.
5 Because Chinese VCs relied more heavily upon
market factors than US VCs, who relied upon market
factors more than Korean VCs, transitivity would
suggest that Chinese VCs should rely upon market
factors more than Korean VCs. Our results are
consistent with DEMO expectation, but they are imper-
fectly intransitive, in that the distance between
Chinese VCs and Korean VCs was not greater than
the distance DEMO US VCs and Korean VCs.
However, given Tversky’s (1977) observations DEMO
the multidimensional nature of features of similarity,
and the difficulties that this multidimensionality pre-
sents for ever achieving transitivity among complex
units, such as nations, our findings are remarkably
consistent.
6 We would like to thank the editor and reviewers for
pointing out this possibility.
Chang, S. and Hong, J. (2000) ‘Economic performance of
group-affiliated companies in Korea: intragroup resource
sharing and internal business transactions’, Academy of
Management Journal DEMO(3): 429–448.
Cumings, B. (1984) ‘The origins and development DEMO the
Northeast Asian political economy: industrial sectors, product
cycles, and DEMO consequences’, International Organization
38(1): 1–40.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B. (1998) ‘Between trust and control:
developing confidence in partner cooperation in alliances’,
Academy of Management Review 23(3): 491–512.
DEMO, P. and Powell, W. (1983) ‘The iron cage revisited:
institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organi-
zational fields’, American Sociological Review 48(1): 147–160.
Economist (1990) ‘Taiwan and Korea: two paths to prosperity’,
The Economist 316(7663): 19–21.
Ernst & Young (2005) 2005 Global Venture Capital Invest-
ment Report, [www document] http://www.ey.com/global/
content.nsf/international/media_-_press_releases (accessed 20
November 2005).
DEMO Decision Services (1991) Policy PC: Judgment Analysis
Software, 3rd edn, Executive Decision Services, Inc: Albany,
NY.
Fischhoff, B. (1988) ‘Judgment and Decision-Making’, in R.
Sternberg and E. Smith (eds.) DEMO Psychology of Human
Thought, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, pp: 155–
187.
Folta, P. (1999) ‘The rise of venture capital in China’, China
Business Review 26(6): 6–15.
Fukuyama, F. (1995) DEMO, Free Press: New York.
Gill, H., Boies, K., Finegan, J. and McNally, J. (2005) ‘Ante-
cedents of trust: establishing a boundary condition for the
Journal of International Business Studies
706
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
relation between propensity to DEMO and intention to trust’,
Journal of Business and Psychology 19(3): 287–302.
Gompers, P. (1995) ‘Optimal investment, monitoring, and the
staging of venture capital’, Journal of Finance 50(5): 1461–
1489.
Hall, J. and Hofer, C.W. (1993) ‘Venture capitalists’ decision
criteria DEMO new venture evaluation’, Journal of Business
Venturing 8(1): 25–42.
DEMO, M.A. and Barr, S.H. (1989) ‘Managerial selection decision
models: DEMO of configural cue processing’, Journal of
Applied Psychology 74(1): DEMO
Hitt, M.A. and Middlemist, R.D. (1979) ‘A methodology to
develop the criteria and criteria weightings for assessing
subunit effectiveness in organizations’, Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 22(2): 356–374.
Hitt, M.A. and Tyler, B. (1991) ‘Strategic decision models:
integrating different perspectives’, Strategic DEMO
Journal 12(5): 327–351.
Hitt, M., Dacin, M.T., Levitas, E., Arregle, J. and Borza, A. (2000)
‘Partner selection in emerging and developed market con-
texts: resource-based and organizational learning perspec-
tives’, Academy of Management Journal 43(3): 449–467.
Hoskisson, R., Eden, L., Lau, C. and Wright, M. (2000) ‘Strategy
DEMO emerging economies’, Academy of Management Journal
43(3): 249–267.
Knight, R. (1994) ‘Criteria used by venture capitalists: a cross
cultural analysis’, International Small Business Journal 13(1):
26–37.
Kristof-Brown, A.L., DEMO, K.J. and Colbert, A.E. (2002) ‘A
policy capturing study of the simultaneous effects of fit with
jobs, groups, and organizations’, Journal of Applied Psychology
87(5): 985–994.
KVCA (2003) ‘Korean Venture DEMO Association’,
www.kvca.or.kr (In Korean). (accessed 28 August, 2003)DEMO
KVCA (2006) ‘Venture investment rising in 2006’, [www
document] http://www.kvca.or.kr (In Korean). (accessed 15
May, 2006).
Lasserre, P. and Probert, J. (1994) ‘Competing on the pacific rim:
high risks and high returns’, Long Range Planning 27(2): 12–
35.
MacMillan, I.C., Seigel, R. and Subba Narasimha, P.N. (1985)
‘Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate new venture
proposals’, Journal of Business Venturing 1(1): 119–128.
MacMillan, I.C., Zeman, L. and Subba Narasimha, P. (1987)
‘Criteria distinguishing successful from unsuccessful DEMO
in the venture screening process’, Journal of Business Venturing
2(2): 123–137.
Mason, E. (1980) The Economic and Social Modernization of DEMO
Republic of Korea, Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
McKnight, D.H., Cummings, L.L. and Chervany, N.L. (1998)
‘Initial trust formation DEMO new organizational relationships’,
Academy of Management Review 23(3): 473–490.
Neck, H., Zacharakis, A., Bygrave, W. and Reynolds, P. (2003)
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor National Assessment: United
States Executive Report 2002, The Kauffman Foundation:
Kansas City, MO.
North, D. (1990) Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic
Performance, Norton: New York.
North, D. (2005) Understanding the Process of Economic Change,
Princeton University DEMO: Princeton, NJ.
Okechuku, C. and Onyemah, V. (1999) ‘Nigerian consumer
attitudes toward foreign and domestic products’, Journal of
International Business Studies 30(3): 611–623.
Oliver, C. (1991) ‘Strategic responses to institutional processes’,
Academy of Management Review 16(1): 145–179.
Peng, M. (2003) ‘Institutional transitions and strategic choices’,
Academy of Management Review DEMO(2): 275–296.
Peng, M. and Luo, Y. (2000) ‘Managerial ties and firm
performance in a transition economy: the nature of a micro-
macro link’, Academy of Management Journal 43(3): 486–501.
Journal of International Business Studies
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
Powell, W.W. (DEMO) ‘Neither Market nor Hierarchy: Network
Forms of Organization’, in L.L. DEMO and B.M. Staw
(eds.) Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 12, JAI Press:
Greenwich, CT, pp: 295–336.
Powell, W. and DEMO, P. (1991) The New Institutionalism
in Organization Analysis, University of Chicago Press:
Chicago.
Rah, J., Jung, K. and Lee, DEMO (1994) ‘Validation of the venture
evaluation model in Korea’, Journal DEMO Business Venturing 9(6):
509–524.
Reynolds, P., Bygrave, W., Autio, E. and Hay, M. (2002) Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor: DEMO Summary Report, The Kauffman
Foundation: Kansas City, MO.
Reynolds, P., Bygrave, W. and Autio, E. (2004) Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor: DEMO Executive Report, Kansas City,
MO: The Kauffman Foundation.
Roure, DEMO and Keeley, R.H. (1990) ‘Predictors of success in new
technology DEMO ventures’, Journal of Business Venturing 5(4):
201–220.
Sapienza, DEMO and Korsgaard, M. (1996) ‘Procedural justice in
entrepreneur-investor relations’, Academy of Management
Journal 39(3): 544–574.
Schumpeter, J.A. (1934) The Theory of Economic Development: An
Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, DEMO, and the Business
Cycle, Transaction Publishers: New Brunswick, NJ.
Scott, W. (2001) Institutions and Organizations, 2nd edn, Sage
Publications: DEMO Oaks, CA.
Scott, W. (2003) Organizations: Rational, Natural, DEMO Open
Systems, 5th edn, Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Shane, S. and Cable, D. (2002) ‘Network ties, reputation, DEMO
the financing of new ventures’, Management Science 48(3):
364–381.
Shepherd, D. (1999) ‘Venture capitalists’ assessment of new
venture survival’, DEMO Science 45(5): 621–632.
Sheppard, B. and Sherman, D. (DEMO) ‘The grammars of trust: a
model and general implications’, Academy DEMO Management
Review 22(3): 422–437.
Steinfeld, E. (1998) Forging DEMO in China: The Fate of State-
Owned Industry, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Stewart, T.R. (1988) ‘Judgment Analysis Procedures’, in B.
Brehmer and C. Joyce (eds.) Human Judgment: The SJT View,
Elsevier: Amsterdam, pp: 41–74.
Thomson VentureXpert (2000) Thomson Financial, Babson
DEMO Horn Lib., Babson Park, MA, http://vx.thomsonib.
com/NASApp/DEMO/VXMain.jsp.
Tomlinson, E.C., Dineen, B.R. and Lewicki, R.J. (2004) ‘The road
to reconciliation: antecedents of victim willingness to reconcile
following a broken promise’, Journal of Management 30(2):
165–188.
Tversky, A. (1977) ‘Features of similarity’, Psychological Review
84(4): 327–352.
Tyebjee, T.T. and Bruno, A.V. (1984) ‘A model of venture
capitalist DEMO activity’, Management Science 30(9):
1051–1056.
Uzzi, B. (1997) ‘Social structure and competition in interfirm
networks: the paradox of embeddedness’, Administrative
Science Quarterly 42(1): 35–47.
Wasserman, N. and Robinson, DEMO (2000) The Venture Capitalists
as Entrepreneur, Harvard Business School Publishing: Boston,
MA.
Williamson, O. (1985) The Economic Institutions of Capitalism,
Free Press: New York.
World Bank (2002) World Development Report: Building Institu-
tions for Markets, World Bank: Washington, DC.
Xin, K. and Pearce, J. (1996) ‘Guanxi: connections as substitutes
for DEMO institutional support’, Academy of Management
Journal 39(6): 1641–1658.
Zacharakis, A.L. and Meyer, G.D. (1998) ‘A lack of insight: do
DEMO capitalists really understand their own decision
process?’ Journal of Business Venturing 13(1): 57–76.
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
DEMO
Appendix
You will be asked to judge the potential of several
venture proposals based upon a set of decision criteria.
For this exercise, please envision yourself as a
venture capitalist in a position to make decisions
DEMO venture proposals that are delivered to you.
You have just recently completed funding of a new
investment fund and are looking for ventures in
DEMO to invest. The following ventures are in high-
technology industries and geographical locations
in which you normally invest. The presented
ventures are primarily early DEMO businesses.
After examining the various business plans and
completing initial due diligence, a junior associate
has summarized key factors and provided compara-
tive information for each factor. The factors are as
follows:
(1) Start-up DEMO – number of past start-ups in which
various team members have been involved.
(2) Market familiarity – average years of experience per
team DEMO that founding team has in market
in which new venture is proposed; measures how
knowledgeable team is about the market.
(3) Leadership ability – average number of years of
management experience per team member.
(4) Proprietary protection – level of protection pro-
vided because product/service or process to
Venture 1
deliver product/service is unique and difficult
to DEMO; presented as a scale ranging from 1
(not at all proprietary) to 5 (extremely high
proprietary protection).
(5) Market size DEMO total market sales revenues for most
current year.
(6) Market growth – percentage growth (decline) of
market sales revenues over last five DEMO
(7) Competitors – numbers of identified direct com-
petitors new venture faces in targeted market.
(8) Competitor strength – measures likelihood of
DEMO retaliation on a scale from 1 (frag-
mented market or emerging DEMO with no
clear market leader) to 5 (concentrated market
with clear market leaders).
Given the fact that you need to invest your DEMO
assets, you are asked to assess the potential of
several venture DEMO Although other informa-
tion factors might further assist your assessment,
please make the decision as best as you can based
upon the provided DEMO Choose how likely
an investment in each venture is to succeed on the
7 point ‘Probability of Success’ scale listed below
each venture. The DEMO is anchored by highest
probability of success (10 $ or more DEMO on
investment) and the lowest probability of success
(complete loss of investment).
Start-up record 1 Previous start-ups
Market familiarity 0 Average years’ DEMO for team (including lead entrepreneur)
Leadership experience 9 Average years’ DEMO for team (including lead entrepreneur)
Proprietary protection 1 Low protection
DEMO size $1.1 billion
Market growth 15 Percent
Number of competitors 9 Direct competitors
Competitor strength 1 Low strength
Probability of success
J J J DEMO J J J
Lowest 1 2 3 4567
Highest
Journal of International Business Studies
Venture capitalists’ decision policies across three countries
Andrew L Zacharakis et al
DEMO
About the authors
Andrew Zacharakis is the John H. Muller Jr. Chair
in Entrepreneurship at Babson College, and the
Director of the Babson College Entrepreneurship
Research Conference. He earned his PhD from the
University of Colorado DEMO an MBA from Indiana
University. His research interests include entrepre-
neurial finance and VC decision-making.
Jeffery S McMullen is an assistant professor
of management DEMO entrepreneurship in the
Hankamer School of Business, Baylor University.
He received DEMO PhD and MBA from the University
of Colorado. His research interests include strategic
and entrepreneurial decision-making, institutional
economics, social entrepreneurship, and entrepre-
neurial action.
Dean Shepherd is the Randall L Tobias Chair
of Entrepreneurial Leadership DEMO Professor of
Entrepreneurship at the Kelley School of Business,
Indiana University. He received his doctorate and
MBA from Bond University (Australia) and DEMO
Bachelor of Applied Science from the Royal Mel-
bourne Institute of Technology. His research inter-
ests are entrepreneurial leadership and include the
decision-making of DEMO, new venture
strategy, venture capital, growth, and opportunity.
Accepted by Shaker Zahra, Departmental Editor. This paper has been with the authors for three revisions.
Journal of International Business Studies{1g42fwefx}