Relational Governance as an Interorganizational Strategy: An Empirical Test of
the Role of Trust in Economic Exchange
Akbar Zaheer; N. Venkatraman
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 16, No. 5. (Jun., 1995), pp. 373-392.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28199506%2916%3A5%3C373%3ARGAAIS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
Strategic Management Journal is currently published by John Wiley & Sons.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates DEMO acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
DEMO://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of DEMO, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for DEMO personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use DEMO this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/jwiley.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must DEMO the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing DEMO long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, DEMO,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit DEMO with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Tue Apr 1 17:32:01 2008
/
/-
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 16, 373-392 (1995)
RELATIONAL GOVERNANCE AS AN
INTERORGANIZATIONAL STRATEGY: AN
EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE ROLE OF TRUST IN
ECONOMIC EXCHANGE
AKBAR ZAHEER
Curtis L. Carlson School of DEMO, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, U.S.A.
N. VENKATRAMAN
Graduate DEMO of Management, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
We develop a model of relational governance as a specijic form of interorganizational
strategy that DEMO distinct from the traditional modes of markets and hierarchies. We
conceptualize this form of strategy in term of structural and processual dimensions and
derive DEMO model of its determinants through arguments drawn from transaction cost economics
and the sociological exchange literature. Hierarchical regression modeling is employed to
test the DEMO model on data collected from a sample of 329 independent insurance
agencies. We include the relational variable of trust and demonstrate that the combined
DEMO explains relational governance better than a model with the traditional determinants
of governance form alone. Further, we observe that governance structure and process are
related and discuss implications of the dynamic link between them. Directions for DEMO
are developed for strategic management research and practice.
A current research thrust in organizational
economics and strategic management is focused
on 'intermediate' modes DEMO governance, distinct
from the traditional modes of market and
hierarchy (Williamson, 1975, 1991). Intermediate
modes of governance may serve as alternative
DEMO structures to vertical financial owner-
ship (Mahoney, 1992; Ring and DEMO de Ven,
1992). These take several forms such as joint
ventures (Harrigan, 1985a; Kogut, 1988), strategic
partnerships between suppliers DEMO buyers (Heide
and John, 1990), technology licensing (Koh and
DEMO, 1991) and alliances (James, 1985;
Key words: relational DEMO; trust; interorgani-
zational strategy
CCC 0143-2095/95/050373-20
01995 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Lewis, 1990). Such governance modes have DEMO
variously termed as hybrids (Williamson, 1991)
or networks (e.g., Eccles and Crane, 1987), and
are not only widespread in the contemporary
business environment, but are increasing greatly
in number (Harrigan, 1988). Further, their
strategic importance is growing (Thorelli, 1986;
Powell, 1987, 1990); for example, networks are
said to enhance the competitive positioning of
firms (Jarillo, 1988). Research into intermediate
governance DEMO has significant implications
for strategic management as it explores critical
choices relating to the scope of the firm and to
firm boundaries.
This paper DEMO on transaction cost reasoning
(Williamson, 1975,1985) and evaluates an DEMO
ing view that noneconomic factors, primarily
Received 18 February 1993
Revised DEMO August 1994
374 A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
embodied in trust-which we term 'sociological'
in order to distinguish them from more traditional
transaction cost determinants-are DEMO
tary to economic ones in the governance of
exchange relationships (Dore, 1983,1987; Grano-
vetter, 1985; Lazerson, 1988; Ring and Van de
Ven, 1992). In other words, we are interested in
DEMO the determinants-both economic
and sociological--of relational governance
(Macneil, 1980; Williamson, 1985; Dwyer, Schurr,
and Oh, 1987). Further, the DEMO views relational
governance as embodied in both the structure
and the process of an interorganizational
relationship-specifically, one involving exchange.
Thus, we draw on DEMO streams on transaction
cost economics and sociological exchange perspec-
tives to develop a research model which is
empirically tested in a service industry by DEMO
data from the commercial segment of the U.S.
property and casualty (DEMO&C) insurance industry
(see also Etgar, 1978; Cummins and VanDerhei,
1979).
More generally, our paper responds to Hill's
(DEMO) call for a greater research focus on the
nature and effects DEMO the 'long-term cooperative
relationships' between economic actors. Further,
this work is in line with Hansen and Wernerfelt
(1989), who integrated economic and behavioral-
sociological factors to explain firm performance
and stressed the need DEMO research attention to
multidisciplinary approaches in explaining firm-
level phenomena.
RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES
Relational governance: A conceptualization
The transaction cost perspective argues that the
transaction costs of exchange are the most
significant determinants of the DEMO form.
Transaction costs are largely determined by the
extent to which the assets of the parties to the
relationship are specialized to the transaction
DEMO occurs between them (Klein, Crawford, and
Alchian, 1978; Williamson, 1985). In order to
protect transaction-specific assets from opportun-
istic appropriation, firms will choose to internalize
the transaction or otherwise arrange to increase
DEMO extent of hierarchical control over the other
party to the relationship.
While traditionally the choice of governance
has been cast in terms of the DEMO polar extremes,
market or hierarchy (Coase, 1937; Williamson,
DEMO), this paper is focused on intermediate
governance modes-specifically on relational
governance. It builds on the assertion articulated
by Macneil (1978, 1980), DEMO (1987), and
others, that contracting is never completely
discrete (DEMO, anonymous, characterized by limited
communication, as assumed by neoclassical
theories) but that even the most fundamental
model of discrete exchange includes some
DEMO e1ements.l Use of the term 'relational
governance' in this paper suggests interfirm
exchange which includes significant relationship-
specific assets, combined with a high level of
interorganizational trust. This is consistent with
Ring and Van de DEMO (1992).
The relational nature of contracting owes its
origins to DEMO (1978, 1980), who views a
contract as reflecting 'the DEMO among parties
to the process of projecting exchange into the
future' (1980: 4). Central to Macneil's argument
is the proposition that relational exchange is
based on a social component, largely represented
by trust. Specifically, the parties involved in
relational exchange derive 'non-economic satis-
factions DEMO engage in social exchange as well as
. . . economic exchange' (Macneil, 1980: 13;
emphasis added). Further '. . . modern relations
. . . just like primitive relations, require solidarity
and hence a degree of trust, or faith in others,
to work successfully' (1980: 21; emphasis added).
This line of DEMO is consistent with the
work of sociologists such as Powell (1990) and
Granovetter (1985), who develop the notion of
embeddedness. Specifically, DEMO scholars have
argued for recognizing the role played by socially
embedded personal relationships in economic
exchange. Economic exchange relations thus
depart from 'pure economic motives' and 'become
overlaid with social content that carries strong
expectations DEMO trust and abstention from oppor-
tunism' (Granovetter, 1985: 490). The significant
social component in economic action is generally
ignored in economic DEMO of exchange
activity, and is frequently consigned to the error
term DEMO to 'noise' (Ring and Van de Ven, 1992).
However, economists such as Arrow (1973: 24)
have also recognized that 'there is an element of
trust in every transaction'.
' As a reviewer rightly points out, nor is exchange ever
completely hierarchical, DEMO long as exit is an option.
Relational Governance
375
In a similar vein, Dore (1987) invokes examples
from the Japanese textile industry to argue
for the significance of sociological DEMO in
exchange. Specifically, he discusses the role that
continuity, mutual dependence, trust, and social
norms play in the maintenance of exchange
relationships DEMO supplier and buyer firms.
He argues that similar considerations intervene
to a greater extent than is generally believed in
Western business contexts as well (see also
Macauley, 1963). Hill (1990) argues that contrary
to the classic transaction cost view that opportun-
ism generally characterizes exchange, it is
relationships based on cooperation and trust that
are more likely to DEMO in the marketplace.
His rationale is that 'opportunism, the safeguards
needed to check opportunism, and internalization
as a response to opportunism dissipate the
composite quasi rent' (1990: 511), and actors
who do not cooperate and trust each other will
therefore tend to be less efficient DEMO those who
do. Competitive pressures will tend to select out
inefficient relationships and firms that enter into
them, leaving behind the more efficient, DEMO
based ones. Thus, empirically, the assumption
that opportunism characterizes exchange should
be reconsidered in favor of one that suggests
that trust does.
Transaction DEMO theorists such as Williamson
(1985) have recognized the abundance of inter-
mediate governance forms and suggest that,
under certain conditions, these 'DEMO' forms
are maintained by economic weapons such as
hostages and credible DEMO to keep
opportunistic behavior at bay. However, this
view of relational DEMO is somewhat at
variance from that articulated by Macneil (1980)
DEMO Dore (1987), who conceive of relational
exchange as supported by DEMO factors
such as trust. It is possible that over time,
relational forms evolve from using economic
safeguards to protect specific assets to employing
DEMO in this way (Ring and Van de Ven, 1992).
Dimensionalizing governance as structure and
process
We view relational governance as comprised of
DEMO basic underlying dimensions: (a) the structure
of the relationship-conceptualized in DEMO of
the degree of vertical quasi-integration (Blois,
1972) reflecting the degree of market or hier-
archical structuring of the transaction; and (DEMO)
the process underlying the relationship-concep-
tualized in terms of the degree of joint action
(Heide and John, 1990) in the exchange relation-
ship. More broadly, the governance structure in
this discussion is viewed as the interunit or
interj5rm framework within which exchange takes
place. The use DEMO the term 'structure' here refers
to 'governance' structure, which DEMO emphasize
is quite distinct from organizational structure.
The latter concept is most frequently used to
describe the administrative relationships within
an organization. Governance process DEMO to
the interunit or interfirm activities that accompany
exchange within the framework of the governance
structure.
We argue that viewing relational governance
in terms DEMO both structure and process is important
since a combination of structural and processual
dimensions more completely describes the com-
plexity of such intermediate relationships DEMO
either the structure or the process dimension
alone. Of course, structure DEMO process are
closely related, as we discuss in more detail later.
DEMO choice of the form of governance, specifically
the determination of the DEMO governance
structure and process, is broadly defined as the
interorganizational strategy DEMO the firm. More
specifically, since we develop our theoretical and
empirical DEMO in the contexts of a vertical
exchange relationship, we can refer DEMO this type
of interorganizational strategy as a vertical control
strategy. In this paper, we use the two terms
interchangeably.2
Quasi-integration as a structural dimension
We define vertical quasi-integration as a 'close
relationship which is based primarily upon the
[firm's] dependence for a significant proportion
of its total DEMO upon a particular [firm]'
(Blois, 1972: 267). Blois DEMO that a relationship
of this type involves an interdependence between
the two firms such that it 'can be considered as
a type of vertical integration without the legal
form' (1972: 268). We argue that this is a
structural dimension of governance, since it
While we have focused on interorganizational strategy, a
more precise view is offered by Mahoney (1992) that vertical
control strategy is distinct from the choice of DEMO
form.
376
A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
captures the transactional form of the DEMO in
terms of the extent of market or hierarchical
mediation of transactions. The rationale for
conceptualizing quasi-integration as governance
structure becomes clearer from the DEMO case
when 100 percent of a firm's output goes to a
single buyer. Although such a situation does not
automatically imply a hierarchical DEMO,
for exchange could conceivably be based entirely
on price, in DEMO terms it is rare to find pure
price-based contracts in these contexts. Such a
relationship in fact would be tantamount to a
hierarchical one DEMO exchange occurred repeatedly.
As Macneil (1978: 898) notes, '[als DEMO
relations expand, those relations take on more
and more the characteristics DEMO mini societies
and mini states.' Eccles (1981) calls stable,
DEMO relationships between contractors and
subcontractors 'quasi-firms' for the same reason.
We argue that higher degrees of quasi-
integration imply a stable, long-term relationship
between buyer and supplier. This form of
relationship is distinct from a DEMO market,
occasional transaction, for it implies continuing
transactions between buyer DEMO seller. When
quasi-integration is high, the expectation is that
the volume DEMO such transactions account for a
significant proportion of the seller's output over
multiple periods of time. Our use of vertical
quasi-integration as a DEMO of governance
is consistent with previous empirical research,
such as John and Weitz (1988), testing transaction
cost explanations for vertical integration.
We further suggest that the higher the level
of quasi-integration, the greater the costs of
terminating the relationship for the exchange
partners (Kay, 1992)DEMO This proposition follows
from our previous argument that higher quasi-
integration generally implies a larger component
of nonprice, or 'hierarchical' elements in the
relationship. The existence of such nonprice
elements in an exchange relationship suggests DEMO
relational contract, and we argue that terminating
a relational contract is DEMO than terminating
a discrete contract.
Joint action as a process dimension
Joint action reflects a move toward closer
relationships which 'involves the parties carrying
out the focal activities in a cooperative or
coordinated way' (Heide DEMO John, 1990: 25).
Joint action serves as a safeguard for transaction-
specific investments since firms that invest in
relationships with other firms DEMO like to
reduce the risks of opportunistic appropriation
by getting involved in joint activities (Leenders
and Blenkhorn, 1988). Joint action is viewed DEMO
governance process since it comprises a set of
decision process mechanisms that determine the
terms of exchange between the members of the
dyad (Achrol, Reve, and Stern, 1983) and due
to its focus on DEMO exchange and implications
of a cooperative endeavor. The rationale is that
the joint responsibility for the activities of the
dyad will serve to protect DEMO party with specific
assets from their appropriation. From a macro-
organization perspective, joint action provides
an appropriate mechanism for planning and
forecasting, in DEMO to the coopting of
environmental elements, and thus would appear
to DEMO as a process counter to organizational
dependence by reducing the uncertainty caused
for the organization by environmental elements
(Thompson, 1967; Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978).
Determinants of governance from the
transaction cost perspective
We consider three key determinants of transaction
costs-(a) the degree of transaction-specific assets
(or asset specificity); (b) the level of uncertainty;
and (c) the extent of reciprocal investments-in
this section. Asset specificity, by creating a small
numbers exchange condition, has been argued
to be a key source of transaction costs. Similarly,
uncertainty has been a prominent DEMO in
previous empirical studies of vertical integration
using the transaction cost approach (e.g., Ander-
son and Schmittlein, 1984). Reciprocal invest-
ments (DEMO reciprocal asset specificity) refer to
transaction-specific investments by the other
party DEMO the exchange and are akin to being a
mirror image of asset specificity. Reciprocal
assets may tend to moderate opportunism by
serving as 'hostages' in an exchange (Williamson,
1985).
Asset spec@city as a DEMO of transaction
costs
Asset specificity has been extensively employed in
empirical research (see, for instance, Monteverde
and Teece, 1982; Walker and Weber, 1984;
Heide and John, 1990; Anderson and Weitz,
1991) on transaction cost explanations for vertical
integration. Given our focus on a service industry
DEMO a research context, rather than considering
physical asset specificity, we develop the concept
of business process asset specificity-which incor-
porates components of both DEMO asset speci-
ficity (Williamson, 1975, 1985) and procedural
asset specificity as discussed below.
Human asset speciJicity deals with the degree
to which DEMO, knowledge and experience of a
firm's personnel are specific to DEMO requirements
of dealing with another firm in a vertical
relationship. Anderson (DEMO) considered special-
ized human knowledge in sales operations as
representing human DEMO specificity given her
focus on the salesperson's role as an agent (vs.
an employee). Masten, Meehan, and Snyder
(1991) conceptualized specialized technical
knowledge in ship building as reflecting human
asset specificity. John DEMO Weitz (1988) oper-
ationalize human asset specificity in terms of the
level of training and experience specific to the
product-line in distribution channels.
DEMO asset speciJicity refers to the degree
a firm's workflows and processes are customized
in line with the requirements of the exchange
partner (Malone, Yates, and Benjamin, 1987).
This notion is akin to the concept of organizational
routines (Nelson and Winter, 1982) which are
hard to alter once established, and may have
involved significant investments in terms of
training and specialization. Dealing with a regular
exchange partner, particularly when the product
or the transaction is complex, can clearly result
in transaction-specific routines which may not
transfer easily to another partner. We need to
DEMO between organizational routines that
are likely to become so transaction-specific that
they are expensive to redeploy, and those that
do not have such asset-specific characteristics.
While there is clearly a continuum of organiza-
tional routines along DEMO asset-specific dimension,
we venture that routines which are highly
complex, DEMO those that are set up to handle
highly specialized products or services produced
by an exchange partner, will possess greater
procedural asset specificity. In the case of
the insurance agencies dealing with complex
commercial products from DEMO focal carriers,
such procedural asset specificity can be reasonably
assumed.
Relational Governance
Integrating these two components of asset
specificity, we argue that the greater level of
business process asset specificity creates an
increased requirement for DEMO governance form to
offset the dependence caused by such specific assets.
Put differently, a higher degree of dependence due
to higher investments made in business processes--
both people and procedure-requires that the
relationship include greater safeguards DEMO that its
transaction-specific assets are not opportunistically
appropriated. Since a higher level of quasi-
integration imposes higher termination costs on
both the parties to DEMO exchange (Kay, 1992), it
can serve effectively as the requisite safeguard.
Thus, we expect a positive effect of asset specificity
on quasi-integration:
Hypothesis 1: Asset specificity is positively
and signiJicantly associated with greater degrees
of quasi-integration.
Uncertainty as a determinant of transaction costs
Uncertainty has DEMO commonly employed as a
determinant of transaction costs in the literature
on pressures for vertical integration (Walker and
Weber, 1984; John and Weitz, 1988). In an
exchange context, the relevant form of uncer-
DEMO is 'behavioral uncertainty' (Williamson,
1985), which could be DEMO as a subset
of Koopmans' (1957) 'secondary uncertainty.'
Behavioral uncertainty arises from the difficulty
in predicting the actions of the other DEMO in
the relationship, in view of the potential for
opportunistic behavior DEMO since bounded ration-
ality precludes the writing of complete contingent
contracts. As contingencies develop, it becomes
costlier to conduct transactions in pure market
settings since opportunistic parties may reinter-
pret contract terms to suit themselves.
In DEMO, macro-organizational theorists have
argued for the role of uncertainty in defining DEMO
boundaries of the firm. For example, Thompson
(1967) specifically postulates DEMO 'organizations
. . . seek to place their boundaries around those
DEMO, which if left to the task environment
would be crucial contingencies' (1967: 39). Stinch-
combe (1990) asserts that relationships incorporate
DEMO elements of hierarchy when dealing with
higher levels of uncertainty. Since a higher
degree of vertical quasi-integration implies greater
hierarchy, we derive the following hypothesis:
377
378 A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
Hypothesis 2a: Uncertainty is positively and
significantly associated with greater degrees of
quasi-integration.
Once a high degree of DEMO has
been achieved between the partners to the
exchange, behavioral uncertainty DEMO tend to
be moderated. Since our research model is a
cross-sectional one, we are not in a position to
capture the temporal sequence of events, and
accordingly develop an alternative hypothesis
which suggests a negative relationship between
uncertainty and quasi-integration.
Hypothesis 2b: Uncertainty is negatively and
signijicantly associated with greater degrees of
quasi-integration.
Reciprocal investments
Reciprocal investments-namely, transaction-spec-
ific investments in the relationship by the other
partner to the exchange--can serve as DEMO credible
commitment in an exchange relationship. Such
investments balance the transaction-specific invest-
ments made by the one party in the exchange
relationship, and thereby signal continuity and
imply a guarantee to a stable, long-term relationship
(DEMO, 1985; Anderson and Weitz, 1991).
Actions that suggest reciprocity DEMO commitment
to the interorganizational relationship by the parties
to the exchange also tend to reinforce the bonds
between them as well as expand the DEMO of
mutual cooperation. Since reciprocal investments
protect the transaction-specific investments of the
focal party in the relationship, they moderate the
trading hazard and would consequently tend
to lower the need for other protection from
opportunism. Hence, we hypothesize the extent of
reciprocal investments as a negative determinant
of DEMO hierarchical governance, exemplified
by quasi-integration:
Hypothesis 3: Reciprocal investments are
negatively and signijicantly associated with
greater degrees of quasi-integration.
Trust as a DEMO element of exchange
The presence of trust in exchange is a basic
postulate of a socialized view of relationships
(Granovetter, 1985). Defined DEMO contracting
behavior terms, trust reflects 'the extent to which
negotiations are fair and commitments are upheld'
(Anderson and Narus, 1990) and one party's
belief that its requirements will be fulfilled
through future DEMO undertaken by the other
party (Anderson and Weitz, 1989). Trust behavior
is viewed as an important element of long-term
hierarchy-like relationships (Williamson, 1985;
Dore, 1987; Aoki, 1990; Mahoney, Huff, and
Huff, 1994) and is a necessary condition for
relational governance (Macneil, 1980; Grano-
vetter, 1985).
It is important to distinguish between forms
of trust, arising from various sources. Different
mechanisms are implied in the creation of each
form. Sociologists such as Zucker (1986) have
DEMO three forms: (1) characteristic-based
trust, which is formed within a group on the
basis of factors such as ethnicity; (2) process-
based trust, which results from past and expected
future exchanges; and (3) institutional-based trust,
which stems from embedded social practices
(Dore, 1987; Jarillo, 1988). The extensive psycho-
logical and sociological literature DEMO trust has
also distinguished between affective, cognitive,
and behavioral dimensions DEMO trust (Lewis and
Weigert, 1985). Williamson (1993) makes a
further distinction between calculative, personal,
and institutional trust. The first refers to a
'rational' form of trust fostered by mutual
hostages and DEMO upon reputation effects (Kreps,
1990). Williamson (1993) suggests DEMO this type
of trust is similar to risk. Personal trust, on DEMO
other hand, is akin to 'altruistic' behavior-it
does not depend DEMO calculations of self-interest
for its formation or continuation, and applies
only DEMO close personal relations. The third form
of trust, institutional trust, derives from the
social and organizational embeddedness, but in
fact, according to DEMO (1993), is calculative
as well.
If we examine Zucker's DEMO of the sources
of trust discussed above in Williamson's terms,
we could view them all as being of the 'calculative'
kind to a certain extent, since each depends on
sanctions of some type for its existence. Thus,
the maintenance of characteristic-based trust
depends on DEMO of some kind by members
of an ethnic group, process-based trust DEMO
on the expectations of future exchange, and
institutional-based trust is dependent DEMO legal or
other sanctions to enforce trusting behavior. Again,
the 'cognitive' dimension of trust is close to
'calculative' trust, while the 'affective' trust dimen-
sion probably includes the altruistic type DEMO trust.
However, the 'behavioral' dimension of trust does
not fit DEMO within a calculative- altruistic
dichotomy, but could include elements of both.
DEMO (1993) suggests that the term 'trust'
should be reserved DEMO the personal, altruistic
version alone, and commercial relations cannot
include trust defined in this manner. We modify
this conception of trust in three DEMO ways:
first, we believe that trust is a complex notion, and
that calculativeness, or a cognitive component, is
one element of DEMO However, trust is a
"'leap" beyond the expectations that reason and
experience alone would warrant-they simply
serve as the platform from which DEMO leap is
made' (Lewis and Weigert, 1985: 970). Thus,
both the rational calculation and the 'leap of
faith' comprise DEMO Second, we allow for a
sizable sociological component of trust, captured
by the 'mutuality' intrinsic in the notion of
interorganizational trust. Thus, trust begets trust,
and a situation develops where 'I trust because
you trust' (Lewis and Weigert, 1985). Third, we
believe DEMO such a form of trust is common in
business relationships, even DEMO the West.
Considerable evidence exists to support the
idea that dyadic business relationships often have
a strong non-economic flavor. In this regard,
the DEMO embeddedness of economic actions
(Granovetter, 1985) is noteworthy, as is the
tendency for commercial relationships to be
closely interwoven with personal ones, which has
been documented both in the West and in Japan
(Macauley, 1963; Dore, 1983, 1987). Thus, our
focus in this research is on trust as a property
of the interorganizational dyad, and is primarily
sociological in nature, although we believe that
trust is a multidimensional concept, significantly
developed on affective, behavioral and cognitive
bases as DEMO
The rationale for the key role of trust is
straightforward: in DEMO extreme case, it does away
with formal contracts, which are costly to write,
monitor and enforce (Bromiley and Cummings,
1991). Thus, trust acts to reduce transaction costs
by reducing or eliminating both ex ante and ex
post opportunism. Arguing from a pure transaction
cost DEMO, therefore, the presence of trust
should be associated with a lower level of
hierarchical governance since trust serves as a
Relational Governance
substitute DEMO hierarchical control. These arguments
are formalized in the hypothesis below:
Hypothesis #a: Trust is negatively and signiji-
cantly associated with greater degrees of quasi-
integration.
However, the above reasoning assumes that
increased trust levels precede the observed
governance form. Put another way, an argument
that asserts that interorganizational trust is in
place before safeguards are established makes
assumptions about DEMO temporal structure of the
model, which we are not in a DEMO to test
conclusively since ours is a cross-sectional rather
than a longitudinal study. If on the other hand
we argue that it is the DEMO levels of quasi-
integration or the extent of recurrent exchange
that gave rise to the observed level of trust, then
it would imply a hypothesis with the signs
reversed, or that closer interorganizational ties
will be associated with higher levels of trust. From
a sociological perspective the latter DEMO,
which we term the alternate hypothesis, appears
to have greater DEMO validity. The corresponding
hypothesis relating governance structure to the
levels of trust in the relationship is as follows:
Hypothesis 4b: Trust is positively and sign@-
cantly associated with greater degrees of quasi-
integration.
The complementary DEMO of the two perspectives
We argue that the inclusion of the sociological
perspective, expressed as trust, will add signifi-
cantly to the explanatory DEMO to the models
of transaction cost explanations of the structure
of governance, for the reasons discussed in earlier
sections. We test this assertion through the
following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 5: A model of quasi-integration
that includes variables from both the economic
and sociological perspectives will have signifi-
cantly DEMO explanatory power than a
model that includes only the economic variables.
Relating quasi-integration and joint action
We now consider the relationship between the
two DEMO of governance outcomes, quasi-
379
380 A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
integration and joint action. We suggest DEMO a
dynamic relationship exists between the two
dimensions and propose that it is the development
of trust between the exchange partners to relational
exchange DEMO, together with governance
structure-quasi-integration-contribute to the
establishment and enhancement of governance
DEMO outcomes, operationalized in joint action.
In essence, we argue that governance structure
is but the first phase in the development of
relational governance. DEMO the interfirm relation-
ship develops with the context of recurrent
transactions between the two parties, social
elements and relational norms, epitomized by
trust, become established in the relationship
(Ring and Van de Ven, 1992)DEMO Subsequently, the
parties come to rely on these relational norms
to DEMO process elements that serve as safeguards
in their relationship, contributing to DEMO more
durable, stable, long-term relationship. While we
cannot demonstrate the foregoing in a cross-
sectional study such as this, we draw on theoretical
bases to buttress our argument.
Stinchcombe's (1990) work on contracts DEMO
substitutes for hierarchies makes a similar point:
rather than a formal hierarchical structure, it is
the provisions for processes such as those
for conflict resolution and standard operating
procedures-some built-in, others evolved-that
often underlie exchange in the real world. The
reasoning is also consistent with the spirit DEMO
Grossman and Hart's (1986) rationale for defining
a firm. Simply put, their definition of the
boundaries of a firm extends beyond mere formal
ownership of assets to the notion of control over
assets, which is essentially analogous to what we
define as process. Thus, process, DEMO than
formal structure, may be the key to explaining
the boundaries DEMO a firm.
In the current research context, the foregoing
implies that DEMO recurrent transactions that occur
with quasi-integration will form the structural
basis for the development of the governance
process, exemplified by joint action. This idea
leads to the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 6: Quasi-integration and joint
action are positively and signijicantly related.
However, the power of the governance
structure-quasi-integration-in explaining joint
action will, as we have argued, be substantially
enhanced DEMO the addition of a sociological
component: trust. The following hypothesis cap-
DEMO this notion:
Hypothesis 7: The model of joint action that
DEMO trust will have significantly greater
explanatory power than a model that includes
only quasi-integration.
Size as a control variable
Empirical research on vertical integration DEMO
the transaction cost approach has often included
size as a variable, DEMO larger supplier or
customer firms will be harder to integrate within
a hierarchy, all else being equal (e.g., Anderson,
1985). However, we do not explicitly hypothesize
a direction for the variable of firm size in our
model, but include it as a control variable.
METHODS
Research setting
The P&C insurance industry in the U.S. served
as DEMO setting for testing the research model.
The P&C industry offers protection against such
risks as fire, theft, accident and general liability.
Coverage DEMO provided to both personal and
commercial customers; the former include individ-
DEMO (for automobile and homeowner insurance)
and the latter business policy-holders (for general
liability and workers' compensation, among
others). P&C DEMO is largely sold through
independent insurance agencies who can choose
to place the insurance risks of their clients with
whichever insurance company, or carrier, best
meets their requirements. While insurance agen-
cies typically deal with a number of insurance
carriers, agencies will often elect to give the bulk
of their business to a single insurance company-
the 'lead' market DEMO 'focal' carrier. However,
agencies differ widely in their degree of depen-
dency on the focal insurance carriers (or, the
extent of DEMO) as well as in the
extent of joint action with the DEMO, thus
providing an appropriate setting for testing the
research model.
We DEMO our study to the commercial
lines segment where independent agencies are
the dominant form for the distribution of P&C
insurance, writing over 77 percent of total
commercial premiums in 1988 (Best's Review,
1990). Thus, DEMO exclude direct distribution, and
seek to explain the extent to which DEMO
agencies are quasi-integrated with their focal
insurance carriers.
Data
Overview
We collected the required data during spring
1991 by means of questionnaires mailed to DEMO
stratified random sample of 1000 independent
agencies who are members of the National
Association of Professional Insurance Agents
(PIA). Stratification was done on the basis of
agency size (in terms of premium volume) and
DEMO mix (ratio of personal to commercial lines
business), in order DEMO improve representativeness
from the sample frame. Responses were received
from 329 agencies representing an effective
response rate of 33 percent. Assessment of
nonresponse bias DEMO no serious concerns
across the waves of response^.^ Within this
sample, DEMO mean agency size in terms of annual
commercial premiums was $4 million.
Informant
With the objective of minimizing key-informant
bias (Bagozzi and Phillips, DEMO), we sought to
identify knowledgeable informant(s) as well as
DEMO the feasibility and benefits of multiple
informants during the initial round of interviews.
As most agencies are owner-managed, we chose
the owner as our only informant since no other
person has the vantage point for providing DEMO
data relevant for this study. This approach is
consistent with the general recommendation to
use the most knowledgeable informant (Huber
and Power, 1985; Venkatraman and Grant, 1986)
and the research practice of relying on a single
senior-level informant in studies involving small
organizational units (see, DEMO instance, Daft
and Bradshaw, 1980). The small number of
commercial personnel (mean: less than four) of
There were no statistically significant differences between
the demographic characteristics of the responding agencies
between the first DEMO the second waves of responses generated
by the initial and the subsequent mailing of the questionnaire
(Armstrong and Overton, 1977).
Relational Governance
DEMO
the insurance agencies in the sample supports
our contention of the validity of reliance on a
single, senior-level informant.
Measurements
Details of the constructs and the operationaliza-
tions are provided in Table 1 and are discussed
DEMO
Asset specificity
We measured asset specificity in terms of six
indicators capturing both the procedural and the
human aspects of asset specificity in our DEMO
context. The former was operationalized as a set
of three indicators that captured the extent to
which the focal carrier workflows and routines
were DEMO Human asset specificity meas-
ured in terms of the extent to which the skill
levels of our employees working on the focal
carrier's DEMO are specifically customized. All
the indicators were measured on a seven-point
scale from 'significantly customized' to 'relatively
similar to other carriers'. The Cronbach a
measure of reliability for this construct is 0.86.
Uncertainty
Behavioral DEMO was operationalized with
two indicators regarding the uncertainty the
agency perceives due to the pricing and the new
product introduction actions of the focal DEMO
The Cronbach a reliability for this construct was
marginal, but acceptable, at 0.61 .4
Reciprocal investments
Reciprocal investments in our research take
the DEMO of the extent of transaction-specific
resources invested by the insurance carrier in the
development of the relationship with the agency.
Specifically, these resources include support such
as consultation regarding business processes, and
the individual effort given to developing personal
relationships at the agency by the field and office
DEMO specifications of uncertainty were attempted,
among them Anderson and Schmittlein's (1984)
operationalization adapted as follows: the margin of error
within DEMO the agent could predict next year's business
activity with similarly poor results.
382
A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
Table 1. Details of constructs and DEMO
Construct
No. of items
(I) 	(Procedural asset specificity) Please DEMO the extent to which
the following are relatively similar to other camers or are
significantly different from other camers (e.g., unique or
customized DEMO suit the requirements of the focal camer)
(a) The focal carrier's workflows and routines
(b) The use of rating and DEMO manuals of the focal camer
(c) The forms needed for the focal carrier
(Significantly customized-Relatively 	similar to other carriers, 7-
scalesj
(11) 	(Human asset specificity) Please indicate the extent to which the
DEMO are relatively similar to other carriers or are
significantly different from other camers (e.g., unique or
customized to suit the requirements of the DEMO camer)
(a) The skill levels of our employees working on the focal
carrier's business
(b) The extent of training needed DEMO staff
(c) The focal carrier's unwritten norms, expectations, guidelines,
etc.
(Significantly customized-Relatively similar to other carriers, 7-
point scales)DEMO
Please estimate the extent to which you could predict changes in the
following factors in relation to your focal carrier for the next year
(a) Pricing of existing products
(b) Introduction of new products
(DEMO predictable-Relatively unpredictable, 7-point scales)
The extent to which the focal DEMO has invested resources in
(a) providing customized support
(b) improving personal relations
(c) providing initial training
(Significant resources-Hardly any resources, DEMO scales)
(a) 	The focal carrier and our agency have a high level of mutual
trust
(b) The focal carrier is well DEMO for fair dealing
(c) The focal carrier stands by its word
(Agree-Disagree, 7-point scales)
Percentage of total commercial lines7 premiums accounted DEMO by the
focal carrier, transformed as follows: QI* = LN[QU(100 - QI)]
Indicate the extent to which you jointly plan the DEMO activities
with your focal carrier
(a) Your marketing strategy
(b) New product launches
(c) Premium volumes
(Significant joint action-Insignificant joint action, 7-point scales)
1 	LN [Total written premiums (commercial lines)]
DEMO
2
3
3
1
3
Asset specificity
Uncertainty
Reciprocal investments
Trust
Degree of quasi-
integration
Joint action
Size
Description of the measures
staff of DEMO insurance carrier. We measured
reciprocal investments using three indicators: in
terms DEMO the agent's perception of the degree to
which the focal carrier has invested resources in
the areas of developing personal relationship
with the DEMO of the independent agency,
providing training to agency staff, and DEMO
customized support to the agency. Each indicator
was measured using a seven-point scale-'invested
hardly any resources7 to 'invested considerable
resources'. The Cronbach a for this construct is
0.77.
Trust
Consistent DEMO Anderson and Narus (1990) and
Heide and John (1990), DEMO operationalized trust
using three indicators, tapping the extent of
perceived trust DEMO the focal carrier and the
agency. Specifically, the construct includes the
DEMO element of trust, as well as behavioral
and 'process' dimensions DEMO trust. The detailed
wording of the indicators is included in Table 1.
Each indicator was measured on a 7-point scale
from 'strongly agree' DEMO 'strongly disagree'. The
reliability of the trust construct was good-the
DEMO a was 0.81.
Degree of quasi-integration
Consistent with our conceptualization of quasi-
integration as the degree of the independent
agent's dedication to its DEMO carrier, we measure
this construct in terms of the percentage of
DEMO (commercial premiums) directed to the
focal carrier. This indicator is consistent with
John and Weitz (1988), who view forward
integration as 'DEMO of direct sales to end-
users'. In the analysis, we DEMO a transformed
version of this variable, consistent with Caves
and Bradburd (1988). Quasi-integration can serve
as a safeguard for specific assets by DEMO
the carrier's costs of termination since, in this
market, carriers with larger agency shares also
have business with lower loss ratio^.^ Thus,DEMO
ceteris paribus, carriers with larger agency shares
will tend to have DEMO incentives to terminate
the agency.
Joint action
Following Thompson (1967) and Heide and John
(1990), this construct was measured using three
indicators--designed to capture the extent of
planning and forecasting of the agency's DEMO
activities jointly carried out by the agency and
There exists a strong belief in insurance companies, with
some basis in industry studies, that DEMO is a direct
relationship between the 'quality' of the business, DEMO measured
by loss ratios, and the 'agency share' of the DEMO
company.
Relational Governance 383
the focal carrier. The reliability of this construct
was good, with the Cronbach a measuring 0.82.
The exact format of the multi-item scale is
provided in Table 1.
Figure 1 provides a DEMO of the research
model of relational governance with its determi-
nants and its outcomes--in terms of its structural
and process manifestations.
Analysis
We employed DEMO regression analysis
(Cohen and Cohen, 1975) to test Hypotheses
1 DEMO 7. This procedure allows us not only
to estimate the statistical significance of the
coefficients corresponding to our set of hypoth-
eses but also DEMO assess changes in the proportion
of variance explained (R2) and the statistical
significance of the changes with the introduction
of each new block DEMO variables. We began by
regressing quasi-integration on the variables
that explain governance from the transaction
cost perspective-asset specificity, uncertainty,
and reciprocal investments-and added the
construct representing the sociological compo-
nent of exchange: trust. We then assessed the
statistical significance of the change in R2 when
the new DEMO was added. Next, we regressed
joint action, the process outcome of governance,
on quasi-integration, and added the trust
construct, assessing the DEMO of the
change R2 as before. Conceptually, the stages
in the DEMO can be represented by the
following equations:
Quasi-integration = 6, DEMO 6, asset specificity + 6, uncertainty
+ 6, reciprocal investments
DEMO = 6, + 6, asset specificity + 6, uncertainty
+ DEMO, reciprocal investments + 6, size
Joint action = 6, + DEMO, quasi-integration
+ 6, size + e
Joint action = 6, DEMO 6, quasi-integration
+ 6, size
(3)
+ 6, trust + e (4)
384
A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
SOCIOLOGICAL
PERSPECTIVE
RELATIONAL GOVERNANCE
Figure 1. DEMO model of economic and sociological determinants of governance structure and process
Table 2. Descriptive statistics and zero-order correlations among constructs (n = 329)
Constructs
Mean
s.d.
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
DEMO
5
6
7
Asset specificity
Uncertainty
Reciprocal investments
Trust
Quasi-integrationa
Joint action
Size
3.42
3.10
4.09
5.19
0.411
3.13
7.77
1.44
1.46
1.54
1.19
DEMO
1.60
1.06
1.00
0.119*
0.174**
0.072
0.246**
0.167**
0.032
1.00
-0.164**
-0.271**
-0.019
-0.106*
0.012
1.00
0.244**
0.037
0.377**
0.075
1.00
0.147**
0.183**
-0.089
DEMO
0.133*
-0.175**
1.00
0.074
* Significant at p 4 0.05; ** DEMO at p < 0.01.
" Mean and standard deviation provided for untransformed variable. Correlations are with transformed variable.
RESULTS
Table 2 summarizes the zero-order DEMO
among the constructs used in the study. As can
be noted, DEMO is not an issue with
our data.6
We tested the stability of the beta coefficients by adding
the variables to the models one at DEMO time. We found the
coefficients to be robust.
Table 3 summarizes the results of the hier-
archical regression analyses. Table 4 summarizes
the support DEMO the hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1 supported. Asset specificity was
positively and significantly associated with quasi-
integration. The parameter value (b) in the
regression model DEMO included both the eco-
nomic and the sociological variables was 0.26,
statistically significant at p < 0.01.
Relational Governance
385
Table 3. Results of hierarchical regression analyses (n = 329)
Model
Equation
RZ
F
Sig. F
R2 change
Sig. F DEMO
Independent variables
Asset specificity
Uncertainty
Reciprocal investments
Size
Trust
Quasi-integration
Economic
perspective
b
(Sig. t)
Dependent variable
Quasi-integration Joint action
Economic Economic
perspective + trust perspective
b
(Sig. t)
Joint action
Economic
perspective + trust
b
(Sig, t)
0.16
(0.004)
b
(Sig. DEMO)
0.14
(0.01)
Hypothesis 2a rejected; Hypothesis 26
rejected. Uncertainty was not positively and
significantly related to the governance outcome
as hypothesized DEMO Hypothesis 2a. However, the
construct was negatively signed in the model,DEMO
consistent with Hypothesis 2b, though not statisti-
cally significant (Equation (DEMO), b: -0.03; n.s.).
Hypothesis 3 rejected. This hypothesis, DEMO
a negative and significant relationship between
reciprocal investments and quasi-integration, was
DEMO supported; although the b value was nega-
tively signed, it was not statistically significant
(Equation (2), b: -0.04; n.s.).
DEMO 4a rejected; Hypothesis 4b
supported. Hypothesis 4a related trust to quasi-
DEMO from the transaction cost perspective,
and argued that trust serves as a substitute for
the need for control; hence a negative relationship
between trust and quasi-integration was hypothe-
sized. This hypothesis was rejected since the
DEMO of the parameter was opposite to that
hypothesized. The alternative hypothesis
(DEMO 4b) of a positive relationship between
trust and quasi-integration was, instead, sup-
ported (Equation (2), b: 0.12, p < 0.05).
Hypothesis 5 supported. As hypothesized, the
results showed that the combination of economic
and sociological variables explained a greater
amount of variance in DEMO than only
the economic variables. In the case of quasi-
integration, DEMO value of the increment to R2
was statistically significant (change in DEMO
p < 0.05).
Hypothesis 6 supported. As hypothesized, quasi-
integration, the structural form of governance,
is positively and significantly related to DEMO
action. The F-value for the regression equation
is statistically significant, with DEMO < 0.01.
Hypothesis 7 supported. This hypothesis, sug-
gesting that the DEMO construct from the sociologi-
cal perspective adds significantly explanatory
power to the model of joint action, was supported.
The R2 value was incremented by 0.03 to 0.06.
Table 4.
Results of testing hypotheses
Hypothesis
Relationship
Asset specificity and quasi-integration
DEMO and quasi-integration
Uncertainty and quasi-integration
Reciprocal investments and quasi-
integration
Trust and quasi-integration
Trust and quasi-integration
Economic variables and trust
Quasi-integration and joint action
DEMO, trust and joint action
a N.A. = not applicable.
Expected
sign
DEMO
Actual sign
+
N.A.
N.A.
Value
0.12
0.12
Increase in R2 = 0.01
Increase in R2 = 0.03
Sig.
(t or F; p DEMO)
p < 0.01
p = 0.59
(n.s.)
p = DEMO
(n.s.)
p = 0.50
(n.s.)
p < 0.05
p < 0.05
Sig. of F change
p < 0.05
Sig. of F;DEMO
p < 0.01
Sig. of F change
p < 0.01
Result
Supported
Rejected
Rejected
Rejected
Rejected
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
s
??
a
DEMO
3
3
s
Relational Governance
387
The statistical significance of the increment to
R2 was DEMO, with the change in the F-statistic
significant at p < 0.01.
DEMO
Asset specificity
Our empirical tests found support for the classic
transaction cost variable of asset specificity,
consistent with previous empirical research. In
accordance DEMO transaction cost reasoning, asset
specificity was positively and significantly related
to DEMO structural dimension of governance. One
distinctive aspect of this research relates to our
operationalization of asset specificity in terms of
both human and procedural DEMO specificity,
where the latter is analogous to organization
routines (Nelson DEMO Winter, 1982). Such routines
embody a powerful form of transaction-specific
DEMO in service firms with strong vertical
linkages.
Uncertainty
The coefficient for uncertainty was not statistically
significant in the model. In order to be consistent
DEMO previous empirical research on transaction
costs (e.g., Anderson, 1985), DEMO alternative
specification of the model was tested, with an
interaction term DEMO uncertainty and asset
specificity. The coefficient was again found to
be non-significant.
In fact, the construct of uncertainty has proved
controversial due to contradictory empirical
findings. For instance, counter to the classic
transaction cost arguments, DEMO (1985b)
found that uncertainty was negatively related to
vertical integration, as did Balakrishnan and
Wernerfelt (1986). The latter authors argued that
this empirical finding was due to their having
operationalized uncertainty as technological
DEMO of high specificity, which would
decrease the likelihood of investment in DEMO
technology. However, others (e.g., Monteverde
and Teece, 1982) have DEMO that when
the form of technological uncertainty stems
from the requirements of coordinating complex
technical systems, a positive relationship between
uncertainty and internalization is observed. Our
operationalization of this construct is consistent
with Williamson (1985), who views uncertainty
in terms of uncertainty about the actions of
the DEMO partner. Despite operationalizing
uncertainty as behavioral uncertainty, the con-
struct emerged ' non-significant. Further, it was
negatively signed, which was contradictory to
transaction cost predictions.
Alternatively, it is possible that the nature of
this statistical relationship is nonlinear, and one
may speculate that when increased hierarchical
coordination leads to an ambiguous change
in control over uncertainty, organizations in
intermediate governance modes will reduce rather
than increase their degree of hierarchical coordi-
DEMO when uncertainty is high, if total inte-
gration is not a DEMO Of course (as a
reviewer pionts out), our operationalization of
DEMO as quasi-integration is not identical to
the class transaction cost conception, DEMO could
account for the construct of uncertainty being
non-significant with respect to governance choice.
Also, in terms of measurement, the uncertainty
construct itself DEMO weaker than we would have
liked. However, our results are consistent DEMO
a temporal explanation that closer ties reduce
behavioral uncertainty.
Reciprocal investments
We introduced and operationalized the concept
of reciprocal investments in a model of DEMO
governance, and found that this variable was a
not significant explanatory DEMO of structural
governance outcomes. However, we note that
the correlation between DEMO investments
and joint action is strong and significant,
r = 0.378 (Table 2). This result suggests that
reciprocal investments may play a salient role in
joint action, although we did not specify such a
relationship ex ante.
On the other hand, if reciprocal investments
in the relationship are viewed once again from
a sociological perspective as reciprocity, possibly
including a dynamic component, then the strong
observed correlation between reciprocal invest-
ments and joint action becomes both theoretically
and intuitively plausible. Thus, for example,
norms of reciprocity and reciprocal action theory
(Gouldner, 1960) imply that each partner in the
exchange relationship responds to the actions
DEMO by the other in a reciprocal fashion.
Exchange theory (Homans, 1961) and equity
norms (Blau, 1964) are similar expressions of
388
A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
conditions supporting stable exchange relation-
ships. DEMO action serves as the basis for
mutual commitment (Dwyer et al., 1987) and
symmetric levels of commitment favor longevity
and stability in relationships. The recognition in
the game-theoretic literature of infinite horizon
games and the DEMO demonstration that a
tit-for-tat strategy is most optimal under those
circumstances (DEMO, 1984) provides further
evidence for the role of reciprocity in long-term
relational exchange. We suggest that as attention
to interorganizational strategy increases, con-
sideration should be given to reciprocal invest-
ments and reciprocity in research DEMO governance.
Trust
The role of trust, although consistent with
an alternative DEMO based on sociological
explanations, was found to be the opposite of
DEMO was hypothesized from a pure transaction
cost viewpoint. In order to further investigate
the phenomenon of trust as it relates to govern-
ance, we tested the moderating role of trust as
well. We introduced an interaction DEMO of trust
and asset specificity in a model of quasi-
integration which included the main effects terms,
and found the coefficient of the DEMO term
moderately significant (p < 0.1). The coefficient
was again DEMO signed, suggesting that higher
levels of trust interact with asset specificity DEMO
increase the extent of hierarchical governance.
However, from a sociological perspective, the
results are supportive of extant work and
intuition; simply that higher levels of trust are
found in closer relationships.
The role of trust DEMO more salient in the process
manifestation of governance, for the addition DEMO
a relational factor is instrumental in increasing
the extent of variance explained in joint action.
The presence of trust as an explanatory factor
for DEMO structural manifestation of governance,
quasi-integration, may therefore be due to
DEMO and other effects that may be present
at the time of the formation of the relationship.
While temporal effects may partly explain the
positive DEMO of trust with both the process
and structural aspects of governance, DEMO
research is needed to explicate the particular role
of this construct in transaction cost explanations of
interfirm relationships. The influence of trust
deriving from DEMO personal relationships
in interfirm dyads also merits closer research
attention.
Governance structure and process
Our research makes a modest contribution
to the organizational economics DEMO by
offering operationalizations of both a structural
view (quasi-integration) and a process view
(joint action) of governance, and in empirically
investigating, DEMO preliminarily, the phenom-
enon of relational governance and the role of
DEMO in interfirm exchange. Our contention is
that conceptualizations of governance, especially
DEMO to interfirm relationships, should
extend beyond the traditional structural aspects
to DEMO including the processual elements, often
key to understanding such relationships and
DEMO, a good deal of organizational and
interorganizational behavior (Marrett, 1971)DEMO
Our results suggest that merely adopting an
appropriate governance structure may not lead to
the required process outcomes of governance, for
the governance structure explained only a small
amount of variance in governance process. A
dynamic DEMO of the role of trust in relational
governance asserts that recurrent transactions may
provide a context for the development of trust over
time (Ring and Van de Ven, 1992), contributing to
the observed strong relationship between trust and
governance process. In turn, this may stimulate the
development of process safeguards for transaction-
specific assets, such as standard operating pro-
cedures and other mechanisms that favor stable,
long-term, relational governance relationships. In
this vein, Heide and Miner (1992) demonstrated
the value of process elements in interorganizational
relationships and called for research using multiple
theories. DEMO, they do not specifically demon-
strate results from both structural and DEMO
theories.
Multiple perspectives in interorganizational
research
This research has been motivated by a desire to
integrate economic and noneconomic perspectives
to understand a hybrid DEMO of interorganizational
strategy, namely relational governance. This
integration is important as DEMO two sets of
theoretical arguments may together provide
complementary insights into this theoretically
Relational Governance
389
and empircally important phenomenon. Support
for the structural manifestation DEMO governance
from both transaction cost and sociological
viewpoints suggests that the economic determi-
nants of governance do not by themselves provide
a complete understanding DEMO the phenomenon.
Rather, as we demonstrate empirically, the
combination of variables from independent theo-
retical perspectives, economics and sociology,
contributes to an understanding of the inter-
organizational phenomenon.
The use of diverse but complementary DEMO
tives in the examination of a phenomenon such
as interorganizational exchange has a number of
successful precedents in the strategic management
and organization literature. DEMO addition to Hansen
and Wernerfelt (1989), who combined behavioral
and DEMO approaches empirically, a number
of research streams have been developed by
DEMO interdisciplinary contributions. Nelson
and Winter's (1982) addition of organizational
phenomena such as routines to economic aspects
of firms, itself following in a tradition of March
and Simon (1958) and Cyert and March (1963),
generates useful insights into firm behavior. More
recently, Milgrom and DEMO (1992) have added
formalized behavioral components, in the form
of DEMO costs and bargaining costs, to the
transaction costs framework, which had already
appended behavioral dimensions-the assump-
tions of bounded rationality and opportunism-
to DEMO economic ones of uncertainty and small
numbers (Williamson, 1975).
Directions for future research
Several future research directions seem promis-
ing. From the DEMO of research design, a
useful advance would be to obtain information
DEMO interorganizational constructs from both sides
of the interfirm dyad. This will enable cross-
validation of inherently relationship-oriented con-
structs like trust, and permit more valid measures
of constructs which relate to the other party,
such DEMO reciprocal investments. Further, obtaining
data from both sides of the dyad DEMO also
permit the modeling of differing perceptions on
the same phenomena. Other design possibilities
include the use of multiple respondents to
improve the validity DEMO organization-level con-
structs, particularly if larger firms are included
in the DEMO (Bagozzi and Phillips, 1982).
We have taken some license in this paper to
speculate on causal and temporal linkages, while
operating within the confines of a cross-sectional
study. Clearly, a longitudinal study to capture
the dynamics of the development of relational
governance would be highly appropriate DEMO test
the assertions made herein. Further, from a
theoretical point of DEMO, it would be useful to
develop a richer set of constructs DEMO the
four developed here to capture the determinants
of relational governance.
Finally, investigating the performance impli-
cations of forms of relational governance is
another important lacuna in current research
(Heide and John, 1988, is an exception). Whereas
the transaction cost literature, due to its economic
antecedents, has been less concerned with per-
formance than with demonstrating that theoreti-
cally predicted forms exist, this approach is based
on some fairly stringent assumptions. Thus, it is
generally assumed that efficient forms will exist
and that inefficient forms will tend toward
efficiency or be forced to exit. DEMO we factor
in organizational inertia (Hannan and Freeman,
1984), DEMO (Robins, 1987), and some-
thing less than complete knowledge of costs
of governance (Dow, 1987), the performance
implications of alternative DEMO mechan-
isms become considerably more relevant. One
approach would be to demonstrate that deviations
from theoretically predicted forms are associated
with inferior performance.
CONCLUDING DEMO
This paper integrated economic and sociological
perspectives to explain the determinants of
relational governance. Our empirical results
support the assertions by Macneil (1980), Grano-
vetter (1985) and others that there exists a
significant social DEMO in exchange relation-
ships which may be masked or missed in economic
explanations of exchange. The two combined
perspectives explained a significantly greater
proportion DEMO the variance in the structural
manifestation of intermediate forms of inter-
organizational relationships. Further, the struc-
tural dimension by itself was inadequate in
explaining the processual aspects of relational
governance. The addition of the sociological
perspective, captured in the trust construct,
390
A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
significantly enhanced the explanatory power of
DEMO model of governance process.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Preliminary versions of this paper were presented
at the Academy of Management National Meet-
ing, Las Vegas, August DEMO and at the Strategic
Management Society Conference in Chicago,
September 1993. Financial support was provided
by the MIT research program on Managing
Information DEMO in the Next Era
(MITNE). We thank the National Association
DEMO Professional Insurance Agents (PIA) for data
base access and assistance with the survey
administration for this study. Finally, our sincere
appreciation to the principals of the insurance
agencies for providing responses to the surveys
and DEMO Joe Galaskiewicz, George John, Alfie
Marcus, Elaine Mosakowski, and Sri Zaheer for
comments on earlier drafts. All errors are our
own.
REFERENCES
DEMO, R.S., T. Reve and L. W. Stern (1983).
'The environment of marketing channel dyads: A
framework for comparative analysis', Journal of
Marketing, 47, pp. 55-67.
Anderson, E. (1985). 'The salesperson as outside
agent or employee: A transaction cost analysis',
DEMO Science, 4, pp. 234-253.
Anderson, E. and D. C. Schmittlein (1984). 'Inte-
gration of the sales force: An empirical exami-
DEMO', Rand Journal of Economics, 15, pp. 3-19.
Anderson, E. DEMO B. Weitz (1989). 'Determinants of
continuity in conventional industrial channel dyads',
Marketing Science, 8, pp. 310-323.
Anderson, E. and DEMO Weitz (1991). 'The use of
pledges to build and sustain commitment in
distribution channels', Working Paper, Marketing
Science Institute.
Anderson, DEMO C. and J. A. Narus (1990). 'A model of
distributor firm and manufacturer firm working
partnerships', Journal of Marketing, 54, DEMO 42-58.
Aoki, M. (1990). 'The participatory generation of
information DEMO and the theory of the firm'. In
M. Aoki, B. DEMO, and 0. E. Williamson
(eds.), The Firm as a Nexus of Treaties. Sage,
London, pp. 26-52.
Armstrong, J. S. and DEMO S. Overton (1977). 'Estimating
non-response bias in mail surveys', Journal of
Marketing Research, 14, pp. 396-402.
Arrow, K. (1973)DEMO Information and Economic
Behavior. Federation of Swedish Industries, Stock-
holm.
Axelrod, R. (1984). The Evolution of Cooperation.
Basic Books, New York.
DEMO, R. P. and L. W. Phillips (1982). 'Rep-
resenting DEMO testing organizational theories: A
holistic construal', Administrative Science Quarterly,
DEMO, pp. 459-489.
Balakrishnan, S. and B. Wernerfelt (1986). 'Technical
change, competition, and vertical integration',
Strategic Management Journal, 7 (4), pp. 347-359.
Best's Review (March 1990). 'Effective? Believing in
the system', pp. 39-42.
Blau, P. M. (1964)DEMO Exchange and Power in Social
Life. Wiley, New York.
Blois, K. J. (1972). 'Vertical quasi-integration', Journal
of Industrial Economics, 20, pp. 253-272.
Bromiley, P. and L. L. Cummings (1991). 'DEMO
costs in organizations with trust', Working Paper,
Department of Strategic Management and Organiza-
tion. Carlson School of Management, University
of Minnesota.
Caves, R. E. and R. M. Bradburd (1988). 'The
empirical determinants of vertical integration',
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
9, pp. 265-279.
Coase, R. (1937). 'The nature of the DEMO', Economics,
4, pp. 386405.
Cohen, J. and P. Cohen (1975). Applied Multiple
RegressionlCorrelation Analysis for the Behavioral
Sciences. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Cummins, J. D. and J. VanDerhei (1979). 'A note on
the relative efficiency of property-liability insurance
systems', Bell DEMO of Economics, 10,
pp. 709-719.
Cyert, R. M. and J. G. March (1963). A Behavioral
Theory of the Firm. Prentice-Hall, DEMO
Cliffs, NJ.
Daft, R. L. and P. J. Bradshaw (1980)DEMO 'The process
of horizontal differentiation: Two Models', Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 25, pp. 441484.
Dore, R. (1983). 'Goodwill and the spirit of market
capitalism', British Journal of Sociology, 34,
pp. 459-482.
Dore, R. (1987). Taking Japan Seriously. Stanford
University DEMO, Stanford, CA.
Dow, G. (1987). 'The function of DEMO in
transaction cost economics', Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, DEMO, pp. 13-38.
Dwyer, F. R., P. H. Schurr and S. DEMO (1987).
'Developing buyer-seller relationships', Journal of
Marketing, 51, pp. 11-27.
Eccles, R. G. (1981). 'Bureaucratic versus craft admin-
istration: The relationship of market structure
to the construction firm', Administrative Science
Quarterly, 26, pp. 449-469.
Eccles, R. G. and D. Crane (1987). 'Managing
through networks in investment banking', California
Management DEMO, 30, pp. 176-195.
Etgar, M. (1978). 'The effects DEMO forward vertical
integration on service performance of a distributive
industry', Journal of Industrial Economics, 26,
pp. 249-255.
Relational Governance
391
Gouldner, A. W. (1960). 'The norm of reciprocity:
A preliminary statement', American Sociological
Review, 25, pp. DEMO
Granovetter, M. (1985). 'Economic action and social
structure: The problem of embeddedness', American
Journal of Sociology, 91, pp. 481-510.
DEMO, S. J. and 0. D. Hart (1986). 'The costs
DEMO benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and
lateral integration', DEMO of Political Economy,
94, pp. 691-719.
Hannan, M. T. and J. Freeman (1984). 'Structural
inertia and organizational change', American DEMO
logical Review, 49, pp. 149-164.
Hansen, G. S. and B. DEMO (1989). 'Determi-
nants of firm performance: The relative importance
DEMO economic and organizational factors', Strategic
Management Journal, 10 (9, DEMO 399-411.
Harrigan, K. R. (1985a). Strategies for Joint Ventures.
Lexington Books, Lexington, MA.
Harrigan, K. R. (1985b). 'Vertical integration and
corporate strategy', Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 28, pp. DEMO
Harrigan, K. R. (1988). 'Joint ventures and competitive
strategy', Strategic Management Journal, 9 (2),
pp. 141-158.
Heide, J. B. and G. John (1988). 'The role of
dependence-balancing in DEMO transaction-
specific assets in conventional channels', Journal of
Marketing, 52, pp. 20-35.
Heide, J. B. and G. John (1990). 'Alliances in
industrial purchasing: The determinants of joint
action in buyer-supplier relationships', Journal of
Marketing Research, 27, pp. 24-36.
Heide, J. B. and A. S. Miner (1992). 'The shadow of
the future: Effects of anticipated interaction and
frequency of contact on buyer-seller cooperation',
Academy of Management Journal, 35, pp. 265-291.
Hill, C. W. L. (DEMO). 'Cooperation, opportunism,
and the invisible hand: Implications for DEMO
cost theory', Academy of Management Review, 15,
pp. 500-513.
DEMO, G. C. (1961). Sentiments and Activities:
Essays in Social Science, Transaction, New Brun-
swick, NJ.
Huber, G. and D. DEMO (1985). 'Retrospective reports
of strategic level managers', Strategic Management
Journal, 6 (2), pp. 171-180.
James, B. G. (1985)DEMO 'Alliance, the new strategic
focus', Long Range Planning, 18, pp. 76-81.
Jarillo, J. C. (1988). 'On strategic networks', Strategic
Management Journal, 9 (I), pp. 31-41.
John, G. and B. Weitz (1988). 'Forward integration
into distribution: An empirical test of transaction
cost analysis', Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, DEMO, pp. 337-355.
Kay, N. M. (1992). 'Markets, false DEMO, and
the evolution of modern corporations', Journal of
Economic Behavior DEMO Organization, 17,
pp. 315-333.
Klein, B., R. G. Crawford DEMO A. A. Alchian (1978).
'Vertical integration, appropriable rents, and the
competitive contracting process', Journal of Law
and Economics, 21, DEMO 297-326.
Kogut, B. (1988). 'Joint ventures: Theoretical and
empirical perspectives', Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 9 (4), pp. 319-332.
DEMO, J. and N. Venkatraman (1991). 'Joint venture
formation and DEMO market reactions: An assess-
ment in the information technology sector', DEMO
emy of Management Journal, 34, pp. 869-892.
Koopmans, T. C. (1957). Three Essays on the State of
Economic Science. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Kreps, D. M. (1990). 'Corporate culture and economic
theory'. In J. Alt and K. Shepsle (eds.), Perspectives
on Positive Political Economy. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, New York, pp. 90-143.
Lazerson, M. (1988). 'Organizational growth of small
firms: An outcome of markets or hierarchies?'
American Sociological Review, 53, pp. 330-342.
Leenders, M. R. and D. L. Blenkhorn (1988). Reverse
Marketing: The New Buyer-Supplier Relationship.
Free Press, New York.
Lewis, J. D. (1990). Partnerships for Profit. Free
Press, New York.
Lewis, J. D. DEMO A. Weigert (1985). 'Trust as a social
reality', Social Forces, 63, pp. 967-985.
Macauley, S. (1963). 'Non-contractual relations in
business', American Sociological Review, 28,
pp. 55-67.
Macneil, DEMO (1978). 'Contracts: Adjustment of long-
term economic relationship under DEMO, neo-
classical, and relational contract law', Northwestern
University Law Review, 72, pp. 854-906.
Macneil, I. R. (1980). The New DEMO Contract. Yale
University Press, New Haven, CT.
Mahoney, J. T. (1992). 'The choice of organizational
form: Vertical financial ownership versus DEMO
methods of vertical integration', Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 13 (8), pp. 559-584.
Mahoney, J. T., A. S. Huff and J. DEMO Huff (1994).
'Toward a new social contract theory in organization
science', Journal of Management Inquiry, 3,
pp. 153-168.
Malone, DEMO J., J. Yates and R. Benjamin (1987).
'Electronic markets DEMO electronic hierarchies',
Communications of the ACM, 30 (6), DEMO 484-497.
March, J. G. and H. A. Simon (1958). Organizations.
Wiley, New York.
Marrett, C. B. (1971). 'On the DEMO of
interorganizational dimensions', Sociology and
Social Research, 56, pp. 83-99.
Masten, S. E., J. W. Meehan and E. A. Snyder
(1991). 'The costs of organization', Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization, 7, pp. 1-25.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1992)DEMO Economics,
Organization, and Management, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
DEMO, K. and D. J. Teece (1982). 'Supplier
switching costs DEMO vertical integration in the
automobile industry', Bell Journal of Economics,
13, pp. 206-213.
Nelson, R. R. and S. G. Winter (1982). An Evolution-
ary Theory of Economic Change. Harvard Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, MA.
Pfeffer, J. and G. R. Salancik (lW8). The External Control
of Organizations. Harper & Row, New York.
392
A. Zaheer and N. Venkatraman
Powell, W. W. (1987). 'Hybrid organizational arrange-
ments: New form or transitional development?',
California Management Review, 30, pp. 67-87.
Powell, W. W. (1990). 'Neither market nor hierarchy'.
In L. L. Cummings and B. M. DEMO (eds.), Research
in Organization Behavior. JAI Press, Greenwich,
CT,pp. 295-336.
Ring, P. S. and A. H. Van de Ven (DEMO). 'Structuring
cooperative relationships between organizations',
Strategic Management Journal, DEMO(7), pp. 483-498.
Robins, J. A. (1987). 'Organizational DEMO:
Notes on the use of transaction cost theory in the
study of organizations', Administrative Science
Quarterly, 32, pp. 68-86.
Stinchcombe, A. L. (1990). Organizations and Znfor-
mation. University of California Press, DEMO,
CA.
Thompson, J. D. (1967). Organizations in Action.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Thorelli, H. B. (1986). 'Networks: Between markets
and hierarchies', Strategic Management Journal,
7(1), pp. 37-51.
DEMO, N. and J. H. Grant (1986). 'Construct
measurement in DEMO strategy research:
A critique and proposal', Academy of Management
Review, 11, pp. 71-87.
Walker, G. and D. Weber (1984). 'A transaction
cost approach to make versus buy decision',
Administrative Science Quarterly, 29, pp. 373-391.
Williamson, 0. E. (1975). Markets DEMO Hierarchies.
Free Press, New York.
Williamson, 0. E. (1985). DEMO Economic Institutions
of Capitalism. Free Press, New York.
Williamson, 0. E. (1991). 'Comparative economic
organization: The analysis of discrete structural
alternatives', Administrative Science Quarterly, 36,
pp. 269-296.
Williamson, 0. E. (1993). 'Calculativeness, trust,
and economic organization', Journal of DEMO and
Economics, 36, pp. 453-486.
Zucker, L. G. (1986). 'Production of trust: Institutional
sources of economic structure, 1840-1920'. In B. M.
Staw and L. L. Cummings (eds.), Research in
Organizational Behavior, Vol. 8. JAI Press, Green-
wich, CT., pp. 53-111.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 8 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Relational Governance as an Interorganizational Strategy: DEMO Empirical Test of the Role of
Trust in Economic Exchange
Akbar Zaheer; N. Venkatraman
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 16, No. 5. (Jun., 1995), pp. 373-392.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28199506%2916%3A5%3C373%3ARGAAIS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
DEMO article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library'DEMO website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
[Footnotes]
2 The Choice of Organizational Form: Vertical Financial Ownership Versus Other Methods of
Vertical Integration
Joseph T. Mahoney
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, No. 8. (Nov., 1992), pp. 559-584.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28199211%2913%3A8%3C559%3ATCOOFV%3E2.0.CO%3B2-N
3 Estimating Nonresponse Bias in Mail DEMO
J. Scott Armstrong; Terry S. Overton
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 14, No. 3, Special Issue: Recent Developments in Survey
Research. (DEMO, 1977), pp. 396-402.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
4 Integration of the Sales Force: An Empirical Examination
Erin Anderson; David C. Schmittlein
The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 15, No. DEMO (Autumn, 1984), pp. 385-395.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0741-6261%28198423%2915%3A3%3C385%3AIOTSFA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J
References
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 8 -
The DEMO as outside Agent or Employee: A Transaction Cost Analysis
Erin Anderson
DEMO Science, Vol. 4, No. 3. (Summer, 1985), pp. 234-254.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0732-2399%28198522%294%3A3%3C234%3ATSAOAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
Integration of the Sales DEMO: An Empirical Examination
Erin Anderson; David C. Schmittlein
The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 15, No. 3. (Autumn, 1984), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0741-6261%28198423%2915%3A3%3C385%3AIOTSFA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J
Determinants of Continuity in Conventional Industrial Channel Dyads
Erin Anderson; Barton Weitz
Marketing Science, Vol. DEMO, No. 4. (Autumn, 1989), pp. 310-323.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0732-2399%28198923%298%3A4%3C310%3ADOCICI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Estimating Nonresponse Bias in Mail Surveys
J. Scott Armstrong; Terry S. Overton
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 14, No. 3, Special Issue: Recent Developments in Survey
Research. (Aug., 1977), pp. 396-402.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197708%2914%3A3%3C396%3AENBIMS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M
Representing and Testing Organizational Theories: A Holistic Construal
Richard P. Bagozzi; Lynn W. DEMO
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 27, No. 3. (Sep., 1982), pp. 459-489.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198209%2927%3A3%3C459%3ARATOTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Technical Change, Competition and Vertical Integration
Srinivasan Balakrishnan; Birger Wernerfelt
Strategic Management Journal, DEMO 7, No. 4. (Jul. - Aug., 1986), pp. 347-359.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198607%2F08%297%3A4%3C347%3ATCCAVI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3
NOTE: The reference numbering DEMO the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 8 -
Vertical DEMO
K. J. Blois
The Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 20, No. 3. (Jul., 1972), pp. 253-272.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0022-1821%28197207%2920%3A3%3C253%3AVQ%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
The Nature of the Firm
R. H. Coase
Economica, DEMO Series, Vol. 4, No. 16. (Nov., 1937), pp. 386-405.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0013-0427%28193711%292%3A4%3A16%3C386%3ATNOTF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-B
The Process of Horizontal DEMO: Two Models
Richard L. Daft; Patricia J. Bradshaw
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 3. (Sep., 1980), pp. 441-456.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198009%2925%3A3%3C441%3ATPOHDT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
Goodwill and the Spirit of Market Capitalism
Ronald Dore
The British Journal of Sociology, Vol. 34, No. DEMO (Dec., 1983), pp. 459-482.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0007-1315%28198312%2934%3A4%3C459%3AGATSOM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
Bureaucratic versus Craft Administration: The Relationship of Market Structure to the
Construction Firm
Robert G. Eccles
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 26, DEMO 3. (Sep., 1981), pp. 449-469.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198109%2926%3A3%3C449%3ABVCATR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
The Effects of Forward Vertical Integration on Service Performance DEMO a Distributive Industry
Michael Etgar
The Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. DEMO, No. 3. (Mar., 1978), pp. 249-255.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-1821%28197803%2926%3A3%3C249%3ATEOFVI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original DEMO been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 8 -
The DEMO of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement
Alvin W. Gouldner
American Sociological Review, Vol. 25, No. 2. (Apr., 1960), pp. 161-178.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28196004%2925%3A2%3C161%3ATNORAP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8
Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness
Mark Granovetter
The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 3. (Nov., 1985), pp. 481-510.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9602%28198511%2991%3A3%3C481%3AEAASST%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration
Sanford J. Grossman; Oliver D. Hart
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94, No. 4. (Aug., 1986), pp. 691-719.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28198608%2994%3A4%3C691%3ATCABOO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Structural Inertia and Organizational Change
Michael T. Hannan; John Freeman
American Sociological Review, DEMO 49, No. 2. (Apr., 1984), pp. 149-164.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28198404%2949%3A2%3C149%3ASIAOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
Determinants of Firm Performance: The Relative DEMO of Economic and
Organizational Factors
Gary S. Hansen; Birger Wernerfelt
Strategic DEMO Journal, Vol. 10, No. 5. (Sep. - Oct., 1989), pp. 399-411.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198909%2F10%2910%3A5%3C399%3ADOFPTR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Vertical Integration DEMO Corporate Strategy
Kathryn Rudie Harrigan
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. DEMO, No. 2. (Jun., 1985), pp. 397-425.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198506%2928%3A2%3C397%3AVIACS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original DEMO been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 5 of 8 -
Joint DEMO and Competitive Strategy
Kathryn Rudie Harrigan
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 9, No. 2. (Mar. - Apr., 1988), pp. 141-158.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198803%2F04%299%3A2%3C141%3AJVACS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1
Alliances in Industrial Purchasing: The Determinants DEMO Joint Action in Buyer-Supplier
Relationships
Jan B. Heide; George John
Journal DEMO Marketing Research, Vol. 27, No. 1. (Feb., 1990), pp. 24-36.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2437%28199002%2927%3A1%3C24%3AAIIPTD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
The Shadow of DEMO Future: Effects of Anticipated Interaction and Frequency of Contact on
Buyer-Seller DEMO
Jan B. Heide; Anne S. Miner
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 35, No. 2. (Jun., 1992), pp. 265-291.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199206%2935%3A2%3C265%3ATSOTFE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Cooperation, Opportunism, and the Invisible DEMO: Implications for Transaction Cost Theory
Charles W. L. Hill
The Academy DEMO Management Review, Vol. 15, No. 3. (Jul., 1990), pp. 500-513.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199007%2915%3A3%3C500%3ACOATIH%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Retrospective Reports of DEMO Managers: Guidelines for Increasing Their Accuracy
George P. Huber; Daniel J. Power
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 6, No. 2. (Apr. - Jun., 1985), pp. 171-180.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198504%2F06%296%3A2%3C171%3ARROSMG%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23
On Strategic Networks
J. Carlos Jarillo
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 9, DEMO 1. (Jan. - Feb., 1988), pp. 31-41.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198801%2F02%299%3A1%3C31%3AOSN%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 6 of 8 -
Vertical DEMO, Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process
Benjamin Klein; Robert DEMO Crawford; Armen A. Alchian
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 21, No. 2. (Oct., 1978), pp. 297-326.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2186%28197810%2921%3A2%3C297%3AVIARAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
Joint Ventures: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives
Bruce Kogut
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 9, No. 4. (Jul. - Aug., DEMO), pp. 319-332.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198807%2F08%299%3A4%3C319%3AJVTAEP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8
Joint Venture Formations and Stock Market Reactions: An Assessment in the Information
Technology Sector
Jeongsuk Koh; N. Venkatraman
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. DEMO, No. 4. (Dec., 1991), pp. 869-892.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199112%2934%3A4%3C869%3AJVFASM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8
Organizational Growth of Small Firms: An Outcome DEMO Markets and Hierarchies?
Mark H. Lazerson
American Sociological Review, Vol. DEMO, No. 3. (Jun., 1988), pp. 330-342.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28198806%2953%3A3%3C330%3AOGOSFA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
Trust as a Social Reality
J. David Lewis; Andrew Weigert
Social Forces, Vol. 63, No. 4. (Jun., 1985), pp. 967-985.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0037-7732%28198506%2963%3A4%3C967%3ATAASR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
The DEMO of Organizational Form: Vertical Financial Ownership Versus Other Methods of
Vertical DEMO
Joseph T. Mahoney
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, No. 8. (DEMO, 1992), pp. 559-584.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in DEMO citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 7 of 8 -
Structuring DEMO Relationships between Organizations
Peter Smith Ring; Andrew H. Van De Ven
DEMO Management Journal, Vol. 13, No. 7. (Oct., 1992), pp. 483-498.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28199210%2913%3A7%3C483%3ASCRBO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
Organizational Economics: Notes on the Use of Transaction-Cost Theory in the Study of
Organizations
James DEMO Robins
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 32, No. 1. (Mar., 1987), pp. 68-86.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198703%2932%3A1%3C68%3AOENOTU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
Networks: Between Markets and Hierarchies
Hans B. Thorelli
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 7, No. 1. (Jan. - Feb., 1986), pp. 37-51.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28198601%2F02%297%3A1%3C37%3ANBMAH%3E2.0.CO%3B2-B
Construct Measurement in Organizational Strategy Research: A Critique and Proposal
N. Venkatraman; John H. Grant
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 11, No. 1. (Jan., 1986), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198601%2911%3A1%3C71%3ACMIOSR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
A Transaction Cost Approach to Make-or-Buy Decisions
Gordon Walker; David Weber
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. DEMO, No. 3. (Sep., 1984), pp. 373-391.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198409%2929%3A3%3C373%3AATCATM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-N
Comparative Economic Organization: The Analysis of Discrete DEMO Alternatives
Oliver E. Williamson
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 36, No. 2. (Jun., 1991), pp. 269-296.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0001-8392%28199106%2936%3A2%3C269%3ACEOTAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained DEMO this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 8 of 8 -
Calculativeness, Trust, and Economic Organization
Oliver E. Williamson
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 36, No. 1, Part 2, John M. Olin Centennial DEMO in Law
and Economics at the University of Chicago. (Apr., 1993), pp. 453-486.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2186%28199304%2936%3A1%3C453%3ACTAEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation DEMO{1g42fwefx}