Does Trust Matter? Exploring the Effects of Interorganizational and Interpersonal Trust on
Performance
Author(s): Akbar Zaheer, Bill McEvily, Vincenzo Perrone
Source: Organization Science, Vol. 9, No. 2 (Mar. - Apr., 1998), pp. 141-159
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2640350
Accessed: 06/11/2009 09:07
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's DEMO and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may DEMO obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=informs.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that DEMO on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, DEMO build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new DEMO
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS DEMO collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Organization DEMO
http://www.jstor.org
Does
of
Trust
Interorganizational and
Trust
Matter?
on
Exploring
the
Effects
DEMO
Performance
Akbar Zaheer * Bill McEvily * Vincenzo Perrone
Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, 321 19th Avenue South, Minneapolis, Minnesota DEMO
Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Carnegie Mellon University, Schenley Park, DEMO,
Pennsylvania 15213-3890
Universita' degli Studi di Cassino and SDA Bocconi DEMO, Graduate School of Management, Italy
nterpersonal
nomics
amined.
I
and
exchanges.
This
inter-organizational
However,
paper
focuses
rarely
on these
trust
have these DEMO
difficult
have
been
tasks.
widely cited as important
been measured
and
components
their
implications
of eco-
ex-
Jay
B. Barney
Abstract
A conceptual challenge DEMO exploring the role of trust in inter-
organizational exchange is translating an inherently individual-
level concept-trust-to the organizational-level outcome of
performance. We define interpersonal DEMO interorganizational
trust as distinct constructs and draw on theories of interorga-
nizational relations to derive a model of exchange performance.
Specifically, we investigate the role of trust in interfirm ex-
change at two levels of analysis DEMO assess its effects on ne-
gotiation costs, conflict, and ultimately performance. Proposi-
tions were tested with data from a sample of 107 buyer-supplier
DEMO relationships in the electrical equipment manufactur-
ing industry using a structural equation model. The results in-
dicate that interpersonal and interorganizational trust are related
DEMO distinct constructs, and play different roles in affecting ne-
gotiation processes DEMO exchange performance. Further, the hy-
potheses linking trust to performance receive DEMO support, al-
though the precise nature of the link is somewhat DEMO than
initially proposed. Overall, the results show that trust in inter-
DEMO exchange relations clearly matters.
(Interorganizational Trust; Interfirm Relations; Rela-
tional DEMO)
The sharp increase in various forms of interfirm cooper-
ation in the current economic environment has stimulated
a profusion of research on such DEMO ties, and more
specifically on the role of trust in facilitating DEMO organi-
zation and coordination of economic activities between
firms. A special issue of The Academy of Management
Journal (1995) on the subject of DEMO interfirm
ties noted editorially that the role of trust in cooperative
relationships is of fundamental importance and that "the
study of trust and its impact on cooperative relationships
at all levels may be a particularly fruitful DEMO of future
research" (Smith et al. 1995, p. 15). DEMO the impor-
tance of understanding the nature of trust in cooperative
interfirm relationships, considerable ambiguity is evident
in the literature about the precise role of trust as it oper-
ates at different levels of analysis and DEMO influence on
performance.
A fundamental challenge in conceptualizing the role of
trust in economic exchange is extending an inherently
individual-level phenomenon to the organizational DEMO
of analysis. Not clearly specifying how trust translates
from the individual to the organization level leads to theo-
retical confusion about who is trusting DEMO because it
is individuals as members of organizations, rather than
the DEMO themselves, who trust. The ambiguity
about the multilevel nature of trust DEMO apparent in theo-
retical frameworks that address the role of trust in eco-
nomic exchange, notably transaction cost economics
(Williamson 1975, 1985). Specifically, transaction cost
theory implies thatfirms tend to behave opportunistically
1047-7039/98/0902/0141/$05.00
Copyright C) 1998, Institute for Operations Research
and DEMO Management Sciences
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol.
9, No. 2, March-April
1998
141
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
(Williamson 1975, 1985), thereby attributing (micro) in-
dividual motivations and behaviors to (macro) organiza-
tions and thus committing a "cross-level fallacy"
(Rousseau 1985)DEMO We maintain that theories of interfirm
exchange that simply view opportunism-or conversely,
trust-as a property of organizations without specifying
the link between micro DEMO macro levels is inaccurate as
it tends to anthropomorphize the organization.
Some imprecision about the roles of trust at multiple
levels of analysis and DEMO trust is related across levels is
also apparent in economic sociology, DEMO specifically in
relational exchange (Dore 1983, Macneil 1980). A central
premise of relational exchange theory is that personal re-
lations generate trust DEMO discourage opportunistic behav-
ior between firms. However, that perspective does not
DEMO how interpersonal trust influences the economic
exchange between and among complex social systems,
such as organizations. Simply stated, the relational ex-
change perspective does not stipulate the mechanisms by
which individual-level action affects organizational-level
outcomes.
DEMO, though several theoretical traditions have rec-
ognized the importance of trust DEMO economic exchange
(e.g., Arrow 1974, Granovetter 1985, Macauley 1963),DEMO
little research has been done to explain how trust, par-
ticularly DEMO conceptualized as a multilevel phenome-
non, operates to affect the performance DEMO interfirm ex-
change. In particular, the organizational and strategy
literature (e.g., Gulati 1995) has asserted that trust in in-
terfirm exchange is DEMO and can be a source of com-
petitive advantage (Barney and DEMO 1995). In the or-
ganizational economics literature, trust has been
DEMO to reduce opportunistic behavior, and hence
transaction costs of exchange, ultimately resulting in
more efficient governance (Bromiley and Cummings
1995, John 1984)DEMO However, though the link between trust
and performance in economic exchange DEMO been fre-
quently theorized in general terms, elucidating the precise
nature DEMO the trust-performance relationship in a multi-
level context remains an important theoretical and em-
pirical challenge.
The primary objective of our research is to DEMO how
trust operates at both individual and organizational levels
of analysis, DEMO trust at the two levels is related, and
particularly how the DEMO by which this inherently
individual-level phenomenon translates into an
organizational-level outcome: DEMO We argue
that in an actual exchange relationship, the role of DEMO
vidual boundary spanners, acting on behalf of their or-
ganizations, has an important influence on interfirm ex-
change. In particular, we propose that institutionalized
142
Does Trust
Matter?
practices and routines for dealing with DEMO partner organi-
zation create a stable context within which interorgani-
zational and interpersonal trust develop. Further, we
maintain that there is a reciprocal relationship between
trust at the two levels of analysis, and neither alone is
sufficient for understanding relational exchange perfor-
mance. We conceptualize the trust-performance link DEMO
being mediated by interfirm negotiation processes, and
we identify the influence DEMO trust at each level on eventual
exchange performance.
We tested our propositions on a sample of 107 buyer-
supplier interfirm relationships in the electrical DEMO
manufacturing industry using a structural equation model.
Our hypotheses linking trust to performance are partially
supported, but several of our findings were unexpected.
The results indicate that interpersonal and interorganiza-
tional trust are related but distinct DEMO, and play
different roles in affecting exchange performance.
Theory and Hypotheses
DEMO and Interorganizational Trust
We use the term interpersonal trust to refer to the extent
of a boundary-spanning agent's trust in her counterpart
in DEMO partner organization. In other words, interpersonal
trust is the trust placed DEMO the individual boundary span-
ner in her individual opposite member. The term inter-
organizational trust is defined as the extent of trust placed
in DEMO partner organization by the members of a focal
organization (see Figure DEMO).
Although considerable research in psychology and so-
ciology has focused on trust in individuals (e.g., Rotter
1971) and in social groups (DEMO, Lewis and Weigert
1985a, Zucker 1986), in the organizational and interor-
ganizational context the role of trust has only recently
attracted interest, notably in the marketing channels lit-
erature (e.g., Anderson and Narus DEMO), and in strategy
Figure 1
Interorganizational and Interpersonal Trust
Supplier
Organization
-
Buyer
Organization
SI - Primary
Boundary
Spanner
Interpersonal
Trust
BI
B2 DEMO
- Primary
Boundary
Boundary
Spanner
Spanner
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 9, No. DEMO, March-April
1998
S
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
and organizational research (e.g., Bradach and Eccles
1987, Ring and Van de Ven 1992, Zaheer and
Venkatraman 1995). As a result of both the range of DEMO
ciplinary lenses used to study trust and the inherent am-
biguity of the trust construct, there is currently a confus-
ing assortment of conceptual perspectives on trust. For
our purposes, two principal issues are involved in devel-
oping a working definition of the trust construct: (1) the
intrinsically complex and multifaceted nature of trust
(Corazzini 1977) and (2) the variety of units and levels
of analysis to which trust has been applied.
In addressing the first issue, we focus on the exchange
dyad to develop a definition of trust that is inherently
relational because DEMO are specifically interested in study-
ing the role of trust in economic exchange and, more gen-
erally, in interorganizational relationships. The literature
on DEMO relations provides two general def-
initions of trust: confidence or predictability DEMO one's ex-
pectations about another's behavior, and confidence in
DEMO's goodwill (Ring and Van de Ven 1992). We use
DEMO extend both conceptualizations and define trust as the
expectation that an actor (1) can be relied on to fulfill
obligations (Anderson and Weitz 1989), (2) will behave
in a predictable manner, and (DEMO) will act and negotiate
fairly when the possibility for opportunism is DEMO
(Anderson and Narus 1990, Bromiley and Cummings
1995). Our conceptualization of trust as an expectation
rather than a conviction reflects an uncertain DEMO
of the referent's future behavior. Our definition explicitly
allows for the possibility of betrayal, which we view as
an inherent feature of trust. This probabilistic element of
trust is analogous to making a "leap of faith" by placing
confidence in a referent without knowing with absolute
certainty that the referent's future actions will not produce
unpleasant surprises. Our DEMO therefore character-
izes interorganizational trust as being based on three com-
ponents-reliability, predictability,1 and fairness-that
capture some of the complexity of trust (DEMO and
Weigert 1985b, Rempel and Holmes 1986, Rempel et al.
1985).
Our conceptualization of trust also explicitly recog-
nizes the distinction between DEMO and dispositional
trust. Whereas dispositional trust is an individual trait re-
flecting expectancies about the trustworthiness of others
in general (Rotter 1971), relational forms of trust pertain
specifically to the counterpart in the dyad. That DEMO
tion is important because high relational trust does not
imply naively trusting all exchange partners. Rather, re-
lational trust is likely to be based on experience and in-
teraction with a particular exchange partner (Ring and
Van de Ven 1992).
The second issue involved in developing a DEMO
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
Does Trust Matter?
definition of the trust construct concerns the level of anal-
ysis DEMO The Oxford English Dictionary defines
trust as "confidence in or reliance DEMO some quality or at-
tribute of a person or thing" (emphasis added), highlight-
ing the fact that the referent of trust may DEMO In other
words, it is conceptually consistent to view trust as DEMO
placed in another individual or in a group of individuals
such as the partner organization. However, the same can-
not be said for the origin of trust. In our view, trust has
its basis in individuals, although individuals in an orga-
nization may share an orientation toward another orga-
nization. From this perspective, interorganizational trust
describes the extent to which organizational members
have a collectively-held trust orientation toward the
partner firm, which is quite different from saying that
organizations trust each other. In contrast, we view inter-
personal trust as also made up of the three DEMO
reliability, predictability, and fairness-but with an in-
dividual as both the referent and origin of trust.
We note that trust as represented by DEMO three compo-
nents can be expressed in different forms-cognitive, be-
havioral, and emotional-at both the interpersonal and
the interorganizational levels. However, we recognize
that to do full justice to the complexity of trust would
require DEMO more elaborate schemes (e.g.,
Cummings and Bromiley 1996).
Micro-Macro DEMO in Interorganizational Relations
Organizations are far from monolithic. Rather, as Pfeffer
(1982, p. 64) notes, they are ".... pluralistic, divided into
interests, sub-units, and subcultures." Similarly, rather
than the relationship between DEMO being face-
less and monolithic, it is actively handled and managed
DEMO individual boundary spanners (Katz and Kahn 1978)
whose orientations and DEMO may well be different
from those of the organization as a whole. Boundary
spanners are more closely involved in the interorganiza-
tional relationship than DEMO members of the organiza-
tion, and tend to interact with their DEMO to a
greater extent (Friedman and Podolny 1992). Hence,
DEMO examining the characteristics of an interorganiza-
tional relationship, we need to DEMO the individual and
organizational levels simultaneously (Rousseau 1985). In
the DEMO of some scholars, theory-driven research on mul-
tilevel phenomena is what "sets [this] field apart from its
parent disciplines in that most of DEMO we study in and
about organizations are phenomena that are intrinsically
mixed-level" (Rousseau 1985, p. 2). In particular, the out-
comes DEMO trust may be different when the boundary-
spanning individual is considered separately from the rest
of the organization, with important consequences for per-
formance.
143
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
We argue that the DEMO between interpersonal
and interorganizational trust is based on institutionalizing
processes. Over time, repeated ties between two firms
evolve into deeper and more stable cooperative arrange-
ments (Gulati 1995). Although individual boundary span-
ners come and go, role definitions are stable and enduring
(Ring and Van de DEMO 1994). Institutionalizing processes
codify informal commitments made by individual bound-
ary spanners, which over time become established and
taken-for-granted organizational structures and routines
(Zucker 1977). Thus, as new individual boundary span-
ners enter DEMO interfirm exchange relationship, they be-
come socialized into the norms of DEMO mini-society it
represents (Macneil 1980). Norms from the interorgani-
zational DEMO are internalized and recreated in
boundary spanners' interpersonal trust orientations to-
DEMO each other in the process of conducting exchange.
At the same time, interpersonal trust becomes reinstitu-
tionalized and boundary spanners' trust orientation in DEMO
influences the orientation of other organizational mem-
bers toward the partner organization. The creation and
recreation of trust structures and action at the interper-
DEMO and interorganizational levels is akin to Giddens'
(1979) concept of structuration. In sum, the foregoing ar-
guments imply that interorganizational trust and interper-
sonal trust exert a positive influence on each other.
HYPOTHESIS 1. DEMO is a positive relationship be-
tween the extent of interpersonal trust and interorgani-
zational trust in an interfirm dyad.
Trust as Reducing Costs and DEMO
Performance
Trust as Reducing Costs of Negotiation. Consistent with
the organization economics literature, we define negoti-
ating costs as those involved in reaching mutually ac-
ceptable agreements. By this definition, negotiating costs
include the time and effort required to determine "effi-
cient courses of action, and to DEMO on divisions of costs
and benefits" (Milgrom and Roberts 1992, DEMO 147). In
particular, bounded rationality, uncertainty, and infor-
mation DEMO stemming from imperfect commu-
nication, private information, and observation and veri-
fication difficulties, all contribute to increasing costs of
negotiation.
Negotiations are less costly under conditions of high
interorganizational trust because agreements are reached
more DEMO and easily as parties are more readily able
to arrive at a "meeting of the minds." Interorganizational
trust mitigates the information asymmetries inherent DEMO
interfirm exchange by allowing more open and honest
144
Does Trust Matter?
sharing of information. As a result, partners' expectations
about how DEMO in the external environment will affect
their exchange relationship tend to converge (Malmgren
1961). Specifically, when unforeseen contingencies arise,
such as DEMO not explicitly covered by the terms of a
contract, high levels DEMO trust facilitate the development of
a common understanding about the contingencies and
how they might be resolved. When interorganizational
trust is high, negotiating positions are based on similar
underlying assumptions, and agreements are likely to be
reached more quickly. In a related vein, we suggest that
trust promotes negotiating efficiency by enabling each ex-
change partner to be more flexible DEMO granting conces-
sions because of the expectation that the other exchange
partner will reciprocate in the future (Dore 1983).2
From a transaction cost perspective, the most compel-
ling argument for the superior efficiency of interorgani-
zational relationships that involve trust is simply that trust
reduces the inclination DEMO guard against opportunistic be-
havior (i.e., deliberate misrepresentation) on the DEMO of
the exchange partner (Bromiley and Cummings 1995,
Dore 1983, John 1984). Under conditions of low trust,
lengthy and difficult DEMO over unforeseen contin-
gencies are likely to take place between exchange part-
ners because of the possibility of both ex ante and ex post
DEMO (Williamson 1975). In addition, contractual
and structural safeguards are put in place to protect in-
vestments in the relationship (Williamson 1985). Under
high trust conditions, in contrast, firms are less inclined
to DEMO on elaborate safeguards for specifying, monitor-
ing, and enforcing agreements. Relations high in trust
therefore imply more efficient exchange governance in
the form DEMO eased negotiations.
HYPOTHESIS 2. There is a negative relationship be-
tween interorganizational trust and costs of negotiation
between the partners to the exchange.
At DEMO level of individual boundary spanners, the ne-
gotiation literature suggests that DEMO trust-based relationship
is conducive to the discovery of mutually beneficial, in-
DEMO solutions (Walton and McKersie 1965). Trust-
ing relations between boundary DEMO also have been
found to be associated with easier negotiations (Currall
DEMO Judge 1995). Negotiations may be easier because of
boundary spanners' DEMO to share sensitive infor-
mation and their confidence that information provided by
the counterpart is not misrepresented. Consequently, we
expect mutually beneficial agreements to be reached more
quickly when boundary spanners trust each other. We ar-
DEMO that the relationship between interpersonal trust and
costs of negotiation is likely to be negative, similar to that
between interorganizational trust and negotiating costs.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
HYPOTHESIS 3. There is DEMO negative relationship be-
tween interpersonal trust and costs of negotiation be-
tween the partners to the exchange.
Trust as Reducing Conflict. Because firms' objectives
in exchange relationships are rarely identical, divergent
goals and unforeseen contingencies in their day-to-day
relationships are likely to result in disagreements. Rela-
tional exchange DEMO that are imbued with trust are char-
acterized by the internal harmonization of conflict and an
array of norms and social processes that work DEMO preserve
the relationship (Macneil 1980). Partners in relational ex-
change DEMO have forged a high level of interorganiza-
tional trust are more likely to give each other the benefit
of the doubt and greater leeway DEMO mutual dealings. Such
leeway will tend to reduce the scope, intensity, and fre-
quency of dysfunctional conflict.
Alternatively, rather than reducing the incidence of
conflict, high levels of interorganizational trust may ac-
tually promote conflict. In particular, the "mixed-motive"
nature (Sako 1992) of buyer-supplier DEMO creates
tension between cooperation and competition. Interorga-
nizational trust gives exchange partners the confidence to
be open with each other, knowing that information shared
will not be used against them. However, though such
openness may facilitate the discovery of solutions that
increase the size of the collective economic DEMO, it could
also lead to disagreement over the pie's distribution. DEMO
additional opportunities for profit are recognized, the in-
centives for exchange DEMO to attempt to capture a
larger proportion for themselves are raised (DEMO and
Levine 1992). The divergence in their goals (e.g., to ap-
propriate as much of the pie as possible for themselves)
DEMO become more salient. As a result, efforts by ex-
change partners DEMO appropriate the gains from the rela-
tionship for themselves are likely to be manifested as con-
flict.
One way of resolving the apparent inconsistency DEMO
tween arguments for positive and negative effects of trust
on conflict is to view those alternatives in the context of
extended exchange relationships. From DEMO perspective,
higher trust may temporarily be associated with higher
conflict, DEMO over time interfirm disagreements will tend
to lead to either termination or reaffirmation of the rela-
tionship. In the latter case, trust is likely to reduce con-
flict. Based on this line of reasoning, we hypothesize,
HYPOTHESIS 4. There is a negative relationship be-
tween interorganizational trust DEMO the level of conflict
in the exchange relationship.
Because the boundary spanners are active participants
in the process of managing the exchange relationship,
DEMO SCIENCE/VOl. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
Does Trust Matter?
their interpersonal relationship is likely to affect the level
of conflict (Currall and Judge 1995). Where interpersonal
trust between boundary spanners is high, the parties are
likely to develop solutions that are focused on the DEMO
lem at hand rather than on the personalities involved
(Fisher and DEMO 1991). Moreover, when interpersonal
trust is high, a boundary spanner is likely to give the
counterpart the benefit of doubt rather than DEMO to
conclusions about the other's motives and intentions. Fur-
ther, DEMO conflict often derives from unexpected actions by
one party, the predictability DEMO in high levels of in-
terpersonal trust is likely to be associated with lower lev-
els of conflict.
A contrasting view of the link DEMO interpersonal
trust and conflict is based on the premise that interper-
sonal trust may actually allow conflict to surface without
disruptive consequences. We argue DEMO individuals in-
volved in exchange relationships characterized by trust
may be more likely to confront and resolve disagreements
rather than smoothing them over. This DEMO is akin to
the idea that boundary spanners are more likely to con-
front trusted counterparts with "harsh truths" than those
they do DEMO trust. In such cases, the parties are able to
accept periodic DEMO without fear of exploita-
tion because the risk that conflict will permanently dam-
age the interpersonal relationship is lower in the presence
of interpersonal DEMO (Walton and McKersie 1965). Para-
doxically, we expect such confrontations ultimately to re-
duce conflict among boundary spanners by enabling the
individuals DEMO resolve issues in a comprehensive way that
gets at the underlying cause of problems rather than treat-
ing them superficially. As a result, the sum total of con-
flict is lower in a high trust than DEMO a low trust relationship.
The process of resolving core differences may be con-
flictual, but in the end it promotes smoother and more
harmonious interactions in the future.
HYPOTHESIS 5. There is a negative relationship be-
DEMO interpersonal trust and the level of conflict in the
exchange relationship.
Costs of Negotiation and Performance. A central
premise of organization economics is that DEMO are as-
sociated with conducting exchange (Coase 1937). Such
transaction DEMO stem from the inability of exchange part-
ners to specify contingencies fully in a contract
(Williamson 1985). The efficiency and performance of an
exchange relationship are consequently greatly influ-
enced by the parties' ability to limit the costs associated
with contracting, in particular the costs of negotiation and
renegotiation. As mentioned earlier, we conceptualize ne-
gotiating costs as the time and effort expended by the
145
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE Does Trust
exchange partners DEMO arrive at agreements about the dis-
tribution of costs and benefits (DEMO and Roberts
1992).
We maintain that exchange performance3 is lowered
when negotiation costs are high because ". . . bargaining
position[s] carry direct costs that the bargainers may wish
they could all avoid. In this DEMO, the time and energy
so often spent haggling, posturing, and DEMO agree-
ments in attempts to influence the terms of the deal are
related wastes" (Milgrom and Roberts 1992, p. 149). The
resources expended in such costly haggling and negoti-
ation take their toll on DEMO because the exchange
partners are distracted from their business. More specif-
ically, when contingencies arise, such as unexpected costs
not explicitly covered by DEMO contract or unanticipated
design changes, high levels of interorganizational trust
enable DEMO partners to address these contingencies without
resorting to legalistic remedies. For example, rather than
concentrating on assigning blame and debating respon-
sibility for bearing the costs of changes, the parties will
tend to direct their efforts toward determining how best
to reach mutually beneficial solutions.
HYPOTHESIS 6. There DEMO a negative relationship be-
tween supplier performance and costs of negotiation be-
tween the partners to the exchange.
Conflict and Performance. Disagreements are a DEMO
ural aspect of interorganizational exchange and may re-
sult in damaging conflict or may be worked out amicably
with consequences that are largely positive (Anderson
and Naurus 1990, Dwyer et al. 1987). As one industry
participant we interviewed put it:
... to maximize return we can DEMO do it through managed-
not adversarial-relationship. Although some conflict is there,
we respect each others' business goals.
If conflict is frequent and pervasive, however, the out-
comes may be dysfunctional because of the increased
DEMO and effort spent resolving the conflict, the involve-
ment of other, more senior, members of the organization,
the spill-over of the conflict into other areas, and the like.
In such cases the performance of the supply relationship
tends to decline as the parties' efforts are directed toward
non-value-enhancing activities.
HYPOTHESIS 7. There is a negative relationship be-
tween DEMO performance and the level of conflict in
the exchange relationship.
Control Variables
Other elements of the transaction context play a role in
the structuring DEMO the dyadic relationship and in the per-
formance of the relationship. In particular, asset specific-
ity, or the extent to which a party'DEMO assets are dedicated
146
Matter?
to the transaction, influences dyadic DEMO structure
by requiring safeguards against appropriation of the as-
sociated rents. Uncertainty in the transaction environment
increases the number of contingencies, creating greater
potential for opportunistic renegotiation of the terms of
the contract. Together, asset specificity and uncertainty
have been theorized to influence the governance struc-
ture, which is the framework within which firms negoti-
ate, execute, and monitor DEMO agreements
(Williamson 1985). Prior research has demonstrated that
relationship performance DEMO influenced by a governance
structure that safeguards the firm's specific assets in the
presence of uncertainty (e.g., Heide and John 1990,
DEMO and Weber 1984). Given the extensive history of
research in this area, we control for asset specificity, en-
vironmental uncertainty, and governance form, and do
not hypothesize specific relationships between these con-
structs.
Methods
Data
Data on dyadic exchange relationships of electrical equip-
ment manufacturers and DEMO component suppliers were
gathered in four phases. In phase 1 an original group of
manufacturing firms in the "Electronic and Other Elec-
trical Equipment and Components" industry (SIC code
3600) was constructed. We selected this industry because
it contains a wide range of purchasing arrangements and
provides DEMO sampling frame of adequate size. A list of pur-
chasing managers in the firms who are members of the
National Association of Purchasing Managers (NAPM)
was made available to us by the association. Extensive
semistructured DEMO, each 45 minutes to one hour
long, were held with 20 purchasing managers from dif-
ferent firms in the industry.
In phase 2 DEMO identified 1,050 NAPM members who
were eligible to participate in our study on the basis of
the following criteria: (1) their firms purchase compo-
nents, (2) they deal directly with supplier firms, DEMO (3)
they have purchasing relationships with at least six sup-
DEMO These NAPM members received a letter requesting
their participation in our study of buyer-supplier relation-
ships. We also asked purchasing managers to identify a
DEMO supplier firm that provides their firm with some
key component used in the final product.
To control for potentially confounding effects on re-
lational DEMO caused by the importance of a sup-
plier and by the amount of purchases made from it, we
used a randomizing procedure (Anderson DEMO Narus
1990). We asked purchasing managers to select their
fourth largest supplier and to identify a specific individual
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VOl.
9, No. 2, March-April
1998
a
AKBAR
ZAHEER,
BILL McEVILY,
AND VINCENZO
PERRONE
(i.e., the DEMO counterpart) with whom they have
been dealing personally. The procedure of DEMO the
fourth largest rather than the largest supplier also miti-
gates social desirability bias, which is sometimes present
in questionnaire research. A total of 153 purchasing man-
agers agreed to participate and sent the requested infor- DEMO
mation about a specific supplier.
Testing for Nonresponse Bias. The participation rate
of approximately 15% (i.e., 153/1,050) was somewhat
low and suggested the potential for nonresponse bias. We
therefore conducted a telephone survey DEMO 100 randomly
selected nonparticipants to determine whether there were
any systematic differences between our sample and the
rest of the population. We carried out DEMO for differ-
ences in the means of participating and nonparticipating
firms on certain key variables. No significant differences
in the means were found for DEMO size of firms (t = 1.10),
length of the business relationship with the supplier com-
pany (t = -0.81), or satisfaction with the buyer-supplier
relationship (t = - 0.56). Hence, we DEMO the threat
to internal validity of the results is limited.
Questionnaires. To increase the reliability and valid-
ity of our measures we developed two DEMO question-
naires on the basis of the semistructured interviews and
previous research: one for the purchasing managers and
another for a second respondent in the purchasing orga-
nization (Bagozzi et al. 1991). The questionnaire for the
second respondent was identical to that for the purchasing
managers with DEMO exception that all items corresponding
to the interpersonal relationship between the purchaser's
and the supplier's representatives were eliminated. Ques-
tionnaires were pretested DEMO local purchasing man-
agers in the same industry, who were subsequently DEMO
cluded from the sample.
In phase 3 of the data collection, DEMO mailed the ques-
tionnaires to the 153 purchasing managers and to the sec-
ond respondents. In total, questionnaires were mailed to
306 individuals in the buyer organization. In the final
phase of our data collection we DEMO Dilman's
(1978) techniques for maximizing the response rate with
follow-up correspondence, questionnaires, and telephone
calls.
We received a total of 205 DEMO for a final re-
sponse rate of 67% of individuals eligible and willing to
participate (205/306). Of the 205 completed question-
naires received, 120 were from purchasing managers and
85 were from the second respondent in the purchasing
organization.
Assessing Multiple Informant Competence. We col-
lected DEMO from multiple informants with the aim of ad-
dressing concerns about single-informant bias in research
on interorganizational relations (Kumar et al. 1993, p.
DEMO
SCIENCE/VOl. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
Does Trust Matter?
1634). However, that approach poses a further problem
of identifying additional individuals competent to report
on a particular dyadic relationship. We evaluated the
DEMO of the second informant in the purchasing
organization by including an item designed to measure
specific knowledge of the firm's business relationship
with DEMO focal supplier. Of the 85 second informants sur-
veyed, 77 (91%) responded to the item "I am familiar
with most aspects of DEMO business relationship with Sup-
plier X" by circling four or higher DEMO a scale from one
(strongly disagree) to seven (strongly agree)DEMO Any second
informants responding three or lower were removed from
our dataset and not included in any analyses. Of the 77
qualified second informants DEMO, 68 had matching
questionnaires from purchasing managers.
Measurement
Scales. Table 1 DEMO the details of the measurement
items and scales used to operationalize our theoretical
constructs. Where available, we used measurement in-
struments from the literature to develop constructs. Some
items were modified to reflect the specific context DEMO the
study. The Cronbach alpha reliability value for each con-
struct is also reported in Table 1. The reliability values
of the measurement scales DEMO exceed the recommended
value of 0.70 (Nunnally 1978) with the exception of that
for the joint action construct, which is marginal at 0.64.
Details of the development of the trust constructs follow.
Trust: To develop measures of trust at the two levels
of analysis we relied primarily DEMO a measurement instru-
ment created and validated by Rempel et al. (DEMO) as
modified by Rempel and Holmes (1986). We chose to
base our trust scales on that instrument because it was
designed specifically DEMO tap trust in close, personal rela-
tionships rather than a more DEMO trusting orientation.
However, not all of the Rempel and Holmes items DEMO
applicable to our research context. In particular, we ex-
cluded items DEMO a faith element and replaced them
with items designed to measure the fairness component
of trust based on our conceptualization of trust in an DEMO
change context. We also eliminated items that did not
apply to both the interorganizational and interpersonal
levels. We further adapted the instrument for use DEMO an
interfirm context by altering the referent of trust (which
was DEMO the organization or the individual counterpart,
referred to as the "DEMO person"). Last, we ensured that
items corresponding to all three forms of trust-cogni-
tive, behavioral, and emotional-were represented in the
scales, consistent with our conceptualization.
We created parallel instruments to measure trust at DEMO
levels of analysis. The initial item pool for interorgani-
zational and interpersonal trust scales contained the same
147
AKBAR
Table 1
Measures and Items
Interorganizational Trust
Supplier X has always DEMO evenhanded in its negotiations with us.
Supplier X may use opportunities that arise to profit at our expense.a
Based on past experience, we cannot with complete confidence rely on Supplier X to keep
promises made to DEMO
We are hesitant to transact with Supplier X when the specifications are vague.a
Supplier X is trustworthy.
= strongly disagree, 4 = neither agree nor disagree, 7 = strongly agree)
Interpersonal Trust
My contact person has always been evenhanded in negotiations with me.
I know how my DEMO person is going to act. S/he can always be counted on to act as I
expect.
My contact person is trustworthy.
I have DEMO in my contact person to look out for my interests even when it is costly to do
so.
I would feel a sense of DEMO if my contact person's performance was below my
expectations.
= strongly disagree, 4 = neither agree nor disagree, 7 = strongly agree)DEMO
Negotiation
1. How easy are negotiations between your business unit and Supplier X over sharing the
burden of costs (not explicitly covered by the contract) when
a. Your business unit requests engineering changes?
b. Supplier X's raw material costs increase?
(1 = not at all, 4 = somewhat, 7 very much)
2. How quick are DEMO between your business unit and Supplier X over sharing the
burden of costs (not explicitly covered by the contract) when
a. Your business DEMO requests engineering changes?
b. Supplier X's raw material costs increase?
(1 = very easy, 4 = somewhat difficult, 7 = very difficult)
Conflict
1. During the past year how often were DEMO significant disagreements between
a. Your business unit and Supplier X?
b. You and the contact person?
(1 = never, 4 = DEMO, 7 = very often)
Supplier Performance
1. Please rate Suppliers DEMO's performance on fulfilling
a. Competitive price
b. Timeliness of delivery
c. High quality supply
(1 = very poor, 4 = fair, 7 = excellent)
Asset Specificity
1. Our production system has been tailored DEMO meet the requirements of dealing with Supplier
X.
2. Gearing up to deal with Supplier X requires highly specialized tools and equipment.
3. Our DEMO system has been tailored to using the particular items bought from Supplier
X.
4. We have made significant investments in tools and equipment dedicated DEMO our relationship
with Supplier X.
(1 = strongly disagree, 4 = neither agree nor disagree, 7 = strongly agree)
148
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
(1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
(1
ZAHEER,DEMO
BILL McEVILY,
Measurement Instruments
AND VINCENZO
PERRONE Does Trust
each of the following goals:
Matter?
ORGANIZATION
I
Consistency
Reliability (a)
0.7664
0.8799
0.8824
0.8104
0.7502
0.7069
Source
nternal
Adapted from Rempel
and DEMO (1986)
Adapted from Rempel
and Holmes (1986)
New Items
Adapted from Van de
Ven and Ferry (1980)
New Items
Adapted from Heide and
John (1990)
SCIENCE/VOl. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
AKBAR
ZAHEER,
BILL McEVILY,
AND VINCENZO
PERRONE Does Trust
Matter?DEMO
Table 1
Continued
Internal
Consistency
Reliability (a)
Uncertainty 0.7700
1. DEMO would you describe the supply of the component purchased from Supplier X
compared to other similar products (not only provided by Supplier X)?DEMO
a. Stable availabilitya
b. Easy to monitor technological trendsa
c. Stable industry volumea
d. Accurate sales forecastsa
(1 = not at all, 4 DEMO somewhat, 7 = very much)
Joint Action
1. Supplier X DEMO our business unit with cost structure information for the component we
purchase from them.
2. We share with Supplier X our long-term plans for DEMO products.
3. Our business unit helps out Supplier X in whatever ways they ask.
4. Our business unit has been actively pursuing JIT (Just-In-Time) practices with Supplier X.
5. Our business unit relies heavily upon TQM (Total Quality Management) policies to manage
its relationship with Supplier X.
(1 = strongly disagree, 4 = neither agree nor disagree, 7 DEMO strongly agree)
aReverse coded.
0.6412
Source
Adapted from
Noordewier, John, and
Nevin (1990)
New Items
Measures and Items
set of items. However, factor analysis of the two trust
measures revealed that a reduced final set of items pro-
vided measurement properties superior to those of DEMO
earlier conceptualization of trust as containing the three
components of predictability, DEMO, and fairness. In
particular, we found that the emotional form of trust
emerged in the interpersonal trust construct but not in the
interorganizational DEMO Further, the predictability items
dropped out of the interorganizational scale and DEMO
did not emerge in the interpersonal scale. The final item
pool contained five items each for interorganizational
trust and interpersonal trust, of which three correspond to
the original items in the Rempel and Holmes (1986) DEMO
Of the five items for the construct interorganizational
trust, two items DEMO the fairness component of trust,
one item directly assessed interorganizational trust, and
the other two tap the reliability aspect of trust. We dis-
carded items measuring predictability after assessing the
construct for unidimensionality, as mentioned previously.
The five-item scale for interpersonal trust consists of
one item related DEMO predictability, three items related to
fairness, and one item that directly assesses interpersonal
trust. Items measuring the reliability element of interper-
sonal trust DEMO eliminated as a result of the assessment
for unidimensionality.
Negotiation: We DEMO the costs of negotia-
tion with a four-item scale. Two items captured the ease
and speed of negotiations pertaining to engineering
changes and two DEMO measured the ease and speed of
negotiations pertaining to increases in raw materials
costs.
Conflict: Two items measured the degree of conflict
between the two organizations and the level of conflict
between the two boundary-spanning individuals. DEMO
items were adapted from Van de Ven and Ferry (1980).
DEMO: We operationalized the performance
construct with a four-item scale reflecting the DEMO to
which the supplier organization fulfilled the goals of com-
petitive price, timeliness of delivery, high quality supply,
and supplier flexibility (Heide and Stump 1995, Walker
1994).4 The operationalization is based on the reasoning
that "the less cooperative the supplier is in meeting the
buyers' needs, the higher the transaction costs the buyer
incurs in trying DEMO achieve its goals in the supply rela-
tionship" (Walker 1994, DEMO 583). This operationalization
is also consistent with the marketing channels literature
(Heide and Stump 1995).
Asset specificity: Our asset specificity construct DEMO
based on a four-item scale measuring the extent to which
the production system is customized for the exchange
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VOl. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
149
AKBAR
ZAHEER,
BILL McEVILY,
AND VINCENZO
PERRONE
partner in terms DEMO investments in specialized tools and
equipment (Heide and John 1988).
DEMO: Four items, adapted from Noordewier et
al. (1990), measured DEMO degree of environmental uncer-
tainty in terms of industry volume, technological DEMO
of the market, stable availability, and accuracy of fore-
casts.
Joint Action: The joint action construct was measured
on a five-item scale reflecting the degree of inter-
penetration of organizational boundaries and the extent
to DEMO the exchange activities are carried out in a co-
operative and coordinated manner (Heide and John
1990).
Modeling Approach. We used the estimation proce-
dure of LISREL 7 (J6reskog and Sorbom 1989) to con-
DEMO a structural equation model to test our hypotheses.
The LISREL technique has the advantage over standard
regression analysis of explicitly considering the measure-
ment DEMO in the indicators and simultaneously estimat-
ing a system of structural equations. However, research-
ers have noted the difficulty of fitting LISREL models
with a large number of items per latent variable (Williams
and Hazer 1986). Specifically, as the number of items and
parameters increases, the DEMO "can be unwieldy be-
cause of likely high levels of random DEMO in typical
items and the many parameters that must be estimated"
(Bagozzi and Heatherton 1994, p. 43). Because of the
complexity DEMO our conceptual model and the relatively
large number of manifest variables, DEMO for the
trust constructs, we used the partial aggregation model
described DEMO Bagozzi and Heatherton (1994). The partial
aggregation approach addresses this DEMO problem
by consolidating the manifest items of a latent variable
into a smaller number of composite indicators.
To construct the composite indicators, we first evalu-
ated each construct for unidimensionality using factor
analysis (Williams and James 1994). We then ranked
each construct' s items according to their loadings and as-
signed them to one of two indicators. The mean DEMO the
items assigned to each indicator was used as the value for
the indicator. The indicators were then loaded onto the
respective latent variables DEMO the measurement model. All
constructs were modeled with the partial aggregation
modeling approach, with the exception of conflict which
contained only two items.
Means, standard deviations, and zero-order correla-
tions among composite indicators are reported DEMO Table
2, and the loadings of the composite indicators on latent
DEMO are reported in Table 3. We handled possible
non-normality by using the maximum likelihood esti-
mation procedures of LISREL 7, which "have been DEMO
to be robust against non-normality" (Joreskog and
150
Does Trust Matter?
S6rbom 1989, p. 21) even with sample sizes as low DEMO 50
(Anderson and Gerbing 1988).
Convergent and Discriminant Validity. Convergent
DEMO is ". . . the degree to which multiple attempts to
DEMO the same concept by different methods are in
agreement" (Phillips 1981, p. 399; Campbell and Fiske
1959). In organizational research, "DEMO methods" of-
ten is taken to mean obtaining reports from independent,DEMO
qualified respondents5 (Bagozzi and Phillips 1982). We
assessed convergent validity DEMO our study by examining
the correlation between interorganizational trust as re-
ported by the purchasing manager and by the second re-
spondent in the DEMO organization. As shown in
Figure 2 (013), the correlation between DEMO
tional trust measured by the two respondents (methods)
is 0.706 (t = 4.27, p < 0.01). The positive and highly
significant correlation provides strong evidence for the
convergent validity of our interorganizational trust DEMO
struct.
Drawing on Campbell and Fiske's (1959) discussion of
construct validity, Bagozzi (1993, p. 54) defines discrim-
inant validity as "the degree to which measures of differ-
ent concepts are distinct. The DEMO is that if two or more
concepts are unique, then valid DEMO of each should
not correlate too highly." We tested for discriminant DEMO
lidity by comparing a model with the correlation between
the two constructs constrained to equal one with an un-
constrained model. A significantly lower DEMO value
for the model with the unconstrained correlation provides
support for discriminant validity (Joreskog 1971).
We conceptualized interpersonal and interorganiza-
tional trust as theoretically distinct but related constructs.
Consequently, we were primarily concerned with assess-
ing the discriminant validity of those constructs.6 Tests
of a model with DEMO correlation between constructs con-
strained to unity yielded Z2(7 df) DEMO 17.70, p < 0.013,
and a model with unconstrained correlation DEMO the
following: x2(6 df) = 8.05, p < 0.234. DEMO difference in
chi-square (1 df) of 9.65 is statistically significant at p <
0.01, providing strong support for the discriminant valid-
ity DEMO interpersonal and interorganizational trust.
Analysis
To test our hypotheses we specified two models using the
maximum likelihood estimation procedure in LISREL: a
trust correlation model and a structural model. The trust
correlation model (see Figure 2) tested Hl, predicting a
positive link between trust at the two DEMO of analysis,
with data from both the primary and secondary respon-
dents of the purchasing organization. The significance of
the correlation coefficients estimated DEMO the LISREL pro-
cedure, and reflected in the b parameter, provides a test
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VOl. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
AKBAR
ZAHEER,
BILL McEVILY,
AND VINCENZO
PERRONE Does Trust
Matter?DEMO
16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1.289
0.102
0.174
0.077
0.162
-
0.101
-
DEMO
-
1.159
1.421
-
1.530
0.972
0.987
-
1.035
0.235 -0.209 0.575
-
-
-
0.079
-
0.118
-
0.040
-0.046 0.081
-
-
DEMO
0.121
0.371
-0.352
0.655
-
1.289
-
0.049
-
0.026
-
0.173 0.165
-
0.172
0.523 -0.375
-
-
1.327
0.143 0.102 -0.038 0.263 DEMO 0.019 0.792
- - -
0.142 0.091 0.387
0.251
0.141
0.214
0.014
0.029
0.079
0.148 0.024 0.192
-
0.144 0.214 0.109
-
0.026
-
DEMO 0.171 -0.205
-
0.319 0.256 0.195 0.149
-
0.194
0.292
-0.144 0.654
-
0.215
0.611
0.128 0.149 -0.291 0.413
-
0.741
0.241
-
0.316 DEMO
0.422
0.076 -0.028 0.009 0.039 0.030 0.164 -0.159
-
-0.230 0.184 0.180 0.757
- -
-0.265 0.165
0.184
-0.264
0.139
0.064
0.676
0.364 0.135
DEMO
Joint
Joint
Asset
Asset
1.171
Table
2
action action
2 1 2 1
Uncertainty Uncertainty
5.746
Conflict
Statistics
-
5.038
2.894
2.813
Conflict
2 DEMO
Negotiation Negotiation
Performance Performance 2 1 Interpersonal Interpersonal
2 1
specificity specificity
2 1 trust trust Interorganizational
2 1
Descriptive
trust Interorganizationaltrust
2 1
DEMO
1.845
2.442
2.560
2.923
5.136
5.628
5.513
5.888 Mean and
3.170
1.343
1.344
1.305
1.013
1.189 S.D.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
DEMO
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
3.080
Zero-Order
Correlations
Constructs
0.203 0.193 0.573
0.306 -0.440 0.402 0.578
-0.223
0.495 0.413 -0.424
0.013 0.376
DEMO
-0.083
-0.086 0.052
0.117 -0.305 0.315
-0.088 0.113
-0.376 0.177
0.166
-0.034
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VOl. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
-0.183
151
-0.439 DEMO 0.392
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
Table 3
(Figure 3)
Parameter
Ax1
Ax2
AX3
AX4
AX5
Ax6
AX7
Ax8
AY,
DEMO
AY3
Ay4
AY5
AY6
AY7
AY8
pi1
P2
f3
Yi
Y2
Y3
Y4
YJ5
A6
Y7
Ys
**p < 0.01.
*p < 0.05.
Parameter DEMO for Structural Model
Standardized
Solution
0.844
0.686
0.815
0.972
0.603
1.119
0.822
0.793
0.902
0.822
0.909
0.720
0.839
0.737
0.823
0.898
0.264
0.034
0.261
DEMO
- 0.593
0.359
0.017
0.395
-0.345
1.011
-0.066
t-value
(fixed parameter)DEMO
7.430**
(fixed parameter)
7.111 **
(fixed parameter)
3.707**
(DEMO parameter)
4.260**
(fixed parameter)
8.297**
(fixed parameter)
5.734**
(fixed parameter)
5.350**
(fixed parameter)
9.438**
1.388*
0.264*
2.829**
DEMO
- 4.465**
3.231**
0.148
3.840**
- 2.829**
3.716**
- 0.477**
of H1. The structural model (see Figure 3) tested H2
through H7, which link trust with performance, mediated
by costs of negotiation and level of conflict. Data from
the purchasing manager respondents were used to esti-
mate DEMO path coefficients that are reflected in the respec-
tive y and fi values. The statistical significance of the path
coefficients provides tests of the DEMO
Results
Trust Correlation Model. The model consists of three
latent variables: DEMO and interorganizational
trust as reported by the purchasing manager and interor-
ganizational trust as reported by the second respondent in
the purchasing organization. The DEMO of overall fit be-
tween the actual and predicted covariances among vari-
ables of a model is reflected in a series of goodness-of-
fit DEMO This model had a chi-square value (6 df) of
152
Does Trust
Matter?
8.05 (p = 0.234). Standard fit indices, DEMO reported in Fig-
ure 2, indicate a satisfactory fit of the DEMO with the
data.7
The predicted relationship (H1) is tested by the strength
of the correlation between interpersonal trust reported by
the purchasing manager DEMO interorganizational trust re-
ported by the second respondent (see Figure 2, 023). In-
terpersonal trust and interorganizational trust are highly
correlated (023 = 0.442; t = 2.74; p < 0.01), providing
support DEMO H1. As a second test of H1, we specified a
correlation DEMO between interpersonal and interorgani-
zational trust both as reported by the purchasing manager
(see Figure 2, 012). Once again, the correlation is positive
and statistically significant (012 = 0.546; t = 3.18; p <
0.01), adding further support for Hi.
Structural Model. The structural model (see Figure 3)
specifies the relationships between trust and performance,
mediated by conflict and negotiating costs, with controls
for transaction cost variables. Following Venkatraman
(1989), we tested for the mediated relationships by spec-
ifying an additional direct path along with the mediation
paths. In DEMO words, to test the prediction that the in-
terorganizational trust-performance link DEMO mediated by
negotiation costs, we specified three paths: a link between
interorganizational trust and negotiation, a further path
between negotiation costs and performance, and a third
direct path between interorganizational trust and perfor-
mance. The same pattern of structural paths was specified
for each of the remaining DEMO relationships hypoth-
esized. This model had a chi-square value (86 df) of 94.82
(p = 0.242). Standard fit indices, as reported DEMO Figure
3, suggest a good fit of the model with the DEMO
Hypothesis 2, predicting a negative relationship be-
tween interorganizational trust and DEMO of negotiation,
is strongly supported (y1 = -0.810; t = -5.87; p <
0.01). Hypothesis 3 predicting a negative relationship DEMO
tween interpersonal trust and costs of negotiation and is
not supported. Rather, the relationship is both positive
and statistically significant (y3 = 0.359; t = 3.23; p <
0.10). As predicted in H4, a negative relationship was
observed between interorganizational trust and conflict
(Y2 = -0.593; t = -4.47; p < 0.01). Contrary to H5,DEMO
a negative relationship was not observed between inter-
personal trust and conflict. The relationship is positive,
although not statistically significant (y4 = 0.017; t =
0.148; n.s.). Hypothesis 6, predicting a negative relation-
ship between supplier performance and costs of negoti-
ation, is not supported (/Bl = 0.264; t = 1.39; n.s.), nor
is DEMO, predicting a negative relationship between supplier
performance and conflict (f82 0.034; t = 0.264; n.s.).
The direct path that we specified DEMO interorganizational
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VOl.
9, No. 2, March-April 1998
=
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
Does Trust
Matter?
DEMO 2
Correlational Model of Trust
Primary
? =0.706
(4.27 1)*-*--
DEMO
Respondent
Organizational
/
_(Iterorganizationa)
Trust
~~~XI A x2 /5
(Iterorganizatlional
Trust
x
6
Level
of
Analysis
?12O0.546
(3.180)**
.. **.
.. . .
XI
X2
..... ...
. . . . DEMO .
.......
(2.742)**
X6
..
..
.
.
.
.
DEMO
.
.
\<
Interpersonal
Individual
Xx31
X3
X4
.
.
.
.
Model
= 8.05
(P =.234)
d.f. = 6
n = 68
Statistics
GFI=.962
AGFI= .867
NFI =.962
CFI =.990
Notes
** P < .01
* P<.05
T-values
in parentheses
trust to performance is positive and statistically signifi-
cant (y7 = 1.011; t = 3.716; p < 0.01), but the direct
path from interpersonal trust to performance DEMO not sig-
nificant (Y8 = -0.066; t = -0.477; n.s.)DEMO
Discussion
In this paper, we examined trust-based relational ex-
change to DEMO a mechanism for the connection be-
tween trust and performance, and DEMO distinguish between
the consequences of interorganizational and interpersonal
trust. Our results broadly support the thesis that trust in
relational exchange influences negotiation processes and
DEMO, although the precise nature of the link is
somewhat different from DEMO we initially proposed.
Eased negotiation and reduced conflict are indeed out-
comes of trust, yet the pattern of findings differs sharply
across levels. Interorganizational trust emerges as the
overriding driver of exchange performance, negotiation,
and conflict, whereas interpersonal trust exerts little direct
influence on those outcomes. Nevertheless, interpersonal
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCEVOl. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
trust
on interorganizational
may also matter
through
trust.
its institutionalizing
effects
Key Findings
Trust at DEMO Levels of Analysis. As hypothesized, we
found interorganizational trust and interpersonal DEMO to
be related, although empirically and theoretically distinct.
Moreover, that finding is not merely an artifact of single-
source bias given that we DEMO data from two different
respondents in the buying organization to test the rela-
tionship. From the perspective of the boundary-spanning
individual in the buying DEMO, this means that the
more one trusts the supplier representative with DEMO
one deals, the more one's organization trusts the supplier
organization. DEMO see this relationship as operating in the
opposite direction as well, DEMO mutually reinforc-
ing effects of trust at the two levels. The implication of
these reciprocal effects is that, although interorganiza-
tional trust may appear to be the more important influence
in relational exchange, interpersonal trust must also be
considered for its effects on interorganizational trust. At
153
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
Does Trust
Matter?
DEMO 3
Structural Model of Relational Exchange
,.................................................................................................................................................................
Theoretical
Variables
t
L
DEMO
terorganizationa
~
>
~
(-)65)**
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.1
~~~~~~~~Negotiati\
~
~
~
~
~
~
Prfrmnc
(-4.465)**
(1-0.477
Contro
Variables
Asse
DEMO
%
terpersona
_ec*f(c.829)*840)*|Model =
0.017~
yxS/
>
DEMO
>
=6
AS
0.35929482
76 -0 345
=
02 = 0.0df.346
DEMO ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~*
/
Ji A
ction
~~~~~ 1
Fl=
DEMO
P.0
Statisticsl
GFI= .909
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~(P
n=-
107
CFI=-988
= .242)
AGFI
= .855
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Notes
p
Xx7/
t
\x8
*
<1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~T-values
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~For
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~(vs
parentheses
correlational
fs) and error
paths
not shown
the same time, interorganizational research examining
trust solely at the individual level may be missing im-
portant institutionalized effects of interorganizational
trust. Simply aggregating interpersonal DEMO as a proxy
for interorganizational trust ignores the influence of social
context in the form of individuals' interactions (Coleman
1990) and organizational rules (Sitkin and Roth 1993)
that constrain and orient its members.
Perhaps our most striking finding is that interpersonal
and interorganizational trust operate quite DEMO
within relational exchange. Interorganizational trust is as-
sociated strongly with lowered costs of negotiation and
conflict, but interpersonal trust is not related to conflict
and showed a seemingly anomalous positive association
with negotiation costs. These findings DEMO that the ef-
fects of trust in the interorganizational context are distinct
at the individual and organizational levels of analysis.
154
Interorganizational Trust and DEMO Our hy-
potheses about the links between trust and performance
at both levels of analysis are partially supported. Al-
though interorganizational trust is related DEMO to
costs of negotiation and the level of conflict in the dyad,
the relationship between trust and performance is not me-
diated by DEMO costs and conflict, contrary to what
we had hypothesized. Further, although we did not hy-
pothesize a direct effect of trust on performance, our em-
pirical results in fact reveal a direct link between inter-
DEMO trust and performance, though not
between interpersonal trust and performance.
Given DEMO strong theoretical rationale in the organi-
zational economics literature, the lack DEMO support for the
positive performance effects of eased negotiations and
reduced conflict is somewhat surprising. Nonetheless, be-
fore concluding that the trust-performance relationship is
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/VOl.
9, No. 2, March-April
1998
in
clarity,
DEMO
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE Does Trust Matter?
DEMO direct rather than a mediated one, we note that eased
negotiations DEMO reduced conflict resulting from interor-
ganizational trust may in fact be enabling conditions al-
lowing exchange partners to pursue a variety of bilateral
governance DEMO as exchange of personnel
and shared decision making-that lead to improved per-
formance.
The preceding point notwithstanding, we believe the
strong direct relationship between interorganizational
trust and performance is a noteworthy and meaningful
finding. It indicates DEMO the performance of interfirm ex-
change is in fact associated with the level of interorga-
nizational trust. Such a link has often been suggested DEMO
previous work on interfirm exchange, but relatively little
empirical support for DEMO relationship exists. A key im-
plication of this finding is that firms in exchange rela-
tionships may derive competitive advantage from rela-
tionships imbued DEMO high levels of interorganizational
trust. Interestingly, the basis for the performance DEMO
hancement does not appear to be based on efficiencies
gained from eased negotiation processes. Rather, we
speculate that the enhancement of transaction value
(DEMO and Olsen 1993)-such as cooperation in the ex-
ploration of new information and coordination technolo-
gies, new market opportunities, and product and DEMO
innovation-may account for the link between interor-
ganizational trust and exchange performance. As one of
the industry participants we interviewed put it:
It DEMO necessary to get away from a "remedy-oriented" contract
which includes all contingencies. We need to focus on what can
go right instead of DEMO can go wrong.
Our findings rule out negotiation processes as a mediating
link, but future research should ascertain the role of these
and other value-enhancing exchange processes.
Although the entire chain of proposed theoretical re-
lationships DEMO not supported, our hypotheses about the link
between interpersonal and interorganizational DEMO and
the links between trust and the costs of negotiation and
conflict are partially supported. These findings are con-
sistent with transaction-cost-based explanations for DEMO
role of trust in exchange (Bromiley and Cummings 1995),
while also emphasizing the positive outcomes from in-
terfirm exchange (Zajac and Olsen 1993). Similarly, the
negative relationship between interorganizational trust
and the level of conflict in the dyad can be attributed to
the willingness of DEMO parties to grant one another greater
leeway when differences arise. In low trust situations,
suspicion of the partner's motives may result in DEMO
tional conflict and impede effective exchange processes.
Taken together, the findings DEMO the conclusion that
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
interorganizational trust acts to smooth negotiation pro-
cesses and thereby reduce the DEMO costs of inter-
firm exchange.
The Role of Interpersonal Trust. We found no support
for our hypotheses relating interpersonal trust to the costs
of DEMO or to the level of conflict in the exchange
relationship. In fact, the finding that interpersonal trust
related positively to the costs of negotiation is contrary
to our initial hypothesis. These results are counter-
intuitive given DEMO research in the boundary-spanning lit-
erature has indicated the importance of boundary-
spanning individuals in managing the interfirm relation-
ship (Friedman and Podolny 1992).8
To investigate the apparent anomaly of negotiation
costs increasing with interpersonal DEMO, we constructed
a three-dimensional surface plot of negotiation costs
against interpersonal DEMO, controlling for interorganiza-
tional trust (see Figure 4). Although the pattern is not
readily apparent, the surface of the plot is saddle-shaped
and rises to the maximum in both the foreground and the
background. DEMO of the plot confirms the in-
verted U-shaped relationship between negotiation costs
and interpersonal trust. Further, the third dimension of the
plot, interorganizational DEMO, provides a possible expla-
nation for the increasing part of the DEMO curve. Spe-
cifically, where interpersonal trust is low, we find that
interorganizational trust remains high. High interorgani-
zational trust appears to compensate for DEMO interpersonal
trust and thus to explain the low level of negotiation costs.
At the same time, the high negotiation costs associated
Figure 4
6
Surface Plot of Negotiation Costs with Interorga-
nizational and Interpersonal Trust
0
DEMO
4
15
,;
?
<~~~~~~
155
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE Does Trust
with intermediate DEMO of interpersonal trust are accom-
panied by lower levels of interorganizational trust as in-
dicated by the high point in the foreground, which cor-
responds to interorganizational trust at its lowest level and
both interpersonal trust DEMO negotiation costs at their
highest levels. This pattern of findings indicates that even
though the individuals across the dyad may not trust each
other, as long as the institutionalized structures accom-
panying high interorganizational trust are DEMO place, ne-
gotiating costs will be kept down. Further, high interor-
ganizational trust and low interpersonal trust can coexist
in the same relationship DEMO that boundary-spanning in-
dividuals come and go, whereas the institutionalized
structures DEMO processes accompanying interorganiza-
tional trust are more stable and enduring (Ring DEMO Van
de Ven 1994).
We conducted an additional analysis to confirm the
curvilinear relationship between interpersonal trust and
negotiation costs by regressing negotiation DEMO on in-
terpersonal trust and its squared term. The results show a
positive and significant coefficient for the main term, con-
sistent with the LISREL analysis, and a negative and sig-
nificant coefficient for the squared term.9 The negative
sign for the squared term indicates an inverted U-shaped
DEMO between interpersonal trust and negotiation
costs. In other words, the costs DEMO negotiation appear to
be lowest at both low and high levels of interpersonal
trust and are highest at intermediate levels of interper-
sonal trust DEMO the inflection point of the inverted
U-shaped curve. We calculated the inflection point of the
curve to be at 4.30 for interpersonal trust, suggesting that
negotiation costs increase with increasing interpersonal
trust up to the value DEMO, after which they decline.
Those observations are strong indications that inter-
DEMO trust by itself is insufficient for lowering nego-
tiation costs. Nevertheless, DEMO trust is by no
means unimportant. At the point where interorganiza-
tional trust is at its maximum, negotiation costs are higher
when interpersonal trust is low, as indicated by the rela-
tively high point in the background. From that point down
the upper right edge of the surface, increasing interper-
sonal trust clearly corresponds to lowering negotiation
costs. This observation DEMO it apparent that interper-
sonal trust plays a distinct, though subordinate, role in
affecting the costs of negotiation when examined in con-
junction DEMO interorganizational trust.
Implications
In comparison with interpersonal trust, interorganiza-
tional trust DEMO as the dominant influence on ex-
change processes and outcomes. The pattern of results
suggests that institutionalized practices and routines for
156
Matter?
DEMO with a partner organization, as captured by inter-
organizational trust, transcend the influence of the indi-
vidual boundary spanner. In considering the role DEMO trust
in relational exchange, we argue that firms must recog-
nize DEMO impersonal (Shapiro 1987) structures, processes,
and routines that create DEMO stable context within which in-
terpersonal trust can develop and persist (DEMO and
Miner 1992, Parkhe 1993). The stability of interfirm ex-
DEMO is not created and maintained solely by boundary
spanning individuals, but DEMO is institutionalized in the
interorganizational relationship. As one purchasing man-
ager we interviewed asserted:
Even though I may leave, the relationship [between our firms]
will continue since what we've been doing goes beyond one DEMO
two people. Over the years, there are a host of people DEMO have
worked together.
We do not by any means suggest that the social com-
ponent of exchange is unimportant. On the contrary, our
data indicate that interpersonal trust, in conjunction with
interorganizational trust, plays a DEMO role in relational
exchange, over and above the effects of governance DEMO
ture. However, we suggest that when exchange is carried
out between DEMO with an institutionalized pat-
tern of dealings, the interorganizational context becomes
DEMO prominent.
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research
Our study makes important theoretical and empirical con-
tributions to the literature on the role of trust DEMO interor-
ganizational relations. However, the validity of the im-
plied causal DEMO of our model is limited by the
cross-sectional nature of our research design. We there-
fore encourage longitudinal research on the development
and consequences DEMO trust in interorganizational ex-
change. Further investigation of our findings based on in-
depth case studies would also enhance our understanding
of how interorganizational DEMO builds up over time and
its dynamic relationship with interpersonal trust.
In our study, we inferred from a specific buyer-supplier
setting to interorganizational relationships more gener-
ally. Clearly replication of our findings in other interfirm
settings, such as joint ventures and strategic alliances, is
needed to establish their external validity. Further, we see
an interesting extension of the research in cross-national
settings where cultural differences may alter the out-
comes of trust DEMO relational exchange.
We also encourage more research specifically exam-
ining the "DEMO" of trust in interorganizational rela-
tions. Much has been made of DEMO positive effects of trust,
but there is clearly potential for abuse of trust by ex-
change partners. Barnes (1981), for example, DEMO
that excessive levels of trust can result in exclusive and
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
dysfunctional reliance on soft DEMO than hard data to
inform decision making.'0 Finally, our understanding DEMO
the phenomenon of interorganizational trust and its con-
sequences would be greatly enhanced by a study of con-
textual antecedents of trust-such as the DEMO to which
exchange partners share similar organizational structures,
policies, and DEMO or cultures-and its immediate
outcomes such as negotiating costs, conflict, and rela-
tionship performance.
Concluding Remarks
Overall, our research makes several contributions to re-
search on relational exchange by examining the nature of
trust in DEMO dyads. Through the use of multiple
organizational respondents, our study recognizes DEMO dis-
tinction between interorganizational and interpersonal
trust. Although associated with each other, these con-
structs are shown to relate differently to costs of negoti-
ation and conflict in the interfirm relationship. Further,
enhanced supplier performance, lowered costs of nego-
tiation, and reduced conflict are shown to be related to
high levels of interorganizational trust.
Acknowledgments
A preliminary version of DEMO paper, entitled "With a Little Help from
My Friends: Exploring DEMO Links Between Interpersonal and Interor-
ganizational Trust," was presented at the Academy of Management
Meetings, Dallas, in August 1994. The authors are DEMO grateful to Phil
Bromiley, Larry Cummings, George John, Sue McEvily, Tom Murtha,
Peter Ring, N. Venkatraman, and Sri Zaheer for DEMO and sug-
gestions on previous versions of the paper. Clearly, those DEMO
are not responsible for its contents. The research was supported by
grants to the first author from the International Program Development
Office of the DEMO School of Management, University of Minnesota,
and from the Graduate DEMO Grants-in-Aid program of the University
of Minnesota. Both are gratefully acknowledged. Iris Leibowitz Dori
provided admirable research assistance. The National Association of
Purchasing Managers DEMO provided access to membership data.
Endnotes
'Whereas reliability includes an element DEMO trust as competence (Barber
1983), predictability simply refers to the DEMO of consistency in in-
tended behavior.
2Clearly, as one reviewer points DEMO, contextual factors other than trust
also may affect negotiation costs, such as the extent to which exchange
partners have similar organizational structures, policies, and mindsets
or cultures.
3We define exchange performance as the extent to which the supplier
has fulfilled the buyer's requirements in terms of DEMO, timeliness of
delivery, input quality, and supplier flexibility.
4We believe DEMO in buyer-supplier relationships, though there may be
a degree of congruence DEMO what the goals of the relationship are,
the buyer organization is the final arbiter of the extent to which ex-
change goals have DEMO met to a satisfactory degree.
5There is a well-established precedent for this approach in the orga-
nizational literature. Most importantly, Bagozzi and Phillips (DEMO)
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/Vol. 9, No. 2, March-April 1998
Does Trust Matter?
explicitly detail the use of the multitrait-multimethod (MTMM) matrix
DEMO two informants as different methods. As those authors indicate,
"[i]nformants DEMO and two are treated as methods" (p. 469).
6The test was carried out with data from the same respondent, thereby
providing a stronger test of discriminant validity than using data from
two different respondents DEMO interpersonal and interorganizational
trust, respectively. The latter approach is considered a DEMO stringent
test because method and trait variance are confounded.
7For each of the models estimated, we report four standard fit indices.
The goodness of fit index (GFI) reflects the relative amount of variance
and covariance DEMO explained by the model. The adjusted goodness
of fit index (AGFI) is the same as the GFI, but adjusts for the number
of degrees of freedom in the model. The normed fit index (NFI)
(Bentler and Bonett 1980) represents the point at which the model
DEMO evaluated falls on a scale from a null model (specifying mutual
DEMO among indicators) to a perfect fit. The comparative fit
index (CFI) (Bentler 1990) is similar to the NFI, but corrects for DEMO
sample size by subtracting the degrees of freedom from their corre-
sponding chi-square values. Each of these indices range from zero to
1.00, with values closer to 1.00 indicating a good fit. A commonly
accepted rule DEMO thumb is that a fit index should be greater than 0.90.
8In order to verify that these results are not a methodological artifact
we DEMO an additional analysis. We found a near identical pattern
of results using partial correlation analyses which is analogous to mul-
tiple regression analysis. Specifically, controlling for interorganiza-
tional trust we found that the partial correlation coefficient DEMO
interpersonal trust and conflict while negative, was nonsignificant (par-
tial correlation coefficient = - 0.09, p = 0.16) and the partial corre-
DEMO coefficient between interpersonal trust and costs of negotiation
was positive and marginally significant (partial correlation coefficient
= 0.15, p = 0.066). This DEMO of results is quite consistent with
those that we obtained using LISREL.
9The standardized beta coefficient for the squared term is - 1.273 (t-
value = -2.85; p < 0.01).
l?We are indebted to an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this point.
References
Anderson, E. and B. Weitz (1989), "Determinants of Continuity in
Conventional Industrial Channel Dyads," Marketing Science, 8,
4, 310-323.
Anderson, J. C. and DEMO W. Gerbing (1988), "Structural Equation Mod-
eling in Practice: DEMO Review and Recommended Two-Step Ap-
proach," Psychological Bulletin, 103, 411-423.
and J. A. Narus (1990), "A Model of Distributor Firm DEMO Man-
ufacturer Firm Working Partnership," Journal of Marketing, 54,
DEMO, 42-58.
Arrow, K. (1974), The Limits of Organizations, New York: Norton.
Bagozzi, R. P. (1993), "Assessing Construct Validity DEMO Personality
Research: Applications to Measures of Self-Esteem," Journal of
Research DEMO Personality, 27, 1, 49-87.
and T. F. Heatherton (1994), "A General Approach to Repre-
senting Multifaceted Personality Constructs: Application to DEMO
Self-Esteem," Structural Equation Modeling, 1, 35-67.
and L. W. Phillips (1982), "Representing and Testing Organi-
zational Theories: A Holistic Construal," Administrative Science
Quarterly, 27, 459-489.
, Y. Yi, and L. W. Phillips (1991), "Assessing Construct Validity
157
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
in Organizational Research," DEMO Science Quarterly,
36, 421-458.
Barber, B. (1983), The DEMO and Limits of Trust, New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press.
Barnes, L. B. (1981), "Managing the Paradox of Organizational Trust,"
Harvard Business Review, 59, 107-116.
Barney, J. B. and DEMO H. Hansen (1995), "Trustworthiness as a Source
of Competitive Advantage," Strategic Management Journal, 15,
Special Issue, 175-190.
Bentler, P. M. (1990), "Comparative Fit Indexes in Structural Models,"
Psychological Bulletin, 107, 238-246.
and D. G. Bonett, (1980), "Significance Tests and Goodness of
Fit in The Analysis of Covariance Structures," DEMO Bul-
letin, 88, 588-606.
Bradach, J. L. and R. G. DEMO (1989), "Price, Authority, and Trust:
From Ideal Types to Plural Forms," Annual Review of Sociology,
15, 97-118.
Bromiley, P. and L. L. Cummings (1995), "Transaction Costs in Or-
ganizations with Trust," in R. Bies, B. Sheppard, and R. DEMO
(Eds.), Research on Negotiation in Organizations, Greenwich,
CT: DEMO Press.
Campbell, D. T. and D. W. Fiske (1959), "DEMO and Discrimi-
nant Validation by the Multitrait-Multimethod Matrix," Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 56, 81-105.
Coase, R. (1937), "The Nature of the Filrm," Economica, 4, 386-405.
Coleman, J. S. (1990), DEMO Foundations of Social Theory, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Corazzini, R. (1977), "Trust as a Complex Multi-Dimensional Con-
struct," Psychological Reports, 40, 75-80.
Cummings, L. L. and P. Bromiley (DEMO), "The Organizational Trust
Inventory (OTI): Development and Validation," in R. N. Kramer
and T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations, Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Currall, S. C. and T. A. Judge (1995), "Measuring Trust Between Or-
ganizational Boundary Role DEMO," Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 64, 151-170.
Dilman, DEMO A. (1978), Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design
Method, New York: Wiley.
Dore, R. (1983), "Goodwill and the Spirit of Market Capitalism," Brit-
ish Journal of Sociology, 34, DEMO
Dwyer, F. R., P. H. Schurr, and S. Oh (1987), "Developing Buyer-
Seller Relationships," Journal of Marketing, 51, April, 11-27.
Fisher, R. and W. Ury (1991), Getting To Yes, New York: Penguin
Books.
Friedman, R. A. and J. Podolny (DEMO), "Differentiation of Boundary
Spanning Roles: Labor Negotiations and Implications for Role
Conflict," Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, March, 28-47.
Giddens, DEMO (1979), Central Problems in Social Theory: Action, Struc-
ture DEMO Contradiction in Social Analysis, Berkeley, CA: Uni-
versity of California DEMO
Granovetter, M. (1985), "Economic Action and Social Structure: The
Problem of Embeddedness," American Journal of Sociology, 91,
3, DEMO
Gulati, R. (1995), "Does Familiarity Breed Trust? The Implications of
Repeated Ties for Contractual Choice in Alliances," Academy of
Management DEMO, 38, 85-112.
Heide, J. B. and G. John (1988), "The Role of Dependence-Balancing
158
Does Trust
Matter?
in Safeguarding Transaction-Specific Assets in Conventional
Channels," Journal of Marketing, 52, 20-35.
and (1990), "Alliances in Industrial Purchasing: The De-
terminants of Joint DEMO in Buyer-Supplier Relationships,"
Journal of Marketing Research, 27, February, 24-36.
and A. S. Miner (1992), "The Shadow of the DEMO: Effects of
Anticipated Interaction and Frequency of Contact on Buyer-Seller
Cooperation," Academy of Management Journal, 35, 2, 256-29 1.
and R. DEMO Stump (1995), "Performance Implications of Buyer-
Supplier Relationships in Industrial Markets: A Transaction Cost
Explanation," Journal of Business Research, 32, 57-66.
Helper, S. and D. Levine (1992), "Long-Term Supplier Relations and
Product Market Structure," Journal of Law Economics and Or-
ganization, 8, 561-581.
John, G. (1984), "An Empirical Investigation of DEMO Antecedents of
Opportunism in a Marketing Channel," Journal of Marketing Re-
search, 21, 278-89.
Joreskog, K. G. (1971), "Statistical Analysis of Congeneric Tests,"
Psychometrika, 36, 109-133.
and D. Sorbom, (1989). LISREL 7. A Guide to the Piogram and
Applications (2nd edition), Chicago, IL: SPSS.
Katz, D. and R. Kahn (DEMO), The Social Psychology Of Organizations
(revised edition), New York: Wiley.
Kumar, N., L. W. Stem, and J. C. Anderson (DEMO), "Conducting In-
terorganizational Research Using Key Informants," Academy of
DEMO Journal, 36, 6, 1633-1651.
Lewis, J. D. and A. J. Weigert (1985a), "Trust as a Social Reality,"
Social Forces, 63, 966-985.
and (1985b), "Social Atomism, Holism, and DEMO," Socio-
logical Quarterly, 26, 455-471.
Luhmann, N. (1979), Trust and Power, New York: Wiley.
Macauley, S. (1963), "Non-contractual Relations in Business," Amer-
ican Sociological Review, 28, 55-67.
DEMO, I. R. (1980), The New Social Contract, New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Malmgren, H. (1961), "Information, Expectation, and the Theory of
the Firm," Quarterly Journal of Economics, DEMO, 399-421.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1992), Economics, Organization and Man-
agement, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Noordewier, T. DEMO, G. John, and J. R. Nevin (1990), "Performance
Outcomes of Purchasing Arrangements in Industrial Buyer-
Vendor Relationships," Journal of Marketing, 54, October, 80-
93.
Nunnally, J. (1978), Psychometric Theory, New York: McGraw Hill.
Parkhe, A. (1993), "Strategic Alliance DEMO: A Game Theoretic
and Transaction Cost Examination of Interfirm Cooperation,"
Academy of Management Journal, 36, 4, 794-829.
Pfeffer, J. (1982), Organizations and Organization Theory, Boston,
MA: Pitman.
Phillips, L. W. (1981), "Assessing Measurement Error in Key Infor-
mant Reports: A Methodological Note on Organizational Anal-
ysis in Marketing," Journal of DEMO Research, 18, 395-415.
Rempel, J. K. and J. G. Holmes (1986), "How Do I Trust Thee?"
Psychology Today, February, 28-34.
and M. P. Zanna (1985), "Trust in Close Relationships,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 95-112.
Ring, DEMO S. and A. H. Van de Ven (1992), "Structuring Cooperative
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VOl.
9, No. 2, March-April 1998
AKBAR ZAHEER, BILL McEVILY, AND VINCENZO PERRONE
Does Trust
Matter?
DEMO Between Organizations," Strategic Management
Journal, 13, 483-498.
and (1994), "Developmental Processes of Cooperative In-
terorganizational Relationships," Academy of Management DEMO
nal, 19, 90-118.
Rotter, J. B. (1971), "Generalized DEMO of Interpersonal Trust,"
American Psychologist, 26, 443-452.
Rousseau, D. M. (1985), "Issues of Level in Organizational Research,"
in L. L. Cummings and B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in Organi-
zational Behavior, 7, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1-37.
Sako, DEMO (1992), Prices, Quality, and Trust: Interfirm Relations in
Britain and Japan, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Shapiro, S. P. (DEMO), "The Social Control of Impersonal Trust," Amer-
ican Journal DEMO Sociology, 93, 3, 623-658.
Sitkin, S. B. and N. L. Roth (1993), "Explaining the Limited Effec-
tiveness of Legalistic 'Remedies' for Trust/Distrust," Organiza-
tion Science, 4, 3, 367-392.
DEMO, K. G., S. J. Carroll, and S. J. Ashford (1995), "Intra- and Inter-
organizational Cooperation: Toward a Research Agenda," DEMO
emy of Management Journal, 38, 7-23.
Van de Ven, A. DEMO and D. L. Ferry (1980), Measuring and Assessing
Organizations, New York: Wiley.
Venkatraman, N. (1989), "Strategic Orientation of Business DEMO
prises: The Construct, Dimensionality and Measurement," Man-
agement Science, DEMO, 8, 942-962.
Walker, G. (1994), "Asset Choice and DEMO Performance in Two
Organizations-US and Japanese," Organization Science, 5, 4,
583-593.
and D. Weber (1984), "A Transaction Cost Approach DEMO Make
Versus Buy Decisions," Administrative Science Quarterly, 29,
373-391.
DEMO, R. E. and R. B. McKersie (1965), A Behavioral Theory of
Labor Negotiations, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Williams, L. J. and J. T. Hazer (1986), "Antecedents and Consequences
of Satisfaction and Commitment DEMO Turnover Models: A Reanal-
ysis Using Latent Variable Structural Equation Methods," Journal
of Applied Psychology, 71, 2, 219-231.
and L. R. DEMO (1994), "Causal Models in Organizational Be-
havior Research: From DEMO Analysis to LISREL and Beyond,"
in J. Greenberg (Ed.), Organizational Behavior: The State of the
Science, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 181-205.
Williamson, 0. E. (1975), Markets and Hierarchies, New York: The
Free Press.
(1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: The
Free Press.
Zaheer, A. and N. Venkatraman. (1995), "Relational Governance as an
Interorganizational Strategy: An Empirical Test of the DEMO Tnist
in Economic Exchange," Strategic Management Journal, 19, 5,
373-392.
Zajac, E. J., and C. P. Olsen (1993), "DEMO Transaction Cost to Trans-
action Value Analysis: Implications for the Study DEMO Interorga-
nizational Strategies," Journal of Management Studies, 30, 1,
131-145.
Zucker, L. G. (1977), "The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Per-
sistence, 1840-1920," American Sociological Review, 42, 726-
743.
(1986), "Production of Trust: Institutional Sources of Economic
Structure, DEMO," in L. L. Cummings and B. M. Staw (Eds.),
Research in Organizational Behavior, 8, Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press, Inc, 53-111.
Accepted by Jay B. Barney; received June 26, 1995. This
paper has been with the authors
for three revisions.
159
ORGANIZATION
SCIENCE/DEMO
9, No. 2, March-April 1998{1g42fwefx}