TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY
AND SOFTWARE NEW
VENTURES’
PERFORMANCE:
EXPLORING THE
MODERATING EFFECT DEMO
THE COMPETITIVE
ENVIRONMENT
SHAKER A. ZAHRA
Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA
WILLIAM C. BOGNER
Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA
Technology strategy (TS) is one of the most important aspects of any ﬁrm’s
EXECUTIVE strategic posture especially in dynamic environments such as the computer
SUMMARY software industry. DEMO only do new ventures face the pressures that accom-
pany all young companies (e.g., shortages of capital), but they also have to
DEMO up with a rapid rate of technological change. Consequently TS, the DEMO
of a ﬁrm’s choices on how to develop and exploit its technological resources,
can profoundly affect a venture’s performance and survival.
This empirical DEMO examines the relationships between TS and new venture performance (NVP).
DEMO focusing on TS variables and analyzing their performance outcomes, the study DEMO insights into
the factors that can inﬂuence the success of new ventures in a fast-paced environment. This study also
examines key environmental moderators, those external environmental forces, which can signiﬁcantly
impact the strength or direction of the relationship between a ﬁrm’s TS and NVP.
Address correspondence to Dr. DEMO Zahra, Department of Management, College of Business Adminis-
tration, Georgia DEMO University, Atlanta, GA 30303, (404) 651-2894, (404) 651-2804 [fax].
This research is supported, in part, by a grant to DEMO ﬁrst author from the College of Business Administra-
tion at Georgia State University. We appreciate the constructive comments of the anonymous JBV reviewers,
DEMO Bantel, Robert C. Hill, Anders P. Nielsen, and Patricia H. DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing 15, 135–173
 1999 Elsevier Science Inc. DEMO rights reserved. 0883-9026/00/$–see front matter
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 PII S0883-9026(98)00009-3
136
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
The study examines ﬁve TSs that DEMO enhance NPV. The ﬁrst is radicality, which means developing
and introducing DEMO products ahead of competitors. The second is the intensity of product upgrades,
which refers to a venture’s commitment to introducing more reﬁnements and DEMO of its products
than its competition. The third is the level of R&D spending, which indicates a venture’s strong investment
in internal research and development activities. The fourth is the use of external technology sources (e.g.,
strategic alliances and licenses) to augment a ﬁrm’s own R&D efforts. The ﬁnal dimension is the use of
copyrights and other DEMO of protecting the venture’s intellectual property.
Environmental moderators examined in this paper were: dynamism, price hostility, non-price hostil-
ity, and heterogeneity. Dynamism DEMO the rate and continuity of change within an industry. Price
hostility indicates the intensity of rivalry in an industry based on costs and reduced DEMO Non-price
hostility indicates an emphasis on product quality and service as the key to success in an industry. Hetero-
geneity indicates the diversity of DEMO market segments in the new venture’s industry; a heterogeneous envi-
ronment DEMO has multiple segments with diverse needs and expectations.
To test the impact of environmental moderators on the efﬁcacy of TS, data were collected from
116 U.S.-based software ﬁrms. NVP was measured by return on equity (ROE) and growth of market
share (GMS). Overall, the results show that not all of the TS dimensions had a signiﬁcant effect on DEMO,
and that the relationships of these dimensions with NVP were moderated by the venture’s perceptions
of the external environment. Three dimensions of TS DEMO associated with both ROE and GMS: radical
new products, frequent product upgrades, and the use of external technology sources. Further, only fre-
DEMO product upgrades had a signiﬁcant impact under all four moderating conditions on both NVP
measures. New product radicality enhances both performance variables in dynamic DEMO; be-
yond that, it only has a signiﬁcant negative interaction with price hostility. R&D, however, is generally
not associated with strong DEMO ROE performance except in heterogeneous environments. Yet, for
GMS, R&D is a signiﬁcant variable except under dynamism. External technology sources also have DEMO
strong association with NVP, being insigniﬁcant only in the case of DEMO in situations of non-price hostil-
ity. Finally, the use of copyrights, patents and other means of protecting the company’s intellectual capital
is generally DEMO associated with NVP under different environmental conditions. In a dynamic environ-
ment, copyrights (and other means of intellectual property protection) appear to speed up the diffusion
of knowledge to rivals and therefore may not enhance DEMO performance.
The results also suggest that new ventures should pursue a formal technology strategy to achieve
successful performance. Those ventures that match their technological DEMO with their external environ-
ments are better positioned to achieve superior performance.  1999 Elsevier Science Inc.
INTRODUCTION
Technology plays a major role in DEMO the success of new ventures (Zahra 1996).
Technology, the sum of a ﬁrm’s knowledge and skills, determine the ability of new ven-
tures to offer the products (services), gain market acceptance, survive, and achieve ﬁ-
nancial success. To develop effective technology strategy, executives need to analyze
their ventures’ competitive setting, (Bettis and Hitt 1995). DEMO is important because
although some technological capabilities can improve performance within certain envi-
ronments, the same choices may lower performance in other environments (DEMO 1995;
Kodama 1995). The external environment, therefore, can moderate the relationship be-
tween a ﬁrm’s technological choices and its performance (Kerin, Varadarajan, and Pe-
terson 1992). Consequently, to be successful, DEMO venture’s technology strategy (TS)
should be “customized” to match the DEMO of its environment. Currently, there
is little evidence on the nature DEMO this moderating effect and how it impacts a ﬁrm’s
performance, a DEMO that has invited calls for empirical studies on this issue (e.g., Miller
1988; Zahra 1996).
To ﬁll this gap in the literature, this study examines how new ventures’ external
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
137
environments may moderate the DEMO between their TS and performance in the
U.S. software industry. Understanding this relationship is important because of the ven-
tures’ major role in creating DEMO and giving life to growth industries such as
software. New ventures, DEMO as ﬁrms that have been in existence for eight years
or less (Zahra 1996), also make signiﬁcant contributions to the economic progress of
the U.S.
TS is important for new ventures’ market survival and ﬁnancial DEMO Developing
new technologies, even breakthrough ones, is rarely sufﬁcient to survive and achieve
market success (McGrath 1994). New ventures, therefore, need also to employ effective
technological strategies that allow them to ﬁnancially beneﬁt DEMO their innovations
(McGee, Dowling, and Meggison 1995). Presently, the contributions of a comprehen-
sive TS to a venture’s proﬁtability and growth DEMO not well documented (Lefebvre et
al. 1992; Zahra 1996), a gap in the literature this study hopes to ﬁll.
The remainder of DEMO paper consists of three sections. First, the importance of un-
derstanding DEMO relationship between a venture’s environment and its TS is discussed.
Next, DEMO on the speciﬁc links between the dimensions of the venture’s external
environment, TS, and NVP are developed. This is followed by an empirical DEMO that
tested the hypotheses in the U.S. software industry. The study’s ﬁndings and their impli-
cations for managerial practice and future research are discussed DEMO the ﬁnal section
of the paper.
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES
Technological capabilities are among the most recognized determinants of the success
of new ventures (McGrath 1994), as they allow these ﬁrms to pursue those strategic
options DEMO can best maximize their chances for survival and achieve superior perfor-
mance (Zahra 1996). Developing these technological capabilities requires managers to
formulate and implement a TS based on the venture’s organizational and ﬁnancial re-
sources, market orientation (Dowling and McGee 1994), competitive goals (Zahra and
DEMO 1993), and external environment. This paper focuses on the relationship between
a venture’s external environment and its TS. Though the exact nature of DEMO relationship
remains unclear (Grant 1995), new ventures are usually more DEMO to their indus-
tries’ conditions than their established rivals. The evolution of the ventures’ technologi-
cal capabilities is also inﬂuenced by their external environments (Anderson and Tush-
man 1990; Pisano 1990). As new ventures analyze their industries, they usually become
aware of the opportunities and threats that exist in their markets. Successful ventures
are expected to invest in developing DEMO technological capabilities that best position
them in their industry (Nelson 1995)DEMO Therefore, this paper explores the impact of new
ventures’ external environment DEMO selecting their TS is therefore an important re-
search issue.
Managers’ perceptions of the external environment are expected to moderate the
relationship between a DEMO TS and its ﬁnancial performance. This means that the
interactions of the environment with TS are expected to be signiﬁcantly related to NVP.
To DEMO NVP, therefore, managers need to pursue technology strategies that best
match the conditions of their ﬁrms’ external environments. This is exceedingly difﬁcult
because DEMO dimensions of the ventures’ environments often impose conﬂicting
demands on these young companies. Through the direct relationship between the exter-
nal environment and company DEMO has been the subject of much discussion in
138 S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
the literature (Boyd et al. 1993; Dess and Beard 1994), there is agreement that mangers’
perceptions of their ﬁrm’s environment signiﬁcantly inﬂuences company performance
(Grant 1995). Consequently, DEMO study extends the literature by exploring the moderat-
ing effect impact of the environment on the TS-NVP relationship.
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY
There are ﬁve key DEMO of a new venture’s TS. Table 1 deﬁnes these dimensions
and explains their importance for successful performance. Although the relationships
between these dimensions are DEMO well understood, some of these dimensions appear to
be mutually supportive. DEMO example, companies that spend heavily on R&D frequently
introduce more DEMO to their markets, often develop radically innovative products,
and frequently DEMO more patents and copyrights (see Buzzell and Gale 1987). One
DEMO be cautious, however, in making broad generalizations about the nature of the
associations among the ﬁve TS dimensions. For example, heavy investments in R&D
may not always lead to frequent product introductions as internal DEMO inefﬁ-
ciencies, poor selection of research projects, and lack of attention to technology com-
mercialization can weaken the venture’s ability to develop or DEMO such products.
Thus, several factors can confound the pattern of associations DEMO a venture’s TS
dimensions and signiﬁcantly impact their associations with NVP. This study, therefore,
explores the moderating effect of the relationship between a venture’s external environ-
ment and ﬁve key TS dimensions. This examination offers DEMO basis for understanding
the interactions between the dimensions of a new venture’s TS variables.
PERCEPTIONS OF NEW VENTURE’S
ENVIRONMENTAL CHARACTERISTICS
The study focuses on DEMO managers’ perceptions of the external environment can mod-
erate the relationship of the TS dimensions with NVP. Although these perceptions do
not always reﬂect DEMO is seen as one “objective” characteristic of the environment
(Boyd et DEMO 1993), they are the interpretation that direct the venture’s TS choices (Adler
1989; Zahra 1996). Importantly, interpretive maps of the competition are developed
and shared in industries. These maps reﬂect perceived “industry recipes” DEMO represent
“shared . . . metaphors [and the] taken-for-granted assumptions [that] most describe a
cohesive industry’s character” (Huff 1982: 125). These shared DEMO guide the
formation of individual ventures’ strategies (Porac, Thomas, and DEMO 1989;
Reger and Huff 1993).
Researchers continue to disagree on the best way to conceptualize the environment
(e.g., Boyd et al. DEMO). Fortunately, the literature suggests three points that guided the
design DEMO the study. First, because environmental conditions vary signiﬁcantly from one
industry DEMO another (Dess and Beard 1984), controls for these variations are DEMO
This study accomplishes this by focusing on a single industry. Second, DEMO nature of the
environmental characteristics is inextricably linked to the stage of the industry’s evolu-
tion (Porter, 1980; Smith, Grimm, and Gannon 1993). To minimize the confounding
effects of these variations, therefore, DEMO study examines the software industry at one
point in time. Currently, DEMO industry is at the growth stage, as software growth in ship-
DEMO far exceeds the rate of growth in the national economy (U.S. DEMO Outlook
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 139
TABLE 1 Key Dimensions DEMO Technology Strategy (TS) and their Implications for New
Venture Performance
The literature highlights ﬁve dimensions, which are examined in this research: radicality, intensive new
product upgrades, R&D spending, the use of external DEMO, and the use of copyrights and other means
of intellectual capital DEMO This table deﬁnes each of these dimensions and highlights its importance
for NVP.
(1) Radicality. This dimension means that the ﬁrm will develop DEMO new product (or process) technolo-
gies and introduce them to the market ahead of the competition (Ali 1994). Radicality is evidenced
usually in the newness of the technology itself (as in the case of breakthroughs or paradigm shifts), or
in the newness of applications the DEMO offers to the customer. Radicality is important for
competitive and market success during the growth stage of the ﬁrm’s industry life cycle (ILC). Indeed,
using the PIMS database, Buzzell and Gale (1987: 203) reported that 49% of the industries in their
sample experienced “major changes in technology” during the growth stage of the ILC. However,
offering DEMO new technologies (products) can be risky because customers may not accept these
technologies. Firm must also invest heavily in educating customers. Also, there are no guarantees that
the technology embodied in the product (or process) will become the industry’s standard (Zahra et al.
1995). However, other companies can leapfrog their pioneering technology. Despite these limitations,
developing DEMO introducing radically new products can spell the difference between the success and
failure of the new venture. Radicality can give the venture a basis DEMO target lucrative market segments,
build a favorable market image and strong brand recognition, develop and control access to distribution
channels, and determine DEMO key success factors in an industry.
(2) Intensive Product Upgrades. This dimension of TS refers to the large number of revisions or extensions
DEMO the venture’s existing products. A company that scores high on this dimension is proliﬁc in introducing
frequent upgrades of its products, far surpassing its rivals in this regard. (Bell and McNamara 1991;
Brown and Eisenhardt 1995; McGrath 1994). These upgrades are key gaining market share, DEMO
customer loyalty (U.S. Industrial Outlook 1994), gaining access to distribution DEMO, and ensuring
proﬁtability (Buzzell and Gale 1987). Upgrades are important also for creating revenues to build a
venture’s competitive position. These upgrades DEMO serve as a credible market signal to rivals by
communicating the venture’s commitment to its industry. Finally, a full product line reinforces the
ﬁrm’s reputation among its customers, perpetuates its leadership position, and enriches its DEMO
(3) R&D Spending Levels. This variable refers to the intensity of the venture’s investment in internal
R&D activities (Adler 1989; DEMO and McGee 1994; Lefebvre et al. 1992; McCann 1991) by DEMO
the facilities, expertise, and skills needed for continuous innovation. As stated in the text, internal
R&D ensures ownership and control of key knowledge and enables the venture to proﬁtably exploit
its innovations. It also DEMO proprietary research platforms which lead to future success (Helfat 1994).
(4) External Sources. This TS dimension refers to the venture’s use of strategic alliances, acquisitions,
licensing agreements, and outright purchase of technology DEMO outside sources (Adler 1989; Dowling
and McGee 1994; Kotabe and DEMO 1995; Shan 1990). These sources can give the venture access DEMO a
large pool of technological capabilities that are necessary to develop new products, offset weaknesses
in the venture’s R&D, expedite product development, and offer opportunities for learning (Dodgson
1993). Alliances and licensing also allow the ﬁrm to bundle its particular technological advantage with
key product DEMO (features) developed by other ﬁrms, and quickly bring a large DEMO of new
products to the market.
(5) Copyrights and Other Means of Intellectual Capital Protection. Ventures can use several approaches
to protect their DEMO capital, including copyrights and trade secrets (Levin et al. 1987; DEMO
1995; Teece 1986; Zahra et al. 1995). These approaches can sometimes delay the diffusion of information
and give the venture a temporary DEMO over its discoveries. Copyrights are also among the venture’s
most valued assets because they enhance its reputation and strengthen its bargaining power with venture
DEMO as well as generate the funds needed for R&D and new product commercialization (Bell
and McNamara 1991).
Several problems arise when software new ventures attempt to use copyrights. First, applications for
copyrights can leak information about the ﬁrm’s discoveries (Grant 1995), which can lower the ﬁrm’s
competitive advantage. Information leakage can enable rivals to quickly respond to DEMO venture’s
discoveries, a factor that reduces the innovative venture’s lead time (Zahra et al. 1995) by enabling
rivals to innovate around the copyright. Second, there is a debate on the types of software activities
that can enjoy the protection of US copyright and patent laws (Zahra et al. 1995). Third, even when
the venture obtains a copyright, DEMO enforcement of the copyright laws is questionable (Liebeskind
1996). Companies DEMO individuals sometimes copy licensed software products and use them for purposes
other than those articulated in the licensing agreement (The Economist 1996).
140
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
TABLE 2 Dimensions of the External DEMO and Their Link to Technology
Strategy (TS)
Dynamism. Dynamism reﬂects DEMO the rate and unpredictability of change in the industry (Dess
and DEMO 1984). These changes result from the entry or exit of competitors, changes in customers’
needs, and shifts in technological conditions (Boyd et al. 1993). These changes create opportunities
and threats for new ventures DEMO compel their managers to act by building and leveraging
technological resources. The unpredictability of these changes can also inﬂuence managers’ invest-
ment in introducing DEMO products and timing of their release (Porter 1983). As Dess DEMO Beard
(1984: 56) conclude “Dynamism should be restricted to change DEMO is hard to predict and that
heightens uncertainty for key organizational members.”
Hostility. Hostility indicates an unfavorable business climate, such as the intense competition for
resources or market opportunities (Edelstein 1992; Iansiti 1995). Hostility DEMO from the existence
of too many competitors, unfavorable supply conditions, and strict regulation. Hostile environ-
ments are therefore resource-poor, lean environments (Aldrich DEMO); they lack the abundance
of resources and capacity needed to support a large number of companies (Dess and Beard 1984).
Competition in these environments can be based on price or non-price factors (Grant 1995).
Heterogeneity. Heterogeneity reﬂects the diversity of the market segments within an DEMO This
diversity results from the industry’s natural conditions and from the choices the companies
themselves make. As industries evolve, new segments emerge. Competing in these segments
usually requires knowledge and expertise by the company, as it has to address a large number
of environmentally interconnected sectors, a factor which can increase the managers’ perceptions
of the complexity of their environments. DEMO increases also because of companies’
strategic choices, especially the breadth of DEMO served markets and product offerings. Frequently,
this intensiﬁes managers’ perceptions of environmental complexity. Thus, the extent to which
the ﬁrm views its external environment as being heterogeneous depends on the industry’s variables
themselves and thee DEMO strategic choices.
1994). Consequently, the study’s hypotheses will focus on DEMO growth stage of the soft-
ware industry.
Third, three characteristics of DEMO ﬁrm’s external environment are acknowledged
in the literature and emphasized in this study: dynamism, hostility, and heterogeneity.
Although these characteristics reﬂect this industry’s objective conditions or result from
managerial enactment, the study emphasizes managers’ perceptions of these character-
istics because these perceptions activate TS choices (Zahra 1996) and other strategic
actions (Boyd et al. 1993) Software new ventures are expected to vary signiﬁcantly in
their perceptions of their environments because DEMO the wide range of software markets
in which they compete as well as their different information processing capabilities, ex-
periences, and resource endowments. DEMO 2 deﬁnes environmental muniﬁcence, com-
plexity, and dynamism. The hypotheses suggested by the literature about the moderat-
ing impact of these variables on DEMO associations between the different TS dimensions
and NVP are discussed next.
Dynamism and the TS-NVP Relationship
The importance of environmental dynamism stems from the DEMO that both the rapid rate
of technological change and the rising speed of diffusion of new ideas and technologies
(Bettis and Hitt 1995) DEMO serious challenges to new ventures. However, ventures fre-
quently lack the DEMO product lines or the resources necessary to keep up with
the speed of technological evolution. This is especially true in high technology industries
such DEMO software where new ventures need to build and leverage their technological
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 141
capabilities in order to DEMO high NVP. Moreover, as Smith et al. (1993) observe,
DEMO uncertainty arising from dynamism is usually confounded by incomplete informa-
tion about rivals’ abilities and resources. Hence, “ﬁrms will often be forced to act and
respond blindly, motivated by a fear of losing ground” (Smith DEMO al. 1993: 126). These
responses often entail considerable imitation. However, given the absence of dominant
technological standards, the stakes are high for those ventures that hope to survive.
New ventures must differentiate themselves from DEMO, hoping to create an industry
standard. Accordingly, as concluded by Porac and Thomas (1990), the competitive chal-
lenge facing software ventures is twofold: to differentiate themselves from the competi-
tion (to develop an DEMO standard) and to imitate (to avoid missteps with the mar-
ket). This section outlines the TS choices expected to enhance NVP in DEMO dynamic
environment.
Radicality
Dynamic industries, such as software, usually encourage the development of radically
new products and technologies (Ali 1994) in order DEMO capture premium market seg-
ments, or preempt competitors’ entry (Utterback 1994). Developing and introducing
radically new products is a proactive, aggressive attempt to push out the edge of the
technological frontier in an industry DEMO a regular basis (Kerin et al. 1992). By developing
and DEMO radically new products, a new venture can inﬂuence its industry’s evolu-
DEMO by shaping product design and conﬁguration (Porter 1985), and establishing DEMO
rules of competition.
In a dynamic environment, a new venture should DEMO develop and introduce
radically new products, as any gains will quickly DEMO diffused to rivals and its advantages
lost. Indeed, those ventures that DEMO as technological followers may have difﬁculty sus-
taining a high level of performance over time. Technological followers can sometimes
gain the necessary knowledge to DEMO a viable substitute quickly, which reduces the
costs of developing radically DEMO products (Kerin et al. 1992). However, by the time
the follower has reached the market the rapid pace of technological change will DEMO
pushed the frontier further out. Consequently, the speed with which the DEMO is cop-
ied is usually offset by the speed with which that technology advances. Similarly, the
occasional development and introduction of radically new products may produce only
short periods of economic rents prior to diffusion, followed by a return to mediocre
levels of performance. A TS based on DEMO moving or the occasional introduction
of radically new products therefore is better suited for a more stable environment
(Miller and Friesen 1984). In a dynamic environment, however, developing and intro-
ducing radically new products DEMO a regular basis is expected to improve NVP by enabling
the venture to repeatedly target premium segments, build high market shares (Buzzell
and DEMO 1987), and achieve market leadership (Golder 1993; Tellis 1993). Despite the
risks inherent in this strategy, the development and introduction of radically new prod-
ucts can improve proﬁtability and GMS in a dynamic DEMO Therefore:
H1a1: In a dynamic environment, developing and introducing radically new prod-
ucts will be positively associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
DEMO: In a dynamic environment, developing and introducing radically new prod-
ucts will be positively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
142 S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
Intensive Product Upgrades
In a dynamic DEMO, the venture that introduces more products to the market
can achieve DEMO NVP, despite the high costs associated with these activities. Some
of DEMO products may be radically new offerings as described above in H1a, DEMO exten-
sions or upgrades of existing products, the focus of this DEMO A large number of prod-
uct upgrades can also increase the likelihood of having a successful product at any given
time period. Over time, this stream of successful hits through successive upgrades as-
sures steady proﬁts, which generates the cash ﬂow needed to support the venture’s R&
DEMO efforts. Ventures with relatively few product hits can not sustain high NVP because,
in a dynamic environment, few products last long as big money makers because of the
rapid diffusion and imitation. As a result, the ﬁnancial gains from any single new product
introduction in a dynamic DEMO may be short-lived.
A lack of constant hits can also undermine the venture’s bargaining power with
down-stream channels that sometimes help maintain marginal products. DEMO con-
straints are particularly critical for young ﬁrms which often lack established relation-
ships or other assets that could be leveraged in lieu of DEMO strong product line. Also, if
several ﬁrms compete by offering a DEMO number of new products through upgrades,
the quantity of their competitive offerings may make it impossible for all ﬁrms to realize
economic rents DEMO this strategy. Thus, in a dynamic environment, frequent product
upgrades and extensions are necessary to capitalize on the changes in a ﬁrm’s industry
DEMO achieve proﬁtability and GMS (Hambrick 1983; Iansiti 1995). Therefore:
H1b1: In a dynamic environment, intensive product upgrades will be positively DEMO
ciated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
H1b2: In a dynamic environment, intensive product upgrades will be positively asso-
ciated with a new venture’s DEMO
R&D Spending Levels
Dynamism also creates many opportunities for growth and proﬁtability (Utterback
1994). Consequently, new ventures in dynamic industries need DEMO develop and introduce
many products to build market share and gain access to vital distribution channels. How-
ever, exploiting these opportunities requires strong and patient R&D investments (Por-
ter 1985) as well as continuous DEMO
Strong R&D investments in maintaining state-of-the-art facilities and excellent re-
searchers are especially important for building the venture’s technological competen-
cies, the keys to sustained proﬁtability and GMS (Bogner and Thomas 1996). Internal
R&D also ensures the venture’s ownership and control of key knowledge, and gives
the venture the ability to proﬁtably exploit its technological developments and DEMO
proprietary research platforms that lead to future success. Internal R&D is important
also because technological knowledge usually develops in a path-dependent way (Dosi
1988), and the knowledge gained at any one point in time DEMO a foundation for
later R&D efforts. If R&D investments in such platforms are nurtured and properly
safeguarded over time, then NVP can increase.
The high speed with which technology shifts and the rapid pace DEMO knowledge diffu-
sion in a dynamic environment usually combine to require high investments in internal
R&D activities (Dodgson 1991, 1993). Similarly, ﬁrms in dynamic industries also recog-
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 143
nize the possibility of DEMO diffusion (Mansﬁeld, Schwartz, and Wagner 1981), which
can weaken DEMO competitive position of those ventures that may not have built strong
technological platforms. Unless new ventures invest heavily in internal R&D, their via-
bility becomes questionable (Bell and McNamara 1991). Conversely, those ventures
DEMO invest heavily in R&D can establish a strong competitive position, DEMO market
share, and achieve proﬁtability.1 Therefore:
H1c1: In a dynamic environment, R&D spending will be positively associated with
a new venture’s proﬁts.
H1c2: In a dynamic environment, R&D spending will be DEMO associated with
a new venture’s GMS.
External Sources of Technology
Increasingly, DEMO ventures that compete in dynamic environments are pressured to ex-
plore external sources of technologies (Shan 1990; Teece 1986). As noted in DEMO 1,
new ventures can combine technologies secured from external sources with internal re-
sources to offer radically new products or upgrade existing ones. DEMO bundling of exter-
nal and internal technologies can enhance the venture’s capacity to introduce highly
differentiated products quickly and economically (McGrath 1994). Further, given that
rapid technological change increases results in rapid obsolescence, new DEMO should
make use of external sources. Besides, in this environment, the variety of internal re-
source bases found among new ﬁrms reduces the DEMO of a single ﬁrm being able to
capture all or even many of the key thrusts that are occurring in a given market at DEMO
one time.
Although the use of external sources can sometimes reduce the proﬁts earned on
a given product (due to royalties or proﬁt sharing with partners), this strategy can in-
crease the regularity of generating DEMO hits and ensure the stability of cash ﬂow.
This strategy also allows those new ﬁrms possessing a key piece of technology to plug
into DEMO pull out of alliances and other arrangements in response to changes in their
market or the performance of their partners. This can give a DEMO venture ﬂexibility in
meeting the demands of its external environment. Clearly, DEMO is advantageous for new
ventures to gain and seek access to a larger, more diverse pool of technological capabili-
ties through external linkages and partnerships (Tyler and Steensma 1995).
The above observations support Link and Tassey’s (1987) argument that environ-
mental dynamism is conducive to the DEMO and licensing of externally-generated
technologies. They also support Auster’s (1992) ﬁnding that technological linkages are
highest in emerging, dynamic industries. Likewise, they DEMO Hagedoorn’s (1993)
conclusion that alliances aimed at technological complementarity and DEMO the
1 The relationship between R&D spending and new venture proﬁtability is complex. In a dynamic
environment, low R&D spending does not support the ﬁrm’s effort to create a sustainable competitive advan-
tage. But DEMO the new venture increases its R&D spending, its proﬁts are DEMO to rise until a point of diminishing
returns is reached and proﬁts decline. Higher R&D investments do not always generate new products that
DEMO be quickly commercialized. Also, in a dynamic environment the odds are DEMO that the ﬁrm will generate
many products that will become huge money makers. Thus, a non-linear relationship might exist between
R&D and proﬁts. Therefore, to determine whether this non-linear relationship exists in the current data,
the squared term for R&D spending was entered into the DEMO step of the regression analysis for both
ROE and market share growth. The results did not support this non-linear relationship. Still, because the
results may be industry speciﬁc, future researchers should determine whether the relationship between R&
D investment and venture performance is non-linear.
144 S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
product development cycle are more prevalent DEMO the dynamic than in stable environ-
ments. Hagedoorn notes that partnerships are especially important in the software in-
dustry as a means for gaining DEMO to the multiple technologies necessary for the devel-
opment of advanced applications. Besides broadening a venture’s product offerings,
external technology sources can offset DEMO in the venture’s internal R&D and
give it major opportunities for learning about the competition (Dodgson 1993).
Therefore:
H1d1: In DEMO dynamic environment, the use of external technology sources will be posi-
DEMO associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
H1d2: In a dynamic environment, the use of external technology sources will be posi-
tively associated with DEMO new venture’s GMS.
Patents, Copyrights, and Other Means of Protection of Intellectual Capital
Dynamism is expected to encourage a new venture to copyright DEMO patent its innovations
and safeguard them against abuses by rivals. Patents and copyrights can give the venture
some control over the fate of its DEMO which it can exploit through licensing agree-
ments or other means. They also enhance the venture’s reputation, strengthen its bar-
gaining power with venture capitalists, and obtain the funds necessary to support inter-
nal R&D (Bell and McNamara 1991). Patents and copyrights are useful also in joining
strategic alliances, while protecting the venture’s intellectual property, which increases
DEMO new venture’s ability to gain market share and achieve growth.
However, DEMO researchers argue that the legal protection of the venture’s intellec-
tual assets is time consuming and expensive and is of little value in fast DEMO indus-
tries such as software. The time and expense of obtaining such protection, the speed
of technological diffusion (Liebskind 1996; Saxenian 1990), and the difﬁculty and ex-
pense of detecting infringement all cast doubts DEMO the wisdom of this strategy (Mansﬁeld
et al. 1981; Rogers and Rogers 1984). Besides, both patents and copyrights are usually
narrowly deﬁned and have a limited life (Liebskind 1996). The present study, DEMO,
provides an opportunity to test the opposing views on the value of copyrights in a critical,
dynamic industry. To ensure completeness, however, the hypothesis will be stated here
(and in subsequent sections addressing DEMO environmental moderators) following the
conventional wisdom. Therefore:
H1e1: In a dynamic environment, the use of patents, copyrights and other means
of DEMO intellectual capital will be positively associated with a new ven-
ture’s proﬁts.
H1e2: In a dynamic environment, the use of patents, copyrights, DEMO other means of
protecting intellectual capital will be positively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
Hostility and the TS-NVP Relationship
A second consideration in DEMO the venture’s TS is hostility (Iansiti 1995), which
often pressures DEMO to pursue conservative choices. As noted in Table 2, hostile
environments DEMO characterized by limited resources and intense competition. They are
lean, non-muniﬁcent DEMO (Dess and Beard 1984), where new ventures must
work hard DEMO achieve survival.
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 145
Hostility can manifest itself DEMO two distinct ways: price and non-price competition.
According to Grant (1995), during the early stages of the industry cycle, companies com-
pete based on technological innovation (e.g., product radicality). However, as the indus-
try becomes more established, competition usually shifts to price-related (Porter DEMO)
concerns where “[t]echnological competition may still be important, but the DEMO
is on the use of technology to obtain low costs and quality advantage” (Grant 1995:
240). The nature of hostility, like DEMO perceived environmental characteristics, varies
by the stage of the ﬁrm’s industry DEMO cycle.
The distinction between price and non-price hostility is critical, as DEMO venture’s
competitive responses and product features may vary considerably by the type of hostil-
ity that dominates the market (Porter 1980). When price-related hostility is high, cus-
tomers typically demand product functionality and efﬁciency. Consequently, a venture’s
strategic responses will typically center on reducing costs or charging low prices, because
successful NVP requires effective cost containment strategies (Grant DEMO). By contrast,
offering valued product features (e.g., image) DEMO be more important than cost manage-
ment when non-price hostility prevails. In this environment, an effective TS will typically
center on building the skills that imbue those distinctive qualities that customers demand.
Consequently, hostility will moderate the TS-NVP relationship, as discussed next.
Radicality
As environmental hostility rises, DEMO development and introduction of radically new
products will decline as new ventures will compete primarily as technological followers
(Ali 1994; Kerin et al. DEMO). One reason is that hostility usually reduces the resources
available for the venture’s radical product development activities (Miller and Friesen
1984). Also, since radically new products usually represent a major departure from exist-
ing and known product attributes, the high risks and high costs associated with their
development might not be an acceptable risk to venture managers as DEMO failure of these
products can cause the demise of the young ﬁrm. Consequently, under these conditions,
venture managers might conclude that developing radically new products is a high-risk
strategy whose costs outweigh potential beneﬁts.
The DEMO to refrain from developing and introducing radically new products will
grow as hostility rises. When price hostility is high, the combination of tight margins
and limited cash ﬂows will frequently discourage these efforts, as found by Ettlie and
Bridges (1982) who reported a negative association between price DEMO and radical
product innovations. This decline may result from competitive price pressures that push
excess proﬁts in the industry to bid down to commodity DEMO Likewise, in a market
where strong non-price competition prevails, the demand for upgrades, enhanced ser-
vice, and other value additions will increase DEMO new venture’s expenses. Even if higher
prices can be obtained, the DEMO costs incurred to ensure product differentiation through
radical innovation will reduce the venture’s proﬁts. Therefore:
H2a1: In an environment with high price hostility, developing and introducing radi-
cally new products will be negatively associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
H2a2: In an environment with high non-price hostility, developing and introducing
radically new products will be negatively associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
Besides reducing the proﬁts to be gained from radically DEMO products, hostility may
146
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
inhibit GMS. Price hostility lowers the DEMO proﬁt margins and reduces the cash
available to develop and market radically new products. In the absence of radically new
products, however, attempts DEMO move competition away from a price-based rivalry and
grow beyond the ﬁrm’s current size will be stiﬂed. High price-based hostility often sig-
nals that DEMO are not searching for signiﬁcant qualitative differences among com-
peting products. With their needs being satisﬁed by existing products, customers usually
stress prices in making their purchasing decisions. In markets where non-price hostility
prevails, however, DEMO situation is reversed. Although the bulk of radical product inno-
vation will be devoted to defending existing market positions, radicality can become a
foundation for the ﬁrm’s GMS as innovative products will be rewarded by those DEMO
seeking non-price distinctiveness among competing product offerings. Therefore:
H2a3: In DEMO environment with high price hostility, developing and introducing radi-
cally new DEMO will be negatively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
H2a4: In DEMO environment with high non-price hostility, developing and introducing
radically new products DEMO be positively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
Intensive Product Upgrades
To succeed in a hostile environment, a new venture should also upgrade its products
by quickly modifying or extending its existing offerings (Iansiti 1995). Upgrades can
enable the venture to maintain customer loyalty without incurring substantial DEMO in
designing, testing, and developing radically new products. However, as DEMO earlier,
even with frequent product upgrades, a new venture might DEMO achieve signiﬁcant gains
in proﬁts because product upgrades are costly. In this environment, the venture must
work hard to simply remain aﬂoat and will just as likely invest heavily in building its
distribution channels, advertising or expanding its marketing activities (Porter 1980).
For a young ﬁrm, DEMO, this spending usually amounts to a higher percentage of
sales than DEMO its established rivals. In a market with high price hostility, these DEMO
create a “squeeze”, as lower prices and increased expenses greatly reduce DEMO venture’s
proﬁt margins. These added expenses can lower a ﬁrm’s net gains from upgrades (Brown
and Eisenhardt 1995). However, such demand for DEMO upgrades is often helpful to
ﬁrms in a non-price-hostile environment, where DEMO allow ﬁrms to charge premium
prices, retain customer loyalty, and capture additional market shares. Therefore:
H2b1: In an environment with high price hostility, intensive product upgrades will
be negatively associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
H2b2: In an environment with high non-price hostility, intensive product DEMO
will be positively associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
Growth in the venture’s sales and market share will also beneﬁt from offering fre-
quent DEMO upgrades, in both price and non-price hostile environments. When com-
petition DEMO price-based, introducing product upgrades that are ﬁne tuned to variations
in DEMO preferences can add costs that reduce the venture’s proﬁts. However, these
DEMO may be the only way by which the venture can achieve sales growth. In
this environment, any price cuts to increase GMS will be quickly matched by rivals and,
as argued above, radically new products are neither rewarded by the customers nor eco-
nomically feasible. Similarly, the frequent introduction of product upgrades can in-
crease the venture’s share where DEMO hostility is intense. Such upgrades will be
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 147
highly demanded and customers DEMO reward those ventures that are quick to respond
to market changes with GMS. Thus:
H2b3: In an environment with high price hostility, DEMO product upgrades will
be positively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
H2b4: In an environment with high non-price hostility, intensive product upgrades
will DEMO positively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
R&D Spending Level
Given the limited opportunities available in a hostile environment, managers are ex-
pected to lower their R&D investments. Believing that heavy R&D spending DEMO the
venture at ﬁnancial risk. This will be particularly true when hostility is price-based, proﬁt
margins are low, and the market does not DEMO radically new products. If the venture
maintains an aggressive R&D program, then it risks diluting its resources without
achieving satisfactory returns on its investments. Buzzell and Gale (1987) and Scherer
and Huh (1992) DEMO previously found this to be true among established companies
competing in hostile environments. Consistent with these ﬁndings, new ventures in a
hostile environment are expected to reduce their R&D spending in order to obtain
higher DEMO Similarly, in markets where non-price hostility prevails, incremental in-
novation is expected to replace developing radically new products as a primary means
for DEMO and maintaining customer loyalty (Utterback 1994; Prusa and Schmitz 1994).
Thus, the overall relationship between the venture’s R&D spending and proﬁt should
be positive in markets where non-price competition exists because customers usually
DEMO innovation. Therefore:
H2c1: In an environment with high price hostility, intensive R&D spending will be
negatively associated with a new venture’s DEMO
H2c2: In an environment with high non-price hostility, intensive R&D spending will
be positively associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
The relationship DEMO R&D spending and a ﬁrm’s GMS is also expected to vary
by the type of the hostility a ﬁrm may experience. Price hostility DEMO rewards
R&D. As mentioned above, product upgrades are conducive to DEMO GMS in a price-
sensitive market. Also, in this environment, all R&D expenditures come from pressured
margins and may take funds away DEMO the marketing and distribution efforts that can
increase the venture’s sales volume, the key to proﬁtability in a low-margin business
(Porter 1980). DEMO, on balance, R&D spending will be negatively associated with
growth in a market with high price hostility. The opposite is expected to DEMO true with
high non-price hostility, where R&D can promote incremental DEMO radical product inno-
vations as a means of ensuring customer satisfaction. Thus, under high non-price hostil-
ity, high R&D spending can promote DEMO Therefore:
H2c3: In an environment with high price hostility, intensive R&D spending will be
negatively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
DEMO: In an environment with high non-price hostility, intensive R&D spending will
be positively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
148
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
External Technology Sources
Although hostility usually DEMO new ventures to lower their R&D spending, it may
also DEMO them to offset this with increases in their use of external sources of tech-
nology (Kotabe and Swan 1995). External sources can give the ventures quick access
to multiple technologies (Dodgson 1993), shorten new product development cycles, and
reduce the high risks associated with new product development efforts. External sources
can also help new ventures safeguard against competence DEMO changes in their
industry (Tushman and Anderson 1986) by licensing technologies from other ﬁrms, in-
stead of relying solely on internal R&D (Link and Tassey 1987). They can also reduce
the uncertainty associated with technology development and quicken the ventures’ re-
sponses to changing market DEMO When price hostility is high, customers become
experienced and their expectations DEMO all ﬁrms rise (Porter 1980). When the costs
and risks DEMO product development are shared with alliance partners, new ventures’
proﬁtability improves. DEMO, in markets where non-price competition is ﬁerce, new
ventures’ can bundle their product traits with those of their partners, which can also
increase proﬁts. Therefore:
H2d1: In an environment with high price hostility, DEMO use of external technology
sources will be positively associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
H2d2: In an environment with high non-price hostility, the DEMO of external technol-
ogy sources will be positively associated with a new venture’s proﬁts.
Technology partnerships can also positively inﬂuence a venture’s GMS. Under
DEMO of high price competition, new ventures that ﬁnd ways to share DEMO costs of
technology will have more free cash for building and supporting their distribution and
marketing activities. Thus, the ventures’ resources can be dedicated to broadening the
sales base, building sales volume, cutting unit costs, and achieving further growth. In-
deed, this is the “textbook” case of Porter’s low-cost leadership advantage (1980). Un-
der non-price hostility, new DEMO that can lever-up their product attributes with
those of their technology alliance partners will out-grow those ﬁrms that lack such part-
nerships. Alliances also DEMO new ventures to bring to their markets new products
that few, DEMO any, ﬁrms could develop and introduce on their own. Under high DEMO
hostility, customers usually reward such combinations and the ventures’ market shares
DEMO accordingly. Therefore:
H2d3: In an environment with high price hostility, the use of external technology
sources will be positively associated with a DEMO venture’s GMS.
H2d4: In an environment with high non-price hostility, the use of external technol-
ogy sources will be positively associated with a DEMO venture’s growth.
Patents, Copyrights, and the Protection of Intellectual Capital
In a hostile environment, rivals usually have an incentive to copy the new venture’s
products or reverse engineer them. Imitation of competitors’ products can reduce DEMO
costs and risks associated with internal new product development. However, by DEMO
copyrights, patents, or similar approaches, the venture can reduce its DEMO ability to
copy its products and control the conditions under which a competitor gains access to
its technologies. In the software industry, having copyrights or patents can also give a
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 149
venture a temporary monopoly (Levin, Klevorick, Nelson, and Winter 1987) and en-
hance the DEMO ability to introduce and proﬁtably exploit its new technology. A
new venture that holds a copyright can also license its technology to other ﬁrms DEMO
generate revenues, or enter strategic alliances and gain access to other DEMO innovative
technologies. However, as noted earlier, the high costs of both registration and enforce-
ment of copyrights and other means of legally protecting DEMO intellectual capital have
led some to question the wisdom of this strategy (Liebeskind 1996). Also, the knowledge
covered in these patents and DEMO are difﬁcult to protect because it is difﬁcult to
detect its illegal use (Liebeskind 1996). In this environment, imitation of rivals’ products
DEMO common (Porter 1980). Thus, the conventional wisdom should be tested in this study
to establish if these efforts increase a venture’s ability DEMO build market share and offer
distinctive products that improve performance.
When high price hostility exists, distinctive product features are not part of the
competitive bundle and customers usually focus primarily on price in making their buy-
DEMO decisions. In this setting, copyright and patents can leak important information DEMO the
competition about the venture’s innovations and, consequently, reduce the venture’s
overall proﬁts. However, when non-price hostility is high, the situation becomes DEMO
ier, as those features and traits that enhance product differentiation become DEMO key
source of a venture’s competitive advantage and proﬁts. If patents and copyrights are
effective, their use should increase a venture’s proﬁts. Therefore:
H2e1: Under high price hostility, the use of patents, copyrights, DEMO other ap-
proaches to protect the new venture’s intellectual capital will be negatively associated
with the venture’s proﬁts.
H2e2: Under high non-price hostility, DEMO use of patents, copyrights, and other ap-
proaches to protect the new venture’s intellectual capital will be positively associated
with the venture’s proﬁts.
DEMO and copyrights can also determine the growth of new ventures, depending
DEMO the type of hostility that dominates the market. When price hostility is high, the use
of patents and copyrights only adds costs and takes the scarce cash resources that the
venture’s thin proﬁt margins do provide DEMO from investments in those capabilities
that usually drive growth in such a market such as distribution systems. Conversely,
conventional wisdom suggests that the DEMO in which the cash ﬂow that fuels GMS in
hostile environment is through the aggressive protection of the venture’s innovations
(Liebeskind 1996). Therefore:
H2e3: Under high price hostility, the use of patents, copyrights, and other ap-
proaches to protect the new venture’s intellectual capital will be negatively associated
with high GMS.
H2e4: Under high non-price hostility, DEMO use of patents, copyrights, and other ap-
proaches to protect the new venture’s intellectual capital will be positively associated
with high GMS.
Heterogeneity DEMO the TS-NVP Relationship
As noted in Table 2, heterogeneity indicates the DEMO complexity of the venture’s
external environment (Boyd et al. 1993), DEMO on the multiplicity of the factors that
150 S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
a venture must address. This section DEMO heterogeneity’s potential moderating im-
pact on the TS-NVP relationship.
Radicality
A key source of perceived heterogeneity is the emergence of multiple segments in an
DEMO because of changes in customer needs and expectations (Slater and Narver
DEMO), particularly during the introductory and growth stages of an industry’s life cycle
(Grant 1995; Porter 1980). The emergence of these segments DEMO encourage new ven-
tures to redeﬁne their markets by pursuing aggressive radical product introductions.
These innovations are likely to be proﬁtable because the ﬁrm DEMO target new customer
groups and position its products as the “industry standard,” which can also stimulate
GMS. Therefore:
H3a1: In a heterogeneous environment, developing and introducing radically new
products will be positively associated with a new venture’s proﬁt.
H3a2: In a heterogeneous environment, developing and DEMO radically new
products will be positively associated with a new venture’s GMS.
Intensive Product Upgrades
In a heterogeneous environment, frequent incremental product upgrades can also help
the venture capture new market segments and respond quickly to DEMO in the needs
of its customers. A venture can offer frequent upgrades of its existing products or target
new segments by using existing or DEMO products (Grant 1995), which can increase
the venture’s market shares. DEMO upgrades and extensions also permit the ventures
to target new segments and achieve high proﬁts and growth. Prior research, using data
from established companies, has reached a similar conclusion (Miller 1987). Therefore:
H3b1: In a heterogeneous environment, intensive product upgrades will be posi-
tively associated with the venture’s proﬁts.
H3b2: In a heterogeneous environment, intensive product DEMO will be posi-
tively associated with the new venture’s GMS.
R&D Spending Levels
A new venture that competes in an heterogeneous environment is DEMO to continue
its innovation intensively and capitalize on emerging opportunities in an industry while
maintaining the loyalty of its existing customers (Zahra et al. 1995). Continuous innova-
tion also requires a new venture to invest DEMO in internal R&D activities, and develop
those products that can DEMO large enough segments that will support the venture’s
GMS objectives. Consequently, DEMO this environment, strong investments in R&D can
improve NVP by DEMO new customers and retaining the loyalty of existing seg-
ments. For those ventures that compete through radical product innovation, strong
R&D investments can improve proﬁtability and GMS. Therefore:
H3c1: In a heterogeneous environment, DEMO&D spending will be positively associated
with a new venture’s proﬁts.
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 151
H3c2: In a heterogeneous environment, R&D spending will be positively associated
with a new venture’s GMS.
External Technology Sources
In a heterogeneous environment, a new venture needs to obtain new and diverse techno-
logical capabilities, which can be quickly and efﬁciently achieved by entering strategic
alliances and using other external technology DEMO (Hagedoorn 1993). These sources
gain importance as the environment becomes DEMO heterogeneous, because no single
ﬁrm can possess all required technologies to DEMO customers’ needs. Given that hetero-
geneity makes learning a time consuming process (Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995), the use
of external technology sources can also improve the venture’s technological capabilities
and quicken its responsiveness to the DEMO New ventures that make good use of exter-
nal technology sources by creating new products or upgrading existing ones can acquire
additional market shares DEMO achieve higher proﬁts. Therefore:
H3d1: In a heterogeneous environment, emphasis on the use of external sources of
technology is positively associated with DEMO new venture’s proﬁts.
H3d2: In a heterogeneous environment, emphasis on the use of external sources of
technology is positively associated with a new DEMO GMS.
Patents, Copyrights, and the Protection of Intellectual Capital
In a heterogeneous environment, any product—whether protected by copyright (or pat-
ented) or not—can command only a small portion of the market, which can limit the
venture’s ﬁnancial beneﬁts. A strong copyright or a patent can at DEMO sustain a niche
position, and the returns to the venture’s copyright DEMO be limited because of the narrow
scope of the copyright. Even if the protected product is superior to its close substitutes,
the percentage DEMO the overall market made up of all substitutes will be small. Also, how
rivals respond to the venture’s copyrights (patents) will affect the gains a venture can
achieve. In this environment, where the differences in product from one segment to
another are relatively small, rivals have an incentive to imitate each others’ products,
which can lower the value DEMO the copyright for the innovative ﬁrm. Yet, heterogeneity
encourages competitors to DEMO their resources to one of the other segments in the
market, DEMO of challenging the copyright holder’s superior products. Thus, a small
market DEMO exist for each copyright holder, but there also is a reduced DEMO for
rivals to challenge that position. Although the outcomes of each competitive contest
will be determined on a case-by-case basis, conventional wisdom would suggest that
those ventures that hold copyrights (or patents) are likely to DEMO additional market
shares and achieve higher GMS and proﬁtability. Therefore:
H3e1: In a heterogeneous environment, the use of patents, copyrights, and DEMO
means of protecting intellectual property will be positively associated with a new
venture’s proﬁts.
H3e2: In a heterogeneous environment, the use of patents, copyrights, and other
means of protecting intellectual property will be positively associated with a new
venture’s GMS.
152
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
METHOD
The U.S. software industry offered DEMO interesting setting in which to test the study’s
hypotheses, it has DEMO one of the most proliﬁc in new product development and intro-
duction (Prusa and Schmitz 1994). The phenomenal growth of the industry has also en-
couraged the creation of companies that depend heavily on commercializing DEMO prod-
ucts, which has spurred further innovation and encouraged market aggressiveness
DEMO companies. This union of technology and marketing has made the software in-
dustry one of the most dynamic and ﬁercely competitive arenas. Ventures have DEMO
sponded to these challenges by developing new markets and attracting new customers,
which has further increased the perceived heterogeneity of the industry. The DEMO range
of software markets offers a variety of competitive contexts, all DEMO the conﬁnes of
a single industry.
The software industry was also chosen for study because it is one of the key indus-
tries of DEMO future. Companies and countries that dominate this industry can leverage
their technological skills in other vital industries (U.S. Industrial Outlook 1994). Conse-
quently, retaining a worldwide lead is crucial for strengthening the global position of
the U.S. and its companies. Recently, Japan and Western European countries have in-
creased their investments in the industry, aiming to dethrone U.S. companies. Under-
standing the technological strategies of U.S. companies, therefore, can be DEMO in dis-
covering the sources of their competitive advantage. Finally, despite DEMO limitations of
single-industry studies, focusing on one industry has the advantage DEMO providing respon-
dents with a common frame of reference and reducing the potentially confounding ef-
fects of diverse macro-environmental conditions (Dess, Ireland, and Hitt 1990).
Sample
To collect data, the software industry’s two major trade associations were contacted to
identify the names and addresses of new DEMO The Software Publishers’ Association
provided a list of 413 names, primarily DEMO microcomputer software producers. The Com-
puter Software and Services Industry Association’s list contained 600 names. Major
newspapers were also reviewed for articles published on DEMO software ventures, which
yielded 18 additional names. Together, these sources generated 1,031 software ven-
ture names.
Three criteria were then used to DEMO the sample. First, only companies that were
eight years or younger DEMO included, which reduced the sample to 773. Second, the
study targeted only those ventures that actually developed and marketed software prod-
ucts; ventures that provided only customer services (e.g., educational or training pro-
grams) were excluded in order to focus on new ventures that competed by DEMO soft-
ware products. This further reduced the sample to 629 ventures. Finally, to control for
macro environmental forces, the study examined only U.S.-based DEMO ventures,
which reduced the target sample to 581.
A mail survey was then used to collect data from the 581 ventures. Personalized
letters DEMO each survey, encouraging participation in the research and assuring
respondents of DEMO conﬁdentiality of their replies. Twenty-seven questionnaires were
returned undelivered. Three mailings, DEMO a period of two months, produced 127 com-
pleted replies, of which 116 were usable, for a response rate of 20.9%. This response
rate compared favorably with the 11.1% achieved by other researchers from the DEMO
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
153
general population (e.g., DEMO and Thomas 1993), and was above the 16% achieved
by Price Waterhouse in its Software Industry Business Practices Survey, commissioned
by the Massachusetts Computer Software Council, Inc. (1991).
Tests also determined the representation DEMO the sample to the population from
which it was drawn. Initially, DEMO combined responses from the ﬁrst and second mail
waves were compared to the known attributes of non-responding companies. Given that
the study’s population included DEMO privately owned small companies, data were not
available for all observations DEMO all non-respondents. T-tests indicated that responding
and non-responding ﬁrms did not differ signiﬁcantly in their age (p , 0.41), employees
(p , DEMO) or return on equity (p , 0.37). Additionally, to DEMO response bias by
location within the U.S., a 2 test was DEMO but was not signiﬁcant (p , 0.41), indicat-
ing the DEMO of such bias. The t-test also revealed that respondents to the ﬁrst and
second mailings were not signiﬁcantly different in their age (p , 0.71), employees (p
,.83), return on equity (p , 0.41), and sales growth (p , 0.26). These results indicated
that the sample resembled its target population in several key attributes.
To DEMO reliable data, the questionnaire was sent to a second senior manager DEMO
each responding venture (n 5 116). Forty-nine of these managers DEMO and their
replies were then matched with replies from the main survey. Simple correlations be-
tween the two sets of respondents showed signiﬁcant interrater DEMO on the study’s
variables, as will be presented in Table 5 DEMO in the paper.
Measures
The data used in this paper are a part of a larger study of the software industry. For
the current DEMO, the data covered a new venture’s environment, TS, performance, and
statistical controls.2
1. Competitive Environment
To measure venture managers’ perceptions of their DEMO, the 12-item measure
developed and validated by Miller and Friesen (1982) was used to gauge these percep-
tions. When subjected to factor analysis, with a varimax orthogonal rotation, these items
yielded four signiﬁcant factors (with eigenvalues above 1.0) that accounted for 61.2 per-
cent of the variance. The results, which appear in Table 3, showed that the DEMO
captured the original factors theorized by Miller and Friesen (1982), DEMO that hostility
emerged as having two dimensions: price and non-price. Even DEMO the response for-
mat used in this study differed from the original format used by Miller and Friesen
(1982), which might account for the separation of the price and non-price hostility fac-
tors, two previous studies that used the revised format (Zahra 1991, 1996) produced
results that were consistent with Miller and Friesen’s conceptualization, which would
suggest that the current results are industry-speciﬁc. The two hostility types found in
this DEMO might have reﬂected the conditions in the software industry where price wars
were commonplace (U.S. Industrial Outlook 1994). Items that had absolute loadings
of 0.50 or above were emphasized in constructing four factors:
2 DEMO for all the study’s measures were collected for the three-year prior to the survey administration.
154 S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
TABLE 3 Factor Analysis: Measures of the New Venture’s Environment
Factors
1234
Items*
Must use different marketing approaches DEMO its operationsa 0.79 0.27 0.05 20.01
Is diversiﬁed in its business operationsa 0.76 0.05 20.05 0.07
Targets many customer groups with different buying habitsa DEMO 0.05 0.00 0.08
Must use many different production systemsa 0.73 20.11 20.07 0.17
Rate of innovationb 20.06 0.78 0.17 20.10
Spending on R&Db DEMO 0.76 20.02 0.13
Spending on advertisingb 0.15 0.76 20.10 0.18
Intensity of competition based on qualityb 20.12 0.05 0.91 0.02
Intensity of competition based DEMO serviceb 0.05 20.00 0.90 0.01
Intensity of price competitionb 0.20 20.11 0.12 0.83
Number of competitorsb 0.02 0.11 20.17 0.71
Rate of bankruptcyb 0.07 DEMO 0.08 0.63
Eigenvalue 2.82 1.86 1.60 1.42
% of variance explained 23.5 15.5 13.3 11.8
Cronbach coefﬁcient a 0.75 0.70 0.77 0.74
* All DEMO were standardized before performing factor analysis;
a Items followed a 5-point response format (1 5 very untrue vs. 5 5 very true);DEMO
b Items followed a 5-point response format (1 5 low vs. DEMO 5 high).
Factor 1: Heterogeneity (4 items): This factor indicated the perceived complexity of
a venture’s environment and an attempt by DEMO venture to respond to this complexity.
Factor 2: Dynamism (3 items): This factor indicated high perceived rates of change
in the industry DEMO of intensive R&D and advertising activities.
Factor 3: Non-Price Hostility (2 items): This factor reﬂected the perceived unfavor-
ableness of a DEMO venture’s external environment, as evidenced by a high rate of
bankruptcies DEMO the venture’s reliance on non-price variables in building the ven-
ture’s market position.
Factor 4: Price-Related Hostility (3 items): This factor indicated DEMO perceived inten-
sity of rivalry in the industry, coupled with intense DEMO to reduce prices.
2. Technology Strategy
Twenty items were extracted from the literature to capture TS (e.g., Cooper 1984a,
1984b; Lefebvre et al. 1992; Zahra and Covin 1993). When the 20 items were factor
analyzed (with a varimax rotation), they produced ﬁve signiﬁcant factors that, com-
bined, explained 74.7% of the variance. These results are DEMO in Table 4 and de-
scribed below.
Factor 1: Internal R&DEMO Investments (5 items): This factor captured the venture’s
heavy investment DEMO internal R&D and indicated that the venture was committed
to maintaining a highly professional staff, having state-of-the-art R&D facilities, and
providing DEMO ﬁnancial support for R&D.
Factor 2: External Sources (4 items): This factor indicated the venture’s reliance on
external sources of technology, and showed that the venture was either active in tech-
nology-based alliances DEMO licensed technologies from other companies.
TABLE 4
Internal R&D External Product Radically
Items Investments Sources Upgrades DEMO Products Copyrights
Average annual spending on R&D as a percent of company sales (past 3 years). 0.88 0.16 0.11 0.31 0.19
Has one of the largest R&D groups in the industry. 0.81 20.18 DEMO 0.26 0.07
Has one of the most productive R&D groups in the industry. 0.74 0.23 0.11 0.27 0.04
Spends more on R&D DEMO the competition. 0.63 20.09 0.02 0.31 20.11
Spends more on R&D than the industry average. 0.61 0.18 0.04 0.23 0.12
Uses joint ventures DEMO R&D. 0.30 0.76 20.21 20.06 0.08
Is heavily engaged in strategic alliances. 20.16 0.74 0.23 20.09 20.07
Collaborates with universities and research centers DEMO R&D. 0.28 0.70 20.16 20.12 20.03
Contracts out a major portion of its R&D activities. 20.09 0.63 0.07 20.11 0.05
Introduces more DEMO products than the competition. 0.26 20.21 0.74 0.08 0.17
Introduces products to the market faster than competitors. 0.31 0.16 0.71 0.07 0.08
Has reduced DEMO time between the development and market introductions of new products. 0.23 0.08 0.68 0.13 0.21
Introduces many new products to the market. 0.09 0.26 DEMO 0.02 0.13
Is well-known for introducing breakthrough-type products. 0.25 20.18 0.21 0.70 0.15
Is this industry’s leader in introducing new products. 0.12 20.30 20.22 DEMO 0.06
Is usually among the ﬁrst to introduce new products to the market. 0.23 0.11 0.03 0.55 0.08
Holds important patent rights. 0.27 0.08 DEMO 0.13 0.65
Has more patents than its key competitors. 0.21 0.17 0.03 20.27 0.58
Uses licensing agreements extensively to sell its products. 0.22 0.18 DEMO 0.11 0.54
Has increased its patenting efforts over the past three years. 0.24 0.25 0.13 0.08 0.51
Eigenvalue 3.53 2.58 2.27 1.82 1.53
% DEMO explained 22.30 17.03 14.98 12.01 10.11
Cronbach coefﬁcient a 0.74 0.73 0.71 0.72 0.71
Factor Analysis: Technology Strategy Dimensions
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
155
156
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
Factor 3: Intensity of Product Upgrades (4 items): This factor indicated the venture’s
strong commitment to introducing a large number of product modiﬁcations or exten-
sions, surpassing their key competitors.
Factor 4: Radicality of New Products (3 items): This DEMO indicated the venture’s
commitment to introducing radically new products (technologies) and showed a
strong disposition by the venture to be among the ﬁrst DEMO its industry to introduce
new products.3
Factor 5: Copyrights, Patents and Protection of Intellectual Capital (4 items): This
factor showed a venture’s interest in, and use of, patenting and other means (e.g.,
trade secrets) to protect the fruits of its innovation.
3. NVP: DEMO and Market Share Growth
Measuring NVP has been the subject of debate in the literature (e.g., Chandler and
Hanks 1993). Yet, there is agreement that the complexity of the NVP construct requires
the use DEMO both growth and proﬁtability measures because of the tradeoffs that might
exist between these measures (Brush and VanderWerf 1992). Proﬁtability was mea-
sured by the average of its three-year ROE, which indicated a venture’s success in using
its resources effectively to make a proﬁt. Still, ROE was affected by the owners’ salaries
and other cost items that were frequently DEMO disclosed to the public.
To overcome the limitations of ROE, two DEMO measures of growth were con-
sidered: sales growth and growth in DEMO share (GMS). Sales growth showed the mar-
ket acceptance of DEMO venture’s products and, therefore, was a key indicator of market
success (Chandler and Hanks 1993; Cooper et al. 1989; Dowling and McGee 1994).
However, Tsai et al. (1991: 14) suggested that DEMO “may be the best measure of new
venture performance available”. GMS, DEMO shows a venture’s progress in building
a strong market base at a rate greater than the overall industry growth, is a predictor
of proﬁtability. Consequently, the survey asked managers to report the percentage
growth in their ﬁrm’s market share over the past three-year period. However, this mea-
sure was difﬁcult to interpret because software companies varied widely in their market
DEMO Given that the sales growth and GMS measures were highly correlated (DEMO 5
0.87), only the results based on GMS were reported in this paper.
Data for performance measures were collected through the survey for DEMO reasons.
First, many ﬁrms were privately owned and did not publish DEMO results. Second,
the performance of corporate venture ﬁrms were not separated from their sponsoring
corporations. Data for ROE for a subset of 41 DEMO venture were signiﬁ-
cantly correlated with secondary survey data, (r 5 0.74, p , 0.001). We did the same
for a subset of corporate sponsored companies and the correlation was also signiﬁcant
(r 5 0.69, p , 0.001). Combined with the signiﬁcant interrater data reported in Table 5,
these results increased our conﬁdence in the study’s DEMO measures. However, because
validation analyses were conducted using subsets of data, caution is necessary.
3 One of the items that loaded signiﬁcantly on DEMO factor, “Is the industry’s leader in introducing new
products”, might conceptually overlap with the domain of the “intensity of product upgrade” factors. To DEMO
this possibility, we reran the factor analysis to force the radicality DEMO upgrade factors into a single factor
by specifying a four-factor solution. The results, however, indicated that the two factors were still distinct
and DEMO the “industry leader” in new product loaded signiﬁcantly on the radicality factor. These results led
us to believe that the respondents might have associated DEMO leadership in new product introductions
with being a pioneering ﬁrm that offered many new products. Of course, the results might be industry speciﬁc.
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 157
4. Statistical Control Variables
DEMO study also controlled for the venture’s age, size, origin, and DEMO scope. These
variables affected the venture’s ability to obtain and deploy resources (Bell & McNa-
mara 1991) and TS choices (Bogner and Thomas 1996; Zahra 1996). A limitation of
the study, however, was failing to explore the direct effect of these variables on the
proﬁt DEMO NVP relationships.
Venture Size. The study controlled for the venture’s size because larger ventures
might have possessed more resources that allowed them to support DEMO&D and introduce
more new products than smaller ventures. The natural log of employees was used as
the measure of company size.
Venture Age. DEMO study also controlled for a venture’s age because younger ven-
tures might have pursued more radical innovations than older ventures (Rosen 1991).
Age was measured by the number of years the venture had been in DEMO
Market (Business) Scope. Ventures that competed in a broadly deﬁned market
were expected to spend more on R&D and introduce more new DEMO (Buzzell and
Gale 1987) than ventures that deﬁned their markets narrowly.5 To control for differ-
ences in market scope, executives’ reports on the number of market segments their com-
pany pursued were used as a DEMO variable.
Venture Origin. The analysis also controlled for the venture’s origin, DEMO it
was created by an independent entrepreneur (coded 0) or an established company
(coded 1). Origin served as a proxy for the venture’s access to different resources. Cor-
porate sponsored ventures typically had greater DEMO to their parent company’s ﬁnan-
cial, marketing, and technological resources (DEMO 1996), which allowed them to pur-
sue more aggressive TS. Independent ventures, which were often more constrained in
their resources, might pursue DEMO TS from corporate ventures. It should be noted
that corporate ventures studied here were either divisions or subsidiaries of established
companies and, therefore, DEMO subject to their managerial and strategic control. Conse-
quently, performance data DEMO corporate ventures were not readily available in second-
ary sources, as DEMO earlier.
Analysis
Table 5 presents the results for interrater agreement, measured DEMO the simple correla-
tions between the two sets of data received from executives in 49 companies. It also
4 To explore the implications of DEMO venture’s age for TS, the sample was split into two groups: very
young ventures (3 years or younger) and older ventures (4 years and older). Both the t-test and discriminant
analysis were used DEMO pinpoint the differences between these two venture groups in TS. The two tests yielded
identical results; both show that younger ventures had signiﬁcantly higher scores than older ventures on two
variables: product radicality and R&D spending. Older companies (4 years and older), however, had signiﬁ-
DEMO higher scores on product upgrades and use of external sources. Venture scores for the use of copyrights
and patents were not statistically different between DEMO two groups.
5 Some past research suggests that business scope (breadth) might impact the ventures’ TS. To examine
this possibility, ventures were split at the mean into two groups: focused versus broad scope. T-tests indicated
that ventures with broad market scope had signiﬁcantly higher scores than focused DEMO in three variables
(p , 0.05): R&D spending, upgrades, and use of external sources. No statistically signiﬁcant differences were
found between the two groups in radicality or the use of patents and copyrights.
TABLE 5
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations*
Variables
Inter
Variables Rater DEMO
1. Dynamism 0.63 2.84 1.47 —
2. Price Hostility 0.66 3.16 1.3 0.23 —
3. Non-price Hostility 0.61 3.01 1.67 0.31 0.26 —
4. DEMO 0.58 2.64 1.89 0.20 0.16 0.09 —
5. Radicality 0.74 2.94 1.81 0.27 20.31 0.21 0.19 —
6. Intens. Product Upgrades 0.66 2.99 1.75 DEMO 20.26 0.16 0.24 0.31 —
7. R&D Investments 0.70 3.07 1.89 0.29 20.11 0.15 0.27 0.27 0.34 —
8. External Sources 0.81 3.16 DEMO 0.31 0.26 0.07 0.18 0.21 0.23 0.28 —
9. Copyrights 0.77 2.69 1.88 20.20 0.10 0.11 0.16 0.19 0.21 0.22 0.17 —
10. ROE DEMO 9.31 12.00 0.08 20.08 0.09 20.14 0.13 0.29 0.30 0.26 0.18 —
11. GMS 0.86 22.61 26.78 0.05 0.02 20.13 0.25 0.11 0.27 0.26 DEMO 0.08 0.21 —
12. Number of Employees 0.89 47.19 33.23 0.16 20.16 0.12 0.18 0.23 0.16 0.26 0.11 0.14 0.18 0.12 —
13. Age DEMO 4.71 1.83 0.11 0.04 20.03 20.09 20.02 0.08 0.03 0.09 0.12 0.05 0.08 0.28 —
14. Market Scope 0.73 3.11 1.29 0.09 20.02 0.04 DEMO 20.04 0.07 0.25 0.19 0.19 0.16 0.14 0.23 0.11
SD 1 2 3 4 5 6789 10 11 12 13
* For n 5 DEMO, simple r must be at least 0.16 to be signiﬁcant at DEMO , 0.05.
158
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
159
shows the means, standard deviations, and the intercorrelations among the study’s vari-
ables. There was no evidence of multicolinearity among the independent variables. Con-
sequently, moderated regression analysis was used to test the hypotheses (Cohen and
Cohen 1983). In Step 1, each NVP measure was regressed on the control variables. In
Step 2, each NVP measure was regressed on the control variables and the ﬁve TS factors.
In Step 3, interactions of the TS factors with the four environmental dimensions were
added to the control and independent DEMO already in the equation, and the analysis
was re-run. Interaction terms DEMO created by multiplying each of the four environmen-
tal dimensions by the ﬁve TS factors.
To maintain sufﬁcient degrees of freedom, four separate regression analyses were
performed for each NVP measure. In the ﬁrst run (Step 3.1), only the interactions of
dynamism with the ﬁve TS factors DEMO added to the equation. In the second and third
runs (Steps DEMO and 3.3), the interaction terms for price and non-price hostility were
entered into the analysis, respectively. The ﬁnal run (Step 3.4), DEMO terms formed
by multiplying heterogeneity and TS factors, were added to DEMO equation. This proce-
dure was appropriate because the hypotheses focused on the impact of speciﬁc interac-
tions on NVP, rather than examining all the interactions between a venture’s external
environment and TS factors. The results for DEMO appear in Table 6, while the results
for GMS appear in DEMO 7.
RESULTS
ROE
As Table 6 shows, neither the regression equation DEMO the four control variables were
signiﬁcant in Step 1. The equation explained a modest 3% of the variance in ROE. In
Step 2, when the ﬁve TS measures were entered as a block, the equation became signiﬁ-
cant (p , 0.05) and had an adjusted R 2 DEMO 11%. Radicality, product upgrades, and exter-
nal sources were positively and signiﬁcantly associated with ROE (p , 0.05 or better).
The results for dynamism appear under Step 3.1 (Table 6), where the equation was
signiﬁcant. Three dynamism*TS interaction terms were also signiﬁcant and positive:
DEMO, product upgrades, and external sources. Step 3.2, which focused on DEMO hos-
tility, was also signiﬁcant. When the price hostility*TS interactions were DEMO,
the coefﬁcient for the external sources was positive and signiﬁcant, DEMO the coefﬁcient
product upgrades were negative and signiﬁcant. Step 3.3, which DEMO non-price
hostility, was signiﬁcant and the coefﬁcients for product upgrades and DEMO use of external
sources were positive and signiﬁcant. Finally, in Step DEMO, the equation for heterogeneity
was signiﬁcant and the interaction of heterogeneity DEMO R&D spending, product up-
grades, the external sources, and DEMO use of copyrights had positive and signiﬁcant coef-
ﬁcients.6
6 To validate the results reported above, moderated regression analysis was re-run for ROE and the
market share growth measures. In these analyses, all the 20 interaction terms (constructed by multiplying
the 4 environment dimensions by the 5 TS factors) were entered simultaneously as a block in Step 3. The
regressions explained 29.6% of ROE and 32.9% of market share growth, respectively. Signiﬁcant interaction
terms in these regression were similar to those found in Tables DEMO and 7.
160
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
TABLE 6
Results of Moderated Regression DEMO for Return on Equity (ROE)
Step 3
Variables Step 1 DEMO 2 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4
Constant 24.09 23.61 22.97 22.81 22.51 3.01
Size 20.02 20.04 20.03 20.01 20.07 20.08
Age 0.13 0.11 0.10 0.10 DEMO 0.08
Scope 20.12 20.12 20.11 20.04 20.05 20.17
Origin (IV 5 DEMO) 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.04 0.02
Radicality 0.26* 0.27* 0.21* 0.29* DEMO
Intensive Product Upgrades 0.23* 0.29* 0.29* 0.31* 0.22*
R&D Spending 20.09 20.18 20.07 20.02 20.03
External Sources 0.41** 0.43** 0.53*** 0.48** 0.45***
Copyrights DEMO 0.03 0.03 0.05 0.03
Dynamism
• Radicality 0.49***
• Intensive Product Upgrades 0.23*
• R&D Spending 0.08
• External Sources 0.18*
• Copyrights DEMO
Hostility (price)
• Radicality 20.06
• Intensive Product Upgrades 20.33*
DEMO R&D Spending 0.04
• External Sources 0.26*
• Copyrights 20.01
Hostility (Non-Price)
• Radicality 20.06
• Intensive Product Upgrades 0.31**
• R&D Spending 0.02
• External Sources 0.19*
• Copyrights 20.13
Heterogeneity
• DEMO 0.02
• Intensive Product Upgrades 0.31*
• R&D Spending 0.33*
• External Sources 0.38**
• Copyrights 0.23*
F-value 0.91 2.37* 4.81** 3.83** 3.59** DEMO
Adjusted R 2 0.03 0.11 0.22 0.19 0.22 0.25
* p , 0.05;
** p , 0.01;
*** p , 0.001.
GMS
DEMO regression analysis was also performed using the new venture’s GMS as the
dependent variable. The three-step procedure described under ROE was repeated here.
The DEMO in Table 7 show that the equation and the four control variables were not
signiﬁcant in Step 1, explaining only four percent of variance. In Step 2, where the TS
variables were included in the analysis, the equation was signiﬁcant (p , 0.01) and had
an adjusted R 2 of 15 percent. Four TS variables were positive and signiﬁcant: radicality,
product upgrades, external technology sources, and the use of DEMO
The equation for dynamism (Step 3.1) was signiﬁcant. The interactions of dyna-
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
161
TABLE 7
Results of DEMO Regression Analysis for New Venture Market Share
Growth (GMS)
Step DEMO
Variables Step 1 Step 2 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4
Constant 2.47 1.91 1.31 1.77 1.69 2.03
Size 0.09 0.09 0.12 0.07 0.13 0.05
Age DEMO 20.11 20.14 20.09 20.08 0.03
Scope 0.05 0.07 0.13 0.11 0.15 0.11
Origin (IV 5 1) 0.11 0.09 0.05 0.11 0.10 0.07
Radicality DEMO 0.29* 0.22* 0.29* 0.29*
Intensive Product Upgrades 0.21* 0.25* 0.22* 0.29*
R&D Spending 20.10 20.14 20.09 20.03 20.11
External Sources 0.39** 0.37** 0.31* DEMO 0.28**
Copyrights 0.20* 0.21* 0.23* 0.21* 0.23*
Dynamism
• Radicality 0.28*
• Intensive Product Upgrades 0.49**
• R&D Spending 0.05
• External Sources DEMO
• Copyrights 0.02
Hostility (Price)
• Radicality 20.27*
• Intensive DEMO Upgrades 0.19*
• R&D Spending 20.21*
• External Sources 0.23*
• Copyrights 20.02
Hostility (Non-Price)
• Radicality 0.09
• Intensive Product Upgrades 0.38**
• R&D Spending 0.21*
• External Sources 0.05
• Copyrights DEMO
Heterogeneity
• Radicality 0.07
• Intensive Product Upgrades 0.21*
• R&D Spending 0.49**
• External Sources 0.37**
• Copyrights 0.03*
F-value 1.14 2.71** DEMO 2.89* 2.69* 4.95**
Adjusted R 2 0.04 0.15 0.21 0.25 0.24 0.26
* p , 0.05;
** p , 0.01.
mism with the DEMO variables were also positive and signiﬁcant: radicality, upgrades,
and external technology sources. The analysis for Step 3.2 was also signiﬁcant. The inter-
DEMO of price hostility with product upgrades and the use of external technology were
positive and signiﬁcant, whereas the interactions for radicality and R&D spending were
negative and signiﬁcant. When non-price hostility was considered (Step 3.3), the equa-
tion was signiﬁcant, and the interactions terms for R&D spending and product upgrades
were positive and signiﬁcant. Finally, the equation for heterogeneity was signiﬁcant.
Three of the interactions of heterogeneity with the DEMO TS measures were positive and
signiﬁcant (in Step 3.4): R&DEMO spending, product upgrades, and the external sources of
162 S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
technology.7 These results and their implications DEMO theory and practice are discussed
in detail in the following section.
DISCUSSION
The effect of technology strategy on new venture performance has been the DEMO of
much interest in the literature. This study shows that a new venture’s TS can signiﬁcantly
impact its performance and that the external environment DEMO the TS-NVP rela-
tionship. These results also help to identify the factors that lead to the success or failure
of young, high technology companies. This section reviews the study’s major ﬁndings.
THE ASSOCIATION OF TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY DEMO NVP
Three observations are evident from the results on the TS-NVP relationship. First, a
formal TS is signiﬁcantly associated with the venture’s ROE and GMS. While the mod-
est adjusted R 2 values found in both DEMO indicate that other organizational vari-
ables (e.g., structure, resources, and culture) and competitive choices (e.g., manufactur-
ing) may inﬂuence performance, the venture’s TS positively and signiﬁcantly impacts
NVP. Second, three technological choices are signiﬁcantly associated with both the ven-
ture’s ROE and GMS: radicality of the ﬁrm’s new products, frequent product upgrades,
and the use of external technology sources. These results support the importance of the
radicality DEMO the venture’s new products (Kerin et al. 1992), frequent upgrades (Dodgson
1993), and the use of the external sources of technology (Leonard-Barton 1995) for
achieving superior performance. Though most past research on these variables was con-
ducted in established companies, the results corroborate these ﬁndings in the context
of young software companies.
Other results, however, were DEMO inconsistent with expectations. Speciﬁcally,
the ventures’ use of patents and copyrights was only signiﬁcantly and positively associ-
ated with GMS (p , 0.05), but not with ROE. Perhaps, software ventures use their
copyrights to achieve goals other than increasing their short-term proﬁts, such as enter-
ing into beneﬁcial strategic alliances to market and distribute their products.
THE COMPETITIVE DEMO AS A MODERATOR OF THE
TS-NVP RELATIONSHIP
The results of the interactions between the TS dramatize and the external environmen-
tal moderators give further DEMO into the drivers of NVP in the U.S. software industry.
7 Given the range of the age of new ventures presented in the sample, we conducted additional analyses
to determine the robustness of the study’s ﬁndings. DEMO reasoned that the early years of a venture’s life cycle
(say, before year 3), focus will center on acquiring resources and building DEMO ventures’ market network and
linkages. To identify the differences associated with the ventures’ age, we analyzed the data for the following
four groups: DEMO, 4–8, 5–8, and 6–8 years. Overall, the results indicated that the relationships between the
ventures’ TS and performance (using both ROE and GMS) were not signiﬁcantly related in the earlier years
(3–8 and DEMO age groups). However, for ventures in the 5–8 age range DEMO later, the results mirrored those
reported in the text, with two notable exceptions. The effect of R&D and external sources on ROE DEMO GMS
became stronger over time, which is consistent with the literature DEMO technological learning (Dodgson 1993;
Helfat 1994; Zahra 1996). These results appeared to suggest that new ventures became more proﬁcient in
transforming DEMO own R&D as well as external sources of technological know how into a source of competi-
tive advantage.
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE 163
TABLE 8 Regression Results DEMO Hypothesized Relationships between Emphasis on a Strategic
Dimension and a High Level of an Environmental Moderator
Environmental Moderators
Hostility (2)
Strategy Dimension Dynamism (1) Price Non-Price Heterogeneity (3)
Radicality (a)
ROE DEMO 1 Predicted 2 Predicted 2 Predicted 1
as predicted association association association
found but found but found but
not signiﬁcant not signiﬁcant not signiﬁcant
DEMO Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 2 Predicted 1 Predicted 1
as predicted as predicted association association
found but found but
not signiﬁcant not signiﬁcant
Intensive Product
DEMO (b)
ROE Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 2 Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1
DEMO predicted as predicted as predicted as predicted
GMS Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1
as predicted as predicted as predicted as predicted
DEMO&D Spending (c)
ROE Predicted 1 Predicted 2 Predicted 2 DEMO 1
association not found; found; 1 but as predicted
found but instead 1 sign insigniﬁcant
not signiﬁcant but insigniﬁ- association
cant observed observed
DEMO Predicted 1 Signiﬁcant 2 Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1
association as predicted as predicted as predicted
found but
not signiﬁcant
External
Technology (d)
ROE Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1
as predicted as predicted DEMO predicted as predicted
GMS Signiﬁcant 1 Signiﬁcant 1 Predicted 1 Signiﬁcant 1
as predicted as predicted association as predicted
found but
not signiﬁcant
Patenting (e)
ROE Predicted 1 Predicted 2 Predicted 2 Signiﬁcant 1
association DEMO association as predicted
found but found but found but
not signiﬁcant not signiﬁcant not signiﬁcant
GMS Predicted 1 Predicted 2 Predicted 1 Predicted 1
DEMO association association association
found but found but found but found but
not signiﬁcant not signiﬁcant not signiﬁcant not signiﬁcant
To ensure clarity, Table 8 summarizes the study’s results relative to the hypotheses.
The results are discussed DEMO
Dynamism
The results support three of the ﬁve sets of hypotheses (DEMO, H1b, and H1d) on the
moderating effect of dynamism, as shown by the positive and signiﬁcant associations
164
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
found between both measures of NVP DEMO the measures of product radicality, product
upgrades, and external sources of technology. The results, therefore, reinforce the im-
portance of radical new DEMO, frequent product upgrades (Prusa and Schmitz 1994),
and the DEMO of external technology sources (Dodgson 1993) for high NVP in a dynamic
competitive environment.
The results do not support H1c1 and H1c2, which suggest a positive association
between R&D spending and NVP. Although R&DEMO has the expected positive signs, it
is not signiﬁcant in the DEMO analyses. Thus, although R&D spending is important
for frequent product DEMO, it may not in itself lead to short-term ﬁnancial or market
DEMO gains in a dynamic environment, which supports prior research (Link and Tassey
1987; Zahra et al. 1995). In some dynamic markets, DEMO ventures may have to spend
heavily on R&D to simply achieve short-term competitive parity and keep up with the
rapid pace of technological DEMO
Contrary to H1e1 and H1e2, a venture’s use of patents and DEMO is not signiﬁ-
cantly associated with the two NVP measures. Thus, DEMO the environment is dynamic,
some ventures may not beneﬁt ﬁnancially from aggressively pursuing patents (copy-
rights) to protect their discoveries. This ﬁnding DEMO consistent with the study (Rogers and
Rogers 1984) of Silicon Valley hardware manufacturers which concluded that, in this
dynamic environment, some ﬁrms DEMO that the use of patents (copyrights) actually
quickened the speed with which competitors imitated their innovations. In the dynamic
software industry, radically new products and upgrades are being introduced at a breath-
taking pace, which makes the use of copyrights a futile activity for new ventures that
DEMO not always have the resources to obtain these copyrights. Obtaining legal protection
of the ﬁrm’s intellectual property might take years to complete, which can further
weaken the value of this approach to protecting a new venture’s DEMO advantage
(U.S. Industrial Outlook 1994). Consequently, in some dynamic industries, traditional
approaches to protecting intellectual property are becoming less effective (The DEMO
mist 1996), while their costs remain high. Thus, using copyrights DEMO be ineffective in
dynamic industries such as software.
In summary, these DEMO partially supported the predicted moderating effect of
venture’s dynamic environment on the TS-NVP relationship. The results also high-
lighted some of the limits of DEMO theory when applied to software new ventures.
This point is further reinforced by the results on hostility, as discussed next.
Hostility
The study also helped to sort out the contradictory ﬁndings reported in past research
on DEMO moderating effect of perceived hostility on the TS-NVP relationship. They
showed that hostility moderates the relationship between a venture’s TS and its perfor-
mance, albeit in ways that sometimes differed signiﬁcantly from the hypotheses derived
from DEMO theory. Perhaps, the separation of hostility into two factors: price
and non-price, provided an opportunity to untangle the speciﬁc associations of those
variables with a venture’s TS. The results were understandable given the study’s focus
DEMO new ventures in a young industry, in contrast to past research DEMO examined estab-
lished companies in mature industries (e.g., Zahra and Covin 1993). Either way, the
results offered a richer view of the impact of the interaction of hostility with TS on NVP.
The results DEMO limited support for H2a1 and H2a2, showing that offering radi-
cally DEMO products is negatively associated with ROE in environments dominated by
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
165
price and non-price hostility. DEMO not signiﬁcant in either environmental setting,
these negative signs were consistent with theoretical expectations that intense hostility
in these markets might make aggressive DEMO of new ventures’ limited ﬁnancial re-
sources by offering radically innovative products a poor strategic choice. These results
also supported the literature (Slater and Narver 1994).
The results for GMS were a bit more compelling DEMO those reported above for
the ventures’ ROE. In support of H2a3, DEMO was a negative and signiﬁcant association
between offering radically new products and GMS when price-based hostility was high,
possibly because of the drain DEMO product innovations might place on the venture’s
limited resources. In partial support of H2a4, offering radically new products was posi-
tively associated with GMS in a non-price hostile environment, although the regression
coefﬁcient was not signiﬁcant.
Consistent with H2b1, frequent product upgrades were negatively and signiﬁcantly
associated with lower ROE when price hostility was high. These upgrades were posi-
tively DEMO with ROE when non-price hostility was high, which supports H2b2.
For DEMO, the results supported both H2b3 and H2b4. Thus, regardless of the impact
on ROE, offering more product upgrades had a signiﬁcant and positive impact on the
new ventures’ GMS. Managers should note that two of DEMO three positive associations
were in non-price hostile settings, where product line DEMO and upgrades would
be key tools in the venture’s TS (Grant DEMO). This suggested that in price-hostile envi-
ronments frequent product upgrades were positively associated with GMS, but might
reduce ROE. Consequently, the long-term DEMO short-term implications of product
upgrades might be signiﬁcant considerations for managers in price-hostile competitive
settings where the pursuit of short-run returns can backﬁre (Iansiti 1995).
The relationship between R&D spending and NVP may be DEMO complex than
previously portrayed in the literature. Consistent with H2c3, when DEMO hostility was
high, R&D spending was signiﬁcantly and negatively associated DEMO GMS, but there
was an insigniﬁcant positive association with ROE—which failed DEMO support H2c1. In
this environment, ROE and R&D were expected DEMO be negatively associated. The results
also showed that when non-price hostility was high, R&D spending was positively asso-
ciated with GMS, which DEMO H2c4. Under high non-price hostility, the associa-
tions between R&D DEMO ROE was positive but not signiﬁcant, which contradicts H2c2.
Although this DEMO sign was in the predicted direction, it is not signiﬁcant. Because
DEMO results may be industry speciﬁc, research was needed to validate the DEMO Mean-
while, the results emphasize the importance of R&D spending DEMO acquiring market
share where non-price competition existed, where such spending could DEMO a venture’s
market share growth.
The results generally supported the expected positive associations between a ven-
ture’s use of external sources of technology and DEMO Three of the four regression coef-
ﬁcients were signiﬁcant and positive, DEMO predicted. These the results support H2d1,
H2d2, and H2d3, but failed to support H2d4 which suggested a positive association be-
tween the DEMO of external sources and GMS. Although the interaction of external
sources and non-price hostility was positive, it was not signiﬁcantly associated with
GMS. However, when hostility was high, those ventures that linked with external tech-
DEMO sources reported higher NVP, which was consistent with some prior ﬁndings
(Dodgson 1993).
Hypotheses 2e1–4, which speciﬁed the nature of the associations between pro-
tecting the venture’s intellectual property and NVP when hostility was DEMO, were not
166
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
supported. Although three of the four DEMO coefﬁcients were in the predicted di-
rection, none of them was DEMO Interestingly, the negative signs observed in H2e1
through H2e3 were consistent DEMO expectations. These signs might have reﬂected the
high cost of copyrights, DEMO time it took the venture to obtain copyrights, and the possi-
DEMO that copyrighting the venture’s products does not preclude imitation by rivals.
Those ventures that were effective patenting their innovations might even risk leaking
information DEMO to their rivals. Consequently, consistent with some recent writings
(Grant 1995), spending a venture’s resources on obtaining copyrights (patents) might
be DEMO when environmental hostility is high. Overall, although hostility
signiﬁcantly moderated the DEMO relationship, this moderating effect appeared to
work in different ways in DEMO contexts (price vs. non-price hostility). These interac-
tions also varied DEMO from the general patterns suggested by research that exam-
ined the TS used by established companies.
Heterogeneity
The results also highlighted the role of DEMO environmental heterogeneity as a sig-
niﬁcant moderator of the TS-NVP relationship. As indicated in Table 8, three of the
ﬁve predicted sets of associations between TS and NVP in this environment were sup-
ported. As reported DEMO, the interactions of heterogeneity with product upgrades
(H3b1 and 2), R&D spending (H3c1 and 2) and the use of external DEMO sources
(H3d1 and 2) were positively and signiﬁcantly associated with the venture’s ROE and
GMS. Success in a heterogeneous environment, therefore, appeared DEMO depend on the
venture’s ability to fund and maintain a strong program of research that leads to fre-
quent product upgrades (Miller 1987), while making extensive use of external technol-
ogy sources (Hagedoorn 1993).
The results also showed that the new venture’s use of copyrights (patents) was sig-
niﬁcantly associated with ROE, which supported H3c1. Consequently, H3e was partially
supported, indicating that software new ventures that were active in copyrighting (or
patenting) their technologies might beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from this effort. DEMO beneﬁts
were not as strong as those gained from other TS dimensions, because any single patent
might be narrow in scope and its potential impact on the venture’s ﬁnancial or market
share gains might be limited.
DEMO hypothesized positive association between new product radicality and NVP
in a heterogeneous environment (H3a1 and 2) was not supported. Speciﬁcally, product
radicality had positive but insigniﬁcant signs in the regression analyses for both ROE
and DEMO Thus, radicality per se may not impact short-term NVP in a DEMO
environment as strongly as theory would suggest (e.g., Kerin et al. 1992). Perhaps, the
ﬁnancial beneﬁts from product radicality were greater for the industry’s early entrants
than for newcomers. As new segments of software DEMO emerge, the early entrants’
known names and established channels might enable DEMO to retain any competitive
advantages derived from offering radically new products (DEMO et al. 1995). This possi-
bility should be examined in future research.
Limitations
Although the above ﬁndings provide several new insights, they also showed a need for
further research on the moderating impact of a DEMO environment on the relation-
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
167
ship between its TS DEMO performance. Moving beyond this study’s cross-sectional sam-
ple, future researchers can DEMO explore the causal relationships among the
TS and NVP within speciﬁc environments. Further, data from other industries, analyzed
in the same way, can add signiﬁcantly to the general nature of the ﬁndings. Researchers
should also DEMO the limitations of the data provided by the CEOs, as these DEMO
might suffer from survivor bias.
One of the study’s limitations was that it did not directly examine the direct effect
of a venture’s resources DEMO TS or on the TS-NVP relationships. The venture’s tangible
(e.g., marketing) and intangible (e.g., reputation and culture) resources can determine
to DEMO strategic options available to the new venture (Bogner and Thomas 1996), and
inﬂuence the commercialization of new products (technologies), which inﬂuences DEMO ven-
ture’s competitive advantage. Rare and inimitable resources can allow the venture to
create and introduce highly differentiated products, thereby protecting a venture’s com-
petitive advantage. The abundance of slack resources (e.g., excess capital) can also pro-
mote the development of radically innovative products. Intangible resources (e.g., social
capital) can also improve the odds of successful technology commercialization. DEMO
quently, by ignoring the direct effect of resources, this study might have overlooked
a key determinant of the venture’s TS. Further, since resources can temporarily buffer
the venture from adverse environmental conditions the type and DEMO of these resources
can inﬂuence the moderating inﬂuences of the environment on the TS-NVP rela-
tionships.
Finally, as noted earlier, data were collected DEMO the same three year period preced-
ing the administration of the survey, limiting our ability to infer cause-effect relation-
ships among the study’s variables. Therefore, the results are best interpreted as sug-
gesting associations among these variables at one point in time. Despite these
limitations, the results suggest several possible managerial actions, as follows.
IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGERIAL ACTION AND
FUTURE RESEARCH
Managerial Implications
As the results indicate, new ventures in growth industries such as software can beneﬁt
greatly from developing and pursuing a comprehensive DEMO This is evident from the
fact that several dimensions of TS are signiﬁcantly related to both the venture’s ROE
and GMS. Entrepreneurs and venture DEMO, however, frequently forget that having
a good product or a sophisticated technology alone does not always guarantee success
in the marketplace (Bell and McNamara 1991; McGrath 1994). TS must be a part of
a comprehensive strategy to manage that technology as an ongoing, living resource that
must ﬁt the venture’s particular competitive environment.
The results also indicate that DEMO key part of a TS for entrepreneurs and managers
is the interaction of that strategy with the ventures’ external environment. This requires
the active DEMO and monitoring of the venture’s different sectors of the environment
and collecting data about their conditions. Managers must also interpret relevant envi-
ronmental forces DEMO forecast how each may impact the venture’s TS choices. To ensure
accurate interpretations, managers need to monitor and scan their environments and
analyze their competition. These analyses can help to align managers’ views with the
objective DEMO of their environment and markets, thus setting the stage for tech-
168
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
nology and strategic planning premises. Only DEMO such a thorough analysis of the envi-
ronment is completed can managers choose those technological capabilities that can
best enhance their venture’s performance. Failure DEMO conduct an effective analysis of
the environment or excessive reliance on informal means of collecting data about the
industry can jeopardize the venture’s technological DEMO, which might be misa-
ligned with the needs of the market.
DEMO study also suggests that the technological capabilities that must be considered
in assessing the ﬁt between the venture’s strategy and environment is not limited DEMO the
ﬁrm’s internal resources. Managers need to tap both the internal and external sources
of technological capabilities when managing environmental challenges. Yet, entrepre-
neurs and venture managers sometimes fail to cultivate the external sources of technol-
DEMO and use them to create new products (technologies). Despite the DEMO of devel-
oping the venture’s internal sources, it unrealistic to expect DEMO young company to possess
all the technological capabilities it needs to compete in a dynamic industry. Given the
rapid pace of obsolescence, therefore, DEMO venture should complement its capabilities by
using external sources of technology.
Managers need also to recognize both the contributions and serious limitations of
legal DEMO of protecting their intellectual capital. As noted previously, the value of
DEMO and copyrights appears to vary signiﬁcantly from one environmental setting to
another. New ventures should use trade secrets and other means to protect the DEMO
innovations. Constant innovation is another viable approach to protecting the venture’s
innovative technologies.
Finally, managers need to recognize that the various dimensions of TS interact with
each other in a dynamic sense. Given this interconnectedness, a change in one variable
therefore can change the nature of the competitive DEMO in which a venture ﬁnds itself.
Firms, therefore, have to deal with the environment as a whole cannot simply alter only
one variable DEMO isolation. Future researchers therefore would beneﬁt from adopting a
holistic view of the interactions among the TS dimensions.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In addition to DEMO reﬁnements already suggested throughout this paper, the study draws
attention for DEMO research on new ventures’ TS. As many industries owe their
existence to the foresight and innovation of new ventures, understanding how these
ventures use their technological capabilities to gain a competitive advantage is fast be-
coming DEMO worthwhile research issue. Future studies can further clarify the relationships
between the dimensions of TS and NVP and document the changes that may occur DEMO
this relationship over time.
This study has added to our understanding of the associations of a new ventures
technology strategy. Results show that some DEMO these dimensions support one another.
Examples include radical new products and R&D investments, strong R&D spending,
and the use of external resources. This is important because new venture managers can
capitalize on the DEMO among the dimensions of the venture’s TS and build
an effective competitive approach using their ﬁrms technological capabilities. Theoreti-
cally this study shows that DEMO should not presume a priori that TS dimensions will con-
ﬂict with one another requiring managers to make signiﬁcant tradeoffs.
Future empirical research on DEMO relationship between the ventures’ TS and NVP is
needed also to identify the contextual variables that affect the payoff from technological
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
169
choices. Researchers need to DEMO new ventures over time and examine their technolog-
ical choices in different stages of growth (e.g., Hamilton and Singh 1992) or across the
different stages of an industry’s life cycle (e.g., Auster 1992). DEMO analyses can
help to document evolutionary patterns in new ventures’ TS. Previous researchers (e.g.,
Helfat 1994; Kotabe and Swan 1995; Singh 1992) who have called for such dynamic anal-
yses of TS variables and relate them to changes in NVP. These studies can help also
in DEMO the side effects of the venture’s use of external technology sources.
Another issue to consider in future studies is the moderating role of the DEMO
(scope) of the venture’s business on the TS-NVP relationships in different environ-
ments. Although this study has treated business scope as a control DEMO, Porter (1980,
1983) suggests that it shapes the ﬁrm’s DEMO choices, especially TS. Scope also inﬂu-
ences the venture’s performance (Grant 1995).8
The nature of interactions among the TS variables should be DEMO explored. As
pointed out in the previous section, environmental conditions leading DEMO such interac-
tions among the variables are not only anticipated, they DEMO likely inevitable. Only by
developing a richer understanding of these interactions can the full impact of the pre-
scriptions for each TS variable be DEMO
Finally, as noted earlier, most new ventures have resource constraints that might
inﬂuence their TS choices. Although this study has used venture origin DEMO a proxy for
differences in resource endowments, researchers should consider more DEMO measures
of venture capitalization and explore the effect of this variable on TS. Researchers need
also to link a venture’s resource pool to its DEMO choices within different environments
and clarify the effective interplay between a ﬁrm’s resources, strategy and performance
in different environments.
Measuring the tangible and intangible resources of a new venture is a demanding
task. In this study DEMO have explicitly measured R&D resources. Understanding how
a new venture uses its technological resources to build a competitive advantage is an
important issue DEMO requires careful analysis and direct measures of these resources
in future studies.
Given that the current study’s results are based on reports by managers DEMO their
perceptions of the environment, there is a need to further DEMO the link between the
objective qualities of the environment and the ventures’ TS; managers’ perceptions of
their environments do not always reﬂect the objective attributes of their markets and
industries. By examining the impact of the DEMO objective qualities (Dess &
Beard 1984) and managers’ perceptions, researchers can establish the relative contribu-
tions of these two sets of variables DEMO TS or explore the effect of the mismatch between
these objective qualities and perceptions on the payoff from the venture’s TS. Such mis-
8 DEMO gain a better appreciation of the moderating role of business scope on the study’s hypotheses, the
sample was split at the median into narrow versus broad business scope. Separate analyses were rerun for
each subgroup. In DEMO of dynamism, the results showed that those ventures with broad scope DEMO higher
coefﬁcients than ventures with narrow scope on the following hypotheses: DEMO, H1b2, H1c1, and H1d1.
Ventures with narrow scope had signiﬁcantly DEMO coefﬁcients than ventures with broad scope in the case
of H1d2. In terms of hostility, narrow scope ventures had a signiﬁcantly higher coefﬁcient with regard to
H2a1 (more negative effect), H2b1 (more negative effect), H2d2, and H2d4. Ventures with broad scope had
signiﬁcantly higher coefﬁcients DEMO ventures with narrow scope on the following: H2b1, H2b2, H2c3, and
H2d1. Finally, the results for heterogeneity indicated that ventures with broad scope had signiﬁcantly higher
coefﬁcients than the other ventures on: H3b1, DEMO, H3c2, H3d1, and H3d2. The opposite was true in the
DEMO of H3a1 and H3a2, where the coefﬁcients for ventures with narrow DEMO were higher than those with
broad scope.
170
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
match, which may arise from ineffective competitive analyses, poor environmental anal-
yses, managers’ cognitive biases, or managerial hubris, can lead ventures to pursue inef-
fective TS, a factor DEMO cause the demise of new ﬁrms.
The process by which new ventures develop and deploy their TS is another area
that requires additional research DEMO answer several basic questions: How are the various
aspects of TS DEMO to create a competitive advantage? How are the ﬁrm’s percep-
tions DEMO the competitive environment factored in making these choices? How are adjust-
DEMO in the venture’s TS made over time and by whom? Answering DEMO questions
can be useful in documenting the evolutionary changes that may occur in the ﬁrm’s TS.
The longitudinal studies prescribed above can be especially DEMO in this regard.
New ventures have contributed signiﬁcantly to the technological progress of the
U.S. by creating and commercializing innovative products, services, and DEMO Gaining
an enduring competitive advantage from these products requires new ventures to pur-
sue technology strategies that match the conditions of their external environment. DEMO
ther empirical research is needed to determine the precise nature of the interactions
between the new ventures’ environments and technological strategies, and how these
interactions may inﬂuence these ﬁrm’s performance. We hope that the current results
DEMO encourage further research on these issues.
REFERENCES
Adler, P. 1989. Technology DEMO: Guide to the Literature. In R.S. Rosenbloom and R.A. Bur-
gelman, eds., Research on Technological Innovation, Management and Policy. Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press, 1–25.
Ali, A. 1994. Pioneering Versus Incremental Innovation: Review and Research Propositions.
Journal of Product Innovation Management 11:46–61.
Anderson, P. and Tushman, M.L. 1990. Technological Discontinuities and Dominant Designs: A
Cyclical DEMO of Technological Change. Administrative Science Quarterly 35(4):604–633.
Auster, E.R. 1992. The Relationship of Industry Evolution to Patterns of Technological Linkages,
DEMO Ventures, and Direct Investment Between U.S. and Japan. Management Science
38(DEMO):778–792.
Bell, C. and McNamara, J. 1991. High-Tech Ventures: The Guide for Entrepreneurial Success.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.
Bettis, R.A. and Hitt, M.A. 1995. The New Competitive Landscape. Strategic Management DEMO
nal 16:7–9.
Bogner, W.C. and Thomas, H. 1996. From Skills to Competencies: The “Play-Out” of Resource
Bundles Across Firms. In R. Sanchez, A. Heene, and H. Thomas, eds., Dynamics of Compe-
tence-Based DEMO London, UK: Pergamon, 101–117.
Bogner, W.C. and Thomas, H. DEMO Core Competence and Competitive Advantage: A Model
and Illustrative Evidence from DEMO Pharmaceutical Industry. In G. Hamel and A. Heene,
eds., Competence DEMO Competition. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., 111–144.
Boyd, B.K., Dess, G.G., and Rasheed, A.M.A. 1993. Divergence Between Archival and DEMO
tual Measures of the Environment: Causes and Consequences. Academy of Management
DEMO 18(2):204–226.
Brown, S.L. and Eisenhardt, K.M. 1995. Product DEMO: Past Research, Present Findings,
and Future Directions. Academy of Management Review 20:343–378.
Brush, C. and VanderWerf, P. 1992. Comparison of DEMO and Sources for Obtaining Esti-
mates of New Venture Performance. Journal of Business Venturing 7(2):157–170.
Buzzell, R. and Gale, B. 1987. The PIMS Principles. New York, NY: Free Press.
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
171
Chandler, G. and Hanks, S. 1993. Measuring the Performance of Emerging Businesses: A Valida-
tion DEMO Journal of Business Venturing 8(5):391–408.
Cohen, J. and Cohen, P. 1983. Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the Behav-
ioral Sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cooper, A.C., Woo, C., and Dunkelberg, W. 1989. Entrepreneurship and the Initial Size of Firms.
Journal of Business DEMO 4:317–332.
Cooper, R.G. 1984a. How New Product Strategies Impact on DEMO Journal of Product
Innovation Management 2:5–18.
Cooper, R.G. 1984b. New DEMO Strategies: What Distinguishes the Top Performers? Journal
of Product Innovation Management 2:151–164.
Dess, G.G. and Beard, D.W. 1984. Dimensions of Organizational DEMO Environments. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly 29(1):52–73.
Dess, G.G., DEMO, D., and Hitt, M. 1990. Industry Effects and Strategic Management DEMO
Journal of Management 16:7–27.
Dodgson, M. 1991. Technology Learning, Technology Strategy and Competitive Pressures. Brit-
ish Journal of Management 2:133–149.
Dodgson, M. 1993. Technological Collaboration in Industry: Strategy, Policy, and International-
ization in Innovation. London: Routledge.
Dosi, G. 1988. Sources, Procedures, and DEMO Effects of Innovation. Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 26:1120–1171.
Dowling, DEMO and McGee, J.E. 1994. Business and Technology Strategies and New Venture DEMO
formance: A Study of the Telecommunications Equipment Industry. Management Science
40(DEMO):1663-1677.
Ettlie, J. and Bridges, W. 1982. Environmental Uncertainty and DEMO Technology Pol-
icy. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, EM-29, 2–10.
Gartner, W.B. and Thomas, R.J. 1993. Factors Affecting New Product Forecasting Accuracy DEMO
New Firms. Journal of Product Innovation 10:35–52.
Golder, P. and DEMO, G. 1993. Pioneer Advantage: Marketing Logic or Marketing legend? Jour-
DEMO of Marketing Research 30(May): 160–174.
Grant, R.M. 1995. Contemporary DEMO Analysis: Concepts, Techniques, Applications, second
edition. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell, Inc.
Hagedoorn, J. 1993. Understanding The Rationale of Strategic Technology DEMO: Interor-
ganizational Modes of Cooperation and Sectoral Differences. Strategic Management Jour-
DEMO 14:371–385.
Hambrick, D.C. 1983. High Proﬁt Strategies in Mature Capital DEMO Industries: A Contingency
Approach. Academy of Management Journal 26(4):687–707.
Hamilton, W. and Singh, H. 1992. The Evolution of Corporate Capabilities DEMO Emerging Technol-
ogy. Interfaces 22(4):13–23.
Helfat, C. 1994. Evolutionary Trajectories in Petroleum Firm R&D. Management Science 40:
1720–1747.
Hill, C. W. and Jones, G. 1992. Strategic Management, An Integrated Approach, 2nd ed. Boston,
MA: Houghton Mifﬂin Company.
Huff, A. 1982. DEMO Inﬂuences on Strategy Reformulation. Strategic Management Journal
3:119–131.
Iansiti, M. DEMO Shooting the Rapids: Managing Product Development in Turbulent Environ-
ments. California DEMO Review 38(1):37–58.
Kerin, R.A., Varadarajan, P.R., and DEMO, R.A. 1992. First-Mover Advantage: A Synthesis,
Conceptual Framework, and DEMO Propositions. Journal of Marketing 56:33–52.
Kotabe, M. and Swan, K.S. 1995. The Role of Strategic Alliances in High-Technology New Prod-
uct Development. DEMO Management Journal 16:621–636.
Lefebvre, L., Langley, A., Harvey, DEMO, and Lefebvre E. 1992. Exploring the Strategy-Technology
172
S.A. ZAHRA AND W.C. BOGNER
Connection in Small Manufacturing Firms. Production DEMO Operations Management
1:269–284.
Leonard-Barton, D. 1995. Wellsprings of Knowledge. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.
Levin, R., Klevorick, A., Nelson, R., and Winter, S. 1987. Appropriating the Returns for Industrial
Research and Development. Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 3:783–820.
Liebeskind, J. 1996. Knowledge, Strategy, and the Theory of the Firm. Strategic Management
Journal DEMO (special issue):93–107.
Link, A.N. and Tassey, G. 1987. Strategies for Technology-based Competition: Meeting the New
Global Challenge. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Mansﬁeld, E., Schwartz, M. and Wagner, S. 1981. Imitation DEMO and Patents: An Empirical
Study. Economic Journal 91:907–918.
McGee, J.E., Dowling, M.J., and Megginson, W.L. 1995. Cooperative Strategy and New DEMO
Performance: The Role of Business Strategy and Management Experience. Strategic Man-
DEMO Journal 16:565–580.
McGrath, M.E. 1994. Product Strategy for High-Technology Companies: How to Growth, Com-
petitive Advantage and Increased Proﬁts. Burr Ridge, DEMO: Irwin.
Miles, R. and Snow, C. 1978. Organizational Strategy, Structure and Process. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Miller, A. 1988. A Taxonomy of Technological Settings, with Related Strategies and Performance
Levels. Strategic Management Journal 9:239–254.
Miller, D. 1987. The Structural and Environmental Correlates of Business Strategy. Strategic
Management Journal 8:55–76.
Miller, D. and Friesen, P. 1982. DEMO in Conservative and Entrepreneurial Firms: Two Mod-
els of Strategic Momentum. DEMO Management Journal 3:1–25.
Miller, D. and Friesen, P. 1984. Organizations: A Quantum View. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall.
Nonaka, DEMO and Takeuchi, H. 1995. The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Companies
Create the Dynamics of Innovation. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Pisano, G. 1990. The R&D Boundaries of the Firm: An Empirical Analysis Administrative Science
Quarterly 35:153–176.
Porac, J.F., Thomas, H., and DEMO, C. 1989. Competitive Groups as Cognitive Communi-
ties: The Case of Scottish Knitwear Manufacturers. Journal of Management Studies
26:397–416.
Porac, J. and Thomas, H. 1990. Taxonomic Mental Models in Competitor Deﬁnition. Academy
of Management Review 15:224–240.
Porter, M.E. 1980. Competitive Strategy. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Porter, M.E. 1985. Competitive Advantage. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Prusa, T.J. and Schmitz, Jr., J.A. 1994. Can Companies Maintain Their Initial Innovative Thrust?
A Study of the PC DEMO Industry. The Review of Economics and Statistics
76(3):523–540.
Reger, R. and Huff, A. 1993. Strategic Groups: A Cognitive Perspective. Strategic DEMO
Journal 14:103–124.
Rogers, E.M. and Rogers, J.K. 1984. Silicon Valley Fever. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Rosen, R. 1991. Research and Development with Asymmetric Company Sizes. Rand Journal of
Economics 22:411–429.
Saxenian, A. 1990. Regional Networks and the Resurgence of Silicon Valley. California Manage-
DEMO Review Fall: 89–112.
Scherer, F. and Huh, K. 1992. R&DEMO Reactions to High-Technology Import Competition. Review
of Economics and Statistics 74:202–212.
Shan, W. 1990. An Empirical Analysis of Organizational Strategies by Entrepreneurial High-
Technology Firms. Strategic Management Journal 11:129–139.
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY AND SOFTWARE NEW VENTURES’ PERFORMANCE
173
Singh, H. 1992. The Evolution of Corporate Capabilities in Emerging Technologies. Inter-
faces 22(4):13–23.
Slater, S.F. and Narver, J.C. 1994. Does Competitive Environment Moderate the DEMO Orienta-
tion-Performance Relationship? Journal of Marketing 58(1):46–55.
Smith, DEMO, Grimm, C.M., and Gannon M.J. 1993. Dynamics of Competitive Strategy, Newberry
Park, CA: Sage.
Software Industry Business Practices Survey. 1991. Massachusetts DEMO Software Council,
Inc.: Price Waterhouse.
Teece, D.J. 1986. Proﬁting From Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration, Collab-
oration, Licensing and Public Policy. Research Policy 15:285–305.
Tsai, W. M-H., MacMillan, I.C., and DEMO, M.B. 1991. Effects of Strategy and Environment on
Corporate Venture Success DEMO Industrial Markets. Journal of Business Venturing 6:9–28.
Tushman, M. and DEMO, P. 1986. Technological Discontinuities and Organizational Environ-
ments. Administrative Science Quarterly DEMO:439–465.
Tyler, B.B. and Steensma, H.K. 1995. Evaluating Technological Collaborative Opportunities: A
Cognitive Modeling Perspective. Strategic Management Journal 16:43–70.
U.S. Industrial Outlook. 1994. Washington, DC: Department of Commerce.
Utterback, J. 1994. Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Busi-
ness Press.
Zahra, S. 1991. Predictors and Financial Outcomes of Corporate Entrepreneurship: An Explor-
atory Study. Journal of Business Venturing 6(4):259–285.
Zahra, S. 1996. Technology DEMO and Performance: A Study of Corporate-sponsored and In-
dependent Biotechnology Ventures. DEMO of Business Venturing 11(4):289–321.
Zahra, S. and Covin, DEMO 1993. Business Strategy, Technology Policy and Company Performance.
Strategic Management Journal DEMO:451–478.{1g42fwefx}