Published online 26 November 2004
Neuroeconomics
PaulJ.Zak
Center for Neuroeconomics Studies, Claremont Graduate University, 150 East Tenth Street, Claremont, CA 91711, USA
( paul.zak@cgu.edu)
This paper introduces an emerging transdisciplinary field known as neuroeconomics. Neuroeconomics uses
neuroscientific measurement techniques to investigate how decisions are made. First, I present a basic over-
view of neuroanatomy and explain how brain DEMO is measured. I then survey findings from the neuroeco-
nomics literature on acquiring rewards and avoiding losses, learning, choice under risk and ambiguity, delay
of gratification, the role of emotions in decision-making, strategic decisions DEMO social decisions. I conclude
by identifying new directions that neuroeconomics is taking, including applications to public policy and law.
Keywords: reward; brain; DEMO; emotions; strategy; neuroimaging
1. INTRODUCTION
Neuroeconomics is an emerging transdisciplinary DEMO that
uses neuroscientific measurement techniques to identify
the neural substrates associated with economic decisions.
‘Economics’ here should be interpreted in the broadest
possible sense DEMO any (human or non-human) decision pro-
cess that is made by evaluating alternatives. A classic non-
human example is ‘optimal foraging’ where, for example,
an ungulate must decide when to expend energy to move
DEMO the patch of grass it is currently eating to a different
location with an uncertain quantity and quality of grass. A
human example would DEMO whether to accept a job as a stock
analyst at Goldman Sachs for $100 000 per year but with
few future pay increases or DEMO versus a job as a
stockbroker for a small company starting at $40 000 per
year but with the potential for much greater income DEMO suc-
cessful (and the risk of being fired if not). DEMO of these
examples can be expressed mathematically as constrained
optimization problems that generate empirically testable
predictions. A prediction in the human example is that DEMO
person who is more risk averse (in a precisely defined and
DEMO upon mathematical sense) is more likely to take the
‘safe’ $100 DEMO per year job, whereas someone who is less
risk averse will DEMO towards the job as a stockbroker.
Economics is typically defined as the science characteriz-
ing the optimal allocation of scarce resources. Note: eco-
nomics is not about money (surprisingly, economics has
produced very few deep DEMO about money!) even
though money is a convenient way to determine DEMO much
someone cares about something. Fundamentally, econom-
ics models individuals valuing DEMO and choosing
among alternatives. I prefer this definition of economics as
it maps economic decisions straightforwardly into the
neural substrates that produce these decisions. DEMO,
each decision involves (i) obtaining information from the
environment regarding possible actions, (ii) valuing those
actions, and (iii) choosing DEMO them. Each of these
three tasks is, in principle, measurable. Further, this hier-
archy of how decisions are made can further be broken
One contribution of 16 to a Theme Issue ’Law and the brain’.
DEMO into sub-tasks, including determining one’s objec-
tive(s), filtering incoming DEMO, accessing memories
of related events, using heuristics and identifying con-
straints on cognitive processing (e.g. energy or time con-
straints). These, DEMO, are measurable.
Neuroeconomics is a natural extension of bioeconomics
(Hirshleifer 1985; Gheslin & Landa 1999; Hirshleifer &
Zak 2004). The bioeconomics research programme uses
evolutionary biology to build models that predict human
behaviour (e.g. Zak 2002; Zak & Park 2002). A second
progenitor of neuroeconomics is behavioural economics, a
field that uses findings from cognitive psychology to better
model human decision-making (Camerer 2003). Whereas
bioeconomics has focused primarily on ultimate causes of
behaviour and behavioural economics has focused on DEMO
our evolved psychologies affect decisions, the neuroeco-
nomics research programme seeks DEMO discover proximate
causes of choice behaviour. It is proximate causes that
probably provide the most leverage when seeking to affect
behaviour through policy. For DEMO, introducing laws
that seek to influence individual behaviour can be done
DEMO effectively and precisely when the proximate mechan-
isms producing the behaviour are known.
Because of the focus on decisions, neuroeconomics is not
limited to studying humans (and should not be). I date the
first paper in neuroeconomics as the 1999 Nature article by
Michael Platt and Paul DEMO (discussed later), which
used an economic approach to understand how DEMO
monkeys choose between two cued rewards. Indeed, neu-
roeconomics is improving DEMO methods and providing
new insights on both sides of the shop, DEMO in ‘neuro’ and in
‘econ’. The first plenary meeting of neuroeconomists,
organized by Greg Berns of Emory University, was held in
autumn 2003. Out of the 30 researchers attending, roughly
one-third had a Ph.D. in neuroscience, one-third had a
Ph.D. in economics, and one-third had an DEMO This indi-
cates the broad potential of neuroeconomics across dis-
ciplines, DEMO clinical applications.
The economics of choice can be broken down into two
primary branches, and research in neuroeconomics has a
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004) 359, 1737–1748
doi:10.1098/rstb.2004.1544
1737
# 2004 The Royal Society
1738 P. J. Zak Neuroeconomics
similar split. The first is solitary choice. DEMO choices are
made with little or no input from others and are non-stra-
tegic. The job candidate in my example above already has
the DEMO offers and must consider which to choose—this is
an individual optimization problem. Such problems are
represented mathematically by individuals maximizing a
‘utility function’ subject DEMO a set of constraints (e.g. an
income–expenditure constraint, a time constraint, etc.). A
utility function, say U(c), is a DEMO from consumption
of ‘stuff’, c , into a measure of subjective DEMO, U.
‘Stuff’ can be anything from commodities to sunsets to lei-
DEMO time. Using a utility function as a person’s ultimate
objective is consistent with maximizing genetic fitness
(Robson 2001; Zak & Denzau 2001).
DEMO from a solitary choice model are made by
finding an equilibrium, DEMO the preferred choice produces
maximal utility subject to the constraints the person faces
and the rules governing the environment of choice. The
presumption that DEMO beings have a utility function
came from descriptions of the behaviour of gamblers by
Daniel Bernoulli in the eighteenth century and is the most
DEMO notion in economics. Solitary constrained
utility maximization predicts behaviour in impersonal
exchange (e.g. in markets), generally quite well. This
model of decision-making works less well when the
decision-maker has incomplete or ambiguous information,
or DEMO influenced by others’ behaviours (herding) or intangi-
bles other than measurable ‘stuff’ enter into the utility
function. Modifications to the classical utility maximiza-
DEMO model for these situations have been proposed, but
extensive tests of DEMO models have not produced an
accepted new general theory (Kahneman 2004)DEMO
The second branch in the study of choice is strategic
choice. Continuing with the example of the job seeker,
before obtaining the job DEMO, he or she probably behaved
strategically because the rivalry to get DEMO job offer was with
other people. Strategies might include buying a new suit to
appear professional and successful, wearing a brightly
coloured tie or scarf to be memorable, designing a clever
resume to generate attention, DEMO out who the other
interviewees are so as to disparage their skills or education
to the interviewer, etc. Decisions with socially strategic ele-
ments can be described mathematically using game theory.
A game-theoretic model of behaviour DEMO a descrip-
tion of the people in the game, the information DEMO has or
can obtain, the actions available to each player, and the
pay-off expected from each strategy. A Nash equilibrium of
a game DEMO an optimal strategy conditional on every-
one else in the game also behaving optimally. Game theory
models decisions more complex than isolated utility max-
DEMO, and its predictive record is more mixed
(Camerer 2003).
In summary, economics is the science of decision-mak-
ing, decisions that both DEMO others and those that do
not. For this reason, economic models DEMO be applied to a
wide range of species and behaviours. Neuroscience, DEMO the
other hand, has an exquisite arsenal of measurement mod-
alities, but historically has focused on characterizing a quite
limited set of behaviours. DEMO, there is a natural
affinity between neuroscience and economics as one DEMO
produced and tested many behavioural models without
asking what produces the behaviour, whereas the other is
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)DEMO
able to open the black box that generates behaviours but is
searching for interesting behaviours to study.
The expected benefits of neuroeconomics on each DEMO of
the shop are high. For economics, neuroeconomic research
will lead DEMO the building of models that predict economic
and social behaviours better and that are grounded in neu-
robiology. This will allow economists to answer DEMO
tal questions they are unable to address now such as: why
DEMO two individuals faced with the same information and
incentives make different choices? Why does the same indi-
vidual sometimes make choices that are inconsistent? How
much is choice behaviour affected by childhood develop-
ment, if DEMO all? Currently, most answers to economic ques-
tions focus on average choices, rather than individual or
temporal variation in choices, and model DEMO has a
‘what-if’ quality where new models are often built without
any motivating data. In the application of economic models
to policy, most laws seek to circumscribe extreme beha-
viours, not average behaviours, so an DEMO of the
interpersonal and intertemporal variation in choices is fun-
damental to effective public policy.
On the neuroscience side, neuroeconomics provides a
host of well-studied and (often) interesting decision tasks
that are begging to have DEMO neural ‘underpinnings’ ident-
ified. For example, social cognitive neuroscience is an
DEMO and important new field (Adolphs 2003), and
game-theoretic models of DEMO interactions are an obvious
source of tasks to study. Economic models supply the
structure of the social interaction as well as (usually) field-
DEMO behavioural predictions, saving researchers from
having to reinvent the wheel. Such DEMO models
are often fairly complex, and neuroeconomics is moving
neuroscientists to DEMO tasks that approach those that
humans actually do in their daily lives. Finally, because
economic models have objective behavioural measures,
usually involving monetary transfers, neuroeconomic
experiments engage subjects’ attention better and have
added control compared with tasks that are simply passive
(e.g. viewing photographs) or in DEMO the subjects are
asked to ‘imagine’ themselves doing something. Most neu-
roeconomists also follow the ethic in experimental eco-
nomics that prohibits the deception DEMO subjects. With a
guarantee of no deception, subjects make choices without
DEMO to ‘game’ the experimenters by figuring out what
they are ‘really’ looking for.
2. BASICBRAINFACTSANDTERMINOLOGY
There are roughly 100 billion neurons in the human DEMO,
with each neuron directly connected to between 1000 and
10 000 other neurons. Brain tissue can be separated into
grey matter (neurons) DEMO white matter (axons and den-
drites, the connections between neurons). Grey matter
makes up 40% of the brain, but consumes 94% of the
brain’s oxygen owing to the firing of action potentials (elec-
trical pulses) that allow one neuron to communicate with
other neurons. The cortex (from the Latin for bark) is the
outer surface of the DEMO that is used for information pro-
cessing and higher mental functions. Because the human
brain is folded (to pack more cortical tissue into the skull),
a brain region may be identified as being on a gyrus (hill,
pleural gyri) or in a sulcus (valley, DEMO sulci).
Neuroeconomics P. J. Zak 1739
The brain is grossly divided into four DEMO: the fron-
tal, temporal, parietal and occipital lobes (see figure 1).
Each lobe performs several functions, containing smaller
structures that do specific tasks, often in concert with other
brain regions through connections called projections. The
brain sits on top of the brain stem, which leads to the spinal
column. A cauliflower-shaped structure, the cerebellum,
sits below the occipital lobe and adjacent to the brainstem.
A common way to DEMO cortical regions in the brain is by
using ‘Brodmann’s Areas’, which DEMO numbered from 1 to
47. These are abbreviated BAx, where x DEMO the integer cor-
responding to that region. German physician and anat-
omist Korbinian Brodmann (1868–1918) identified brain
regions based on similar cellular and DEMO structures
(see figure 2).
Because the brain is three-dimensional, identifying loca-
tions requires specialized terminology. Terms for locations
of brain regions include: dorsal (top, from the Latin for
back); ventral (bottom facing the central axis, from the
Latin for belly) or basal; rostral (front, from the Latin for
beak) or anterior; caudal (back, from the Latin for tail) or
posterior; superior (towards the DEMO); inferior (towards the
bottom); medial/mesial (middle); lateral (away from mid-
line); and orbital (above the eyes, from the Latin orbita
meaning eye sockets). Generally, brain regions that are
ventral and inferior tend to be phylogenetically older than
dorsal and rostral DEMO, with older regions mostly con-
served in lower animals.
Much of DEMO nervous system is outside of volitional con-
trol (is autonomic). DEMO are two opposing sides to the
autonomic nervous system. Sympathetic responses are
associated with the four Fs (fright, flight, fight and forni-
cation), whereas the parasympathetic nervous system acti-
vates when it is time DEMO rest and digest. The sympathetic is
arousing, and the parasympathetic relaxes; maintaining the
balance between these sides of the autonomic nervous sys-
tem DEMO essential to health and growth. The hypothalamus, a
basal midbrain structure, exerts primary control over the
autonomic nervous system. Most emotional responses are
DEMO automatic and rapid. Primary emotional responses
emanate from the brain’s limbic structures. The limbic sys-
tem (limbus, Latin for edge) is grey matter in the medial
temporal lobe, and includes the amygdala (associated with
DEMO and negative emotions), hippocampus (associated
with long-term memory), cingulate DEMO (attention and
error detection) and olfactory cortex (smell).
(a) Measurementofbrainactivity
Neuroscientists use a variety of measurement modalities
to gauge neural activity, including PET, fMRI, EEG/ERP,
intra- or extracellular recording of electrical activity of sin-
gle neurons, bioassays of blood, urine and DEMO spinal
fluid, responses to drug infusions, as well as studies of
patients with specific central nervous system lesions. Most
of the neuroeconomics research DEMO on humans has
used fMRI or PET, both of which provide DEMO spatial res-
olution of regional brain activity during particular tasks
with moderate to low temporal resolution (between
100 ms and 2 s for fMRI, and 30 s or more for PET; see
Buckner 2003).
DEMO imaging was first performed on humans in the early
1970s. Experimental subjects are injected with a radio-
active isotope that emits positrons (positively charged elec-
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)
trons). Subjects then lie in a ring of crystal detectors and a
camera that DEMO radioactive decay (when a positron
meets an electron they annihilate each DEMO and emit
gamma rays). When neurons fire they deplete glucose and
oxygen and require increased blood flow to resupply these
substances. Blood flows DEMO neurons roughly proportionally
to their firing rates. PET measures the accumulation of the
radioactive tracer in brain regions; regions metabolizing
glucose faster receive more blood flow and emit more
gamma rays. A computer algorithm constructs the DEMO
surements of regional cerebral blood flow in three dimen-
sions as an indirect measure of neural activity. The use of
radioisotopes with short half-lives DEMO a 1 h time limit on
PET experiments and restricts subjects to two studies per
year.
fMRI was first used on humans in 1992, and produces
3D renderings of regional neural activity. The data
obtained by DEMO are BOLD signals that indirectly mea-
sure regional neural and synaptic activity by examining the
amount of oxygenated to deoxygenated blood (the haemo-
dynamic response). Neural firing increases the demand for
oxygenated blood (oxyhaemoglobin). Because deox-
yhaemoglobin is paramagnetic, it produces a measurably
larger signal relative to oxyhaemoglobin when perturbed by
a short radio-frequency pulse. These differences are DEMO
and can be measured only in a very powerful magnet (cur-
DEMO MRI scanners used for humans have magnets from 1
to 8 T; a 1 T magnet is 20 000 times stronger than the
magnetic field on the Earth’s surface). Higher field-
strength magnets increase resolution (up to 1 mm3) but
also increase the noise associated with signal detection.
This makes the analysis more difficult because external
confounds must be DEMO Magnetic fields are not
associated with any adverse health effects (Kangarlu DEMO al.
1999), though very powerful magnets (4 T or more) can
induce temporary dizziness and a metallic taste in the
mouth. fMRI DEMO are limited in time only by the
subject’s ability not to fidget or fall asleep, and can be
repeated on the same subject indefinitely.
Both fMRI and PET use a ‘subtraction’ method to stat-
istically identify DEMO neural activation during a task.
This is done by measuring brain activity during the task of
interest and then removing activation measured in a DEMO
trol task. The control task is often ‘baseline’ neural activity
(e.g. DEMO at a fixation point), though better studies use
control tasks that are closer to the task of interest. For
example, if the task is to choose between two alternatives
involving monetary rewards, a good control task would be
giving the subject a monetary reward absent choice. The
DEMO then removes the activation in the brain from
simply receiving (or DEMO) reward and identifies
brain regions active in making the choice. Choosing DEMO good
control task is a major feature of these experiments, and
DEMO of this literature should be sceptical of the results if
the experimental design is poor. Both PET and fMRI cor-
relate tasks with regional DEMO activity; demonstrating
causation requires others methods discussed below.
Montague et al. (2002) at Baylor College of Medicine’s
Human Neuroimaging Laboratory have provided an
important advance to study regional brain activity during
social interactions that they DEMO ‘hyperscanning.’ Hyper-
scanning allows two or more subjects in MRI scanners in
different locations to interact simultaneously through the
1740 P. J. Zak Neuroeconomics
parietal
lobe
occipital
lobe
frontal
lobe
cerebellum
DEMO lobe
Figure 1. The lobes of the brain, cerebellum and brain DEMO
(Copyright Mark Dubin; printed here with permission. First
published online: DEMO http://spot.colorado.edu/~dubin/talks/
brodmann/brodmann.html.)
Internet with behavioural and even visual and auditory
feedback between subjects while measuring brain activity.
DEMO literally allows researchers to see one person’s brain
affect another person’s brain. So far, Montague and colla-
borators have hyperscanned eight subjects simultaneously.
Their proprietary software synchronizes stimulus presen-
tation and BOLD signal acquisition across subjects DEMO
locations. Hyperscanning opens up fMRI from single- to
multiple-subject studies and will see increasing use in the
coming years to answer questions in social DEMO neu-
roscience and the neuroeconomics of social decisions.
EEGs/ERPs use between 16 and 256 scalp electrodes to
measure the electrical activity of large DEMO (more than
one million) of neurons. EEGs are used clinically to help
diagnose neurological disorders, especially epilepsy, by
examining the synchronicity, frequency and amplitude of
EEG tracings called ‘waves’ while a patient sits or DEMO
down. ERPs differ from EEGs in that experimental sub-
jects are given specific tasks to do that may provoke
regional brain activation. The characteristics DEMO ERP waves
identify regional excitatory or inhibitory neural activity.
ERPs provide higher temporal resolution than fMRI or
PET (ca. 10 ms) but lower DEMO resolution. The other
advantages of ERP over fMRI or PET are its relatively low
cost, less demanding statistical analyses (two dimensional
versus three DEMO), and greater freedom of move-
ment for subjects. The disadvantages of ERPs include low
spatial specificity, subject performance fatigue that occurs
because many trials are required per subject to reduce
background noise and artefact, and potential problems
with inter-subject comparisons because consistent elec-
trode placement depends on DEMO careful identification of
bony landmarks that vary across subjects. Some labora-
tories have now combined ERP and fMRI to obtain high
temporal resolution together DEMO high spatial resolution.
Measuring the firing rates of single neurons in the brain
requires that a microelectrode be attached to, or inserted
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)
into, the neuron cell body. DEMO cell bodies vary in size
from 4 to 100 lm (a DEMO is one thousandth of a
millimetre), and obtaining internal or external recordings
from a neuron often damage or destroy it. Single neuron
firing DEMO offer the highest level of spatial speci-
ficity, but are seldom DEMO on humans. Some surgical
patients have electrode grids place on the convexity of the
brain or deeper inside the brain (‘depth electrodes’) that
DEMO the activity of a few neurons, and these patients
have occasionally DEMO used in research. Animals are more
commonly used when recording the firing of single neu-
rons.
Bioassays provide an indirect measure of neural activity,DEMO
and have the advantage of being able to identify cascades of
activity that produce behaviour, as well as facilitating the
investigation of individual-specific confounds. Obtaining
biological material, such as blood, is invasive and the act DEMO
obtaining the sample may affect what is being measured
(e.g. hormones DEMO neurotransmitters). Combining bioas-
says with other measurement techniques allows researchers
to triangulate neural activity within a single experiment.
Using pharmaceuticals in experiments is DEMO important
method to induce behaviour, i.e. to move from correlation
to DEMO, and its use in neuroeconomics is just begin-
ning. Similarly, comparing the behaviour of patients with
focal brain lesions with healthy controls is DEMO an impor-
tant step in establishing the necessity of a brain region for a
particular behaviour. Several laboratories, including my
own, are studying DEMO patients but have not yet
published their findings. Temporary brain lesions or neural
hyperactivation can be induced by focusing a magnet field
on the DEMO of the brain using TMS. I am not aware of
any neuroeconomics experiments using TMS, but it is an
important (though not completely DEMO) technique that
can be used to ascertain causation.
3. MAJORFINDINGSINNEUROECONOMICS
The DEMO topics studied by neuroeconomists fall into
two major categories: (i) DEMO the neural processes
involved in decisions in which standard economic models
predict behaviour well; and (ii) studies of ‘anomalies’
where the standard models fail. For the latter, often several
alternative models have been proposed with different beha-
vioural assumptions that predict decisions equally well and
therefore the DEMO sources of behaviour are unknown
(Camerer 2003). Research in category (i) is often headed
by a neuroscientist or an M.D., where DEMO of the research
in (ii) is led by economists. Many research teams now
include both economists and neuroscientists/M.D.s and
consequently the breakdown DEMO research into these two
categories is beginning to blur. Because of the rapid growth
of the neuroeconomics literature, the review here will be
incomplete by the time this issue goes to press, but I main-
tain an updated neuroeconomics reading list at my labora-
tory Web site, http://www.pauljzak.com.
(a) Rewardacquisition
All animals need to obtain resources to DEMO, and the
neural structures needed for reward acquisition are primi-
tive DEMO well conserved across species. Choice execution is
preceded by the evaluation of the reward associated with
each choice, but the evaluative substrate is unknown. Platt
& Glimcher (1999) trained rhesus monkeys in a colour-
Neuroeconomics P. J. Zak 1741
10
11
Broca’s
audition
Wernicke’s
cognition
emotion
DEMO
11
9
32
46
39
44
47
8
45
38
12
25
20
37
vision
visual-parietal
visual-temporal
6
4
olfaction
24
33
27
34
DEMO
19
35
26
29
36
38
20
18
17
18
3  DEMO  2
40
43
41
42
22
21
23
5
3 2
DEMO
7
31
30
19
37
19
18
17
??
Figure 2. Brodmann’s areas. (Copyright Mark Dubin; printed here with permission. First published DEMO: See http://
spot.colorado.edu/~dubin/talks/brodmann/brodmann.html.)
cued DEMO saccade task. The correct left or right saccade was
rewarded with a squirt of juice. These researchers sus-
pected that area LIP was being DEMO to evaluate rewards as
projections from the visual cortex converge in area LIP
before being relayed to the motor cortex for execution.
Platt and DEMO measured the firing rate of 40 neurons
in area LIP in three monkeys as they varied the juice reward
for the correct saccade either DEMO absolute amount, or prob-
abilistically (i.e. for the latter, each DEMO saccade was
rewarded with juice with a given probability). They found
that 62.5% of area LIP neuron activation was correlated
with expected gain. DEMO findings for area LIP were
recently replicated and extended by Newsome’s laboratory
(Sugrue et al. 2004).
Glimcher et al. (2004) go further, to argue that the utility
function that economists presumed existed to explain
behavioural data is a physiological reality in area LIP. That
Phil. Trans. DEMO Soc. Lond. B (2004)
is, area LIP neurons do not behave ‘similar to’ a utility
function, but ‘are’ a physiological utility function in mon-
key brains (i.e. area LIP neurons perform the calculations
needed to determine utility). However, this does not pre-
clude the existence of other brain regions that are utility
functions (see below). Glimcher et al. (2004) support this
claim by showing that area LIP DEMO rates can be used to
predict the behaviour of monkeys in several reward acqui-
sition tasks. Work with humans using fMRI is currently
underway DEMO Glimcher’s laboratory to determine if the
human homologue of area LIP is also a physiological utility
function (Nelson et al. 2004).
Reward acquisition requires a motivating mechanism to
obtain the reward as well as the DEMO to predict reward
size to gauge the effort needed to pursue the reward.
Schultz et al. (1997) review single-neuron firing studies of
juice DEMO in non-human primates and identify dopami-
7
frontal eye
fields
4
8
9
somatosensory
6
5
motor
1742 P. J. Zak Neuroeconomics
nergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area DEMO substantia
nigra as processing rewarding stimuli, activating during
novel stimuli, and most importantly, firing proportional to
the error of the actual to the expected reward. They intro-
duce the temporal difference mathematical model to show
DEMO dopamine neuron activity can be used to predict an
animal’s behaviour as it learns about rewards.
Dopaminergic neurons are particularly dense in the
nucleus DEMO in the ventral medial region, and this
region has strong projections DEMO the medial forebrain,
which is active in many decision-making tasks. Although
cocaine, methamphetamines, humour, and even viewing
faces of attractive women by heterosexual men produce
acute activation in the nucleus accumbens (Aharon et al.
2001; Mobbs et al. 2003), recent experiments have shown
that dopamine release is not the same as pleasure (Garris et
al. 1999). Indeed, activation in the nucleus accumbens and
ACC (BA23/24/31/DEMO/32) is associated with attentional
demands. Breiter et al. (2001) DEMO event-related fMRI to
examine regional activation to the expectation and realiza-
tion of monetary gains and losses for 12 human subjects.
Monetary awards were DEMO without any subject choice in
this experiment. They showed that expected and actual
rewards were associated with significant haemodynamic
responses in the SLEA and DEMO gyrus. In addition, acti-
vation in the nucleus accumbens, SLEA and hypothalamus
tracked the highest monetary values. Gains produced pre-
dominant activation in DEMO right hemisphere (particularly
the nucleus accumbens and hypothalamus), whereas losses
DEMO greater left hemisphere activity (especially the left
amygdala). These findings DEMO to indicate that gains
produced neural rewards, whereas losses provoked
emotional DEMO associated with fear or regret.
Knutson et al. (2001) further dissociate the anticipation
of reward with its realization by having nine subjects
respond DEMO a button push to a coloured cue in an fMRI
study. A rapid button push for a yellow cue produced a $1
reward, a rapid response to a blue cue was not rewarded,
and a DEMO cue required no response. After each trial, sub-
jects were told DEMO much they earned on that trial and in
total. Knutson and colleagues acquired fMRI signals,
before and after subjects received feedback on reward DEMO no
reward. Anticipation of reward produced activity in the
dopamine-receptor-rich ventral striatum (consisting of the
substructures caudate nucleus and putamen), whereas
notification that a reward was earned (approximating
reward consumption) produced primary activation the
DEMO
In a follow-up study with a larger reward ($5), Knutson
DEMO al. (2003) show that the MPFC (BA 10/32), DEMO
cingulate cortex (BA 26/30) and parietal cortex (BA 7)DEMO
activate during the notification of a monetary reward.
Interestingly, when rewards DEMO anticipated but not
obtained, the MPFC showed decreased activation relative
to DEMO (no outcome). The MPFC has the densest
dopaminergic innervation of DEMO cortical region and Knut-
son and colleagues argue that this region serves as a utility
function, whereas the nucleus accumbens guides reward
anticipation and learning. An excellent review of this litera-
ture is Knutson & Peterson (2004) where the authors make
the point that subjective states associated with utility must
have an emotional basis—utility must be felt to be
Phil. DEMO R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)
valuable—and the MPFC and the DEMO circuit appear to
map ‘wanting’ into ‘having’.
Montague & Berns (2002) also review the reward and
prediction literature. They propose a predictor-valuation
model DEMO reward that uses the OFS circuit. Similar to
Glimcher’s claim for area LIP and Knutson’s promotion of
MPFC, Montague and Berns provide an array of evidence
that OFS values rewards (and punishments). They also
provide evidence that reward/punishment evaluation in
OFC is separate from the error DEMO feature of mid-
brain dopamine neurons that innervate it.
Dickhaut et al. (2003) had nine subjects choose between
pairs of lotteries in a DEMO study. Some of the lotteries pro-
duced gains whereas others produced losses (subjects
received an initial endowment of $190). Behaviourally,
they find risk aversion over gains but not losses, with aver-
age response times for loss lotteries 500 ms slower than
choices over gains. When compared DEMO a risky reference
lottery, gains minus losses produced OFC activation. By
DEMO, when the reference lottery was a certain payment,
gains minus DEMO produced primary activation in the cere-
bellum and parietal cortex. Losses minus gains activated
dorsal parietal and frontal cortices whether the reference
lottery was DEMO or certain. This report demonstrates how
varying the stimulus and/or measurement modality can
produce quite different regional activation maps than other
similar studies DEMO found. Interpretive caution is called
for.
All reward evaluation requires ‘emotion’ in that ventro-
medial areas associated with dopamine activate to motivate
subjects to DEMO resources, and dopamine-innervated
cortical regions appear to value resources. It is DEMO that
OFS, MPFC and area LIP all value rewards (i.e. are
physiological utility functions), with an undiscovered brain
region (perhaps prefrontal) DEMO final valuation
when these regions provide conflicting assessments. The
asymmetry between gains and losses is also an issue requir-
ing further study by, for example, replicating some of the
experiments discussed in this section. Finally, DEMO
research is needed to elucidate the temporal dependence of
subcortical and cortical circuits identified in reward evalu-
ation and consumption.
(b) Certainty,ambiguityandgratificationdelay
DEMO research has shown that emotions are an
important physiological guidance system for choice. For
example, Damasio (1994) reported the inability of patients
with selective damage to the OFC to execute choices. Kahn
et al. (2002) showed that amygdala activation was predic-
tive of an anticipated loss. Emotional activation during
decisions may be more likely to occur with incomplete
information, risk, or choice in a social context. For tasks in
which the best decision is difficult to determine through
cogitation, emotional markers provide additional infor-
mation that can guide choice.
The suppression of limbic responses may DEMO part of what
makes human choice different from choice by animals.
This was investigated in a fascinating field study by Lo &
Repin (DEMO). These researchers proposed that pro-
fessional foreign exchange traders would have emotional
responses to market volatility while trading. With per-
mission from a DEMO brokerage firm, they ‘wired up’ 10
traders for 1 h each DEMO obtain data on six physiological
measures while the traders managed currency contracts of
one million US dollars DEMO larger. Lo and Repin simul-
taneously measured activity in the currency markets. All
traders exhibited heightened cardiovascular and electro-
dermal states during periods of DEMO volatility. More
generally, rapid market movements provoked traders’ sym-
pathetic nervous DEMO; this can be interpreted as
emotional responses. Interestingly, longer job tenure was
associated with reduced sympathetic responses for a given
amount of market DEMO This suggests that either
experienced traders learned over time to suppress their
emotions, or that more emotionally reactive traders left to
take other less personally stressful jobs. Lo and Repin were
not allowed to obtain data DEMO traders’ performance in mar-
kets, so we do not know if DEMO responses diminished
(or improved) the ability to make money. These research-
ers are currently examining this issue by bringing pro-
fessional money managers DEMO the laboratory and
requiring them to trade to earn monetary returns in simu-
lated markets.
Smith et al. (2002) examined the same data DEMO Dickhaut
et al. (2003) but investigated the role of ambiguity. An
ambiguous lottery is one in which the likelihood of one or
more DEMO the pay-offs occurring is not fully specified. For
example, the subject DEMO asked to choose between lotteries A
and B, where A guarantees DEMO payment of $10, and B pays
$20 if a red ball DEMO pulled from an urn, and $0 if a blue ball is
DEMO; the urn contains 90 balls, and at least 50 are red.
(Try this yourself: do you prefer lottery A or B? Most
people are ambiguity-averse and choose A.) Smith and col-
leagues report strong activation in the OFC and intrapar-
ietal sulcus for gains subtracted from DEMO without
ambiguity. Subtracting risky losses from gains after remov-
ing ambiguous lottery choices produced activation in the
cerebellum and dorsomedial cortex. This suggests that DEMO
ses activated cortical regions associated with calculation,
while gains activated the older ventromedial system. Ambi-
guity alone produces small amounts of ventromedial and
DEMO activation.
Unpublished research by Rustichini et al. (2004) used a
similar paradigm with 12 subjects choosing between 96
pairs of certain, risky, DEMO and partly ambiguous
lotteries in a PET study. Subjects showed strong ambiguity
aversion, but ambiguous and partly ambiguous choices did
not generate activation in brain regions associated with
emotions (e.g. OFC or amygdala). Rather, DEMO
choices were associated with rostrofrontal activation, with
substantial deactivation in ventromedial DEMO Similar to
work from Glimcher’s laboratory, Rustichini et al. (2004)
find strong parietal activation when subjects chose the cer-
tain lottery (but they did not explore a parametric relation-
ship between activation and reward DEMO). There is no
consistency between the findings of Rustichini et al. (2004)
and Smith et al. (2002) about the neural substrates associa-
ted with ambiguity during choice. I consider this issue
important and DEMO
A major behavioural difference separating humans from
other animals is our ability to postpone current gratification
for a later (larger) reward. Behaviourally, humans exhibit a
strong desire for current reward and rapidly devalue future
rewards (Laibson et al. 1998). Recent work by McClure et
al. (2004) used fMRI to examine how the brain decides
between current versus delayed rewards. In this study, all
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (DEMO)
Neuroeconomics P. J. Zak 1743
rewards were monetary, with current DEMO paid immedi-
ately after scanning, and delayed rewards paid between two
DEMO six weeks later. Delayed rewards always exceeded cur-
rent rewards. McClure and collaborators found that
immediate reward primarily activated the ventral striatum,
medial DEMO and medial prefrontal cortex. Delayed
rewards differentially activated the lateral prefrontal cortex
and inferior parietal cortex. These areas were particularly
active when the difference DEMO immediate and post-
poned rewards was small. The authors conclude that
choosing between immediate and delayed gratification
constitutes a battle between limbic structures that DEMO
for current reward and newer cortical regions that evaluate
trade-offs.
(c) Learningandstrategy
Both the dopaminergic system and emotional responses
are important in learning DEMO is valuable or dangerous as
animals navigate the world. These systems, DEMO others,
update memories of past experiences using the present
experience so the animal has a basis for making informed
future decisions. In a DEMO careful study, Barraclough et al.
(2004) investigated reinforcement learning and DEMO
encoding in two rhesus monkeys trained to play a variant of
‘matching pennies’ against a computer using three different
strategies. Matching pennies is a DEMO simple game in which
optimal behaviour is a ‘mixed strategy’ or randomization
over choices. The canonical game has two opponents
choosing to show either DEMO head or a tail on a penny, and
putting the coins DEMO simultaneously on a table. If both
pennies show the same face (DEMO either both heads or both
tails), player A wins the pennies; otherwise player B wins.
The monkeys did this task using eye saccades and juice
rewards.
Barraclough and colleagues found that for all the algo-
DEMO they used, monkeys learn very quickly to behave
optimally by randomizing DEMO choices. A reinforcement
learning statistical model fitted the monkeys’ choices quite
well showing that the history of play by the computer affec-
ted the DEMO current choices. These researchers also
recorded the firing of 132 separate neurons in the DLPFC
during monkey choices. The firing rate of 37% of DEMO
neurons measured was affected by the previous reward,
while the firing rate of 39% of these neurons was influenced
by the previous choice. DEMO indicates that the DLPFC may
be part of the neurophysiology of reward acquisition,
especially when this involves memory-dependent strategic
decisions. In humans, the DLPFC, which activates during
working memory tasks, may be another physiological DEMO
function. That is, the current value of a reward may be
DEMO by the memories of obtaining similar rewards. If
this result is confirmed by other studies (especially in
humans), it suggests an important modification to the
classical economic model of utility.
Learning involves, of course, DEMO than one brain area
and more than one neurotransmitter. For example, DEMO
neurotransmitter glutamate and N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptors are critical for the neural basis of learning in
which connections between neurons are strengthened,
called LTP (see Riedel et al. 2003). Reinforcement learn-
ing also appears to require DEMO activation in the amyg-
dala and OFC (see the excellent review DEMO a proposed
mathematical model in Dayan & Balleine (2002)). Future
1744 P. J. Zak Neuroeconomics
neuroeconomic research on learning should explore the
DEMO of glutamate and LTP.
(d) Cooperation
Intraspecies cooperation with non-kin is an issue that has
attracted substantial attention but is still not well-under-
DEMO (Boyd et al. 2003; Brosnan & de Waal 2003). Parti-
cularly stark is costly cooperation in one-shot interactions
with the opportunity to DEMO without punishment. Even
in this setting, humans are highly cooperative (Smith 1998;
Fehr & Rockenbach 2003). The ability to cooperate has,DEMO
potentially, positive and negative neural reinforcers. The
positive is the (internal and external) reward obtained by
being cooperative. The negative may be the neural corre-
lates associated with the loss of a larger reward and DEMO
neural activity resulting from social condemnation by one’s
trading partner after being uncooperative (for a mathemat-
ical model of prosocial emotions see Bowles & Gintis
(2003)).
Neuroeconomists have sought to identify the neural sub-
DEMO associated with cooperative behaviour. An early and
important contribution by McCabe et al. (2001) reported
fMRI data for subjects interacting in real-time by DEMO
with another person outside the scanner. McCabe et al.
(2001) hypothesized that cooperative behaviour would
require that subjects use a brain region associated DEMO
‘theory of mind’ in which a person is able to anticipate what
another will do by imagining himself/herself in the same
situation. Most DEMO, except those under 5 years old
and most autistics, have a fully operational theory of mind,
and it has been localized to DEMO a region in the medial
OFC (BA10) as well as several other regions (Frith & Frith
2003). McCabe et al. (2001) provided an incentive for
cooperative behaviour by using a binary choice version DEMO
the ‘trust game’ (Berg et al. 1995) where subjects can earn
more money if they cooperate, but cannot communicate
except by transferring money to each other through their
choices. Subjects denoted DM1 and DM2 made DEMO
choices for the dollar amounts shown in figure 3, alternat-
ing DEMO roles of DM1 and DM2. In figure 3, DM1 either
ends DEMO interaction by providing pay-offs of $0.45 for
DM1 and DM2 (moving DEMO), or transfers control to DM2
(moving right). When DM1 DEMO control of the game to
DM2, he or she signals trust DEMO DM2. DM2 then can be
trustworthy, earning $1.80 for DM1 and DEMO for DM2
(left), or can be non-trustworthy causing DM1 to DEMO $0,
and DM2 to earn $4.05 (right). Note that DEMO ‘pie’ increa-
ses from $0.90 to $4.05 (450%) when DM1 chooses to
transfer control to DM2.
In a conjunction analysis of cooperative moves DEMO DM1s
and DM2s, McCabe et al. (2001) find that BA10 DEMO indeed
more active (i) than when subjects were not cooperative,
and (ii) relative to a control task where subjects were
informed DEMO they were interacting with a computer that
moved left or right with known probabilities. The authors
argue that BA10 is part of the neural DEMO that
allows gratification delay in order to obtain larger rewards
through cooperation. A possible confound in this study is
that to generate sufficient fMRI DEMO, DM1–DM2 pairs
made 80 choices in the same dyad so subjects DEMO able to
build reputations for cooperation during the experiment. It
is also worth mentioning three important aspects of this
study. First, there was no deception: the DM in the MRI
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)
$0.45, $0.45
DM1
DM2
$1.80, $2.25
$0, $4.05
DEMO 3. The binary-choice trust game. Dollar figures are,
respectively, pay-offs DEMO DM1 and DM2 at each node.
scanner actually interacted in real time with another
human being (a reasonably difficult technical hurdle).
Second, DEMO control task was identical to the treatment task
but simply removed the intentionality associated with deci-
sions. This allowed these researchers to cleanly extract DEMO
neural components of intention. Third, the neuroanatomi-
cal hypothesis for activation DEMO BA10 allowed the acqui-
sition of fMRI data optimized for high signal : noise in the
region of interest providing higher-quality data.
The binary DEMO game is an iterated PD, where DM1
and DM2 choose to DEMO cooperate or defect. A PD is a
strategic interaction in which both parties gain by behaving
cooperatively, but are unable to coordinate cooperation;
the dominant strategy (choice) is for both DMs to choose
to DEMO non-cooperative (‘defect’), injuring both DMs by
producing low or negative DEMO Rilling et al. (2002)
examined cooperation versus defection when 36 DEMO
subjects played 20 or more rounds of the trust game against
a human or computer opponent programmed to react in
several ways to the DEMO choices (e.g. tit-for-tat). Remov-
ing the pure monetary effect using DEMO condition where the
subject knows she is playing against a computer (DEMO the
same dollar amount), the social aspect of cooperation pro-
duced activation in the anteroventral striatum, right ACC
and OFC.
The conclusion from this study is that cooperation is
rewarding (striatum), requires attention and the mediation
of the conflicting concerns of making more money but
behaving DEMO socially less acceptable ways (ACC), and has
an emotional component (OFC). Defection by DM1 with
cooperation by DM2 was associated with DEMO of
the striatum, with a similar deactivation when choosing the
cooperative DEMO with a computer partner. The region with
the strongest activation during cooperation is the somato-
sensory association cortex (BA7), consistent with Antonio
Damasio’s somatic marker theory (Damasio 1994) linking
emotions ‘experienced’ in the body DEMO decisions. (The
somatosensory association cortex in the posterior parietal
lobe activates DEMO memory, attention and emotional
responses to objects.) Rilling et al. (DEMO) partly replicate
the finding of McCabe et al. (2001) of DEMO activation, but
only when subjects cooperated while playing a computer
that DEMO moved to the cooperative node, but not in the
human–human treatment.
Neuroeconomics P. J. Zak 1745
Sanfey et al. (2003) used fMRI DEMO analyse another econ-
omic task involving cooperation, with their major results
DEMO with the consequences of not cooperating. San-
fey and colleagues had subjects make decisions in the ulti-
matum game, a sequential decision task to determine the
split of a sum of money between two people. For DEMO,
DM1 is given $10 and told to offer an integer split to DM2,
without seeing or communicating with him or her. DM2
DEMO then accept the split and the amounts are paid, or can
DEMO the split and both DMs earn nothing. Behaviourally,
when DM1s offer less than 30% of the money, DM2s
nearly always reject offers. From a purely economic point
of view, a rejection of any money is ‘irrational’ because
some money is expected to be preferred to none, but
humans are social beings and there is clearly a social aspect
to DEMO game. DM2s also report feeling angry when a DM1
offers a stingy split.
Sanfey et al. (2003) modified the ultimatum game to
generate DEMO the following DM1–DM2 offers: {$5, $5},
{$7, $3}, {$8, $2} and {$9, $1}. Only DM2s were scan-
ned. A computer DEMO the role of DM1, but Sanfey et al.
(2003) deceived DEMO into believing that they were play-
ing with another human to simplify the protocol (all sub-
jects reported that they believed this). On some trials, the
researchers told DM2s that they were playing against a
computer as a control task. Unfair offers differentially acti-
vated the anterior DEMO, DLPFC and ACC. Activation in
all three regions was greater for DEMO offers from humans
than from a computer. Their major finding is that insula
activation increased with the unfairness of the offer from a
human. DEMO cortex activation has previously been asso-
ciated with disgust, pain, hunger and thirst. Sanfey and col-
leagues concluded that low offers in the DEMO game
are rejected because of a sense of disgust, while DLPFC
DEMO may be signalling the importance of acquiring
money.
Interpersonal trust is the most powerful predictor at the
country level of whether nations will experience DEMO liv-
ing standards or will remain trapped in poverty (Zak &
Knack 2001). Zak et al. (2004) examine whether there is DEMO
physiological correlate associated with the receipt of a sig-
nal of trust that motivates individuals to be trustworthy
(that is, to reciprocate trust)DEMO Drawing on research with
rodents on social recognition and attachment, Zak DEMO col-
leagues proposed that the neuroactive hormone OT would
process signals of trust and induce trustworthy behaviour.
They used a variant of the trust DEMO in which all DMs
received a $10 show-up payment and were randomly
assigned to dyads. DM1s were prompted to send an integer
amount, including zero, of their $10 show-up money to the
DM2 in their dyad. The amount sent was removed from
DM1’s account, and was tripled in DM2’s account. DM2s
were then told the tripled amount that they were DEMO and
the total in their accounts. Next, DM2s were prompted to
DEMO some amount back to the DM1 in their dyad, includ-
ing DEMO All interactions were mediated by computer, and
subjects were fully informed DEMO the structure of the interac-
tion and the consequences of their choices. Participants
where also told that they would only make a single decision.
DEMO this experiment, DMs made decisions serially, and
immediately after each decision went to an anteroom and
had 28 ml of blood drawn from DEMO antecubital vein. All
experiments began at 13.00, a trough in diurnal DEMO
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)
variation. Zak and DEMO showed that DM2s receiving
trust signals had OT levels almost twice that of DM2s in a
control task in which DM2s received random (uninten-
tional) monetary transfers of the same average amount as in
the treatment task. In addition, higher OT levels in DM2s
were strongly associated with trustworthy behaviour. None
of nine other hormones measured, except for progesterone,
responded to the trust signal nor were associated with
DM2 behaviour. Women DEMO the study who were ovulating
(progesterone level more than 3 ng DEMO) were less trust-
worthy than other subjects. Progesterone is known to
DEMO OT uptake. This finding indicates that OT is the
primary hormone responding to signals of trust (i.e. the
behavioural effect is caused by OT and not another hor-
mone). There were no overall gender differences. DEMO
analysis shows that OT is released in response to a signal of
trust (the experimental state), rather than being a primary
trait of subjects (i.e. DM1s with high OT levels did not
behave any differently than other DM1s as these subjects
did not receive a trust signal)DEMO Zak’s team concludes that
OT, which activates the parasympathetic system and DEMO
itates dopamine release, is a positive physiological moti-
vator of cooperation.
DEMO THEFUTURE:CONVERGENTEVIDENCE
One of the important lessons neuroscience can teach eco-
nomics is the necessity of convergent evidence before a
finding is accepted as DEMO This typically means using
different measurement modalities, subject groups
(especially atypical groups), and moving from correlation
to causation. An example of this DEMO using economic
decision tasks but absent neurophysiological measurement
is the study of autistics by Hill & Sally (2003). They com-
pared the behaviour of healthy children and adults with
age-matched patients diagnosed with autistic spectrum DEMO
order as they made choices in the PD, ultimatum and dic-
DEMO games. (In the dictator game, DM1 is given a
monetary endowment and chooses to give some amount of
it to an unknown DM2; DM2 does not make a choice.
Healthy adult DM1s typically offer 10% DEMO less to DM2s in
this game which is designed to measure altruistic behav-
iour.) They report that autistics were no less likely to coop-
erate, but did not learn to be strategic in repeat play as did
healthy subjects. Some of this failure to learn strategy
appeared to DEMO from a lack of a theory of mind by autis-
tics, DEMO even healthy young children (ca. 6 years old)
learned this. DEMO authors suggest that part of the difference
in behaviour is occurring because autistics have not
developed social ‘fairness’ rules that most healthy indivi-
duals DEMO internalized through repeated social interac-
tions. The veracity of this claim would be clarified with
measurements of neural activity.
A second example of the DEMO for convergence comes
from Knutson’s laboratory (Bjork et al. 2004) who repli-
cated the paradigm of Knutson et al. (2003) using 12 DEMO
lescents (ages 12–17 years) and 12 young adults (ages 22–
DEMO years) as subjects. Rewards for the correctly cued colour
choice were DEMO, $1 or $5, and choices were designed so
that subjects were correct 70% of the time. Gain acqui-
sition in both age groups DEMO activated the MPFC.
Interestingly, while anticipation of gains activated the ven-
DEMO striatum in both groups, adolescents had a significantly
1746 P. J. Zak Neuroeconomics
lower average BOLD signal than young adults DEMO the same
sized reward. These data indicate that one reason adoles-
cents may engage in risky behaviours is to compensate for
hypoactive reward activity DEMO their brains. It also suggests
that to fully understand anticipation and consumption of
rewards, one cannot only study young healthy adults.
The above review of the neuroeconomics literature is, by
necessity, truncated and subject to DEMO own biases. Other
discussions of the neuroeconomics literature and method-
ology can be found in Camerer (2003), Camerer et al.
(2004), DEMO 2002 special issue of Neuron (Cohen & Blum
2002), a DEMO issue of Games and economic behavior (in
the press) and the book by Glimcher (2003).
5. NEUROECONOMICSANDTHELAW
One of most important areas that neuroeconomics can
contribute to is the law. Laws (or more generally institu-
tions as defined by Douglass North (1990)) specify the
‘rules of the game’; yet not everyone follows these rules.
Neuroeconomics experiments that vary the ‘laws’ and
allow subjects to make choices under several legal DEMO
could be an important step towards better public policy.
Such experiments could provide a deep understanding into
the usefulness of laws that are either DEMO or ‘sticks’.
For example, when an action results in a harsh DEMO
(e.g. experimentally, a decrement of money), why do some
subjects still choose to do this? What drives such behav-
iour? How DEMO of it can be traced to nature and nurture?
Do known criminals have different neural activity than
non-criminals? The number of interesting questions is
manifold. The late Margaret Gruter, of the Gruter Institute
for Law and Behavioral Research, called this field ‘neuro-
jurisprudence’. The economic part is important exper-
imentally because it allows the imposition of acceptable
and valued DEMO and punishments for behaviours in an
experimental setting.
A specific legal example is property crime. Property
crime (larceny) is little impacted by most DEMO, an
increased likelihood of detection, or the provision of pre-
sumed alternative leisure activities such as nighttime bas-
ketball (Zak 2000). More effective laws might be designed
if the neural activation associated with obtaining DEMO
illegally, but risking punishment, were characterized. This
is straightforward to do in a neuroeconomic experiment
using, for example, the ‘power-to-take’ game (Bosman &
van Winden 2002). Neural activity can be measured as
rewards and punishments are varied to determine why
most punishments fail to deter DEMO, and to search for
those that are likely to work. The DEMO activity of larce-
nists could be compared in this experiment with non-crim-
inals to understand recidivism. In addition, humans appear
to have a strong sense of ownership of physical property.
Behaviourally, people value an item more when they pos-
sess it than when they do not (Camerer 2003). This sug-
gests that people might pay more to protect property DEMO
the expected loss associated with its expropriation. There
may be neural clues to this behaviour that might suggest
why individuals may not want to DEMO off a given amount
of theft for less police protection and lower taxes. This is
one example of neuroeconomic–neurojurisprudence com-
plementarity, but many more surely exist. Note that there
are a host of important technical and DEMO issues that this
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)
DEMO opens up, including using averaged brain data to
determine policy, using brain-scanning data to identify
criminals, appropriate statistical thresholds to determine if
something has been demonstrated, etc. The reader is
referred to the discussion of these topics by Goodenough &
Prehn (2004) and Greene & Cohen (2004) in this issue.
Another transdisciplinary field that also impacts ques-
DEMO of law is neuroethics (Greene & Haidt 2002; Moreno
2003). The notion that some behaviours are almost uni-
versally considered wrong is DEMO the first issues that
neuroethicists have studied. Greene et al. (2001) showed,
using fMRI, that personal moral dilemmas (e.g. whether it
DEMO morally acceptable to personally kill one person to save
five others from certain death) activated cortical areas asso-
ciated with social cognition, including DEMO medial OFC
(BA9/10), posterior cingulate (BA39) and angular DEMO
(BA39). Interestingly, regions associated with working
memory (BA46, BA7/40) exhibited reduced neural activity
during personal moral dilemmas. A legal implication of this
research is that laws designed to prohibit personal moral
violations DEMO activate brain regions associated with
understanding others to be effective.
In fMRI research similar to that of Greene et al. (2001)
(though DEMO substantially different control tasks), Moll et
al. (2002) found that moral judgements are associated with
significant BOLD signals in the medial OFC, as well as in
the temporal pole (BA38) and superior temporal DEMO
(BA21/22). This provides support for the role of emotions
DEMO moral judgments. Both the Greene and Moll studies
could be extended using neuroeconomic methods (e.g.
using monetary rewards and punishments) so that subjects’
DEMO have weight and their attention is consistently
focused on the task. Further, by varying the ‘costs’ of
immoral behaviour, the robustness of moral DEMO could
be probed.
6. CONCLUSION
The nineteenth century economist Thorstein Veblen wrote
in 1898 that ‘Economics, properly understood, is simply a
branch of DEMO Human beings are a biological species
doing what every other species seeks to do: survive and
reproduce (albeit with a larger brain than DEMO other spe-
cies). These activities require that choices be made to
acquire resources, i.e. to process environmental signals,
value alternatives and chose among them. Resource acqui-
sition may also require that we interact with DEMO humans,
sometimes strategically. Neuroeconomics provides a uni-
fied framework to measure neurophysiological activity dur-
ing the process of choice, and in doing so opens a window
into human nature.
REFERENCES
Adolphs, R. 2003 Cognitive neuroscience of human social
behaviour Nature Rev. Neurosci. 4, 165–178.
Aharon, I., Etcoff, N., Ariely, D., Chabris, C. F., O’Connor,
DEMO & Breiter, H. C. 2001 Beautiful faces have variable
reward value: fMRI and behavioral evidence. Neuron 32,
537–551.
Barraclough, D. J., DEMO, M. L. & Lee, D. 2004 Prefrontal
cortex and decision making in a mixed-strategy game. Nat-
ure Neurosci 7, 404–410.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J. & McCabe, K. 1995 Trust, reciprocity,
and social history. Games Econ. Behav. 10, 122–142.
Neuroeconomics P. J. Zak 1747
Bjork, J. M., Knutson, B., DEMO, G. W., Caggiano, D. M.,
Bennett, S. M. & Hommer, D. W. 2004 Incentive-elicited
brain activation in adolescents: similarities and DEMO
from young adults. J. Neurosci 24, 1793–1802.
Bosman, R. & van Winden, F. 2002 Emotional hazard in a
power-to-take game experiment. Econ. J. 112, 147–169.
Bowles, S. & Gintis, H. 2003 Prosocial emotions. Santa Fe
Institute working paper no. 02-07-028.
Boyd, R., Gintis, H., DEMO, S. & Richerson, P. J. 2003 The
evolution of altruistic punishment. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA100, 3531–3535.
Breiter, H. C., Aharon, DEMO, Kahneman, D., Anders, D. &
Shizgal, P. 2001 Functional imaging of neural responses to
expectancy and experience of monetary gains and DEMO
Neuron 30, 619–639.
Brosnan, S. F. & de Waal, F. DEMO M. 2003 Monkeys reject
unequal pay. Nature 425, 297–299.
Buckner, R. L. 2003 The hemodynamic inverse problem:
making inferences about neural activity DEMO MRI signals.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 2177–2179.
Camerer, C. F. 2003 Strategizing in the brain. Science 300,
1673–1675.
Camerer, C. F., Loewenstein, G. & Prelec, D. 2004 Neuroe-
conomics: how DEMO can inform economics. J.
Economic Lit. (In the press.)
Cohen, J. D. & Blum, K. I. 2002 Reward and decision. Neuron
36, 193–198.
Damasio, A. R. 1994 Descartes’ error: emotion, reason, and the
human brain. New York: Avon Books.
Dayan, P. & Balleine, B. W. 2002 Reward, motivation, and
reinforcement learning. Neuron 36, 285–298.
Dickhaut, J., McCabe, K., Nagode, J. C., Rustichini, A.,
Smith, K. & Pardo, J. V. 2003 The impact of DEMO certainty
context on the process of choice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
100, 3536–3541.
Fehr, E. & Rockenbach, B. 2003 Detrimental effects of sanc-
tions on human altruism. Nature 422, 137–140.
Frith, U. & DEMO, C. D. 2003 Development and neurophysiol-
ogy of mentalizing. Phil. Trans. DEMO Soc. Lond. B 358, 459–
473. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1218)
Gheslin, M. & Landa, J. T. 1999 The emerging discipline of
bioeconomics: aims and scope of the journal of bioeco-
nomics J. Bioecon. 1, 5–12.
Garris, P. A., Kilpatrick, M., Bunin, M. A., DEMO, D.,
Walker, O. D. & Wightman, R. M. 1999 DEMO of
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens from intra-
cranial self-stimulation. Nature 398, 67–69.
Glimcher, P. W. 2003 Decisions, uncertainty, and the DEMO: the
science of neuroeconomics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Glimcher, P. W., Dorris, M. C., Bayer, H. M. & Lau, B. 2004
Physiologic utility theory and the neuroeconomics of choice.
Games Econ. Behav. (In the press.)
Goodenough, O. R. & Prehn, K. 2004 DEMO neuroscientific
approach to normative judgment in law and justice. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 359, 1709–1726. (doi:10.1098/rstb.
2004.1552)
Greene, J. & Haidt, J. 2002 How (and where) does moral judg-
ment work? Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 517–523.
Greene, J. & Cohen, J. 2004 For the law, neuroscience chan-
ges nothing and everything. DEMO Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 359,
1775–1785. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2004.1546)DEMO
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J.
M. & Cohen, J. D. 2001 An fMRI investigation DEMO emotional
engagement in moral judgment. Science 293, 2105–2108.
(doi: 10.1126/DEMO)
Hill, E. & Sally, D. 2003 Dilemmas and bargains: DEMO,
theory-of-mind, cooperation and fairness. Working paper,
University College London.
DEMO Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)
Hirshleifer, J. 1985 The expanding domain of economics. Am.
Econ. Rev. 75, 53–68.
Hirshleifer, J. & Zak, P. J. 2004 The bioeconomics of social
behavior: introduction. J. Bioecon. 6, 1–2.
Kahn, I., Yeshurun, Y., Rotshtein, P., Fried, I., Ben-Bashat,
D. & Hendler, T. 2002 The role of the amygdala in signal-
ing prospective outcome of choice. Neuron 33, 983–994.
Kahneman, D. 2004 Maps of bounded rationality: psychology
for behavioral DEMO Am. Econ. Rev. 93, 1449–1475.
Kangarlu, A., Burgess, R. E., Zhu, H., Nakayama, T.,
Hamlin, R. L., Abduljalil, A. M. & Robitaille, P. M. 1999
Cognitive, cardiac, and physiological safety studies in ultra
high field magnetic resonance imaging. Magn. Reson. Imag.
DEMO, 1407–1416.
Knutson, B. & Peterson, D. 2004 Neurally reconstructing
expected DEMO Games Econ. Behav. (In the press.)
Knutson, B., Fong, G. W., Adams, C. M., Varner, J. &
Hommer, DEMO 2001 Dissociation of reward anticipation and
outcome with event-related fMRI. NeuroReport 12, 3683–
3687.
Knutson, B., Fong, G. W., Bennett, S. DEMO, Adams, C. S. &
Hommer, D. 2003 A region of mesial prefrontal cortex
tracks monetarily rewarding outcomes: characterization
with rapid event-related fMRI. NeuroImage 18, 263–272.
Laibson, D., Repetto, A. & Tobacman, J. 1998 Self-control
and savings for retirement. Brook. Papers Econ. Act. 1,
DEMO
Lo, A. W. & Repin, D. 2002 The psychophysiology of real-
time financial risk processing. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 14,
323–339.
McCabe, K., Houser, D., Ryan, L., Smith, V. & Trouard, T.
2001 A functional imaging study of cooperation in two-per-
son reciprocal exchange. DEMO Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98,
11 832–11 835.
McClure, S. DEMO, Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G. & Cohen, J.
D. DEMO Separate neural systems value immediate and
delayed monetary rewards. Science 306, DEMO (doi:
10.1126/science.1100907)
Mobbs, D., Greicius, M. D., Abdel-Azim, E., Menon, V. &
Reiss, A. L. 2003 DEMO modulates the mesolimbic reward
centers. Neuron 40, 1041–1048.
Moll, J., DEMO Oliveira-Souza, R., Bramati, I. E. & Grafman, J.
2002 Functional networks in emotional moral and non-
moral judgments. NeuroImage 16, 696–703.
Montague, R. P. & Berns, G. S. 2002 Neural economics and
the DEMO substrates of valuation. Neuron 36, 265–284.
Montague, P. R., Berns, G. S., Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M.,
Pagnoni, G., Dhamala, M., Wiest, M. C., Karpov, I., King,
R. D., Apple, N. & Fisher, R. E. 2002 Hyperscanning: sim-
ultaneous fMRI during linked social interactions. Neuro-
Image 16, 1159–1164.
DEMO, J. D. 2003 Neuroethics: an agenda for neuroscience
and society. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 4, 149–153.
Nelson, A. J., Heeger, D. J., McCabe, K., Houser, D., Zak, P.
& Glimcher, P. DEMO 2004 Expected utility provides a model
for choice behavior and brain activation in humans.
Abstract No. 20.12. Society for Neuroscience.
North, D. 1990 Institutions, institutional change and economic
performance. Cambridge University Press.
Platt, M. L. & Glimcher, P. W. 1999 Neural correlates of
decision variables in parietal DEMO Nature 400, 233–238.
Riedel, G., Platt, B. & Micheau, DEMO 2003 Glutamate receptor
function in learning and memory. Behav. Brain Res. 140,
1–47.
Rilling, J. K., Gutman, D. A., Zeh, T. R., Pagnoni, G., Berns,
G. S. & Kilts, C. DEMO 2002 A neural basis for social
cooperation. Neuron 35, 395–405.
1748 P. J. Zak Neuroeconomics
Robson, A. J. 2001 Why would nature give individuals utility
functions? J. Polit. Econ. 109, 900–914.
Rustichini, A., Dickhaut, J., Ghirardato, P, Smith, P. & Glim-
cher, P.W. 2004 Expected utility provides a model for
choice behavior and brain DEMO in humans. Abstract
No. 20. 12. Society for Neuroscience.
Sanfey, A. DEMO, Rilling, J. K., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E. &
Cohen, J. D. 2003 The neural basis of economic decision-
DEMO in the ultimatum game. Science 300, 1755–1758.
(doi: 10.1126/science.1082976)DEMO
Schultz, W., Dayan, P. & Montague, P. R. 1997 A neural sub-
strate of prediction and reward. Science 275, 1593–1599.
(doi: 10.1126/science.275.5306.1593)
Smith, K., Dickhaut, J., McCabe, K. & Pardo, J. 2002 Neuro-
nal substrates for choice under ambiguity, risk, certainty,
gains, and losses. Mngmt Sci. 48, 711–718.
Smith, V. 1998 The two faces of Adam Smith. South. Econ. J.
65, 1–29.
Sugrue, L. P., Corrado, G. S. & Newsome, W. T. DEMO
Matching behavior and the representation of value in the
parietal cortex. Science 304, 1782–1787. (doi: 10.1126/
science.1094765)
Zak, P. J. DEMO Larceny. Econ. Govern. 1, 157–179.
Zak, P. J. 2002 Genetics, DEMO structure, and economic
growth J. Evol. Econ. 12, 343–365.
Zak, DEMO J. & Knack, S. 2001 Trust and growth. Econ. J. 111,DEMO
295–321.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2004)
Zak, P. J. & Denzau, A. 2001 Economics is an evolutionary
science. In Evolutionary approaches in the behavioral sciences:
toward a better understanding of human DEMO (ed. A. Somit &
S. Peterson), pp. 31–65. New York: JAI Press.
Zak, P. J. & Park, K.-W. 2002 Population genetics and econ-
omic growth. J. Bioecon. 4, 1–37.
Zak, P. J., Kurzban, R. & Matzner, W. 2004 The neurobiology
of trust. Ann. DEMO Acad. Sci. 1032. (In the press.)
GLOSSARY
ACC: anterior cingulate cortex
BOLD: blood oxygen-level dependent
DLPFC: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
DM1: decision maker 1
DM2: decision maker 2
EEG: electroencephalogram
ERP: evoked response potential
fMRI: functional magnetic resonance imaging
LIP: lateral intraparietal
LTP: long-term potentiation
MPFC: mesial prefrontal cortex
OFC: orbitofrontal cortex
OFS: orbitofrontal–striatal
OT: oxytocin
PD: Prisoner’s Dilemma
PET: positron emission tomography
SLEA: sublenticular DEMO amygdala
TMS: transcranial magnetic stimulation{1g42fwefx}