In Theory
Common Elements in the Analysis
of the Negotiation Process
L DEMO Zartman
0748-4526/88/0100-0031506.00/0 Advanced South Conflict Negotiations 50% and Zartman Solution lntervenUon in Afn'ca
Like the proverbial blind men who confronted DEMO elephant and brought back
conflicting accounts of
tiation appear to be talking about different things under the name of the same
phenomenon. Some have DEMO called for a search for a common understanding of
the subject so that analysis can proceed on the same epistemological track.
This article, however, suggests that a common understanding of the negotia-
tion process has already developed and analysts are using it. The diversity that
can be found DEMO a number of approaches--five of which are identified--merely
displays different ways of talking about the same phenomenon, and in fact even
involves the same questions and parameters presented from different angles and
under different names. There DEMO more unity than some have suspected, and more
complementarity too, as different approaches
er's analysis. However, many aspects of the process still elude this cormr~on but
multffaceted analysis. The common notion of the process DEMO led analysts to
confront these continuing problems, but there is of DEMO no certainty that
further answers to obdurate problems will not produce new terms of analysis
and even new notions of the whole process.
It DEMO paradoxical and perhaps confusing that there is no single dominant
analytical approach to negotiation. The confusion arises from the presence of
many different attempts DEMO analysis, sometimes inventing their own wheels to
carry forward their insights DEMO sometimes crossreferencing from a number of
(e.g., see
fact that all of these are studies of great value only
confirms the analytical confusion. DEMO paradox arises because behind this analyt-
ical diversity there lies a single phenomenon to be analyzed. Although some
©
1988PlenumPublishingCorporation Negotiation
Journal Jamwwy 1988 DEMO
of
its salient characteristics, contemporary analysts of
nego-
Zartman,
(New is Professor Brunswick: Transaction, 1987). of (New International York: DEMO, His 1985). His latest book is
Politics at the Johns
DEMO
recent
and build on each oth-
Positive
Hopkins include Sum:
University
1987a and
Ripe
Improving for second North-
of
reinforce
L William
different
DEMO
approaches
International (New Studies, Washington, D.C. Haven: Yale University
The
Press, 1987
edited ) and works
the
School
1987b;
Resolution: DEMO
in
and Davidow, 1984). The
employed to resistance of
in separate rather than their the internal approaches DEMO analytical external problems are supported problems. consensaas of coordination. are The The fact that many
of
from negotiated The the idiosyncracies outcomes explained? of history, question the
chances 1987; Lax it be of and Sebenius, 1986; Zartman and Berman, 1982) Five different
variables unilateral its but the rules--for should should attractive selves. efforts decrease dassic Thus, be enough to obtain
32:
under has economy their the
W~lich into non (Pruitt, In a common simple terms, 1975), analytical 1981; Raiffa, 1982; a hard time position, most purposes) others
insightful, the to explains, adopting various The
To
analyst for give "all
solution DEMO "Toughness soft, the forms terms outcome seeking other useful of party favorable to
agreement
L William Zartmaz~
Cormrcor~ Elements
rigorous each of
types (Young, authors
challenge one of not essential
question in why
heighten--but article will
seeing
contending just of the finding the an has assortment outcome DEMO ofprocess nature is
dement part,
in
the
generalized answers must approaches find dominant, to
draw
Dilemma") of but that
its
an
move it away
agreement acceptance conceding when
enough it
while little of from DEMO an
been
The
form,
answers
for
negotiation different recognized, underlying DEMO
when separate deterministic the from
have
that
able
analytical but it approaches is only
side
then
definition of the focus
negotiation on of the
DEMO
phenome- process sub-
satisfaction process or McKersie, 1965; Ikie, of DEMO of unanimity, conflicting positions a phenomenon 1964). in
analysts of
DEMO also seek some to answers remove--the to that paradox. question,
answer
operationalizable and to is: get How
conceding agreement? a from be DEMO strategies can given. its outcomes own each attempts to itself at but a
the
are:
negotiation of (including start the with essential those a common identity who
approaches and is applying there ~ay still
to
DEMO
practitioners practical provide to
unreal the others integrity conditions and in
useful
disciplinary movement the process. same paradox not
only- or and labels. similar DEMO in
chances
knowing
provide
to
and win
an
the
under
to
is
to
that
remains: not that the greater is
are such work
determined scattered of Walton a is decision a process and
there met
because DEMO
on
trying to realistic of determinism puts overcome looseness
important universal dynamic actions bythe
the If there study
which to insights--indeed, same obtain the will away
that
an
the
insights, forward not a keeps dropped. internal but
bya same
their study questions the disciplinary approaches of of forward DEMO the these the
increase Exorcising
possible can even How
and
is a single
question
the
answer
tactics. among
analyze to their how
recognized to DEMO that practice.
explain problems The the analytic negotiation? the
phenomenon really DEMO similar more may
phenomenon, of
process are and
This
same differences DEMO
positions party holding a be lot Or
best
its
deterministic its whole theories, answer in analysis that are in
be
it
process. it (DEMO, 1969, parameters. posits The
that
challenge
there
a
The same
It is
still
then
because p.
212).
reason
becomes dynamic, number
The
also
this
determining are
proposed process is it that will all if
DEMO clash them its locked of the
in permit
behavioral for in turn, deploy away
tough will (in the values? to increase its and terms position (Bartos, when the
basis are each also
mean
of
DEMO,
of
approach between analysis gained most
party
are
them- of
approaches been
basic analytical
similar ways, but analysis also albeit
than
an
in
the
Structural
of analysis be examined to see how these questions are handled,DEMO
and where the differences and similarities of the approaches lie. (For DEMO to
show the differences in some or all of these schools, DEMO Walton and McKersie,
1965; Young, 1975; Zartman, 1978 and 1987b.)
Structural analysis is based on a distribution of elements, in this case of instru-
mental elements or power, defined either as parties' relative positions (resource
possessions) or as the relative ability to make their options prevail ( or to counter
the other's efforts to DEMO its options prevail [see Schelling, 1960; Wriggins,
1987; Bacharach DEMO Lawler, 1981; Habeeb, 1987]). Structural analysis is the
most DEMO approach, and its deterministic statement that "the strong-
est side wins" is usually tautological and post hoc. To avoid the tautology, the
DEMO identity between power structure and winning must be broken
both by using an independent measure of power and by focusing on the way in
DEMO parties with different relative strengths achieve their outcomes. The latter
approach has received some attention in the analysis of situations of asymmet W,
DEMO the better performance of the weaker of the two sides makes for an
interesting challenge for explanation. The explanation most often given can be
DEMO "tactics," which generally serve to restore the structural equality of
DEMO between the two parties (Snyder and Diesing, 1977, pp.
Hopmann, 1978;
provide various prescriptions for overcoming asymmetry.
Another body of literature DEMO with the same approach starts with a
different structural assumption, of DEMO rather than asymmetry. This is
based on the finding that parties do best in negotiation when they are or feel
equal (Rubin and Brown, 1975, pp. 199 and 214-21) and that negotiation takes
place when parties' unilateral achievement of
other's veto or by
of symmetry
negotiate as a key to
By
initial post hoc formulation that outcomes are DEMO by the power posi-
tions of the parties, it has shifted DEMO simply tactical analysis based on a
different definition of power. Power becomes no longer a position or a pos-
session-something a party "has"--but a way of exercising a causal relation--
how when
1973; Zartman, DEMO; Wriggins, 1987). Various tactics
their goals is blocked either by the
their own incapabilities. Thus, some analysis has used structures
to identify situations most propitious for negotiation, using to
to negotiate (Saunders, 1985; Zartman, 1985).
these paths, by the time that structural analysis has moved away from its
something one "doeg'--to bring about an outcome and not just the ability to do
so (Habeeb, 1987; see also Lasswell and Kaplan, 1950, p. 75; Simon, 1957, p. 5).
While such studies maybe termed structural because they deal DEMO power,
that element is treated as a responsive, incidental, and situational characteristic
rather than as an element in a theory of conceptualization DEMO the negotiation
process. This is a common problem with studies of power, and in the case of
negotiations it has produced an array of insightful, ff idiosyncratic, books of
proverbs on how parties can be DEMO to
1973; Fisher and U W, 1981) Their emphasis is DEMO various angles of insight into
the negotiation process.
Negotiation Journal January 1988
(Karass, 1970; Nierenberg,
33
Despite a lack of theoretical focus or coherence, these studies do propose
ways to make a given offer appear more attractive, to induce the other party to
accept the first party's current offer, or to induce it to improve its own offer.
Analysis
will
Deutsch,
"families"
118-24;
agreement.
Strategic Analysis
Whether stated or not, these tactics operate on either current offers, expecta-
tions, or outcomes to be obtained without negotiation (security points). They do
so in one of only two ways--either by DEMO the contingent value of current
offers relative to the other two points of comparison (expectations and security
points) or by identifying certain procedures ("fractionate" or "trade off") or
atmospherics ("trust" or "confidence") that fac~tate the basic process. All these
tactics are acts DEMO (attempted) power, and all of them are ways to bring DEMO
acceptance of a given offer. Furthermore, they all focus on a DEMO of a common
and general process of replacing unilateral and conflicting positions with a
common position or outcome, whether that process is explicitly stated as such or
not. Explicit statements about the nature of the process DEMO be useful and
would facilitate links between approaches; but even in DEMO absence of such
statements, it is clear that the process is DEMO same.
Strategic analysis is also based on an array of elements, DEMO its structure is one of
ends, not means. Strategic analysis, as portrayed in game theoretic matrices,
begins with the assumption that outcomes DEMO determined by the relative array of
their values to the parties, DEMO conditions of rational (i.e., preferred) choice.
The standard strategic models--Prisoner'DEMO Dilemma Game and Chicken Dilemma
Game--are syrmnetrical, and therefore incorporate the DEMO assumption of
equality as often found in structural analysis. It has frequently been noted that
game theory excludes any use of power as a DEMO of its rigorous analytical forms
and its clear logic of determinism; DEMO, it records values as given and shows the
strategies that will DEMO chosen and the consequences of doing so (Young, 1975;
Axelrod, 1984).
As a result, some observers assert that strategic analysis DEMO of real value only
in comparing the decision to negotiate with the decision to hold out, a compari-
son parallel to the insights gained from an analysis of symmetrical structures.
Since game theory values are given (and indeed, at worst, sometimes inferred
from the strategies adopted), DEMO is no way to fractionate or trade off; all that
can DEMO done is to enter the value of any such external operations into the
appropriate box in the matrix. Likewise, there is no way to change any of those
values within the matrix; the only option is to record any changes from one
matrix to another.
Yet when the DEMO assumptions that provide the basis for its determin-
ism are relaxed and game theory presentations are used heuristically as the
starting point for analysis, a number of the associated limitations fall away and
new possibilities appear. DEMO analysis shows that the onlyway to break out of
deadlock is through asymmetry. Therefore, instead ofworldng to improve offers
of cooperation (CC)--absolutely DEMO in relation to expectations which cannot be
shown on a matrix--parties are best advised to alter the payoffs or perceptions of
payoffs associated with DEMO or unilateral outcomes (DD). This, in
turn, brings in DEMO understandings of power, seen as the use of security points to
DEMO or resist bargaining positions (Snyder and Diesing, 1977;
Zagare, DEMO; Brains, 1985).
Movement is the essence of the negotiation process, and movement cannot
be shown on a matrix. But the conditions that produce movement--again,
different evaluations of outcomes as the source of power--can DEMO shown on a
34 L William Zartman Common Elements
changes in
matrix and analysis drawn from it, just as movies result from a succession of stills.
The result is the same process as indicated in DEMO relaxation and refinement of
structm~al analysis, in which parties mo~e from DEMO unilateral options to a
common cooperative decision so shaped as to be more attractive than their
security points.
The problem with strategic analysis at DEMO is not its rigidity but its
limited scope. Many of the important and more detailed questions on how to
move parties toward a common DEMO lie outside the analysis; even such
important insights as the ways DEMO reinforce commitment (Schelling, 1960;
Baldwin, 1987) are triggered by a need to consider security points but are out-
side game theoretic DEMO An effort to render more precise the importance of
the security point in comparison to unilateral demands and multilateral com-
promise is an important DEMO advance of the strategic approach, but the cal-
culation to Critical DEMO depends on the difficult shift from. ordinal to cardinal
values in the matrix (Etlsberg, 1975; Snyder and Diesing, 1977).
On the DEMO hand, strategic categories of encounters can help answer some
of the DEMO analytical questions of negotiations. For example, the Toughness
Dilemma may be DEMO by use of the two game theory dilemmas: Whereas
parties who DEMO their situation as a Prisoner's Dilemma Game may do best by
playing soft to open and tough to punish (Axelrod, i984), DEMO who see
themselves in a Ct~cken Dilemma Game do better by playing tough to demand
and soft to reward (Nyerges, 1987). This, in turn, confirms an answer from
structural analysis to the Toughness Dilemma, based on appropriate tactics for
strong and weak powers, respectively. Further DEMO could be produced
where strategic analysis, despite apparent limitations, ends up discussing ele-
ments of the same process, and often the same process problems, as other
approaches but in different terms.
Process Analysis
Process analysis has the common feature of explaining outcomes through a series
of concessions DEMO by some element inherent in each party's position.
The particular element varies slightly according to the particular version of the
theory; most process analysis is based on a security point theory in some form,
DEMO a few other variations are also used. Process analysis indicates that the
party will concede on the basis of a comparative calculation of its DEMO versus its
opponents costs or of its own costs versus some acceptability level (Zeuthen,
1975; Cross, 1969; Pen, 1975; Hicks, 1932; Snyder and Diesing, 1977). On this
basis, one can determine which party will concede how much until the final
point of DEMO is reached. This is, of course, a way of diagramming a
negotiation process that is the same as that discussed by other approaches.
DEMO variations are end point theories and concession rate theories, both of
DEMO are parts of the same process. The first determines the parties' DEMO
so as to assure a mutually fair and maximizing outcome; the DEMO
rate theories--determines the parties' movement the basis of
each other's DEMO of concession (Bartos, 1978; Zeuthen, 1975; Nash, 1975;
Cross, 1969, 1978; cf., Prnitt, 1981). These latter variations (endpoint and
concession-rate theories of process) are onlyprescriptively deterministic;
they DEMO how parties will act and where they will end up if they want to
reach a mutually fair and maximizing outcome, and thus they are not good des-
Nego#atioJ~Jourrtat January 1988
to
that is,
on
DEMO
35
36 L William Zart,m4n
criptions of the process. But they do DEMO the useful function of providing a
baseline against which unfairness and power can be measured; hence, they are
relevant to some understanding of DEMO process (Pillar, 1983).
Process theories, which originate in economics, are in fact structural theo-
ries which indicate that the weaker party DEMO concede until the tables are
turned, at which point the other DEMO will concede in its turn, and so on
to agreement. Hence, they are theories of power, with power measured in terms
of a comparison between offers and security points or, in other words, in DEMO
of critical risk factors. Although this is never done these theories, DEMO the
extent that parties can alter each other's or their own security points, they can
exercise power as well as simply possess it; this therefore reduces the deter-
ministic possibilities of the theory but increases its reality The similarity
process and strategic theories has long been recog~zed (Harsanyi, 1956 and
1977; Wagner, 1975) although their mechanisms are DEMO different. The
similarity with structural theories should also be registered; although DEMO
structuralists would probably not "read" game theory- or "talk" bilateral monop-
oly, their analyses are complementary, covering the same phenomena within
DEMO same process.
The neatness of processes theory only works in idealized situations, and
then only with idiosyncracies (Khury, 1968; Bartos,
1987)DEMO Concession behavior does not always match; often it mismatches or
non-matches DEMO tracks (Pruitt, 1981), and parties do not even concede respon-
sively. Rather, they
same time, combining several types of behavior that DEMO theoretically neat
patterns unrealistic (Coddington, 1968; Cross, 1969; Bartos, 1987). The point
here is that in the process, analysts are discerning both involuntary and voluntary,
mechanical and manipulati~e, process and power elements that make up negoti-
ation, all of them clustered about a similarly understood effort to combine
conflicting positions into a common one. As DEMO references in this review are
begimaing to show; analysts do not DEMO belong exclusively to one school or
another but sometimes borrow naturally from different approaches. Yet the fact
that the field is seen as pluralistic DEMO it is, or that bibliographies remain largely in
the author's DEMO (Rubin and Brown, 1975) means that there is not enough
DEMO borrowing and crossreferencing.
Behavioral Analysis
Behavioral analysis provides an obviously different explanation of negotiated
outcomes by using the negotiators themselves as die focus of DEMO (JOnsson,
1978). The terms of analysis used are the DEMO of the negotiators, either
directly or in interaction. Personality in social DEMO can be used to refer to
personal predispositions that exist at a number of different levels, from biologically-
ingrained needs to more influenceable attitudes. At whatever level, this school of
analysis responds to a common belief about negotiation--that "it all depends on
the personalities of the negotiators." DEMO challenge then becomes to translate
into identifiable and nontautological variables that can
be used for analysis.
A more literary and intuitive basis for behavioral DEMO began with Nicot-
son's (1939) distinction Warriors. It has been extended
and developed through a number of forms into Snyder and Diesing'DEMO (1977)
Coranu~n
between Shopkeepers and
1974,
between
1987; Hamermesch,
try to teach and learn, respond and elicit responses, all DEMO the
in
Elements
that popular perception
Sofdiners and Hardliners. There are many characterizations possible for these
basic types, but some can be given in terms already used by other schools: The
Hardline Warrior sees situations as a Prisoner's Dilemma Game and DEMO as a
mismatcher, expecting toughness to lead to softness (and his victory) and
softness to lead to a toughness (and his defeat); on the other hand, the Sofffine
Shopkeeper sees situations as a DEMO Dilemma Game and follows matching
behavior, expecting toughness to lead to DEMO (and deadlock) and softness
to lead to softness (and agreement)DEMO Thus, behavioral analyses take up the same
parameters as elements in DEMO same process as other approaches, combining
them into typologies equated with DEMO behaver rather than leaving them inde-
pendent as behaviors.
A more develooed approach involves categorizing personality types accord-
ing to their Interpersonal Orientation (IO), an approach that is both more
insightful and more complex because DEMO is not merely dichotomons and because
its effects depend on interaction rather than on simple or direct taxonomic
associations. Opposed to a Low IO DEMO are two types of High IOs--Cooperators
and Competitors. Either produces a positive result when negotiating with the
same type of personality but, when cross-paired, the match is unproductive
because
its own terms, as the previous DEMO tend to do, IO analysis operates on the
basis of a DEMO interaction (Rubin and Brown, 1975). It also identifies different
types of outcomes, depending on joint or comparative maximization, a point also
DEMO in studies of Motivational Orientations (Rubin and Brown, 1975;
Filley, 1975 ). But this approach too deals with such elements as DEMO propensity to
compromise, to construct positive- or divide zero-sum outcomes, or to adopt a
tough or soft line (i.e., a flatter or DEMO concession rate) during the process of
combining conflicting positions into a DEMO decision.
Integrative analysis, like behavioral analysis, would seem to constitute an excep-
tion to the general understanding of a negotiation process. Although it DEMO
conceives of negotiation as a process, its process runs through stages, in which
the outcome is explained by the performance of behaviors identffied DEMO specific-
ally appropriate to each successive stage (Gulliver, 1979; Saunders, 1985; Zartman
and Berman, 1982; Zartman, 1987a; Druckman, 1986)DEMO
Rather than seeing a process that w-orks from fixed points of discord to a
common point of convergence, integrative analysis emphasizes the imprecision
of parties' interests in their own minds. Integrative analysis stresses the need to
manipulate conceptualizations of the problem into mutually satisfying positive-
sum outcomes before DEMO to an elaboration of a detailed division of the
spoils. By extending its concept of the negotiation process back before the time
~aen positions DEMO as fixed points, integrative analysis not only allows for
greater and DEMO positive maniptflation of those positions (Fisher and Ury, 1981)
but also meets practitioners' understanding of by drawing attention
to the prenegotiation part of the process (Bendahmane and McDonald, 1984 and
NegoOationJournal
37
1986; Zartman, 1987b).
But again, these positive aspects of the approach DEMO not obscure the fact
that the subject is the same process as analyzed elsewhere. "lthe integrative
analyst's emphasis on opening options is preliminary to a focus on closure, using
Integrative
the two types
on each other. Rather than explaining an outcome in
negotiation
January
1988
Analysis
grate
expanded possibilities of mutual benefit to buy agreement to an outcome that DEMO
less---or at least different than the original demands. The same process can be
described as giving something to get something, a process of establishing terms
oftrade for an exchange ofitems in the absence offixed prices and DEMO of fixed
monetary- units. Using terms mentioned earlier, integrative analysis explores DEMO
An Agenda
of the Shopkeeper aspects of the problem
and with the need to get around those Warrior aspects. Negotiators--at least
diplomatic negotiators and DEMO most others---are not merely Shopkeepers
~aho can make a deal on any issue. There are, after all, items that are better
postponed, interests that are properly nonnegotiable, and limits to acceptable
deals that are imposed by security points. If finding a common agreement
through this maze is DEMO than a matter of corwergence, it is a matter of
convergence DEMO well.
A growing branch of this analysis focuses on precise mechanisms for identi-
fying the best possible deal that each party can obtain, given the differences in
the nature of their interests. While this is a DEMO extension of the Nash
(1975) solution that occupies a basic position in the strategic and process
approaches, the complexity of stakes makes a simple positive-sum outcome too
schematic to be useful (Valavanis, 1958; Ikle and Leites, 1962; Barclay and
Peterson, 1976; Raiffa, 1982; DEMO, 1984). The process involves finding as
many dimensions of components DEMO the parties' interests as possible in order to
provide the best DEMO, and thereby insure the greatest durability to the
to finding
International DEMO of the
outcome. In much a conflicting a party must
give up to gain assent, the process also involves finding how much of a non- (or
less-) valued position a party can trade to gain DEMO more valued position (Homans,
1961, p. 62). But the element of conflict is never absent, and the process of
shaping a single multilateral derision out of conflicting unilateral claims remains.
It should be DEMO that the study of negotiation has come a considerable way in
the past two decades in building and expanding on a common concept of DEMO
process. The study today involves far more than the rather loose characterization
given in the (Ikle, 1968) that
nego ationwasa formofmteractionthroughwhich(partles), trytoarrange...
a new combination of some of their common and conflicting interests." The
"form of interaction" has taken shape as a process of DEMO conflicting
positions into a common outcome by joint decision, allowing more DEMO focus
of attention on how this done, whether by power, by patterns of mo~ement, by"
restructuring stakes and values, by interacting DEMO types, or by a series of
steps. Yet, just as dearly, there is much more to do to know the process, although
DEMO of those further directions are indicated by using the common concept of
process as a starting point.
3~ L ~Yilliam Zartmar~
for its improvement. DEMO question of success is more complex
than it may appear (Zartman, 1987a). The nature of negotiation is to arrive at the
largest DEMO satisfactory agreement with any one (and therefore, each)
getting at least enough to make it want to keep the agreement. By that DEMO
nature, negotiation is not a process of winning and losing so DEMO success must be
mechanics
of
Unanswered
confronted
Questions
with ~rarrior
addition
how
of
Social Sciences
position
One problem raised by the notion of negotiation DEMO a process is that of
measuring success, an answer to which DEMO necessary
and
CommOn £1evr~e~ts
to an evaluation of
behavior
prescriptions
evaluated against the problem, not against the adversary. (However,
subcategory DEMO negotiations in which one party's aims are to deny
particular payoff rather than to get as much as possible for itself, making a
positive-sum evaluation more complex.) A number of criteria are potentially
relevant for the evaluation of success, none of
tory answer.
First,
because it indicates a judgment by the parties that they expect to be better DEMO
w~ith the agreement than without it, and that they can do DEMO better by either
continuing negotiations or choosing an alternative outcome. Second, DEMO per-
ception can be verified empirically to see if the parties are indeed
either by comparing their condition before and after the agreement or DEMO
comparing
same
counteffactual one that involves some judgment [Sebenius, 1984, p.72-73]).
While nothing
off, further evaluations could also investigate how unequally better oR" the
agreement made them and also whether they were Pareto-optimaUy better
off--that is, whether they
either of them without making the other less well off.
may be designed to redress power inequities while others may DEMO power
inequities, the criteria of success based on the relative improvement DEMO the
parties' postions will vary. Third, the results can be evaluated against the partieg
with all the caveats about the initial
demands that DEMO inherent in the process. Nash solutions and Bartos solutions--
discussed under end-point determinism--are a function of opening positions,
and can serve as a DEMO to evaluate actual outcomes. Despite the fact that they
are commonly used, all three of these criteria for evaluation have flaws and
complexities that call for further work--there is presently very little--on
systems of evaluation.
Another DEMO of concern is the analysis of negotiations in the case of the
three very different types of stakes--those solvable by division, those by creation,
and those by exchange. Although much of the earlier literature on DEMO
focused on the more obvious topic of divisio n (Schopenhauer, 1896; Nicolson,
1939; Schelling, 1960) with its notion of negotiation DEMO winning or losing, much
more attention lately has been drawn to DEMO improvement of exchanges (Homans,
1961; Axetrod, 1970; Nash, DEMO; Sebenius, 1984; Zartman, 1987a) with its
notion of mutual DEMO
The importance of resolv~mg problems by exchange bears much emphasis
because patties in conflict often forget that resolution by multilateral decisions
means "buying" DEMO other party's agreement through inducements in terms of
items that part}" values, in order to make agreement attractive to itself. At the
DEMO time, emphasis on exchange carries a different
encounter of conceding and DEMO, portraying
where "everyone wins" (something). Unfortunately,
Just as there must be a ltttle Warrior in every successful Shopkeeper, so there is
inevitably some zero-sum aspect to every
ated a greater good, there is some need to decide how to divide and share it.
Furthermore, there are some stakes that are indivisible and others that are
signature
DEMO off,
the adversary
a
which gives a completely
satisfac-
a
of an agreement is a prima fade or nominal sign of success
openingpositions,DEMO
position after the agreement
in the absence of an agreement (a DEMO relevent comparison, but a
with their
presumed
position at the
says DEMO the parties must be equallywell
offor
even equally
better
had missed opportunities to improve the condition of
Since some negotiations
vagueness and inflation
of
DEMO
image of
a positive-sum
this is not the whole picture.
Journal January 1988 39
positive-sum. Once parties have cre-
negotiation
from
an
their
there DEMO
instead
process
time
unexchangeable. These aspects of negotiation are still not the
tive or definitive DEMO, and they are somewhat
insightful analysis of redistributive bargaining (Walton and McKersie, 1965).
To date, there are three ways of
is DEMO replace it in the context of exchange by means of
determining what the item is worth, the other party can counterbalance it
through compensatory concessions. Unfortunately, some stakes have an absolute
or infinite worth, so DEMO no compensation is possible. Second is to
perceptions of the stakes so that things are seen differently and the zero.sum
nature of the outcomes DEMO removed. Again, some stakes escape such creative
reformulation or, even
ble in detail. Third is to manipulate notions of
translated to the specific, an idea akin to the previous notion of a creative
formula. But DEMO merely intellectualizes the problem without solving it in many
cases, since DEMO is the conflicting notions of justice that make the problems of
divisions so intractable in the first place. Obviously, practitioners need more help
in ways of dealing with the zero-sum aspects of negotiation--the "Jerusalem
Problems"--that lie beyond positive-sum creativity.
A third topic of continuing inquiry highlighted by DEMO generally accepted
notion of the negotiation process is the Toughness Dilemma. The question of
when to be tough and when to be soft, and the paradox on which it is based, has
already been identified as the major tactical question for analysts and practition-
ers alike. By now, it is plain that there is no way out of the dilemma DEMO presented,
and that correct and insightful answers depend on some intermediate variable,
such as personality, timing, phase, power, etc. But DEMO is still no sense of any
hierarchy among these intermediate variables---other than the eternal debates
among disciplines as to which gives the best analysis--and DEMO notions as to which
are trumps. Somewhere between the anecdotal proverbs and the unoperation-
alizable theory lies a not-yet-fully mined terrain of inquiry which DEMO require
new parameters.
Finally, an area of negotiation that falls outside DEMO current paradigm is
multilateral bargaining. The current process notion has thus far worked to
effective consideration of multilateral negotiation, and those that have
been treated well tend to be reduced to bilateral analysis (Lipson, 1985, p. 220).
When not reduced to dyads, multilateral negotiation tends to be treated merely
descriptively even if
in regard to the successive GATT DEMO (Preeg, 1970; Evans, 1971; Cline et al.,
1978; Winham, 1987). There have been a number of
an approach to multilateral negotiations (that is, a large number of
not merely more DEMO two, as in Raiffa, 1982; Zagare, 1978) which indicate DEMO
promising directions (Zartman, 1987c).
One set of approaches treats multilateral negotiations as a problem in
(Rubin and Brown, 1975, pp. 64 ft.; Snyder and Diesing,
1977, pp. 349 ft.; Raiffa, DEMO). However, coalition is a very
coalition covers the shaping of DEMO to
some sort ofweighted decision rule, it hides a separate
40
DEMO
justice
subject
from the earlier,
thinking about the problem of
division. First
By
L William Zartman
when subject of
an attractive formula, they prove intracta-
which can then be
negotiation. to the
be decided up DEMO down by
negotiation process. There is something going on in the interstices of coalition
that needs a separate analysis that is not yet available. DEMO the strategic approach
to bilateral negotiations, to which it is related, coalition analyzes what happens
coalition-formation
insightftdly, a problem that has posed particular challenges
excellent attempts to devise
participants,
different
process from
Common Elements
DEMO
exhaus-
of
different
exclude
And,
extent that
imaginative between they
is ics Other obtained; might approaches provide as in coalition, a are new conceivable analytical context, but have becomes as DEMO been voting a used--small conceptual or at least examination approaches group
negotiation, its Multilateral stakes own analysis too basic by ingredients permits are parties and stakes. Negotiated pieces. agreements are made
Systems Department Analysis, (1974), and A. 18-22 evolution May conflict 1987, of cooperation. of Laxenburg, interest. Bargaining: Poweg, tactics, Chicago: Markham. New Austria. York: Basic. and outcomes. San Francisco:
for the categories of of
not be DEMO with each other.
The Project original on the version Processes of this on International paper was Negotiation (PIN) of the International Institute of
DEMO, Bacharach, .......... . (1984). R. S. (1970). and The Lawler, The E. ( 1981).
D. Perspectives "How "Simple D. Foreign and
Druckman, Friedheim, Fisher, 1987. R. and D. R. Ury, (1986). (1987). The W. International The L "DEMO, "The (1981). third turning United Nations conference on the DEMO of the Sea," In Zartman,
Secondly,
Barclay, Bartos, Baldwin, Jossey-Bass. Decisions, S.
.......... . Bendahmane, Brains, .......... . DEMO
Coddington, Cross,J. institution. W. (1969). R. ai.
(1984)DEMO et A.
Cline, Davidow, Filley, Deutsch, Evans, Ellsberg, University A. C. J. J. W. M. D. (1975). (1971). (1975). (1973). Press. (
construction In multilateral indicate of
(1986).
negotiations ways preferences ingredients (Sebenius, and
parties. that negotiation DEMO model are Bilateral to enjoy the many needs
(1978),
(DEMO).
S. (1985).
(1987). "Bargaining
Superpower Process predictable DEMO, model Service on Trade
(1978).
A
1968
many
blind
agreement rather Friedheim, on
of
Resolution economics peace Theories negotiation. gaznes.
)
"Theory
Institute.
Kennedy
of
in Southern of Getting to conflict resolution. YES.
DEMO
an negotiation agreement as out in the of individual predominant
and
impinges 1984; to
negotiation either approaches same benefits. men NOTE to
REFERENCES
negotiation." are negotiaaons bargaining. conflict. J., Round the negotiations?" New eds. DEMO Africa. in
and practice of points, New and blackmail." Glenview, DEMO Young, Ill.: 1975. Scott
Negotiation
have but
has bilateral mode, DEMO two
at a conference on negotiation organized Applied by the
with of Washington: Haven: Yale (1984). negotiations. New
American Boston: Houghton DEMO Journal Jameary 1988 41
an
scaling
but
In
in
only into that to its
been
New
Boulder,
fit
1987;
coexist one In DEMO
Zartman, the In International Tok3o 1978. Department Round. negotiation. Foreign
Zartman, State University 1987b. Press.
ct~ses."JournalofConflictResolution
Haven: Yale York:
Cambridge, DEMO
any
elephant, concept case, and process model reinforce in of
and
trade
Colo.: Westview.
Basic
Chicago:
University
policy.
Books.
Washington:
Aldine.
Press.
used than Hipel the in
and
capture some process Fraser, different them. 1984). and But
does not
bywhich dynam- it
the
Washington: Service Institute. State
The BrooMngs
Mass.: 30:32%360. Harvard
regard
process
each two to
it.
or as a basis
bilateral should invent other.
of
DEMO
might
Technical Peterson,
and outcome
Report C. (1976). 76-1.
DEMO
Multi-attribute
hijackers."
airline
utility
In Zartman, models. York: Columbia McLean, 1987b.
University Va,:
Designs
Press,
and
Habeeb, Gulliver, W. P. M. ( H. (1979). Disputes and negotiations: negotiations. Panama, Sp~n, Iceland.
Hamermesch, and Cambridge. J. (1956). J. Rational 1987).Asymmetn'cal (1987). 'Approaches behavior '%Vho "wins' wages. and to the bargaining in bargaining wage bargaining?" DEMO In Zartman, Press. 1987b. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Ji~nsson, Kissinger, Homans, Karrass, Hopmann, .......... . Ilde, (1970). (1978). (1969). "Situation-specific "The 6:19-28. negotiation Political Research Vietnam negotiations." game. vs. actor-specific New 6:381-398. York: World. negotiator. Foreign the approaches Affairs sciences, social In the utilities." Zartman, theory situations. of games." New
European C. C. H. Journal The of Princeton negotiator." In DEMO, 1975. Academic ~llae University Brooldngs Press. York: Male American international The University Free Press. Press. bargaining."
Sebenius,J. Schopenhauer, Simon, Schelling, Saunders, Rubin, RaH~, Academic J. and S. ( and H. Brown, ( Press. 1985 ). B. The (1977). conflict Hawthorn. Press. and Institution. Princeton negotiation.
Wriggins, Young, .......... W'mham, Walton, DEMO; Zartman, Valavanis, .......... . Za~tre, .......... . Snyder, Hill. DEMO 2:156-169. ., (1983). O., ed. R. F, G. H. G, L (1978). H. and ed. (1957). (DEMO). W., (1987). (1987). 1958). McKersie, Press. (1975). Dieslng, Ripe "Game (1978). for '>l "Resolution International "Up unified Bargaining. resolution. P, R. theoretic for The ( 1965 auction." treatment negotiation of ). A trade Urbana, analysis DEMO of Zartman, process. of II1.: the the University utilities Vietnam 1987b. Newbury theory." Round oflabor interact."Journal of negotiations." Princeton: Illinois. Park, Calif.: Sage. In negotiation. negotiations, Young, 1975. In Princeton: New Princeton
Hicks, .......... . ( Harsanyi, York: tn Young, 1975. DEMO 1977 The theory of
Hipel, New J. (1932). (1961 ). Frasel; Soc/al N. (1984). Conflict analysis. London:
DEMO E and C, (1964).
Nierenberg, Nicholson, Nash, Lipson,DEMO
Preeg, Pruitt, Pen, Pillar, Nyerges,
York: Macmillan. (1968). G. Leites, P. T. Resolution How (1978). "Negotiation." DEMO ). nations (1962). "An behavior. negotiate. application "Political In InternationaiEncyclopedia New New negotiation of York: the York: Richardson Harcourt & DEMO Brace. Process of the modifying Model." social voI. 2, Journal 1978. p. 117. of
P. ( 1983 D. (1952). E. (1950)DEMO C. ( 1985 ). H. G. (1939). (1973). "The Diplomacy. dilemma." Power York: negotiating. In and Oxford. Young, 1975. society, in 38 New
Harper ms a process of 47:211-234, DEMO
Middle New (October):200-225. Negotiation New Haven: East."
soclalpsychology DEMO bargaining
J. J. (1970). (1987). ). 'A "DEMO's "Ten bargaining commandrnents problem." New of for a
University J. H. (1982). (1981). (1957). 17. (1960). DEMO (1984). A. Negotiation general Negotiation behavior. Traders The Models The DEMO and (1975). strategy theory and other The peace. diplomats. art DEMO The bargaining," Princeton: of New negotiation. Washington: York:
H. K. University York: McGraw Press.
1:121-138. (1985). Positive sum: Improving Zartman, Negotiation 1978.
Fundamentals science of American Enterprise Mass.: Journal DEMO 3:21-27. New York:
North-South negotiations.
of of conflict. controversy.
42 Transaction. L William Zartrm~n Common Elements New York: Oxford The North-South University Press. Stalemate" New Brunswick, N.J.:
New York: Academic
MacaniUan. problem York: Elsevier. before
and after
equilibrium in games and
lax,
Lasswell, Khury, 70:698-706. D. and E
H.
(1968). Sebenius,J. and Kaplan,
(1896).
behavioral
theory Tokyo
and
bargaining when
Harvard
ed. "Negotiating from asymmetry:
Journal
"The
(1986). etiquette A.
(1950).
The
of bargaining
Cambridge,
manageras World Politics
York:
Anthropologist
W~tshington:
Negotiating of man. Conflict the Law among of the
DEMO
New York: Wiley.
Cambridge,
London:
nations.
Cambridge, Mass.: DEMO Harvard & biass.:
Unwin.
Harvard
UmN'ersity Press.
of Conflict
University
Press.
Resolution
.......... ..........
Zeuthell,
sented
.,
.
and
(1987c). ed, E Berman, (t987b). to
(1930),
the
"l~Lanaging DEMO "Economic M. The 50% (1982). Political multilateral soluPdon, warfare." The practical Science Association, 2rid complexity: In
ed,
Young,
DEMO
New
1975. Haven: Many Chicago, New are Yale Haven: called DEMO September but Yale
few
University Press. 1987. chose." Press. Paper
pre-
DEMO
January 1988
43{1g42fwefx}