The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available DEMO
www.emeraldinsight.com/1355-2554.htm
IJEBR
17,1
82
International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Behaviour &DEMO
Research
Vol. 17 No. 1, 2011
pp. 82-103
q Emerald Group DEMO Limited
1355-2554
DOI 10.1108/13552551111107525
Personal characteristics and
strategic orientation:
entrepreneurs in Canadian
manufacturing companies
David Di Zhang
Department of Management and Marketing, Edwards School of Business,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada, and
Edward Bruning
Department of Marketing, Asper School of Business, University of DEMO,
Winnipeg, Canada
Abstract
Purpose – Extant theories suggest that entrepreneurs’ DEMO characteristics have substantial
impacts on their ﬁrm’s performance. From a resource-based view, the paper considers an
entrepreneur’s personal characteristics to be a unique resource endowment to their ﬁrm. The paper
seeks to discuss these issues.
Design/DEMO/approach – Data were collected through a national survey of owners and
senior managers of small- to medium-sized Canadian manufacturing companies. Mediation
relationships were DEMO with hierarchical regression analyses.
Findings – Consistent with the authors’ hypotheses, DEMO is found that entrepreneurs’ personal
characteristics, such as need for achievement, need for cognition, and internal locus of control, have
positive inﬂuences DEMO ﬁrm performance. Furthermore, it is demonstrated that their strategic orientations
mediated DEMO inﬂuences. The data indicate that entrepreneurs with higher levels of internal locus of
control are more likely to adopt an entrepreneurial orientation than a DEMO orientation.
Originality/value – This paper helps to better understand why entrepreneurs make different
strategic decisions under seemingly similar competitive environments. The ﬁndings suggest DEMO
entrepreneurs do not simply react mechanically to external environmental changes. Instead, DEMO they
seek and interpret information and formulate organizational strategies is partially inﬂuenced by their
personal characteristics. Entrepreneurs develop their own ways of utilizing the DEMO capital that
they bring to their ﬁrms.
Keywords Personality, Entrepreneurs, Manufacturing systems, Canada
Paper type Research paper
The success of small businesses heavily depends on the human capital of their
owner-managers ( Jones et al., 2007). When an entrepreneur starts a business, they
bring a unique set of human capital to their business as a part of resource DEMO
to the ﬁrm, including, but not limited to, their skills, experience, and personality. As
such, the business becomes an extension of DEMO entrepreneur as an individual
(Hambrick and Mason, 1984).
The resource-based view of the ﬁrm (RBV) posits that each organization is endowed
DEMO a ﬁnite amount of resources. Some of these resources are rare, DEMO, and
difﬁcult for competitors to copy, and therefore provide the ﬁrm with opportunities to
gain sustainable competitive advantages (Peteraf, 1993; Barney, DEMO; Hunt and
Morgan, 1995; Penrose, 1959). Penrose (1959) maintains that human capital, such as the
entrepreneur’s skills, experience, and other personal characteristics, are key resource
endowments. This paper investigates how entrepreneurs utilize their skills and
experiences to inﬂuence their ﬁrm’s performance. More speciﬁcally, we will
demonstrate that the entrepreneur’s personal characteristics inﬂuence their strategic
choices, which in turn inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s performance.
Many researchers have investigated entrepreneurial characteristics by applying
DEMO and Mason’s (1984) upper echelon theory, which regards a ﬁrm DEMO a
reﬂection and extension of its owner. Research has revealed, for DEMO, the ﬁrm’s
strategic choices, behaviors, and performances are to a DEMO extent inﬂuenced by the
demographic characteristics of its owners or top managers (Smith et al., 1996), their
social connections (Geletkanycz and Hambrick, 1997), their perceptions of the
environment (Kiesler and Sproull, 1982), and their decision-making styles (Eisenhardt,
1999). Essentially, the DEMO echelon theory, a special case of RBV, enriches the
strategy formulation and resource allocation processes described by Child and Francis
(1977) by DEMO the inﬂuence of entrepreneurial characteristics. Recent empirical
evidence supports the view that entrepreneurs’ and top managers’ personal
characteristics have a substantial direct impact on DEMO performance (Switzer and
Huang, 2007; Adams et al., 2005), and an indirect impact on performance, mediated by
decision-making speed, decision DEMO, and strategy formulation (Karami et al., 2006).
Seymour (2006) critiques classic approaches in business research, arguing that
making direct links DEMO factors such as resources and performance, or
environment and strategy, is overly objective and lacks subjectivity. Ketchen et al.
(2007) argue that DEMO endowment alone may not automatically lead to superior
ﬁrm performance. Instead, DEMO propose that entrepreneurs and managers must deploy
resources wisely to maximize potential beneﬁts. In other words, they argue that the
resource-performance link is mediated by a ﬁrm’s strategic choices. Macpherson and
Holt (2007) further highlight DEMO complexity of interactions among human capital,
organizational systems, and ﬁrm DEMO
Commenting on knowledge utilization in organizations, Tsoukas (2002, p. 420)DEMO
draws our attention to “developing a distinctive way of utilizing resources” and the
“inherently creative potential of human action”. Evidence suggests that even under
DEMO similar external environmental conditions, some ﬁrms might opt to place
greater DEMO on understanding the market, while others might focus on innovation
(Atuahene-Gima and Ko, 2001). Grinstein (2008) argues that research should shift away
from assessing the efﬁcacy of a singular strategy to examining strategic DEMO and
potentially combination strategies. In this paper, we examine how entrepreneurs
DEMO both market and entrepreneurial orientations when developing strategic
decisions.
According to Ketchen et al.’s (2007) propositions, the RBV should be extended to
include strategic choices that mediate the relationship between resource endowment and
ﬁrm performance. DEMO and Holt (2007) clearly favor holistic studies, as well. For
DEMO purposes, we have limited the scope of our study to include DEMO small number of
variables in each category of constructs. Considered as human capital resource
endowment, we investigate a sample of personal characteristics: internal DEMO of control,
need for cognition, and need for achievement. Considered DEMO organizational strategic
choices, we examine whether the organization is more market-oriented DEMO
Personal
characteristics
83
IJEBR
17,1
84
entrepreneurial-oriented. For ﬁrm performance, we consider a multitude of ﬁnance-based
indicators including revenue, return on investment, and return on DEMO In the course of
this paper, we review and summarize the DEMO on market orientation,
entrepreneurial orientation, and various relevant personal characteristics. DEMO then
hypothesize their relationships and describe our empirical study designed to test these
relationships. Finally, we discuss the implications of our ﬁndings.
1. Literature review
Considerable effort has been invested in identifying the set of desirable DEMO
characteristics for starting or effectively managing businesses. For example,
researchers have identiﬁed that achievement motivation positively affects an
entrepreneur’s speed of decision-making (Kauer et al., 2007), risk-taking attitudes
inﬂuence an entrepreneur’s strategic decisions whether to form alliances with other
businesses (Pansiri, 2007), professional experience DEMO education are likely to lead and
enable an entrepreneur to develop formal strategic plans (Karami et al., 2006), and
intuition leads an DEMO to prefer a prospector strategy (Gallen, 2006).
Although researchers have uncovered a host of personal characteristics that are
critical antecedents to ﬁrm DEMO, as Dobbs and Hamilton (2007) observe,
knowledge about the DEMO among the characteristics of entrepreneurs, their
strategic decisions, and the performance of their ﬁrms is still fragmented, and that no
research to date has produced a coherent theory. The following discussion elucidates
these prior ﬁndings DEMO attempts to join them together.
1.1 Market orientation
Market orientation (MO) is the organization-wide concerted effort in generating market
intelligence pertaining to current DEMO future customer needs, disseminating intelligence
across departments, and responding to such intelligence (Kohli and Jaworski, 1990).
Market-oriented ﬁrms embrace a collection DEMO special behaviors that place primary
emphasis on customers. It has also been argued that an organization’s ability to respond
to the market depends on DEMO extent of its knowledge of both customers and competitors
(Narver and DEMO, 1990). That is, a market-oriented ﬁrm must have an organizational
culture that encourages and facilitates all activities involved in both acquiring
information DEMO customers and competitors in the target market and disseminating the
information throughout the business. Hence, MO is a composite construct that
encompasses three distinct components: customer orientation, competitor orientation,
and inter-functional coordination. Both Narver DEMO Slater’s (1990) and Kohli and
Jaworski’s (1990) conceptualizations of market orientation have been extensively
employed in the stream of research that followed DEMO work. Empirical ﬁndings from
both perspectives generally converge to support the conclusion that MO has a robust
positive inﬂuence on ﬁrm performance (Kirca et al., 2005; Cano et al.,2004).
Notwithstanding the solid impact DEMO MO on performance, other strategic options are
available for managers to DEMO For example, Sin et al. (2002) have shown that
relationship DEMO orientation (RMO), which focuses on cultivating a mutually
beneﬁcial long-term DEMO between buyers and sellers, also has positive effects
on ﬁrm performance. DEMO researchers have also demonstrated that, depending on
industry and economic ideology, RMO may be more effective than MO in some cases
(Sin et al., 2005).
A notable shortcoming of MO is its reliance on entities external to DEMO ﬁrm (e.g.,
customers and competitors) to guide its actions. Jaworski et al. (2000) have warned that
ﬁrms should avoid being market-driven DEMO, instead, should attempt to drive the
market. In order to achieve such goals, some have identiﬁed innovation, proactivity,
and risk-taking as DEMO elements to MO. For example, Atuahene-Gima and
Ko (2001) demonstrate DEMO entrepreneurial orientation (EO) is an alternative to MO.
When a ﬁrm aligns both MO and EO it would have superior performance in the
DEMO of new products. Zhou et al. (2005) also consider EO as an
alternative strategic orientation to MO.
1.2 Entrepreneurial orientation
EO relates to DEMO processes, practices, and decision-making activities that lead to a new
entry (Lumpkin and Dess, 1996). EO involves not only the intentions DEMO also the
actions of key players in a dynamic generative process aimed at new venture creation.
The fundamental dimensions that characterize EO, Lumpkin and Dess assert, include a
propensity to act autonomously, a willingness to DEMO and take risks, a tendency to
be aggressive toward competitors, and proactively pursuing market opportunities.
Covin and Slevin (1991) maintain that, in addition to inﬂuencing new venture creation,
EO also inﬂuences a ﬁrm’s DEMO performance. Therefore, EO is an important
strategic orientation for existing ﬁrms DEMO well. Empirical evidence suggests that ﬁrms
with a high level of EO are much more likely to engage in innovation (Manimala, 1992)
DEMO enjoy better overall organizational performance (Smart and Conant, 1994). The
positive inﬂuence of EO on performance is extensive, and the strength of this inﬂuence
increases over time. Therefore, researchers argue that investment in EO is ﬁnancially
worthwhile as it will pay off over an extended period DEMO time (Wiklund, 1999).
Atuahene-Gima and Ko (2001) demonstrate that ﬁrms adopt various combinations of
strategic orientation. Some place their emphasis more DEMO on either MO or EO. Those
that integrate both MO and EO, however, achieve the strongest performances in the
commercialization of innovation. Zhang DEMO al. (2007) further demonstrate that, while both
MO and EO DEMO unique and signiﬁcant positive inﬂuences on ﬁrm performance, these
two strategic DEMO inﬂuence performance via different paths.
Entrepreneurial-oriented ﬁrms are more likely to concentrate on direct links to ﬁnancial
performance, whereas market-oriented ﬁrms are more likely to focus on customers and
gaining long-term ﬁnancial return through improved satisfaction DEMO loyalty.
Environmental factors have typically been conceptualized as moderators for both
MO (Kohli and Jaworski, 1990) and EO (Lumpkin and Dess, 1996). Only a few studies
have examined the factors that lead managers DEMO choose either strategic orientation.
Zhang et al. (2007) suggest that certain market environmental factors, such as
muniﬁcence, competitive intensity, and market turbulence, might affect managers’
selection of strategic orientations. Kohli and Jaworski (1990) have stipulated that the
top manager’s emphasis is an important antecedent to DEMO We suspect that it could
also be the case in EO. In the following subsection, we seek to identify what type of
entrepreneurs is more likely to adopt MO or EO.
1.3 Managerial characteristics in management DEMO
There is a rich body of management literature that seeks to identify certain sets of
desirable personal characteristics for entrepreneurs starting new businesses and DEMO
Personal
characteristics
85
IJEBR
17,1
86
managers running companies effectively. A large number of DEMO
characteristics have been examined in the management literature. For example,
prior research has shown that managers with higher levels of achievement motivation
make DEMO faster (Kauer et al., 2007), owner-manager’s personal visions correlate
with above average annual sales levels (Mazzarol et al., 2009), managers DEMO higher
levels of education are more likely to develop formal strategic plans (Karami et al.,
2006), managerial cognition plays a vital role in managerial conduct and performance
(Panagiotou, 2006), and managers with DEMO internal locus of control tend to be more
innovative (Miller and DEMO, 1986) and effective (Govindarajan, 1989). Prior
research has considered achievement motivation and internal locus of control as
critical characteristics of successful DEMO (Littenen, 2000; Hansemark, 1998).
However, extant knowledge on DEMO topic is fragmented (Dobbs and Hamilton, 2007).
More research is needed to provide a holistic picture of entrepreneurial behaviors
(Macpherson and Holt, 2007).
In our study, we take a resource-based view and DEMO the entrepreneur’s
personal characteristics as human capital resource endowments, and examine DEMO in
the context of strategy and performance. In terms of variables, DEMO examine three
frequently investigated personal characteristics in the entrepreneurship research: need
DEMO achievement, need for cognition, and internal locus of control.
Need for achievement. The need for achievement (NFA) construct has a long history
DEMO psychology. It generally refers to a stable, learned characteristic in which
DEMO is obtained by striving for and attaining higher levels of excellence
(DEMO, 1999). Although NFA was originally conceptualized as a stable personal
DEMO, more recent studies have demonstrated that it can evolve over time, particularly
through the acquisition of advanced education, such as an MBA programme. One
study found that students substantially increased their achievement needs after
enrolling DEMO an MBA programme (Hansemark, 1998). Prior research also indicates that
there is a positive relationship between NFA and entrepreneurship ( Johnson, 1990).
Research also suggests that angel investors typically have a higher NFA (Duxbury
et al., 1996); entrepreneurs with a higher NFA are more likely to be successful ( Johnson
and Ma, 1995). In some cases, NFA is one of the selection criteria for entering
entrepreneurship training programmes (Gupta, 1989). There seems to be a consensus
on DEMO positive relationship between managerial NFA and successful performance.
Several studies have examined NFA’s inﬂuence on ﬁrm strategies. For example, it
was found that a CEO’s NFA affects the rationality of the strategic decision-making
processes by increasing DEMO formalization and integration (Miller et al.,
1988). When a DEMO has a high level of NFA, they are more likely to DEMO broadly
focused strategies and be proactive (Miller and Toulouse, 1986). Being proactive is one
of the key elements of entrepreneurial orientation (Lumpkin and Dess, 1996). Therefore,
we suspect that entrepreneurs with higher levels of NFA are likely to adopt
entrepreneurial-oriented strategies.
Lumpkin and Dess (1996) have also theorized a positive relationship between NFA
and EO. They predict that entrepreneurs and managers with higher levels of NFA are
more DEMO to adopt EO, which in turn contributes to superior ﬁrm performance. DEMO
literature, however, is relatively silent on the relationship between NFA and MO. In
summary, extant literature supports the idea that entrepreneurs with higher levels of
NFA are more likely to cultivate an organizational culture that DEMO more competitive and
proactive. We hypothesize that an entrepreneur’s NFA has a signiﬁcant direct impact
DEMO the ﬁrm’s strategy and an indirect on performance:
H1. An entrepreneur with a higher level of NFA is likely to adopt entrepreneurial
orientation DEMO achieve superior ﬁrm performance.
Internal locus of control. According to Rotter (DEMO), internal locus of control (ILOC)
versus external locus of DEMO conceptualizes how individuals see their own actions
affecting events that surround their lives. Individuals with ILOC tend to believe that
events are the results DEMO their own actions (Rotter, 1966), while individuals with
external locus of control tend to attribute events to external environmental factors,
such DEMO powerful others or chance (Levenson, 1973).
If we put the concept of ILOC in the context of an entrepreneur running their
business DEMO a competitive environment, we can imagine that an entrepreneur with a
DEMO ILOC would believe that they can make things happen, and that DEMO success or
failure of their business is the result of their own actions. In contrast, an entrepreneur
with an external locus of control might consider that the external environment is the
main reason for their business DEMO or failure.
Market-oriented organizational culture requires that a ﬁrm be attuned to its
customers, and design and deliver products and services that fulﬁll customer needs
and wants. In other words, a market orientation assumes the customers as the locus of
control. An entrepreneur with a high level of DEMO may not be willing to surrender the
control of their organizations and seek directions from customers, competitors, or other
external entities. They would DEMO take matters into their own hands and formulate a
competitive organizational culture that is internally driven by their own innovative
and creative ideas.
ILOC DEMO a signature characteristic of angel investors and entrepreneurs ( Johnson
and Ma, 1995). Entrepreneurs with high levels of ILOC tend to perceive themselves as
having more managerial discretion and power (Carpenter and Golden, 1997)DEMO Managers
and entrepreneurs with ILOC also tend to be more innovative (DEMO and Toulouse,
1986) and effective (Govindarajan, 1989). Prior DEMO have also indicated that the
positive impact of ILOC on ﬁrm performance is mediated by the entrepreneur’s
risk-taking behaviors (Boone et al., 1996)DEMO The extant literature clearly indicates a
positive relationship between ILOC and entrepreneurial behaviors. Consistent with
prior ﬁndings, we hypothesize that an entrepreneur’s ILOC has direct and indirect
positive impacts on the ﬁrm’s performance, and the entrepreneur with a high level of
ILOC is more likely to adopt EO:DEMO
H2. An entrepreneur with a high level of ILOC is likely to adopt entrepreneurial
orientation to achieve superior ﬁrm performance.
Need for cognition. A DEMO for cognition (NFC) is a tendency to engage in and enjoy
thinking (Cacioppo and Petty, 1982). The psychology literature suggests that
DEMO naturally differ in their levels of NFC (Cacioppo et al., 1996). Those with
higher levels of NFC possess positive attitudes toward complex DEMO that require
thinking (Cacioppo et al., 1986). Individuals with higher levels of NFC also favor
extensive information searches, whereas those with lower levels of NFC prefer
interpersonal sources of information and are more likely DEMO act upon perceptions and
gut feelings (Mourali et al., 2005).
Personal
characteristics
87
IJEBR
17,1
88
Although the NFC construct was originally developed in DEMO, it has been
widely applied in the marketing ﬁeld, particularly in consumer behavior and
advertising research. For example, in the context of assessing the effects of reference
group opinions, it has been found that individuals with high levels of NFC place
greater emphasis on the logical evaluation DEMO topic-relevant arguments, while
individuals with low levels of NFC make their DEMO based on affective attitudes
toward the information (Areni et al., 2000). Campbell and Kirmani (2000) have found
that consumers with higher DEMO of NFC and cognitive capacity are more capable of
activating their knowledge base. Those with higher levels of formal education are
thought to have DEMO cognitive capacity and higher NFC, and are more likely to engage
DEMO rational reasoning (Cacioppo et al., 1986). In an advertising context, researchers have
found that individuals with higher levels of NFC are more capable of understanding
complex advertisements (Putrevu et al., 2004).
While DEMO has not been extensively examined in the domains of strategic
management and entrepreneurship, evidence shows that managers and entrepreneurs
with higher NFC are more successful at adaptive decision-making (Levin et al., 2000). If
individuals DEMO higher levels of NFC behave in certain patterns, it would be
DEMO to deduce that entrepreneurs with higher levels of NFC would behave
similarly. We would expect that an entrepreneur with a higher level of NFC DEMO
place greater emphasis on logical arguments and make their strategic decisions based
on extensive market research rather than on intuition. MO encourages the entrepreneur
DEMO generate extensive market intelligence. The market intelligence can be complex, and
DEMO requires a high level of cognitive capacity to effectively analyze and respond. We
hypothesize, therefore, that an entrepreneur’s NFC has a signiﬁcant impact DEMO a ﬁrm’s
strategy and performance, and the entrepreneur with a high DEMO of NFC is likely to be
market-oriented:
H3. An entrepreneur with a higher level of NFC is likely to adopt market
orientation to DEMO superior ﬁrm performance.
Essentially, we propose a contextual model based on DEMO extended resource-based view
(Ketchen et al., 2007). We believe an entrepreneur’s personal characteristics will
inﬂuence their strategic orientations, which ultimately leads to business performance
(see Figure 1).
2. Research methods
2.1 Procedure
We have hypothesized several relationships among entrepreneurs’ personal
characteristics, their ﬁrm’s strategic orientations, and performances. A
cross-sectional survey-based method is suitable for testing the study hypotheses
because data on a large number of organizations can be collected DEMO via
this method (Babbie, 1973). The survey method is the least susceptible to researcher
bias in data collection, analysis, and interpretation (Busha and Harter, 1980).
A mail survey was administered to small to medium sized enterprises (SMEs) in
Canadian manufacturing industry. A sample DEMO 2,200 companies was selected from
approximately 100,000 Canadian companies listed in Proﬁle Canada’s database. This
selection was a compromise between a wide DEMO sample and a focused
sample. The companies in our sample are all in the manufacturing industry but they
Personal
characteristics
89
produce a wide variety of products, including processed food, clothing, furniture, and
industrial equipments. A cross-industry sampling approach would allow broader
generalization but errors may occur because each industry has its unique DEMO
environment. A focused sample would limit the inﬂuence of industry factors but limit the
generalizability of the ﬁndings. We have chosen to sample the DEMO populated and
relatively diverse manufacturing industry in order to allow our results to be generalized
to a larger population, yet at the same time keep the environmental factors relatively
comparable. Our sample does not include, for example, companies in ﬁnancial services or
oil and gas sectors where competitive behaviors are considerably different because of
oligopoly and government regulations. The manufacturing DEMO has been a favorite
sample frame for many prior studies of a similar nature (Pelham, 1999; Menguc and Auh,
2006; Matsuno DEMO Mentzer, 2000; Knight, 2000; Avlonitis and Gounaris, 1999).
DEMO business owners or general managers of the selected companies were contacted
by mail, informed of the nature of our study, and asked to DEMO a survey
questionnaire. Follow-up reminder postcards were sent two weeks after the initial
mail-out. Of the 2,200 packets mailed, 198 were returned as undeliverable. One hundred
and sixty-three respondents returned the completed survey questionnaires. Two DEMO
these were deleted due to a large amount of missing data. The survey, therefore,
yielded 161 usable responses, representing an 8 percent DEMO rate.
The descriptive statistics of the companies that responded to our survey are
reported in Table I. These companies, on average, have been DEMO business for 32 years,
with 72 employees, and have approximately DEMO million dollars in annual revenue.
These statistics will be used to As suggested by Armstrong and Overton (1977), we
conducted a t-test to compare the early respondents (those who responded within the
Variables
n
Minimum Maximum Mean
Years in business 144 2 85 32
Number of employees DEMO 1 700 72
Revenue 118 $20,000 $900,000,000 $27,000,000
Figure 1.
Hypothesized model
Table I.
Descriptive statistics of
the respondents
IJEBR
17,1
90
Table II.
Early respondent-late
respondent t-test
ﬁrst three DEMO of mailing) and the late respondents along a number of major
DEMO, including MO and EO. This did not reveal any statistically signiﬁcant
DEMO between the two groups (see Table II).
We know very DEMO about the companies that did not respond to our survey except
for their approximate number of employees and estimated revenue. We were unable to
DEMO revenue between responding and non-responding companies because of a
large percentage of missing data. Therefore, we compared respondents’ number of
employees with that of the overall sample; no signiﬁcant difference was found. Hence,
we believe that non-response bias is not a As a preventative measure to potential
DEMO method bias, which refers to the artiﬁcially high correlation among constructs
DEMO to a single measurement method (Podsakoff et al., 2003), we rigorously followed the
recommendations made by methodologists such as Busha and Harter (1980), Podsakoff
et al. (2003), and Klein (2007). DEMO example, we used previously published scales with
demonstrated validity and reliability DEMO possible, and we did not mix the
measurement items. We also DEMO several open-ended questions and varied
question types among Likert scales and semantic differential scales. While these
techniques reduce common method bias, they do not eliminate it. We tested common
method bias post hoc using Harman’s single-factor DEMO (Podsakoff and Organ, 1986).
The test revealed 27 factors with Eigen values greater than 1.00, suggesting that
common method bias is not a major concern in our data.
2.2 Construct measurement
Market Orientation (MO). Kohli et al. (1993) and Narver and Slater (1990) DEMO
two different measurement scales to capture the MO construct. Both scales have been
used extensively. Over the years, several scholars have extended, shortened, and
modiﬁed these scales to suit their respective research context (Gainer and Padanyi,
2005; Mavondo et al., 2005; Hult et al., DEMO; Zhou et al., 2005). Particularly, Matsuno
et al. (2005) have demonstrated that Narver and Slater’s scale captures MO slightly
better. Hence, we used a 12-item, seven-point Likert scale, originally developed by
Narver and Slater, to capture each respondent’s perceptions of his/her company’s
customer orientation, competitor orientation, and inter-functional coordination (see the
Appendix (Figure DEMO) for items included in our questionnaire). These 12 items
demonstrated DEMO reliability, with a Conbach’s alpha of 0.847. We averaged these 12
DEMO to create a MO composite index.
Entrepreneurial Orientation (EO). This DEMO measured with a nine-item, seven-point
semantic differential scale based on the DEMO of Naman and Slevin (1993). The items
were designed to DEMO a ﬁrm’s innovativeness, pro-activeness, and risk-taking
behavior. These items also demonstrated good reliability, with a Cronbach’s alpha of
0.841. These items were subsequently averaged into a single EO composite index.
Variables Group
n
Mean SD
DEMO Sig.
MO Early 108 5.24 0.84 0.803 0.424
Late 53 5.13 0.79
EO Early 108 4.03 1.10 0.002 0.998
Late 53 4.03 1.23
Need for Achievement (NFA). The NFA was measured with a ﬁve-item, seven-point
Likert scale. The items were selected from the need for achievement subscale of Needs
Assessment Questionnaire (Heckert et al., 1999). These DEMO demonstrated good scale
reliability, with a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.886. We DEMO these ﬁve items to create an
index score for NFA.
Internal Locus of Control (ILOC). This was measured with a seven-item, seven-point
DEMO scale. Three items, measuring internal locus of control, were based on the work
of Rotter (1966), and the remaining four, measuring DEMO locus of control, were
based on the work of Levenson (1973). In order to test their loading, we conducted an
exploratory factor analysis with varimax rotation, which revealed that one single
factor underlies the seven items measured. Accordingly, we reverse-coded the four
items that were designed to capture external locus of control. The resulting seven items
demonstrated good DEMO, with a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.801. We then averaged
these seven DEMO into one ILOC composite index.
Need for Cognition (NFC). Cacioppo DEMO al. (1984) developed two versions of a scale to
measure NFC: a 34-item long scale and an 18-item shorter version. A recent study
reported that NFC consists of four key components: enjoyment of cognitive
stimulation, preference for complexity, commitment of cognitive effort, and desire for
understanding (Lord and Putrevu, 2006). Accordingly, we designed a four-item
measure to capture these aspects of NFC. One item did not load well DEMO was later
dropped. The remaining three items exhibited reasonable reliability (Cronbach’s
DEMO ¼ 0:704). We averaged these remaining items to create an NFC index.
Firm Performance (FP). This was measured with a three-item, seven-point
perceptual measure of a ﬁrm’s performance relative to competition. Respondents were
asked to indicate their ﬁrm’s overall sales revenue, return on investment (DEMO), and
return on assets (ROA) relative to its major competitors. Such a measure has been used
by Jaworski and Kohli (1993). These three items demonstrated an excellent reliability
(Cronbach’s alpha ¼ 0:903). We averaged these three items into one ﬁrm performance
index.
2.3 DEMO
The correlation matrix among the constructs is presented in Table III. Notice that MO
and EO are only moderately correlated (Pearson’s correlation r ¼ 0:328, p ¼ 0:000).
We calculated a 90 percent conﬁdence interval of their covariance. Such conﬁdence
interval does not contain the DEMO of 1. Therefore, the discriminate validity between
MO and EO has DEMO met.
Variables MO
EO
NFA ILOC NFC FP
MO 1
EO 0.328 *** 1
NFA 0.513 *** 0.413 *** 1
ILOC 0.165 ** 0.452 DEMO 0.483 *** 1
NFC 0.262 *** 0.352 *** 0.429 *** 0.481 *** 1
FP 0.182 ** 0.348 * 0.267 *** 0.372 *** 0.152 ** DEMO
Notes: *Correlation is signiﬁcant at the p , 0.10 level (two-tailed); **Correlation is signiﬁcant at the
p , 0.05 level (two-tailed); ***Correlation is signiﬁcant at the p , 0.01 level (two-tailed)
Personal
characteristics
91
Table III.
Correlation matrix
IJEBR
17,1
92
Table IV.
NFA and its direct and
indirect DEMO
We established a base model, using ﬁrm performance as the dependent DEMO, and ﬁrm
age, number of employees, and estimated annual revenue DEMO the independent variables:
¼ þ þ
FP b1*Age b2 *Employee b3 *Revenue:
The result indicates this model is not statistically signiﬁcant (p ¼ 0:265) and none of
the independent variables has signiﬁcant relationship with the dependent variable
(p
small portion of the variance in the dependent variable (adjusted-R
¼ 0:889, 0.110, 0.733, respectively). DEMO, these three variables explain a very2 ¼ 0:009).
method DEMO by Baron and Kenny (1986), we tested a group of DEMO models:H1 predicts a classic mediation relationship of NFA ! EO ! FP. Following the
FP ¼ b*NFA;
FP ¼ b*EO; EO
FP ¼ b1 *EO
.
¼ b*NFA; and
2*NFA.
.
þ
b
.
The results are presented in Table IV. The data conﬁrm that NFA DEMO a statistically
signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on performance (b¼ 0:267, p ¼ 0:001); NFA has a
positive and signiﬁcant inﬂuence on DEMO (b¼ 0:413, p ¼ 0:000); and EO has a positive
inﬂuence on performance (b¼ 0:348, p ¼ 0:DEMO). The relationship between NFA and
performance reduces its magnitude but remains statistically signiﬁcant (from
b¼ 0:267, p ¼ 0:001 to DEMO 0:185, p ¼ 0:031) when both NFA and EO are considered
in the same regression model. Hence, it appears that EO partially mediates NFA’s
inﬂuence on FP. H1 is supported.
The regression model DEMO ¼b1*NFA þ b2*EO is statistically signiﬁcant (p ¼ 0:000).
DEMO djusted-R 2 is 0.149. When the control variables are added, the DEMO 2 reduces to
0.126 due to added model complexity without additional explanatory power. But it is still
an improvement compared to the base model (DR 2 ¼ 0:117). 0:413, p 0:000)
and NFArelationship between NFA and MO was strong. We interpret this result DEMO mean thatWe also compared the relationships between NFA! MO (b¼ 0:DEMO, p ¼ 0:000). Contrary to what we had expected, the! EO (b¼ ¼
entrepreneurs with high levels of NFA may regard both MO and EO as viable means
for their achievement objectives. A DEMO research has revealed a strong relationship
between NFA and EO (Lumpkin DEMO Dess, 1996). The strong relationship we
discovered between NFA and DEMO is new and interesting. One possible explanation is
the overlap between MO and EO (correlation ¼ 0:328, p , 0.01). This DEMO might
indicate that MO and EO are not mutually exclusive options. Rather, there may be
synergies between the two strategic orientations. Atuahene-Gima and Ko (2001), for
example, argue that companies that are both market- DEMO entrepreneurial-oriented
would have the best performance outcomes.
DV
FP
EO
FP
FP
IV
NFA
NFA
EO
NFA
EO
Adjusted R 2
0.071
0.170
0.121
DEMO
Standardized beta
0.267
0.413
0.348
0.185
0.268
Sig.
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.031
0.002
H2 predicts a mediating relationship ILOC*EO*FP. Using the same method prescribed
by DEMO and Kenny (1986), we tested a group of regression models:DEMO
.
.
.
FP
FP
FP
¼
¼
¼
b
b
b
*ILOC;
*EO; EO
1*EO
þ
¼
b
b
2*ILOC.
*ILOC; DEMO
The results are presented in Table V. The data conﬁrm that ILOC has a statistically
signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on FP (b¼ 0:372, DEMO ¼ 0:000); ILOC also has a positive
and signiﬁcant inﬂuence on EO (b¼ 0:452, p ¼ 0:000). The DEMO also suggest that the
relationship between ILOC and FP, while still DEMO signiﬁcant, reduces in
magnitude (from b¼ 0:372, p ¼ DEMO:000 to b¼ 0:300, p ¼ 0:012) when both ILOC and
EO are considered in the same regression model. Hence, ILOC’s inﬂuence on FP is
partially mediated via EO. H2 is also supported.
DEMO relationship between ILOC and EO (b¼ 0:452, p ¼ 0:000) is much stronger than
that between ILOC and MO (b¼ DEMO:165, p ¼ 0:039). Entrepreneurs with strong ILOC
tend DEMO place more emphasis on entrepreneurial orientation and less on market
orientation, DEMO the latter focuses on external entities, such as customers and competitors.
DEMO regression model FP ¼ b1*ILOC þ b2*EO is statistically signiﬁcant
(p DEMO 0:000). Its adjusted R 2 is 0.182. When the control variables are added, the
adjusted-R 2 reduces to 0.138 due to added model complexity. But it is a considerable
improvement compared to the base DEMO (DR 2 ¼ 0:129).
H3 predicts that NFC has DEMO positive inﬂuence on FP, and that such inﬂuence is
mediated via DEMO We tested a group of four regression models:
. FP ¼ b*NFC;
. FP ¼ b*MO; MO ¼b*NFC; and
. FP DEMO b1*MO þ b2*NFC.
The results are presented in Table VI. The data conﬁrm that NFC has a marginally
signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on FP (b¼ 0:152, p ¼ 0:062). The data also suggest that
DV
FP
EO
FP
FP
IV
ILOC
ILOC
EO
ILOC
EO
Adjusted DEMO 2
0.132
0.199
0.115
0.182
Standardized beta
0.372
0.452
0.348
0.300
0.213
Sig.
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.012
DV
FP
MO
FP
FP
IV
DEMO
NFC
MO
NFC
MO
Adjusted R 2
0.023
0.063
0.027
0.032
Standardized beta
0.152
0.262
0.182
0.112
0.153
Sig.
0.062
0.001
0.025
0.181
0.069
DEMO
characteristics
93
Table V.
ILOC and its direct and
indirect effects
Table VI.
NFC and its direct and
indirect effects
IJEBR
17,1
94
NFC has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on MO (b¼ 0:262, p ¼ 0:001), and MO has a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on FP (b¼ 0:182, p ¼ 0:025). DEMO inﬂuence on FP is reduced to
same regression model. Hence, NFC’s DEMO on FP is completely mediated via MO.insigniﬁcant (b¼ 0:112, p ¼ 0:181) when both NFC and MO are considered in the
H3 is supported.
The regression model FP ¼b1*NFC þ b2*MO is statistically DEMO
(p ¼ 0:035). Its adjusted-R 2 is 0.032. When DEMO control variables are added, the
adjusted-R 2 reduces to 0.015 due DEMO added model complexity. But it is an improvement
compared to the base model (DR 2 ¼ 0:006).
Our data reveal that both NFC-MO (b¼ 0:262, p ¼ 0:001) and NFC-EO (DEMO 0:352,
NFC might have carefully assessed the beneﬁts of MO and EO, and decided to adoptp ¼ 0:000) relationships are DEMO indicating entrepreneurs with high levels of
both strategic orientations.
3. Discussion and conclusions
Scholars have long studied what criteria make entrepreneurial ﬁrms more likely DEMO
succeed. However, a comprehensive theory of success is still absent. This DEMO adds
new knowledge to the strategic management of small businesses by bridging
previously segregated streams of literature. Upper echelon theory has generally
posited that DEMO entrepreneur’s personal characteristics play critically important roles in
their ﬁrm’s behaviors and performance. RBV considers human resources, including the
entrepreneurs’ skills, experiences, and personal characteristics, as strategically
important organizational resources, and as having a DEMO impact on ﬁrm
performance (Barney, 1991). More recently, Ketchen DEMO al. (2007) proposed that the
relationship between organizational resource endowments and performance is
mediated through behavioral variables. Such behaviors include the formation of DEMO
particular type of strategic orientation for a ﬁrm.
Consistent with these prior studies and theories, this paper provides empirical
support for the positive direct and indirect links between an entrepreneur’s personal
characteristics (including internal locus of control, need for achievement, and need for
cognition) and their ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial performance. Thus, our ﬁndings ﬁt well with the
resource-based view of ﬁrms and support the notion that human capital is an important
resource DEMO (Penrose, 1959), and the owners and managers of SMEs play critical
roles in the success of their ﬁrms (Jones et al. 2007). Such direct relationships have been
documented in the extant literature (Hansemark, 1998; Littenen, 2000).
More importantly, our data provide empirical DEMO for the idea that
entrepreneurs’ decisions and organizational behaviors are the mechanisms by which
ﬁrms take advantage of resource endowments and realize their beneﬁts. DEMO carefully
developing appropriate strategic orientations for their company, entrepreneurs and
their DEMO management teams have found effective ways of utilizing their personal
contribution to create a sustainable competitive advantage for the ﬁrm, as Tsoukas
(2002) predicted. Our data conﬁrm that the linkages between resource endowments and
ﬁrm DEMO are mediated by strategic choices. When entrepreneurs believe, for
example, “We will have the best products and services” (high NFA), they combine both
market orientation and entrepreneurial orientation to gain intimate understanding of
what DEMO customers want and need, and provide their customers with the best
DEMO and services through creativity and innovation.
Our data also indicate that there are strategic orientation options available to
DEMO Depending on the type of available resource endowments,
entrepreneurs and managers make different strategic decisions. Prior studies have
revealed that external environmental factors DEMO entrepreneurs’ choice of
organizational strategic orientations. For example, in a muniﬁcent DEMO,
where growth opportunities are abundant, entrepreneurs are more likely to DEMO creative
and innovative. In contrast, entrepreneurs in a more competitive environment DEMO to
be more cautious and are more likely to follow market signals carefully (Zhang et al.,
2007). In this paper, we DEMO that entrepreneurs’ internal personality factors
also play a role. Our data show that entrepreneurs with internal locus of control are
likely to adopt an DEMO orientation; that is, to be more proactive, innovative,
and DEMO Interestingly, our data indicate that possessing a higher need for
achievement DEMO not preclude an entrepreneur from adopting a market-based
strategic orientation. Even though Lumpkin and Dess (1996) predicted a strong
relationship between NFA and DEMO, our data suggest that highly motivated
entrepreneurs utilize multiple means to DEMO their goals for success. In other
words, high-achieving entrepreneurs fuel their DEMO and creativity with market
intelligence. Their risk-taking behaviors are calculated because they understand their
customers’ needs.
Logical and pragmatic entrepreneurs with high levels of DEMO for cognition thrive
when dealing with complex problems. They know that they must be innovative and
proactive in order to meet the market demands. DEMO all cases, the impacts of
entrepreneurial characteristics on ﬁrm performance are DEMO by either market or
entrepreneurial orientation, sometimes both.
Prior research reveals DEMO while both MO and EO are positively correlated with
ﬁrm performance, DEMO asserts their inﬂuences via different paths (Zhang et al., 2007).
Market-oriented ﬁrms achieve market success by appealing to their customers,
ensuring DEMO satisfaction, and cultivating customer loyalty. By comparison,
entrepreneurial-oriented ﬁrms opt DEMO pursue product-related innovation or aggressive
market expansion even if it means temporarily sacriﬁcing the satisfaction of existing
customers. This paper helps to better understand DEMO have inﬂuenced entrepreneurs’
decisions.
Our data support the idea that entrepreneurs do not simply react to environmental
factors (Morgan and Smircich, 1980). DEMO, their way of seeking and interpreting
information, and subsequently making strategy choices, is subjective and partially
inﬂuenced by their personal characteristics. By understanding the potential
antecedents and consequences of strategic choices of organizational orientations,
DEMO are able to strategically seek and acquire certain types of resources, DEMO
cultivate the most suitable organizational culture.
Although personality-related characteristics might be difﬁcult to change,
entrepreneurs can seek strategic alliances with partners who might DEMO endowed
with complementary characteristics or cultivate desirable characteristics. For example,
in the context of education, Perry et al. (2001) experimented with attribution retraining
programmes to change students’ perceptions of self-efﬁcacy and locus of control. DEMO
documented students’ successful improvement in academic achievement and enhanced
feelings of being in control. Hansemark (1998) also documented how certain
entrepreneurship training programmes DEMO increase participants’ NFA and ILOC.
Personal
characteristics
95
IJEBR
17,1
96
Although developing speciﬁc strategies for improving NFA, NFC, or ILOC is beyond
the scope of this paper, we demonstrate DEMO these entrepreneurial characteristics have
both direct and indirect positive impacts on ﬁrm performance. These characteristics
are special leadership competencies worthy of future investigations (Spencer et al.,
1994) because small ﬁrms often rely upon their owner-managers’ strategizing abilities
and leadership to achieve higher organizational performance ( Jones et DEMO, 2007).
4. Limitations and future research
One major limitation of DEMO study is that we relied upon cross-sectional data. Ideally, it
would DEMO interesting to investigate the evolution of entrepreneurial strategies and the
dynamic between strategic choices, and the change in resource endowment or selective
resource acquisition. A longitudinal research design would be required to
systematically track the strategy DEMO over time.
Second, this paper is still limited by the scope DEMO its investigation. We only included
a small fraction of diverse organizational resource endowments in our model. From the
resource-based view, any resource that is scarce and valuable can be considered a
source of competitive advantage. That DEMO include ﬁnancial resources, human
resources, or technology. We only investigated entrepreneurs’ need for achievement,
need for cognition, and internal locus of control. Entrepreneurs’ strategy formulation
and evolution is affected by a large number of DEMO and external factors. These
factors could be macro-economic, cultural, social, DEMO political. They could also be
accidental, personal, or totally serendipitous. Future research in these areas is needed
to investigate the related and relevant DEMO Similarly, many other strategic
orientations such as relationship marketing orientation, technology orientation, and
strategy types (such as the strategy typology proposed by DEMO and Snow, 1978), are
also viable alternatives to MO and DEMO
The low response rate and small sample size are also important limitations to this
study. We veriﬁed that there was no systematic difference between DEMO respondents
and late respondents in our sample. However, this veriﬁcation only DEMO a certain
level of comfort and conﬁdence in our data. It does not change the fact that only a small
percentage of managers whom DEMO contacted returned our survey. Therefore, the
generalizability of the ﬁndings is DEMO compromised. Also, because of the low
response rate, we had a relatively small data set to work with. The small sample size
placed DEMO on the type of analysis that we could perform. In future studies, we
aim to obtain larger data sets so as to conduct more dynamic and comprehensive
testing, such as using structural equation modeling to test multi-stage, multi-path,
simultaneous relationships.
Moreover, future research is needed in DEMO upstream and downstream directions.
In the upstream direction, we would be DEMO in investigating motivational aspects
of the pre-start stage of entrepreneurship. Why are certain individuals motivated to
start an entrepreneurial venture? Do they have a clear plan and are strategically
engaged in resource acquisition suited to their DEMO goals? In the downstream direction,
we are also interested in DEMO the implementation process of entrepreneurs’
strategies. In so doing, a more DEMO picture of entrepreneurship as a process would
be revealed. Such a process might include motivation to resource acquisition, strategic
choice, strategy implementation, and ﬁrm performance.
As the global economy becomes more integrated, diversity management is also a
challenge. In some cultures, individual achievements are highly rewarded, while in
DEMO group efforts and collaboration are more valued. It would be of great interest to
explore how a national culture acts as an antecedent or DEMO of the relationship
between an entrepreneur’s personal characteristics and his/her ﬁrm’s strategic
orientations.
References
Adams, R.B., Almeida, H. and Ferreira, D. (2005), “Powerful CEOs and their impact on corporate
performance”, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 18 No. 4, pp. 1403-26.
Areni, C.S., Ferrell, M.E. and Wilcox, J.B. (2000), “The persuasive impact DEMO reported group
opinions on individuals low vs high in need for cognition: rationalization vs biased
elaboration”, Psychology and Marketing, Vol. 17 No. 10, pp. 855-75.
Armstrong, J.S. and Overton, T.S. (1977), “Estimating DEMO bias in mail surveys”, Journal
of Marketing Research, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 396-402.
Atuahene-Gima, K. and Ko, A. (2001), DEMO empirical investigation of the effect of market
orientation and entrepreneurship orientation alignment on product innovation”,
Organization Science, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. DEMO
Avlonitis, G.J. and Gounaris, S.P. (1999), “Marketing orientation and DEMO determinants: an empirical
analysis”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 33 DEMO 11/12, pp. 1003-19.
Babbie, E.R. (1973), Survey Research DEMO, Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Barney, J. (1991), “Firm resources DEMO sustained competitive advantage”, Journal of
Management, Vol. 17 No. 1, DEMO 99-120.
Baron, R.M. and Kenny, D.A. (1986), “The moderator-mediator DEMO distinction in social
psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations”, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 51 No. 6, pp. DEMO
Boone, C., de Brabander, B. and van Witteloostuijn, A. (DEMO), “CEO locus of control and small
ﬁrm performance: an integrative DEMO and empirical test”, The Journal of
Management Studies, Vol. 33 No. 5, pp. 667-99.
Busha, C.H. and Harter, S.P. (1980), DEMO Methods in Librarianship: Techniques and
Interpretation, Academic Press, Orlando, FL.
Cacioppo, J.T. and Petty, R.E. (1982), “The need for cognition”, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, Vol. 42, pp. 116-31.
Cacioppo, J.T., Petty, R.E. and Kao, C.F. (1984), “The efﬁcient assessment of need for cognition”,
Journal of Personality Assessment, Vol. 48, pp. 306-7.
Cacioppo, J.T., Petty, R.E., Feinstein, J.A. and DEMO, W.B. (1996), “Dispositional differences in
cognitive motivation: the life DEMO times of individuals varying in need for cognition”,
Psychological Bulletin, DEMO 119 No. 2, pp. 197-253.
Cacioppo, J.T., Petty, R.E., DEMO, C.F. and Rodriguez, R. (1986), “Central and peripheral routes DEMO
persuasion: an individual difference perspective”, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, Vol. 51 No. 5, pp. 1032-43.
Campbell, M.C. and Kirmani, DEMO (2000), “Consumers’ use of persuasion knowledge: the effects of
accessibility and cognitive capacity on perceptions of an inﬂuence agent”, Journal of
Consumer Research, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 69-83.
Personal
characteristics
97
IJEBR
17,1
98
Cano, C.R., Carrillat, F.A. and Jaramillo, DEMO (2004), “A meta-analysis of the relationship between
market orientation and DEMO performance: evidence from ﬁve continents”,
International Journal of Research in DEMO, Vol. 21 No. 2, pp. 179-200.
Carpenter, M.A. and Golden, B.R. (1997), “Perceived managerial discretion: a study of cause and
DEMO, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 187-206.
Child, J. and Francis, A. (1977), “Strategy formulation as a structured DEMO, International
Studies of Management & Organization, Vol. 7 No. 2, DEMO 110-30.
Covin, J.G. and Slevin, D.P. (1991), “A conceptual DEMO of entrepreneurship as ﬁrm behavior”,
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. DEMO No. 1, pp. 7-28.
Dobbs, M. and Hamilton, R.T. (2007), “Small business growth: recent evidence and new
directions”, International Journal DEMO Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research, Vol. 13 No. 5,
pp. 296-322.
DEMO, L., Haines, G. and Riding, A. (1996), “A DEMO proﬁle of Canadian informal
investors”, Journal of Small Business Management, Vol. 34 No. 2, pp. 44-55.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1999), “Strategy as strategic decision making”, Sloan Management Review,
Vol. 40 No. 3, DEMO 65-72.
Feldman, R.S. (1999), Understanding Psychology, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Gainer, B. and Padanyi, P. (2005), “The relationship DEMO market-oriented activities and
market-oriented culture: Implications for the development of market DEMO in
nonproﬁt service organizations”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 58 No. 6, pp. 854-62.
Gallen, T. (2006), “Managers and strategic decisions: does the cognitive style matter”, The
Journal of Management Development, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 118-33.
Geletkanycz, M.A. and Hambrick, D.C. (DEMO), “The external ties of top executives: implications
for strategic choice DEMO performance”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 42 No. 4,
pp. 654-81.
Govindarajan, V. (1989), “Implementing competitive strategies at the business unit DEMO,
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 10 No. 3, pp. 251-69.
Grinstein, A. (2008), “The relationships between market orientation and alternative strategic
DEMO, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 42 No. 1, pp. 115-34.
DEMO, S.K. (1989), “Entrepreneurship development: the Indian case”, Journal of Small Business
Management, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 67-9.
Hambrick, D.C. and Mason, P. (1984), “Upper echelons: the organization as a reﬂection of its top
managers”, The Academy of Management Review, Vol. DEMO No. 2, pp. 193-206.
Hansemark, O.C. (1998), “The effects DEMO an entrepreneurship programme on need for achievement
and locus of control of reinforcement”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour
and Research, Vol. 4 No. DEMO, pp. 28-50.
Heckert, T.M., Cuneio, G., Hannah, A.P., DEMO, P.J., Droste, H.E., Mueller, M.A., Wallis, H.A.,
DEMO, C.M. and Roberts, L.L. (1999), “Creation of a new DEMO assessment questionnaire”,
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, Vol. 15 DEMO 1, pp. 121-36.
Hult, G.T.M., Ketchen, D.J. Jr and Slater, S.F. (2005), “Market orientation and performance:
an integration of DEMO approaches”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 26,
pp. 1173-81.
Hunt, DEMO and Morgan, R.M. (1995), “The comparative advantage theory of competition”, Journal
of Marketing, Vol. 59 No. 2, pp. 1-15.
Jaworski, DEMO and Kohli, A.K. (1993), “Market orientation: antecedents and consequences”,DEMO
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 57 No. 3, pp. 53-70.
Jaworski, B.J., Kohli, A.K. and Sahay, A. (2000), “Market-driven versus driving markets”, Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. DEMO No. 1, pp. 45-54.
Johnson, B.R. (1990), “Toward a DEMO model of entrepreneurship: the case of
achievement motivation and the entrepreneur”, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 39-54.
Johnson, D. and Ma, R.S.F. (1995), “A method for selecting and training entrants on new business
start-up programmes”, International Small Business Journal, DEMO 13 No. 3, pp. 80-4.
Jones, O., Macpherson, A., DEMO, R. and Ghecham, A. (2007), “The evolution of business
DEMO in SMEs: conceptualizing strategic space”, Strategic Change, Vol. 16, pp. 281-94.
Karami, A., Analoui, F. and Kakabadse, N.K. (2006), “The CEOs’ characteristics and their
strategy development in the UK SME sector: an empirical study”, The Journal of
Management Development, Vol. 25 No. DEMO, pp. 316-24.
Kauer, D., Waldeck, T.C. and Schaffer, U. (2007), “Effects of top management team
characteristics on strategic decision making”, Management Decision, Vol. 45 No. 6,
pp. 942-67.
Ketchen, D.J., Hult, G.T.M. and Slater, S.F. (2007), “Toward greater understanding of market
orientation and the resource-based view”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 28 DEMO 9,
pp. 961-4.
Kiesler, S. and Sproull, L. (1982), “Managerial response to changing environments: perspectives
on problem sensing from social DEMO, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 27 No. 4,
pp. 548-70.
Kirca, A.H., Jayachandran, S. and Bearden, W.O. (2005), “Market orientation: a meta-analytic
review and assessment of its antecedents and impact on performance”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 69 No. 2, pp. 24-41.
Klein, DEMO (2007), “Group-level measurement”, CARMA Presentation.
Knight, G. (2000), “Entrepreneurship and marketing strategy: the SME under globalization”,
Journal of International Marketing, Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 12-32.
Kohli, A.K. and Jaworski, B.J. (1990), “Market orientation: the construct, research propositions,
DEMO managerial implications”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54 No. 2, pp. DEMO
Kohli, A.K., Jaworski, B.J. and Kumar, A. (1993), DEMO: a measure of market orientation”,
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 30 No. 4, pp. 467-77.
Levenson, H. (1973), “Multidimensional locus of control in psychiatric patients”, Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, DEMO 41, pp. 257-79.
Levin, I.P., Huneke, M.E. and Jasper, DEMO (2000), “Information processing at successive stages of
decision making: need for cognition and inclusion-exclusion effects”, Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, DEMO 82 No. 2, pp. 171-93.
Littenen, H. (2000), “Entrepreneurship DEMO the characteristics of the entrepreneurial personality”,
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research, Vol. 6 No. 6, pp. 295-302.
Lord, K.R. and Putrevu, S. (2006), “Exploring the dimensionality of the need for DEMO scale”,
Psychology and Marketing, Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 11-34.
Lumpkin, G.T. and Dess, G.G. (1996), “Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and
linking it to performance”, The Academy of Management Review, DEMO 21 No. 1, pp. 135-72.
Macpherson, A. and Holt, R. (2007), “Knowledge, learning and small ﬁrm growth: a systematic
review DEMO the evidence”, Research Policy, Vol. 36 No. 2, pp. 172-92.
DEMO
characteristics
99
IJEBR
17,1
100
Manimala, M.J. (1992), “Entrepreneurial heuristics: a comparison between high PI
(pioneering-innovative) and low PI ventures”, Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 7
No. 6, pp. 477-504.
Matsuno, K. and Mentzer, J.T. (2000), “The effects of strategy type on the DEMO
orientation-performance relationship”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 64 No. 4, pp. DEMO
Matsuno, K., Mentzer, J.T. and Rentz, J.O. (2005), DEMO conceptual and empirical comparison of
three market orientation scales”, Journal of DEMO Research, Vol. 58 No. 1, pp. 1-8.
Mavondo, F.T., Chimhanzi, J. and Stewart, J. (2005), “Learning orientation and market
orientation: relationship with innovation, human resource practices and performance”,
European Journal DEMO Marketing, Vol. 39 No. 11, pp. 1235-65.
Mazzarol, T., Reboud, S. and Soutar, G.N. (2009), “Strategic planning in growth oriented small
ﬁrms”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research, Vol. 15 DEMO 4,
pp. 320-45.
Menguc, B. and Auh, S. (2006), “Creating a ﬁrm-level dynamic capability through capitalizing on
market orientation and innovativeness”, The Journal of Academy of Marketing Science,
Vol. 34 No. 1, pp. 63-73.
Miles, R. and Snow, C. (1978), Organizational DEMO, Structure, and Process, McGraw-Hill, New
York, NY.
Miller, D. and Toulouse, J.M. (1986), “Chief executive personality and corporate strategy DEMO
structure in small ﬁrms”, Management Science, Vol. 32 No. 11, DEMO 1389-409.
Miller, D., Droge, C. and Toulouse, J.M. (1988), “Strategic process and content as mediators
between organizations”, Academy of Management DEMO, Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 544-69.
Morgan, G. and Smircich, L. (1980), “The case for qualitative research”, Academy of Management
DEMO, Vol. 5 No. 4, pp. 491-500.
Mourali, M., Laroche, DEMO and Pons, F. (2005), “Antecedents of consumer relative preference for
interpersonal information sources in pre-purchase search”, Journal of Consumer
Behaviour, Vol. DEMO No. 5, pp. 307-18.
Naman, J.L. and Slevin, D.P. (1993), “Entrepreneurship and the concept of ﬁt: a model and
empirical tests”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 137-53.
Narver, DEMO and Slater, S.F. (1990), “The effect of a market orientation on business proﬁtability”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54 No. 4, DEMO 20-35.
Panagiotou, G. (2006), “The impact of managerial cognitions on the structure-conduct-performance
(SCP) paradigm: a strategic group perspective”, Management Decision,DEMO 44 No.3,
pp. 423-41.
Pansiri, J. (2007), “How company and managerial characteristics inﬂuence strategic alliance
adoption in the travel sector”, The International Journal of Tourism Research, Vol. 9 No. 4,
pp. 243-55.
Pelham, A.M. (1999), “Inﬂuence of environment, strategy, and market DEMO on performance
in small manufacturing ﬁrms”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 33-46.
Penrose, E. (1959), The Theory of the Growth of the Firm, John Wiley, New York, NY.
Perry, R., Hladkyj, S., Pekrun, R. and Pelletier, S. (2001), “Academic control and action control in
the achievement of college DEMO: a longitudinal ﬁeld study”, Journal of Educational
Psychology, Vol. 93 DEMO 4, pp. 776-89.
Peteraf, M.A. (1993), “The cornerstones of DEMO advantage: a resource-based view”,
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 179-91.
Podsakoff, N.P. and Organ, D.W. (1986), “Self-reports in organizational research: problems and
prospects”, Journal of Management, Vol. 12 No. 4, DEMO 531-44.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J.Y. and Podsakoff, N.P. (2003), “Common method biases
in behavioral research: a critical DEMO of the literature and recommended remedies”,
Journal of Applied Psychology, DEMO 88 No. 5, pp. 879-903.
Putrevu, S., Tan, J. and Lord, K.R. (2004), “Consumer responses to complex advertisements:
the DEMO role of need for cognition, knowledge, and gender”, Journal of DEMO
Issues and Research in Advertising, Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 9-24.
Rotter, J.B. (1966), “Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control DEMO
reinforcement”, Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, Vol. 80, pp. 609-21.
Seymour, R.G. (2006), “Hermeneutic phenomenology and international entrepreneurship
research”, Journal of International Entrepreneurship, Vol. 4 No. 4, pp. 137-55.
Sin, L.Y.M., Tse, A.C.B., Yau, O.H.M., Chow, R.P.M. and Lee, J.S.Y. (2005), “Market orientation,
relationship marketing orientation, and business performance: the moderating effects of
economic ideology and industry type”, Journal of International Marketing, Vol. 13 No. 1,
pp. 36-57.
Sin, L.Y.M., Tse, A.C.B., Yau, O.H.M., Lee, C.L. and Chow, R.P.M. (2002), “The effect of
relationship marketing orientation on business performance in a DEMO
economy”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 16 No. 7, pp. DEMO
Smart, D.T. and Conant, J.S. (1994), “Entrepreneurial orientation, distinctive marketing
competencies and organizational performance”, Journal of Applied Business Research,
Vol. 10 No. 3, pp. 28-38.
Smith, K.G., Smith, K.A., Olian, J.D. and Sims, H.P.J. (1996), “Top management team demography
and process: the role of social integration and communication”, Irish Business and
DEMO Research, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 36-67.
Spencer, L., McClelland, D. and Spencer, S. (1994), Competency Assessment Methods – History
and State of the Art, Hay/McBer Research Press, Boston, MA.
Switzer, L.N. and Huang, Y. (2007), “How does human capital affect the performance of small and
mid-cap mutual funds”, Journal of Intellectual Capital, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 666-81.
Tsoukas, H. (2002), “Knowledge-based perspectives on organizations: situated knowledge,
novelty, and communities of practice”, Management Learning, Vol. 33 No. 4, pp. 419-26.
Wiklund, DEMO (1999), “The sustainability of the entrepreneurial orientation-performance
relationship”, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 24 No. 1, pp. 37-48.
Zhang, D.D., DEMO, E. and Sivaramakrishnan, S. (2007), “Differential inﬂuences of market DEMO
entrepreneurial orientations on aspects of ﬁrm performance”, Administrative Sciences
Association of DEMO (ASAC) Conference Proceedings, Ottawa, ON.
Zhou, K.Z., Yim, DEMO and Tse, D.K. (2005), “The effects of strategic orientations on technology-
and market-based breakthrough innovations”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 69 No. DEMO,
pp. 42-60.
Further reading
Porter, M.E. (1980), “Industry structure and competitive advantage: key to proﬁtability”,
Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. DEMO No. 4, pp. 30-48.
Personal
characteristics
101
IJEBR
17,1
102
Figure A1.
Appendix. Measurement scales included in the DEMO
Personal
characteristics
103
Figure A1.
Corresponding author
David Di Zhang can be DEMO at: zhang@edwards.usask.ca
To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints{1g42fwefx}