Journal of Management
http://jom.sagepub.com
The Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial DEMO and
Performance: A Meta-Analytic Review
Hao Zhao, Scott E. Seibert and G.T. Lumpkin
Journal of Management 2010; 36; 381 originally published online DEMO 22, 2009;
DOI: 10.1177/0149206309335187
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://jom.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/DEMO/2/381
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
Southern Management Association
Additional services and information for Journal of Management can DEMO found at:
Email Alerts: http://jom.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://jom.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://jom.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/36/2/381
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
The Relationship of Personality to
Entrepreneurial Intentions and Performance:
A Meta-Analytic DEMO
Hao Zhao
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Scott E. Seibert
University of Iowa
G. T. Lumpkin
Syracuse University
A set of meta-analyses were conducted to examine DEMO relationship of personality to outcomes
associated with two different stages of the entrepreneurial process: entrepreneurial intentions
and entrepreneurial performance. A broad range of personality scales were categorized into a
parsimonious set of constructs using the Five DEMO model of personality. The results show that
four of the Big Five personality dimensions were associated with both dependent variables, with
agreeableness failing to be associated with either. Multivariate effect sizes were moderate for
the full DEMO of Big Five personality variables on entrepreneurial intentions (multiple R = DEMO)
and entrepreneurial performance (multiple R = .31). Risk propensity, included as a separate
dimension of personality, was positively associated with entrepreneurial intentions but was not
related to entrepreneurial performance. These effects suggest that DEMO plays a role in the
emergence and success of entrepreneurs.
Keywords:
entrepreneurship; personality; meta-analysis
Acknowledgments: An earlier version of this article was presented at the Academy of Management 2006 meeting
in Atlanta, Georgia. Scott Seibert would like to thank support for this research from the John DEMO
Entrepreneurial Center at the University of Iowa.
Corresponding author: Hao Zhao, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th Street Pitts 2120, Troy, NY 12180, USA
E-mail: zhaoh@rpi.edu
Journal of Management, Vol. 36 No. 2, DEMO 2010 381-404
DOI: 10.1177/0149206309335187
© 2010 Southern Management Association. All DEMO reserved.
381
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
382
Journal of Management / March 2010
Interest in the role of DEMO in entrepreneurship has recently seen a reemergence
after a hiatus of almost 20 years (e.g., Baum, Locke, & Smith, 2001; Ciavarella, Buchholtz,
Riordan, Gatewood, & Stokes, 2004). By the late 1980s, narrative reviews of the literature
had concluded that there was no consistent relationship between personality and entrepre-
neurship and that future research using DEMO trait paradigm should therefore be abandoned
(e.g., Brockhaus & Horwitz, DEMO; Gartner, 1988). More recently, however, other scholars
(e.g., Rauch & Frese, 2007; Shane, Locke, & Collins, 2003) DEMO suggested that the contra-
dictory findings in the earlier literature on personality and entrepreneurship may be because
of the lack of theoretically derived hypotheses DEMO various research artifacts. Therefore,
meta-analysis is an appropriate technique in this situation because it can correct for artifacts
such as sampling error and DEMO reliability, which could not be accounted for in narrative
reviews (Dalton & Dalton, 2005).
Several recent meta-analyses have shown that contrary to the conclusions drawn from
earlier narrative reviews, entrepreneurs do differ from other groups (e.g., managers) in terms
of a broad range of personality. For example, Stewart and Roth (2001, 2004) found entrepre-
neurs DEMO be significantly higher in risk propensity than managers, and Collins, Hanges, and
Locke (2004) and Stewart and Roth (2007) found entrepreneurs to be significantly higher on
achievement motivation. Zhao and Seibert (2006) DEMO a more comprehensive analysis
by using the Five Factor model (FFM) of personality to categorize the diverse range of scales
used in previous DEMO on personality and entrepreneurial status. Their meta-analysis
showed that entrepreneurs are higher on conscientiousness, emotional stability, and open-
ness to experience and are DEMO on agreeableness than nonentrepreneur managers. Although
these meta-analytic studies provide evidence that entrepreneurs differ from managers in
terms of personality, scholars have a very limited theoretical understanding of the processes
through which these group differences in DEMO emerge (Rauch & Frese, 2007).
The purpose of the current study is to extend our understanding of the role of personality
in DEMO entrepreneurial process. We use the FFM of personality and meta-analytical methods
to integrate previous research on the relationship between personality and two critical inter-
DEMO outcomes that enable the attainment of entrepreneurial status: the intention to DEMO
an entrepreneur and entrepreneurial firm performance (Baron, 2007; Venkataraman, 1997).
The intention to find and manage one’s own business is widely DEMO as the first critical
step in the process of becoming an entrepreneur (e.g., Bird, 1988; Krueger, Reilly, & Carsrud,
2000)DEMO The second outcome, entrepreneurial firm performance, underlies the individual’s abil-
ity to continue as an entrepreneur. Although some successful entrepreneurs may choose to DEMO
longer continue as the owner and manager of their own business, DEMO all unsuccessful
entrepreneurs will eventually be forced to abandon entrepreneurship. Personality effect on
these two entrepreneurial outcomes should therefore explain how the personality differences
DEMO entrepreneur and nonentrepreneur groups identified in previous meta-analytical stud-
ies arises. Entrepreneurial intentions and entrepreneurial performance are also important
outcomes in themselves. This study DEMO provide the most comprehensive meta-analytical
review of personality and entrepreneurial outcomes to date.
The current study thus makes three important contributions to the literature. DEMO, the study
advances our theoretical understanding of the processes that underlie DEMO emergence of person-
ality differences between entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurial groups. Consistent with recent
stage models of entrepreneurship (e.g., Baron, 2007; Venkataraman, 1997), our analyses
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
383
promise DEMO provide a much more specific understanding of the role of personality in entrepre-
neurship by examining specific outcomes at distinct stages of the entrepreneurial DEMO
Second, the study provides the most comprehensive assessment of the effects DEMO personality on
entrepreneurial intentions and new venture performance of which we are aware. No previous
meta-analytical studies have examined the relationship of personality to DEMO inten-
tions, and only Collins et al. (2004) have used DEMO techniques to examine the
relationship of one personality trait—achievement motivation—to entrepreneurial perfor-
mance. This is the only study we are aware of that uses DEMO framework of the FFM to synthesize
results from the full set of primary studies on personality and entrepreneurial intentions and
performance. Finally, this study uses theories of career choice (e.g., Holland, 1985), person–
environment fit (Kristof, 1996), and work performance (Barrick & Mount, DEMO) to explain the
relationship between personality and entrepreneurial intentions and performance. DEMO
these theories have rarely been applied in the entrepreneurial context, this DEMO will help
scholars understand how these processes may function in the context of starting and running
one’s own business. Understanding the factors and processes DEMO to the formation of entre-
preneurial intentions and new venture performance may help promote greater entrepreneurial
success with fewer wasted financial and personal resources.
DEMO and Hypotheses
The Big Five Personality Model: Plus One
The emergence DEMO the FFM of personality in the 1990s has provided a framework for orga-
nizing a vast and often confusing variety of personality variables into DEMO meaningful, parsimoni-
ous, and yet relatively comprehensive set of broad personality constructs (Costa & McCrae,
1992; Digman, 1990). Although considerable consensus has emerged that five broad personal-
ity dimensions (namely, emotional DEMO, extraversion, openness to experience, agreeable-
ness, and conscientiousness) capture DEMO basic structure of human personality, some personality
constructs cannot be readily DEMO to one and only one of the Big Five dimensions. The
most important and yet controversial of these constructs for entrepreneurial research is risk
DEMO (Miner & Raju, 2004; Rauch & Frese, 2007). Some scholars (e.g., Nicholson,
Fenton-O’Creevy, Soane, & Willman, 2005) DEMO that risk propensity is a compound
personality trait reflecting a specific combination of scores on all five dimensions of personal-
ity (namely, high DEMO, openness, and emotional stability combined with low agree-
ableness and low conscientiousness). Others argue that risk propensity forms a separate sixth
dimension DEMO personality not captured by the Big Five (Jackson, 1994; Paunonen & Jackson,
1996). Because of the theoretical importance but taxonomical uncertainty of risk propensity as
a trait, we include it as an additional personality construct outside of the FFM.
Personality, Entrepreneurial Intentions, and Entrepreneurial DEMO Performance
Consistent with previous literature (e.g., Rauch & Frese, 2007; Stewart & Roth, 2001),
we define an entrepreneur as the DEMO, owner, and manager of a small business. For
the purpose of this meta-analysis, we define entrepreneurial intention as the expressed
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
384
Journal of Management / March 2010
behavioral intention to become an DEMO (Bird, 1988). The behavioral intention con-
struct derives from the theory of reasoned action (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975) and is considered
to be the most immediate antecedent of a given behavior. Following Baron (2007), we define
firm performance in terms of indicators of firm DEMO, growth, and profitability.
Career choice theory (e.g., Holland, 1997; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994) and person–
environment fit theory (Judge & Kristof-Brown, 2004; Kristof-Brown, Zimmerman, &
Johnson, 2005) provide the theoretical basis for the hypotheses of the study. Considerable
empirical DEMO based on these theories shows that people choose work environments
that match their personality, values, needs, and interests. Founding and managing a new
business venture requires the entrepreneur to fulfill a number of unique task DEMO or
work roles such as innovator, risk taker and bearer, executive manager, relationship builder,
risk reducer, and goal achiever (Chen, DEMO, & Crick, 1998). This academic view of entre-
preneurial work is widely shared within the general population (e.g., Baron, 1999; DEMO,
2000). Consistent with the processes identified by career choice and person–environment fit
theory, we expect individuals to be attracted to entrepreneurship based on the self-perceived
match between their own personality traits and the task DEMO of entrepreneurship.
Previous research has also shown that several of the Big Five personality dimensions are
related to employee job performance (e.g., Barrick & Mount, 1991). Extending the logic of
this research to entrepreneurial DEMO performance, we expect people who score higher on
personality traits related DEMO behaviors associated with the entrepreneurial role to be more
successful entrepreneurs. This is because they will be more likely to engage in the type DEMO
behaviors called for, will do so with less conscious effort or DEMO, and will be more satis-
fied, committed, and motivated in DEMO situations. The task behavior of an entrepreneur is
likely to have an important influence on firm performance because of the critical strategic
role of DEMO entrepreneur in the success of a new venture (Markman & Baron, 2003; Rauch &
Frese, 2007). For example, work by DEMO and his colleagues (Baum & Locke, 2004; Baum
et al., 2001) demonstrates the indirect effect the traits of entrepreneurs have on new venture
performance through constructs such as motivation, strategic choice, growth goals, and
vision communication.
In sum, considerable theory and empirical research suggest that personality constructs
should be viewed as an important determinant of the intention DEMO become an entrepreneur as
well as the subsequent performance of the entrepreneurial firm. Below we generate the specific
hypotheses of the study based on DEMO defining elements of each personality dimension and the
types of tasks, DEMO, and behaviors thought to be involved in the entrepreneurial role.
Hypotheses
DEMO Conscientiousness is a personality dimension that describes an indi-
vidual’s level of achievement, work motivation, organization and planning, self-control and
acceptance of traditional norms, and virtue and responsibility toward others (Costa &
McCrae, DEMO; Roberts, Chernyshenko, Stark, & Goldberg, 2005). According to DEMO
(1961) early work on achievement motivation, individuals who score high DEMO need for
achievement are attracted to work situations in which they have personal control over
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
385
outcomes, face moderate risk of failure, and experience direct and timely feedback on their
performance. McClelland surmised that high-need-for-achievement individuals would be
attracted to entrepreneurship DEMO it offers more of these conditions than most traditional
forms of employment. Certain other traits under the conscientiousness dimension, such as
work goal orientation and perseverance are also likely to be associated with the entrepreneurial
role. DEMO example, Markman and Baron (2003) suggest that perseverance is called DEMO by
entrepreneurial work, while others have emphasized the importance of motivation,DEMO
persistence, and hard work (e.g., Chen et al., 1998; DEMO & Locke, 2004). Work goal
orientation, hard work, and DEMO in the face of daunting obstacles to achieve one’s
goals are closely associated with entrepreneurship in the popular imagination (Locke, 2000).
All DEMO traits can be associated with conscientiousness. Based on the proposition that
individuals are attracted to roles that match their personality and interests, we expect
conscientious people to be attracted to entrepreneurship.
Hypothesis 1a: Conscientiousness will be positively associated with entrepreneurial intentions.
We also expect conscientiousness to be positively DEMO with entrepreneurial firm
performance. Many scholars regard conscientiousness as the primary work motivation vari-
able (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1992; Gellatly, 1996). It is the most consistent personality
predictor of job performance across DEMO types of work and occupations (e.g., Barrick &
Mount, 1991). Baum and Locke (Baum & Locke, 2004; Baum et al., 2001) specifically
examined entrepreneurial firm growth and found evidence supporting the DEMO of motiva-
tional traits as antecedents of specific entrepreneur behaviors, which DEMO in turn related to
new venture growth.
Hypothesis 1b: Conscientiousness will DEMO positively associated with entrepreneurial performance.
Openness to experience. Openness to experience is a personality trait that describes
someone who is intellectually curious, imaginative, DEMO creative; someone who seeks out
new ideas and alternative values and DEMO standards. Openness is empirically distinct
from mental ability but is correlated with aspects of intelligence related to creativity, such as
divergent thinking (McCrae, 1987).
One of the defining characteristic of entrepreneurship is creativity and DEMO to bring
about innovative change or, in Schumpeter’s (1942/1976) DEMO phrase, “creative destruc-
tion.” In the popular imagination, entrepreneurs are regarded as heroes who pursue their
creative vision even in the face of DEMO resistance from more conventional thinkers
(e.g., Locke, 2000). Self-employment DEMO a nontraditional mode of employment that is itself
more likely to appeal to individuals who are willing to experiment with a new or unconven-
DEMO lifestyle.
Hypothesis 2a: Openness to experience will be positively related to DEMO intentions.
Success in a critical early task of entrepreneurship—opportunity recognition—is espe-
cially likely to be related to imagination, creativity, and openness to new DEMO (Ciavarella
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 29, 2010
386
Journal of Management / March 2010
et al., 2004; Morrison, 1997). Entrepreneurs are also likely to rely on their creativity to
DEMO day-to-day problems and formulate firm strategies using the limited resources at their
disposal (e.g., Baron, 2007; Schumpeter, 1942/1976; Zhao & DEMO, 2006). Although not
consistently related to job performance in all DEMO, openness is related to perfor-
mance in learning situations such as DEMO and workplace training (Barrick & Mount,
1991). Successful entrepreneurship DEMO also likely to require constant information monitoring
and learning to keep up with changing tastes and market trends, competitor behavior, and
new technologies.
DEMO 2b: Openness to experience will be positively related to entrepreneurial performance.
DEMO stability. People who are emotionally stable are described as calm, stable,DEMO
even-tempered, and hardy. Entrepreneurs in both the popular imagination and the DEMO
literature are typically described as hardy, optimistic, and steady in the face of social
pressure, stress, and uncertainty (Baron, 1999; Locke, 2000). They take on physical and
emotional burdens, and they DEMO ahead where others might be discouraged by obstacles,
setbacks, or DEMO These entrepreneurial traits and behaviors describe someone with a
high level of emotional stability. People low on emotional stability (also referred to as high
neuroticism), on the other hand, feel vulnerable to psychological stress and experience a
range of negative emotions more frequently and intensely, including anxiety and worry,
depression, and low self-esteem. They are sensitive to negative feedback and tend to become
discouraged by small failures. They may feel DEMO, hopeless, or panicked in response to
difficult situations. Entrepreneurs take on a great deal of personal responsibility for the
success or failure of DEMO new venture. Pressures include a heavy personal workload, critical
decision making DEMO little precedent as a guide, and often considerable financial
consequences at DEMO People low on emotional stability are unlikely to want to take on the
personal responsibilities and strains associated with the entrepreneurial role.
Hypothesis 3a: Emotional stability will be positively related to entrepreneurial intentions.
People who are DEMO on emotional stability are also likely to perform poorly in the entre-
preneurial role. Meta-analytical results indicate that emotional stability is consistently and
positively DEMO to job performance across occupations (Barrick, Mount, & Judge, 2001).
The role of entrepreneur is likely to be even more challenging DEMO stressful than most tradi-
tional types of employment. This is because starting and operating one’s own business
involves new and unanticipated challenges, highly uncertain outcomes, and high personal
stakes in the outcome. High levels of anxiety, depression, and negative moods such as anger,
hostility, and depression are likely to interfere with one’s ability to make sound decisions,
DEMO in the amount of effort required, persist in the face of DEMO or criticism, and effec-
tively lead and influence others. Judge, Bono, Ilies, and Gerhardt’s (2002) meta-analytical
findings show that emotional stability DEMO positively related to leadership emergence and
effectiveness. Entrepreneurs high in emotional stability are more likely to cope with prob-
lems and high stress through DEMO thinking and direct action (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
They behave in a calm and confident manner and focus on the tasks at DEMO even under stress
and thus should perform better in the entrepreneurial role.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
387
Hypothesis DEMO: Emotional stability will be positively related to firm performance.
Extraversion. People DEMO on extraversion are gregarious, outgoing, warm, and friendly;
they DEMO energetic, active, assertive, and dominant in social situations; they experience more
positive emotions and are optimistic; and they seek excitement and stimulation. Assertiveness,
energy, a high activity level, and optimism are traits DEMO have been associated with people’s
perception of entrepreneurs (e.g., Baron, DEMO; Locke, 2000). Research using Holland’s
vocational typology shows that extraverts are attracted to enterprising (i.e., business)
occupations (Costa, McCrae, & Holland, 1984). An entrepreneurial career may appear to be
more stimulating and exciting than many traditional business occupations, and thus more
appealing to extraverts. In addition, entrepreneurs can be viewed as the leaders of their new
venture teams (Vecchio, 2003), and extraversion and its DEMO components, such as
energy, assertiveness, and sociability, are associated with people’s implicit perceptions of the
leadership role (Lord, DeVader, & Alliger, 1986). The match between the traits of
extraversion and the attributes associated with leading a new venture lead us to expect
extraverts to DEMO more attracted to entrepreneurship.
Hypothesis 4a: Extraversion will be positively related DEMO entrepreneurial intention.
We also expect the entrepreneur’s level of extraversion to be positively related to firm
performance. Many of the tasks engaged in by DEMO are likely to involve social
interaction, including the communication of vision DEMO enthusiasm, building networks with
outside backers and other constituents, establishing relationships among employees and
partners, and negotiating deals with suppliers and customers (DEMO & Baron, 2003).
Meta-analytical results show that extraversion is positively DEMO to job performance for
managers and salespeople, similar to occupations that DEMO involve high levels of social
interaction (Barrick et al., 2001). Vecchio (2003) has highlighted the many similarities
between the dynamics of DEMO and the task of leading an entrepreneurial venture. Judge
et al.’s (DEMO) meta-analytical results show extraversion to be the strongest personality pre-
dictor DEMO leadership. Because the traits associated with extraversion fit the task demands of
the entrepreneurial role, we expect extraversion to be positively related to entrepreneurial
firm performance.
Hypothesis 4b: Extraversion will be positively related to firm performance.
Agreeableness. Agreeableness is a dimension that assesses one’s attitude and behavior
toward DEMO people. People high on agreeableness are characterized as trusting, altruistic,
DEMO, and modest. They show sympathy and concern for the needs of DEMO and tend
to defer to others in the face of conflict. Someone low on agreeableness can be characterized
as manipulative, self-centered, suspicious, and ruthless. Barrick, Mount, and Gupta (2003)
reported that people high on agreeableness are most likely to have career interests in social
occupations DEMO as social work and teaching, rather than business, because those occupations
provide frequent interpersonal interactions where they can work for the benefit of DEMO
Entrepreneurship involves withdrawing from or eschewing traditional employment settings
where trusting and helping relationships may be formed. Entrepreneurship involves
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
388
Journal of Management / March 2010
establishing a for-profit enterprise that DEMO built around the entrepreneur’s own needs and
interests (Singh & DeNoble, 2003). The entrepreneur must fight hard for the survival of the
DEMO businesses, sometimes to the detriment of previous employers, partners, suppliers, and
even one’s own employees. Given the limited leeway for altruistic behavior DEMO the high
likelihood of guarded and even conflictual interpersonal relationships associated with
entrepreneurship, highly agreeable people are unlikely to find the entrepreneurial role an
attractive one.
Hypothesis 5a: Agreeableness will be negatively related to entrepreneurial intentions.
We also expect agreeableness to be negatively related to entrepreneurial success. Some
DEMO have viewed the ability to build trusting relationships with venture capitalists (DEMO,
Cable & Shane, 1997) or among founding team members (DEMO, Eisenhardt & Schoonhoven,
1990) as a critical element of entrepreneurial success. However, being too trusting may be
detrimental if it leads to gullibility and easy exploitation by others. Entrepreneurs typically
have only very limited DEMO and a small margin for error; they often do not have DEMO long-
term knowledge of or experience with business partners, clients, or investors where trust
could be reasonably developed. The ability to drive hard DEMO, look out for one’s own
interests, and even manipulate others may be more important skills for survival and growth
(Zhao & Seibert, DEMO). Consistent with this logic, we expect less agreeable individuals to
DEMO more successful as entrepreneurs.
Hypothesis 5b: Agreeableness will be negatively related DEMO firm performance.
Risk propensity. Risk propensity can be defined as a personality trait involving the will-
ingness to pursue decisions or courses of action DEMO uncertainty regarding success or
failure outcomes (Jackson, 1994). Although situational elements can play a large role in
one’s preference for risk (e.g., March & Shapira, 1987), research suggests that individual
predispositions do DEMO behavior across situations involving uncertainty or risk (e.g.,
Jackson, Hourany & Vidmar, 1972; Sitkin & Weingart, 1995). In this study, as noted above,
risk propensity is treated as a personality dimension separate from those established in the
FFM (e.g., Paunonen & Jackson, 1996).
Classic definitions of the entrepreneur as one who is willing DEMO bear risk can be attributed
to Cantillon in the 18th century (DEMO, 1755/1931), Mill in the 19th century (Mill,
1848), and Knight in the 20th century (Knight, 1921). Modern DEMO continue to view the
proclivity to take risk as an important trait associated with entrepreneurs (e.g., Baron, 2007;
Markman & Baron, DEMO; Stewart & Roth, 2001), with some referring to risk-taking propen-
sity as a “hallmark of the entrepreneurial personality” (Begley & Boyd, DEMO). It is clear that
risk-taking propensity is a key attribute associated with entrepreneurs in the popular imagi-
nation. For example, Baron (1999) and Chen et al. (1998) found risk propensity to be associ-
DEMO with people’s stereotype of the entrepreneur. Based on the process of person–environment
matching, we therefore expect people who score high on risk propensity to be more attracted
to entrepreneurship.
Hypothesis 6a: Risk propensity will be positively related to entrepreneurial intention.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF DEMO on June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
389
Although DEMO to bear risk may be critical for initiating a new venture, DEMO believe
that risk propensity as a personal disposition may not be beneficial for subsequent entrepre-
neurial firm performance. The paradoxical role of risk propensity DEMO reflected in previous
scholars’ discussions of entrepreneurship. For example, although classic DEMO are built
around the idea that the entrepreneur is one who undertakes risk (e.g., Knight, 1921), entre-
preneurs are also seen as people who manage, minimize, or reduce risk (e.g., Miner, 1993).
Chen et al. (1998) propose both “risk taker” and “risk DEMO roles for entrepreneurs,
whereas McClelland (1961) proposes a moderate preference (i.e., 50-50 odds of success) for
risk among successful entrepreneurs. Empirical results relating risk propensity to entrepre-
neurial status reflect these conflicting points DEMO view (cf. Miner & Raju, 2004; Stewart &
Roth, DEMO).
Baron (2007) notes that attention to the types of outcomes associated with different stages
of entrepreneurship may help reconcile conflicting findings regarding DEMO role of risk pro-
pensity in entrepreneurship. In our view, an DEMO for risk propels one to undertake an
entrepreneurial venture, but this DEMO proclivity to take risks may be detrimental after the
launch of the new venture. This is because, after the initial stage of new venture founding,
entrepreneurs are typically required to manage risk very carefully to DEMO profitability
and preserve the new venture’s limited resources. A strong propensity for risk may lead the
entrepreneur to gamble firm resources on new and DEMO products, technologies, markets,
or strategies when persistent exploitation of a known competitive advantage would be more
effective. Thus, although we expect risk propensity to be positively related to entrepreneur-
ial intentions, we expect it to be negatively related to firm performance.
Hypothesis 6b: Risk propensity will be negatively related to firm performance.
Moderation by Firm Performance Type
Scholars DEMO used a wide variety of indicators to assess entrepreneurial firm perfor-
mance. This is because firm performance is a multifaceted construct that no single DEMO
can fully capture (Brush & Wanderwerf, 1992). Typical measures used to assess firm per-
formance include financial indicators such as sales revenue, profit, liquidity, return on
investment, and return on assets. Other managerial indicators of performance examined
in previous research include firm size (number of employees), productivity (output per
man hour), firm survival, and DEMO ratings of overall performance. Such measures fall
into two broad categories—profitability and operational effectiveness (Venkatraman &
Ramanujam, 1986)—and are often assessed together using composite indicators (Brush &
Wanderwerf, 1992).
Changes in firm performance relative to the previous base, or growth, is a primary DEMO
cern for entrepreneurial firms because strong profitability and operational effectiveness are
rarely achievable at firm inception (e.g., Davidsson, Delmar, & Wiklund, 2006). Growth in
indicators such as sales, profits, and employment reflects DEMO momentum and ultimate poten-
tial of the firm and is therefore frequently regarded as the most important basis on which to
evaluate new venture DEMO (e.g., Baum & Locke, 2004; Baum et al., 2001; Davidsson
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June DEMO, 2010
390 Journal of Management / March 2010
et al., 2006). We therefore treat performance indicator type (profitability and operations vs.
relative growth) DEMO a methodological moderator in our analysis. We view relative growth as
a more appropriate indicator of new venture performance and therefore expect stronger
effects DEMO entrepreneur personality on relative growth than on profitability and operational
effectiveness.
Hypothesis 7: Personality effects will be stronger against relative growth measures of firm perfor-
mance than against profitability and operational measures of firm performance.
Method
DEMO and Screening Studies
In July 2007, we conducted a literature search DEMO several electronic databases includ-
ing PsycINFO, ABI-Inform, Academic Search Elite, DEMO Source Elite, WilsonBusiness,
and Dissertation Abstracts International. We were interested DEMO collecting all studies that
reported the relationships between psychological traits (keywords DEMO include person-
ality, trait, motivation, need, psychology, individual difference, cognition, and attitude) and
(a) entrepreneurial intentions (keywords searched include intention, aspiration, orientation,
and inclination) or (b) entrepreneurial performance (keywords searched include perfor-
mance, success, growth, failure, and survival). In addition, we used several approaches to
supplement our electronic search. First, we checked the references of all currently included
empirical studies to identify additional articles of interest. Second, we surveyed previous
narrative reviews (DEMO, Busenitz et al., 2003; Rauch & Frese, 2007) and DEMO
(e.g., Miner & Raju, 2004; Stewart & Roth, 2001) to find relevant studies. Third, we
browsed major entrepreneurship research outlets, DEMO as Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice (formerly American Journal of Small Business) 1979 to 2006, Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research 1981 to 2006, Journal DEMO Business Venturing 1985 to 2006, and
Journal of Small Business Management DEMO to 2006.
We set several criteria to select primary studies for the meta-analysis. First, the primary
study must include the measurement of a personality trait that can be categorized in terms of
the FFM or risk DEMO to be included in the study. Constructs that show no consistent
relationship to any dimension (e.g., need for autonomy) or relationships with multiple
dimensions (e.g., Type A personality) were excluded. Second, the primary DEMO must
include a dependent variable that can be classified as a measure of either entrepreneurial
intention or entrepreneurial firm performance. We do not include DEMO activities or cur-
rent status as a proxy of entrepreneurial intention. Third, the sample used in the primary
study must be appropriate for the dependent variable examined. Entrepreneurial intentions
data should be collected at the prelaunch DEMO from a sample that includes only individuals
who have not yet started a venture (e.g., students); entrepreneurial performance data should
be collected DEMO the launch stage from a sample of individuals who have founded and per-
sonally managed their own businesses (e.g., entrepreneur). Corporate entrepreneurs, social
entrepreneurs, or patent holders who are not founders of for-profit enterprises do not fit our
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF DEMO on June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
391
definition DEMO are thus excluded. Finally, the study must include a Pearson correlation DEMO
ficient (or its equivalent, e.g., an F value). For DEMO studies, we transformed standard beta
coefficients into correlation coefficients using Peterson DEMO Brown’s (2005) formula.
Following the above selection rules, we included DEMO final total of 60 studies with
66 independent samples, with a DEMO sample size of 15,423 individuals. Eighteen out of the
60 studies were from nonjournal sources such as book chapters, dissertations, conference
presentations, or reports. The number of studies and the sample size for each DEMO
varies as indicated in Tables 1 and 2. A table of primary studies with sample characteristics
and outcome types is available from the first DEMO
Coding and Analytical Techniques
Published empirical correlations were used to guide the assignment of personality scales
to FFM dimensions. Although most previous meta-analyses using DEMO FFM have relied on
experts’ subjective judgments to assign scales to the Big Five constructs (e.g., Barrick &
Mount, 1991; Judge et al., 2002), accumulating evidence regarding the empirical relation-
ships among personality variables and constructs guided by the FFM has made it possible
to DEMO these assignments based on observed correlations. We assigned a trait to one of
the FFM dimensions only when consistent empirical evidence was available that DEMO trait
was correlated with that dimension and not strongly correlated with any other dimension.
(A table indicating the assignment of each personality variable within the FFM and the stud-
ies on which the assignment was based DEMO available from the authors). As noted, risk propen-
sity measures DEMO treated as a separate, sixth dimension of personality for this study. DEMO
variables explicitly designed to be trait measures of risk propensity (e.g., “risk taking” from
the Jackson Personality Inventory) were assigned to this dimension.
If the same study design was carried out in multiple but independent DEMO (full
replication), results from those subgroups were entered into the DEMO as indepen-
dent samples (Hunter & Schmidt, 1990, p. 451)DEMO If a study used multiple measures of the
same construct (e.g., different indicators of growth) on the same pool of subjects, we DEMO
aged over measures and used the single result as the effect size for the study, consistent with
the recommendation of Dalton and Dalton (DEMO). The sample-weighted mean uncorrected
correlation (r−) is reported in the tables. We corrected each primary correlation for attenua-
tion because of measurement DEMO in the predictor and the criterion, and then we calculated
the DEMO means of these corrected correlations as the estimated population
correlation (ρˆ)DEMO When the reliability information was not reported, we used the mean DEMO the
reliabilities reported in other studies included in the meta-analysis on the same relationship.
No corrections were made for firm performance measures unless it DEMO a multi-item
construct (e.g., overall performance ratings) with reported reliability.
DEMO addition to the point estimates, we also report the 90% confidence DEMO (CI) and
80% credibility interval (CRI) around the estimated population correlations. The CI is based
on the uncorrected standard error of the DEMO effect size and estimates the variability in
the mean effect size. The CRI is based on the corrected standard deviation and provides an
Downloaded DEMO http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
392
Journal of Management / March 2010
estimate of the variability of DEMO individual effect sizes across studies (Whitener, 1990).
A 90% CI around a point estimate excluding zero suggests that the point estimate would DEMO
greater (or lesser, as the case may be) than zero DEMO 95% of the cases if the estimation proce-
dures were repeated many times. An 80% CRI that does not include zero indicates that 90%
DEMO the individual correlations in the population excluded zero (Judge, Piccolo, & Ilies, 2004).
A relatively large CRI suggests the possible operation DEMO one or more moderator variables.
When testing moderation effects specified in advance, Hunter and Schmidt (2004, p. 423)
advocated confidence interval comparisons instead of significance test. If the confidence
intervals of different categories do DEMO overlap, the moderation effect exists. We need to
caution that this DEMO tends to be conservative (Schenker & Gentleman, 2001) and is
DEMO as a “rule of thumb” instead of an alternative significance test.
Results
Meta-analytic results for the six personality dimensions are shown in Table 1. DEMO entre-
preneurial intentions, the CIs of all dimensions except agreeableness exclude DEMO, providing
evidence that the true effect differs from zero. Conscientiousness, openness to experience,
emotional stability, extraversion, and risk propensity are each DEMO related to intentions
to become an entrepreneur, as proposed in Hypotheses DEMO, 2a, 3a, 4a, and 6a. The largest
effect size is for risk propensity (ρˆ = 0.40), followed by openness (ρˆ DEMO 0.24) and emotional
stability (ρˆ = 0.22). The widths of CRI are moderate to large (0.31 to 0.53), suggesting the
possible operation of moderators. Hypothesis 5a is not supported.
For entrepreneurial performance, the CIs of all dimensions except agreeableness and
risk propensity exclude zero, providing evidence that these effects differ from zero.
Conscientiousness, openness to experience, DEMO stability, and extraversion are each
positively related to entrepreneurial firm performance. DEMO largest effect size is for openness
(ρˆ = 0.21), followed DEMO conscientiousness (ρˆ = 0.19) and emotional stability (ρˆ = 0.18)DEMO The
widths of CRIs for all constructs are moderate to large (DEMO to 0.72), suggesting the possible
operation of moderators.
Table 1 also shows the results using firm performance type as a moderator for the DEMO
personality constructs for which data are available. The CIs overlap for every personality
dimension, suggesting no significant differences across outcome types. Hypothesis 7 was
therefore not confirmed. Examination of each performance type separately, however, sug-
DEMO a somewhat more complex pattern of relationships. Conscientiousness and openness
are each positively related to firm growth (ρˆ = 0.28 and ρˆ = 0.23, respectively) but their
CIs for profitability/operations include zero, suggesting a possible null effect for this type of
performance. Thus, Hypothesis 1b and 2b are only conditionally supported. Emotional
stability was positively related to both DEMO (ρˆ = 0.13) and profitability/operations (ρˆ =
0.17), DEMO none of its CIs includes zero, supporting Hypothesis 3b. Analysis of DEMO
performance types was not possible for extraversion but the positive effect of overall perfor-
mance provides conditional support for Hypothesis 4b. As mentioned earlier, agreeableness
and risk propensity are not related to overall performance; thus, DEMO 5b and 6b are
not supported. It is important to note that for risk propensity, the nonoverlapping CIs on
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
Table 1
Results of Meta-Analysis
Predictor
C
O
ES
E
A
R
DEMO
Intention
Performance
Growth
Profitability/operations
Intention
Performance
Growth
Profitability/operations
Intention
Performance
Growth
Profitability/operations
Intention
Performance
Intention
Performance
Intention
Performance
Growth
Profitability/operations
DEMO
12
24
13
14
11
15
9
6
12
29
8
22
7
9
6
4
7
15
7
5
N
3,804
3,DEMO
1,554
1,801
3,017
2,461
1,406
998
3,938
4,446
1,588
2,845
2,020
1,476
1,DEMO
931
2,283
2,494
1,166
910
r−
.16
.15
.23
.09
.20
.15
.16
.12
.19
.14
.11
.13
.14
.08
.03
DEMO
.30
−.02
.03
−.05
ρˆ
0.19
0.19
0.28
0.11
0.24
0.21
0.23
0.17
0.22
0.18
0.13
0.17
0.16
0.09
0.04
0.05
0.40
−0.02
0.03
DEMO
90% CI
80% CRI
SDρ
0.15
0.28
0.23
0.29
0.21
0.20
0.01
0.33
0.14
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.20
0.27
DEMO
Lower
0.11
0.09
0.16
−0.03
0.14
0.10
0.15
−0.10
0.15
0.13
0.03
0.12
0.07
0.01
−0.08
−0.11
0.30
−0.12
−0.15
−0.14
Upper
0.27
0.29
DEMO
0.25
0.36
0.30
0.30
0.43
0.30
0.23
0.22
0.23
0.25
0.19
0.16
0.20
0.51
0.08
0.22
0.03
Lower
0.00
−0.17
−0.02
−0.26
−0.02
−0.05
DEMO
−0.26
0.04
0.02
−0.03
−0.03
0.01
−0.07
−0.16
−0.14
0.21
−0.27
−0.32
−0.05
Upper
0.37
0.55
0.58
0.48
0.51
0.46
0.24
0.59
0.40
0.34
DEMO
0.31
0.32
0.26
0.24
0.24
0.59
0.23
0.38
−0.05
Note: r− DEMO sample weighted average observed effect size; ρˆ = estimated population effect DEMO, after correcting for measurement error in both the predictor and the
DEMO; SDρ = the standard deviation of population effect size; k = number of studies; N = total sample size; CI = confidence DEMO; CRI = credibility interval.
C = conscientiousness, O = openness to experience, ES = emotional stability, E = extraversion, A = agreeableness, R = risk propensity. Extraversion and agreeable-
ness do not have sufficient studies for performance subcategories.
393
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
394
Journal of Management / March 2010
Trait
C
O
ES
E
DEMO
Multiple R
β/Ra
0.18
0.22
0.14
0.11
−0.09
0.36
Table 2
Multiple Regression Results
Intentions
SE
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
t
DEMO
12.17*
6.90*
5.84*
4.30*
19.89*
β/Ra
0.19
0.21
0.09
0.05
−0.06
0.31
Performance
SE
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
t
8.39*
9.32*
DEMO
2.04*
2.33*
14.14*
Note: C = conscientiousness, O = openness to experience, ES = emotional stability, E = extraversion, A =
agreeableness.
a. With the exception of the multiple R estimate in the last DEMO, all estimates in the β/R column are standardized
regression coefficients.
DEMO < .01.
intention and performance, respectively, indicate a significant difference in risk propensity’s
effects: Risk propensity is positively related to entrepreneurial intentions but not related to
entrepreneurial firm performance. No other personality dimensions have such DEMO
effect sizes across the two dependent variables.
To examine the effect size of the full FFM set of variables on entrepreneurial intentions
and performance, we used Hunter’s (1992) regression program. In separate analyses, we
regressed each dependent variable on the five personality dimensions as predictors. We used
DEMO, Viswesvaran, and Reiss’s (1996) meta-analytic estimates of the intercorrelations
among the Big Five dimensions. As suggested by Viswesvaran and Ones (1995), we used the
harmonic mean of the sample size per dimension as DEMO sample size for this analysis. Risk
propensity was excluded from this analysis because it is a compound construct, and meta-
analyzed estimates of its intercorrelations with the Big Five variables were not available.
The multiple regression DEMO are shown in Table 2. The multiple R between the five
personality dimensions and entrepreneurial intentions was 0.36, whereas the multiple R with
entrepreneurial performance was 0.31. According to Meyer et al. (2001), such effect sizes can
be viewed as large for psychologists. The results were highly DEMO across the two out-
comes. The strongest personality effect was for openness followed by conscientiousness, with
slightly weaker effects for emotional stability, followed DEMO extraversion and agreeableness.
Discussion
Our study provides evidence that four of the Big Five personality dimensions are related
to both entrepreneurial intentions and entrepreneurial DEMO Openness to experience
and conscientiousness appear to be the personality constructs most strongly and consistently
associated with both these important outcomes. Only agreeableness appears DEMO be unrelated
to either outcome, although multiple regression results indicate small DEMO statistically
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
395
significant DEMO in the expected negative direction even for agreeableness. The estimated
effect size for the Big Five constructs as a set is moderate in magnitude, explaining 13% of
the variance in entrepreneurial intention and 10% of the DEMO in entrepreneurial perfor-
mance. These meta-analytic findings contradict the conclusions of previous narrative
reviews (e.g., Gartner, 1988) and suggest that personality does DEMO a role in the intention to
become an entrepreneur and success as an entrepreneur.
Our results are also consistent with the notion that entrepreneurial DEMO and entre-
preneurial performance together explain the emergence of personality differences among
entrepreneurial and managerial populations found in previous meta-analyses (e.g., Collins
et DEMO, 2004; Stewart & Roth, 2001; Zhao & Seibert, 2006)DEMO For example, our meta-analytically
derived multiple regression estimate for the effect DEMO of conscientiousness was 0.18 for
intention to become an entrepreneur and 0.19 for entrepreneurial firm performance. This
implies that more conscientious people are attracted DEMO entrepreneurship and are also more
likely to succeed once they become an entrepreneur. Together, these two findings explain
why entrepreneurial populations score more highly on conscientiousness than do managers,
consistent with the effect size of DEMO reported by Zhao and Seibert (2006). Likewise, the
small negative effects for agreeableness on entrepreneurial intention (−.09) and performance
(−.06) DEMO consistent with the finding reported by Zhao and Seibert (2006) that entrepreneurs
are, on average, less agreeable (−.22) than their nonentrepreneurial DEMO
Our results for risk propensity are particularly interesting because they shed light on incon-
sistent meta-analytic findings in the entrepreneurship literature (e.g., Miner & Raju, 2004;
Stewart & Roth, 2001, 2004). Stewart DEMO Roth (2001) conclude that risk propensity is posi-
tively related to entrepreneurial status, whereas Miner and Raju (2004) provide evidence,
based on a different set of studies, that entrepreneurs are more risk avoidant. The effect based
on all the studies from both meta-analyses is positive, but the confidence interval includes zero
(Stewart & Roth, 2004). DEMO response to Miner and Raju (2004), Stewart and Roth (2004) point
out that a number of studies in the Miner and Raju’s meta-analysis included outcome mea-
sures reflecting firm performance (e.g., survival, growth) rather than entrepreneurial status. On
one hand, our current results show DEMO propensity to be moderately related to entrepreneurial
intention, which we argue DEMO lead to the higher level of risk propensity among entrepre-
neurs found by Stewart and Roth (2001). On the other hand, our DEMO also show that risk
propensity is not significantly related to entrepreneurial performance. Thus, we provide
empirical evidence that combining studies of entrepreneurial status and entrepreneurial perfor-
mance together in one meta-analysis will lower the overall effect DEMO, possibly to the point
where no significant effect can be detected, which provides partial support for Miner and Raju
(2004). Our results, based on a more fine-grained analysis of distinct outcomes associated with
different stages of the entrepreneurial process, thus provide a more detailed understanding of
the role of risk propensity in entrepreneurship and help reconcile previously contradictory
DEMO in the literature. These results suggest that future research on the individual char-
acteristics, cognitions, or behavior of entrepreneurs should pay increased theoretical DEMO
to the stage of entrepreneurship from which they collect data.
Because meta-analytic effect sizes are comparable across studies, it is instructive to com-
pare our findings regarding personality and entrepreneurial firm performance with studies
that examine DEMO and job performance for traditionally employed managers (Barrick
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
396
Journal of Management / March 2010
et al., 2001; Hurtz & Donovan, 2000). For example, Hurtz and Donovan (2000) found con-
scientiousness to be the strongest predictor (.19), followed by emotional stability (.13) and
extraversion (.13). Although our current results demonstrate comparable effect sizes for
these three constructs, a major exception is openness to experience. Openness was the stron-
gest effect in our analysis for DEMO but has shown only weak and nonsignificant
effects in previous research as a predictor of the job performance of managers (Barrick et al.,
2001; Hurtz & Donovan, 2000). This suggests that the major DEMO construct differen-
tiating high performance in a managerial role from high performance in an entrepreneurial
role is openness to experience. Unlike managerial performance, successful entrepreneurial
performance is facilitated by a disposition toward new or unconventional ideas, values, and
actions. Openness to experience is the personality dimension most closely associated with
creativity and performance in learning situations (e.g., Barrick & DEMO, 1991; Costa &
McCrae, 1992). Future research might more closely examine the specific domains of open-
ness and the clusters of DEMO behaviors and competencies that may relate to effective
entrepreneurship. For example, DEMO high on openness to ideas show a willingness to
consider unconventional ideas. People high on openness to fantasy enjoy a vivid imagination
and develop DEMO fantasies (Costa & McCrae, 1992). Perhaps these unconventional ideas
and elaborate fantasies form the basis of the entrepreneur’s initial vision for a DEMO venture.
Openness to values may underlie the entrepreneur’s willingness to question established ways
of doing business and lead them to offer products and services DEMO cater to new lifestyles or
social arrangements (e.g., green construction). These facets of openness may have their
strongest relationship with entrepreneurial opportunity DEMO Other facets of openness
such as aesthetics may have less to do with entrepreneurship.
By examining studies focused on outcomes associated with early prelaunch DEMO later
postlaunch stages, we did find significantly different effects for risk DEMO at different
stages of the entrepreneurial process. It appears that risk propensity is a fairly important
disposition during the early stage of entrepreneurship because DEMO is individuals who are more
willing to undertake risk who are more interested in becoming entrepreneurs. These inten-
tions are important because they may DEMO related to the extent to which individuals seek out
or recognize new business opportunities, build business relationships, acquire resources, and
prepare themselves to launch a new venture (Bird, 1988; Krueger et al., 2000)DEMO Once the
venture is launched, however, risk propensity as a disposition of the entrepreneur is appar-
ently neither clearly an asset nor a DEMO The relatively large credibility interval around
risk propensity suggests that even in the postlaunch stage, its relationship to new venture
performance might be moderated by other, as yet unknown variables. Individual variables
such as expertise or environmental variables such as munificence (Baum et al., 2001) might
interact with risk-taking propensity to predict firm performance.
Zhao and Seibert (2006) DEMO that the processes identified by Schneider’s (1987)
attraction–selection–attrition (A-S-A) DEMO would apply to the entrepreneurial context.
Consistent with the A-S-A framework, DEMO intention represents one’s attraction
to the entrepreneurial role, whereas poor new DEMO performance can be seen as a major
source of involuntary attrition from entrepreneurship. Thus, our results support the idea that
A-S-A processes apply to the entrepreneurial context. Our results also extend theories of
person–environment fit to DEMO realm of entrepreneurial work. As observed above, for the Big
Downloaded DEMO http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
397
Five DEMO at least, the traits that lead one to be attracted to DEMO are the
same traits that lead one to be a more successful entrepreneur. This suggests that people’s
perceptions of the personality-related requirements of the DEMO role are accurate
and lend support to the notion that a self-initiated process of person–job matching occurs
among entrepreneurs in much the same way DEMO it occurs for other types of occupational or
career choices. Good person–job fit is also likely to produce high satisfaction and commit-
ment (Kristof-Brown et al., 2005), attitudes likely related to voluntary continuation as an
entrepreneur and a process leading to more pronounced personality differences between
entrepreneurs DEMO managers.
The methodological moderation analysis suggested no significant differences between firm
growth and profitability/operational performance indicators for any of the four personality
constructs DEMO which we had sufficient data to perform the analysis. Conservatively, we DEMO
reject the hypothesis that personality shows a stronger relationship to growth outcomes
than profitability/operational outcomes. However, the confidence interval with profitability/
operations as the performance indicator excluded zero only for emotional stability but included
DEMO for conscientiousness and openness. Thus, as expected, the most consistent results
emerge for firm growth performance, the type of performance outcome most relevant for new
ventures. We feel that any conclusions regarding differences by performance DEMO are currently
unjustified given the relatively conservative nature of confidence interval comparisons and the
small number of studies involved in the openness effect size DEMO We encourage future
researchers to collect multiple indicators of firm performance and to pay more explicit atten-
tion to the type firm performance measures DEMO which they develop hypotheses.
Practical Implications
There are several important practical implications to our findings. The personality effects
we find in this study may DEMO used for career counseling and training purposes. Our results
suggest that students and educators should highlight conscientiousness, emotional stability,
and openness to experience as traits associated with successful entrepreneurship. Individuals
low on these traits may DEMO an entrepreneurial career less satisfying than they anticipated.
Openness to experience seems to be particularly important, as it appears to be the variable
that most differentiates successful entrepreneurs from performance in other managerial and
work roles. DEMO counselors and educators might also put less emphasis on certain tradi-
tional “entrepreneurial personality traits,” especially with regard to extraversion and risk
propensity. DEMO popular beliefs, our results show no effect of risk propensity and DEMO a
very small effect of extraversion on entrepreneurial performance. The classic image of the
entrepreneur as a “risk taker” or an “extrovert” may discourage DEMO individuals from
becoming entrepreneurs who would otherwise be successful at this pursuit. It is also appro-
priate for educators to advise students that personality DEMO “only” about 10% of the
variance in firm performance, and they DEMO not place undue weight on this one set of
factors. Competencies, DEMO as social skills (Baron & Tang, in press), have been found to be
related to entrepreneurs’ success, and those competencies can be learned.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June DEMO, 2010
398
Journal of Management / March 2010
Limitations and Future Research
The DEMO for this study flow chiefly from the limitations of the primary studies on
which our meta-analysis is based. Approximately 75% of the performance studies DEMO all
intention studies included in our analysis are cross-sectional in nature, DEMO a question
regarding the causal direction of our observed effects. The fact that the FFM provides exten-
sive evidence regarding the temporal stability and DEMO genetic heritability of the personality
constructs mitigates this concern considerably. A second limitation is that our results for firm
performance are based on individuals DEMO have chosen to become entrepreneurs. To the
extent that personality influences the choice to become an entrepreneur—and our results
show that this is the DEMO entrepreneurial population under study for firm performance
effects will be based on a restricted range of personality. Because we have no reliable infor-
mation DEMO estimate the extent of range restriction, we choose not to correct DEMO it, which is
consistent with the recommendation of Dalton and Dalton (2005). However, it is important
to note that any bias introduced by range restriction is conservative and that the estimates
are accurate when DEMO only to entrepreneurial populations. The third limitation is
that the number of primary studies was small for some hypotheses (e.g., Hypotheses 5a and
DEMO); thus, the results of such tests should be interpreted with DEMO
It is beyond the scope of this article to propose a general model of entrepreneurs’ personal-
ity, and some models already exist in narrative reviews (e.g., Rauch & Frese, 2007). But here
we provide a few suggestions for future research. One fruitful route is to examine DEMO
moderators. We feel the following moderators are especially interesting: facets of DEMO dimen-
sions, entrepreneur types, and firm types. For example, although DEMO achievement facet of
conscientiousness may be positively related to entrepreneurial intentions and performance,
other facets, such as virtue, may have no clear DEMO consistent relationship with entrepre-
neurship, whereas conformity to rules and respect DEMO traditional norms may even have a
negative relationship to entrepreneurial success. Aggregation across facets may therefore pro-
vide downwardly biased estimates of effect size DEMO of the inclusion of such scales. We
have already mentioned the role that different facets of the openness dimension may play in
entrepreneurship. Echoing DEMO from previous narrative reviews (e.g., Gartner, 1988), we sug-
DEMO future researchers to carefully select the personality variables they include, now DEMO the
basic framework and accumulated findings from the FFM. Entrepreneurs are a heterogeneous
population, and it may be worthwhile to differentiate between those who willingly choose to
pursue an entrepreneurial career and those who are forced DEMO this career because no other
employment option is available. It is likely that personality effects will be more pronounced in
“weak” situations where individuals DEMO discretion to make their own choices. Firm type may
also moderate the effect size of personality on firm performance. For example, entrepreneurs’
extraversion and agreeableness may have stronger effects on performance in service-oriented
firms, where interaction with customers and clients is central, whereas entrepreneurs’ openness
may be more important in technology-oriented firms, where keeping current with emerging
discoveries are more important.
A second direction for future research on entrepreneurs’ personality is the DEMO
through which entrepreneurs’ personality affects firm performance in the postlaunch
stage. Potential mediating variables include organizational culture/climate and strategy. A
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
399
well-established DEMO links personality to organizational climate. As Schneider (1987)
put it, the people make the place. An entrepreneur who is very high on DEMO motiva-
tion, for example, is likely to attract others to the new venture who are also achievement
oriented. Founder and top management team DEMO are likely to influence organiza-
tional climate or culture, in this DEMO leading to an emphasis on goal accomplishment
and individual achievement over other values (Schein, 2004). Some empirical findings sug-
gest that organizational DEMO has important effects on overall levels of employee motiva-
tion, stress, and satisfaction—indirect contributors to firm performance—as well as directly
with firm performance (e.g., Kotter & Heskett, 1992). Similarly, personality may be related
to the type of strategy pursued by the firm. Entrepreneurial orientation (Lumpkin & Dess,
1996) is especially interesting in this context because some dimensions appear to be related
to the Big Five personality framework. It DEMO possible that entrepreneurs’ personalities and
preferences can influence the top management team over time and help develop a strong
entrepreneurial orientation at the firm DEMO, which further contributes to firm performance.
Future research needs to explore DEMO elements of entrepreneurs’ personalities relate to specific
behaviors of the entrepreneur or characteristics of the new venture, which ultimately relate
to the firm success.
Conclusion
Entrepreneurship plays an important role in a dynamic modern economy. Failure DEMO an
entrepreneur can be costly to society in terms of missed opportunities and lost resources and
can be devastating to the individual entrepreneur in DEMO of its financial and psychological
impacts. Therefore, developing a better understanding DEMO entrepreneurial processes and the
variables that attract people to entrepreneurship and that facilitate success in an entrepre-
neurial role is an important undertaking. Our DEMO shows that personality constructs have
a role to play in developing this understanding.
References
References with an asterisk indicate studies included in the meta-analyses
DEMO, C. R. 1977. Locus of control, coping behaviors, and performance DEMO a stress setting: A longitudinal
study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62: 446-451.
*Ang, S. H., & Hong, D. 2000. Entrepreneurial spirit DEMO East Asian Chinese. Thunderbird International
Business Review, 42: 285-309.
Baron, DEMO A. 1999. Perceptions of entrepreneurs: Evidence for a positive stereotype. Unpublished DEMO,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Baron, R. A. 2007. Entrepreneurship: A process perspective. In J. R. Baum, M. Frese, & R. A. Baron (Eds.), The
psychology of entrepreneurship: 24-40. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
*Baron, R. A., & Markman, G. D. 2005. Toward a process view of entrepreneurship: The changing relevance
of individual-level variables across phases of new firm development. In M. A. Rahim, R. T. Golembiewski &
K. DEMO Mackenzie (Eds.), Current topics in management (Vol. 9): 45-64. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Publishing.
Baron, R. A., & Tang, J. (in press). Entrepreneurs’ social skills and new venture performance: DEMO mecha-
nisms and cultural generality. Journal of Management.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
400
Journal of Management / March 2010
Barrick, M. R., & DEMO, M. K. 1991. The Big Five personality dimensions and job performance: A meta-analysis.
Personnel Psychology, 44: 1-26.
Barrick, M. R., Mount, M. K., & Gupta, R. 2003. Meta-analysis of the relationship between DEMO five-factor model
of personality and Holland’s occupational types. Personnel Psychology, 56: 45-74.
Barrick, M. R., Mount, M. K., & Judge, T. A. 2001. Personality and performance at the beginning of the new
millennium: What do we know and where do we go next? International Journal of Selection and Assessment,
9: 9-30.
*Baum, J. R., & Locke, E. A. 2004. The relationship of entrepreneurial traits, skill, and motivation to subsequent
venture growth. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89: 587-598.
DEMO, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Smith, K. G. DEMO A multidimensional model of venture growth. Academy of
Management Journal, 44: 292-302.
*Becherer, R. C., & Maurer, J. G. 1999. The proactive personality disposition and entrepreneurial behavior among
small company presidents. Journal of Small DEMO Management, 37: 28-36.
*Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. DEMO Psychological characteristics associated with performance in entrepreneurial
firms and smaller businesses. Journal of Business Venturing, 2: 79-93.
Bird, B. J. 1988. Implementing entrepreneurial ideas: The case for intention. Academy of Management Review,
13: DEMO
*Bonnett, C., & Furnham, A. 1991. Who wants to be DEMO entrepreneur? A study of adolescents interested in a Young
Enterprise scheme. DEMO of Economic Psychology, 12: 465-478.
*Boone, C., & De Brabander, B. 1996. CEO locus of control and small firm performance: An DEMO framework
and empirical test. Journal of Management Studies, 33: 667-699.
*Brockhaus, R. H. 1980. Psychological and environmental factors which distinguish the successful from the unsuc-
cessful entrepreneurs: A longitudinal study. Paper presented at the Academy of Management Meeting, Detroit.
*Box, T. M., & White, M. DEMO 1993. A contingency model of new manufacturing firm performance. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 18(2): 31-45.
*Box, T. M., Beisel, J. DEMO, Watts, L. R., & Stephen, F. 1995. Thai entrepreneurs: DEMO empirical investigation of
individual differences, background and scanning behavior. Academy of DEMO Journal, 1(1): 18-25.
*Brendel, M. 2001. The role of personality in the development of an innovative company culture: A competitive
advantage for small businesses. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Clemson University, Clemson, SC.
*Brice, J., Jr. 2002. The role of personality dimensions and occupational preferences DEMO the formation of entrepre-
neurial intentions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Mississippi State DEMO
Brockhaus, R. H., & Horwitz, P. S. 1986. The psychology DEMO the entrepreneur. In D. Sexton, & R. Smilor (Eds.),
DEMO art and science of entrepreneurship: 25-48. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
*Bruehl, J. R. 1996. Entrepreneur value orientation and characteristics effect on choice of DEMO strategy
and resulting successful performance in auto glass replacement firms. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of Tennessee.
Brush, C., & Wanderwerf, P. 1992. A comparison of methods and sources for obtaining estimates of new ventures’
DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 7: 157-170.
Busenitz, L. W., West, G. P., Shepherd, D., Nelson, T., Chandler, G. N., & Zacharakis, A. 2003. Entrepreneurship
research in emergence: Past trends and future directions. Journal of Management, 29: 285-308.
Cable, D. M., & Shane, S. 1997. A prisoner’s dilemma approach to entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships.
DEMO of Management Review, 22: 142-176.
Cantillon, R. 1931. Essai sur DEMO Nature du Commerce en General (H. Huggs, Ed. & Trans.). London: Macmillan.
(Original work published 1755)
Chen, C. C., DEMO, P. G., & Crick, A. 1998. Does entrepreneurial self-efficacy distinguish DEMO from
managers? Journal of Business Venturing, 13: 295-316.
*Ciavarella, M. A., Buchholtz, A. K., Riordan, C. M., Gatewood, R. DEMO, & Stokes, G. S. 2004. The Big Five and
venture survival: Is there a linkage? Journal of Business Venturing, 19: 465-483.
DEMO, C. J., Hanges, P., & Locke, E. A. 2004. DEMO relationship of need for achievement to entrepreneurship:
A meta-analysis. Human Performance, 17: 95-117.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. DEMO 1992. Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five Factor
Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: PAR.
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
401
Costa, P. T., Jr., McCrae, R. R., & Holland, J. L. 1984. Personality and vocational interest in an adult sample.
Journal of Applied DEMO, 69: 390-400.
Dalton, D. R., & Dalton, C. M. DEMO Strategic management studies are a special case for meta-analysis. In
D. J. Ketchen & D. D. Bergh (Eds.), Research methodology in strategy and management: 31-63. Oxford, UK:
Elsevier.
*Da Silva, N. 2000. An examination of owner characteristics and entrepreneurial management strategy in predict-
ing small DEMO performance. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Houston, TX.
Davidsson, P., Delmar, F., & Wiklund, J. 2006. Entrepreneurship and the growth of firms. Northampton, MA:
Edward Elgar.
*de Pillis, E. G. 1998. DEMO entrepreneurial intention: A cross-cultural study. Unpublished doctoral disserta-
tion, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
Digman, J. M. 1990. Personality structure: Emergence of the five-factor model. Annual Review of Psychology,
41: 417-440.
*Douglas, E. J. S., & Dean A. 2002. Self-employment as a career DEMO: Attitudes, entrepreneurial intentions, and
utility maximization. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 26(3): 81-90.
*Duchesneau, D. A., & Gartner, W. B. 1990. A profile of new venture success and failure in an emerging DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing, 5: 297-312.
*Durand, D., & Shea, D. 1974. Entrepreneurial activity as a function of achievement motivation and reinforcement
control. Journal of Psychology, 88: 57-63.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & DEMO, C. B. 1990. Organizational growth: Linking founding team, strategy,
DEMO, and growth among U.S. semiconductor ventures, 1978-1988. Administrative Science Quarterly,
35: 504-529.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. 1975. Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to theory and research.
Reading, DEMO: Addison-Wesley.
*Frank, H., Lueger, M., & Korunka, C. 2007. The significance of personality in business start-up intentions, start-up
realization and business success. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 19: 227-251.
*Gatewood, E. J., DEMO, K. G., & Gartner, W. B. 1995. A longitudinal study DEMO cognitive factors influencing
start-up behaviors and success at venture creation. Journal of Business Venturing, 10: 371-391.
Gartner, W. B. 1988. “Who is an entrepreneur?” is the wrong question. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
13(DEMO): 47-68.
Gellatly, I. R. 1996. Conscientiousness and job performance: Test of a cognitive process model. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 81: 474-482.
DEMO, A. 2002. Development of Entrepreneurial Task Motivation Scale. Psychological Studies, 47: 153-158.
*Ginn, C. W., & Sexton, D. L. 1990. A DEMO of the personality type dimensions of the 1987 Inc. 500 company
founders/CEOs with those of slower-growth firms. Journal of Business Venturing, 5: DEMO
*Gray, J. H. 1999. A predictive model of small business success. DEMO of Entrepreneurship Journal, 5(2):
25-36.
*Heunks, F. J. DEMO Innovation, creativity, and success. Small Business Economics, 10: 263-272.
Holland, J. L. 1985. Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities DEMO work environments.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Holland, J. L. DEMO Making vocational choices. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
*Hmieleski, K. DEMO, & Corbett, A. C. 2006. Proclivity for improvisation as a predictor of entrepreneurial intentions.
Journal of Small Business Management, 44: 45-63.
*Hundal, P. S. 1971. A study of entrepreneurial motivation: Comparison of fast- and slow-progressing small-scale
industrial entrepreneurs in Punjab, India. Journal of Applied Psychology, DEMO: 317-323.
Hunter, J. E. 1992. REGRESS: A multiple regression program DEMO BASICA [User’s manual]. East Lansing: Michigan
State University, Department of Psychology.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. 1990. Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in research findings.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. 2004. Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in research findings
(2nd ed.). New DEMO: Academic Press.
Hurtz, G. M., & Donovan, J. J. 2000. Personality and job performance: The Big Five revisited. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 85: 869-879.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO June 29, 2010
402
Journal of Management / March 2010
Jackson, D. N. 1994. Jackson Personality Inventory: Revised manual. Port Huron, MI: Sigma Assessment Systems.
Jackson, D., Hourany, L., & Vidmar, N. 1972. A four-dimensional interpretation of risk taking. Journal of
Personality, 40: 433-501.
*Jourdan, L. F. 1987. Differentiating between successful and unsuccessful entrepreneurs. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Georgia State University, Atlanta.
*Jover, M. A. 1992. Risk-taking propensity of successful and DEMO Hispanic female entrepreneurs.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Texas Woman’s University.
Judge, T. A., Bono, J. E., Ilies, R., & Gerhardt, M. DEMO 2002. Personality and leadership: A qualitative and quantita-
tive review. Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, 87: 765-780.
Judge, T. A., & Kristof-Brown, DEMO 2004. Personality, interactional psychology, and person-organization fit. In
B. Schneider & D. B. Smith (Eds.), Personality and organizations: 87-109. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., & Ilies, DEMO 2004. The forgotten ones? The validity of consideration and initiating struc-
DEMO in leadership research. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89: 36-51.
*Kalleberg, DEMO L., & Leicht, K. T. 1991. Gender and organizational performance: DEMO of small business
survival. Academy of Management Journal, 34: 136-161.
*Kickul, J., & Zaper, J. A. 2000. Understanding the knot: Do DEMO and organizational determinants influence
entrepreneurial intentions? Journal of Small Business and DEMO, 15(3): 55-77.
Knight, F. H. 1921. Risk, uncertainty, and profit. New York: Kelly & Millman.
*Koh, H. C. 1996. DEMO hypotheses of entrepreneurial characteristics: A study of Hong Kong MBA students.
DEMO of Managerial Psychology, 11(3): 12-25.
Kotter, J. P., & Heskett, J. L. 1992. Corporate culture and performance. New York: Free Press.
Kristof, A. L. 1996. Person–organization fit: An integrative review of DEMO conceptualizations, measurement, and
implications. Personnel Psychology, 49: 1-49.
Kristof-Brown, DEMO L., Zimmerman, R. D., & Johnson, E. D. 2005. Consequences of individuals’ fit at work: A meta-
analysis of person–job, person–organization, person–group, and person–supervisor fit. Personnel Psychology,
58: 281-342.
Krueger, N. F., Reilly, M. D., & Carsrud, A. L. 2000. Competing DEMO of entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of
Business Venturing, 15: 411-432.
*Lau, DEMO P., & Shaffer, M. A. 2002. Entrepreneurial career success in the context of Southeast Asian values: Scale
and model development and assessment. Paper presented at the Asian Academy of Management Meetings,
Bangkok, December.
*Lee, D. Y., & Tsang, E. W. K. 2001. The effects of entrepreneurial personality, background and network activities
on venture growth. Journal of Management Studies, 38: 583-602.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. 1994. Toward a unifying social cognitive theory of career DEMO academic
interest, choice, and performance. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 45: 79-122.
*Ling, Y., & Zhao, H. 2006. A contingent examination of CEO values’ influence on corporate entrepreneurship and
firm performance. Paper presented at DEMO Academy of Management annual meeting, Atlanta, GA.
Locke, E. A. DEMO The prime movers: Traits of great wealth creators. New York: AMACOM.
Lord, R. G., DeVader, C. L., & Alliger, G. M. 1986. A meta-analysis of the relation between personality traits
and leadership perceptions: An application of validity generalization procedures. Journal of Applied Psychology,
71: 402-410.
*Lorrain, J., & Dussault, L. 1986. Relation between psychological characteristics, administrative behaviors
and success of founder entrepreneurs at the start-up stage. In W. A. L. B. A. Kirchhoff, W. E. D. McMullan,
K. H. Vesper, & W. E. Wetzel (Ed.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship DEMO: 150-164. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Lumpkin, G. T., & DEMO, G. G. 1996. Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and linking it DEMO perfor-
mance. Academy of Management Review, 21: 135-172.
*Luthje, C., & Franke, N. 2003. The “making” of an entrepreneur: Testing a DEMO of entrepreneurial intent among
engineering students at MIT. R & D Management, 33(2): 135-147.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. DEMO Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking. Management Science, 33:
DEMO
Markman, G. D., & Baron, R. A. 2003. Peron-entrepreneurship fit: Why some people are more successful as entre-
preneurs than others. Human DEMO Management Review, 134: 1-21.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
Zhao et al. / Relationship of Personality to Entrepreneurial Intentions
403
McClelland, D. 1961. The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
McCrae, R. R. 1987. Creativity, divergent thinking, and openness to experience. Journal of DEMO and Social
Psychology, 52: 1258-1265.
Meyer, G. J., Finn, DEMO E., Eyde, L. D., Kay, G. G., Moreland, K. L., Dies, R. R., et al. 2001. Psychological testing
and psychological assessment: A review of evidence and issues. American Psychologist, 56: 128-165.
Mill, J. S. 1848. Principles of political economy with some of their applications to social philosophy. Boston: C.C.
Little & Brown.
Miner, J. DEMO 1993. Role motivation theories. New York: Routledge.
Miner, J. B., & Raju, N. S. 2004. Risk propensity differences between managers and entrepreneurs DEMO between low
and high growth entrepreneurs: A reply in a more DEMO vein. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89: 3-13.
*Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Bracker, J. S. 1994. Role of entrepreneurial task motivation in the growth of techno-
logically innovative firms: Interpretations from follow-up data. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79: 627-630.
*Morris, J. L., & Fargher, K. 1974. Achievement drive and creativity as correlates of DEMO in small enterprises.
Australian Journal of Psychology, 26: 217-222.
*Morrison, DEMO A. 1997. How franchise job satisfaction and personality affects performance, organizational DEMO
ment, franchisor relations, and intention to remain. Journal of Small Business Management, 35(3): 39-67.
*Muller, G. F., & Cathrin, DEMO 2005. Personality types of entrepreneurs. Psychological Reports, 96: 737-746.
*Nelson, DEMO W., & Sharp, W. H. 1989. Locus of control and achievement of female proprietors of small businesses.
Psychological Reports, 65: 890.
Nicholson, N., Fenton-O’Creevy, M. P., Soane, E., & Willman, P. DEMO Personality and domain-specific risk-
taking. Journal of Risk Research, 8: 157-176.
Ones, D. S., Viswesvaran, C., & Reiss, A. D. 1996. Role of social desirability in personality testing for personnel
selection: The red herring. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81: 660-679.
*Pandey, J., & DEMO, N. B. 1979. Locus of control and achievement values of entrepreneurs. DEMO of
Occupational Psychology, 52: 107-111.
Paunonen, S. V., & Jackson, D. N. 1996. The Jackson Personality Inventory and the Five-Factor Model of person-
ality. Journal of Research in Personality, 30: 42-59.
Peterson, R. A., & Brown, S. P. 2005. On the use of beta DEMO in meta-analysis. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 90: 175-181.
*Poon, J. DEMO L., Ainuddin, R. A., & Junit, S. O. H. 2006. Effects of self-concept traits and entrepreneurial orienta-
tion on firm performance. International DEMO Business Journal, 24(1): 61-82.
*Ray, J. W. 1982. An empirical examination of the characteristics and attributes of entrepreneurs, franchise own-
ers, and managers engaged in retail ventures. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of DEMO Carolina,
Columbia.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. 2007. Born DEMO be an entrepreneur? Revisiting the personality approach to entrepreneurship.
In J. DEMO Baum, M. Frese, & R. A. Baron (Eds.), The DEMO of entrepreneurship: 41-65. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Roberts, B. W., Chernyshenko, O., Stark, S., & Goldberg, L. 2005. The structure of conscientiousness: An empirical
investigation based on seven major personality questionnaires. Personnel Psychology, 58: 103-139.
*Rodriguez, L. T. 2000. The wind beneath their wings: The moderating effects of social support on the entrepreneur
and entrepreneurial performance outcomes. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Nebraska.
Schein, E. 2004. DEMO culture and leadership (3rd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Schenker, DEMO, & Gentleman, J. F. 2001. On judging the significance of differences by examining the overlap
between confidence intervals. The American Statistician, 55: DEMO
*Schmitt-Rodermund, E., & Vondracek, F. W. 2002. Occupational dreams, choices and aspirations: Adolescents’
enterpreneurial prospects and orientations. Journal of Adolescence, 25(DEMO): 65-78.
Schneider, B. 1987. The people make the place. Personnel DEMO, 40: 437-453.
*Schreier, J. W. 1976. Identification and comparison of DEMO and personality profiles for college business stu-
dents based on background and intention for entrepreneurial activity. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Marquette University.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1942. Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. New York: Harper & Brothers. (Harper Colophon
edition, 1976)
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010
404
Journal of Management / March 2010
Shane, S., Locke, E. A., & Collins, C. J. 2003. Entrepreneurial Motivation. Human Resource Management DEMO,
13: 257-279.
*Singh, S. 1989. Personality characteristics, work values, and life styles of fast- and slow-progressing small-scale
industrial entrepreneurs. Journal of DEMO Psychology, 129: 801-805.
*Singh, G., & DeNoble, A. F. DEMO Views on self-employment and personality: An exploratory study. Journal of
Developmental DEMO, 8(3): 265-281.
Sitkin, S. B., & Weingart, L. R. 1995. Determinants of risky decision-making behavior: A test of the mediating role
of risk perceptions and risk propensity. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 1573-1592.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. 2001. Risk DEMO differences between entrepreneurs and managers: A meta-
analytic review. Journal of DEMO Psychology, 86: 145-153.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. DEMO 2004. Data quality affects meta-analytic conclusions: A response to Miner and DEMO
(2004) concerning entrepreneurial risk propensity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89: 14-21.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. 2007. A meta-analysis of achievement motivation differences between entrepreneurs
and managers. Journal of Small Business DEMO, 45: 401-421.
*Summers, D. F. 1998. An empirical investigation of DEMO and situational factors that relate to the formation
of entrepreneurial intentions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of North Texas.
*Tracy, K. B. 1993. Effects DEMO need for achievement, task motivation, goal-setting and planning on the performance
of the entrepreneurial firm. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland.
*Tullar, DEMO L. 2001. Russian entrepreneurial motive patterns: A validation of the Miner DEMO Completion Scale
in Russia. Applied Psychology, 50: 422-435.
*Utsch, A., & Rauch, A. 2000. Innovativeness and initiative as mediators between achievement orientation and
venture performance. European Journal of Work & Organizational Psychology, 9: DEMO
Vecchio, R. 2003. Entrepreneurship and leadership: Common trends and common threads. Human Resource
Management Review, 13(2): 303-327.
*Vella, N. 2001. DEMO attributes in Malta. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Maastricht School of
Management, The Netherlands.
Venkataraman, S. 1997. The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An DEMO perspective. In J. Katz
(Ed.), Advances in entrepreneurship, firm emergence, and growth (Vol. 3): 119-138. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.
DEMO, N., & Ramanujam, V. 1986. Measurement of business performance in DEMO research: A compari-
son of approaches. Academy of Management Review, 11:801-814.
Viswesvaran, C., & Ones, D. S. 1995. Theory testing: DEMO psychometric meta-analysis and structural equa-
tions modeling. Personnel Psychology, 48: 865-885.
Whitener, E. M. 1990. Confusion of confidence intervals and credibility intervals in meta-analysis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 75: 315-321.
*Wijbenga, F. H., & Witteloostuijn, A. V. 2000. Strategy and performance of venture capital-backed SMEs:DEMO
Entrepreneurial locus of control, and the role and influence of the DEMO capitalist. Unpublished report,
University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
*Yasin, M. 1996. Entrepreneurial effectiveness and achievement in Arab culture: New evidence to rekindle interest
in an old predictor. Journal of Business Research, 35(1): 69-77.
*Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. E. 2005. The mediating role of self-efficacy in the development of entrepre-
neurial DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 90: 1265-1272.
Zhao, H., & Seibert, S. E. 2006. The Big Five personality dimensions and entrepreneurial status: DEMO meta-analytical
review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91: 259-271.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on June 29, 2010{1g42fwefx}