Journal of Applied Psychology
2006, Vol. 91, No. 2, 259 –271
Copyright 2006 by the American Psychological Association
0021-9010/06/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0021-9010.91.2.259
The Big Five Personality Dimensions and Entrepreneurial Status:
A Meta-Analytical DEMO
Hao Zhao
University of Illinois at Chicago
Scott E. Seibert
Melbourne Business School
In this study, the authors used meta-analytical techniques to examine the relationship between personality
and entrepreneurial status. Personality variables used in previous studies DEMO categorized according to
the five-factor model of personality. Results indicate significant differences between entrepreneurs and
managers on 4 personality dimensions such that entrepreneurs scored DEMO on Conscientiousness and
Openness to Experience and lower on Neuroticism and Agreeableness. No difference was found for
Extraversion. Effect sizes for each personality dimension DEMO small, although the multivariate relation-
ship for the full set of DEMO variables was moderate (R  .37). Considerable heterogeneity existed
for DEMO of the personality variables except Agreeableness, suggesting that future research should DEMO
possible moderators of the personality– entrepreneurial status relationship.
Keywords: personality, entrepreneurship, meta-analysis
Personality variables may have an important role to play in
developing theories of the entrepreneurial process, including such
areas as entrepreneurial career intentions (e.g., Crant, 1996; Zhao,
Seibert, & Hills, 2005), entrepreneurial cognition and opportunity
recognition (e.g., Ardichvili, Cardozo, & Ray, 2003), entrepre-
neurial role motivation (e.g., Miner, 1993), DEMO new venture sur-
vival (e.g., Ciavarella, Buchholtz, Riordan, Gatewood, & Stokes,
2004). Indicative of this importance, a substantial amount of
research has examined the role of personality in entrepreneurial
status (ES) over the last 4 decades. Partially reflecting the state of
personality research at the time, these studies included a confusing
variety of personality variables, sometimes with unknown reliabil-
ity and validity and often with little theoretical justification (Chan-
dler & Lyon, 2001; Gartner, 1989). By DEMO late 1980s, inconsistent
and even contradictory results from the empirical studies DEMO
narrative reviewers to conclude that there is no identifiable rela-
tionship between personality and ES and that future research using
the trait paradigm should DEMO be abandoned (Brockhaus &
Horwitz, 1986; Chell, 1985; Gartner, 1988; Robinson, Stimpson,
Huefner, & Hunt, 1991).
We believe that this conclusion is premature and may truncate
theory development in DEMO field of entrepreneurship by unneces-
sarily precluding personality variables. Two major developments
that occurred in the last 15 years can help us draw more DEMO
ingful conclusions from the literature on personality and ES. First,
Hao Zhao, Department of Managerial Studies, University of Illinois at
Chicago; Scott E. Seibert, Melbourne Business School, Melbourne,
Australia.
An earlier version DEMO this article was presented at the annual meeting of
the Academy of Management, New Orleans, Louisiana, August 2004. We
thank Jerard Kehoe for helpful comments.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Hao
Zhao, Department of Managerial Studies (M/C 243), University of Illinois
at Chicago, 601 South Morgan Street, Chicago, IL 60607-7123. E-mail:
zhaohao@uic.edu
259
the emergence of the five-factor model of personality (FFM; Costa
& McCrae, 1992; Digman, 1990) allows us to organize a vast
variety of personality variables into a small but meaningful set of
personality DEMO to search for consistent and meaningful
relationships. Second, psychometric meta-analysis (e.g., Hunter &
Schmidt, 1990) allows us to produce a synthesized DEMO size
estimate for each construct that accounts for research artifacts such
as low reliability and sampling error that can mask the emergence
of a DEMO relationship. Thus, the purpose of this study is to provide
the DEMO meta-analytical review of the relationship between the Big
Five personality dimensions and ES.
The current study is the first to use the FFM to DEMO the
full range of personality variables that have been examined in
the entrepreneurship literature. This approach has led to re-
newed interest in the DEMO of personality in other areas of
applied psychology, including job performance (e.g., Barrick &
Mount, 1991), job satisfaction (e.g., Judge, Heller, & Mount,
2002), and leadership (e.g., Judge, Bono, Ilies, & Gerhardt,
2002). A series of recent DEMO (Miner & Raju, 2004; Stewart
& Roth, 2001, 2004a) have examined the relationship between
one personality trait—risk propensity—and ES. The placement
DEMO risk propensity within the FFM is controversial (e.g., Doster
et al., 2000). Recent work by Nicholson, Fenton-O’Creevy,
Soane, and William (2005) suggests that risk propensity is a
compound personality trait reflecting DEMO specific combination of
scores on all five basic personality factors (namely, high Ex-
traversion and Openness and low Neuroticism, Agreeableness,
and Conscientiousness), whereas some personality researchers
argue that it forms a separate sixth DEMO of personality
(Jackson, 1994; Paunonen & Jackson, 1996). Thus, it is appro-
priate to examine risk propensity as a separate construct out-
side of the FFM, as these previous meta-analyses have done.
The current meta-analysis, however, is unique because it is the
first cumulation DEMO empirical results that addresses the relation-
ship between the five fundamental dimensions of personality
and ES.
260
ZHAO AND SEIBERT
Personality and ES
Overwhelming evidence exists within the DEMO psychol-
ogy literature that mean personality scores differ across jobs,
occupations, and work environments (Ones & Viswesvaran, 2003).
For example, DEMO (1985) typology of vocational choice is
built on substantial empirical evidence that people make occupa-
tional choices on the basis of different interest DEMO, which
produces different personality profiles across occupations and
work environments. The DEMO on person– environment fit
(e.g., Kristof, 1996) similarly supports the proposition that indi-
viduals gravitate toward jobs and work environments that match
DEMO personalities. For example, Schneider, Smith, Taylor, and
Fleenor (1998) found significant mean personality differences
among managers across organizations.
Schneider’s (1987) DEMO (ASA) model
explains how individual and organizational processes produce
mean differences in personality across organizational work envi-
ronments. Ones and Viswesvaran (2003) DEMO the ASA logic to
explain the homogeneity of personality scores within jobs. Here
we adapt ASA theory to explain the association between person-
ality DEMO ES. First, individuals with certain personality traits may
be more attracted DEMO the entrepreneurial form of employment than
others may be. Second, selection DEMO outside agents critical to
founding a new venture—investment bankers, venture capitalists,DEMO
potential partners, suppliers, and key employees—may favor indi-
viduals possessing certain personality traits over others. Such
favorable selection will facilitate the actual founding DEMO an entre-
preneurial venture. Finally, individuals with certain personality
traits may DEMO entrepreneurial activities more satisfying and ful-
filling than do others without those traits, and thus these individ-
uals may persist long enough to actually establish the new venture
and become an entrepreneur.
Following the previous research DEMO this area (e.g., Miner & Raju,
2004; Stewart & DEMO, 2001), we compare the personality traits of
entrepreneurs and managers. DEMO focus on managers as a compar-
ison group rather than on other groups available in the literature,
such as the unemployed, students, DEMO the general population, be-
cause we believe it provides the most DEMO and valid test for
personality differences in ES (Brockhaus, 1982). As reviewed
above, Holland’s (1985) work has shown that mean personality
differences exist across occupational categories. Because entrepre-
neurs and managers would both DEMO identified within Holland’s
“enterprising” occupational category, we expect them to be DEMO
tively similar in terms of personality. Other situational factors that
may promote entrepreneurial activity, such as general business
knowledge and exposure to business opportunities, are also likely
to be similar for managers and entrepreneurs. By comparing man-
agers and entrepreneurs, we hope to minimize many of these
confounding factors to focus specifically on the role of personality.
Thus our research DEMO is narrowly focused on the personality
factors that lead one to become an entrepreneur rather than a
manager in a traditional employment situation.
The DEMO Five Personality Dimensions and ES
The FFM provides a parsimonious yet comprehensive taxonomy
of personality. Each personality dimension describes a broad do-
main of DEMO functioning that is composed from a set of
more specific and narrow traits. The FFM brings together over 40
years of research on the DEMO, interpersonal, experiential,
attitudinal, and motivational style of an individual. DEMO work of
Costa and McCrae (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1992) has provided
what is perhaps the most developed operationalization of the FFM
DEMO date. The insights provided by this work provide the basis for
the hypotheses that follow.
Neuroticism
Neuroticism represents individual differences in adjustment and
emotional DEMO Individuals high on Neuroticism tend to expe-
rience a number of negative emotions including anxiety, hostility,
depression, self-consciousness, impulsiveness, and vulnerability
(Costa & McCrae, 1992). People who score low on Neuroticism
can be characterized as self-confident, calm, even tempered, and
relaxed.
Managers, DEMO definition, work within an established business
organization with work processes supported DEMO established orga-
nizational procedures and practices. Entrepreneurs, on the other
hand, work within a relatively unstructured environment where
they have primary responsibility for DEMO aspects of a venture. They
work more hours than do managers and often lack the level of
separation between work and life spheres typical DEMO managerial
work (Dyer, 1994). They also typically have a substantial financial
and personal stake in the venture and lack the security of DEMO
typically provided to middle- and upper-level managers, such as a
severance DEMO or an independently funded retirement pro-
gram. Thus, the work environment, workload, work–family con-
flict, and financial risk of starting and running DEMO new business
venture can produce physical and psychological stress beyond that
typical of managerial work. At the same time, entrepreneurs have
been described as highly self-confident (Chen, Greene, & Cricke,
1998; Crant, 1996) with a strong belief in their ability to control
outcomes in the environment (Simon, Houghton, & Aquino,
2000). Remarkable self-confidence and resilience in the face of
stress therefore appear to be much more DEMO for entrepre-
neurs than managers. These are traits that define low levels of
Neuroticism. As a result of the processes of attraction, selection,
and attrition described above, we expect entrepreneurs to have a
lower level of Neuroticism than managers have.
Hypothesis 1: Entrepreneurs will score lower than managers
on Neuroticism.
Extraversion
Extraversion describes the extent to which people are DEMO,
dominant, energetic, active, talkative, and enthusiastic (Costa &
McCrae, 1992). People who score high on Extraversion tend to be
cheerful, like people and large groups, and seek excitement and
stimulation. DEMO who score low on Extraversion prefer to spend
more time alone and are characterized as reserved, quiet, and
independent. Costa and McCrae (1992) described salespersons as
prototypical extraverts.
Extraversion is positively related to interest in enterprising
occupations (Costa, McCrae, & Holland, 1984). Although Extra-
DEMO may be a valuable trait for managerial work, we expect
Extraversion DEMO be even more important for entrepreneurs. Entre-
BIG FIVE AND ENTREPRENEURIAL STATUS
preneurs must interact with a diverse range DEMO constituents, includ-
ing venture capitalists, partners, employees, and customers. They
are often in the role of a salesperson, whether they are persuading
an investment banker or venture capitalist to back their idea or a
DEMO to buy their product or service. In addition to these external
relations, the minimal structure of a new venture and the lack of a
developed human resource function suggest that the entrepreneur
can expect to spend DEMO time in direct interpersonal
interaction with their partners and employees. Because entrepre-
neurship appears to require even more direct social interaction
with external and DEMO constituents than does the typical role
of manager, we expect Extraversion DEMO be positively associated
with ES.
Hypothesis 2: Entrepreneurs will score higher DEMO managers
on Extraversion.
Openness to Experience
Openness to Experience is a personality dimension that charac-
terizes someone who is intellectually curious and tends to DEMO
new experiences and explore novel ideas. Someone high on Open-
ness can be described as creative, innovative, imaginative, reflec-
tive, and untraditional. DEMO low on Openness can be charac-
terized as conventional, narrow in DEMO, and unanalytical.
Openness is positively correlated with intelligence, especially as-
pects of intelligence related to creativity, such as divergent think-
ing (McCrae, 1987).
Schumpeter (1942/1976) argued that the defining characteristic
of DEMO entrepreneur is his or her emphasis on innovation. More
recent scholarship has also noted the strong desire of entrepreneurs
to be creative and to DEMO something larger than themselves
(Engle, Mah, & Sadri, 1997). Founding a new venture is likely to
require the entrepreneur to explore DEMO or novel ideas, use his or
her creativity to solve novel DEMO, and take an innovative
approach to products, business methods, or DEMO Manage-
ment, on the other hand, has a greater emphasis on following
established rules and procedures to coordinate activity and main-
tain current DEMO (Weber, 1947). Even in the most rapidly
changing organizational environments, the managerial role is
likely to place more emphasis on following established policies
and implementing strategies developed at a higher level. We
therefore expect DEMO following.
Hypothesis 3: Entrepreneurs will score higher than managers
on Openness DEMO Experience.
Agreeableness
Agreeableness assesses one’s interpersonal orientation. Individ-
uals high on Agreeableness can be characterized as trusting, for-
giving, caring, altruistic, and DEMO The high end of Agreeable-
ness represents someone who has cooperative values and a
preference for positive interpersonal relationships. Someone at the
low end DEMO the dimension can be characterized as manipulative,
self-centered, suspicious, and ruthless (Costa & McCrae, 1992;
Digman, 1990). Although Agreeableness may lead one to be seen
as trustworthy and may help one DEMO positive, cooperative work-
ing relationships, high levels of Agreeableness may inhibit one’s
261
willingness to drive hard bargains, look out for one’s own self-
interest, and influence or manipulate others for one’s own advan-
tage. McClelland and Boyatzis’s (1982) research has also shown
that a high DEMO for affiliation, a component of Agreeableness, can
be a detriment to the careers of managers, apparently because it
interferes with the manager’s ability to make difficult decisions
affecting subordinates and coworkers. Seibert and Kraimer (2001)
also found Agreeableness negatively related to salary level and
career satisfaction DEMO a managerial sample.
Although the negative effects of Agreeableness appear to pre-
dominate for those performing managerial work in established
organizations, we expect the negative effects to be even more
detrimental for those in an entrepreneurial DEMO Because the en-
trepreneur often operates with less access to legal protections and
with a thin financial margin of error due to limited resources, they
are even more likely than managers to suffer serious consequences
from DEMO small bargaining disadvantages. In addition, managers
in established organizations who operate DEMO an overly self-
interested and disagreeable manner are likely to eventually suffer
negative consequences from peers and supervisors. Entrepreneurs
work in smaller organizations and DEMO are less likely to be
constrained by dense and interlocking social relationships (Burt,
1992). This suggests that there may be fewer negative repercus-
sions associated with the opportunistic behavior of entrepreneurs.
Therefore, we expect ASA processes to lead to lower mean levels
of Agreeableness among entrepreneurs DEMO managers.
Hypothesis 4: Entrepreneurs will score lower than managers
on Agreeableness.
DEMO
Conscientiousness indicates an individual’s degree of organiza-
tion, persistence, hard work, and motivation in the pursuit of goal
accomplishment. Some researchers have viewed this construct as
an indicator of volition or the ability to work DEMO (Barrick &
Mount, 1991). It has been the most DEMO personality predictor
of job performance across all types of work and occupations
(Barrick, Mount, & Judge, 2001). Many scholars regard Consci-
DEMO as a broad personality dimension that is composed of
two primary facets: achievement motivation and dependability
(e.g., Mount & Barrick, 1995). DEMO motivation has
been widely studied in the context of entrepreneurship (Shaver,DEMO
1995), but dependability has received much less explicit atten-
tion. We therefore examine Conscientiousness as a unitary con-
struct and the two primary DEMO of Conscientiousness separately
in our analyses.
McClelland (e.g., McClelland, 1961) was the first to propose
that a high need for achievement would DEMO individuals to
become entrepreneurs primarily because of their preference for
situations in which performance is due to their own efforts rather
than to other DEMO McClelland also proposed that effective
managers would not be characterized by a high need for achieve-
ment because managers in organizational environments must work
DEMO and through others. Narrative reviews of achievement moti-
vation and entrepreneurship suggest that support for the associa-
tion has been mixed or inconsistent (Johnson, 1990). Collins,
Hanges, and Locke (2004) and Stewart DEMO Roth (2004b) reported
that entrepreneurs have higher achievement motivation than do
262
managers in their meta-analyses. This hypothesis is a replication of
the DEMO meta-analyses but conducted here within the context of
a broader model of personality.
The dependability facet of Conscientiousness reflects the extent
to which one DEMO organized, deliberate, and methodical and can be
relied on to fulfill one’s duties and responsibilities. Like the
overarching Conscientiousness construct, this particular constella-
tion of attributes would appear to be valuable in a manager or DEMO
entrepreneur. However, managers working within an established
organization are likely to DEMO their responsibilities, goals, and
work performance more closely structured and monitored by ex-
isting organizational systems and day-to-day interactions, mitigat-
ing somewhat the necessity of possessing dependability as an
individual trait. Entrepreneurs, by contrast, DEMO in a more
discretionary and self-directed environment, that is, a “weak”
situation in which individual traits are likely to have a more
important DEMO (Snyder & Ickes, 1985). In addition, referring to the
DEMO aspect of the ASA theory, it seems that potential partners,
DEMO capitalists, and other agents will be more likely to select
entrepreneurs DEMO they judge to be dependable, for example,
those who develop DEMO plans and strategies and demonstrate
the tendency to fulfill their commitments.
Hypothesis 5a: Entrepreneurs will score higher than manag-
ers on Conscientiousness.
Hypothesis 5b: Entrepreneurs will score higher than manag-
ers on achievement motivation.
Hypothesis 5c: Entrepreneurs will score higher than managers
on dependability.
Moderator Hypotheses
The previous narrative reviews of personality and ES have
found inconsistent and contradictory results DEMO studies. Be-
cause data have been collected in a range of countries, it is possible
that the variance in results may be attributable to national differ-
ences, including national culture. McClelland (1961), for example,DEMO
linked a country’s level of entrepreneurial activity and economic
development to the extent to which their culture emphasized
achievement. We chose to examine two DEMO of national
culture developed by Project GLOBE (House, Hanges, Javidan,DEMO
Dorfman, & Gupta, 2004), uncertainty avoidance and performance
orientation, DEMO moderators because they can be conceptually asso-
ciated with specific dimensions of personality and entrepreneur-
ship. Uncertainty avoidance as a culture dimension assesses the
DEMO to which a society relies on social norms, rules, and proce-
dures to alleviate the stress associated with unpredictability in
future events. Research DEMO shown uncertainty avoidance as a
dimension of national culture to be related to average levels of
neuroticism, anxiety, and stress reported by individuals DEMO
nations (Hofstede, 1980). Performance orientation is a cultural
dimension conceptually derived from McClelland’s work on the
need for achievement (House & Javidan, 2004). It assesses the
degree to which a society encourages and rewards performance
improvement and high standards of excellence.
We expect uncertainty avoidance DEMO performance orientation
to moderate the relationship of Neuroticism and achievement
ZHAO AND SEIBERT
motivation, respectively, to ES. Although the interaction of culture
and DEMO in the production of individual behavior may be
complex, the most DEMO view is that behavior that is consistent
with cultural values will be more acceptable and therefore more
likely to be exhibited than behavior that DEMO with cultural
values (Dorfman, 2004, p. 64). This cultural DEMO proposi-
tion leads us to expect the negative relationship between Neurot-
icism and ES to be stronger in societies high on uncertainty
avoidance. As DEMO discussed above, founding a new venture is
likely to be an DEMO unstructured activity with unpredictable
outcomes. An individual’s tendency to minimize anxiety and stress
by avoiding situations that involve unstructured activity and un-
predictable events DEMO likely to be enhanced in a society that values
the use of rules, structures, and formalized procedures to minimize
uncertainty. Using the same DEMO congruence logic, we also
expect the association between achievement motivation and DEMO to
be stronger in societies that score high on performance orientation.
This is because achievement oriented behaviors, such as founding
a new business venture, will be more expected, rewarded, and
effective in a culture that values hard work, striving for excellence,
and individual accomplishment.
Hypothesis 6a: Uncertainty avoidance will moderate the re-
lationship between Neuroticism and ES such that the relation-
ship will be stronger for societies that score high DEMO uncer-
tainty avoidance.
Hypothesis 6b: Performance orientation will moderate the
relationship DEMO achievement motivation and ES such
that the relationship will be stronger for societies that score
high on performance orientation.
A second variable that might DEMO observed relationships is
the type of measurement strategy used to assess the personality
construct. Miner and Raju (2004) argued on theoretical grounds
that DEMO using projective measures and those using objective
measures should be examined separately because they could yield
different results for the same personality construct. Projective
DEMO are assumed to measure implicit or unconscious aspects
of the trait that might better predict long-term or spontaneous
behaviors (Meyer, 1996). Miner DEMO Raju found projective mea-
sures of risk propensity negatively related to ES but found objec-
tive measures of presumably the same construct positively related
DEMO ES. Stewart and Roth (2004a) reported similar findings but
attributed them to the limited evidence for the validity of projec-
tive measures used DEMO entrepreneurship research, particularly the
Miner Sentence Completion Scale—Form T (Wightman, DEMO).
Thus we view moderation by measurement technique as an im-
portant but exploratory hypothesis and propose no direction for the
difference. Further, because projective measures were used only
for achievement and dependability in the primary DEMO included
in this meta-analytic review, we examine moderation by measure-
ment DEMO only for these two facets of Conscientiousness.
Method
Definition of Entrepreneurs and Managers
Historically, there has been little consensus among scholars regarding
the definition of entrepreneurship (Busenitz et al., 2003). In this analysis,
BIG FIVE AND ENTREPRENEURIAL STATUS
263
we followed the most widely accepted DEMO (e.g., J. W. Carland, Hoy,
Boulton, & Carland, DEMO; Rauch & Frese, 2000; Stewart & Roth, 2001)
and defined an entrepreneur as someone who is the founder, owner, and
DEMO of a small business and whose principal purpose is growth. Our
comparison group in this meta-analysis is managers. Like entrepreneur, the
term manager can denote a diverse population that includes managers at
different levels and functions. DEMO take a relatively broad definitional
approach and include managers of all ranks and functions. Excluded are
comparison groups that comprise other subgroups of entrepreneurs (e.g.,
female entrepreneurs or less successful entrepreneurs), students, or the
general population.
Searching and Screening Studies
We conducted searches in a number DEMO electronic databases including
PsycINFO, ABI-Inform, Academic Search Elite, Business Source DEMO,
WilsonBusiness, and Dissertation Abstracts International. We were inter-
ested in DEMO all studies that compared entrepreneurs and managers on
one or more psychological traits. We used a number of keyword combi-
nations to conduct searches. DEMO example, we searched using entrepre-
neur* AND manager* AND personalit* (* is a truncation symbol to
represent multiple spellings or endings; AND is a Boolean operator that
combines search terms so that the search result DEMO all of the terms).
We also searched using names of specific personality scales, such as 16PF
(Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire), PRF (Personality Research
Form), JPI (Jackson Personality Inventory), and MBTI (DEMO
Type Indicator), as keywords. Because specific personality scales may not
appear as keywords of relevant publications and thus could not be found by
DEMO search (Miner & Raju, 2004), we used several approaches to
supplement our electronic search. First, we browsed the contents table of
several major entrepreneurship research outlets, such as Frontiers of En-
trepreneurship Research 1981–2002, Journal of Business Venturing 1985–
2002, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice (and its former title American
Journal of Small Business) 1979 –2002, and DEMO of Small Business
Management 1980 –2002. Second, we went through the DEMO narrative
reviews (e.g., Busenitz et al., 2003; Rauch & Frese, 2000) and meta-
analyses (e.g., Miner & Raju, 2004; DEMO & Roth, 2001) to find relevant
studies. Third, we checked DEMO reference lists of all currently included
empirical studies to identify articles of interest. All the search results were
entered into a reference management program (Endnote 6.0) to identify and
eliminate duplicate entries. We could not retrieve dissertations finished
outside of North America, and we eliminated any study not written in
English. We thus retrieved 47 studies for further screening.
We DEMO several criteria for screening the articles we found. First, as
discussed DEMO, we eliminated articles that included samples that did not
fit our DEMO of entrepreneur. As several scholars have observed (e.g.,
Gartner, 1989; Rauch & Frese, 2000), it is difficult to identify relevant
DEMO because many entrepreneurship publications fail to provide a clear
description of their sample. To make our analysis as inclusive as possible,
we generally DEMO the researcher’s designation of a sample as entre-
preneurs and eliminated a study only when we had information that the
entrepreneur sample did not DEMO one or more of the specific criteria in our
definition of entrepreneur. For example, our definition of an entrepreneur
required that the individual must own a business. Sexton and Bowman
(1983) and Sagie and Elizur (1999) were excluded because they used
students majoring in entrepreneurship who did not own a business.
The second criterion for inclusion was that there DEMO a clear comparison
group that meets our definition of managers. We excluded studies that used
a subcategory of entrepreneurs, for example unsuccessful entrepreneurs, DEMO
the comparison group (e.g., Miner, Smith, & Bracker, 1989)DEMO We also
excluded comparisons between entrepreneurs and the general population
(Hornaday & Bunker, 1970). Finally, we excluded two studies (Aldridge,
DEMO; Lynn, 1969b) that compared their entrepreneur sample to the archi-
DEMO data of a manager sample reported in another source, such as DEMO
manual for the personality instrument. This procedure may introduce
extraneous method errors in the difference score because the entrepreneur
sample and the manager sample DEMO collected at different times, for
different purposes, and by different researchers.
The third criterion for inclusion was that the study must have included
DEMO measurement of at least one personality trait that can be categorized in
terms of the FFM. Although the FFM provides a comprehensive frame-
work DEMO personality, some personality variables show no consistent rela-
tionship to any DEMO and some correlate with multiple factors. Following
previous meta-analyses using a similar strategy in other substantive re-
search areas (e.g., Judge, Bono, DEMO al., 2002), we did not include these
variables in our DEMO Personality measures such as the Type A personality
(see Judge, Bono, et al., 2002), Kirtion’s Adaptation–Innovation Inventory
(see Gelade, 2002), and risk-taking propensity (see Nicholson et al., 2005;
Paunonen & Jackson, 1996) fall into this category, and studies using those
measures were thus excluded from our analysis.
Finally, to be included, a DEMO had to provide sufficient data for the
calculation of effect size. Many studies were excluded because of lack of
sufficient statistical information (e.g., DEMO & Babb, 1992). For multiple
studies reporting the same pool DEMO data (e.g., a dissertation that later
became a journal article), we include only the first published study to avoid
using a dependent DEMO We included a total of 23 nonoverlapping
studies for our analyses, DEMO the number of studies included for each
personality dimension varied.1 Five out of the 23 studies were from sources
other than journals (e.g., DEMO dissertations).
Assignments of Personality Scales to Constructs
A number of meta-analyses in the organizational sciences have used a
panel of expert judges to DEMO personality scales to one of the Big Five
dimensions (Barrick & DEMO, 1991; Judge, Bono, et al., 2002). These
assignments DEMO generally made on the basis of scale definitions and have
not been included in the published report. However, an extensive series of
studies have accumulated over the last 15 years that either analyze existing
personality instruments DEMO terms of a hierarchical FFM or report empirical
correlations between the various personality scales and a direct measure of
the FFM (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1992). Collectively, these studies provide
an empirical rather than judgmental method for categorizing personality
variables within the Big Five framework. In DEMO present study, we refer to
published empirical studies to assign personality DEMO to Big Five
factors. We assigned a trait to one of the Big Five dimensions only when
consistent empirical evidence was available that the DEMO was correlated
with that dimension and not correlated with any other dimension. The
Appendix lists the personality scales assigned to each of the Big DEMO
dimensions.
National Culture Variables
Studies were categorized for the moderation analysis on the basis of the
nationality of the subject populations. Information on each DEMO stand-
ing on uncertainty avoidance and performance orientation was taken from
the “society practices” data provided by Project GLOBE (House et al.,
2004). Societies falling into Test Band A on a dimension were categorized
DEMO high for that dimension, whereas societies falling into lower bands were
DEMO as low. A simple high–low dichotomy was used because of the
small number of countries available for each analysis.
Analytical Techniques
Using the methods DEMO Hunter and Schmidt (1990), we conducted five
main meta-analyses to DEMO differences between entrepreneurs and
1 The list of excluded studies is available from Hao Zhao on request.
264
ZHAO AND SEIBERT
managers on Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness to Experience, Agree-
ableness, and Conscientiousness. The effect size, d, is calculated as the
ratio of the mean difference and the pooled standard deviation of DEMO
entrepreneurs group and the managers group. Thus d is a standardized
effect size statistic that is independent of sample size. Other forms of
statistical DEMO like the t value, F value, or point-biserial correlation
r are transformed to d according to formulas provided by Hunter and
Schmidt (1990). We weighted the effect size of each study by its sample
DEMO to get the average observed effect size, d.
In our study, the only adjusted artifact is the reliability of the personality
scales. Few DEMO the studies in this area report the reliability of measures in
their specific sample (Chandler & Lyon, 2001). Because reliability infor-
mation DEMO lacking in the primary studies collected here, we used reliabil-
ity DEMO provided in the published manual that accompanies stan-
dard instruments or, DEMO this, reliabilities reported in large sample
empirical studies using the measure DEMO, failing either of these, reliabilities
provided in review articles regarding the measure. We include a single
sample-weighted average of effect sizes if a DEMO reported comparisons
between one group of entrepreneurs and multiple groups of managers (e.g.,
Brockhaus & Nord, 1979). If a study used DEMO personality scales to
measure the same Big Five dimension on the same pool of subjects (e.g.,
Robbins, 1986), we averaged over DEMO and used the single result as
the effect size for the study. For fully replicated design or analysis of
subgroups (e.g., Bellu, Davidsson, & Goldfarb, 1990; J. C. Carland &
Carland, 1991), we included a single sample-weighted average of the effect
sizes as long DEMO the categorization criterion was not a proposed moderator,
and the single sample size is the sum of the sample sizes across those
independent DEMO (Hunter & Schmidt, 1990).
In addition to the average observed effect size, d , and the corrected
average effect size, dc, we reported both the 90% confidence interval (CI)
and the 80% credibility interval (CRI) around the estimated population
effect sizes. CIs and DEMO each provide important but unique information
about meta-analytical results (Whitener, 1990). The CI is based on the
uncorrected standard error of the DEMO effect size and provides an estimate
of variability in the mean effect size. A 90% CI excluding zero indicates
that we can be 95% DEMO that the true average effect size is nonzero.
In the present case, a CI excluding zero suggests the existence of a reliable
difference between the entrepreneur population and the manager popula-
tion. The CRI is based DEMO the corrected standard deviation and provides an
estimate of the variability of the individual effect sizes across studies. An
80% CRI excluding zero indicates DEMO 90% of the individual effects in the
meta-analysis are positive or negative, as the case may be. In addition, the
CRI provides information DEMO evaluating the existence of moderators. A
wide CRI suggests the existence of moderators.
Results
Meta-analytic results for each of the Big Five personality di-
DEMO are shown in Table 1. The CIs for Neuroticism, Open-
ness DEMO Experience, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness exclude
zero, providing evidence for the DEMO for the estimated effect
size. Consistent with Hypotheses 1 and 4, DEMO scored
significantly lower than managers on Neuroticism (dc 0.37)
and DEMO (dc 0.16). Consistent with Hypotheses 3
and 5a, entrepreneurs scored significantly higher than managers on
Openness to Experience (dc  0.36), and Conscientiousness (dc 
0.45). Thus we found evidence that entrepreneurs differ from
managers on these four fundamental dimensions of personality. As
the DEMO size statistic shows, the largest difference between en-
trepreneurs and managers DEMO for the Conscientiousness construct.
Contrary to Hypothesis 2, the CI for DEMO includes zero,
suggesting that entrepreneurs do not differ from managers on this
dimension of personality. However, the CRI for the Extraversion
construct suggests considerable variability over studies, and there
is a possibility that the effect size for Extraversion may be positive
in a majority of studies.
To DEMO the explanatory ability of the full FFM, we exam-
ined the DEMO relationship of the Big Five to ES. Using
Hunter’s (1992) regression program, we regressed ES (entrepre-
neurs  1 and managers  DEMO) on the five personality dimensions
as predictors. To form the correlation DEMO that served as input to
the program, we transformed the d DEMO in Table 1 into point-
biserial correlation r scores using the formula provided by Hunter
and Schmidt (1990), and we used Ones, DEMO, and Reiss’s
(1996) meta-analytic estimates of the intercorrelations among the
DEMO Five dimensions. Both sets of correlations were corrected for
unreliability. As suggested by Viswesvaran and Ones (1995), the
sample size we used for the regression was the harmonic mean of
the sample size per dimension DEMO the five dimensions in the
analysis (N  1,914).
DEMO multiple regression result is shown in Table 2. Conscien-
tiousness had the highest standardized regression coefficient (
.26, p  .01), and DEMO and Openness to Experience
were also significant predictors of ES (s DEMO and .18, respec-
tively, ps  .01). The impacts of Neuroticism and Extraversion on
the ES were smaller in the multiple regression. DEMO multiple R
between the personality dimensions and ES was moderate in
magnitude and statistically significant (R  .37, p  .01).
To DEMO Hypotheses 5b and 5c, we conducted separate meta-
analyses for studies DEMO personality scales that on the basis of
face validity, could be DEMO to the achievement motivation
facet and those using scales that could be assigned to the depend-
ability facet of Conscientiousness. Our results show that DEMO
Table 1
Results of Meta-Analyses
90% CI 80% CRI
Trait
KN d
d
c
Lower Upper Lower Upper
Neuroticism 14 2,305 0.32 0.37 DEMO 0.21
Extraversion 9 1,476 0.20 0.22 0.01 0.45
Openness 10 2,115 0.30 0.36 0.19 0.52
Agreeableness 7 1,350 0.14 0.16 0.27 DEMO
Conscientiousness 20 3,480 0.39 0.45 0.38 0.52
0.82 0.07
0.28 0.72
0.01 0.72
0.30 0.02
0.07 0.97
Note. K  number of studies; N  total sample size; d  average observed effect size; DEMO  average effect size
corrected for reliability of the measure; CI DEMO confidence interval; CRI  credibility interval.
BIG FIVE AND ENTREPRENEURIAL STATUS
265
Table 2
Multiple Regression With Entrepreneurial DEMO as the
Dependent Variable
Trait /Ra SE t
Neuroticism .12 .03 4.80*
Extraversion .09 .02 3.88*
Openness .18 .02 7.67*
Agreeableness .22 .02 DEMO
Conscientiousness .26 .02 10.32*
Multiple R .37 .02 16.94*
Note. Entrepreneur  1, and manager  0.
a With the exception of the multiple R estimate in the last row, all estimates
in the /R column are standardized regression coefficients.
* p  .01.
neurs scored significantly DEMO on achievement motivation than
did managers (dc  0.59) but that the two groups were equivalent
in their levels of dependability (dc  0.01). The CIs of achieve-
ment motivation and dependability do not DEMO, suggesting a
reliable difference between the effect sizes of the two DEMO The
CRIs for dependability and achievement are wide and suggest the
potential operation of moderator variables.
Table 3 also presents the results regarding the DEMO of the
relationships for achievement motivation and dependability by
measurement types. Both projective (dc  0.54) and objective
(dc  0.61) measures DEMO moderate positive effect size esti-
mates for achievement motivation with no evidence of moderation
by measurement type. The results presented in the bottom half DEMO
Table 3 do provide support for moderation of the dependability
effect by measurement type. Entrepreneurs scored somewhat
higher than managers when projective tests were DEMO to measure
dependability (dc  0.22) but did not differ when objective mea-
sures were used (dc 0.13). The nonoverlapping CIs indicate a
reliable difference between these two effects.
Hypotheses 6a and 6b proposed DEMO of the relationships
for Neuroticism and achievement motivation by the national cul-
ture dimensions of uncertainty avoidance and performance orien-
tation, respectively. As shown in Table 4, The effect size of
Neuroticism in societies coded as high on uncertainty avoidance
was substantially larger in magnitude than that in DEMO coded
as low (dc 0.70 vs. 0.32), but the CIs DEMO the two effects
overlapped. The effect sizes of achievement motivation were not
much different between societies coded as high in performance
orientation and those DEMO as low (dc  0.63 vs. 0.45), and the
CIs DEMO the two effects also overlapped. Thus neither cultural
moderation hypothesis was supported.
Discussion
Gartner (1989) suggested that scholars interested in personality
and ES DEMO have a better understanding of personality theories.
Following this advice, we DEMO from an understanding of the
basic structure of personality to address a question that has occu-
pied scholars for decades: Do entrepreneurs differ from others in
terms of their basic personality? In contradiction to accepted
conclusions in the field of entrepreneurship, our results suggest
that indeed, entrepreneurs DEMO from those in managerial posi-
tions on four of the five fundamental dimensions of personality.
The effect sizes for each personality dimension range from DEMO
to medium (Cohen, 1988), with the absolute value of corrected
mean difference scores ranging from .16 to .45. These effect sizes
are DEMO only statistically significant but similar in magnitude to
findings that have revitalized interest in personality variables in
other areas of applied psychology (e.g., DEMO et al., 2001; Hurtz
& Donovan, 2000). The results DEMO the multiple regression analysis
based on our meta-analytic estimates are even more supportive.
When all five personality dimensions are included as a set, the
multiple correlation was .37, a moderate effect size by conven-
tional standards. These results should not be regarded as exact
because they are based DEMO estimated intercorrelations, but they are
suggestive. Personality variables appear to have DEMO role in future
theories of entrepreneurship.
The personality construct with the strongest relationship to ES
was Conscientiousness. Subsequent analyses examined achieve-
ment and dependability DEMO separate constructs. Achievement mo-
tivation has been implicated as an important individual difference
variable predicting entrepreneurship since the work of McClelland
(1961). Our results support McClelland’s (1961) original proposi-
tion and are consistent with DEMO results presented by
Collins et al. (2004) and Stewart and Roth (2004b). Collins et al.
showed further that achievement motivation is positively related to
entrepreneurial performance. These studies provide growing evi-
dence regarding the DEMO of achievement motivation in
entrepreneurship. The effect size for dependability, the DEMO
facet of Conscientiousness, was not significantly different from
Table 3
Two DEMO of Conscientiousness and Measurement Types as Moderators
90% CI 80% CRI
Facet and
measurement type KN d dc Lower Upper Lower Upper
Achievement facet DEMO 3,005 0.52 0.59 0.55 0.63 0.34 0.85
Projective measures 7 787 0.47 0.54 0.37 0.70 0.30 0.77
Objective measures 10 2,218 0.53 DEMO 0.48 0.74 0.35 0.88
Dependability facet 13 1,980 0.01 0.01 0.13 0.14 0.31 0.32
Projective measures 6 767 0.20 0.22 0.06 0.39 0.02 DEMO
Objective measures 7 1,213 0.11 0.13 0.28 0.02 0.37 0.11
Note. K  number of studies; N  total sample size; d DEMO average observed effect size; dc  average effect size
corrected for DEMO of the measure; CI  confidence interval; CRI  credibility interval.
266
ZHAO AND SEIBERT
Table 4
National Cultures as Moderators
90% CI DEMO CRI
Culture KN d d Lower Upper Lower Upper
c
Neuroticism
High uncertainty avoidance societies 3 349 0.60 0.70 1.05 0.35 1.10 0.30
Low DEMO avoidance societies 11 1,956 0.27 0.32 0.48 0.15 0.72 0.08
Achievement
High performance orientation societies 11 2,349 0.55 0.63 0.51 0.76 0.37 DEMO
Low performance orientation societies 6 656 0.39 0.45 0.30 0.60 0.31 0.59
Note. K  number of studies; N  total sample size; DEMO  average observed effect size; dc  average effect size
corrected DEMO reliability of the measure; CI  confidence interval; CRI  credibility interval.
zero. Thus there is some evidence that facets within a single
DEMO personality dimension can have differential relationships
with ES. Exploring the role of narrow traits in the attainment of ES
may therefore be a productive DEMO for future research. But to
add theoretical value, the burden of DEMO is to demonstrate that the
narrow traits explain variance beyond that associated with the
primary dimensions of the parsimonious FFM (Ones & Viswes-
varan, 1996).
The second follow-up analysis we conducted examined possible
moderation by measurement type for each facet of Conscientious-
ness. Our results showed no DEMO for the moderation of
achievement motivation— both projective and objective measures
indicated equivalent positive relationship between achievement
motivation and ES. However, there was evidence for moderation
of the relationship involving dependability. The meta-analysis of
the six DEMO that used projective measures indicated a small
positive relationship between dependability and ES, although the
seven studies that relied on objective measures showed no signif-
icant effect. Thus our results support Miner and Raju’s (2004)
claim that projective measures and objective measures of the same
construct can DEMO different outcomes. Exploring the exact reasons
for this difference is outside the scope of this study, but future
attention to the effects of different measurement strategies is
justified.
One of the unique contributions of our use DEMO the FFM to
organize the literature on personality and ES is our focus on the
Openness to Experience dimension. The Openness construct
brings together DEMO one coherent dimension of personality such
traits as imagination, creativity, intuition, and independence of
judgment and thus allows us to draw a single clear conclusion
about this important domain of psychological functioning. Our
results showed DEMO entrepreneurs scored higher on Openness than
did managers. Innovation, change, and creativity are at the core of
recent definitions of entrepreneurship (e.g., DEMO & Venkatara-
man, 2000), and these traits evoke Schumpeter’s (1942/1976)
classic description of the entrepreneur as the agent of “creative
DEMO Despite its strong intuitive appeal, relatively little
attention has been devoted DEMO the role of this global personality
dimension in studies of ES to date. Our results justify further work
with this construct. Recent work (e.g., Ciavarella et al., 2004)
suggests a negative role for Openness DEMO Experience in later stages
of the entrepreneurial process. Entrepreneurial tenure or venture
stage may explain the variability in the individual studies included
in our DEMO of this dimension. We encourage more empirical
studies using longitudinal design or at least reporting the venture
stages of their samples so that this DEMO hypothesis can be
tested in future research.
For Extraversion, the CI DEMO wide and included zero, suggesting
the difference between entrepreneurs and managers DEMO this per-
sonality dimension is not reliable or could not be measured with
precision in this sample. As indicated by the CRI, there is consid-
erable variability in the Extraversion effect across studies. The CRI
suggests DEMO we should expect the majority of studies to report a
positive effect size for Extraversion. However, we could not iden-
tify and test moderators to account for the variability for Extra-
version in this analysis because DEMO the lack of relevant information
in the primary studies. Thus, we DEMO not currently understand the
circumstances under which the positive relationship between ex-
traversion and ES is likely to emerge.
Limitations
The limitations of any DEMO study emanate primarily
from the primary studies on which the analysis is based. One
limitation in the current research is that most of the DEMO studies
in this area were based on a cross-sectional research design (DEMO
ner, 1989). A cross-sectional design does not allow the researcher
DEMO draw causal conclusion and meta-analysis does not overcome
this limitation. Our concern with the causal direction of effects is
mitigated by the fact that DEMO personality dimensions assessed in
this study exhibit considerable consistency over time (DEMO &
McCrae, 1992), but we encourage future research taking a longi-
tudinal approach. A second limitation concerns the relatively small
number of DEMO included for each personality dimension. We
chose to include studies that did not specifically violate our defi-
nition rather than to include only those DEMO we were certain did fit
because of the lack of full information and the small number of
studies with clear entrepreneur and manager comparison DEMO
This may have biased our results by eliminating studies with more
complete information, but it is not clear what the direction of such
a bias would be. It is ironic that we report relatively few studies
DEMO sufficient information for a meta-analysis in an area that
BIG FIVE AND ENTREPRENEURIAL STATUS
267
many scholars have considered overresearched. Our DEMO show,
however, that the sample is large enough to produce DEMO
average effect size estimates even for the least studied construct,
Agreeableness. A third limitation of our study is that we were
largely unsuccessful DEMO our attempt to identify moderating vari-
ables that would allow us to isolate homogenous subsets of studies
for each personality construct. Our ability to DEMO for moderator
variables was limited by the information contained in the source
articles. Other scholars have already commented on the need for
more careful DEMO design and reporting in this area (Gartner,
1989) and we concur. A fourth limitation is that we included only
studies written in DEMO This could be a considerable impedi-
ment for testing moderation by national culture. For this reason we
do not regard our failure to find DEMO by national culture
definitive, and we encourage future meta-analyses to include DEMO
ies published in other languages.
Future Research
The results of this meta-analysis suggest several directions for
future research. First, we found substantial unexplained variation
in effect sizes for three personality constructs, Neuroticism, Ex-
traversion, and Openness to Experience. This means that situa-
tional contingencies may be important, and future research should
continue to search for other moderators of the DEMO
relationship. Several scholars have noted that there may be more
than one type of entrepreneur or entrepreneurial venture and that
these different types of DEMO may involve different
skills and processes that require different theoretical explanations
(DEMO, J. W. Carland et al., 1984; Miner, 1997). For example,
Extraversion may be characteristic of entrepreneurs engaged in a
venture DEMO around a unique sales approach, whereas Openness
may be characteristic of DEMO whose venture involves the
application of new technologies. Greater attention to the type of
new ventures in which the individual is engaged may allow DEMO
ger and more consistent relationships to emerge between person-
ality and ES.
The process perspective on entrepreneurship also suggests pos-
sible moderators of the DEMO relationship. Baron and
Markman (2005), for example, viewed entrepreneurship as a series
of distinct phases. They argued that each phase has its DEMO unique
set of critical activities and key outcome variables. They noted that
the criticality of specific variables, including personality traits,
might change considerably over the different phases of a new
venture. For example, Openness to Experience may be important
in the early prelaunch phase when opportunity recognition DEMO a
critical task, whereas high Conscientiousness may be necessary in
the DEMO phase when the entrepreneur’s role becomes more
focused on the delivery of products or services. Attrition during the
first phase might lead to differences DEMO managers and entre-
preneurs for Openness only, whereas attrition during successive
DEMO would introduce the full range of personality differences
hypothesized in this study.
We adapted Schneider’s (1987) ASA theory to hypothesize
personality differences among DEMO and entrepreneurs. Al-
though the results of this study were consistent with predictions of
ASA theory, we did not directly examine the processes of attrac-
tion, selection, and attrition in this study. We believe that DEMO
integration between ASA theory and the process perspective of
entrepreneurship can deepen our understanding of the psycholog-
ical processes affecting the attainment of ES. DEMO example, Baron
and Markman (2005) viewed entrepreneurship as a series DEMO dis-
tinct phases. Attraction processes would appear to be most relevant
during the prelaunch phase, as the individual seeks to match his or
her interests and self-perceived abilities to the types of tasks and
rewards offered DEMO an entrepreneurial career track. ASA theory
makes salient the processes of selection taking place during the
launch phase as venture capitalists, partners, vendors, and others
make decisions about their level of support for the potential
DEMO Although these decision makers are unlikely to make
explicit use of personality testing, an implicit theory may be
operative similar to the implicit leadership theories discussed by
Lord and Maher (1991). Attrition processes may be most relevant
through the postlaunch phase as the nascent entrepreneur evaluates
the DEMO of satisfaction he or she derives from the entrepreneurial
role. We might expect the relationship between personality and ES
to become stronger in samples DEMO greater entrepreneurial tenure
because of the attrition of individuals whose personality does not
fit the demands of the entrepreneurial role. As these examples
show, ASA theory suggests many new lines of inquiry that may
lead to DEMO more fully specified model of entrepreneurship. Future
research along these lines can also test whether ASA theory or
other theories of career choice (e.g., Holland, 1985) provide the
best explanation for personality differences among managers and
entrepreneurs.
An enhanced understanding of the relationship between person-
ality and DEMO has the potential to contribute in a number of applied
areas related to entrepreneurship. Theories of vocational choice
have had widespread applicability in the DEMO of career coun-
seling, but little attention has been devoted to DEMO as
a career path within this literature. Our findings provide evidence
regarding the personality dimensions that distinguish a person who
is likely to be DEMO to, selected in, and remain in an entrepre-
neurial career distinct from a general interest in business and
management. This information will allow DEMO to better
match themselves to the challenges and rewards offered by an
entrepreneurial occupation. Venture capitalists, government fund-
ing agencies, and others may DEMO decisions regarding their sup-
port for specific entrepreneurs based in part on their own implicit
theories of entrepreneurship and personality. Information regard-
ing the DEMO relationship of personality to ES may make these
decisions more accurate— or may make decision makers more
realistic and humble in the application of DEMO own implicit the-
ories. Large organizations often seek to promote innovation by
selecting employees who will take on an entrepreneurial role
within the firm (intrapreneurs) and move them into key positions.
The findings from this study may be used to develop appropriate
selection and placement criteria for such DEMO Finally, this
study has implications for the training of individuals interested DEMO
entrepreneurship. Although the underlying personality dimensions
of the FFM are relatively stable, many of the behaviors associated
with these variables can be acquired with practice and effort. For
example, Barrick, Mount, and Strauss (1993) showed that individ-
uals high on Conscientiousness were more likely to set DEMO be
committed to goals, which in turn was associated with their DEMO
job performance. Training designed to promote the behaviors
associated with the attainment of ES might be very beneficial to
the individual wishing to pursue DEMO entrepreneurial career and to
268
ZHAO AND SEIBERT
society in general, which benefits enormously from entrepreneurial
activity.
We do not argue that personality theory provides a complete
theory DEMO entrepreneurship or even exhausts the range of topics that
can be explored at the level of the individual entrepreneur. Rather,
our results show DEMO personality must be considered as one im-
portant component of a multidimensional model of the variables,
processes, and environmental factors affecting entrepreneurship
and new venture creation.
References
References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included DEMO the
meta-analysis.
*Ahmed, S. U. (1985). nAch, risk-taking propensity, locus of control and
entrepreneurship. Personality and Individual Difference, 6, 781–782.
DEMO, J. H., Jr. (1997). An occupational personality profile of DEMO male
entrepreneur as assessed by the 16PF fifth edition. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH.
Ardichvili, A., Cardozo, R., & Ray, S. (2003). A theory of entrepreneurial
opportunity identification DEMO development. Journal of Business Ven-
turing, 18, 105–123.
Babb, E. DEMO, & Babb, S. V. (1992). Psychological traits of rural DEMO
neurs. Journal of Socio-Economics, 21, 353–362.
Baron, R. A., & Markman, G. D. (2005). Toward a process view of
entrepreneurship: The changing relevance of individual-level variables
across phases of new firm development. DEMO M. A. Rahim, R. T. Golem-
biewski, & K. D. Mackenzie (Eds.), Current Topics in Management
(Vol. 9, pp. 45– 64). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Barrick, M. R., & DEMO, M. K. (1991). The Big Five personality dimen-
sions and job performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44,
1–26.
Barrick, M. R., Mount, M. K., & Judge, T. A. (2001). Personality and
performance at the beginning of the new millennium: What do we know
and where do we go next? International Journal of Selection and
Assessment, 9, 9 –30.
Barrick, M. R., Mount, M. K., & Strauss, J. P. (1993). Conscientiousness
and performance of sales representatives: Test of the mediating effects
of goal setting. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 715–722.
*Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. P. (1987). Psychological characteristics
associated with performance in entrepreneurial firms and smaller busi-
ness. Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 79 –93.
*Bellu, R. R. (1988). Entrepreneurs and managers: Are they different? In
B. Kirchhoff, W. Long, W. McMullan, K. Vesper, & W. DEMO (Eds.),
Frontiers of entrepreneurship research (pp. 16 –30). DEMO, MA:
Babson College.
*Bellu, R. R. (1993). Task DEMO motivation and attributional style as
predictors of entrepreneurial performance: Female sample DEMO En-
trepreneurship and Regional Development, 5, 331–344.
*Bellu, R. R., Davidsson, P., & Goldfarb, C. (1990). Toward a theory DEMO
entrepreneurial behavior: Empirical evidence from Israel, Italy and Swe-
den. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 2, 195–209.
Brandsta¨tter, H. (1988). Sechzehn DEMO (16PA)
als Forschungsinstrument anstelle des 16PF [Sixteen Personality Adjec-
tive DEMO as research instrument in place of the 16PF]. Zeitschrift fu
experimentelle und angewandte Psychologie, 35, 370 –391.
*Brandsta¨tter, H. (1997). Becoming DEMO entrepreneur: A question of per-
sonality structure? Journal of Economic Psychology, 18, 157–177.
Brockhaus, R. H. (1982). The psychology of DEMO entrepreneur. In C. A.
Kent, D. L. Sexton, & K. H. Vesper (Eds.), Encyclopedia of entrepre-
neurship (pp. 39 –57). DEMO Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Brockhaus, R. H., & Horwitz, DEMO S. (1986). The psychology of the entre-
preneur. In D. DEMO & R. Smilor (Eds.), The art and science of
entrepreneurship (pp. 25– 48). Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
¨r
*Brockhaus, R. H., & Nord, W. R. (1979). An exploration of factors
affecting the entrepreneurial decision: Personal characteristic vs. envi-
ronmental conditions. In R. Huseman (Ed.), Proceedings of the Academy
of Management Conference (pp. 364 DEMO). Birmingham, AL: Academy
of Management.
*Brodsky, M. A. (1993). Successful female corporate managers and en-
trepreneurs: Similarities and differences. Group & Organization Man-
agement, 18, 366 –378.
Budner, S. (1962)DEMO Intolerance of ambiguity as a personality variable.
Journal of Personality, 30, 29 –50.
*Buergin, A. O. (1998). Differences between Swiss entrepreneurs DEMO
Swiss managers in brain dominance, achievement motivation, and locus
of control. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Walden University, Min-
neapolis, MN.
Burt, R. DEMO (1992). Structural holes: The social structure of competition.
Cambridge, DEMO: Harvard University Press.
Busenitz, L. W., West, G. P., DEMO, D., Nelson, T., Chandler, G. N., &
Zacharakis, A. (2003). Entrepreneurship research in emergence: Past
trends and future DEMO Journal of Management, 29, 285–308.
*Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. W. (1991). An empirical investigation into
the distinctions between DEMO and female entrepreneurs and managers.
International Small Business Journal, 9, 62–72.
Carland, J. W., Hoy, F., Boulton, W. R., & DEMO, J. C. (1984). Differ-
entiating small business owners from entrepreneurs. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 9, 354 –359.
Cattell, R. B., Eber, H. W., & Tatsuoka, M. M. (1970). Handbook for the
Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16PF). Champaign, IL: In-
stitute for Personality and Ability Testing.
Chandler, G. N., & Lyon, D. W. (2001). Issues of research design and
construct measurement in entrepreneurship research: The past decade.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25(4), 101–113.
Chell, E. (1985). The entrepreneurial personality: A few DEMO laid to rest?
International Small Business Journal, 3(3), DEMO
Chen, C. C., Greene, P. G., & Crick, A. (1998). Does entrepreneurial
self-efficacy distinguish entrepreneurs from managers? Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, 13, 295–316.
Ciavarella, M. A., Bucholtz, A. K., Riordan, C. M., Gatewood, R. D., &
Stokes, G. S. (2004). The Big Five and venture success: Is there DEMO
linkage? Journal of Business Venturing, 19, 465– 483.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Collins, C. J., Hanges, P., & Locke, E. A. (2004). The relationship of need
for achievement to entrepreneurship: A DEMO Human Perfor-
mance, 17, 95–117.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality
Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI)
professional manual. Odessa, FL: PAR.
Costa, P. T., Jr., McCrae, R. R., & Holland, J. L. (1984). Personality and
vocational interest in an adult DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology,
69, 390 – 400.
Crant, J. M. (1996). The proactive personality scale as a predictor of
entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of Small Business Management, 34,
42– 49.
*Cromie, DEMO, & Johns, S. (1983). Irish entrepreneurs: Some personal
characteristics. Journal of Occupational Behavior, 4, 317–324.
Digman, J. M. (1990)DEMO Personality structure: Emergence of the five-factor
model. Annual Review of Psychology, 41, 417– 440.
Dorfman, P. W. (2004). Cultural influences on organizational leadership.
In R. J. House, P. J. Hanges, M. Javidan, P. W. Dorfman, & V. Gupta
(Eds.), Leadership, culture and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62
societies (pp. 51–73). Thousand DEMO, CA: Sage.
Doster, J. A., Wilcox, S. E., Lambert, P. L., Rubion-Watkins, M. F.,
Goven, A. J., Moorefield, R., & Kofman, F. (2000). Stability and factor
BIG FIVE AND ENTREPRENEURIAL STATUS
269
structure of the Jackson Personality Inventory-Revised. DEMO
Reports, 86, 421– 428.
Dyer, W. G., Jr. (1994)DEMO Toward a theory of entrepreneurial careers.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 18(DEMO), 7–21.
Edwards, A. L. (1959). Edwards Personal Preference Schedule manual.
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Engle, D. E., Mah, J. J., & Sadri, G. (1997). An empirical comparison of
entrepreneurs and employees: Implications for innovation. Creativity
Research Journal, 10(1), 45– 49.
*Envick, B. R., & Langford, M. (2000). The five-factor model of person-
ality: Assessing entrepreneurs and managers. Academy of Entrepreneur-
ship Journal, 6(1), 6 –17.
Frese, M., Stewart, J., & Hannover, B. (1987). Goal orientation and
planfulness: Action styles as personality concepts. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 52, 1182–1194.
Furham, A. (1986). Economic locus of control. Human Relations, 39,
29 – 43.
Gartner, W. B. (1988). Who is an entrepreneur? Is the wrong question.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 13(4), 47– 68.
Gartner, W. B. (1989). Some suggestions for research on entrepreneurial
traits and characteristics. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14(1),
27–37.
Gelade, G. A. (2002). Creative style, personality, and artistic endeavor.
Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 128, 213–234.
Gough, H. G., & Heilbrun, A. B. (1983). The Adjective Check List manual.
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists DEMO
*Green, R., David, J., & Dent, M. (1996). The Russian entrepreneur: A
study of psychological characteristics. International Journal of Entre-
preneurial Behaviour & Research, 2, 49 –58.
Henning, H., & DEMO, B. (1977). Konstruktion einer Machiavellismus Skala
[Construction of a Machiavellism scale]. Zeitschrift fur Sozial-
Psychologie, 8, 185–198.
Herrmann, N. (1989)DEMO The creative brain. Lake Lure, NC: Ned Herrmann
Group.
*Hines, DEMO H. (1973). Achievement motivation, occupations, and labor
turnover in DEMO Zealand. Journal of Applied Psychology, 58, 313–317.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences in
work-related values. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Holland J. L. (1985). Making vocational choices: A theory DEMO vocational
personalities and work environments. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Hornaday, J., & Bunker, C. (1970). Characteristics of successful entrepre-
DEMO Personnel Psychology, 24, 141–153.
House, R. J., Hanges, P. DEMO, Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W., & Gupta, V.
(DEMO). Leadership, culture and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62
societies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
House, R. J., & Javidan, M. (2004). Overview of GLOBE. In R. J. House,
P. J. Hanges, M. Javidan, P. W. Dorfman, & V. Gupta (Eds.), Leader-
ship, culture and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies (pp.
9 –28). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Howard, P. DEMO, Medina, P. L., & Howard, J. M. (1996). DEMO big-five locator:
A quick assessment tool for consultants and trainers. In J. W. Pfeiffer
(Ed.), The 1996 Annual (Vol. 1, pp. 1–310). San Diego, CA: Pfeiffer &
Company.
Hunter, J. DEMO (1992). REGRESS: A multiple regression program in BASICA
[User’s manual]. East Lansing: Michigan State University, Department
of Psychology.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (1990). Methods of meta-analysis: Cor-
DEMO error and bias in research findings. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hurtz, G. M., & Donovan, J. J. (2000). Personality and DEMO performance:
The Big Five revisited. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 869 – 879.
Jackson, D. N. (1984). Personality Research Form DEMO Goshen, NY:
Research Psychologists Press.
Jackson, D. N. (1994)DEMO Jackson Personality Inventory—Revised manual.
Port Huron, MI. Sigma Assessment Systems.
Johnson, B. R. (1990). Toward a multidimensional model of entrepreneur-
ship: DEMO case of achievement motivation and the entrepreneur. Entre-
preneurship Theory and Practice, 14(3), 39 –54.
Judge, T. A., Bono, J. DEMO, Ilies, R., & Gerhardt, M. W. (2002). Personality
DEMO leadership: A qualitative and quantitative review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 87, 765–780.
Judge, T. A., Heller, D., & Mount, M. DEMO (2002). Personality and job
satisfaction: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 530 –
541.
Kristof, A. L. (1996). DEMO fit: An integrative review of its
conceptualizations, measurement, and implications. DEMO Psychol-
ogy, 49, 1– 49.
Levenson, H. (1973). Multidimensional locus of control in psychiatric
patients. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 41, 397– 404.
Lord, R. G., & Maher, K. J. (1991). Leadership & information processing.
London: Routledge.
Lynn, R. (1969a). An achievement motivation questionnaire. British Jour-
nal of Psychology, 60, DEMO –34.
Lynn, R. (1969b). Personality characteristics of a group of entrepreneurs.
Occupational Psychology, 43, 151–152.
*Malach-Pines, A., Sadeh, A., DEMO, D., & Yafe-Yanai, O. (2002). Entre-
preneurs and managers: Similar yet different. International Journal of
Organizational Analysis, 10, 172–190.
McClelland, D. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nos-
DEMO
McClelland, D. C., & Boyatzis, R. E. (1982). Leadership motive pattern
and long-term success in management. Journal of Applied Psychology,
DEMO, 737–743.
McCrae, R. R. (1987). Creativity, divergent thinking, DEMO openness to
experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 1258 –
1265.
Meyer, G. J. (1996). The Rorschach and MMPI: Toward a more scientif-
ically differential understanding of cross-method assessment. Journal of
DEMO Assessment, 67, 558 –578.
Miner, J. B. (1986). Scoring guide for the Miner Sentence Completion
Scale—Form T. Eugene, OR: Organizational DEMO System
Press.
*Miner, J. B. (1990). Entrepreneurs, high growth DEMO, and man-
agers: Contrasting and overlapping motivational patterns. Journal of
Business Venturing, 5, 221–234.
Miner, J. B. (1993). Role motivation DEMO New York: Routledge.
Miner, J. B. (1997). A psychological DEMO of successful entrepreneurs.
Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Miner, J. B., & Raju, N. S. (2004). Risk propensity differences between
managers DEMO entrepreneurs and between low and high growth entre-
preneurs: A reply DEMO a more conservative vein. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 89, 3–13.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Bracker, J. S. (DEMO). Role of entrepreneurial
task motivation in the growth of technologically innovative firms. Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology, 74, 554 –560.
Modick, H. E. (1977). Leistungsmotivation. Fragebogen zur Erfassung des
Leistungsmotivs [The questionnaire for measuring need for achieve-
ment]. Diagnostica, 23, 298 –321.
Mount, M. K., & Barrick, M. R. (1995). The Big Five personality dimen-
sions: Implications for research and practice in human resources man-
agement. In G. R. Ferris (Ed.), Research in personnel and human
resources management (Vol. 13, pp. 153–200). Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.
DEMO, I. B., & McCaulley, M. H. (1985). A guide for the development and
use of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Nicholson, N., Fenton-O’Creevy, M. P., Soane, E., & William, P. (2005).
270
ZHAO AND SEIBERT
Personality and domain-specific risk-taking. Journal of Risk Research,DEMO
8, 157–176.
Ones, D. S., & Viswesvaran, C. (1996)DEMO Bandwidth-fidelity in personality
measurement for personnel selection. Journal of Organizational Behav-
ior, 17, 609 – 626.
Ones, D. S., & Viswesvaran, C. (2003). Job-specific applicant pools and
national norms for personality scales implications for range-restriction
corrections in validation research. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88,
570 –577.
Ones, D. S., Viswesvaran, C., & Reiss, A. D. (1996). Role of social
desirability in personality testing for personnel selection: The red her-
ring. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 660 – 679.
Patchen, M. (1965). Some questionnaire measure of employee DEMO
and morale: A report on their reliability and validity. Ann Arbor:DEMO
University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social
Research.
Paunonen, S. V., & Jackson, D. N. (1996). The Jackson DEMO
Inventory and the five-factor model of personality. Journal of Research
in Personality, 30, 42–59.
*Rahim, A. (1996). Stress, strain, and DEMO moderators: An empirical
comparison of entrepreneurs and managers. Journal of Small DEMO
Management, 34, 46 –58.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (2000). Psychological approaches to entrepreneur-
ial success: A general model and an overview of findings. In C. L.
Cooper & I. T. Robertson (Eds.), International review of industrial and
organizational psychology (Vol. 15, DEMO 101–141). New York: Wiley.
*Richard, J. C. (1991). DEMO comparison of the social characteristics, per-
sonalities, and managerial styles of managers and entrepreneurs. Un-
published doctoral dissertation, University of Windsor, Windsor, On-
tario, Canada.
*Robbins, N. G. (1986). Entrepreneurial assessment: DEMO
which differentiate entrepreneurs, intrapreneurs, and managers. Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, DEMO of Minnesota, Twin Cities.
Robinson, R. B. Stimpson, D. V., Huefner, J. C., & Hunt, H. K. (1991). An
DEMO approach to the prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneur-
ship Theory and Practice, DEMO(2), 13–31.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external
control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80, 1–27.
Sagie, A., & Elizur, D. (1999). Achievement motive and entrepreneurial
orientation: A structural analysis. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
20, 375–387.
Schneider, B. (1987). The people make the place. Personnel Psychology,
40, 437– 453.
Schneider, B., Smith, D. B., Taylor, S., & Fleenor, J. (1998). Personality
and organizations: A test of the homogeneity of personality hypothesis.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 462– DEMO
Schumpeter, J. A. (1976). Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. New
York: Harper and Brothers. (Original work published 1942)
Seibert, S. E., & Kraimer, M. L. (2001). The five-factor model of person-
ality and career success. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 58, 1–21.
DEMO, S., & Sen, A. (1995). Behavioral characteristics of woman entre-
preneurs executives vis-a`-vis their male counterparts. Social Science
International, 11, DEMO –33.
Sexton, D. L., & Bowman, N. B. (1983). Comparative entrepreneurship
characteristics of students: Preliminary results. In J. Hornaday, J. DEMO
mons, & K. Vesper (Eds.), Frontiers of entrepreneurship research (DEMO
213–225). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as
a field of DEMO Academy of Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Shaver, K. G. (1995). The entrepreneurial myth. Business & Economic
Review, 41(3), 20 –23.
Simon, M., Houghton, S. M., & Aquino, K. (DEMO). Cognitive biases, risk
perception, and venture formation: How individuals DEMO to start
companies. Journal of Business Venturing, 15, 113–134.
Smith, DEMO M. (1973). A quick measure of achievement motivation. British
Journal DEMO Social and Clinical Psychology, 12, 137–143.
Snyder, M., & Ickes, W. (1985). Personality and social behavior. In G.
Lindzey & DEMO Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (3rd ed.,
Vol. 2, pp. 883–947). New York: Random House.
Speier, C., & Frese, M. (1997). Self-efficacy as a mediator and moderator
between control and complexity at work and personal initiative: A
longitudinal field study in East Germany. Human Performance, 10,
171–192.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2001). Risk propensity differences between
entrepreneurs DEMO managers: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86, 145–153.
DEMO, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2004a). Data quality affects meta-analytic
conclusions: A response to Miner and Raju (2004) concerning entrepre-
neurial risk propensity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 14 –21.
DEMO, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2004b, August). DEMO meta-analysis of
achievement motivation and ES. Paper presented at the Academy of
Management annual meeting, New Orleans, LA.
*Stewart, W. H., Jr., Watson, W. E., Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. W.
(1998). A proclivity for entrepreneurship: A comparison of entrepre-
neurs, small business owners, and corporate managers. Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing, DEMO, 189 –214.
*Utsch, A., Rauch, A., Rothfufs, R., & Frese, M. (1999). Who becomes a
small scale entrepreneur in a post-socialist environment: On the differ-
ence between entrepreneurs and managers in East Germany. Journal of
Small Business Management, 37(3), 31.
Viswesvaran, C., & Ones, D. S. (1995). Theory testing: Combining psy-
chometric meta-analysis and structural equations modeling. Personnel
Psychology, 48, 865– DEMO
Weber, M. (1947). The theory of social and economic organization (A. M.
Parson & T. Parsons, Trans.). New York: Free Press.
Whitener, E. M. (1990). Confusion of confidence intervals and DEMO
intervals in meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 315–321.
Wightman, DEMO F. (1992). Review of the Miner Sentence Completion Scale.
In DEMO J. Kramer & J. C. Conoley (Eds.), 11th mental measurements
DEMO (pp. 537–538). New York: Organizational Measurement Sys-
tem Press.
*Wooten, K. C., Timmerman, T. A., & Folger, R. (1999)DEMO The use of
personality and the five-factor model to predict new business ventures:
From outplacement to start-up. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 54,
82–101.
Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. E. (2005). The mediating role of
self-efficacy in the development of entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 90, 1265–1272.
BIG FIVE AND ENTREPRENEURIAL STATUS
271
Appendix
Assignment of Personality Scales Available DEMO Primary Studies to the Five-Factor Model
Instrument Scale Author
Neuroticism
16 Personality Adjective scales Emotional Stability () Brandsta¨tter, 1988
16 Personality Factor Questionnaire Emotional Stability (), Apprehension, Tension Cattell et al., 1970
1-Item Scales Confident () Malach-Pines et al., 2002
Big Five Locator Adjustment () Howard et al., 1996
California Psychological Inventory Well-Being () Gough & Heilbrun, 1983
Generalized work self-efficacy Generalized Work Self-Efficacy () Speier & Frese, 1997
Internal, Powerful Others, and Chance Scale Locus of Control () Levenson, 1973
Jackson Personality Inventory Anxiety, Conformity DEMO, 1994
Locus of Control Internal Locus of Control () Furham, 1986
Locus of Control Internal Locus of Control () Rotter 1996
DEMO
16 Personality Adjective scales Extraversion Brandsta¨tter, 1988
16 Personality Factor Questionnaire DEMO, Liveliness, Social Boldness, Self-Reliance () Cattell et al., 1970
1-Item Scales Energy, Optimism Malach-Pines et al., 2002
Big Five Locator DEMO Howard et al., 1996
California Psychological Inventory Dominance, Sociability Gough & Heilbrun, 1983
Herrmann Brain Dominance Instrument Extraversion (1 item) Herrmann, DEMO
Jackson Personality Inventory Social Confidence, Social Participation Jackson, 1994
Meyers–Briggs Type Indicator Introversion () Myers & McCaulley, 1985
Personality Research Form Affiliation Jackson, 1984
Openness to Experience
16 Personality Factor Questionnaire Sensitivity, Abstractedness DEMO et al., 1970
1-Item Scales Dreamer, Creative Malach-Pines et al., DEMO
Big Five Locator Openness to Experience Howard et al., 1996
Interest DEMO Innovation; Readiness to Change Interest in Innovation; Readiness to Change Patchen, 1965
Jackson Personality Inventory Innovation Jackson, 1994
Meyers–Briggs Type Indicator Intuition DEMO & McCaulley, 1985
Personality Research Form Change Jackson, 1984
Tolerance for Ambiguity Tolerance for Ambiguity Budner, 1962
Agreeableness
16 Personality Adjective scales Independent () Brandsta¨tter, 1988
16 Personality Factor Questionnaire Vigilance (), DEMO to Change () Cattell et al., 1970
Big Five Locator DEMO Howard et al., 1996
California Psychological Inventory Tolerance Gough & Heilbrun, 1983
Machiavellism Machiavellism () Henning & Six, 1977
Meyers–Briggs Type Indicator Feeling Myers & McCaulley, 1985
Personality Research Form Aggression () Jackson, 1984
Conscientiousness
16 Personality Adjective scales Norm Oriented Brandstätter, 1988
16 DEMO Factor Questionnaire Rule Consciousness, Perfectionism Cattell et al., 1970
Need for Achievement Need for Achievement Modick, 1977
Need for Achievement Need for Achievement Lynn, 1969a
Achievement Motivation Achievement Motivation Smith, 1973
Action Styles Goal DEMO; Planfulness Frese et al., 1987
Big Five Locator Conscientiousness Howard et al., 1996
California Psychological Inventory Responsibility Gough & Heilbrun, 1983
Edwards DEMO Preference Schedule Achievement Edwards, 1959
Jackson Personality Inventory Organization, Value Orthodoxy Jackson, 1994
Meyers–Briggs Type Indicator Perceiving () Myers & McCaulley, DEMO
Miner Sentence Completion Scale—Form T Total Task Motivation Miner, 1986
Personality DEMO Form Achievement Jackson, 1984
Received April 27, 2004
Revision received April 15, 2005
Accepted April 15, 2005 {1g42fwefx}