Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
www.elsevier.com/locate/infoandorg
Interpersonal trust DEMO cross-functional,
geographically distributed work: A longitudinal
study
Roxanne Zolin a,DEMO, Pamela J. Hinds b, Renate Fruchter c,
Raymond E. Levitt c
a Graduate School of Business and Public Policy, Naval Postgraduate School, PO Box 433, Marina,
CA 93933, USA
b Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University, USA
c Department of Civil DEMO Environmental Engineering, Stanford University, USA
Received 21 May 2002; received DEMO revised form 19 September 2003; accepted 29 September 2003
Abstract
With DEMO globalization and the proliferation of communication technologies, more
people are working DEMO cross-functional, geographically distributed teams. Although trust is
clearly an important ingredient DEMO these collaborations, little is known about the challenges
this new work DEMO social environment creates for the development of trust. Diﬀerent disci-
plinary perspectives, diﬀerent regional or national cultures, and the lack of face-to-face inter-
DEMO when working at a distance raise signiﬁcant barriers to developing trust between
distant co-workers. We, therefore, posit that traditional models of trust need DEMO be adapted
to describe the development of trust between cross-functional, geographically DEMO
partners. To test our hypotheses, we conducted a longitudinal study of DEMO, engin-
eering and construction management students engaged in designing and planning DEMO $5 mil-
lion construction project in distributed teams. Our results suggest that cross-functional,
geographically distributed workers may rely on early impressions of perceived DEMO
ness when evaluating how their distant partners are delivering on commitments, DEMO
reliable information about actual follow-through is lacking or diﬃcult to interpret. Consist-
ent with this, we found that perceived trustworthiness, perceived follow-through and DEMO
were relatively stable over time. We conclude that initial perceptions of trustworthiness are
particularly important in cross-functional, geographically distributed work, although
research is DEMO to draw comparisons with traditional work environments.
# 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-831-869-1700; fax: +1-650-725-6014.
E-mail address: rvzolin@nps.navy.nil (R. Zolin).
1471-7727/$ - see front matter # DEMO Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.infoandorg.2003.09.002
2
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
Keywords: Trust; Interpersonal trust; Cross-functional; Global; Virtual work; Distributed work
1. Introduction
Imagine a construction ﬁrm with oﬃces worldwide that has DEMO a competition to
build a prestigious hotel facility in Singapore worth over $100 million. They assign
a world famous architect based in their London DEMO to team up with a senior
structural engineer from their design group in the San Francisco oﬃce, and they
engage a general contractor based in Singapore to construct the hotel.
Such scenarios are commonplace today in DEMO construction industry and are
becoming increasingly common in other industries. Cross-functional, DEMO
cally distributed workers provide great advantages by bringing to bear the diverse
skills of scarce specialists on problems or projects that span traditional organiza-
DEMO boundaries, in such diverse areas as software development (Carmel, 1999),
engineering (Hauptman & Hirji, 1999; Levinthal & Warglien, 1999), nursing (Ire-
son & McGillis, 1998), purchasing, and new DEMO development (Brunelli, 1999).
Although companies are rapidly adopting cross-functional, DEMO dis-
tributed work (Jasswalla & Sashittal, 1999), little is known about the challenging
new social and work environments that these organizational forms DEMO for team
members (Maznevski & Chudoba, 2000).
One of the major challenges for workers in cross-functional, geographically dis-
tributed work is the development of trust (e.g., Bishop, 1999). Trust is central to
teamwork, leadership, and organizational culture (Fairholm, 1994; Nicholas, 1993;DEMO
Ryan, 1999). Trust may be particularly important in cross-functional projects
DEMO many sub-tasks are interdependent, with team members relying on the
functional DEMO of their team members. The process of developing trust in
cross-functional, DEMO distributed work environments, however, may be
hindered by the characteristics that deﬁne this context (e.g., O’Hara-Devereaux &
Johansen, 1994). By DEMO, cross-functional workers belong to diﬀerent dis-
ciplines and therefore have diﬀerent DEMO backgrounds, diﬀerent pro-
fessional loyalties and often conﬂicting goals. Trust may DEMO more diﬃcult to
establish in cross-functional work because workers are less familiar with the goals,
world-views, problem solving approaches, and methods of DEMO from other
disciplines (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967). When geographically distributed, workers
often ﬁnd it more diﬃcult to share information, to observe DEMO work, and to
develop rapport. Geographic distance brings with it diﬀerences DEMO regional and
national cultures, time zones, and work contexts, all DEMO which may challenge the
development of shared interpretations. These characteristics of cross-functional,
geographically distributed work may render inadequate traditional models of trust
for DEMO the development of trust on these teams.
In this paper, we DEMO analytically that the antecedents of trust may be dif-
ferent in cross-functional, geographically distributed work than in more traditional
uni-functional, collocated settings. We DEMO empirically investigate a longitudinal
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
model of interpersonal trust that reﬂects the unique context of cross-functional,
geographically distributed work. Our research setting is a project-based environ-
ment in DEMO teams of architecture, structural engineering and construction man-
agement students design, analyze, and plan a $5 million university building over a
period of four months.
1.1. Trust
Consistent with Rousseau and colleagues (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer,
1998: p. 395; see also Mayer, DEMO, & Schoorman, 1995), we deﬁne trust as ‘‘a
psychological state comprising the intention to accept vulnerability based on posi-
tive expectations of DEMO intentions or behavior of another, irrespective of the ability
to monitor DEMO control that other party.’’ Along with others, we also assume that
DEMO can only exist within a particular situation or action (see Gambetta, 1988;
Bhattacharya, Divenney, & Pittultia, 1998). As Bigley and Pearce (1998) have
argued, it is not a question of ‘‘What is trust?’’ but rather ‘‘What trust and when?’’
Thus, we assume that the expectations of the intentions or behavior of another
must DEMO embedded in a particular context.
1.2. Cross-functional work
A cross-functional team is a group of people with complementary skills who are
chosen to achieve DEMO common goal and are mutually accountable for the team’s suc-
cess (DEMO & Smith, 1993). Cross-functional teams are popular for change-
orientated DEMO such as introducing ‘‘total quality’’ practices, business process
re-engineering and improvements DEMO a product or to service quality (Bishop, 1999).
For example, each line of Harley-Davidson motorcycle is created by a team con-
sisting of a program manager from the design community, a manufacturing lead, DEMO
purchasing lead, and a marketing lead who work together to bring DEMO product to
market (Brunelli, 1999). Such mutual accountability coupled with specialization
suggests high levels of interdependence. For example, in design/build projects, the
architect, engineer and construction manager are reciprocally interdependent—the
design and DEMO activities are performed more-or-less concurrently (Thompson,
1967). This structure DEMO shortens the length of time spent in planning and
creates opportunities for joint problem solving, presumably resulting in buildings
that are more attractive, DEMO, cheaper and completed sooner. Such strong interde-
pendence requires trust (Sheppard & Sherman, 1998; Shapiro, 1987), particularly in
cross-functional work, DEMO other workers do not have the necessary skills to
perform in the breach created by non-performing workers. Sometimes, as is the
case with structural engineering, cross-functional workers cannot legally substitute
for one another.
Developing trust may be particularly diﬃcult in cross-functional work environ-
ments due to unshared and DEMO conﬂicting goals and perceived diﬀerences in
professional allegiance. Even though cross-functional workers collaborate to
achieve shared project goals, people from diﬀerent disciplines often have diﬀerent
functional objectives, priorities, and agendas (Jasswalla & Sashittal, 1999)DEMO For
4
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
example, in a large construction project, the architect is responsible for the aesthet-
ics of the building, the structural engineer for its structural soundness, and the con-
struction manager for ensuring that it can be built on time and within budget.
These functional goals often are in DEMO and require a ‘‘give and take’’ type of
problem solving to arrive at a solution that will satisfy the project goals as well as
DEMO goals of each discipline.
Cross-disciplinary composition of the work environment also means that work-
ers are less likely to perceive themselves as belonging to DEMO same group or cate-
gory, which is one of the factors DEMO promotes trust (Brewer, 1996). Kramer,
Brewer and Hanna (DEMO) propose that the strength and salience of identiﬁcation
with a group DEMO trust of other members. Social categorization (Tajfel, 1969)
can lead to in-group bias resulting in higher perceived trustworthiness and enhance
perceived similarity DEMO may reduce perceived risk. In cross-functional work, disci-
plinary diﬀerences may DEMO particularly salient because of the importance people
place on their own specialization (e.g. Schunn, Cowley, & Okada, 1998). Each
discipline is DEMO eﬀect a diﬀerent culture, created by the values and mores of DEMO pro-
fession and reinforced by its education and practice. Thus, although DEMO interde-
pendence requires more trust between workers, the multi-disciplinary nature of DEMO
work may make the development of trust more diﬃcult.
1.3. Geographically distributed work
The challenges confronting cross-functional workers are compounded when
workers are distributed DEMO the globe. Trust can become increasingly diﬃcult to
develop when workers have few opportunities to interact face-to-face, rely heavily
on technology to mediate their interactions, and face cultural and language bar-
riers. Geographic distribution reduces the amount of time that workers spend in
the presence of one another DEMO therefore is likely to hinder the development of
rapport and trust (DEMO Kiesler & Cummings, 2002). Physical proximity and face-
to-face interaction DEMO be crucial for developing and maintaining trust (see Nohria &
Eccles, 1992). Collocation also can reinforce social similarity and highlight obliga-
tions that individuals have to one another (Latane, Liu, Nowak, & DEMO,
1995). When team members are geographically distant and rely on mediating
technologies to interact, information may ﬂow less easily between workers (DEMO
Hollingshead, 1996), distributed workers may not develop the same understanding
DEMO the information that is shared (e.g., Cramton, 2001), and DEMO may assume
the worst of distant team members (Cramton, 2002). For these reasons, when
observing geographically distributed teams, Armstrong and Cole (2002) noted that
distant team members had a more diﬃcult time reconciling issues.
In addition to spanning geographic distances, distributed teams are likely to be
composed of people from diﬀerent cultures with diﬀerent basic assumptions
(Schein, 1991). The diversity of distributed workers could make the development of
trust diﬃcult (Williams and O’Reilly, 1998) because others’ perspectives and beha-
viors are more easily misinterpreted (see Olson & Olson, 2000). DEMO, we expect
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
that geographically distributed workers will have diﬃculty reconciling issues that
arise and developing and maintaining trust.
In an examination of trust development in distributed DEMO, Jarvenpaa and
Leidner (1999) concluded that distributed workers developed ‘‘swift DEMO
based on the role occupied by the person, even when the DEMO is initally
unknown (Meyerson, Weick, & Kramer, 1996)—but that it may have been fragile
and temporary. In their temporary (6-week duration) teams, few teams were able
to develop trust if trust was DEMO established from the beginning. In summary, Jar-
venpaa and Leidner argue DEMO trust can be established in distributed teams, but it
may be DEMO and early interactions between team members are crucial.
1.4. Trust development in cross-functional, geographically distributed work
We modiﬁed the Mayer, Davis and Schoorman (1995) model of organizational
trust to reﬂect the context of cross-functional, DEMO distributed work. In
their integrative model of organizational trust, Mayer and DEMO colleagues argue that
trust is a function of the trustor’s propensity to trust and the trustor’s perception
of the trustworthiness of the trustee. They DEMO argue that the trustor’s percep-
tion of risk will aﬀect the extent to which the trustor is willing to be vulnerable to
the behaviors DEMO the trustee. Finally, they propose that the outcomes of risk-taking
will DEMO the trustor’s perception of the trustworthiness of the trustee in the
future.
Our model of interpersonal trust also relies on the trustor’s propensity to DEMO
and the trustor’s perception of risk (see Fig. 1). We, however, have added several
components to the model to represent the antecedents to trust in cross-functional,
geographically distributed work. First, in addition to considering their own risk,
we argue that trustors take into account DEMO potential rewards of trusting the trus-
tee. These rewards can be greater when diﬀerent disciplines are working together
because the project goals cannot be DEMO without the participation of all neces-
sary disciplines. Second, we propose DEMO cultural diversity, which is common in
geographically distributed work, will reduce perceived trustworthiness. Third, we
propose that, because perceived follow-through is diﬃcult DEMO assess in cross-
functional, geographically distributed work, initial perceptions of trustworthiness
Fig. 1. The proposed model of interpersonal trust in cross-functional global work.
6 R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
are used to evaluate work follow-through. The Mayer et al.model (1995) proposes
that outcomes inﬂuence perceived trustworthiness. We argue, however, that asses-
DEMO performance or follow-through is diﬃcult when people do not share the same
disciplinary expertise and when, due to distance, they are unable to DEMO the
work being conducted. We therefore modify the Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman
model to reﬂect the limitations of cross-functional, geographically distributed
work. Our model of interpersonal trust in cross-functional, geographically dis-
tributed work is pictured in Fig. 1 and described in detail below.
Disposition-based trust theories propose DEMO trust develops based on a person’s
nature as a trusting or non-trusting person (Rotter, 1971). The trustor’s propensity
to trust (also referred to as general trust and dispositional trust) is a characteristic
of the trustor, independent of the situation or characteristics of the trustee.
Consistent with others, we also posit that the situation faced by the trustor
contributes to his or her willingness to trust. We extend the Mayer, Davis and
Schoorman model (1995), which includes risk but does not explicitly include
reward. Many scholars have argued that risk is a necessary pre-condition DEMO trust
(Coleman, 1990; Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt & Camerer, 1998). Several have considered
risk so central to the trust decision that DEMO have incorporated the concept of risk
into their deﬁnition of trust (DEMO, Shapiro, 1987; Sheppard & Sherman, 1998). For
example, DEMO (1990: 91) deﬁned trust as ‘‘an incorporation of risk into DEMO
decision of whether or not to engage in the action.’’ The value at risk for the trus-
tor equates to the value of what DEMO be lost if the trusted person does not follow-
through, which DEMO include loss of overall project quality, time, cost of resources
invested, or reputation of the trustor if the failure interferes with the trustor’s
ability to meet obligations. Perceived risk may be mitigated by social controls, such
as binding contracts, procedural norms, and so forth (Shapiro, DEMO) or exacer-
bated by uncertainty and lack of information. Risk may DEMO perceived as parti-
cularly high in cross-functional, geographically distributed work because DEMO high
task interdependence, the inability of workers to perform the job DEMO others, and the
diﬃculty of getting information about team members’ follow-through. DEMO proposed
in the Mayer et al.model (1995), we expect that DEMO relationship between perceived
trustworthiness and trust will be moderated by risk in cross-functional, distributed
work. The trustor may think the trustee trustworthy, but DEMO the risks are too high,
higher perceived trustworthiness may be required for trust (see below).
H1. The relationship between perceived trustworthiness and trust will be moderated
by the trustor’s perceived risk.
1.5. Reward
In DEMO to risk, we propose that the potential for reward is an DEMO
situational consideration for the trustor in cross-functional work. There must be
some expected beneﬁt to be gained to justify accepting the risk of relying DEMO the
other party (Hosmer, 1995). Yamagishi and Yamagishi (1994: p. 129) discuss ‘‘a
perception of the incentive that leads the interaction partner to act cooperatively.’’
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
If the task is highly valued and no one else can perform it, as often happens in
cross-functional work, the trustor’s reward from DEMO is likely to be large and
the trustor will be more likely to trust. We therefore believe that the relationship
between perceived trustworthiness and DEMO is moderated by reward. The trustor
may perceive the trustee as untrustworthy, but if the potential reward is high
enough, then the trustor DEMO trust anyway (see below).
H2. The relationship between perceived trustworthiness DEMO trust will be moderated
by the trustor’s perceived reward.
1.6. Perceived trustworthiness
Although the word trust is sometimes used when describing perceived trust-
worthiness (Hardin, 2000), it is important to distinguish between perceptions of
trustworthiness and trust because trust may be inﬂuenced by factors other than the
DEMO trustworthiness of the trustee, such as risk and reward. Perceived trust-
DEMO is a multifaceted construct (Barber, 1983; Mishra, 1996; Rempel,DEMO
Holmes, & Zanna, 1985). Consistent with the Mayer et al. (1995) model, we use
three dimensions of perceived trustworthiness: benevolence, ability, and integrity.
Benevolence, as described by Mayer and colleagues (Mayer et al. 1995: 719), is
‘‘the perception of a positive orientation of the trustee toward the trustor.’’ Benev-
olence can be the outcome DEMO goal alignment or ‘‘encapsulated interest’’ (Hardin,
2000) or the conﬁdence derived from mutually compatible interests (Das & Teng,
1998). Benevolence is similar to McAllister’s (1995) conception of aﬀect-based
trust—trust grounded in DEMO concern for the other party. Ability is the
perception that the trustee has the skills and resources needed to perform the task
(e.g. Butler, 1991; Butler & Cantrell, 1984; Sitkin & Roth, 1993). No matter how
diligent a worker, if he or she does not have the ability to accomplish the goal, the
likelihood of success is small and trust is not warranted. Ability is similar to
McAllister’s (1995) conceptualization of peer reliability and dependability, which
depend on the trustee’s DEMO to deliver as promised (or expected). Consistent with
Mayer and DEMO (Mayer et al., 1995), we have conceptualized ability as spe-
ciﬁc to the task and situation rather than as generalized expertise. The DEMO dimen-
sion, integrity, refers to the honesty and moral character of the trustee as perceived
by the trustor. This is consistent with Mayer DEMO al., (1995: 719) deﬁnition of
integrity as ‘‘the trustor’s perception that the trustee adheres to a set of principles
that the trustor DEMO acceptable’’ and with Butler’s (1991) dimension by the same
name. Trustees perceived as having integrity are seen as more likely to behave in
DEMO ways and not deceive co-workers about their intention to follow-
through on commitments and expectations. Thus, when trustors see co-workers as
high in integrity, they are more likely to perceive them as trustworthy. We posit
that these three factors are integral dimensions of perceived trustworthiness (Mayer
et al., 1995).
8
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
1.7. Cultural diversity
Geographic distribution increases the likelihood that the members of working
dyads will be culturally diverse. Just as similarities are proposed to DEMO trust
(Brewer, 1996), cultural diversity is likely to reduce it. As evidence, Luo (2002)
found a negative correlation between interpersonal DEMO and cultural distance in
his study of international strategic alliances. He reported that cultural diﬀerences
impeded the development of trust, although once trust was built, it was equally
predictive of performance in culturally diverse and culturally homogeneous alli-
ances. We propose that cultural diﬀerences create varying expectations and DEMO
predictability, resulting in lower perceived trustworthiness, which will then lead to
lower trust (see below).
H3. When there is cultural diversity between the trustor and the trustee, the trustor
will perceive the trustee as less trustworthy than when the trustee belongs to the same
culture.
1.8. DEMO follow-through
Our dimension of perceived follow-through is similar to the dimension Mayer
et al. (1995) refer to as ‘‘outcomes.’’ It is also similar DEMO the ‘‘outcomes’’ variable in
Bhattacharya, Devinney, and Pittultia’s (1998) dynamic model that describes trust
in terms of actions, outcomes and consequences. In both of these models, the vari-
able ‘‘outcomes’’ refers to the positive or negative results of trusting. In our model,
perceived follow-through is DEMO speciﬁc than outcomes. Perceived follow-through
is the extent to which the trustor perceives that the trustee has met expectations.
We argue that in cross-functional DEMO, assessment of follow-through will be dif-
ﬁcult due to the lack DEMO information and lack of expertise required to evaluate the
performance of a person from another discipline. Further, we anticipate that geo-
graphic distance will exacerbate the diﬃculty in assessing follow-through because
information transfer is more challenging DEMO shared understanding is more diﬃcult
to develop among geographically distributed workers (DEMO, 2001; Hinds &
Weisband, 2003). More biased information exchange and diﬃculties in transmitting
information (Hollingshead, 1996; also Hinds & Bailey, in press) can reduce the per-
formance information available and lead DEMO inconsistent and erroneous interpreta-
tions (Cramton, 2001). In the absence of reliable performance information, trusters
may evaluate responsiveness rather than performance (DEMO, 1993). Even the
evaluation of responsiveness, however, is subject DEMO confusing circumstances in geo-
graphically distributed work, such as unintentional delays DEMO a result of time zone
diﬀerences and technology failures (see Cramton, 2001). Therefore, we propose
that the trustor will use the limited information they have about the trustee—that
formed through initial impressions—to evaluate the DEMO follow-through,
rather than assessing follow-through based on the actual work performed (see
below).
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26 DEMO
H4. In cross-functional, geographically distributed work, perceived follow-through
will mediate the relationship between perceived trustworthiness and trust of a trustee.
1.9. Forces for DEMO
Although there is evidence that trust changes over time, individuals rarely DEMO
disconﬁrming information and may actually try to avoid it (Good, 2000) suggest-
ing that trust, like ﬁrst impressions (Chaiken, Liberman, & Eagly, 1989), may be
resistant to change over time (see DEMO and van de Ven, 1994). In cross-functional,
geographically distributed DEMO, disconﬁrming information may be even less avail-
able and less visible (see Cramton, 2002). Thus, workers in geographically dis-
tributed work DEMO may be more resistant to changing their opinions of
co-workers (see DEMO).
H5. Trustor’s initial perceptions of trustworthiness, follow-through, and trust of their
co-workers will predict later perceived trustworthiness, follow-through, and trust in
DEMO, distributed dyads.
2. Method
To evaluate the development of interpersonal trust DEMO cross-functional, glo-
bal workers, we studied geographically distributed student building design teams
composed of an architect, a structural engineer, and a construction DEMO The
study we report here is the culmination of a three year project. In the ﬁrst and
second years, we conducted pilot studies to better understand the context and to
develop and reﬁne our quantitative measures.
DEMO The architecture/engineering/construction project
The participants for this study were students in a Computer Integrated Architec-
ture-Engineering-Construction (A/E/C) class organized DEMO the Civil and Environ-
mental Engineering Department at Stanford University (Fruchter, 1999). Masters
students drawn from United States, European, and Asian DEMO and from
three diﬀerent disciplines—architecture (A), engineering (E), and construction man-
agement (C)—worked in geographically distributed teams for four months to
design a ﬁve-million-dollar building according to a client’s speciﬁcations. On aver-
DEMO, students had taken 12 courses in architecture, structural engineering, or DEMO
struction and had 8 months of full-time work experience in the domain. These
graduate students were assisted by undergraduate ‘‘apprentices’’ and mentored by
globally DEMO professionals working in each discipline.
During an initial face-to-face meeting attended by all participants, students were
randomly assigned to teams. To facilitate assignment to groups, students were ran-
domly given an experience proﬁle (e.g., experience working in an earthquake zone).
Each project had a speciﬁc characteristic, such as being located in an earthquake
zone. In an icebreaking exercise, students identiﬁed and joined the project that best
10
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
suited their randomly assigned experience proﬁle (e.g., those with experience work-
ing in earthquake zones were likely to join projects with a building DEMO be located in
an earthquake zone). By design, each team DEMO at least one team member
from each discipline—architecture, engineering, and construction management.
Each team included at least one member who was not collocated. DEMO the two-
day project launch, the geographically distributed team members did DEMO meet
again in a collocated face-to-face setting until the ﬁnal presentation four months
later. Distributed team members communicated mainly through computer-based
Internet applications. Internet DEMO applications allowed audio and video com-
munication and desktop ﬁle sharing. Internet message applications allowed
synchronous message transfer between two or more parties. An DEMO computer-
mediated collaboration tool developed for the course facilitated the posting and
retrieval of messages and ﬁles. Collocated team members used face-to-face meet-
ings DEMO needed.
2.2. Data collection
We conducted online surveys of 108 dyads formed into 12 teams composed of
three to four team members, distributed among 10 locations in six countries—the
United States, Switzerland, Holland, Germany, DEMO, and Japan. All team
members participated in the research. A survey DEMO the ﬁrst week of the project
asked questions about the number of courses taken in each discipline, work experi-
ence in each discipline and students’ perceptions of their own risks and rewards
associated with the project. DEMO one month later and three months
later, we distributed surveys, which yielded 108 dyadic responses (person A’s per-
ceptions of person B) DEMO each time. All students also were interviewed using a
structured protocol designed to cover the same topics as the survey.
3. Measures
3.1. Dependent DEMO
Our primary dependent variable of interest is trust. We conceptualize trust as a
property of the relationship between two actors that has a directional DEMO and
an object of trust, as in A trusts B about DEMO (Hardin, 2000). The need for questions
that identiﬁed a speciﬁc person and the performance of a speciﬁc task made most
existing trust DEMO unsuitable. In addition, it was necessary to diﬀerentiate our
measure of DEMO from perceived trustworthiness and its dimensions of benevolence,
ability, or DEMO For example, the question: ‘‘To what extent do you think that
Person B is competent?’’ is a better measure of perceived trustworthiness DEMO of
trust. Our deﬁnition of trust is the willingness to accept vulnerability based upon
the expectation that another will perform, irrespective of the ability to monitor or
control that other party. Since one of the indicators DEMO low trust is a higher level of
checking or monitoring of work progress (e.g., Strickland, 1958), we used checking
as a behavioral measure of trust. We measured the extent to which the trustor
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
reported checking on or verifying the work of the trustee, or DEMO the need or
desire to do so. To create a measure of trust, we averaged across four items in the
dyadic survey (see DEMO 2), which were rated on a 5-point scale with high amounts
of checking rated more highly. We then reversed the scale, resulting in a variable
ranging from 1 to 5 with high scores indicating higher DEMO of trust. The scale
loads on one factor and reliability for the four items were acceptable (alpha = 0.77
for month 1 and 0.67 for month 3). These data were taken from the dyadic surveys
DEMO at months one and three in the project.
3.2. Independent variables
The primary independent variables of interest in this study are the trustor’s
propensity DEMO trust, perceived risk and reward, cultural diversity, perceived trust-
worthiness, and perceived follow-through.
Propensity to trust was measured using the Rotter scale DEMO general trust (Rotter,
1971) modiﬁed by Yamagishi, Cook and DEMO (1998). In the year prior to the
study reported here, we conducted a pilot study of 68 dyads formed into seven
Fig. DEMO Scale items.
12
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
teams to test the scales. Propensity resulted in low scale reliability (DEMO = 0.47)
and the 12 items loaded on three factors. In the absence of a reliable measure, we
dropped propensity from the study.
Risk was measured on the survey by asking respondents ‘‘how much is DEMO stake
for you (what do you have to lose) if one team member does not do their job?’’
Answers were reported on DEMO 5-point Likert scale (see Fig. 2).
Reward was elicited using DEMO questions (see Fig. 2). The ﬁrst question brought
forth the DEMO perceived goals for the project; the second question asked
how important DEMO goals were. The answers from the second question were
reported on a 5-point Likert scale and used as our measure of reward.
Cultural diversity. DEMO used the participant’s country of origin to calculate
whether the team members of each dyad were of the same or diﬀerent culture.
We created DEMO dummy variable for cultural diversity, coding 1 where the dyad
partners DEMO to diﬀerent cultures and 0 where they were from the same
culture.
Perceived trustworthiness was measured based on the dimensions of perceived
benevolence, ability, and integrity reported by the trustor about the trustee in the
dyadic surveys. All items are listed in Fig. 2 and were measured using DEMO 5-point
scale with 5 equal to higher levels of benevolence, ability, or integrity. Benevolence
was the extent to which the trustee demonstrated sensitive DEMO helpful behaviors
that showed concern for the trustee. Ability was the extent to which the trustee
exhibited technical, professional, and project level competence. DEMO with
Mayer et al. (1995), we operationalized integrity as virtuosity DEMO honesty as per-
ceived by the trustor. This conceptualization was consistent with two questions
from McCroskey’s (1966) scales about source credibility, which we therefore adop-
ted. Unfortunately, our measure for integrity was excluded from the survey for
month 1, so we only have this measure at month 3. To test the inﬂuence of integ-
rity as a dimension of DEMO trustworthiness, we created a measure for per-
ceived trustworthiness at month DEMO, not including integrity, and ran all statistical
analyses. The pattern of results was the same. For month 3, we also conducted a
factor analysis and conﬁrmed that the items loaded on three factors as expected.
DEMO month 1 and month 3, we conﬁrmed that the scale for DEMO trustworthi-
ness was reliable as a single scale (alpha = 0.84 DEMO 0.84, respectively). Consistent
with our theory, we then averaged across all items to create scales for perceived
trustworthiness.
Perceived follow-through was measured DEMO on the trustor’s evaluation of the
extent to which a co-worker followed through on commitments and completed
work on schedule (see Fig. 2). Perceived follow-through was measured at one and
three months into the project. DEMO four items were measured on a 5-point scale,
where 5 equated to high levels of perceived follow-through. The scale had a
reliability of DEMO (month 1) and 0.88 (month 3), so the four DEMO were averaged to
create our measures of perceived follow-through.
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
4. Results
4.1. Analysis
We tested our hypotheses using linear regression models with ordinary least
squares estimation (OLS). We anticipated a problem with autocorrelation—the
correlation between values of the same variable across diﬀerent cases. Autocorrela-
DEMO would occur if the trust of person A was related to the trust of person B. The-
ories of trust based upon reciprocity (Creed and Miles, 1996: 19) suggest that the
level of trust between two people is positively related (e.g. the more A trusts B, DEMO
higher is B’s trust of A), which could cause a problem with ﬁrst order autocorrela-
tion of the data between dyads. The Durbin-Watson (Hamilton, 1992) test statistic
(d) for correlation between the value DEMO checking of the trustor and the trustee
were higher than the upper limit (d = 2.14) suggesting no positive ﬁrst-order auto-
correlation among DEMO errors. Thus, the reciprocal nature of trust does not appear
to DEMO signiﬁcant in our data.
We also used the estimation procedure of AMOS (Hoyle, 1995; Byrne, 2001)to
construct a structural equation model (SEM). Doing so allowed us to observe
more complex relationships between DEMO and changes over time. The AMOS
SEM is a test of goodness of ﬁt between the data and the proposed model. There-
fore, a low p-value indicates that the null hypotheses, that the model does not ﬁt,
can be accepted. A high p-value indicates that the null DEMO can be rejected
and that the model does ﬁt. We adopted a conﬁrmatory analysis approach
(Joreskog, 1993). To maintain the same variables DEMO used in our multivariate
regression models, we choose not to construct DEMO variables because isolating the
measurement error in the indicator variables (Hoyle, 1995) was not our goal and
could alter the values of the latent variables at the two points in time. Two poten-
tial problems DEMO our data, a small sample size and non-normal distributions of
variables, tended to overestimate the v2 statistic and hence could lead to the DEMO
tion of suitable models (Byrne, 2001). We therefore used bootstrapping to provide
a greater degree of accuracy in assessment of model ﬁt DEMO (Byrne, 2001).
4.2. Hypotheses tests
The descriptive statistics and correlations of the variables are shown in Table 1.
The majority of the DEMO were culturally diverse (84%, see Table 1). Variables
measured at two points in time, such as trust, perceived trustworthiness and
perceived DEMO, had a higher standard deviation at month 1 than at
month DEMO For example, the standard deviation of Trust (1) is .87, while the
standard deviation of Trust (3) was only 0.70. We DEMO a positive relationship
between the trustor’s perceived rewards in the project and the perceived follow-
through of the trustee at month 1 (r = 0.23, p < 0.05). We also noticed a negative
relationship between the trustor’s perceived risk and the perceived follow-through
of the trustee at DEMO 3 (r = 0.29, p < 0.01). This could indicate that the
higher the rewards for the trustor, the more likely the trustor will be to interpret
Table 1
Descriptive statistics and correlation table for month one (1) DEMO month three (3) (N = 104)
Mean Std. 123 DEMO
Dev.
1. Trust (1) 3.49 0.87
2. Risk 3.67 0.71 0.12
3. Reward 4.19 0.91 0.13 0.08
4. Cultural diversity 0.84 0.37 0.01 DEMO 0.01
5. Perceived trustworthiness (1) 3.58 0.75 0.22 0.26 0.12 0.29
6. Perceived follow-through (1) 3.94 0.82 0.47 0.18 0.23 0.12 0.59
DEMO Trust (3) 3.58 0.70 0.32 0.17 0.16 0.21 0.44 0.44
8. Perceived trustworthiness (3) 3.93 0.68 0.16 0.38 0.05 0.32 0.56 0.46 DEMO
9. Perceived follow-through (3) 3.99 0.67 0.04 0.29 0.17 0.21 0.50 0.50 0.66 0.76
p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < DEMO
14
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
the trustee’s follow-through in a positive light early in the project, DEMO that risk
becomes more salient later in the project.
We hypothesized that the relationship between perceived trustworthiness and
trust will be moderated by the DEMO perceived risk (H1). To test hypotheses 1
we conducted multivariate DEMO models predicting trust (see Table 2) with
terms representing the interaction between risk and perceived trustworthiness. To
create the interaction we hypothesized (low risk and perceived trustworthiness), we
reversed risk to create low risk DEMO multiplied by perceived trustworthiness.
Although the interaction was not signiﬁcant in the ﬁrst models, when perceived fol-
low-through was added to the model, DEMO achieved signiﬁcance at month 1 (b = 1.12,
p < DEMO, see Table 2, model E1), providing partial support for hypothesis 1.
We also hypothesized that the relationship between perceived trustworthiness
and trust DEMO be moderated by the trustor’s perceived reward (H2). We created DEMO
variable to represent the interaction between reward and perceived trustworthiness.
The interaction variable was signiﬁcant in model C at month 1 (b = 1.23, p < 0.05),
but not at month 3 (b = 0.69, n.s.). When perceived follow-through was added
to the model, DEMO eﬀect was no longer signiﬁcant, providing mixed support for
hypotheses 2 (see Table 2).
Hypothesis 3 states that trustors in culturally diverse DEMO will have lower per-
ceived trustworthiness for the trustee. As expected, DEMO diversity was signiﬁcant
in predicting perceived trustworthiness at month 1 (T DEMO .029, r < 0.01) and month
3(r = 0.32, DEMO < 0.001) (see Table 1). We also observed that cultural diversity was
signiﬁcant in predicting trust in month 3 (b =1.23, DEMO < 0.05, see model A3) until
perceived trustworthiness was added to the models (see Table 2, model B3). This
suggests that DEMO trustworthiness may mediate the relationship between cul-
tural diversity and trust.
Hypothesis 4 proposes that perceived follow-through will mediate the relation-
ship between perceived DEMO and trust in cross-functional, geographi-
cally distributed work. We found strong DEMO between perceived follow-
through and trust and also between perceived trustworthiness and trust at both
month 1 and month 3. Because both perceived trustworthiness DEMO perceived fol-
low-through predict trust, the variable that maintains signiﬁcance when DEMO are
added to a model predicting trust is the variable that directly inﬂuences trust
(Baron & Kenney, 1986). In regression models B1 DEMO B2 (see Table 2), perceived
trustworthiness predicts trust at month DEMO (b = 0.28, p < 0.01) and month 3 (b =
0.61, p < 0.001). When perceived follow-through is added in models D1 and D3,
perceived trustworthiness is not signiﬁcant at month DEMO (b = 0.02, n.s.) and less
signiﬁcant at month 3 (b = 0.24, p < 0.05), suggesting full mediation early in the
project and partial mediation later. In contrast, perceived follow-through main-
tained signiﬁcance at both month 1 (b = 0.52, p < 0.001) and month 3 (b = 0.48,
p < 0.001). Overall, these analyses provide strong support for hypothesis 4.
Table 2
Comparison of OLS estimates (standardized beta values) of trust DEMO month 1 and month 3, (N = 108)
Independent variables Model
A1 A3 B1 B3 C1 C3 D1 D3 E1 E3
Month DEMO Month 3 Month 1 Month 3 Month 1 Month 3 Month 1 Month 3 Month 1 Month 3
Intercept
  
+
 DEMO
Cultural diversity 0.01 0.20
Low risk 0.13 0.15
Reward 0.14 0.15 0.11 0.15
Perceived trustworthiness 0.28 0.61
Low risk  perceived
0.09
0.20
0.08 DEMO
0.06 0.14+
0.72 0.37 0.03 0.08 0.72
0.26 0.16 0.02 0.24 0.14
0.47 0.04 1.12
+
0.02 0.06
0.08 0.21
0.02 0.07
0.06
0.03
DEMO 0.07+
0.35
0.17
0.57
trustworthiness
Reward  Perceived
trustworthiness
Perceived follow-through
Adj. R-squared 0.007 0.07 0.07 0.35 0.09 0.35 0.23 0.44 0.25 0.44
Model DEMO 1.3 3.5 2.9 15.5 2.8 10.5 7.6 17.9 6.1 12.9
Degrees of freedom 2, 104 3, 104 4, 103 4, 102 6, 101 6, 100 5, 102 5, 101 7, 100 7, 99
1.23
0.69
0.52
0.48
0.65
0.51
0.04
0.48
+p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.001.
16
R. DEMO et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
4.3. Longitudinal model
In our last hypothesis (H5), we predicted DEMO trustor’s initial perceptions of co-
workers’ trustworthiness, follow-through, and trust would predict later perceived
trustworthiness, follow-through and trust in cross-functional, geographically dis-
DEMO dyads. To test this hypothesis, we used our theoretical model to DEMO
the ﬁt of the data using structural equation modeling. Our ﬁrst structural equation
model (Fig. 3, SEM A) indicates that, as expected, perceived trustworthiness at
month 1 predicts perceived trustworthiness at month 3. Similarly, perceived follow-
through at month 1 predicts perceived follow-through at month 3 DEMO trust at
month 1 predicts trust at month 3. This analysis provides strong support for
hypothesis 5, suggesting stability of perceived trustworthiness, perceived DEMO
through, and trust over the three months that this data were DEMO Although
Fig. 3. Structural equation model estimation of standardized coeﬃcients.
18
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
model ﬁt statistics indicate a reasonable ﬁt with the data, v2 (12, N = 108) = 19.48,
p = 0.078, modiﬁcation indices suggest that improvements are possible. In parti-
cular, a direct relationship between trust at month 1 and perceived follow-through
at month 3 and DEMO link between perceived follow-through at month 1 and perceived
trustworthiness at month 3 would improve the ﬁt (see Fig. 3, SEM B). DEMO revised
model ﬁt our data better, v2 (10, N = DEMO) = 5.236, p = 0.875, and goodness of ﬁt
indices DEMO indicated a higher level of ﬁt (NFI = 0.998, RFI = 0.994, CFI = 1.0,
RMSEA = 0.000). The negative relationship between trust at month 1 and per-
ceived follow-through at month 3 DEMO signiﬁcant (b = 0.20, p < 0.01). This suggests
that lack of trust at month 1 may increase monitoring of one’s co-workers, which
could then increase perceived follow-through at month 3 by providing conﬁrming
DEMO that the co-workers are performing as hoped. By the same token, DEMO
trust at month 1 could mean less checking which leads to lower perceptions of fol-
low-through at month 3.
In both structural equation models, we also conﬁrmed that perceived follow-
through mediates the relationship between perceived DEMO and trust at
months 1 and 3 and that cultural diversity impedes perceptions of trustworthiness
in these dyads. In Table 3, we provide a list of our hypotheses, how they were tes-
ted, and a DEMO of the results.
Table 3
Summary of hypotheses, tests and results
DEMO Tests Results
H1 The relationship between perceived trustworthiness and
trust will be moderated by the trustor’s perceived risk.
H2 The relationship between perceived trustworthiness DEMO
trust will be moderated by the trustor’s perceived reward.
H3 When there is cultural diversity between the trustor and
the trustee, the trustor will perceive the trustee as less
trustworthy than when the trustee belongs to DEMO same
culture.
H4 In cross-functional, geographically distributed work, per-
ceived follow-through will mediate the relationship
between perceived trustworthiness and trust of a trustee.
DEMO Trustor’s initial perceptions of the trustworthiness, fol-
low-through, and trust of their co-workers will predict
later perceived trustworthiness, follow-through and trust
more strongly in distributed dyads than in collocated
dyads.
Structural Equation Modeling (SEM).
Regression (Table 2) Partially
supported at
month 1
Regression (Table 2) Partially
supported at
month 1
Regression and SEM Supported
(Fig. 3)DEMO
Mediation analysis
and SEM (Fig. 3)
Supported
SEM (Fig. 3) Supported
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
5. Discussion
Traditional models of trust suggest that if a co-worker performs well, he or she
will be perceived as more trustworthy (see DEMO et al., 1995). We found some-
thing quite diﬀerent in DEMO study we report here. Our ﬁndings indicate that, among
cross-functional, geographically distributed partners, if a worker is perceived as
trustworthy, he or DEMO will be perceived as delivering on work commitments. We
reason that it may be diﬃcult for co-workers to evaluate the deliverables of collea-
gues DEMO other disciplines, particularly when they are not physically collocated
and their DEMO process is not visible. Thus, the initial perceptions of one’s co-
DEMO may determine the extent to which one believes these co-workers have
followed through on work expectations. This points to the importance of ﬁrst
impressions DEMO cross-functional, geographically distributed work.
An alternative explanation is that those who DEMO perceived as more trustworthy
also are more likely to follow-through, either DEMO the original assessment of
their trustworthiness was accurate or because the trust that was placed in them
caused them to be more diligent. Such DEMO call into question existing
models of interpersonal trust, which consistently include DEMO link between perform-
ance outcomes and perceived trustworthiness, but rarely the DEMO
The results of our longitudinal analysis further support the stability of trust in
these dyads. Perceived trustworthiness, perceived follow-through, and trust at
month DEMO predicted those same variables at month 3, indicating that ﬁrst impres-
DEMO played a signiﬁcant role in determining later perceptions. We do not have the
data on actual behavior required to assess the extent to which DEMO stability we
observed is the result of ﬁrst impressions that were not updated with behavioral
data, ﬁrst impressions that were accurate to begin with and did not require updat-
ing, or initial impressions that set into motion behaviors that reinforced the status
quo. Teasing apart these alternative explanations DEMO an important next step in
understanding the role of trust and the generalizeability of these results beyond
cross-functional, geographically distributed work.
Although our results generally suggest the stability of trust in cross-functional,
geographically distributed dyads, our longitudinal analysis also indicates that some
participants updated their perceptions of DEMO and trustworthiness. Per-
ceived follow-through at month 1, for example, predicted perceived trustworthiness
at month 3, suggesting that co-workers’ behavior sometimes contributed to per-
ceived trustworthiness. Although weaker than the eﬀect of perceived trustworthi-
ness DEMO perceived follow-though, this ﬁnding is consistent with existing models of
trust (e.g. Mayer et al., 1995) and with theories of history-based trust, which argue
that trust is an outcome of cumulative interactions between individuals DEMO is
updated based on the trustor’s experience of the trustee’s behavior. These results
also point to the important role of perceived (not necessarily actual) follow-
through in cross-functional, global work and may indicate that sharing DEMO
mation about work progress could help to build trust between these co-workers.
This notion is consistent with O’Leary, Orlikowski, and Yates’ (2002) DEMO of
trust and control in the Hudson Bay Company in which they found that providing
20
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
regular reports to headquarters went hand-in-hand with establishing trust between
distant locations.
We also found that cultural diversity was associated with lower perceived trust-
DEMO This eﬀect was stronger later in the project, suggesting that it DEMO be
the result of cultural misunderstandings rather than prejudices. Thus, the DEMO
the cultural diversity in cross-functional, distributed work, the more fragile the
trust as people struggle to ﬁnd common ground and search for signs DEMO benevol-
ence, ability, and integrity—all characteristics whose manifestations and interpreta-
tions may be heavily inﬂuenced by culture. In the study we report here, we can
merely state that cultural diversity was associated with less perceived DEMO
ness. Further studies are needed to understand how culturally diverse, cross-func-
DEMO, distributed co-workers negotiate their diﬀerences over space and time.
Each discipline DEMO has its own culture created by shared professional para-
digms and reinforced by education. All of the dyads in our study were cross-func-
tional, not allowing us to compare with uni-functional dyads, but we found
evidence of discipline-based cultural diﬀerences during our qualitative work in our
pilot study. DEMO discipline-based group discussions, members of each profession
said that they would DEMO a member of their own profession more than one of the
other professions, supporting our assertion that developing trust may be more
challenging in cross-functional work. The architects felt that architects were ‘‘inher-
ently more trustworthy’’ DEMO the architect has to coordinate the design team. The
structural engineers said that the structural engineer must be trustworthy or the
building would fall DEMO One construction manager jokingly said, ‘‘Architects are
useless,’’ but the DEMO managers all laughed at the joke. Our respondents
reported that making ‘‘personal sacriﬁces for the good of the team’’ built trust.
‘‘Seeing someone do DEMO to save himself,’’ was described as severely damag-
ing trust. International diﬀerences in holidays that were not discussed also caused
problems because several DEMO did not coordinate their spring break and left their
team members wondering where they were for two weeks. Interacting with diﬀerent
disciplines, being geographically and temporally distributed (e.g., being in diﬀerent
time zones), and DEMO on technology all reportedly made trust more diﬃcult.
There are several limitations to the study we report. First, the studies were con-
ducted with student teams. Although these student teams operated in ways that are
similar DEMO teams in the construction industry, the teams were artiﬁcial in the DEMO
that students were taking a class for which they would receive a grade. Because the
students were not employees of a ﬁrm, there were no immediate ﬁnancial stakes,
and they had little expectation of working DEMO these team members on future pro-
jects, although there was some DEMO of the opportunity to be recruited by the
industry mentors to work in their companies. Researchers have identiﬁed relation-
ships between trust and work DEMO performance that are not simple and may be
mediated by factors such as coordination and motivation (e.g. Dirks, 1999)and
may be complicated DEMO organizational level (Zaheer, McEvily, & Perrone, 1998).
Such factors are diﬃcult to replicate in student teams. In an ethnography of the
DEMO Bay Company, O’Leary and his colleagues (O’Leary et al., 2002) describe
the relationship between trust and control in a distributed work setting. DEMO our
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
student teams, no binding contracts were signed, and students had few ways of
controlling their peers. Although this may also often be the DEMO in non-student
work groups, the relationship between control and trust is DEMO important one and
emphasizes the importance of conducting further research in organizational set-
tings to understand the complexity of trust between team members and DEMO
the generalizeability of the results reported here.
Another important characteristic of our study setting was that team members
met face-to-face for two days at DEMO start of the project. Others have argued for the
importance of geographically distributed teams meeting early in the life of a project
as a DEMO of developing rapport and establishing a shared vision (Armstrong &
Cole, 2002; Kraut, Galegher, Fish, & Chalfonte, 1992). However, many distributed
teams never meet face-to-face. In those cases, we suspect that trust may be slower
to develop and swift trust based on expectations DEMO roles will be more crucial
(see Jarvenpaa & Leidner, 1999). More research is needed to better understand the
impact of face-to-face meetings DEMO the development and maintenance of trust in
cross-functional, geographically distributed work.
DEMO this study, we created a measure of trust based on participants’ DEMO to
check and the extent to which they actually checked on their co-workers. Because
monitoring can reduce uncertainty, authors have noted that the desire to monitor
another’s behavior is directly associated with trust (Nooteboom, 2002; Wicks,
Berman, & Jones, 1999). Buskens, for example, DEMO the number of legal and ﬁnan-
cial safeguards in a contract as an inverse measure of trust (Buskens, 2002). Moni-
toring can DEMO be considered a type of safeguard in cross-functional,
distributed work where contracts are not used. Using monitoring, rather than trust
attitude, as DEMO measure helped us to overcome the problem of many attitudinal mea-
sures that make it diﬃcult to separate trust from perceived trustworthiness. Our
measure, however, also has some limitations. First, although we were attempting to
DEMO an indicator of behavior, ours is not a behavioral measure. It DEMO possible
that self-reported checking and desire to check are biased by one’s recall of the
checking event. In our study context, this could have resulted in a bias toward
more checking because of the salience of DEMO checking events. Second, checking on
one’s co-workers is undoubtedly challenging in DEMO, distributed work.
It requires eﬀort, is likely to be diﬃcult to do unobtrusively, and may be diﬃcult to
coordinate. Cross-functional, distributed workers DEMO therefore monitor their co-
workers infrequently, not because they trust them, but because it is too challenging
to check on them. Both of DEMO factors suggest a possible bias in our data toward
less checking, DEMO could indicate that less trust exists between these co-workers
than is captured by our data. Although we believe the items that measured desire
to DEMO help to alleviate these biases, some bias may remain. Because these DEMO
do not aﬀect the measurement of our independent variables or the relationship
between our independent variables and trust, we anticipate that eliminating any
residual bias would strengthen our ﬁndings, but additional research is needed to
better understand the relationship between monitoring and trust between cross-
functional, distributed co-workers. Future work that observes more closely the
22
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
interactions between co-workers over time will help to shed light on these relation-
ships.
Due to poor scale reliability, we were unable to assess the role of trust propen-
sity in cross-functional, geographically distributed dyads. The scale developed by
Rotter (1971) has been used to predict trust DEMO a number of studies (Yamagishi &
Yamagishi, 1994; Yamagishi, DEMO, & Watabe, 1998). However, our measure of
trust propensity DEMO to have low reliability (alpha = 0.47), which contributed to
DEMO with prediction. We speculate that trust propensity may be more easily
observed in laboratory experiments than in working relationships, where the
strength of the context may overwhelm individual diﬀerences. We further speculate
that the international cross-cultural DEMO of the dyads in our study may contrib-
ute to low reliability of the scale. We believe it is necessary to conduct further
research DEMO determine the importance of trust propensity in predicting trust within
cross-functional, DEMO work.
Finally, the model that we developed and the conclusions that DEMO draw are for
dyads conducting cross-functional, geographically distributed work. Because we
DEMO not compare cross-functional with uni-functional dyads or distributed dyads
with collocated dyads, we are not able to draw conclusions about the diﬀerences
that exist or about trust in traditional dyads. We anticipate that uni-functional
dyads rely DEMO heavily on behavioral indicators of follow-through than on per-
ceptions about the trustworthiness of co-workers to assess follow-through. We also
suspect that cross-functional, geographically distributed workers may be less able
to gather information about their co-workers DEMO objectively assess co-workers’
follow-through. Thus, we believe that assessments of follow-through DEMO be parti-
cularly subjective in cross-functional, distributed work. These comparisons are DEMO
for future research.
6. Conclusion
In this study, we tested a DEMO of trust modiﬁed to reﬂect the context of cross-
functional, geographically DEMO work. In contrast to traditional models of
trust, we found that DEMO trustworthiness may determine perceived follow-
through rather than the reverse. Based on our ﬁndings, we oﬀer several recommen-
dations for those who manage or are engaged in cross-functional, geographically
distributed work. First, our results reinforce DEMO importance of building rapport
and trust early in a project. In particular, creating an environment in which co-
workers can evaluate one another’s perceived trustworthiness (benevolence, ability,
and integrity) may help to set the tone for the partnership well into the future. Cre-
ating opportunities to DEMO trustworthiness is especially important in cross-func-
tional and cross-cultural relationships where trustworthiness may be more diﬃcult
and time-consuming to evaluate accurately. Second, our ﬁndings suggest that trust,
once established, may be fairly stable in cross-functional, global work. If high
levels of trust are established early in the development of the partnership, this may
be beneﬁcial. It may also, DEMO, increase project risk if trusted partners fail to
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
deliver, but continue to be perceived as following through. It is DEMO important
that information is shared and reviews be instituted so that risk can be averted.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by NSF DEMO IIS-9872996 to the second
author and a grant from the Obayashi Corporation (Japan) to the third author.
We would like to thank the DEMO, faculty and mentors of Stanford
University’s CEE222 class for their participation DEMO the ‘‘Trust in Global Teams’’
research project. We also thank Daniel Robey and our three anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments on earlier drafts DEMO this article.
References
Armstrong, D. J., & Cole, P. (2002). Managing distances and diﬀerences in geographically distributed
work groups. In P. DEMO Hinds, & S. Kiesler (Eds.), Distributed Work (pp. 167–186)DEMO Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Barber, B. (1983). DEMO logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The DEMO variable distinction in social psychologi-
cal research: Conceptual, strategic, and DEMO considerations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 6, 1173–1182.
Bhattacharya, DEMO T., Divenney, T. M., & Pillutla, M. M. (1998)DEMO A formal model of trust based on out-
comes. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 473–490.
Bigley, G. A., & Pearce, DEMO L. (1998). Straining for shared meaning in organization science: Problems of
trust and distrust. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 405–421.
Bishop, S. K. (1999). Cross-functional project teams in functionally aligned DEMO Project
Management Journal, 30(3), 6–12.
Brewer, M. B. (DEMO). In-group favoritism: The subtle side of intergroup discrimination. In D. DEMO Mes-
sick, & A. Tenbrunsel (Eds.), Codes of conduct: DEMO research and business ethics (pp. 160–170).
New York: Russel Sage Foundation.
Brunelli, M. A. (1999). How Harley-Davidson uses cross-functional teams. DEMO, 127(7), 148.
Buskens, V. (2002). Social networks DEMO trust. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Butler Jr., J. K. (1991)DEMO Toward understanding and measuring conditions of trust: Evolution of a con-
DEMO of trust inventory. Journal of Management, 17, 643–663.
Butler Jr., DEMO K., & Cantrell, R. S. (1984). A behavioral decision DEMO approach to modeling dyadic
trust in superiors and subordinates. Psychological Reports, DEMO, 19–28.
Byrne, B. M. (2001). Structural equation modeling with DEMO: basic concepts, applications, and program-
ming. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence DEMO Associates, Publishers.
Carmel, E. (1999). Global software teams: collaborating across borders and time zones. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc..
Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., & Eagly, A. (1989). DEMO and systematic information processing within
and beyond the persuasion context. In J. S. Uleman, & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought
(pp. 212–252). NY, NY: The Guilford Press.
Coleman, J. (1990)DEMO Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cramton, DEMO D. (2002). Attributions in distributed work groups. In P. J. DEMO, & S. Kiesler (Eds.), Dis-
tributed work (pp. 191–212)DEMO Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Cramton, C. D. (2001). The mutual knowledge problem and its consequences in geographically dis-
persed teams. DEMO Science, 12(3), 346–371.
24
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
Creed, W. E. D., & Miles, R. E. (1996). Trust in organizations: A conceptual framework linking organi-
zational forms, managerial DEMO, and the opportunity costs of controls. In R. M. Kramer, &DEMO
T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 16–38). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (1998). Between trust and DEMO: Developing conﬁdence in partner cooperation
in alliances. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 491–512.
Dirks, K. T. (1999). The eﬀects DEMO interpersonal trust on work group performance. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 84(DEMO), 445–455.
Fairholm, G. W. (1994). Leadership and the culture of trust. Westport, CT: Praeger, Publishers.
Fruchter, R. (1999). Architecture/engineering/construction teamwork: A collaborative design and learn-
ing space. ASCE Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 13(4), 261–270.
Gambetta, DEMO (1988). Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations. Oxford: Basil DEMO Ltd.
Good, D. (2000). Individuals, interpersonal relations, and trust. In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making
and breaking cooperative relations, (electronic edition) (pp. 31–48). University of Oxford: Department
of DEMO
Hamilton, L. C. (1992). Regression with graphics, a second DEMO in applied statistics. Belmont, Canada:
Duxbury Press.
Hardin, R. (DEMO). Trust and trustworthiness. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hauptman, O., & Hirji, K. K. (1999). Managing integration and DEMO in cross-functional teams:
An international study of concurrent engineering product development. R&D Management, 29(2),
179–191.
Hinds, P., & DEMO, D. (In Press). Out of Sight, Out of Sync: Understanding Conﬂict in Distribute
Teams. Organization Science.
Hinds, P., & Weisband, S. (2003). Shared knowledge and shared understanding in virtual teams.
In C. B. Gibson, & S. G. Cohen (Eds.), Emerging perspectives DEMO creating the conditions for
virtual team eﬀectiveness. New York, NY: Jossey-Bass.
Hollingshead, A. (1996). Information suppression and status persistence in group DEMO making.
Human Communication Research, 23(2), 193–219.
Hosmer, L. T. (1995). Trust: the connecting link between organizational theory and philosophical DEMO
Academy of Management Review, 20(2), 379–403.
Hoyle, R. H. (1995). Structural equation modeling: Concepts, issues, and applications. Thousand DEMO,
CA: Sage Publictions, Inc..
Ireson, C. L., & McGillis, G. (1998). A multidisciplinary shared governance model. Nursing Manage-
ment, 29(2), 37–39.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., & Leidner, D. E. (1999). Communication and trust in global virtual teams. Organiza-
tion Science, 10(6), 791–815.
Jasswalla Avan, R., & Sashittal, H. DEMO (1999). Building collaborative cross-functional new product
teams. The Academy of DEMO Executive, 13(3), 50–63.
Joreskog, K. G. (1993). DEMO structural equation models. In K. A. Bollen, & S. Long (Eds.), Testing
structural equation models (pp. 294–316). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Katzenback, J., & Smith, D. (1993). The wisdom DEMO teams. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers.
Kiesler, S., & Cummings, J. C. (2002). What do we know about proximity and DEMO in work groups?
A legacy of research. In P. J. Hinds, & S. Kiesler (Eds.), Distributed work (pp. 57–82). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kramer, R. M., Brewer, M. B., & Hanna, B. A. (1996). Collective trust and collective action. DEMO R. M.
Kramer, & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 357–389).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Kraut, R., Galegher, J., Fish, R., & Chalfonte, B. (1992). Task requirements and media choice in DEMO
borative writing. Human Computer Interaction, 7, 375–407.
Latane, B., Lui, J., Nowak, A., & Bonevento, M. (1995). Distance DEMO: Physical space and social
impact. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 795–805.
Lawrence, P., & Lorsch, J. (1967). Organization and Environment: Managing Diﬀerentiation and Inte-
gration. Cambridge: MA: Harvard University Press.
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) 1–26
DEMO
Levinthal, D. A., & Warglien, M. (1999). Landscape design: designing for local action in complex
worlds. Organization Science, 10(3), 342–357.
Luo, Y. (2002). Building trust in cross-cultural collaborations: DEMO a contingency perspective. Journal
of Management, 28(5), 669–694.
Maister, D. (1993). Quality work doesn’t mean quality service. In D. Maister (Ed.), Managing the pro-
fessional service ﬁrm (pp. 69–77). DEMO York: Free Press.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational trust.
Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 709–734.
Maznevski, M. L., & Chudoba, K. M. (2000). Bridging space over time: Global virtual team dynamics
and eﬀectiveness. Organization Science, 11(5), 473–492.
McAllister, DEMO J. (1995). Aﬀect-and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation
DEMO organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 24–59.
McCroskey, J. C. (1966). Scales for the measurement of ethos. Speech Monographs, DEMO, 65–72.
Meyerson, D., Weick, K. E., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Swift trust in temporary groups. In R. M.
Kramer, & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations (pp. 90–113). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Pub-
lications.
Mishra, A. (1996)DEMO Organizational responses to crisis: The centrality of trust. In R. M. DEMO, & T. R.
Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations (pp. DEMO). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc..
Nohria, N. R., & Eccles, R. G. (1992). Face-to-face: Making network organizations DEMO In N. R.
Nohria, & R. G. Eccles (Eds.), Networks and organization (pp. 288–308). Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Nooteboom, B. (2002). Trust. Forms, foundations, functions, failures and ﬁgures. Cheltenman, UK:
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.
Nicholas, T. (1993). Secrets of entrepreneurial leadership. USA: Dearborn Financial Publishing, Inc..
O’Hara-Devereaux, M., & Johansen, R. (1994). Global work: Bridging distance, culture, and time. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
O’Leary, M., Orlikowski, W., & Yates, J. (2002). Distributed work over the DEMO: Trust and control
in the Hudson’s Bay Company. In P. J. DEMO, & S. Kiesler (Eds.), Distributed work (pp. 27–54).
DEMO, MA: The MIT Press.
Olson, G., & Olson, J. (2000). Distance matters. Human Computer Interaction, 15, 139–179.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, M. P. (1985). Trust in close relationships. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 49(1), 95–112.
Ring, P. S., & van de Ven, A. H. (1994). Development process of cooperative interorganizational rela-
tionships. Academy of Management Review, 19(1), 90–118.
Rotter, J. B. (1971). Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. American Psychologist, 26(5),
443–452.
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so diﬀerent after all: A cross-
discipline view of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 393–404.
Ryan, K. D. (1999). Driving fear out of the medication-use process DEMO that improvement can occur.
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc., 56(17), 1765–1769.
Schein, E. H. (1991). ‘‘What is culture?DEMO In P. J. Frost, L. F. Moore, M. R. Louis, DEMO C. Lundberg, &
J. Martin (Eds.), Reframing organizational culture (pp. 243–253). Newburry Park, CA: Sage.
Schunn, C. D., DEMO, K., & Okada, T. (1988). The growth of multidisciplinarity in the cognitive
science society. Cognitive Science, 22, 107–130.
Shapiro, S. P. (1987). The social control of impersonal trust. American Journal of Sociology, 93(3),
623–658.
Sheppard, B. H., & Sherman, M. (1998). The grammers of trust: A model and general DEMO
Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 422–437.
Sitkin, S. B., & Roth, N. L. (1993). Explaining the limited eﬀectiveness of legalistic ‘‘remedies’’ for trust/
distrust. Organization Science, 4(3), 367–392.
Strickland, L. H. (1958). Surveillance and trust. Journal of Personality, 26, 200–215.
Tajfel, H. (1969). Cognitive aspects of prejudice. Journal of Social Issues, 25, 79–97.
26
R. Zolin et al. / Information and Organization 14 (2004) DEMO
Thompson, J. D. (1967). Organizations in action: social science DEMO in administrative behavior. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill, Inc..
Wicks, A. C., Berman, S. L., & Jones, T. M. (1999). The structure of optinal trust: moral and strategic
implications. Academy of Management Review, 24(1), 99–116.
Williams, K. Y., & O’Reilly, DEMO A. (1998). Demography and diversity in organizations: A review of 40
years of research. In B. M. Straw, & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior,
Vol. 20. (pp. 77–140)DEMO Connecticut: Jai Press, Inc..
Yamagishi, T., Cook, D. S., & Watabe, M. (1998). Uncertainty, trust, and commitment formation DEMO the
United States and Japan. American Journal of Sociology, 104(1), 165–194.
Yamagishi, T., & Yamagishi, M. (1994). Trust and commitment in the United States and Japan. Motiv-
ation and Emotion, 18(2), 129–166.
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., & Perone, V. (1998). Does trust matter? Exploring the eﬀects of interorganiza-
tional DEMO interpersonal trust on performance. Organization Science, 9(2), 141–159.{1g42fwefx}