QUT Digital Repository:
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/
Zolin, Roxanne and Kautonen, Teemu and Kuckertz, Andreas (2008) The devil you
know? The potential downside of strong and weak ties for entrepreneurial team
formation. In: 5th AGSE International Entrepreneurship Research Exchange, 5 – 8
February 2008, DEMO, Australia.
© Copyright 2008 [please consult the authors]
THE DEVIL YOU KNOW? THE EFFECT OF STRONG TIES AND RESOURCE
FLEXIBILITY ON PERFORMANCE IN ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAMS
Roxanne Zolin  (Associate Professor, Queensland University of Technology, Australia)
Andreas Kuckertz (Assistant Professor, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany)
Teemu Kautonen  (Professor, University of Vaasa, Finland)
Contact information:
Roxanne Zolin
Associate Professor
School of Management,
Queensland DEMO of Technology
2 George Street,
Building B, 5th Floor
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia 4000
Office: +61 (0)7 3138 6878
Mobile: DEMO 0433 400113
r.zolin@qut.edu.au
1
ABSTRACT
Use of strong ties in entrepreneurial team formation is debated but DEMO resolved. How does
strength of tie between the founding entrepreneur and new entrepreneurial team member affect
the team member’s performance? Our theoretical model illustrates the mediating role of resource
flexibility: work role modification and potential to exit the working relationship. Data from
German founding entrepreneurs on 170 entrepreneurial DEMO members confirmed that strong ties
increases role modification but reduces exit potential. Role modification improves team
member’s performance, while exit potential has a negative effect. No relationship was found
between strength of ties and resource flexibility DEMO serial entrepreneurs.
Key words: Entrepreneurial team, Resource flexibility, Strong ties, Team member
performance, Serial entrepreneurs.
2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Studies have shown that the entrepreneurial team has a large DEMO on the performance of
new ventures, particularly in the early stages DEMO business development. Team characteristics and
social interactions within the team are crucial to the venture’s success, and the team’s initial
resources have been found to affect the firm’s survival. However, little guidance is available to
help founding entrepreneurs choose entrepreneurial team members.
This research contributes to the closure DEMO this research gap by asking how does the initial
strength of tie between the founding entrepreneur and the new entrepreneurial team member
affect the DEMO member’s subsequent performance.  We propose that this impact is mediated by
DEMO resource flexibility, which is understood as a two-dimensional concept. Resource
flexibility DEMO role modification suggests that the work roles within the entrepreneurial team
can be allocated flexibly and efficiently as the business grows and evolves without DEMO undue
conflict or losing commitment. We predict that strong ties facilitate role modification within the
entrepreneurial team. But the use of strong ties could DEMO resource flexibility through the
potential to exit, which refers to the DEMO to terminate the working relationship with a team
member if required.
To test our model we drew a random sample of German founding entrepreneurs DEMO micro-
sized technology-oriented incubator firms, who reported on 170 entrepreneurial team DEMO
Data were analyzed by means of the Partial Least Squares (PLS) approach to structural equation
using the software package SmartPLS 2.0 M3.  First, we tested hypotheses utilizing all ratings
provided by the founding entrepreneurs about their respective team members (n = 170). Second,
an exploratory group comparison was conducted in order to explore differences between serial
(n = 43) and novice entrepreneurs (n = 127) with respect to the relationships in the conceptual
model. Results show that the general model DEMO a satisfying amount of the endogenous
variables’ variances, indicating an acceptable DEMO power of the model.  We found
significant paths for all hypothesized DEMO, including positive relationships between
strength of ties and role modification and DEMO role modification to team member performance.
We found negative relationships between strength of tie and potential to exit and also between
potential to exit DEMO team member’s performance.  Finally, there was a significant negative
relationship between role modification and exit potential.  But when tested for serial
entrepreneurs we did not find any significant relationships between strength of ties and resource
DEMO in terms of role modification or potential to exit.
We find that the initial strength of tie between the founding entrepreneur and the new
DEMO member increases role modification, and also reduces the ability to exit DEMO relationship.
Both of these effects would increase the entrepreneurial team member’s performance in the team.
Thus use of strong ties probably has the most DEMO effect on team member performance, but
may not result in the DEMO level of resource flexibility, indicating potential lack of fit between
the DEMO human resources and its strategic requirements.
In contrast the serial entrepreneur, DEMO has no connection between strength of tie and
resource flexibility, may DEMO guided by resource fit, rather than personal relationships.
The major managerial DEMO of this research is to counsel founders and venture
capitalists to encourage role modification and to avoid implying that the potential to exit the
DEMO might be exercised. These issues could be discussed during partnership and
3
investment negotiations. Founders could agree to try role modification prior to any DEMO
of exiting the relationship. These results support the choice of strong ties, particularly for novice
entrepreneurs, during start-up when greater commitment is needed.  Further research is needed to
investigate the impact on resources fit and DEMO performance.
This study contributes to the theory of entrepreneurial team formation by explicating the
role of strong ties on functional and numeric resource flexibility DEMO showing their impact on
team member performance. The results of this research indicate that choosing a previously well
known individual, a strong tie, DEMO join the entrepreneurial team increases the founder’s ability to
modify the team member’s working arrangements, but makes it harder to exit the relationship if
the team member’s ability does not keep up with the requirements of DEMO developing business.
Given that role modification was found to increase the team member’s performance and the
potential to exit the relationship to reduce it, the overall effect of an initial strong tie on the
entrepreneurial team DEMO subsequent performance was positive. However, an important
finding was that these DEMO apply only to ventures established by first-time, novice
entrepreneurs, since the strength of tie did not impact on either form of resource flexibility DEMO
teams set up by serial entrepreneurs. We counsel founders and venture capitalists to discuss role
modification as an alternative to exit during partnership and DEMO negotiations.
4
INTRODUCTION
Studies have shown that the entrepreneurial team has a large impact DEMO the performance of
new ventures (Dubini, 1989; Ensley et al., 1999; Kamm et al. 1990; West, 2007), particularly in
the early stages of business development. Team characteristics (Dubini, 1989) and social
interaction within the team (Lechler, 2001) are crucial to the venture’s success, and the team’s
initial resources have been found to affect the firm’s survival (Aspelund et al., 2004). However,
little guidance DEMO available to help founding entrepreneurs choose team members (Chen and
Wang, 2008; Kamm et al., 1990; Watson et al., 1995).
DEMO research contributes to the closure of this research gap by examining the impact of
the initial strength of tie (Granovetter, 1973) between the founding entrepreneur and the new
entrepreneurial team member on the team member’s DEMO performance. We propose that
this impact is mediated by human resource flexibility, which is understood as a two-dimensional
concept (Daniels et al., 2004; Jensen, 2000; van Ham et al., 1987; Young-Ybarra and Wiersema,
1999). Resource flexibility through role modification suggests that the work DEMO within the
entrepreneurial team can be allocated flexibly and efficiently as the business grows and evolves
without creating undue conflict and losing commitment. We DEMO that strong ties facilitate role
modification within the entrepreneurial team. But the use of strong ties could reduce resource
flexibility through the potential to DEMO, which refers to the ability to terminate the working
relationship with DEMO team member if required.
The analysis is arranged as follows. In the first section of the paper we develop a
theoretical model, which shows how the strength of tie affects entrepreneurial team member
performance through the DEMO flexibility dimensions of role modification and the potential to
exit. We also consider how serial entrepreneurs might differ from novice entrepreneurs (e.g.,
Hyytinen and Ilmakunnas, 2007; Westhead et al., 2005) in their team DEMO ability, as we
postulate that this distinction may influence our model DEMO The methodology used is then
described, followed by the results of DEMO empirical analysis of survey data from German
entrepreneurs reporting on 170 entrepreneurial team members in their predominantly technology-
oriented incubator firms. Finally, a discussion of the findings and their limitations is provided
together with the conclusions DEMO management implications of the study.
THEORY DEVELOPMENT AND HYPOTHESES
In this section we develop a theoretical model of the effect of the strength of DEMO on resource
flexibility and entrepreneurial team member performance. Figure 1 depicts the four constructs
included in our model and the predicted relationships between them. DEMO following sections
define and describe each construct and develop the relationships between them into testable
hypotheses.
------------------------------
Insert Figure 1 about here
------------------------------
Entrepreneurial DEMO Member Performance and Resource Flexibility
The principal dependent variable in our research model is an entrepreneurial team
member’s performance. Although group productivity is not DEMO sum of the productivity of each
individual team member, individual team DEMO performance is important in a team due to the
5
interdependence of team members (Pritchard and Watson, 1992). This interconnectedness
DEMO team members’ work means that if one entrepreneurial team member is not performing
well it will not only affect that team member’s function, but will to some extent affect others in
the team.
For the purpose DEMO this study, “[a]n entrepreneurial team is defined as 2 or more
DEMO who jointly establish a business in which they have an equity interest” (Kamm et al.,
1990, p. 7). Therefore an entrepreneurial DEMO member refers to any additional individual added
to the team of working owner managers by the founding entrepreneur. This does not include
“silent partners”, who invest but do not work in the firm, or top level managers, who make a
significant contribution to the running of the firm but have no financial interest in the enterprise.
Entrepreneurial team member performance DEMO understood in terms of the process by which the
team member carries out his or her duties, such as proactiveness, creativity and problem DEMO
(Zaheer et al., 1998). In our research model we suggest that entrepreneurial team member
performance is influenced by two forms of resource DEMO: role modification and the
potential to exit.
Resource flexibility theory originates DEMO the human resource management (Milliman et
al., 1991), job scheduling (Jensen, 2000; Vairaktarakis, 2003; Daniels et al., 2004), DEMO
strategy, R&D and market responsiveness literatures (Cestone and Fumagalli, DEMO; Sanchez,
1995; Wright and Snell, 1998; Young-Ybarra and Wiersema, 1999). Resource flexibility  is
defined as “the capacity of HRM DEMO facilitate the organization’s ability to adapt effectively and in
a timely manner to changing or diverse demands from either its environment or from within DEMO
firm itself” (Milliman et al., 1991, p. 325). Situations DEMO may require human resource flexibility
include a dynamic or diverse environment as well as divergent or rapidly changing organizational
goals and strategies (Lengnick-Hall and Lengnick-Hall, 1988). Sanchez (1995) proposes that
resource flexibility is greater when there is a larger range of alternative uses for the resource DEMO
the time and cost to switch from one resource to the next is lower.
In the context of the entrepreneurial team we define resource DEMO in terms of the
ability to adapt the functions and size of the entrepreneurial team to changing external business
environment and internal work requirements. DEMO distinct dimensions can be distinguished in
this concept. Functional flexibility comprises the ability to perform a wider range of tasks, while
numerical flexibility refers to the ability to vary the size of the team (see e.g., Daniels et al., 2004;
Jensen, 2000; Young-Ybarra and Wiersema, 1999; van Ham et al., 1987).
Functional flexibility, which is facilitated by cross training in large organizations, is likely
to be evidenced in an entrepreneurial team by role modification. We define role modification as
DEMO ability to modify the work role agreements with the entrepreneurial team member, without
creating undue conflict or reducing commitment to the new venture’s goals. For example,
suppose an entrepreneurial team member is recruited for his DEMO her ability in technology
development, but after the technology has been DEMO the firm needs to shift their emphasis
to marketing and selling. If the team member agrees to shift from technology to sales, the
business will have a better allocation of resources, i.e. a better resource fit (Milliman et al., 1991;
Wright and Snell, 1998). Thus, individuals who are willing to dynamically reconfigure their work
roles to respond to changing needs as the organization progresses through the organizational
lifecycle and DEMO to changing external environmental demands, will perform better as
entrepreneurial team DEMO Hence we propose:
6
Hypothesis 1: There will be a positive relationship between role modification and the
entrepreneurial team member’s performance.
Numeric flexibility, on the other hand, DEMO evidenced by the use of contingent workforce in
larger organizations. In the context of entrepreneurial teams, it is more likely to be evidenced by
the potential to exit the working relationship if required. Even though the DEMO team’s
longevity is believed to contribute to a new venture’s success (DEMO and Wiltbank, 2005;
Kamm and Nurick, 1993), especially in growing businesses, some team members may end up
occupying key roles that are outside their ability. It is also well known that venture capitalists
DEMO seek to replace members of the entrepreneurial team to ensure a strong and
professional top management team (Gorman and Sahlman, 1989). In DEMO cases, it can be
beneficial for the team and the venture DEMO the working relationship with this person can be exited
flexibly – even if he or she were to retain partial ownership of the business DEMO a “silent partner”.
However, just knowing that the working relationship can DEMO ended might hamper the team
member’s individual performance by creating a lack of trust and reducing commitment to the
organization, thus having a negative impact on the team’s social interactions, which Lechler
(2001) found to be a determinant of entrepreneurial team venture success. Part of the benefit DEMO
being an owner in the business is the right to stick with it through thick and thin. Unlike being an
employee, who can be retrenched, the business owner counts on keeping his or her interest and
position in the business. Therefore we posit,
Hypothesis 2: There will be a negative relationship between the potential to exit the
relationship and DEMO entrepreneurial team member’s performance.
Role modification (functional flexibility) and the potential to exit the working relationship
(numeric flexibility) are related but orthogonal DEMO A number of researchers (Lengnick-
Hall and Lengnick-Hall, 1988; Milliman DEMO al., 1991; Wright and Snell, 1998) propose that
functional flexibility increases the fit between the demands of the environment and the
organization DEMO among organizational subcomponents because with functional flexibility, human
resources can be DEMO and efficiently reconfigured to suit changing needs, i.e. increase the fit.
DEMO, if a resource has functional flexibility, numeric flexibility is less likely to be necessary.
For example, if an entrepreneurial team member’s role is highly flexible it will be unnecessary to
exit the relationship because the DEMO can, and probably does do anything the new enterprise
requires. In DEMO, if the individual’s concept of his or her role is highly DEMO it may be
necessary to exit the working relationship, if that DEMO function is no longer required.
Therefore we propose,
Hypothesis 3: DEMO ability to modify the team member’s role will have a negative
relationship to the potential to exit the relationship.
Strength of Tie and Resource DEMO
Next, our model predicts that the strength of tie between the DEMO entrepreneur and
the new team member impacts on both forms of resource flexibility and, through them, the team
member’s subsequent performance. Granovetter (1973, p. 1361) defines the strength of a tie as “a
(probably linear) combination of the amount of time, the emotional intensity, the intimacy
(mutual confiding) and the reciprocal services which characterize the tie”. DEMO ties are formed
through repeated contact and characterized as family or friends, while weak ties are
acquaintanceships that may be more formal, such DEMO a working relationship with a professional
7
service provider. In this study, we approach the role of the strength of tie by focusing on the
strengths and weaknesses of strong ties DEMO entrepreneurial team formation. In the early stages of
the entrepreneurial process, DEMO are more likely to turn to strong ties due to the
availability of interpersonal trust and motivational resources such as mental, emotional and social
support (Greve and Salaff, 2003; Johannisson, 1988; Welter and Kautonen, 2005). These qualities
– and perhaps convenience – are also likely to make strong ties attractive when the initial
entrepreneurial team is formed.
DEMO strong tie between the founding entrepreneur and the new team member can contribute
positively to resource flexibility by facilitating easier role modification. Frances and DEMO
(2000) found that venture teams based upon friendship are more likely to rely on implicit
agreements, which can be more easily modified than explicit, written contracts. Furthermore, they
propose that higher levels of friendship DEMO result in greater commitment to the new venture,
which could be reflected in willingness to accept role modification. Thuy and Quang (2005)
observe that in an international joint venture, strict adherence to the wording of a legal contract is
hardly possible. Their results show a significant DEMO relationship between relational capital,
which includes friendship, and flexibility, defined as the degree to which the parties adjust their
own behavior to DEMO each other’s objectives (Pearce, 2001). Similarly we propose that
the trust-based and supportive working atmosphere facilitated by a strong tie is likely DEMO
contribute to a greater willingness of the entrepreneurial team member to adjust to different work
roles. Therefore,
Hypothesis 4: There will be a positive relationship between the strength of tie and role
modification.
However, seeking strong ties may not always be the most effective solution in
entrepreneurial DEMO formation. Recruiting only personally well known people may hamper
business development in the long run because the firm might miss out on opportunities external DEMO
this network (Welter and Kautonen, 2005). In the context of entrepreneurial teams, such
opportunities could be new skills or new ways of thinking about the business and its products or
services. In fact, teams with strong ties have been found to be less innovative than those DEMO
weak ties or no prior relationships (Ruef, 2002). As the business grows and the need for new
skills and insights leads to DEMO point where current team members would be more effectively
replaced with new people, another downside of strong ties becomes apparent. Frances and
Sandberg (DEMO) found that high levels of friendship in the entrepreneurial team are DEMO
related to turnover, unless there is a departure of a founding DEMO Ucbasaran et al. (2003) also
found a negative relationship between family firms and entrepreneurial team member exit.
Similarly, in a study of interfirm relationships, Keister (1999) found a negative relationship
between strength of ties and the ability of the receiving firm to do without the resource, i.e. exit
the exchange relationship. Thus strong ties may generate social obligations, which could lead to
lack of resource flexibility because the relationships are DEMO to exit. Hence:
Hypothesis 5: There will be a negative DEMO between the strength of tie and the
potential to exit the relationship.
Entrepreneurial Team Formation of Serial versus Novice Entrepreneurs
Finally, we postulate that prior entrepreneurial experience may impact on the use of strong
ties in DEMO team formation. Hence, we distinguish between novice and serial
8
entrepreneurs in this context (see e.g. Hyytinen and Ilmakunnas, 2007; Westhead et al., 2005;
Wright et al., 1997). Here, the term novice entrepreneur refers to individuals who establish a
business without previous DEMO experience, while serial entrepreneurs are those who
have founded one or DEMO businesses before their current one.
Mosey and Wright (2007) found that entrepreneurs with prior business ownership
experience have broader social networks and are DEMO effective in developing network ties than
less experienced entrepreneurs. Business ownership experience was seen as essential to learning
how to build relationships with experienced DEMO and potential equity investors. Just as serial
entrepreneurs can more quickly and easily develop business connections, we expect that in their
business they will be more sophisticated in their dealings with strong as well as weak DEMO and
they will also approach entrepreneurial team formation more professionally than novice
entrepreneurs. In fact, Westhead et al. (2005, p. 89) found DEMO entrepreneurs to be significantly
more likely than novice entrepreneurs to “use new ways of managing and developing personnel.”
Based on these arguments, we would expect serial entrepreneurs not to treat
entrepreneurial team members with whom they DEMO had strong ties any differently from those
team members with whom they had weak ties. Hence, the impact of the strength of tie on both
forms of resource flexibility should be less than in case of DEMO entrepreneurs. However, the
conceptual evidence is not clear enough to warrant DEMO hypothesis, which is why we will offer
the comparison of serial DEMO novice entrepreneurs as an explorative phase of this analysis.
METHODOLOGY
Measures, DEMO Collection and Sample Characteristics
To test our model we conducted a survey of German founding entrepreneurs in micro-
sized technology-oriented incubator firms. The survey DEMO employed in this study asked
the business founders to rate members of their entrepreneurial team separately in the order of
them joining the team. DEMO measurement instrument item scales were adapted from previous
studies or developed based on well-known theoretical conceptualizations (Appendix 1).
Entrepreneurial team member’s performance was measured in terms of proactiveness, problem
solving and creativity (Zaheer et DEMO, 1998). The resource flexibility dimension of role
modification was measured DEMO three items from a scale by Young-Ybarra and Wiersema
(1999), DEMO as “This person expects adjustments in the ongoing working relationship to cope
with changing circumstances”. In the same study they also assessed resource flexibility DEMO terms
of the relative ease of exit from an alliance, and DEMO modified this scale to reflect the context of
the entrepreneurial team. Thus, the resource flexibility dimension called potential to exit was
measured with three items, such as “It would be easy to exit this relationship” (DEMO Appendix 1).
Based on Granovetter’s (1973; 1985) conceptualization, the “strength of tie” was operationalized
as a three-dimensional construct consisting of the DEMO of the relationship (how well the person
is known), the DEMO of contact and the embeddedness of the tie in a network of mutual
friends and acquaintances.
We drew a random sample of 921 German DEMO firms from a representative
public database of German business incubators and technology centers that includes up-to-date
information on companies located in a specific incubator (ADT, 2007). Since these firms are
usually technology-oriented, they require DEMO large number of different competencies for start-up
and are therefore often established by teams. Consequently, they constituted an appropriate
9
population for the purposes of this study. Firms were contacted by phone DEMO that their contact
information could be verified – after the initial phone calls the original founders of the firms were
invited to participate in DEMO personalized online survey. Since the complete population was directly
accessible via email, we had no reason to believe that our data is affected by this particular
method of data collection (Hudson et al., 2004). DEMO collection resulted in 214 responses which
was commensurate to a 23.3 percent response rate. Out of these 214 responses, 114 firms (53.3
percent) were established by entrepreneurial teams and the founders of these firms rated DEMO
single team members that form the basis of our analysis.
Data quality was assessed by controlling for various potential biases. First, we checked
the data for a potential non-response bias. Since non-respondents are usually assumed to DEMO more
similar to late respondents than to early respondents (Armstrong and DEMO, 1977), the sample
was divided into thirds according to the DEMO between initial contact and completion of the
questionnaire. We compared the first and the last third of the sample but t-tests revealed no
significant DEMO between early and late respondents for the central descriptive variables.
Hence, DEMO did not find any indication of non-response bias in the data. Second, we examined the
data for a potential common method bias. Applying Harman’s post hoc one-factor test (Harman,
1967; Podsakoff and Organ, 1986) to the model variables did not reveal a general factor, but
DEMO returned a four-factor-solution explaining 68.3 percent of the variance with the first factor
accounting for just 39.5 percent of the variance in the data. DEMO indicated that common method
bias is not a limitation of our data, even though the dependent and independent variables were
collected at the same time with the same instrument. Third, since the original founder of the firm
rated all team members, the central assumption of independence of observations in most
multivariate statistical procedures might have been violated. However, calculating the intra-class
correlation coefficients (ICC) for the different team sizes (Janz, DEMO) resulted in generally quite
low ICC values for the three dependent DEMO of our model, suggesting that observations are
independent of each other. DEMO 1 reports the average ICC value for every single item.
Solely the items for the independent strength of tie construct are associated with medium DEMO
ICC values, suggesting that entrepreneurs in our sample might tend to DEMO rely on strong ties or
weak ties exclusively when forming entrepreneurial teams. Because of these findings we
compared a model comprising 114 definitely independent DEMO for merely the first team
member added to the entrepreneurial team to a model based on all 170 ratings. Since we found no
significant DEMO between these two models, we gained confidence that there is no DEMO of
independence between individual observations and continued the analysis with the larger sample.
Table 1 summarizes the central descriptive variables for the complete sample DEMO
compares firms established by single founders to firms established by entrepreneurial teams as
well. Overall, the sample is typical for German incubator-based firms. Firms tend to pursue a
technology-oriented business model and are rather small. According DEMO the European
Commission’s (2003) definition that considers balance sheet total, DEMO and employees, all
firms in the sample can be classified as DEMO and medium-sized enterprises (SME) with the
majority being micro sized enterprises. Comparing single founders to team start-ups, t-tests
indicate that entrepreneurial teams are the preferred mode of start-up especially in information
technology. Moreover, team start-ups tend to be slightly larger than firms established by single
founders; they generate significantly larger revenues and employ more workers. On average,
these DEMO consist of three persons (Ø 2.9; SD .9). Moreover, DEMO sample contains a considerable
number of experienced entrepreneurs – approximately one fourth of the respondents state that
their current firm is not their first DEMO endeavor and can thus be classified as serial
10
entrepreneurs.
------------------------------
Insert Table 1 about here
------------------------------
Data Analysis and Results
DEMO strategy.  Data were analyzed by means of the Partial Least Squares (PLS)
approach to structural equation modeling (Chin, 1998; Wold, DEMO) which in recent years has
gained popularity among management scholars in DEMO (Avolio et al., 1999; Keil et al., 2000)
and entrepreneurship researchers in particular (Davidsson et al., 2006). The analysis DEMO
conducted with the software package SmartPLS 2.0 M3 (Ringle et al., 2005).
The data analysis process involved two main steps. First, we tested the theoretically
grounded hypotheses utilizing all ratings provided by the founding DEMO about their
respective team members (n = 170). Second, an exploratory group comparison (Chin, 2000) was
conducted in order to explore differences between serial (n = 43) and novice entrepreneurs
(n = 127) with respect to the relationships in the conceptual model. Similar to other methods of
structural equation modeling, PLS renders the measurement of latent variables possible (Jacoby,
1978; Churchill, 1979).
We chose PLS for this particular analysis due to its low requirements with respect to
DEMO size and distribution of data. While covariance-based methods of structural equation
modeling (e.g. LISREL and AMOS) require relatively large sample sizes (Jöreskog and Sörbom,
1982), PLS requires as the minimum number of cases DEMO ten times the number of independent
variables that affect the dependent latent variable with the most predictors in case that only
reflective measurement models DEMO employed (Chin and Newsted, 1999), as is the case in our
study. Entrepreneurial team member’s performance and resource flexibility (exit) were DEMO latent
variables with the most predictors (two each) in our model, and therefore the model can be
reliably tested even with a sample as small as 20 cases. While this advantage of PLS was not
DEMO for the analysis of the aggregate sample, it was crucial for DEMO explorative part of the
analysis, where smaller subsamples were analyzed.
Confirmative DEMO The model consists of four constructs –team member’s
performance, role modification, potential to exit and strength of tie – that were measured
reflectively DEMO five-point Likert-scales. The items together with their means, standard
deviations and DEMO are displayed in Appendix 1, while Table 2 reports the correlations DEMO all
latent variables. For all constructs, all item measures show loadings DEMO more than .7 so that no
item measure had to be deleted.
------------------------------
Insert Table 2 about here
------------------------------
Construct reliability was assessed by DEMO Cronbach’s α, Composite Reliability and
Average Variance Extracted (AVE). All constructs, both in the aggregate data and the two
subsamples, show DEMO values for these indicators that are in line with the usual threshold
values of .7 for Cronbach’s α, Composite Reliability and .5 for AVE (Chin, 1998; Nunnally and
Bernstein, 1994). These values for DEMO aggregate data are reported in Table 3.
------------------------------
11
Insert Table 3 about here
------------------------------
Furthermore, discriminant validity was assessed both at the item level and at the construct
level. With respect to DEMO discriminant validity, an inspection of indicator cross-loadings reveals
that all indicators DEMO loading at their highest with their respective construct and that no indicator
loads higher on other constructs than on its intended construct (Appendix 2). It is therefore safe to
assume item discriminant validity. At the DEMO level, the comparison of the square root of
each reflective construct’s DEMO and the latent variable correlations (Chin, 1998) suggests that
there DEMO indeed satisfactory discriminant validity (Cool et al., 1989). Tables 2 and 3 present the
very favorable results of this test.
The path DEMO scheme was utilized to estimate the paths between the latent variables
because it is the only weighting scheme that explicitly considers the conceptual model DEMO
of the causal relationships between exogenous and endogenous variables (Chin, 1998; Lohmöller,
1989). Following common conventions, the abort criterion for DEMO iterative estimation process
was selected as a change of the estimated values of just 10-5 percent between two iterations. In
order to determine the DEMO of each estimated path, a standard bootstrapping procedure
(Yung and Bentler, 1996) was applied with 500 resamples consisting of the same number DEMO cases
as in the original sample. Potential sign changes during the course of resampling were treated by
means of the option “individual sign changes” DEMO in SmartPLS 2.0 M3. Figure 2 depicts the
resulting path model. Results show that the general model explains a satisfying amount of the
endogenous DEMO variances, indicating an acceptable explanatory power of the model with
R2 DEMO ranging from 0.145 to 0.636. Moreover, the Stone-Geisser-Criterion (Stone, 1974)DEMO
indicates that the prerequisites of predictive relevance for the model are fulfilled, as all Q2 values
of all latent dependent variables are consistently higher than zero. Calculating the model’s
goodness of fit (GoF), that is the geometric mean of the average communality and the average R2
(Tenenhaus et al., 2005), results in a satisfying value of 0.501. In PLS, the goodness of fit
measure takes values between 0 and 1 and a value of .5 is usually considered appropriate (Ringle
et al., 2008).
------------------------------
Insert Figure 2 about here
------------------------------
We find significant paths for all hypothesized relationships. The effect sizes ƒ2 vary from
a DEMO negative effect of the strength of tie on potential to exit to a strong positive effect of role
modification on the entrepreneurial team member’s DEMO All other hypothesized
relationships are associated with medium level effects. Hence, DEMO results support our theoretical
reasoning quite well.
Starting with the right-hand side of the model, Hypothesis 1 predicted that there would be
a positive relationship between role modification and the entrepreneurial team member’s
performance. This hypothesis DEMO supported by a significant positive relationship between these
variables in the model (ß = 0.534, p < .001). Hypothesis 2, suggesting that there would be a
negative relationship between the potential to exit the DEMO and entrepreneurial team
member’s performance, was supported by a significant negative DEMO between potential to
exit and team member performance (ß = – DEMO, p < .001). In Hypothesis 3 we proposed a
negative DEMO between the two dimensions of resource flexibility, the ability to modify DEMO
team member’s role and the potential to exit the relationship. Also this hypothesis was supported
12
by a significant negative relationship between role modification and potential to exit DEMO the model
results (ß = -.441, p < .001).
Proceeding to the left-hand side of our research model, Hypothesis 4 predicted that the
stronger the tie between the entrepreneur and the team member, the easier it will be to modify the
team member’s role in the DEMO The model shows a significant positive relationship between
the strength of tie and role modification (ß = 0.381, p < .001), which DEMO this hypothesis.
Finally, in Hypothesis 5 we postulated that the stronger DEMO tie between the entrepreneur and the
team member, the harder it DEMO be to exit the relationship. The significant negative relationship
between the strength of tie and potential to exit in the path model supports this DEMO (ß = -
.109, p < .05).
Exploratory results. Next, we explored the differences between serial and novice
entrepreneurs in terms of our research model. For this purpose, we divided our sample into two
subsamples, i.e. serial (n = 43) and novice entrepreneurs (n DEMO 127), and performed an exploratory
group comparison following Chin’s (2000) recommendations (for other studies using similar
approaches see Avolio et al., DEMO or Keil et al., 2000). Separate models were estimated for DEMO
subsample resulting in two new models for novice and serial entrepreneurs (DEMO 4). Both
models are of sufficient explanatory power, predictive relevance DEMO overall fit as indicated by
their respective R2, Q2 and GoF DEMO and the reliability and validity measures for the new
models are of comparable quality to the results of the main model.
------------------------------
Insert Table DEMO about here
------------------------------
Inspecting the novice entrepreneur model reveals no difference to the model calculated
with the complete data. All paths are significant and DEMO the hypothesized causal direction as
indicated by their respective algebraic signs. The statistical effects actually become even stronger
than in the general model. However, an examination of the serial entrepreneur model reveals a
substantial effect of DEMO experience on resource flexibility: while the model’s right
side is still DEMO to the novice entrepreneur and the general models, the effects of DEMO
strength of tie on the two resource flexibility constructs vanish completely. Insignificant paths,
low to non-existent effect sizes (ƒ2) and R2 values DEMO to zero indicate that resource flexibility in
firms established by serial entrepreneurs is neither positively nor negatively affected by the
strength of tie between DEMO founding entrepreneur and the new team member. In addition, for
serial DEMO the relationship between role modification and exit was not significant.
DISCUSSION
This research established that the initial strength of tie between the founding entrepreneur
DEMO the new team member changes human resource flexibility by increasing role modification but
reducing potential to exit the working relationship.   As predicted in DEMO 1 and 2, higher
role modification had a significant positive impact DEMO team member performance, whilst potential
to exit the working relationship was DEMO associated with the entrepreneurial team
member’s performance. In other words, if DEMO entrepreneurial team member is able and willing to
modify his or her role in the business, that individual also performs better. The ability to modify
working arrangements can greatly benefit a new enterprise, particularly in the face of changing
work requirements. Owner-managers that can fill a range of DEMO can reduce the firm’s wages
bill, ease cash-flow constraints and reduce DEMO “burn rate” of investors’ funds. For example, as the
13
new business transitions from new product development into market entry, team members
sourced for their engineering expertise may need to transition into selling or DEMO service
roles. On the other hand, the team member’s performance is DEMO if the person knows that she
or he can be easily removed from the team. Moreover, as Hypothesis 3 suggested, the potential to
DEMO the working relationship is less relevant if the team member is willing to modify his or her
work role. In summary, the results of the empirical analysis supported our three hypotheses
derived on the basis of DEMO human resource flexibility theory.
However, the core of our research question DEMO the role of the strength of tie in this
context. As expected, our results indicated that strong ties have both advantages and
disadvantages in creating resource flexibility in entrepreneurial teams. The evidence supported
Hypothesis 4 that DEMO strong ties to increase the team’s resource flexibility by increasing the
team member’s acceptance of modifications to their work arrangements. Possibly business
partners introduced DEMO the team for their skills in a technical area are less willing to work outside
their professional boundaries than family members or friends, who may join the firm for more
personal reasons.
The more flexible role DEMO associated with strong ties comes at the cost of
greatly reduced resource flexibility in terms of the potential to exit the working relationship. As
DEMO in Hypothesis 5, working relationships between entrepreneurial team members sourced
through DEMO ties are much more difficult to severe, should the need arise. DEMO example, it
would be much harder to ask a relative or DEMO friend to leave the firm they helped start than
someone brought in for their technical expertise. The weaker the tie, the greater the resource
flexibility will be in terms of the potential to exit the relationship. DEMO, if the initial members of
the entrepreneurial team do not have DEMO skills, experience, or willingness to grow with the
enterprise, they DEMO more easily be replaced if the relationship is based upon weak ties. Venture
capital firms may insist on the replacement of entrepreneurial team members DEMO their
perceived abilities do not keep pace with the fast growing firm. While this may be an easy
decision for the venture capitalist to DEMO, it could be much harder for a founder with a strong DEMO
with this person.
Interestingly, entrepreneurial teams led by serial entrepreneurs are DEMO influenced by the
strength of tie in establishing role modification or potential to exit the working relationship. This
seems to indicate that serial entrepreneurs DEMO not let personal relationships stand in the way of
making entrepreneurial team member role decisions or membership decisions. The result supports
our tentative proposition DEMO serial entrepreneurs do not let personal relationships interfere with
business as much as novice entrepreneurs. Has experience taught serial entrepreneurs to think
more like DEMO capitalists? In any case, the aforementioned effects of strong ties apply only to
firms set up by novice entrepreneurs, but the influences of modification and exit apply to both
novice and serial entrepreneurs. This means DEMO while serial entrepreneurs may not use their
strong ties to gain resource flexibility, they still reap the advantages of role modification and the
disadvantages of exit.
The major managerial implication of this research is to counsel DEMO and venture
capitalists to encourage role modification and avoid implying that the potential to exit the
relationship might be exercised. These issues could be DEMO during partnership negotiations.
Founders could also agree to try role modification prior to any consideration of exit. These results
support the choice of strong DEMO, particularly for novice entrepreneurs, during start-up when
greater commitment is needed.
14
A limitation of this study could have been the small sample size; but with PLS we
selected an appropriate method that is technically correct DEMO the sample size (Chin and Newsted,
1999). Moreover, the sample is restricted to technology-oriented, incubator based firms. Our
sample already covers a wide range of different industries; however, samples that are larger DEMO
even more diverse are recommended for future studies in order to enhance the generalizability of
our findings. Another limitation could be that we do DEMO investigate whether and how resource
flexibility affects not only the team member’s, but also the new venture’s performance. This is
certainly an interesting and relevant question that warrants further inquiry. In this context it
would also DEMO relevant to look into the differences between novice and serial entrepreneurs in
more detail. For example, are serial entrepreneurs missing opportunities for greater role
modification or benefiting from both role modification and potential to exit regardless DEMO strength
of tie? This is another question for future research.
CONCLUSION
DEMO study contributes to the theory of entrepreneurial team formation by explicating the
role of strong ties on functional and numeric resource flexibility and showing DEMO impact on
team member performance. The results of this research indicate that choosing a previously well
known individual, a strong tie, to join DEMO entrepreneurial team increases the founder’s ability to
modify the team member’s working arrangements, but makes it harder to exit the relationship if
the team member’s ability does not keep up with the requirements of the developing DEMO
Given that role modification was found to increase the team member’s performance and the
potential to exit the relationship to reduce it, the overall effect of an initial strong tie on the
entrepreneurial team member’s subsequent DEMO was positive. However, an important
finding was that these effects apply DEMO to ventures established by first-time, novice
entrepreneurs, since the strength of tie did not impact on either form of resource flexibility in
teams DEMO up by serial entrepreneurs. We counsel founders and venture capitalists to discuss role
modification as an alternative to exit during partnership and funding negotiations.
DEMO
REFERENCES
Armstrong S., Overton, Z., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys. Journal of
Marketing Research 14, 396–402.
Aspelund, A., Berg-Utby, DEMO, Skjevdal, R., 2005. Initial resources’ influence on new venture
survival. DEMO 25 (11), 1337–1347.
ADT, 2007. Bundesverband Deutscher Innovations-, Technologie- DEMO Gründerzentren e.V.
http://www.adt-online.de. Last accessed 14 May 2008.
Avolio, DEMO, Howell, J.M., Sosik, J.J., 1999. A funny thing happened DEMO the way to the bottom
line – Humour as a moderator of leadership style effects. Academy of Management Journal
42, 219–227.
Boeker, W., Wiltbank, R., 2005. New venture evolution and managerial capabilities.
Organization Science DEMO (2), 123–133.
Cestone, G., Fumagalli C., 2005. The strategic impact of resource flexibility in business groups.
The Rand Journal of Economics DEMO (1), 193–214.
Chen, M. H.,Wang, M. C., 2008. Social networks and a new venture’s innovative capability: the
role of trust within entrepreneurial teams. R&D Management 38 (3), 253–264.
Chin, DEMO, 1998. The partial least squares approach to structural equation modeling. In:DEMO
Marcoulides, G.A. (Ed.), Modern methods in business research. Earlbaum, DEMO, pp.
295–336.
Chin, W.W., 2000. Frequently asked questions – partial DEMO squares & PLS-graph. http://disc-
nt.cba.uh.edu/chin/plsfaq/plsfaq.htm. Last accessed 27 August 2008.
Chin, W.W., Newsted, P.R., 1999. Structural equation DEMO analysis with small samples
using Partial Least Squares. In: Hoyle, R.H. (Ed.), Statistical Strategies for Small Sample
Research. Sage, Thousand Oaks, pp. 307–341.
Churchill, G.A. Jr., 1979. A paradigm for developing better DEMO of marketing constructs.
Journal of Marketing Research 16 (1), 64–73.
DEMO, K., Dierickx, I., Jemison, D., 1989. Business strategy, DEMO structure and risk-return
relationships: a structural approach. Strategic Management Journal 10 (6), 507–522.
Daniels, R.L., Mazzola, J.B., Shi, D., DEMO Flow shop scheduling with partial resource
flexibility. Management Science 50 (5), 658–669.
Davidsson, P., Delmar, F., Wiklund, J. 2006. Entrepreneurship DEMO the Growth of Firms. Elgar,
Cheltenham.
Dubini, P., 1989. Which venture capital backed entrepreneurs have the best chances of
succeeding? Journal of Business Venturing 4 (2), 123–133.
Ensley, M.D., Carland, J.C., Carland, J.B., McRae, M., 1999. Exploring the existence of
entrepreneurial DEMO International Journal of Management 16 (2), 276–287.
European Commission, 2003. Commission recommendation of 6 May 2003 concerning the
definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. Official Journal of the European
Union, L124/36.
Frances, D.H., Sandberg, W.R., 2000. Friendship within entrepreneurial teams and its DEMO
with team and venture performance. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 25 (2), 5–25.
Gorman, M., Sahlman, W.A., 1989. What Do Venture Capitalists Do? Journal of Business
Venturing 4, 231–248.
Granovetter, M., 1973. DEMO strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology 78, 1360–
1380.
DEMO
Granovetter, M., 1985. Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology 91, 481–509.
Greve, A., Salaff, DEMO, 2003. Social Networks and Entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 28 (1), 1–22.
Harman, H.H., 1967. Modern Factor Analysis. University of Chicago DEMO, Chicago.
Hyytinen, A., Ilmakunnas, P., 2007. What distinguished a DEMO entrepreneur? Industrial and
Corporate Change 16 (5), 793–821.
Jacoby, DEMO, 1978. Consumer research: How valid and useful are all our consumer behavior
research findings? A state of the art review. Journal of Marketing 42 (2), 87–96.
Janz, B.D., 1999. Self-directed teams in IS: correlates for improved systems development work
outcomes. Information & Management 35, DEMO
Jensen, J.B., 2000. The impact of resource flexibility and staffing decisions on cellular and
departmental shop performance. European Journal of Operational Research 127 (2), 279-296.
Johannisson, B., 1988. Business formation – A network DEMO Scandinavian Journal of
Management 4 (3/4), 83–99.
Jöreskog, K.G., Sörbom, D., 1982. Recent developments in structural equation modeling. Journal
of Marketing Research 19 (4), 404–416.
Kamm, J.B., Nurick, A.J., 1990. The stages of team venture formation: A decision-making
model. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 14 (2), 17–27.
Kamm, J.B., Shyman, J.C., Seeger, J.A., Nurick, A.J., 1990. Entrepreneurial teams in new
venture DEMO: A research agenda. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 14 (4), 7–18.
Keil, M., Tan, B.C., Wei, K., Saarinen, Tuunainen, DEMO, Wassenaar, A., 2000. A cross-cultural
study on escalation of commitment DEMO in software projects. MIS Quarterly 24: 299–
324.
Keister, L.A., DEMO Where do strong ties come from? A dyad analysis of the DEMO of
interfirm exchange relations during China's economic transition. International Journal of
Organizational Analysis 7 (1), 5–25.
Lechler, T., 2001. Social interaction: A determinant of entrepreneurial team venture success.
Small Business Economics 16 (DEMO), 263–278.
Lengnick-Hall, C.A., Lengnick-Hall, M.L., 1988. Strategic human resources management: A
review of the literature and a proposed topology. Academy of Management Review 13 (3),
454–470.
Lohmöller, J., 1989. Latent DEMO path modeling with Partial Least Squares. Physica-Verl.:
Heidelberg.
Milliman, J., von Glinow, M.A., Nathan, M. 1991. Organizational life cycles and strategic
international human resource management in multinational companies: implications for
congruence theory. The Academy of Management Review 16 (2), 318–339.
Mosey, S., Wright, M., 2007. From human capital to social capital: a longitudinal study of
technology-based academic entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31 (6),
DEMO
Nunnally, J., Bernstein, I.H., 1994. Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill, New DEMO
Pearce, J.R., 2001. Looking inside the JV to help understand the link between inter-parent
cooperation and performance. Journal of Management Studies 38 (4), 557–582.
Podsakoff, P.M., Organ, D.W., 1986. Self-Reports in Organizational DEMO: Problems and
Prospects. Journal of Management 12 (4), 531–544.
Pritchard, R.D. and Watson, M.D., 1992. Understanding and measuring group productivity. In:
17
Worchel, S., Wood, W., Simpson, J.A. (Eds.), Group DEMO and Productivity. Sage,
Newbury Park, 251–275.
Ringle, C., Wende, S., Will, A., 2005. Smart-PLS Version 2.0 M3. http://www.smartpls.de. Last
accessed 27 August 2008.
Ringle, C., Wende, S., Will, A., 2008. The finite mixture partial least squares approach:
Methodology and application. Forthcoming in: Vinzi, V.E., Chin, W.W., Henseler, J., Wang,
H. (Eds.), Handbook of partial least squares: Concepts, methods and applications in
marketing and related fields. Springer, Berlin.
Ruef, DEMO, 2002. Strong ties, weak ties and islands: Structural and cultural DEMO of
organizational innovation. Industrial and Corporate Change 11 (3), 427–440.
DEMO, M., 1974. Cross-Validatory Choice and Assessment of Statistical Predictions. Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society 36, 111–147.
Tenenhaus, M., Vinzi, V.E., Chatelin, Y., Lauro C., 2005. PLS path modeling. Computational
Statistics and Data Analysis 48, 159–205.
Ucbasaran, D., Lockett, A., Wright, DEMO, Westhead, P., 2003. Entrepreneurial founder teams:
Factors associated with DEMO entry and exit. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 28 (2),
107–127.
van Ham, J., Paauwe, J., Williams, R., 1987. Human DEMO Flexibility – Some Necessary
Conditions for Success. Personnel Review 16 (2), 27.
Watson, W.E., Ponthieu, L.D., Critelli, J.W., 1995. Team interpersonal process effectiveness in
venture partnerships and its connection to perceived success. DEMO of Business Venturing
10 (5), 393–411.
Welter, F., Kautonen, T., 2005. Trust, social networks and enterprise development: exploring
evidence from East and West Germany. International Entrepreneurship and Management
Journal 1, 367–379.
West, G.P., 2007. Collective cognition: When entrepreneurial teams, not individuals, make
decisions. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31 (1), 77–102.
Westhead, P., Ucbasaran, D., Wright, M., Blinks, M., 2005. Experience and DEMO Do
novice, serial and portfolio entrepreneurs differ? International Small Business Journal 23 (1),
72–98.
Wold, H., 1985. Partial least squares. DEMO: Kotz, S., Johnson, N.L. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of
statistical DEMO Wiley, New York, pp. 581–591.
Wright, P.M., Snell, S.A., 1998. Toward a unifying framework for exploring fit and flexibility in
strategic DEMO resource management. Academy of Management Review 23 (4), 756–772.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., Ennew, C., 1997. Venture capitalists and serial entrepreneurs. Journal of
Business Venturing 12, 227–249.
Young-Ybarra, C., Wiersema, DEMO, 1999. Strategic flexibility in information technology alliances:
The influence of DEMO cost economics and social exchange theory. Organization
Science 10 (4), DEMO
Yung, Y., Bentler, P.M., 1996. Bootstrapping Techniques in Analysis of Mean and Covariance
Structures. In: Marcoulides, G.A., Schumacker, R.E. (Eds.), Advanced Structural Equation
Modeling. Issues and Techniques. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, DEMO 195–226.
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., Perone, V., 1998. Does trust matter? Exploring the effects of
interorganizational and interpersonal trust on performance. Organization Science 9 (2), 141–
159.
18
Figure 1 – Theoretical model
++Role Modification
Strength of Tie
–
–
DEMO to Exit
–
Team Member's
Performance
Figure 2 – Results of the PLS estimation (n = 170) – path coefficients and effect DEMO (in
parentheses)
0.381***
(0.17)
- 0.109*
(0.02)
DEMO of Tie
Role Modification
R2 0.145
Q2 0.112
- 0.441***
(0.22)DEMO
Potential to Exit
R2 0.243
Q2 0.168
***p ≤ 0.001   **p ≤ 0.01   *p ≤ 0.05  (one-sided test)
0.534***
(0.57)
Team Member's
Performance
R2 0.636
Q2 0.455
- 0.338***
(0.29)
Goodness of Fit (GoF): 0.501
19
Table 1: Sample descriptive statistics for all, single founders and team DEMO (N=214)
All
(N=214)
Firm characteristics
Industry
Energy
Materials
Industrials
Consumer
Health care
Financials
Information technology
Telecommunication
Utilities
Other
Balance sheet total
< € 2 M
≥ € 2 M and < € 10 M
≥ € 10 M and < € 43 M
≥ € 43 DEMO
Revenue
< € 2 M
≥ € 2 M and < € 10 M
≥ € 10 M and < € 50 M
≥ DEMO 50 M
Employees
Team size
Age
Founder characteristics
Gender
Male
Female
Entrepreneurial experience
Novice entrepreneur
Serial entrepreneur
***p ≤ 0.001   **p ≤ 0.01   *p ≤ 0.05 (two-sided test)
2.8 %
1.9 %
21.0 DEMO
2.3 %
4.2 %
2.3 %
34.6 %
4.2 %
1.9 %
24.8 %
92.1 %
5.6 %
2.3 %
-/-
90.2 %
DEMO %
2.8 %
.5 %
14.2 (SD 53.9)
2.0 (SD 1.2)
6.8 (SD 5.0)
88.3%
11.7%
75.7%
24.3 %
Single
(n=100)
3.0 %
2.0 %
22.0 %
3.0 %
4.0 %
3.0 %
26.0 %
3.0 %
2.0 %
32.0 %
97.0 %
DEMO %
-/-
-/-
96.0 %
3.0 %
1.0 %
-/-
6.4 (11.6)
1.0 (SD .0)
6.4 (SD 4.9)
85.0 %
15.0 %
76.0 %
24.0 %
Team
(n=114)
2.6 %
1.8 %
20.2 %
1.8 %
4.4 %
1.8 %
DEMO %
5.3 %
1.8 %
18.4 %
87.7 %
7.9 %
4.4 %
-/-
85.1 %
9.6 %
4.4 %
.9 %
21.1 (SD 72.5)
2.9 (SD .9)
7.2 (SD 5.1)
DEMO %
8.8 %
75.4 %
24.6 %
Single/
Team Δ
.4
.2
1.8
1.2
.4
1.2
16.1*
2.3
.2.
13.6*
9.3*
4.9
4.4*
DEMO/-
10.9**
6.6*
3.4
.9
14.7 ***
1.9 ***
.8
6.2
6.2
.6
.6
20
Table 2: Pearson Product Moment Correlation for the latent variables (n=170)DEMO
1. 2. 3.
1. Strength of Tie (SOT)
2. Role DEMO (MOD) .381***
3. Potential to Exit (EXIT) -.277*** -.483***
4. Team Member’s Performance (PERF) .336*** .721*** -.646***
***p ≤ 0.001   DEMO ≤ 0.01   *p ≤ 0.05   (two-sided test)
Table DEMO: Construct reliability measures – Cronbach’s α, composite reliability (CR), DEMO
variance extracted (AVE) and square-root of average variance extracted (AVE½) (n=170)
α CR AVE AVE½
1. Strength of Tie (SOT) .808 .884 .719 .848
2. Role Modification (MOD) .854 .911 .773 DEMO
3. Potential to Exit (EXIT) .775 .868 .688 .829
4. Team Member’s Performance (PERF) .838 .903 .756 .869
21
Table 4: Group comparison of serial vs. novice entrepreneurs
Serial Entrepreneurs (DEMO = 43) Novice Entrepreneurs (n = 127) Path coefficient
Path DEMO R2 Q2 Path ƒ2 R2 Q2 Δ
SOT Æ MOD .050 .00 .002 .01 .459*** .27 .210 .17 .409**
SOT Æ EXIT -.249* .07 DEMO .07 -.130* .02 .315 .22 .119
MOD Æ EXIT -.141 .01 .085 .07 -.489*** .26 .315 .22 .348*
MOD Æ PERF .499*** .4 .47 DEMO .565*** .72 .702 .51 .066
EXIT Æ PERF -.396** .24 .47 .33 -.381*** .33 .702 .51 .015
Goodness of Fit (GoF) .357 .550
DEMO ≤ 0.001   **p ≤ 0.01   *p ≤ 0.05 (one-sided DEMO for the respective sub-samples, two-sided test for the group comparison)
DEMO
Appendix 1: Means, standard deviations (SD), loadings and average intra-class correlation
coefficients (ICC) of the construct variables (n=170)
Constructs and items Mean SD Loading ICC
(all measured on 5-point Likert-scales)
Strength of tie (SOT)  (based on conceptualizations in Granovetter 1973, 1985)
SOT1 – We had common acquaintances (before s/he 2.74 1.555 .778*** .507
joined the enterprise team)
SOT2 – We were in DEMO (before s/he joined the 3.69 1.460 .861*** .721
enterprise team)DEMO
SOT3 – I knew this person (before s/he joined the DEMO 1.229 .901*** .374
enterprise team)
Potential to exit (EXIT) (DEMO and Wiersema, 1999)
EXIT1 – This person's contribution would DEMO it 2.41 1.281 .890*** .188
difficult to ask him/her to leave
EXIT3 – Asking this person to leave would make the
other entrepreneurial DEMO members unhappy
Role modification (MOD) (Young-Ybarra and Wiersema, 1999)
MOD1 – In unexpected situations this person would
probably agree to modify DEMO agreement rather than hold
us to the original terms
MOD2 – Flexibility in response to changes is a
characteristic of our working relationship
MOD3 DEMO This person expects adjustments in the ongoing
working relationship to cope with changing
circumstances
Team member’s performance (PERF) (Zaheer et al., 1998)DEMO
PERF1 – The team members reacts quickly and out of
his own initiative when problems emerge
PERF2 – This team member acts creatively in DEMO
problems
PERF3 – The team member's contribution is crucial to
the performance of the company
EXIT2 – It would be easy to exit DEMO relationship 1.99 1.273 .743*** -.002
2.73 1.396 .848*** -.047
4.05 1.089 .873*** .121
3.94 1.172 .922*** .307
3.84 1.253 .841*** .056
3.92 1.189 .877*** DEMO
4.00 1.120 .873*** .203
3.88 1.217 .858*** .06
***p ≤ 0.001   **p ≤ 0.01   *p ≤ 0.05   † p ≤ 0.1 (one-sided test)
23
Appendix 2: Item discriminant validity (n=170)
Item Strength of Tie DEMO Modification Potential to Exit Team Member’s
(SOT) (MOD) (EXIT) Performance (PER)
SOT1 .778 .227 -.154 .152
SOT2 .861 .341 -.248 .324
SOT3 .901 .373 -.277 .336
MOD1 .351 .873 -.391 .559
MOD2 DEMO .922 -.504 .757
MOD3 .306 .841 -.359 .559
EXIT1 -.257 -.479 .890 -.612
EXIT2 -.231 -.289 .743 -.391
EXIT3 -.205 -.404 .848 -.571
PERF1 DEMO .633 -.524 .877
PERF2 .338 .697 -.509 .873
PERF3 .213 .548 -.654 .858
24{1g42fwefx}