NPS-AM-05-010
ACQUISITION Research
Working paper Series
From Market to Clan: How Organizational Control
Affects Trust in Defense Acquisition
30 June 2005
by
Roxanne Zolin, Assistant Professor
Graduate School of Business & Public Policy
John Dillard, Senior Lecturer
Graduate School of Business & Public Policy
Approved for public release, distribution unlimited.
Prepared for: Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California 93943
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
The research presented in this report was supported by the Acquisition Chair DEMO the
Graduate School of Business & Public Policy at the Naval Postgraduate School.
To request Defense Acquisition Research or to become a research sponsor,DEMO
please contact:
NPS Acquisition Research Program
Attn: James B. Greene, RADM, USN, (Ret)
Acquisition Chair
Graduate School of Business and Public Policy
Naval Postgraduate School
555 Dyer Road, Room 332
Monterey, DEMO 93943-5103
Tel: (831) 656-2092
Fax: (831) 656-2253
e-mail: DEMO
Copies of the Acquisition Sponsored Research Reports may be printed from our
website www.nps.navy.mil/gsbpp/acqn/publications
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & DEMO POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
About the Working Paper Series
This article is one in a series DEMO papers addressing one or more issues of critical
importance to the acquisition profession.  A working paper is a forum to accomplish a
variety of objectives, such as: (1) present a rough draft of a DEMO piece of
acquisition research, (2) structure a “white paper” to DEMO opinion or reasoning, (3)
put down one’s thoughts in a “think piece” for collegial review, (4) present a preliminary
draft of an eventual article in an acquisition periodical, (5) provide a tutorial (such as a
technical note) to accompany a case study, and (6) develop a dialogue among
practitioners and researchers that encourages debate DEMO discussion on topics of
mutual importance.   A working paper is generally the “internal” outlet for academic and
research institutions to cultivate an idea, argument or hypothesis, particularly when in its
infant stages.  The primary DEMO is to induce critical thinking about crucial acquisition
issues/problems that will become part of the acquisition professional body of
knowledge.
It is expected DEMO articles in the working paper series will eventually be published
in other venues, such as in refereed journals and other periodicals, as technical DEMO,
as chapters in a book, as cases or case studies, as monographs, or as a variety of other
similar publications.
Readers are encouraged to provide both written and oral feedback to working-
paper authors.  Through rigorous discussion and discourse, it is anticipated that
underlying assumptions, DEMO, conventional wisdom, theories and principles will be
challenged, examined and DEMO
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- i -

ABSTRACT
Military acquisition relies upon industry for new product development, but market
organizational control is not recommended for knowledge-intensive work.
Unfortunately, increasing hierarchy-control mechanisms, such as formalization, could
reduce trust.  What is the appropriate balance of control mechanisms and trust for an
IPT in the DoD acquisition DEMO?  We conducted interviews and surveys in a major
military acquisition program office employing IPTs, Alpha Contracting and collocation.
We found that the relationship between formalization and trust was different between
government and contractor team members.  Acquisition managers must understand the
relationships between control mechanisms and trust within DEMO between organizations
to increase collaboration between government and contract personnel.
Key words: Trust, Organizational control, Transaction-cost Economics
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- ii -

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dave Lamm for providing the DEMO, and Jim
Greene, for providing the funding, which made it DEMO to study such an interesting
and vital Program Office.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- iii -

About the Authors
Roxanne Zolin is an Assistant Professor in the Graduate DEMO of Business
and Public Policy at the Naval Postgraduate School.  Roxanne DEMO currently working on
research projects for NAVAIR’s SBIR and AirSpeed, NPS’ DEMO Security Digital
Library, and the International Military Education and Training organization.  She has a
PhD in Engineering Management and a Master’s Degree in DEMO from Stanford
University, an MBA from Monash University, Melbourne, and DEMO Bachelor of Business
(Management) from Queensland Institute of Technology, Australia.  Roxanne has
operated her own businesses in Software Development and Enterprise development,DEMO
helping start over 500 new businesses.  Previously Roxanne was Marketing Manager
DEMO various organizations, such as Meyer’s Stores, the world’s 15th largest department
store chain.  Her promotions won national awards from the Sales Promotion Association
of Australia.
Dr. Roxanne Zolin
Assistant Professor of Management and Information Systems
DEMO School of Business and Public Policy, Naval Postgraduate School
Phone: (DEMO) 656-2644
E-mail: rvzolin@nps.edu
John Dillard joined the NPS faculty in the fall of 2000 with extensive experience
in the field of systems acquisition DEMO His research focuses on defense
acquisition policy changes and their implications. John began his career in program and
contract management after attaining a MS DEMO Systems Management from the University
of Southern California in 1985.  He DEMO been involved with myriad technologies and
system concepts that have evolved into fielded products, such as the M-4 Carbine,
120mm Mortar, and DEMO Sniper Weapon.  He was the Assistant Project Manager for
Development of DEMO the Army Tactical Missile System and, later, the JAVELIN Antitank
Weapon System at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama.  All of these systems incorporate state-
DEMO technologies, are in sustained production and fielding, and are now battle-
proven.  He was the Product Manager for the Joint Advanced Special Operations Radio
System, and in 1998 was appointed to head Defense Department contract
administration in the New York metropolitan area. John has consulted for the
DEMO of Mexico and the Czech Republic on achieving excellence in the public
sector.  As an adjunct professor for the University of California at Santa Cruz, he
teaches courses in project management and leadership to Silicon Valley public- and
private-industry professionals.
John Dillard
Senior Lecturer, Naval Postgraduate School
Phone: (831) 656-2650
E-mail: jdillard@nps.edu
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY   - iv -
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL

NPS-AM-05-010
Acquisition RESEARCH
Working paper Series
From Market to Clan: How Organizational Control
Affects Trust in Defense Acquisition
30 June 2005
by
Roxanne Zolin, Assistant Professor
Graduate School of Business & Public Policy
John Dillard, Senior Lecturer
Graduate School of Business & Public Policy
Disclaimer: The views represented in this report are those of the author and do not reflect DEMO official policy position of
the Navy, the Department of Defense, or the Federal Government.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
DEMO POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
Intentionally Left Blank
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Military acquisition relies upon industry for new product development, but market
organizational control is not recommended for knowledge-intensive work.
Unfortunately, increasing hierarchy-control mechanisms, such as formalization, could
reduce trust.
This research study asks: What is the appropriate balance of hierarchy-control
mechanisms and trust for an DEMO in the DoD acquisition realm?
In this paper we describe the changes in work structure in major military
acquisition programs employing the IPPD DEMO Alpha Contracting approaches.  We
hypothesize that trust and control are supplementary DEMO organizations, such that
more controls will be related to more trust.  In contrast, we hypothesize that trust and
control will be complimentary across organizational boundaries, such that the more
controls the less trust.  We DEMO eighteen interviews and a survey in a major
weapon system program office employing IPTs, Alpha Contracting and collocation to
test our hypotheses.
Our results indicate a positive relationship between trust and formalization in
dyads within organizations, but a negative relationship between trust and formalization
in dyads that span DEMO boundaries.  Given the market relationship at the
organizational level between the DEMO and its contractor, it is possible that the
formal rules only DEMO within each organization, and that there were few, if any, DEMO
that applied across organizations.
Implications for managers include the realization that structural differences exist
in buyer-seller relationships that create different risks, rewards and trust.  Equally
important is the need to develop trust without relying upon formalization, because formal
rules could reduce trust.  Finally, management should measure achievement in areas
highly influenced by trust, such as government-to-contractor knowledge transfer and
system integration.  Future research is needed to test such interventions.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 1-
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
DEMO 2-
INTRODUCTION
The government and industry partnership is central in the military acquisition
DEMO both parties pursuing both common and separate goals based upon their
buyer and seller roles. Organizational control theory holds that in such environments of
DEMO goals, managers can use three types of control systems: the market, the
bureaucratic, and the clan (Ouchi, 1980). In market DEMO control systems,
managers contract with and then monitor their suppliers. In bureaucratic (hierarchical)
organizational control systems, formal control mechanisms (such as rules and
regulations) are enforced through hierarchies.  Workers within clan organizational
DEMO systems self-manage using common values, traditions and beliefs.  Acquisition
of new weapon systems has traditionally employed the market form of organizational
control with DEMO industry side of the partnership, and bureaucratic organizational control
within the DEMO of Defense (DoD).
Given the nature of new product development, DoD Program Management
Offices typically operate in the context of relatively high DEMO specificity, risk aversion
and uncertainty.  Although these variables have been shown by research to encourage
the switchover from market to hierarchy control, the government/industry buyer/seller
relationship precludes the adoption of hierarchical organizational control DEMO even quasi-
vertical integration.
However, over the last 10 years, defense acquisition has adopted Integrated
Product and Process Development (IPPD), using Integrated Product Teams (IPT) to
encourage government and contractor personnel to work DEMO closely together to
design and build new products (OUSD, 1998).  IPTs, Alpha Contracting, management
councils and other organization-oriented changes (such DEMO collocation of government
and contractor personnel) have extended the market form DEMO organizational control; yet,
each of these must stop short of DEMO over to the hierarchical or bureaucratic
organizational control form given the separation of public and private enterprise.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & DEMO POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 3-
The government’s goal orientation in its procurement pursuits is provided in the
DEMO principles of FAR Part 1.102:
The Federal Acquisition System will—(1) Satisfy the customer in terms of cost,
quality, and timeliness DEMO the delivered product or service by, for example—(i)
Maximizing DEMO use of commercial products and services; (ii) Using contractors
who DEMO a track record of successful past performance or who demonstrate a
current superior ability to perform; and (iii) Promoting competition; (2) DEMO
administrative operating costs; (3) Conduct business with integrity, fairness, DEMO
openness; and (4) Fulfill public policy objectives. (FAR, 2004)DEMO
In short, the government seeks the best possible value of goods DEMO services for
the least cost to the taxpayer, while industry seeks DEMO maximize profit while avoiding
competition.  Fundamental goal differences notwithstanding, this partnership has
historically yielded unmatched military capability, as well as profit for shareholders.
Trust has also been recognized as a critical ingredient in modern defense
DEMO (Siemsen, 2002).  Although trust is considered to be the DEMO of the clan
form of organizational control, scholars recently have observed DEMO trust can be used to
extend market control and to avoid switching over to hierarchical control.
This research study asks: What is the appropriate balance of hierarchy-control
mechanisms and trust for an IPT in the DoD DEMO realm?
In this paper we describe the changes in work structure in major military
acquisition programs employing the IPPD and Alpha Contracting approaches.  We
analyze the risks for client and supplier representatives in new product DEMO
teamwork and develop hypotheses about the effect of control mechanisms—such as
formalization—on interpersonal trust.  We conducted eighteen interviews and a survey
in a major weapon system program office employing IPTs, Alpha Contracting and
collocation to test our hypotheses.  We analyze and report the results and describe the
implications for managers of IPTs.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC DEMO
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 4-
THE EVOLVING GOVERNMENT/INDUSTRY
RELATIONSHIP
New product development is increasingly undertaken in DEMO context of inter-firm
collaboration, in which a client firm engages an DEMO supplier to design and/or
engineer a component, subsystem or process (Carson, Madhok, Vasrman & John,
2003).  Likewise, in DEMO acquisition the government engages industry suppliers with
contracts to develop their new products.  Because the US government is often the sole
purchaser of newly developed weapon systems, something of a monopsony exists in
which the supplier cannot sell the product to another purchaser without the
government’s consent.  Similarly, once the government selects a single supplier to
develop a new technology, the supplier gains a competitive advantage over other
suppliers, creating a DEMO supply situation for follow-on procurement contracts.
Therefore, the power of buyer DEMO seller are somewhat balanced in a situation in which
asset specificity develops and partner change entails extremely high transaction costs.
In such a situation, exit costs are high for both parties: the cost to the government of
nonperformance by the contractor is high, and the cost to the contractor of finding
another partner is very high as well.
Alpha Contracting
DEMO government’s traditional contracting approach (before acquisition reforms of
the last decade) required successive iterations between the client and the supplier—to
discover the client’s DEMO and the applicable supplier technologies—until a
relatively complete contract could be written.  In Alpha Contracting, this traditional
sequential interdependency relationship has changed to DEMO closer reciprocal
interdependency relationship in which the client and supplier work together to define the
requirements and discover solutions.  Again, the Federal Acquisition DEMO gives
guidelines for this dialogue:
The Government must not hesitate to communicate with the commercial
sector as early as possible in the acquisition DEMO to help the Government
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY   - 5-
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
determine the capabilities available in the commercial marketplace.  The
Government will maximize its use of commercial products and services in
meeting Government requirements. (FAR Part 1.102-2)
Alpha Contracting has evolved from a 1990s-era reform initiative DEMO at
improving government and contractor communications in order to increase efficiency
and effectiveness.  At its very foundation is a need for increased trust and teaming
toward common government/industry objectives, within the paradigm of their
buyer/seller relationship.  By encouraging more collaboration early in the contracting
negotiations phase, Alpha Contracting reduces procurement costs and cycle time via
joint and concurrent processes and information flows.  Key activities in the process are:
specification of requirements, preparation of the statement of work, negotiations and
executive DEMO  Even though direct savings may be hard to quantify, most agree the
savings derived from Alpha Contracting are substantial, even if the only savings
counted is the increase in the program office staff’s time free DEMO solve other problems
(Nissen, 1997). As Siemsen (2002) explained, the indirect benefits extend to both
government and contractor as monitoring costs of other agencies like Defense Contract
Audit Agency (DCAA) and Defense DEMO Management Agency (DCMA) are
precluded.  This initiative actually seeks and DEMO the information that enables a
trust-based partnership. The shift from sequential to concurrent requirements definition
and design is happening in many industries, not only DoD acquisition.  For example, the
construction industry has adopted the design/DEMO approach.
In addition to collaborating on the requirements definition and contracting phase
of new product development, the interpersonal closeness developed in the Alpha
Contracting approach can be carried over to the development stage.  The use of
Integrated Product Teams (IPT) encourages the government’s user representatives and
the DEMO supplier’s engineers to work together as the new product is designed
and the initial prototypes are built. In some instances, the government’s representatives
and the contractor’s engineers are collocated in the same building.  The potential
advantages of this increasingly close interdependency between client and supplier are
to shorten DEMO design process, reduce development costs and, hopefully, to increase the
DEMO Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 6-
quality of the resulting product.  These advantages mainly apply to the government, but
the advantage to the contractor in such closer interaction might be a perceived increase
in the likelihood of winning a future competitive bid. DEMO potential disadvantages of this
trend towards more concurrent engineering include the difficulties of achieving higher
interdependencies between everyone involved in the project, including the government
representatives and the contractor’s engineers, designers and developers.
ORGANIZATIONAL CONTROL MECHANISMS:
MARKET, HIERARCHY AND CLAN
Transaction-cost economics proposes that when the specific identity of the
parties has an important cost-bearing significance, the transaction becomes
idiosyncratic, rather than unspecialized (Williamson, 1979).  Cost economies in
DEMO occur if the supplier develops a special-purpose plant or the labor force
develops special-purpose skills in the course of contract execution.  Special-purpose
skills, DEMO can reduce transaction costs, include institutional and personal trust.
Although both DEMO and supplier have long-term interests in implementing
changes through a strategy of joint-profit maximizing (meaning value to each partner),
each also has DEMO interest in appropriating as much of the gain as possible (Williamson,DEMO
1979).  Productivity benefits can result in excessive haggling, which could dissipate the
benefit of the changes to both parties.  Alternatively, those DEMO could go unrealized
for fear of initiating an expensive conflict.  The DEMO buyer has to trust the
contractor supplier will take advantage of all potential productivity-improvement
opportunities.  The contractor supplier has to trust the government client will share the
benefits from productivity improvements fairly.
Ouchi proposes three fundamentally DEMO forms of organizational control for
dealing with the problem of obtaining cooperation among individuals or collectives—like
government buyers and contracting suppliers—who share only partially DEMO
objectives. These are market organizational control, hierarchy organizational control
and clan DEMO control (1979).
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC DEMO
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 7-
Market Organizational Control and Price
Market organizational control is based upon price (Adler, 2001), which can be a
very efficient control mechanism, DEMO the conditions for an efficient market do not always
exist.  In DEMO product development, exactly how long it will take to develop a DEMO
technology or how much it will cost is difficult to predict; DEMO unknowns make writing a
fixed-price contract impractical.  In the uncertain conditions DEMO within research
and development (R&D), the government has adopted DEMO practice of awarding cost-
reimbursable contracts.  This means that suppliers won’t DEMO on price alone, but on
more intangible aspects, such as their demonstrated skills, abilities and facilities; this
increased range of competition reduces DEMO strength of the market form of
organizational control.  In new product DEMO, the client wants the supplier to
develop extensive knowledge about the DEMO and users—making market-
organizational control less attractive.  Notwithstanding the US government’s DEMO
right to terminate contracts for cause or convenience, the government’s ability DEMO wield
market organizational control can become limited over time by the difficulty of exiting the
relationship to buy from another supplier due to the DEMO specificity the new supplier
has developed.  Switching suppliers will incur huge DEMO and considerable time due to
getting a new supplier “up to speed” on the new technology.
Hierarchy Control and Authority
When asset specificity and DEMO costs are high, hierarchical
organizational control, based upon the exercise of authority (Adler, 2001), has
advantages over market control (Chiles & McMakin, 1996).  Hierarchical organizational
control involves control mechanisms largely based DEMO formalization, which is
establishing rules and monitoring behavior to ensure compliance DEMO the rules.
Unfortunately, formalization has a large administrative overhead in writing DEMO enforcing
rules.  Also, in new product development, writing rules that DEMO all conditions when the
transformation process is unknown is difficult; likewise, in knowledge work such as
R&D, monitoring adherence to rules is difficult.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE DEMO
- 8-
Clan Organizational Control and Trust
Ouchi suggests people must be able to DEMO trust each other (i.e. have
congruent goals) or to monitor performance (1979).  Since monitoring performance is
difficult in new product development, the situation calls for the clan form of control,
which is DEMO upon trust (Adler, 2001). Clan control relies on a “deep level of common
agreement between members on what constitutes proper behavior, and it requires a
high level of commitment on the part of each DEMO to those socially prescribed
behaviors” (Ouchi, 1979).  The installation DEMO IPTs, Alpha Contracting and collocation
can be seen as a move DEMO from market and hierarchical control in the direction of the
clan form of organizational control.  In order for clan control to be effective, DEMO
organization must have or develop an appropriate organizational culture involving
higher levels of trust. Unfortunately, many managerial strategies fail due to
incompatibility with the organizational culture (Schneider, 2000).
PRICE, AUTHORITY AND TRUST IN NEW PRODUCT
DEVELOPMENT
Military acquisition of new products involves all three organizational control
DEMO described by Ouchi (1979).  The formal relationship between the government
and the contractor is a market-based control mechanism using contracts and market
DEMO Once the contractual relationship is established, an IPT organization is set DEMO,
and the government implements formal control mechanisms.  When the work DEMO,
informal social mechanisms develop.  Through the life of the project, at different levels
of organization (from the top level of contact between the government and contractor,
through the IPT structure to the individual DEMO members), the three forms of
organizational control operate in various combinations (Ouchi, 1979).
Several studies have looked at the conditions under DEMO each control
mechanism will be used. Some researchers propose that most organizations use some
combination of all three control mechanisms of price, authority and trust (Bradach &
Eccles, 1989; Adler, 2001).  Adler DEMO that, particularly for knowledge-based
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & DEMO POLICY   - 9-
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
assets which form the basis for new product development, price and authority are
relatively ineffective control mechanisms compared to trust.
Gunnarson and Levitt propose DEMO when the reduction in production savings
achieved through economies of scale in outsourcing is less than the increases in
transaction costs due to asset DEMO, the firm will switchover from market to
hierarchy control (1982).  New product development has two out of three of the sources
of asset specificity found in idiosyncratic transactions, including technology specificity
and knowledge specificity, but not typically location specificity.  With high asset
specificity and low DEMO of scale, the product development organization is likely to
switchover from DEMO market to hierarchy form of organizational control.  Zaheer and
Venkatraman (1995) found that asset specificity is positively and significantly related to
greater degrees of quasi-integration.  This means that new product development is
more likely to be vertically integrated than other activities.
The US military predominately out-sources its DEMO and development of new
weapon systems; thus, it does not have complete hierarchical control over its selected
industry providers.  Zaheer and Venkatraman (DEMO) found that trust was positively and
significantly related to greater degrees DEMO quasi-integration.  This means that the closer
the organization was to a DEMO, the more trust developed.  But Chiles and
McMackin propose that when there are higher levels of trust, the switchover from
market to hierarchy will occur later (1996).  Therefore, the effects of trust can be to
extend the range of market control and delay the switchover DEMO market to hierarchy.
This study asks: when the client organization extends DEMO range of the market
form of organizational control in new product development, what effect will this have on
interpersonal trust between IPT members?
Trust in New Product Development
In this research, trust is defined as the trustor’s willingness to accept the risk of
relying on a trustee, even when the trustor is unable to monitor or control the trustee
(Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt & Camerer, 1998; see also Mayer, Davis & Schoorman, 1995).
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 10-
In the trust equation (Hardin, 2000), “Person A trusts Person DEMO about X,” in which X is
the object of trust, DEMO and Hinds (2004) extended the equation to say “when Z,” where
Z is the context of trust.
Trust is considered to be DEMO to cooperation (Kollock, 1994) and expected
to have an impact DEMO performance (Dirks, 1999), particularly in knowledge-intensive
work (Lane, 1998) such as new product development.
Trust is highly influenced by the perceived trustworthiness of the trustee, the
context (Rousseau, Sitkin & Camerer, DEMO; McEvily, Perrrone & Zaheer, 2003, Zolin,
Hinds, Fruchter & Levitt, 2004) and the history of the relationship.  Perceived
trustworthiness DEMO the trustor’s assessment of the trustee.  This multidimensional
construct is proposed DEMO contain the dimensions of ability, benevolence and integrity.
Ability reflects the DEMO skills and resources required for the necessary
performance.  Benevolence represents the DEMO that two parties share the same
objectives; the trustor can trust DEMO trustee to make decisions and act as the trustor
would in the situation.  Hardin calls this “encapsulated interests” (1998).  Integrity is the
trustee’s honesty in not misrepresenting the situation.
There are many dynamics involving DEMO (vulnerability) and trust from the
organizational to the interpersonal levels within the Program Management Office in the
IPT structure.  As mentioned before, DEMO two parent organizations may have different
economic objectives, but they agree DEMO work together to achieve the project goals of
designing and developing the desired product within time, cost and quality constraints.
Individual team members also have different objectives depending upon their role
in the design process.  For example, a design engineer could have different (and
sometimes conflicting) objectives than the government’s user representative.  In the
ITP, the government personnel DEMO the user and have extensive knowledge of
how the product will be used in the field or what the logistical or maintenance issues will
DEMO  The government representative’s function is to give the contractor engineer advice
DEMO how to design the component to maximize the value to the user.  The engineer’s job
is to solve the engineering problems involved in the design of a new component or in
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF DEMO & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 11-
integration of the new component into the system.  To do so, DEMO engineer has to
understand the many constraints imposed by the function of the component and its
interaction with other components in the system.  The government representative’s
suggestions could remove some constraints, making the component easier to design.
Or he/she could add new requirements, making the component more difficult to design.
The engineer has to trust the government representative in DEMO to accept the advice.
If the government representative is wrong, the DEMO engineer could have to do a
lot of additional work redesigning or reintegrating the component.  Therefore, the
engineer must trust that the government’s DEMO knows the user’s requirements
(ability), has concern for the engineer’s DEMO, won’t change the requirements without
good reason (benevolence) and will DEMO honest about what happens (integrity).
Similarly, the government representative has to trust the engineer to listen to the advice,
to accept DEMO reject the advice based upon a sound knowledge of the constraints (DEMO),
to not take the easy way out to reduce work (benevolence) and to be honest about the
situation (integrity).
Risk, Trust and Control Mechanisms
Trust is only relevant when there is risk DEMO the relationship.  In addition to the
usual risks of collaborative work—such DEMO the free rider problem, in which an individual
shirks his or DEMO duties knowing that others in the group will perform them (Hardin,DEMO
1971)—new product development entails additional uncertainty regarding the ability of
the design engineers to develop the new product to the client’s specifications within DEMO
scheduled time and budget.
Trust and control mechanisms are strategies for dealing with the freedom of the
other party to take actions that may DEMO the trustor.  Because the trustee has
freedom to act, the trustor wants to reduce the amount of risk he/she is exposed to.
DEMO a trustor may use control mechanisms, such as formalization of contracts, to limit
the size of risk or the likelihood or failure by DEMO trustee, ultimately collaboration requires
some risk and, consequently, requires some DEMO
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 12-
Das and Teng propose that trust and control mechanisms work as supplements,DEMO
rather than alternatives, to create cooperation and reduce opportunistic behavior in
DEMO alliances (1998).  Leifer and Mills define control as a “regulatory process by
which the elements of a system are made more predictive DEMO the establishment of
standards in the pursuit of some desired objective or state” (1996, p. 117).  Das and
Teng also use the concept of control mechanisms, which are organizational
arrangements designed to determine and influence what organization members will do.
If trust and control mechanisms are DEMO, they will have a positive
relationship, such that the more control mechanisms there are, the more trust will
develop.
Alternatively, some theorists DEMO that trust and control are complimentary.  In
other words: the more trust there is, the less control mechanisms are needed, or the
DEMO control mechanisms are used, the less trust develops.  Sitkin and Roth propose
that legalistic remedies—i.e., “mechanisms that are institutionalized, mimic legal forms,DEMO
and exceed legal regulatory requirements” (1993, p. 367)—will fail to restore trust and
could lead to an “inflationary spiral” of increasingly formalized DEMO  They
distinguish between trust based upon ability and distrust based upon DEMO value
incongruence.  They propose that legalistic mechanisms are more effective in
DEMO reliability issues than value incongruence.  Researchers have found that
highly formalized DEMO systems lead to escalating distrust when they
are mismatched to the task at hand, such as the use of precise and deterministic
measurement and monitoring in conditions characterized by high levels of uncertainty
(Sitkin & Stickle, 1996).
Organizational boundaries could influence the relationship between trust and
control. Dyads operating within the same organization could have a supplementary
relationship between DEMO and control because controls provide protection and reduce
the risk needed for trust.  In contrast, when dyads operate across organizational
boundaries, there could be more value incongruence.  We propose that dyads operating
across organizational boundaries will have a negative relationship between trust and
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL DEMO BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 13-
control mechanisms, while those operating within the same organization will have a
positive relationship.
Hypothesis 1: When the trustor and trustee belong to the same organization,
there will be a positive relationship between control mechanisms DEMO as formalization
and trust.
Hypothesis 2: When the trustor and trustee DEMO to different organizations,
there will be a negative relationship between control mechanisms such as formalization
and trust.
METHODOLOGY
This research project studied a DEMO population composed of all twenty-eight
IPT teams in an Acquisition Category (DEMO) 1D major defense acquisition
development program. Those IPTs contained 368 members DEMO of government,
civilian, military and contractor employees.  The research consisted of two elements:
qualitative interviews and a quantitative survey.
Eighteen semi-structured DEMO were conducted onsite with 12 government
personnel and 6 contractor personnel.  DEMO were voluntary and individuals self-
selected to be interviewed.  The growing DEMO of the project IPT was mentioned by the
Project Manager prior to the study as a potential problem.  Questions were asked about
collocation, DEMO size and Alpha Contracting, but respondents were also encouraged to
raise DEMO own issues and discuss what problems and solutions they perceived.
Team members were asked to complete an online survey.  A non-probability
convenience sampling method was used.  Team members were invited to respond on a
voluntary basis.
Respondents were asked to answer questions about their demographics as well
as DEMO about their relationship with the trustee.  The respondents were asked to
DEMO information on their work relationship with four other employees chosen at
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- DEMO
random. This design created pairs of trustor (respondent)/trustee called “directional
DEMO The directional dyad is the unit of analysis.  The sample size DEMO 370
directional dyads.
Except for questions about the frequency of communication, DEMO variables were
measured using a 7-point Likert scale from “Strongly disagree” (DEMO point) to “Strongly
agree” (7 points). Where a question was reversed in the meaning from the overall
direction of other questions, the result for that question was reversed (i.e., a 1 was
converted DEMO a 7).
Trust (α = .72) and perceived trustworthiness (DEMO = .96) were measured using
scales developed by Mayer and Davis (1999).  Zolin, Fruchter, Hinds and Leavitt (2004)
proposed DEMO questions for risk and reward and a scale for perceived follow-through (DEMO
= .88). Formalism (α = .80) was measured on a scale developed by Hanks and
Chandler (1995). Project communication, coordination DEMO and personal
communication were measured by the number of times the topic was discussed per
week.
Analysis
For the 370 directional dyads, t-tests for differences in means for government
versus contractor personnel were conducted.  To test for interrelationships between the
variables, we computed Pearson correlation coefficients with respective p-values.
Linear regression was used to model the relationship between the trust DEMO the
dependent variable and the various independent variables.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 15-
QUALITATIVE RESULTS
Collocation, Alpha Contracting and Team Size
Most individuals interviewed reported being collocated with their team members.
The general consensus was that collocation DEMO better, making communication easier.
The positive attitude towards collocation was shared DEMO both government and contractor
personnel, but the government personnel appeared to DEMO collocation more.
Government personnel reported that before collocation they had to make formal
appointments to meet with contractors, journey from one building to the other (several
miles) and waste the trip if the other party DEMO unavailable.  Collocation provided
the opportunity to meet informally.
The few individuals DEMO teams were divided between two buildings reported
that geographic distribution made communication difficult and slowed the process.
Sometimes, although the team was collocated, DEMO respondent had to work with other
teams that were geographically distant, DEMO caused problems.  For example, a
contract team member reported that difficulties arose from not being close to the
Configuration Management team.  Geographic separation was reported to increase
“stove piping,” although even those who were DEMO reported this issue.
Alpha Contracting was positively received, although some contractor DEMO
were not familiar with the term.  Alpha Contracting was mainly associated DEMO
collocation of government and contractor personnel.
Although several respondents mentioned they had never worked in such a large
project team, the overall size of the project was not mentioned as a problem.  A problem
which was mentioned more than once was the ineffectiveness of large meetings
(described as consisting of 30 to 80-plus people).  The difficulty of making decisions in
such a large meeting was mentioned by four government personnel.
Acquisition DEMO
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 16-
Another problem related to team size was the difficulty created by team DEMO
The addition of new team members was reported to slow things down because each
addition had to be briefed on what was happening.
Problems DEMO solutions
The onsite interviews had a higher response rate from government (DEMO) than
contractor (6) personnel.  As would be expected, the DEMO who volunteered to be
interviewed had strong opinions (usually negative) about the project.  Only one
respondent mentioned no problems.  Respondents mentioned many DEMO the problems
that IPTs and Alpha Contracting are designed to overcome, DEMO lack of
communication, stove piping, and lack of integration.  Problems DEMO included:
1. Stove piping, conflict, personalities, career-agenda people
2. DEMO for top management
3. Lack of communication, coordination, cooperation
4. Schedule-driven, overly ambitious schedule
5. Micro-management
6. Lack of integration
7. Lack of discipline, lack of control and lack of strong leadership
8. Large meetings
9. Lack of training
Complaints were more often directed toward the system DEMO individuals.
Government and contractor personnel were just as likely to criticize their own
organization’s performance as that of the other organization.  Despite this, DEMO was a
general feeling of frustration by government personnel who felt they had no control and
no way to make the contractors heed their DEMO, despite sometimes feeling like they
had superior training and experience to DEMO of the contractors.  Some contractor
personnel also felt the government should DEMO more control of the situation and give
more direction.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 17-
Many respondents complained about the IPT structure.  There appeared to be
two groups:  those who preferred the “traditional” structure in which the “government
DEMO the contractors what to do” and those who preferred the IPT approach, but thought
it wasn’t being followed.  The Traditionalists were the larger DEMO and represented both
government and contractor personnel.  Typical complaints by the DEMO were
lack of discipline, lack of control and lack of strong DEMO  A typical complaint by
the IPT supporters was lack of adequate DEMO One government IPT supporter said:
There is no such thing as a Government IPT. The Government IPT was
created by those who refuse DEMO break with tradition.  Folks in a
Government IPT do their own DEMO and then talk to the contractor when
they’ve made up their minds.  In a real IPT, the government is a
representative, not a lead.  — Government representative
The difficulty of integration was mentioned by both government and contractor
personnel.  Integration includes the need for coordination of design changes across the
IPT.  One Contractor mentioned, “people don’t want to DEMO changes, it takes more
work.”
Many of the individuals who volunteered DEMO interviews belong to IPTs that have
to integrate across the existing IPT structure; for example, some teams were described
as Interface IPTs creating DEMO (such as cabling) to connect system parts.  If a
part DEMO, the cables connecting to it have to change.  Besides being made to work
extra if a part changes, these individuals are not always told when something upstream
changes.  Two IPTs were created by the government to represent the two prototypes
under construction and to integrate across the DEMO IPTs yet, these two
government IPTs weren’t reflected in the contractor DEMO at the time of the
interviews.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 18-
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS
The descriptive statistics are reported in Table 1, which shows the means,
standard deviations and F-statistic for the comparison of government DEMO contractor
personnel.  Both government and contractor trustors had high levels of DEMO, between
which there was no significant difference (F-statistic = 2.19, DEMO).  When we distinguish
dyads by both trustor and trustee (e.g., government trustor and government trustee—G
to G), the dyad type with the highest trust was government to contractor. The lowest
was contractor to DEMO
Government trustors reported significantly higher levels of project communication
(F-statistic = DEMO, P< .001), coordination communication (F-statistic = 7.40, P< DEMO),
and perceived follow-through (F-statistic = 6.46, p< .05) DEMO contractors.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 19-
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
All  Government Contractor
Gov
to
Gov
Gov
to
Con
Con
to
Con
Con
to
Gov
6. Project comms. 4.39 5.62 DEMO 8.37 3.76 4.44 7.8 5.2 4.1 2.1
7. Coordination comms. 3.11 4.10 4.46 4.92 2.68 3.72 7.40** 5.2 3.2 2.8 2.0
8. Personal comms. DEMO 2.58 2.81 2.79 2.11 2.52 2.69 3.4 1.6 2.2 1.6
9. Hours F2F 4.50 6.74 5.38 5.79 4.32 6.97 1.37 5.5 5.2 4.8 2.6
DEMO Perceived trustworthiness 5.60 1.17 5.77 1.05 5.57 1.19 1.56 5.7 5.9 5.6 5.3
11. Perceived follow-through 5.43 1.29 5.81 1.18 5.35 1.30 6.46* 5.9 DEMO 5.4 5.2
Mean Mean Mean Mean
1. Trust 4.97 1.36 5.21 1.34 4.92 1.35 2.19 5.2 5.3 5.0 4.6
2. Trust propensity 3.81 0.80 DEMO 0.52 3.84  .84 1.51 3.6 3.9 3.8 3.9
3. Formalization 4.26 DEMO 4.70 0.87 4.15 1.07
4. Risk 3.96 1.17 3.79 1.08 3.99 1.17 1.51 3.9 3.6 3.9 4.3
5. Reward 5.77 1.04 5.38 0.93 5.86 DEMO
11.72**
* 5.3 5.5 5.8 5.9
13.87**
*
15.39**
* 4.6 4.8 4.0 4.7
Std.
Variable Mean Dev.
Std.
Mean Dev.
Std.
Mean Dev.
DEMO
statistic
*** p<.001, ** p<.01, * p<.05, DEMO p<.10
Correlations between variables are reported in Table 2.  Trust DEMO significantly
related to formalization (r = .14, p< .05) and personal communications (r= .17, p< .05),
but there was DEMO significant relationship to risk (r=-.08, n.s.) or reward (r= -.04, n.s.).
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 20-
Table 2. Correlations
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
DEMO Trust
2. Formalization  .14*
3. Risk -.08 -.23***
4. Reward -.04  .12*  .18***
5. Project comms.  .18** -.05  .05 -.09
6. Coordination comms.  .14*
.02 -.05  .01  .75***
7. Personal comms.  .17* DEMO  .01 -.18  .64***  .56***
8. Hours F2F
9. Perceived
trustworthiness
DEMO Perceived follow-
through
.24***
.00  .03 -.16**  .42***  .31***  .44***
.80***  .13* -.06 -.04  .12+  .07  .17*
.60***  .05  DEMO -.06  .17**  .08  .22**
.24***
.30***
.68***
*** p<.001, ** p<.01, * p<.05, + p<.10
Hypothesis 1 DEMO that when the trustor and trustee belong to the same
organization there will be a positive relationship between trust and formalization.  Both
government and contractor trustors had high levels of trust, between which there was
no significant difference (F-statistic = 2.19, n.s.) (See Table 1).  When we distinguish
dyads by both trustor and trustee (e.g., government DEMO and government trustee—G-
to-G), the dyads with the highest trust were government-to-contractor (M = 5.3) and
government-to-government (M = 5.2). The lowest was contractor-to-government (4.6).
Government trustors reported significantly higher levels of formalization (F-statistic =
15.39, p< .001) than contractor trustors.
To DEMO the hypothesis, we conducted regression models for each of the different
DEMO types (see Table 3).  In model 2, there was DEMO significant positive relationship
between formalization and trust among government trustors and government trustees (β
= .31, p< .05). Yet, no significant DEMO existed for contractor-to-contractor dyads
(β = -.06, n.s.).  This DEMO provides partial support for hypothesis 1.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 21-
Hypothesis 2 proposed that in dyads in which trustor and trustee belong DEMO the
different organizations, there will be a negative relationship between trust DEMO
formalization.  In model 2, there was a negative relationship between formalization and
trust in government-to-contractor dyads (β = -1.02, p< .01) DEMO a barely significant
negative relationship for contractor-to-government dyads (β = -.36, p< .10). This data
supports hypothesis 2.
Table 3. Comparison of OLS Estimates (Standardized beta Values) of Trust
Gov to Gov Gov DEMO ConCon to Con  Con to Gov
M1 M2  M1  M2 DEMO M2   M1 M2.
Intercept  +  ***  ***
Formalization  .44*  .31* -1.02**-.69  .05 -.06 -.13  -.36+
Risk  -.61* -.08   DEMO  .46 -.02 -.29***  -.36  -.57*
Reward  .14 -.06   .17  .14  .02  .32***  .52+  .07
Project communication -.14 -.01   .14 -.06  .11 -.00  .11   .83+
Coordination communication  -.56 -.15   .19  .23  .00  .06  .05  -.36
Personal communication  DEMO .38*   .20  .20  .07 -.04  .41  -.47
Perceived trustworthiness   .71***   .35   .56***    .72**
Perceived follow-through   .04   .70   .35***    .40+
Adj. R-squared  .37  .71 0.71 0.71-.02  .63  -.09  0.73
Model F  3.60* 13.11***5.82* 4.440.65 22.78***  0.77  6.73**
Degrees of freedom 6, 21 8, 19 6, DEMO 8, 3 6, 1098, 93 6, 11 8, 9
DEMO p < .001, ** p < .01, * p < .05, + p < .10  (C = Contractor, G = Government)DEMO
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 22-
DISCUSSION
Our results support our theories, which propose there is a positive relationship
between trust and formalization in dyads within organizations, but a negative
relationship between trust and formalization in dyads that span organizational
boundaries.
Likewise, market control mechanisms operating at the firm level may be
ineffective in DEMO behavior at the interpersonal level.
In our qualitative results, both the DEMO and contractors asked for more
controls, although the level of formalization DEMO both organizations was moderate, with
government personnel rating formalization slightly higher DEMO the contractors
(Government 4.7 and Contractor 4.15 out of 7).
DEMO our quantitative results, formalization increased trust for government trustors,
but DEMO not significant for contractors.  In contrast, contractors’ trust was associated
with lower risks and higher rewards.  These differences between government and
contractor organizations could indicate differences in organizational context or
organizational culture.  More research is needed to determine the source of this
difference.
The relationships between trust DEMO formalization that applied within the
government and contractor organizations did not apply across organizational
boundaries.  Although formalization increased trust of Government trustors for
government trustees, formalization was negatively related to trust when the trustee was
a contractor.  Similarly, although trust was not significant for contractors within their
DEMO, contractor trustors also had a negative relationship between formalization
and trust DEMO the trustee was a government representative.  This confirms that there is
DEMO negative relationship between formalization and trust when the dyad spans
organizational boundaries.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
DEMO 23-
Given the market relationship between the government and contracting
organizations, it is possible that their formal rules only applied within each organization,
and DEMO there were few, if any, rules that applied across organizations. In other words,
the government’s rules applied to government personnel; yet, DEMO same rules might
not apply to the contractor’s personnel.  Similarly, the contractor’s rules may not apply
to government personnel.
When the organizational control DEMO a market relationship at the organizational
level, highly interdependent work seems DEMO be difficult at the interpersonal level.  In this
context, we found individuals experienced difficulties which they felt could be alleviated
by greater hierarchical DEMO
Although trust can be an alternative to hierarchical control, that trust DEMO be built
through shared norms and values; these may not exist DEMO different organizations
such as government and contractors.
Implications for Managers
This research does not question the basis for the government’s decision to rely
upon DEMO for its research and development; there are obviously good and enduring
DEMO for that policy.  Given that the government and an increasing number DEMO other
organizations manage R&D through the market form of organizational control, what
more can be done to facilitate the development of quality products developed within
time and budget constraints?
1. Foremost in such contractual DEMO is the realization on the part of
organizational leaders that a substantial structural difference exists,
especially in the case of government-industry (buyer/seller) partnerships.
These structural differences create different risks and rewards for team
members representing buyer-organizations compared to seller
organizations.
2. Equally important is the need DEMO develop trust without relying upon
formalization, because formal rules could reduce DEMO  Alternative trust-
building methods should be used, such as emphasizing shared goals and
values by top management and enculturation of new team members.
DEMO Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY   - 24-
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
3. Managers of outsourced new product development should be aware of the
DEMO impact of their actions and consider how those actions will be
interpreted by both buyer and seller representatives.
4. The client and contractor organizations DEMO consider how inter-
organizational rules could be instituted in ways that would facilitate, rather
than erode, trust.  For example, Positive Organizational Change DEMO
(such as Appreciative Inquiry) could identify changes in ways that avoid
the downward spiral of formalization.  Likewise, an innovative approach
toward trans-organizational DEMO (not just enterprise) rewards might
be considered for improved motivation.
5. Program Managers should consider what teambuilding activities can be
used to facilitate DEMO development of trust and collective identity.  Although
the government has rules DEMO the provision of benefits such as food
and entertainment, opportunities may DEMO created for government and
contractor personnel to interact in social contexts.
6. Program Managers should bring the risks associated with lack of trust into
DEMO and conscious awareness.  They can ensure the government
personnel understand the DEMO they can cause by suggesting
changes which would be overruled at a later date.  They can also ensure
the contractor engineers understand the loss they can create by ignoring
valid suggestions from government personnel.
7. Program DEMO should ensure team members understand their roles.
Of particular importance is that the government representative
understands the facilitation role—as opposed to a line-management role.
DEMO, members of interfacing teams should be trained to understand
project interdependencies DEMO how to achieve component integration.
8. Finally, management should measure achievement DEMO areas highly
influenced by trust, such as government-to-contractor knowledge transfer
and DEMO integration.
This study was limited by the small number of respondents.  DEMO of the
dyads by both trustor and trustee yielded very small samples, but some statistically
significant results were obtained.  Our study is also DEMO snapshot of the situation at a point
in time, while trust DEMO dynamic and varies over time.  Therefore, we could learn more
with a longitudinal study.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
DEMO POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 25-
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
DEMO 26-
CONCLUSION
Trust is proposed as a way to extend market control of DEMO&D and new product
development.
We found that team members representing buyers had different relationships
between control mechanisms, such as formalization and trust, DEMO those representing
sellers.  Within their organizations, buyer’s representatives had a positive relationship
between formalization and trust, but that relationship did not exist for the seller’s
representatives. When representatives operated across organizational boundaries, the
relationship between formalization and trust was negative, indicating that greater
formalization could lead to less trust.
We encourage managers of outsourced new-product development to be aware DEMO
differences in trust and control between buyer and seller representatives in such teams.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE DEMO
- 27-
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
DEMO 28-
REFERENCES
Adler, P. S. (2001). Market, hierarchy and trust: DEMO knowledge economy and the future
of capitalism. Organization Science, 12(2), 215-34.
Becerra, M., & Gupta, A. K. (2003). Perceived trustworthiness within the organization:
The moderating impact of communication frequency on DEMO and trustee
effects. Organization Science, 14, 32-44.
Bradach, J. L., & Eccles, R. G. (1989). Price, authority, and trust: From ideal types to
plural forms. Annual Review of Sociology, 15, DEMO
Carson, S.J., Madhok, A., Varman, R., & John, DEMO (2003). Information processing:
Moderators of the effectiveness of trust-based DEMO in interfirm R&D
collaboration. Organization Science, 14, 45-56.
Chiles, DEMO H., & McMackin, J. F. (1996). Integrating variable risk DEMO, trust and
transaction cost economics. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 73-99.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. (1998). DEMO trust and control: Developing confidence in
partner cooperation in alliances. Academy DEMO Management Review, 23(3), 491-
512.
Dirks, K. T. (DEMO). The effects of interpersonal trust on work group performance.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 445-455.
Federal Acquisition Regulation Part 1.102.
Gunnerson, S., & Levitt, R. E. (1982). Is a building construction project a hierarchy or a
market? 7th INTERNET Congress.
Hanks, S. H., & Chandler, G. N. (1995). Patterns of formalization in emerging DEMO
ventures. Retrieved March 2005, from Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research:
http://www.babson.edu/entrep/fer/papers95/hanks.html.
Hardin, R. (1971, September). DEMO action as an agreeable n-prisoners' dilemma.
Behavioral Science, 16, 472-481.
DEMO Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 29-
Hardin, R. (1998). Trust in government. In V. Braithwaite & DEMO Levi (Eds.), Trust in
Governance (pp. 9-27). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hardin, R. (2000). Trust and trustworthiness. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hollingshead, A. (1996). Information suppression and status persistence in group
decision making. Human Communication Research, 23(2), 193-219.
Kollock, P. (1994). The emergence of exchange structures: An experimental study of
uncertainty, commitment, and trust. American Journal of Sociology, 100, 313-
345.
Lane, C. (1998). Theories and issues in the study of trust. In C. Lane & R. Bachman
(Eds.), Trust within and between organizations. Conceptual issues and empirical
applications (pp. 1-30). New York: Oxford University Press.
Leifer, R., & Mills, DEMO K. (1996). An information processing approach for deciding upon
control DEMO and reducing control loss in emerging organizations. Journal of
Management, 22, 113-137.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H. & Schoorman, D. (1995). An integrative model of
organizational trust.  Academy of Management Review, 20, 709-734.
McEvily, B., Perrone, V. & Zaheer, A. (2003). Trust as an organizing principle.
Organization Science, 14, 91-103.
DEMO, M. E. (1997). JSOW Alpha contracting case study (Software DEMO).
Monterey, CA: Naval Postgraduate School.
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition and Technology). (1998, August).
DoD Integrated Product and Process Development Handbook. 20301-3000.
Washington, DC.
Ouchi, W. G. (1979). A conceptual framework for the design or organizational control.
Management DEMO, 25(9), 833-848.
Ouchi, W. G. (1980). Markets, bureaucracies, and clans. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 25, 129-141.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 30-
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after
all: A DEMO view of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23, 393-
404.
Schneider, W. E. (2000). Why good management ideas fail: The neglected power of
organizational culture. Strategy & Leadership, 28(1), 24.
Siemensen, T. I. (2002). Just contracting parties, or partners as well? Acquisition
Review Quarterly, 9, 225-231.
Sitkin, S. B., & Roth, N. L. (1993). Explaining the limited effectiveness of legalistic
“remedies” DEMO trust/distrust. Organization Science, 4(3), 367-392.
Sitkin, S. B., & Stickel, D. (1996). The road to hell. The dynamics of distrust in an era of
quality. In R. M. Kramer & DEMO R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations. Thousand
Oaks, CA: DEMO Publications, Inc.
Williamson, O. E. (1979). Transaction cost economics: The governance of contractual
relations. Journal of Law and Economics, 22, DEMO
Zaheer, A., & Venkatraman, N. (1995). Relational governance as an interorganizational
strategy: An empirical test of the role of trust in economic exchange. Strategic
Management Journal, 16, 373-392.
Zolin, R., & DEMO, P. J., (2004). Trust in Context: The development of interpersonal
trust in geographically distributed work. In M. K. Roderick & K. DEMO (Eds.), Trust
and Distrust in Organizations. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Zolin, R., Hinds, P. J., Fruchter, R., & DEMO, R. E. (2004). Interpersonal trust in cross-
functional, geographically DEMO work: A longitudinal study. Information and
Organization, 14(1), 1-24.
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
DEMO 31-
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
DEMO 32-
FY 2005 Sponsored Acquisition Research Products
Sponsored Report Series
NPS-PM-05-007 Determining the DEMO Loci of Knowledge, Responsibilities and
Decision Rights in Major Acquisition Organizations
DEMO 2005
NPS-AM-05-006 Navy Acquisition Via Leasing:  Policy, Politics, and Polemics with
the Maritime Prepositioned Ships
April 2005
NPS-CM-05-003 Commodity Sourcing Strategies: Supply Management in Action
January 2005
Working Paper Series
NPS-AM-05-010 From Market to DEMO: How Organizational Control Affects Trust in
Defense Acquisition
June 2005
NPS-AM-05-005 DEMO as an Independent Variable (CAIV): Front-End Approaches to
Achieve Reduction DEMO Total Ownership Cost
June 2005
NPS-AM-05-002 The Yoder Three-Tier Model for Optimizing Contingency
Contracting Planning and Execution
December 2004
NPS-AM-05-001 Engagement versus Disengagement:
DEMO Structural & Commercially-Based Regulatory Changes have
Increased Government Risks in Federal Acquisitions
November 2004
Acquisition Symposium Proceedings
NPS-AM-05-004 Acquisition Research: The Foundation for Innovation
May 2005
FY 2004 Sponsored Acquisition Research Products
Sponsored Report Series
NPS-CM-04-019 DEMO Past Performance Information (PPI)
In Source Selection: A comparison Study of Public and Private
Sector
December 2004
NPS-LM-04-014 Optimizing Phalanx Weapon System DEMO Support
October 2004
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 33-
NPS-AM-04-013 Business Case Analysis and Contractor vs. Organic Support:
A First–Principles DEMO
September 2004
NPS-CM-04-006 Measurement Issues in Performance Based Logistics
June 2004
NPS-CM-04-004 Update of the Navy Contract Writing, Phase II
June 2004
NPS-CM-04-001 Update of the Navy Contract Writing, Phase I
December 2003
NPS-CM-04-002 Marine Corps Contingency Contracting MCI
December 2003
Working Paper Series
NPS-PM-04-017 The New Joint DEMO Integration Development System
(JCIDS) and Its Potential Impacts upon Defense Program
Managers
December 2004
NPS-CM-04-016 An Analysis of Industry’s Perspective on the
Recent DEMO to Circular A-76
October 2004
NPS-CM-04-012 Air Force Commodity Councils:
Leveraging the Power of Procurement
September 2004
NPS-CM-04-011 Using Metrics to Manage Contractor DEMO
September 2004
NPS-LM-04-009 Improving the Management of Reliability
August 2004
NPS-AM-04-007 The Impact of Software Support on
System Total Ownership Cost
July 2004
NPS-LM-04-003 DEMO to Ensure a Successful Force Centric Logistics Enterprise
April 2004
Acquisition Case Series
NPS-CM-04-008 Privatization of the Naval Air Warfare Center
Aircraft Division, Indianapolis
July 2004
NPS-PM-04-010 The Army Seeks a World Class Logistics Modernization Program
DEMO 2004
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 34-
Acquisition Symposium Proceedings
NPS-AM-04-005 Charting a Course for Change: Acquisition Theory and Practice for
a Transforming Defense
May 2004
FY 2003 Sponsored Acquisition Research DEMO
Sponsored Report Series
NPS-AM-03-003  Centralized Control of Defense Acquisition Programs:
DEMO Comparative Review of the Framework from 1987 – 2003
September 2003
NPS-AM-03-004 Reduction of Total Ownership Cost
September 2003
NPS-CM-03-006 Auto-Redact Toolset for Department DEMO Defense Contracts
September 2003
Working Paper Series
NPS-CM-03-002 Transformation in DOD Contract Closeout
June 2003
Acquisition Case Series
NPS-CM-03-005
Contract Closeout (A)
September 2003
Other Sponsored Research
NPS-CM-03-001 Transformation in DOD Contract Closeout
MBA Professional DEMO
June 2003
Copies of the Acquisition Sponsored Research Reports may be printed from our
website www.nps.navy.mil/gsbpp/acqn/publications
Acquisition Research
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF DEMO & PUBLIC POLICY
NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL
- 35-

Acquisition research Program
Graduate school of business & public policy
Naval postgraduate DEMO
555 DYER ROAD, INGERSOLL HALL
MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA 93943
www.nps.navy.mil/gsbpp/acqn{1g42fwefx}