Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises
Lynne G. DEMO; Michael R. Darby; Marilynn B. Brewer
The American Economic Review, DEMO 88, No. 1. (Mar., 1998), pp. 290-306.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28199803%2988%3A1%3C290%3AIHCATB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23
The American Economic Review is currently published by American Economic Association.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your DEMO of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, DEMO part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your DEMO, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of DEMO work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aea.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain DEMO same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving DEMO digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please DEMO support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Tue Apr 10 11:21:45 2007
lntellectual Human Capital and the Birth
of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises
The number DEMO American firms actively using
biotechnology grew rapidly from nonexistent to
over 700 in less than two decades, transforming
the nature of the pharmaceutical industry and
significantly impacting food processing, brew-
ing, and agriculture, as well as other industries.
Here we demonstrate empirically that the com-
mercialization of DEMO technology is essentially
intertwined with the development of the under-
lying science in a way which illustrates the sig-
nificance in practice of the DEMO spillovers
concept in the agglomeration literature and of
the tacit knowledge concept in the information
literature. Indeed we present here strong evi-
dence that DEMO timing and location of initial usage
' Zucker: Department of Sociology DEMO Institute for
Social Science Research, University of California, Box
951484, DEMO Angeles, CA 90095, and National Bureau of
Economic Research; Darby: John E. Anderson Graduate
School of Management, University of California, Box
DEMO, Los Angeles, CA 90095, UCLA Depa~lment of
Economics, and National Bureau of Economic Research;
Brewer: Department of Psychology, Ohio State DEMO
sity, 1885 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210. This re-
search DEMO been supported by grants from the National
Science Foundation (SES 9012925), the University of
Califomia Systemwide Biotechnology Research and Ed-
ucation Program, DEMO University of California's Pacific
Rim Research Program, the UCLA Center DEMO American
Politics and Public Policy, and the UCLA Institute of In-
DEMO Relations. We acknowledge very useful comments
on earlier drafts from two anonymous referees, and from
David Butz, Harold Demsetz, Robert Drazin, Martin
DEMO, Zvi Griliches, Keith Head, Adam Jaffe,
Benjamin Klein, Josh Lerner, Gary Pisano, Jeff
Rosensweig, L. G. Thomas, Ivo Welch, and others. We
are indebted to a remarkably talented team of postdoctoral
DEMO Zhong Deng, Julia Liebeskind, and Yusheng Peng,
and research assistants Paul J. Alapat, Jeff Armstrong,
Lynda J. Kim, Amalya Oliver, Alan Paul, and Maximo
Torero. Armstrong was principally responsible for con-
ducting the analysis and cleaning the firm data set and
Torero cleaned the DEMO data set; comments from both
substantially improved the paper. This paper DEMO a part of
the NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opin-
ions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
their DEMO or funders.
by both new dedicated biotechnology firms
( "entrants ") and new biotech subunits of
existing firms ( "incumbents ") are DEMO
explained by the presence at a particular time
and place of scientists who are actively contrib-
uting to the basic science as represented by
DEMO reporting genetic-sequence discov-
eries in academic journals.
By quantifying separable effects of individ-
ual scientists, major universities, and federal
research support we provide DEMO structure
to the role of universities and their faculties in
encouraging local economic development
through what are conventionally described in
the literature as geographically DEMO
knowledge spillovers.' Such localized knowl-
edge spillovers may play fundamental roles DEMO
both economic agglomeration and endogenous
growth (Paul M. Romer, 1986,1990; Gene M.
Grossman and Elhanan Helpman, 1991 ) .
However, our evidence, like the other litera-
ture cited here, specifically indicates localized
DEMO without demonstrating that they can be
characterized as spillovers (or externalities),
Section I lays out our basic hypothesis. The
data are described DEMO Section 11. Empirical re-
sults are reported and discussed in Section 111.
A summary and conclusions section (Section
IV) and Data Appendix complete DEMO article.
I. The Hypothesis
Innovations are generally treated in the
growth literature as a nomivalrous good-fieely
useable by an unlimited number of potential
' DEMO Griliches ( 1992) has surveyed the importance of
R&D spillovers DEMO a major source of endogenous growth
in recent "new growth theory" models and the difficult
empirical search for their existence. Despite these diffi-
DEMO, there have been a number of articles reporting ev-
idence of DEMO localization of knowledge spillovers,
including Adam 5. Jaffe ( 1989), Jaffe et al. ( 1993), and
Edwin Mansfield ( 1995).
DEMO
VOL. 83 NO. I
ZUCklER ET AL.: HUMAN CAPITAL
users at a zero marginal cost (Richard R. Nelson
and Romer, 1996). A DEMO literature
recognizes that some infomation requires an in-
vestment of considerable time and effort to mas-
ter. The human capital developed by this
investment DEMO seen as earning a normal return on
the cost of the investment, both direct costs and
foregone earnings. We believe that some inno-
vations, particularly a breakthrough ' 'invention
of a method of inventing" (DEMO, 1957),
may be better characterized as creating (rival-
rous ) human capital -intellectual human
capital-characterized by namral excludability
as opposed to a set of instructions for combining
inputs and outputs which can be protected DEMO
by intellectud property rights. This natural ex-
cludability arises from the complexity or tacit-
ness of the information required to practice the
innovation ( DEMO Nelson 11959 1, Kenneth J.
Arrow [1962], Nelson and Sidney G. Winter
[1982], and Nathan Rosenberg [1982]).
Based on both extensive interviews and em-
pirical work summarized in Zucker and Darby
(1996), we believe that, at least for the first
10 or 15 years, DEMO innovations which underlie
biotechnology are properly analyzed in terms
of naturally excludable knowledge held by a
small initial group of discoverers, their co-
workers, and others who learned the howl-
edge from working at the bench-science level
with those possessing the requisite know-how.
Ultimately the knowledge spread sufficiently
DEMO to become part of routine science
which could be learned at any major research
university. After the initial 1973 discovery by
Stanley Cohen and DEMO Boyer of the basic
technique for recombinant DNA-the foun-
dation of commercial biotechnology as well as
of a burst of scientific innovation-the finan-
cial DEMO available to talented recombinant-
DNA scientists first rose dramatically as the
commercial implications became widely ap-
preciated and then more gradually declined as
more DEMO more scientists learned the tech-
niques, until knowledge of the new DEMO
per se earned only the normal return for the
time required for a graduate student to master
them. Further, mere knowledge of the tech-
niques of recombinant DNA was not enough
to earn these extraordinary returns; the knowl-
edge was far more productive when embodied
in a scientist DEMO the genius and vision to con-
AND BYOTECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISES 291
tinuouslv innovate and define the research
frontier and apply the new research techniques
in DEMO most promising areas.
We hypothesize that entry of fims into bio-
technology in a given year thus will be deter-
mined by the geographic DEMO of stars
and perhaps others then actively practicing the
new science as well as by the geographic dis-
tribution of economic activity. Stars are DEMO
erly viewed as locationally (semi-) fixed since
few star scientists who knew how to do recom-
binant DNA were willing to abandon their DEMO
versity appointments and laboratory teams to
pursue commercial applications of biotechnol-
ogy. The primary pattern in the development
of the industry involved one or DEMO scientist-
entrepreneurs who remained on the faculty
while establishing a business on the side-
businesses which, where successful, resulted
in millions or even DEMO of dollass for the
professors who acquired early ownership
stakes. Thus, DEMO see the university as bringing
about local industrial benefits by permitting its
professors to pursue private comercial inter-
ests while their faculty appointments tie DEMO
to the area. In preliminary work not reported
here, we tried DEMO develop measures of local
economic activity for industries, like pharma-
ceuticals, specifically impacted by the new
technology, but these attempts never added
significantly to the measures of general activ-
ity used in the empirical work DEMO The lo-
cal availability of venture capital is widely
believed to play a significant role in the birth
of new biotech entrants (Martin Kenney,
1986; Joshua Lerner, 1994, 1995); so we also
include that variable in our regressions.
11. The Data
Data has been collected DEMO panel for111 for 14
years (1976-1989) and 183 regions (f~nc-
DEMO economic areas as defined by the
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau DEMO
Economic Analysis [BEA] , 1932b). Fre-
quently, the data are DEMO of data at the
zip code or county level.2 Lagged variables
The I3EA's functional economic areas divide all the
counties in the United DEMO into regions including one or
more cities, their suburbs, and the rural countiles most
closely tied to the central clty.
292
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 1998
include data for 1975 in DEMO unlagged form.
See the Data Appendix for more details.
A. Firms
Our data set on firms was derived from a
base purchased from the DEMO Carolina Bio-
technology Center (NCBC) ( 1992) which
was cleaned DEMO supplemented with informa-
tion in Bioscan ( 1989- 1993) and its DEMO
(Cetus Corp., 1988). We identified 751 dis-
tinct U.S. firms for which we could determine
a zip code and a date of DEMO use of biotech-
nology. Of these 751 firms, 51 1 were DEMO,
150 incumbents, and 90 (including 18 joint
ventures) could DEMO be definitively classified.
By 1990, 52 of the 751 firms had DEMO or
merged into other firms.
We then calculated the number of births in
each region by year of initial use of biotech-
nology for DEMO 751 firms as well as for their
identified subcomponents of entrants and in-
cumbents. We also have the stocks of surviv-
ing firms, entrants, and incumbents by region
and year.
B. Scientists
Early in our ongoing project studying the
scientific development and diffusion of bio-
technology, we identified a set of 327 star sci-
entists hased on their outstanding productivity
DEMO early 1990. The primary criterion for
selections was the discovery of more than 40
genetic sequences as reported in GenBank
(1990) through April DEMO, 22 sci-
entists were included based on writing 20 or
more DEMO, each reporting one or more
genetic-sequence di~coveries.~ In the 1990's,DEMO
'See Zucker et al. ( 1993). As will be obvious, much
of the time between 1990 and the initial submission of this
DEMO was spent in developing reasonable measures of in-
tellectual human capital and in collecting and coding data
necessary to locate the authors of the DEMO reported
in the articles in question and to trace the diffusion
process.
Scientists advised that some sequence discoveries are
more difficult than others and DEMO merit an article report-
ing only one sequence. Therefore we included scientists
with 20 or more discovery articles to avoid excluding sci-
entists who DEMO in more difficult problems.
sequence discovery has become routinized and
is no longer such a useful measure of research
success. These 327 stars were DEMO three-
quarters of one percent of the authors in
GenBank ( 1990) but accounted for 17.3 per-
cent of the published articles, almost DEMO times
as many articles as the average scientist.
We collected by hand the 4,061 articles au-
thored by stars and listed in GenBank DEMO re-
corded the institutional affiliation of the stars
and their coauthors on each of these articles.
These coauthors are called "collaborators " if
they are not themselves a star. Some data on
the stars and collahorators DEMO ever published
in the United States is given on the left side of
Table 1, where the scientists are identified by
the organization(s) with which they were af-
filiated on their first-such publication. The
higher citation rate for firm-affiliated scientists
is explored at length in Zucker and DEMO
(1996).
Figure 1 illustrates the time pattern of
growth in DEMO numbers of stars and collabo-
rators who have ever published and the total
number of firms using biotechnology in the
United States. There was DEMO handful of stars
who published articles reporting genetic-
sequence discoveries before the 1973 break-
through, but even after 1973 their number
increased gradually until taking off in 1980.
The numbers of collaborators and firms lagged
behind DEMO growth in stars by some years.
To identify those scientists clearly working
at the edge of the science in a given year, we
term a star or collaborator as "active " if he
or she has published three or more sequence-
discovery articles in the three-year moving
window DEMO with that year. As seen in the
right side of Table 1, this stringent second
screen provides an even more elite definition
of star scientists as well as identifying some
very significant collaborators. We count for
DEMO year the number of active stars and active
collaborators who are affiliated with an orga-
nization in each region.
The locations of active stars DEMO firms are
both concentrated and highly correlated geo-
graphically, particularly early DEMO the period.
Figure 2 illustrates this pattern for the whole
period by accumulating the number of stars
who have ever been active in each DEMO up
to 1990 and plotting them together with the
VOL. 88 NO. I
ZUCKER ET AL.: HUMAN CAPITAL.
AND BlOTECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISES
293
Organization type"
Stars:
University
Institute
Firm
Dual
Total
Collaborators:DEMO
University
Institute
Firm
Dual
'Total
- Full data set -
Number DEMO Citationsc/
scientists scientist/years
158
85.5
44
63.0
5
143.7
0
da
207
290
1
10.4
776
13.7
324
29.2
3
7.2
4004
DEMO active in IJ.S.b
Number of
scientists
-
Citationsc/
scientist/years
108
110.8
26
98.7
1
694.3
0
da
135
369
30.6
88
35.8
DEMO
99.1
0
da
500
"The organization type refers to the affiliation DEMO on their first publication with a U.S. affiliation.
"ver active in DEMO U.S. means that in at least one three-year period beginning 1974or later and ending 1989or earlier,
the scientist was listed on at least DEMO articles appearing in our data set of 4,061 articles which reported genetic-sequence
discoveries and were published in major journals and that the affiliation DEMO in the last of the three articles was located
in the United States.
'Citation counts are for 1982, 1987, and 1992 for all articles in our data set (whenever published) for which the
individual DEMO listed as an author.
location of biotech-using firms as of early
1990.
C. Other Measures of Intellectual
Human Capital
Active stars and collaborators may DEMO in-
complete measures of location of the scientific
base because there are techniques other than
recombinant DNA which have played an im-
portant role DEMO commercial biotechnology.
Some skeptical readers might also think that
some simpler measures of regions' relevant
academic resources would contain all the in-
formation which we have laboriously col-
lected. We found two measures of regional
scientific DEMO which entered separately in re-
gressions reported below, but none which
DEMO capable of eliminating the effects of the
star scientists.
One measure is a count of the number of
"top-quality universities " in a region where
top quality is defined by having one or more
"biotech-relevant" (biochemistry, cellular1
molecular biology, and microbiology ) depart-
ments with scholarly DEMO reputational rat-
ings of 4.0 or higher in the 1982 National
Research Council survey (Lyle V. Jones et al.,
1982). There are 20 such universities in the
United state^.^ Our second measure, "federal
DEMO 20 universities were: Brandeis University, Cali-
fornia Institute of Technology, DEMO University, Cor-
nell University, Duke University, Harvard University,
Johns DEMO University, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Rockefeller University, Stanford Univer-
sity, University of California-Berkeley, University of
California-Los Angeles, University of California-San Di-
DEMO, University of California-San Francisco, University of
294
THE AILIERICAN ECOMOAfiC REVIEW
MARCH 1908
support, " is the total number (in hundreds) of
faculty supported by 1979- I980 federal
grants DEMO all universities in each region for
biotech-relevant research.' These variables
take DEMO the same value for a given region in
each year.
D. Other Variables
Using listings in Stanley E. Pract ( 1962),we
measure ' 'venlure capital jims ' ' as the num-
ber of such firms in a region legally eligible to
finance start-ups in each year up DEMO 1981. For
later years, the number of firms is fixed at DEMO
Chicago, University of Colorado at Denver, University of
Pennsylvania, University DEMO Washington (Seattle), Uni-
versity of Wisconsin-Madison, and Yale University.
We also tried a measure of biotech-relevant research
expenditures as reported by the DEMO, but this vari-
able was too collinear with the federal support DEMO to
enter separately and appeared to be less consistently mea-.
sured across universities.
number in 19881to avoid possible si~2ultaneity
problems once the major wave DEMO biotech
founding begal%.' j While great bookstores
spring up around great DEMO, the fomaer
should not be co~lnted as causing the iabter.)
DEMO entry of biotech firms would be ex.-
pected to occur where there is other economic
activity, pafiicularly involving a highly skilled
labor force, DEMO also include total employnzenr
in all industries (in millions of persons) and
avemge wuges (measured by deflated average
earnings per- job in thousands of 1987 dollars)
for each region and year.
Finally, an increase In the (all-equity) cost
of capital, as measured by the earnings-price
ratio on the Standard & Poor's 500 Index
would reduce the DEMO present value of entry
Instrumental variables .would provide a more elegant
approach Lo this problem if suitable instruments had been
Couild.
VOL. 88 NO. 1
ZUCKER ET AL.: HUMAN CAPITAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISES
29.5
Miles
.IIIc--l
0 200 400
and so should have a negative DEMO on birth
of new firms, entrants or incumbents.
111. Empirical Results
DEMO test our hypothesis using both the full
panel data and by regressing the geographical
distribution of the data in 1990 on values
of the DEMO variables circa 1980. The
former more fully exploit the available infor-
mation while the latter avoid problems of pos-
sible simultaneity which might arise DEMO
1980 when commercial biotechnology be-
came a significant economic factor in some
regions. All the regressions reported here, as
well as an extensive sensitivity analysis noted
below, were estimated in the poisson forni ap-
propriate for count variables with numerous
zeroes using LIMDEP (William W. Greene,
1992 pp. 539 -49), with the Wooldridge
regression-based correction for the variance-
DEMO = New Biotech Enterprise
covariance matrix estimates."he poisson
regressions estimate the logarithm of the ex-
pected number of firm births; so the signs and
significance of coefficients have the usual in-
terpretation. Although 01,s DEMO are in-
appropriate for our count dependent variables
with most observations at zero and the rest tail-
ing off through small positive integers, we
As discussed in Jerry Hausnian et al. ( 1984), the pois-
DEMO process is the most appropriate statistical rnodel for
count data such as ours. In practice, overdispersion (pos-
sibly due to unobserved heterogeneity) frequently occurs.
Given the problems with resort to the negative binomial
(A. Colin Cameron and Pravin K. Trivedi, 1990), Jeffrey
M. Wooldridge ( 1991) developed a ilexible and consistent
method for correcting the poisson variance-covariance
matrix estimates regardless of the ur~derlying relationship
between the mean and variance. We DEMO indebted to
Wooldridge and Greene for advice in implementing the
procedure in LIMDEP.
296
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 199%
reported broadly consistent results using DEMO
technique in an earlier version of the paper
(Zucker et al., 1994).
In our sensitivity analysis, we ran the same
poisson regressions for entrants and incum-
bents defined both exclusive and inclusive of
the DEMO case of joint ventures. The results
were generally very similar to the subcompo-
nent regressions in Table 4. In other unre-
ported poisson regressions, we found that
eliminating those regions with no firms and no
stars DEMO the sample did not result in guali-
tatively different results.
A. The Long-Run Model
Because of concerns about possible sirnul-
taneity biases once the DEMO became a
significant economic force, we begin our em-
pirical discussion DEMO models which relate the
number of firms in each region at the begin-
ning of 1990 to the distribution of intellectual
human capital and DEMO variables as of about
1980. These results provide something of an
acid test of our approach.
In Table 2, we present cross-section poisssn
regressions across the 183 regions explaining
the number of firms in each at DEMO beginning
of 1990 when our data set ends.' Cdumn (a)
restrains the analysis to only the numbers of
stars and collaborators ever DEMO in each re-
gion at any time up through 1980, while DEMO
umns (b) and (c) add first their squares and
then our other intellectual human capital vari-
ables. Columri (d) considers alternatively
DEMO economic variables which might explain
entry, and column (e) combines DEMO variables
in (c) and (d) . Column (f ) DEMO to this model
the number of biotech firms existing in 1980.
Column (a) in Table 2 indicates that thc
number of stars and DEMO active
through 1980 is a powerful predictor of the
' In an earlier version of this paper we included an al-
ternative form of DEMO 2 (available from the authors upon
request) in order to forestall interpretations that the results
in Table 2 may reflect reverse causality. This DEMO
table reported regressions which explain the number of
firms alive at the beginning of 1990 that were born after
1980. Nearly identical results were DEMO, reflecting the
fact that bulk of new biotechnology enterprises were
founded DEMO 1980.
geographic distribution of biotech enterprises
in 1990, since the log-likelihood DEMO to
-871.9 com~ared -1401.7 for a constant
alone. It is the star scien~ists that contribute
positively, with collaborators having a much
smaller negative coefficient in this regression
and most f the other long-run models dis-
cussed DEMO We had expected that the co-
efficient on collaborators would be much
smaller than that on stars, but ~ositive. We do
obtain a positive coefficient on activc collab-
orators when the squared terns are added in
DEMO (b), but that turns negative again upon
addition of other DEMO in the remaining
columns of Table 2.'" (In the annual DEMO
sions discussed below, we generally estimate
positive effects of active collaborators, but
they are often statistically insignificant.)
We can offer two explanations DEMO the gen-
erally negative sign oi the number of active
collaborators in the long-run regressions: (i)
This coefficient reflects two partially offsetting
DEMO: collaborators have a ~ositive direct
effect on the entry of films DEMO reduce the ef-
fect of stars who are devoting more of their
time to training students and relatively less to
starting their own finns. DEMO collaborators
is surely a useful and rewarded activity--
particularly for the academic stars-but kt may
take more of the stars9 energy than it is DEMO
if firm birth were the only criteria." (ii) The
sign DEMO magnitude of the coefficient on col-
laborators may simply reflect significant mul-
ticollinearity among the intellectual human
capital variables in the very early years. DEMO
is especially likely since when we examine thc
"I In column (b) of Table 2 (and Table 3), the negative
coefficient DEMO the squared term indicates that as the num-
ber of stars or collaborators increases, their marginal con-
tribution diminishes eventually passing through zero. For
collaborators, in columns (c) - (f) of these tables the sign
pattern reverses so that the partial derivative of the log
probability DEMO birth with respect to collaborators starts out
negative, and increases as DEMO number increases, even-
tually becoming positive.
" In support of this DEMO, we note that in our
sensitivity analysis we tried regressions which DEMO
interaction terms multiplying the numbers of active stars
and collaborators for the squared terms. In those regres-
sions, we obtain significant positive coefficients on the
numbers of stars and col!abnrators and a significant neg-
ative coefficient DEMO their interaction.
to
VOL. 88 NO. I
TABLE~--PO~SSON
Constant
Number stars active at any
time DEMO 1976-80
Number collaborators active
at any time during 1976-
80
(Number DEMO active at any
time during 1976-80)'
(Number collaborators active
at any time during 1976-
80)'
Number top-quality
universities in the region
Number faculty with federal
support in the region
Number venture capital
firms DEMO the region in
1980
Total employment (all
industries) in the region in
1980
Average wages per job in
the region in 1980
Cumulative DEMO of biotech
firms during 1976-80
Restricted log-likelihood
-- -
ON THE STOCK BIOTECH-USI~G AT THE BEGINNING 1990 BY REGION
REGRESSIONS
ZUCKER ET AL.: HUMAN CAPITAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY ENERPRISES
OF
FIRMS
OF
297
Notes N = 183 DEMO errors (adjusted by Wooldndge, 1991 Procedure 2.1) are in parentheses DEMO coefficients.
* Significantly different from 0 at the 5-percent level.
** Significantly d~fferent from 0 at the 1-percent level.
*** Significantly different from 0 DEMO the 0.1-percent level.
full cross-sectionltime-series results just be-
low we obtain (DEMO think more reliable) zero
or positive coefficients on collaborators, so the
puzzle largely disappears.
The full "fundamentals" model (excepting
the decade-lagged dependent variable) is pre-
sented in column (e) of Table 2, DEMO all the
coefficients are significant except that for total
employment. Leaving aside the question of the
negative collaborator coefficient, we note the
strong, DEMO, separate effects of stars, top-
quality universities, and federal research
DEMO tit universities on birth of firms in a
given geographic region. The intellectual hu-
man capital variables alone increase the log-
likelihood ratio from DEMO to -543.2 [see
column (c)], with the final three variables
bringing this quantity up to --416.0. As to the
last three variables, the quality of the labor
force, measured by average wages per job,
seems much more relevant than its size. Sur-
prisingly, to some observers, the number of
venture capital firms in a region enters, DEMO
with a significantly negative sign. We interpret
298
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH I998
the negative sign as evidence DEMO venture cap-
italists did play an active role in the formation
of entrant firms, but they apparently resulted
in fewer, larger firms being DEMO in the areas
in which they were more active."
This sign of the coefficient of the number of
venture capital firms in a DEMO is robust in
sensitivity experiments with other forms (not
reported here) except for regressions which
exclude the intellectual human capital vari-
ables such DEMO in column (d). That regression
looks good in terms of DEMO and ex-
pected sign pattern although it has a much
lower explanatory power than the intellectual
human capital variables alone [column (c)].
Just below, we report very similar results in a
cross-sectionltime-series context. Thus, DEMO is
certainly easy to see why the evidence for an
important positive impact of venture capital
firms on the birth of biotech firms may DEMO
appeared stronger in previous work than seems
warranted based on fuller models: Since ven-
ture capital firms have developed around a
number of great universities, their presence
proxies for intellectual human capital in the
absence of more direct measures; if they are
the only variable indicating presence of great
universities and their faculties, they enter pos-
itively even if their packaging activities result
in a negative direct effect on births.
The decade-lagged DEMO variable is
added to the full fundamentals model in col-
umn (DEMO) of Table 2. Doing so primarily has
the effect of weakening DEMO significance of the
top-quality universities variable (but, see the
annual model below) due to significant mul-
ticollinearity between the variables.'' One in-
terpretation of this positive coefficient on the
lagged dependent variable is that DEMO
'' This hypothesis was derived from anecdotal evi-
dence, but note that the top nine of Emst & Young's list
of top-ten DEMO by 1993 market valuation (G. Steven
Burrill and Kenneth B. Lee, Jr., 1334 p. 54) were located
and founded in regions richly DEMO with venture cap-
ital firms: Boston (3), San Francisco (DEMO), Los Angeles
( 1) , San Diego ( 1) , and Seattle ( 1) .
j3 In the alternative version of Table 2 (see footnote 9
above), the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable
was nearly as large as in Table 2, so the significant positive
coefficient does not arise from firms born 1976- 1980 ap-
pearing DEMO both the current and lagged dependent
variables.
tion effects strengthen the impact of funda-
mentals on regional development. However,
the statistical properties of DEMO regressions
with lagged dependent variables are somewhat
so such regressions and their es-
timated standard errors should be viewed
cautiously.
In conclusion. the intellectual DEMO ca~ital
variables play a stron-tg role in determining
where the U.S. biotech industry developed
during the B 980's. We have been able to DEMO
tify particular star scientists who appear to
play a crucial role in the process of spillover
and geographic agglomeration over and above
that which-would DEMO ~redicted based on uni-
versity reputation and scientists supported by
federal grants alone. The strong positive role
of venture capital variable reported previously
is DEMO supported for firm births. Indeed, the
data tell us that there DEMO fewer firms
founded, other things equal, where there more
venture capital firms. It is left to future re.-
search to explore whether firms DEMO are as-
sociated with particular star scientists or were
midwifed by venture capitalists are more suc-
cessful than other fi~ms.'"
B. The Annual Model
We next report analogous poisson regres-
sions exploiting the panel nature DEMO our data
set with observations for the 183 regions for
each of the years 1976 through 1989. Tables
3 and 4 report poisson regressions DEMO this en-
tire panel.
Column (a) of TaMe 3 reports the results
using only the counts of stars and their collab-
orators active DEMO year in each region. As
with the long-mn models in Table 2, exami-
nation of the data suggested that these effects-
particularly for stars-were nonlinear so we
add squared values in column (b). Again, DEMO
the number of stars increases, their marginal
contribution diminishes eventually passing
DEMO zero.
These nonlinearities might reflect the de-
clining value over time of the intellectual hu-.
Inan capital as we have measured it. Basically,
'" See Zucker et al. ( 1994) for our first effort to assess
the determinants of success of firms after birth.
VOL. 88 NO. I
ZUCKER ET AL.: HUMAN CAPITAL AND BlOTECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISES
2 99
TABLE
3-ANNEAL POISSON
REGRESSIONS
ON THE
Constant
Number stars active DEMO the region and
Year
Number collaborators active in the region
and year
(Number stars active in the region and
year)*
(Number collaborators DEMO in !he
region and year)*
Number stars active in the region and
year x DUMMY1986-89
Number collaborators active in the region
and year DEMO DUMMY 1986-89
(Number stars active in the region
and year x DEMO 1986-89)2
(Number collaborators active in Lhe
region and year X DEMO 1986-89)2
Number top-quality universities in the
region in 1981
Number faculty with federal support in
the region in 1979 -80
Number venture capital DEMO in the
region and year"
Total employment (all industries) in the
region and year
Average wages per job in the region and
DEMO
Earnings-price ratio (Standard & Poors
500) for year
Number firms active in the region at end
of previous year
Number firms active in DEMO U.S. at end of
previous year
Births of biotech firms in the region for
previous year
(a)
-1,591***
(0.032)
0.157""*
(0.020)
0.043***
(0.013)
-.
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
-
-
-
-
BIRTH BIOTF'CH-USING
FIRMS
BY REGION
AND YEAR,
1976-1989
-- -
OF
(b)
-],~IS***
(DEMO)
0.529***
(0.051)
0.083*
(0.035)
-0.022***
(0.002)
DEMO
(0.001)
-
.-
(c)
-2,148***
(0.057)
DEMO
(0.088)
0.047
(0.049)
-0.014*
(0.006)
0.000
(0.00 1)
-0.219
(0.1 13)
-- (4
-4,447***
(0.226)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
--
-
(el
-4,491 ***
(0.349)
0.361***
(0.080)
0.013
(0.047)
-0.015**
(0.005)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.298**
(0.102)
(0
DEMO,687***
(0.565)
0.282**
(0.103)
0.032
(0.052)
-0.014
(0.008)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.245
(0.128)
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
-
-
-
-
.-
-
-
-
-.
-
-
-
-.-
-
-
-
--
-
0.020
(0.013)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.054
(0.034)
Restricted log-likelihood ---2238.5 -2238.5 -2233.5 -2238.5 DEMO -2238.5
- --
Notes: N = 2562. Standard errors (adjusted by Wooldridge, 1991 Procedure 2.1) are in parentheses below coefficients.
Tor years DEMO 1981, the number of ventun: capital firms in a region is held constant at the 1981 level to avert simultaneity problems.
* Significantly DEMO from 0 at the 5-percent level.
** Significantly different from 0 at the I-percent level.
*** Significantly different fiom 0 at the 0.1-percent level.
DEMO the knowledge diffuses we expect that more
and more stars will result in less and less pay-
off to any one of them if DEMO or she were to start
a firm, and indeed stars are DEMO likely to result
in birth of firms after 1985 than before. This
is illustrated in column (c) of Table 3 where
we add DEMO interaction ternls in which these
counts and their squares have been multiplied
300
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 1998
by a dummy DUMMY1986-89 equal DEMO 1
during 1986- 1989 and 0 otherwise, as well as
the DEMO intellectual human capital terms.
During 1986-1989 the positive effect of stars
is sharply reduced while that of collaborators
more than triples.15 Nonetheless, we should
view this inference cautiously since the sig-
nificance values of the interaction DEMO for
stars and collaborators with DlJMMY 1986-
89 fall between 0.10 and 0.05, except for stars
in the full fundamentals model in column (DEMO)
where the stars interaction term is significant
at the 0.01 level.
Thus, we see that (at least during the first
decade of DEMO industry) localities with out-
standing scientists having the tacit knowledge
to DEMO recombinant DNA were much more
likely to see new firms founded and preexist-
ing fims begin to apply biotechnology. There
is some evidence that DEMO knowledge about
gene splicing diffused and the tacit knowledge
lost its scarcity and extraordinary value, the
training function of universities became more
important relative to the attraction of great sci-
entists to an area. It is DEMO that the quad-
ratic term for stars is negative, suggesting
diminishing DEMO (or possibly just propor-
tionately fewer, larger firms) rather than DEMO
increasing returns suggested by standard
views of knowledge spillovers which posit un-
internalized, positive external effects from
university scientists.'' In the same regression
in column (c), we see that, beyond the iden-
tified DEMO and collaborators, university qual-
ity and federal support are also significant
DEMO of intellectual human capital rele-
vant to firm founding.
"To compute DEMO effects of stars in the 1986-1989
period, we need to add DEMO coefficients of the number of
active stars and the coefficient of the same variable inter-
acted with DIJMMY1986-89 and then do the same for
DEMO two terms involving the squared values of these vari-
ables. An analogous approach yields the effect of collab-
orators during 1986- 1989. We examined DEMO interactions
with dummy variables for 1976-1980 and with a time
trend. Since the coefficients were very small and statisti-
cally insignificant for interaction terms DEMO 1976-
1980 dummies, we believe the reported form inore
accurately reflects DEMO time or diffusion dependence than
a negative trend throughout the period.
''We are indebted to Jeff Armstrong for this point.
Column (d) DEMO Table 3 leads to the same
conclusions with panel data as found for the
same column in Table 2: 'The economic vari-
ables DEMO significantly with the expected sign
if the intellectual human capital variables are
omitted from the regression: However, unlike
the previous long-run case, we can now enter
the earnings-price ratio.17 Here this variable
enters with the DEMO sign, but does not even
reach the 0.10 level of significance.
DEMO (e) of Table 3 presents the annual
full fundamentals model incorporating the in-
tellectual human capital and other variables.
The results for the DEMO human capital
measures are robust while the sign of the ven-
ture capital variable turns significantly nega-
tive as in the long-run model and DEMO
employment variable becomes insignificant
(and negative)
Column (f) of DEMO 3, analogously to Ta-
ble 2, adds ;a lagged dependent DEMO to the
full fundamentals model. We also included the
one-year lagged regional and national counts
of firms using biotechnology as dynamic influ-
ences reflecting DEMO agglomeration effects
and market competition effects, respectively,
None of the DEMO dynamic variables enter sig-
nificantly although their signs are consistent
with some geographic agglomeration.
Thus, taken as a whole the results sum-
marized in Table 3 support the strong role of
intellectual human ca~ital variables in DEMO
mining the developrnent of the American bio-
tech industry.
The role of the economic variables. ~artic-
ularly the number of venture capital fims in
DEMO region, is explored further in Table 4. This
table presents representative DEMO for births
in thi entrant ad incun~bent subcomponents
of fim entry into biotechnology. We see in
columns (a) and (b) that if DEMO the economic
variables are introduced we get all the ex-
pected signs at appropriate significance
[except for employment in (a) and the
earnings-price DEMO in both], including a result
consistent with conventional wisdom that the
DEMO of venture capital firms has a signifi-
"The earnings-price ratio had DEMO be dropped from
these analyses because it is available only nationally over
time.
,
L
VOL. 88 NO. I
TABLE
4--ANNUALPOISSON
AND INCUMBENTS
REGRESSIONS THE BIRTH BIOTECH-USING
DEMO
AND YEAR,1976- 1989
~~NTRANTS
(a)
Entrants
(b)
Incumbents
(c)
Entrants
(d)
Incumbents
(e)
Entrants
Constant
Number stars active in the region
and year
Number collaborators active in the
DEMO and year
(Number stars active in the region
and year)'
(Number collaborators active in
the region and year)'
Number stars DEMO in the region
and year x DUMMY1986-89
Number collaborators active in the
region and year X
DUMMY1986-89
(Number stars active in the region
and year x DUMMY1986-
89)'
(Number collaborators active in
the region DEMO year X
DUMMY 1986-89)'
Number top-quality universities in
the region DEMO 198 1
Number faculty with federal
support in the region in 1979-
80
Number venture capital firms in
the region and year"
Total DEMO (all industries)
in the region and year
Average wages per DEMO in the
region and year
Earnings-price ratio (Standard &
Poors 500) for year
Number firms active in the region
at end of previous year
Number firms active in all U.S. at
end of previous year
DEMO of biotech firms in the
region for previous year
Restricted log-likelihood
ZUCKER ET AL.: HUMAN CAPITAL
AND BIOTECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISES
Notes: N = 2562. DEMO errors (adjusted by Wooldridge, 1991 Procedure 2.1) are in parentheses DEMO coefficients.
Tor years after 1981, the number of venture capital firms DEMO a region is held constant at the 1981 level to avert simultaneity problems.
* Significantly different from 0 at the 5-percent level.
** Significantly DEMO from 0 at the I-percent level.
*** Significantly different from 0 at the 0.1-percent level.
301
(fl
Incumbents
ON
OF
BY
-
302
THE AMERICAN ECONOlMlC REVIEW
MARCH 1998
cantly positive effect on the DEMO of new firms
but an insignificant effect on the birth of sub-
units of existing firms which would not nor-
mally be financed by DEMO capital firms. The
full fundamentals model is reported in col-
umns (DEMO) and (d) for births of entrants and
incumbents, respectively, DEMO is to be com-
pared to column (e) for all firm births in Table
3. Again, in the presence of intellectual human
capital the simple economic story does not
hold up: the coefficients of venture capital
firms and total employment turn negative, sig-
nificantly so in the former case. Similar results
are obtained in the dynamic versions of the DEMO
model reported in colums (e) and (f) of Ta-
ble 4. The robustness of the negative venture
capital coefficient remains a puzzle DEMO future
work, particularly in view of Yolanda K.
Henderson9 s ( DEMO) evidence that, despite
some significant localization, most invest-
ments by DEMO capitalists cross regional
boundaries.
IV. Summary and Conclusions
The American biotechnology industry
which was essentially nonexistent in 1975
grew to 700 active firms over DEMO next 15
years. In this paper, we show the tight con-
DEMO between the intellectual human capital
created by frontier research and the founding
of firms in the industry. At least for this high-
tech industry, the growth and location of in-
tellectual human capital was the principal
DEMO of the growth and location of the
industry itself. This industry is a testament to
the value of basic scientific research. The num-
ber DEMO local venture capital firms, which ap-
pears to be a positive DEMO when
intellectual human capital variables are ex-
cluded from the regressions, DEMO found to de-
press the rate of firm birth in an area, perhaps
due to the role of these venture capital firms
in packaging a number of scientists into one
larger firm which is likely to DEMO public sooner.
We conclude that the growth and diffusion
of intellectual human capital was the main de-
terminant of where and when the American
DEMO industry developed. Intellectual
human capital tended to flourish around great
universities, DEMO the existence of outstanding
scientists measured in terms of research prs-
ductivity played a key role over, above, and
separate from the presence DEMO those universi-
ties and government research funding to them.
We believe that our results provide new in-
sight into the role of research universities DEMO
their top scientists as central to the formation
of new high-tech industries spawned by sci-
entific breakthroughs. By being able to quan-
titatively identify DEMO with the ability
both to invent and to commercia!ize these
breakthroughs, DEMO have developed new speci-
ficity for the idea of spillovers and in paiticular
raised the issue of whether spillovers are best
viewed as resulting DEMO the nonappropriabil-
ity of scientific knowledge or from the maxi-
mizing behavior of scientists who have the
ability to appropriate the commercial fruits sf
DEMO academic discoveries.
The data used here are generally in panel
form for 14 years ( 1976.- 1989) and 183
regions (functional economic areas DEMO defined
by the BEA). Frequently, the data are aggre-
gates DEMO data at the zip code or county level.
Lagged variables include data for 1975 in the
unlagged form. These data sets, part of our on-
going project on "Intellectual Capital, Tech-
nology Transfer, and the Organization of
Leading-Edge Industries: Biotechnology,"
will be archived upon completion DEMO the proj-
ect in the Data Archives at the UCLA Institute
for Social Science Research. A full description
of the data is available from DEMO authors upon
request.
Biotechnology Firms
The starting point for our firm data set cav-
ered the industry as of April 1990 and was
purchased DEMO NCBC ( 1991) , a private firm
which tracks the industry. DEMO data set iden-
tified 1075 firms, some of which were dupli-
DEMO or foreign and others of which had died
or merged. Further, DEMO were a significant
number of firms missing which had exited
prior to April 1990. For these reasons, an in-
tensive effort was made to supplement the
NCBC data with information from Bioscan
(1989-1993) and an DEMO data set pro-
vided by a firm in the fndustry which was also
VOL. 88 NO. 1
ZUCKER ET AL.: HUMAN CAPITAL AND BZOTECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISES
303
the ancestor of the Bioscan data set (Cetus
Corp., 1988)DEMO
We generally counted entry of firms by add-
ing up for each year and region the number of
entrants founded and incumbents first using
DEMO A few special cases should be
noted: Where a firm enters DEMO data set due to
the merger of a entrant and another film, we
count it for the purposes of this paper as a con-
tinuation of the original entrant and not a new
birth (the older entrant if two are involved).
If firms already in the data DEMO merge and one
continues with the other(s) absorbed, the en-
terprise is counted as the continuing enterprise
and not a new birth.
DEMO
Star scientists and their collaborators were
identified as described in the text. Individual
scientists are linked to locations through the
institutional affiliations reported in DEMO
publications in the article data set. The discov-
ery of genetic sequences is recognized by
GenBank's assignment to an article of a "pri-
mary accession number" to identify each. The
22 additional stars added to the 3 15 with more
than 40 primary accession numbers thus had
DEMO or more articles with at least one primary
accession number and 20-40 primary acces-
sion numbers total.
Articles
Our article data set consists of DEMO 4,061 ar-
ticles in major journals listed in GenBank as
reporting genetic-sequence discoveries for
which one or more of our 327 stars were DEMO
as authors. (A small number of unpublished
papers and articles appearing DEMO proceedings
volumes and obscure journals were excluded
to permit the hand coding detailed below.) All
of these articles were assigned unique article
ID numbers and collected bv hand. For each
article, scientist ID numbers are used to iden-
tif~the and the institu-
tional affiliation and location for each DEMO
on each article. This hand coding was neces-
sary because, under DEMO authorship traditions
for these the head of the laboratory who
is often the most prestigious author frequently
appears last. Our stars, for example, DEMO first
authors on 18.3 percent of the articles and last
authors on 69.1 percent of the 4,031 articles
remaining after excluding the 30 DEMO
articles." Unfortunately, only first- and/or
corresponding-author affiliations are available
in machine-readable source^.'^
The resulting authorship data file contains
19,346 observations, approximately 4.8 au-
thors for each of the 4,061 published articles.
DEMO authorship observation gives the article
ID number, the order of authorship, the sci-
entist ID number of one of our stars and col-
DEMO, and an institutional ID number
for the author's affiliation which DEMO him
or her to a particular institution with a known
zip code as of the publication date of the
article.
Citations
We have collected DEMO for 1982, 1987, and
1992 on the total number of citations to each
of our 4,061 published articles listed in the In-
DEMO for Scientific Information's Science Ci-
tation Index (1982, 1987, DEMO). These
citation counts are linked to the article and au-
thorship data set by the article ID number. The
citations were collected for DEMO if and only
if they appeared in the article data set; DEMO sci-
entists are credited with citations only insofar
as they are to the 4,061 articles reporting
genetic-sequence discoveries and published in
major journals.
DEMO
Our university data set consists of all U.S.
institutions listed as granting the Ph.T). degree
in any field in the Higher Education General
DEMO Survey ( HEGIS ) , Institutional
Characteristics, 1983- 1984 (U.S. Department
of Education, National Center for Education
''This positional tradition holds across national baund-
aries: As a percentage of articles coauthored by their fel-
low nationals. American stars are 16.4 Dercernt of first
authors and 71.2 DEMO of last autllors, compared to 21.2
percent and 63.1 percent, respectively, for Japanese, and
19.7 percent and 69.2 percent for other nationalities.
DEMO The Science Citation Index lists up to six of the af-
filiations listed on the paper but only lmks the correspond-
ing author to DEMO particular affiliation
304
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 1998
Statistics, 1985). Each university is assigned
an institutional ID number, a university flag,
and located by zip code based on the WEGIS
address file. Additional information described
DEMO the text was collected from Jones et al.
( 1982) for DEMO universities granting the
Ph.D. degree in biochemistry, cellular/molec-
ular biology, and/or microbiology which we
define as "biotech-relevant " fields.
Research Institutes and Hospitals
For those U.S. research institutions and hos-
pitals listed as DEMO in the article data set,
we assigned an institutional ID number and an
institute/hospital flag, and obtained an address
including a zip code as required for geocoding.
No additional information has been collected
on DEMO institutions.
Venture Capital Firms
We created a venture capital firm data set
by extracting from the Pratt ( 1982) directory
the name, type, location, year of founding, and
interest in funding biotech firnis. This DEMO
mation was extracted for all venture capital
which were legally permitted to finance start-
ups. This latter requirement eliminated a num-
ber of firms DEMO are chartered under
government programs targeted at small and
minority businesses. This approach accounts
includes founding date of firms appearing in
the 1982 Pratt DEMO, excluding those firms
that may have either entered thereafter or ex-
DEMO in earlier years but exited before the di-
rectory was compiled.
Other Economic Variables
Total employment and average earnings
per job by region and DEMO are as reported by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis based on
county Level data in U.S. Department of
Commerce ( 199%) : Total employment is
from Table K, line 010 (in millions of per-
sons)DEMO Average earnings is from Table 61,
line 290 (wage St DEMO disbursements,
other labor income, and proprietors income
per job in DEMO of current dollars), de-
flated by the implicit price deflator for per-
sonal consumption expenditures. The annual
data for the implicit price deflator DEMO per-
sonal consumption expenditures were taken
from U.S. Department of Commerce (DEMO
p. 247, line 16) as updated in the July 1992
Survey of Current Business, (p. 92, line 16).
The S&P 500 earnings-price ratio was taken
from CITIBASE ( 1993), series FSEXP.
DEMO, Kenneth J. "Economic Welfare and the
Allocation of Resources for Invention," in
Richard R. Nelson, ed., The rate and direc-
tion DEMO inventive activity: Economic and so-
cial factors. National Bureau of Economic
DEMO Special Conference Series, Vol.
13. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1962, pp. 609-25.
Bioscan9Vols. 3-7. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press,
1989-1993.
Burrill, G. Steven and Lee, Kenneth B., Jr. Bio-
tech 94: Long-term value, short-term hur-
dles. Ernst & Young's Eighth Annual
DEMO on the Biotechnology Industry. San
Francisco: Ernst St Young, 1994.
Cameron, A. Colin and Trivedi, Bravin K.
"Regression-Based Tests for Overdisper-
sion in the Poisson Model." Journal of
Econometrics, December 1990,46(3 ) , pp.
347-64.
&letus Gorp. "'Biotechnology Company Data
Base," DEMO source for Bioscan.
Computer printout, Cetus Corp., 1988.
B7dTIBASE: Citibank DEMO Database. Ma-
chine-readable database, 1946- June 1993.
New York: Citibank, DEMO
GenBank; Rebase 650. Machine-readable data-
base. Palo Alto, CA: JntelliGentics, Inc.,
1990.
Greene, William H, LIMDEP: User's manual
and reference guide, version 6.0. Bellport,
NY:Econometric Software. 1992.
Griiiiches, DEMO, "'EIybrid Corn: An Explora-
tion in the Economics of Technological
Change." Econom~trica,October 1957,
-22.
- 25(4), pp. 501
. "'The Search for R&D Spillovers."
Scandinavian Journal of DEMO, 1992
Supplement, 94, pp. 29-47.
Grossman, Gene M, and DEMO, Ellbanan. In-
ovation and growth in the global economy.
Cambridge, MA: MPT Press. 1991.
VOL. 88 NO.I
ZUCKER ET AL.: HUMAN CAPITAL AND BZOTECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISES
305
Hausman, Jerry; Mall, Bronwyn H. and Griliches,
Zvi. "Econometric DEMO for Count Data
with an Application to the Patents-R&D
Relationship." DEMO , July 1984,
52(4), pp. 909-38.
Henderson, Yolanda DEMO "Venture Capital and
Economic Development." Paper presented
to the New England Advisory Council, Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA,
July 11, 1989.
Institute for Scientific Information. Science Ci-
tation Index, DEMO compact disc editions,
machine-readable database. Philadelphia:
Institute for Scientific Information, 1982,
1987, 1992.
Jaffe, Adam B. "Real Effects of DEMO Re-
search.' ' American Economic Review, De-
cember 1989, 79(DEMO), pp. 957-70.
Jaffe, Adam B.; Trajtenberg, Manuel and
Henderson, Rebecca. ' 'Geographic Localiza-
tion of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced
by Patent Citations." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, August 1993,63(3), pp. DEMO
98.
Jones, Lyle V.; Lindzey, Gardner and Coggeshall,
Porter DEMO, eds. An assessment of research-
doctorate programs in the United States:DEMO
Biological sciences. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academy Press, 1982.
Kenney, Martin. Biotechnology: The
university-industrid complex. New Haven,
CT: Yale University DEMO, 1986.
Lerner, Joshua. "Venture Capitalists and the
Decision to Go DEMO" Journal of Finan-
cial Economics, June 1994, 35 ( 3 ) , pp.
293-316.
. "Venture Capitalists and the Over-
sight of DEMO Firms." Journal of Fi-
nance, March 1995, 50(1), DEMO 301-
18.
Mansfield, Edwin. "Academic Research Under-
lying Industrial Innovations: DEMO, Char-
acteristics, and Financing." Review of
Economics and Statistics, February 1995,
77(1), pp. 55-65.
Nelson, Richard R. "The DEMO Economics of
Basic Scientific Research." Journal of Po-
litical Economy, June 1959, 67(3), pp.
297 -306.
Nelson, Richard R. and DEMO, Paul M. "Sci-
ence, Economic Growth, and Public Pol-
icy," in Bruce L. R. Smith and Claude E.
Barfield, eds., DEMO, R&D, and the
economy. Washington, DC: Brookings In-
stitution and American Enterprise Institute,
1996, ~p.
Nelson, Richard R. and DEMO, Sidney 6. An
evolutionary theory ojC economic change.
Cambridge, MA: DEMO University Press,
1982.
North Carolina Biotechnology Center. lVorth Car-
olina Biotechnology Center U.S. companies
rlatabase, machine-readable database. Re-
search Triangle Park, NC: North Carolina
Biotechnology Center, April 16, 1992.
Pratt, Stanley E. Guide to venture capital
sources, 6th Ed. Engdewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1982.
Romer, Paul M, "Increasing Returns and
Long-Run Growth." Journal DEMO Political
Econoiny , October 1986, 94 ( 5 ) , pp.
DEMO 1002-37. "Endogcnous Teclmological Change.' '
Journal of Political Economy, October
1990, Part 2, 9S(5), pp. S71-S102.
Rosenberg, Nathan. Inside the black box: Tech-
nology and economics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University DEMO, 1982.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureall of Eco-
nomic Analysis, DEMO and Statistics
Administration. National income and prod-
uct accounts of the United States, volume 2,
1959-88. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1992a.
-	. Regional economic znformation sys-
tem, version 1.3, CD-ROM, machine-
readable database. Washington, DC: Bureau
of Economic Analysis, May DEMO, 1992b.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center
for Education Statistics. Higher education
general information sunley (HEGIS), insti-.
tutional charac~eristics, 1983-84, machine-
readable database, ICPSR 8291. Ann Arbor,
MI: Inter-University Consortium for DEMO
and Social Research, circa 1985.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. "On the DEMO of
Robust, Regression-Based Diagnostics to
Models of Conditional Means and Condi-
DEMO Variances." Journal of Economet-
rics, January 1991,47(1), pp. 5-46.
Zucker, Lynne G.; Brewer, Marilynn B.; Oliver,
Amalya DEMO Liebeskind, Julia. "Basic Science
as Intellectual Capital in Firms: Infoma-
DEMO Dilemmas in rDNA Biotecbnology
49-74.
306
THE AMERICAN ECOh'OMlC REVIEW
MARCH 1 998
Research." Working paper, UCLA Institute
for Social Science Research, 1993.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Darby, Michael W. "'Star
Scientists and Institutional Transformation:
Patterns of Invention and Innovation in the
Formation of the Biotechnology Industry."
Proceedings DEMO the National Academy of
Sciences, November 12, 1996, 93(23), pp.
12709-12716.
Zucker, Lynne 6.; Darby, Michael R. and
Armstrong, Jeff. "Intellectual Capital and the
Firm: The Technology of Geographically
Localized DEMO Spillovers." National
Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge,
MA) Working DEMO No. 4946, December
1994.
Zucker, Lynne G.; Darby, Michael R.and Brewer,
Marilynn B. "Intellectual Capital and the
Birth of U.S. Biotechrlology Enterprises."
National Bureau of Economic Research
(Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.
4653, February 1994.{1g42fwefx}