http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/index.html
What is the Academic Integrity Tutorial?

The Academic Integrity Tutorial is designed to help you learn about academic integrity. The information in this tutorial is applicable for all subject and research areas and any level of study.

After completing this tutorial you will be able to:

Explain the concept of ‘academic integrity’ and identify five different kinds of academic dishonesty.
Identify the key points of York’s Senate Policy on Academic Honesty and the procedures and penalties associated with violating York’s Policy.
Differentiate between what is acceptable use of another’s ideas/words and what is plagiarism.
Identify several reasons why it is essential to document/reference sources of information/ideas.
Recognize three strategies you can use to incorporate another person's ideas/words into your own work.
Identify the elements that are required for a complete reference to a source of information and be familiar with referencing styles.
Identify the usefulness of tools such as RefWorks and where you can get help at York from an expert if you have questions about whether you are using or referencing material appropriately.
Understand the importance of seeking help if you have questions regarding any issue associated with academic integrity.
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/how.html
How to Use this Site

The following sections of this Tutorial provide information about academic integrity and how to demonstrate it. When you apply these ideas and strategies in your academic work, you will be demonstrating your own academic integrity.

Academic Integrity - Definitions and discussion
Plagiarism - Definition, examples and importance of documenting sources
Demonstrating Academic Integrity - How to get credit for your own work
Academic Integrity Checklist - Key points to check
Practice Examples - Recognizing plagiarism and acknowledging sources
Test Yourself - An online Test
You can work through the tutorial step-by-step by following the links from page to page, or by working sequentially through the navigation menu on the left side of the page.

In several places you will be directed to a new page in a new window. When you have studied the page, close the window to return to the tutorial.

At the end of the tutorial you will be invited to take a self-test. You can use it to test your own knowledge (what you are expected to know is explained in the list above). You may also be required to demonstrate that you have taken the Tutorial as part of your course work. When you answer all the questions correctly, you will have completed the Academic Integrity Tutorial successfully.

Hot Tip! Take Time to Save Time!

This module can be done in approximately 30-40 minutes. Each section contains information you need to pass the self-test. If you decide to skip over some of the material you may actually end up taking more time than if you read through all the sections before proceeding to the quiz.
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/introtech.html
Technical Requirements for The Academic Integrity Tutorial

Web Browser

You must have Javascript enabled in your web browser in order to do some of the exercises and to take the quiz.
You have Javascript enabled... great!
You must have cookies enabled in your browser to be able to log in to take the Quiz.
Instructions from Google on how to enable cookies on your browser.
Passport York ID & Password

If you do not yet have a Passport York ID, you can activate one online using Manage My Services.
Increasing and decreasing the font on your browser

To increase the font on your browser
(Windows) Ctrl +         (Mac) Command +

To decrease the font on your browser
(Windows) Ctrl -          (Mac) Command -

Printer

You will need to print the quiz results for your instructor and for your own records.
Print several copies of the quiz results page. The quiz does not allow you to look up your previous attempts--printing extra copies for yourself will save you having to do the quiz again if it is required in any of your other classes.
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/introdefn.html
What is Academic Integrity?

Academic integrity is the term used to refer to some of the most important values of the university community. We hold high standards and expectations for the quality and honesty of our own work, and for the work of other members of the academic community. We rely on one another to live up to these standards because the quality and value of our own academic work depends on the trustworthiness of the work done by our colleagues. Academic work is like building blocks as the work of one academic builds upon another, therefore, it is imperative that we acknowledge and properly document the sources of information that we are using. This will also ensure that others can locate the original information if they want to know more.

The reputation of our academic work is founded on whether others can use it with confidence and feel confident that their own contributions will be acknowledged. Similarly, the reputation of our University and respect for the value of the qualifications we gain from it are earned and maintained through the integrity of our work.

York's Senate Policy on Academic Honesty affirms and clarifies the general obligation for all members of the University to maintain the highest standards of academic honesty.

In practical terms, demonstrating academic integrity means:

doing our academic work well and with honesty, and
giving credit to other people′s work by indicating when we are using their ideas by citing (referencing) the original source.
**See also our glossary for other definitions of terms contained within this tutorial.

What does this mean to me?

As a student, to have academic integrity means that you have adopted principles or standards that consistently govern how you pursue your school work. A student with academic integrity earns a degree with honest effort, and knows that this degree is a true accomplishment reflecting years of hard work and genuine learning. Academic integrity requires you to develop essential skills including research, writing, and documenting.

It is not always easy to know what choices to make in school. There are many questions with answers that may be unclear to you:

When is it acceptable to use other people′s information or ideas?
How can I use other people's ideas without “cheating”?
Can I use work I did last year in one of my courses this year?
Can I share my answers/work/research with my friends?
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/acaddishforms.html
Forms of Academic Dishonesty

There are several other kinds of actions that are also considered offences against the standards of academic honesty. Among these are cheating, impersonation, aiding and abetting, collusion and falsification and fabrication, defined as follows:

Cheating

Cheating is the attempt to gain an improper advantage in an academic evaluation. Some forms of cheating include getting a copy of an exam or finding out an exam question before it is officially available; copying another person's answer to an exam question; consulting an unauthorized source during an exam; submitting the work one has done for one class or project in a second class; submitting work prepared in collaboration with other members of a class without authorization from the instructor; submitting work prepared in whole or in part by another person and representing that work as one's own.

Impersonation

It is a breach of academic honesty to have someone impersonate one's self in class, in a test or examination, or in connection with any other type of assignment in a course. Both the impersonator and the individual impersonated may be charged.

Aiding and Abetting

It is academic misconduct to encourage, enable or cause others to commit a breach of academic honesty. Anyone who helps or enables another in cheating, impersonation, plagiarism, or any other breach of academic honesty will be subject to the penalties outlined in York's policy. The giver need not be aware of the fact that the receiver will misuse the academic work. Simply providing it enables the receiver to misuse it and thus maybe considered aiding and abetting. Examples of aiding and abetting include sharing a lab report/formula/assignment/old exam/computer program with another student in person or electronically by email or on a social networking site such as Facebook. Both the owner of the lab report/formula/assignment/old exam/computer program and the person who copied maybe charged.

Collusion

There is a significant difference between collaboration and collusion. Collaboration is working jointly with others and is often encouraged by course instructors. Collusion is working jointly with others when it is not permissible or when the instructor does not authorize working in a group.

Permissible Collaboration includes:

Group work that clearly follows the course director's instructions
Sharing research findings or discussing course materials with other students when these contributions are fully acknowledged in one's individual work
In contrast, collusion includes:

Working with another student on an assignment when working in groups has not been approved by the instructor.
Dividing sections of an assignment or project among a group and then presenting it as work having been completed individually.
Splitting the tasks for group assignments unevenly where some students do most of the work while others do very little.
Fabrication and Falsification

It is a breach of academic honesty to fabricate (make-up) research or results. This includes: statistics, experimental results or data, research methodology, facts, quotations, references or bibliographic material and research and the ideas of others.

It is also a violation of academic honesty to falsify information. This includes:

"Massaging" or dishonest reporting of research, lab results or data1
Starting from expected results and working backwards2
Misrepresenting the research and ideas of others3
"Falsely reporting having met the responsibilities for a course, practicum or internship".4
Falsifying one′s attendance in a course or fieldwork5
"Falsifying letters of support or letters of reference
Falsifying academic records and transcripts
Misrepresenting the amount of work one has contributed to group assignments and activities"6
Falsifying doctors′ notes or other documentation related to petitions or missed work
Modifying graded, returned material then submitting it for regrading
1  Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia, Fabrication (Science) URL:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fabrication_%28science%29, retrieved March 20th, 2009.
2  Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia, Fabrication (Science) URL:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fabrication_%28science%29, retrieved March 20th, 2009.
3  Brigham Young University, Honor Code, Fabrication or Falsification. URL:
http://honorcode.byu.edu/content/view/3565/, retrieved March 20th, 2009.
4  University of North Carolina Geensboro, Dean of Students, Academic Integrity. URL:
http://academicintegrity.uncg.edu/violation/falsify/ , retrieved March 20th, 2009.
5  University of North Carolina Geensboro, Dean of Students, Academic Integrity. URL:
http://academicintegrity.uncg.edu/violation/falsify/ , retrieved March 20th, 2009.
6  University of Guelph Undergraduate Degree Regulations and Proceedures, Academic Misconduct, Offences. 2008-2009 Undergraduate Calendar, VIII. URL:
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-amisconductoffen.shtml,
retrieved March 20th, 2009.

green checkFor further details on these and other forms of cheating, consult the Summary of Offences Against the Standards of Academic Honesty in the Senate Policy on Academic Honesty.
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/polpoints.html
The Key Points of York's Policy on Academic Honesty

York's Senate Policy on Academic Honesty affirms and clarifies the general obligation for all members of the University to maintain the highest standards of academic honesty.

In particular, the policy:

Recognizes the general responsibility of all faculty members to foster acceptable standards of academic conduct and of students to be mindful of and abide by such standards;
Defines the types of conduct that are regarded as offences against the standards of academic honesty, including plagiarism, cheating, impersonation, and other forms of academic misconduct;
Defines the penalties that can be imposed on a student who is found to have committed plagiarism or any other form of academic misconduct;
Outlines the procedures for dealing with students who are accused of violating the Senate Policy on Academic Honesty.
**Note: a lack of familiarity with the Senate Policy cannot be used as a defence by those accused of academic misconduct.

a question markDid you click on the links in the key points above to get more information? You may be tested on this material at the end of the tutorial!
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/plagdef.html
What is Plagiarism?

Plagiarism is representing someone else's ideas, writing or other intellectual property as your own, and is another form of academic dishonesty.

Any use of the work of others, whether published, unpublished or posted electronically (e.g., on web sites), attributed or anonymous, must include proper acknowledgement.

You can find full definitions of plagiarism and other forms of conduct that are regarded as serious academic offences in York's Senate Policy on Academic Honesty.

Common Types of Plagiarism

Plagiarism can take many forms. Some of the most common types of plagiarism include1:

Downloading or buying research papers (Downloading a free paper from a web site or paying to download a paper and submitting it as your own work)
Copying and Pasting (copying and pasting portions of text from online journal articles or websites without proper citation)
Copying or submitting someone else′s work (copying a paper/lab report/formula/design/computer code/music/choreography/assignment etc. and submitting it as your own work)
1 Harris, R. A. (2002). The plagiarism handbook: Strategies for preventing, detecting, and dealing with plagiarism.
Los Angeles: Pyrczak Publishing, p. 13.

Important: You must use York′s standards when submitting your work even if you were taught to document your sources differently in the past.
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/plagsources.html
Why Document Your Sources?

It is very important to document your sources. Here are a few reasons why1:

Strengthens your work/writing
Citing a source through paraphrasing or quoting demonstrates that you have researched and incorporated your findings into your own argument. You also demonstrate that you are aware of other academic opinions on the topic.

Documenting Sources Shows Respect for Intellectual Property
Citing shows respect for the creators of ideas and arguments honouring thinkers and their intellectual property.

Citing is a service to the Reader
Citing enables the reader to locate the sources of information and pursue further reading or investigation on the topic.

Serious Consequences if you do not Document your Sources
Any violation of academic honesty can result in serious consequences, ranging from a written disciplinary warning to expulsion from the university, depending on the extent and nature of the offence.

Within the academic community plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty are seen as very serious offences, as illustrated by the following statement:

It would be impossible to think of any greater insult to the integrity of an academic institution or to an academic community than that of dishonesty whether it is called intellectual dishonesty or fraud. One can therefore sympathize with the desire to uncover it and treat it with the condemnation it deserves when it is thought to exist.
Krever, J. in Hajee v. York University, 11 OAC 72, 1985

1 Harris, R. A. (2002). The plagiarism handbook: Strategies for preventing, detecting, and dealing with plagiarism. Los Angeles: Pyrczak Publishing, p. 35.

Ultimately, if you weigh the risks and costs involved in submitting a plagiarized paper, you might consider it a far better strategy to work on improving your research and writing skills to produce honest work. Why not take advantage of the many resources available on campus and on the Internet to help you improve your academic skills?
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/plagcite.html
Demonstrating Academic Integrity

When to Cite?

There are two basic rules:

If you directly use someone else′ s words, etc., use quotation marks and give a complete reference.

Give a complete reference if you use someone else's:
Idea, theory or opinion
Music, drawings, designs, dance, photography and other artistic or technical work
Tables, graphs or any other graphic element
Facts and information that are not generally known
Unusual or distinctive phrases, specialized terms, computer codes, quantitative data
Spoken or written words
Sources that Do Not Have to be Referenced

Your own ideas do not have to be referenced. Anything that you conclude from your research or that you think up on your own counts as your own idea.
The exception to this is work that you have previously submitted in any course in the past. This must be referenced like any other source.
If your idea is similar to another author's, make it clear in your writing that you thought of this idea on your own, but you later discovered it in another source (example: "Similar conclusions are found in.")
Common knowledge does not have to be referenced. If the information meets the following criteria, it can usually be considered common knowledge:
It appears in several sources without reference.
It is not controversial. This means the information is generally considered as fact. (i.e. The earth orbits around the Sun)
If it is part of your thesis or main arguments, or it is the basis of your research, it must be referenced. If you have any doubts as to whether the information constitutes common knowledge, cite the source or consult your professor.
Incorporating another person's ideas and words into your work:

Direct Quotation: When incorporating another person's exact words into your work use a direct quotation. Be sure to place an opening quotation (“) when beginning the quote and a closing quotation (”) when ending the quote.

Paraphrasing or Summarizing: A paraphrase or summary uses your own words and sentence structure to explain someone else's idea or information obtained from another source (see example). You do not need to use quotation marks, however, you must acknowledge the originating source in your work with a citation. Failing to acknowledge a paraphrase implies that the writing represents your own original idea.
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/plagcite4.html
Referencing Styles

In your own academic work, you will need to find out what format you are expected to use for your references - this is usually stated with the description of your assignments in your course outline. If you are unsure, please consult the course professor, teaching assistant, or visit the York University Libraries Website for more information. Below are some examples of reference styles:

American Sociological Association Format
APA Writing Guide Publication manual of the American Psychological Association, 5th Edition
Chicago Referencing Chicago Manual of Style, 15th Edition (2003)
MLA Format MLA handbook for writers of research papers (2003)
Oxford Style
Vancouver Style
Pay attention to the details of the format: there can be very specific requirements about the order of the information, or for particular kinds of information to be written in fonts such as bold or italic, or for a specific sequence of punctuation marks to separate the different kinds of information. Accuracy is important as it is very frustrating to be unable to find something because the reference was incorrect or incomplete.

Tools/Help with Referencing:

Time and Planning: First and foremost, give yourself time for your assignment. Keep careful track of what you read, and if there are ideas or quotes you think you will use, find a system to label them with the information you will need to reference them later.

RefWorks: York provides you with free access to a very helpful tool called RefWorks. RefWorks is a web-based bibliographic management tool (citation manager) that allows you to create a database of citations or references to resources (books, journal articles, web sites, etc.). It facilitates the insertion of citations within a research paper as in-text references, footnotes, or endnotes, and the creation of a formatted bibliography using a citation style of choice. All major citation styles are supported (e.g., APA, MLA, Chicago, etc.).

Find out more about RefWorks

York University Libraries: The library has lots of links to resources on referencing materials in your academic work as well as an online bilingual tutorial on using RefWorks. Do ask a librarian if you are unsure or need help.

Other sources of Help:

York University's Academic Writing Centres
Counselling and Development Centre
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/plagcite3.html
How to Cite Right:

There are 2 elements needed to correctly document a source:

1. In your text: Whenever you quote, paraphrase, summarize, or otherwise refer to the work of another, you are required to cite its source, either by way of parenthetical documentation (bibliographic information within parentheses) or by means of a footnote/endnote (bibliographic information at the bottom of the page or at the end of the paper).

Example MLA style:
Human beings have been described as "symbol-using animals" (Burke 3).

**Note you can place the author′s name in the citation (as above) or directly in the text. This is called a signal phrase (see below).

Burke explains that human beings have been described as "symbol-using animals" (3).

Long quotations: Each reference style will have specific directions for direct quotations that are more than 3 or 4 lines. For example, for APA and MLA styles the following rules apply:

In most cases, use a colon to introduce the quotation.
Indent the quotation one inch from the left margin.
Double-space the quotation.
Do not use quotation marks.
Place the parenthetical citation (author and page number) after the period (or other mark of punctuation) that closes the block quotation.
2. In your Bibliography/Works Cited/Reference List: Most style manuals require you to assemble a list of the works that you have cited in your paper. This list, included at the end of your paper, may be termed “Works Cited”, a “Reference List”, a “Bibliography”, or some similar term.

Example APA style:
Fleming T. (1997). Liberty!: The American revolution. New York: Viking.

Important elements in your Bibliography/Works Cited/Reference List

There are essential pieces of information that a writer must provide about the articles, texts and other sources they have drawn on. Some or all of them are necessary to uniquely identify and locate the original source, or to find similar materials.

Author, editor, Group/Association (name and initials)
Title of the work (where applicable)
Title of the book or journal where the work came from
Volume number (of a journal or series of books)
Publisher
Place of publication
Date of publication
Web page address (URL or DOI)
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/acadintechecklist.html
Academic Integrity Checklist

PDF version of checklist

In order to ensure that you have adhered to the university's policies regarding academic integrity please work through the following checklist:

I fully understand my instructor's requirements for group and individual assignments (when in doubt always ask).

There is no section or component of my assignment, paper or research report that I do not understand (if you do not understand your own work it is, therefore, not in your own words, and has been plagiarized).

I have kept my research notes, lab-sheets, outlines and early drafts (you may be asked to provide these to your instructor).

My direct quotations have quotation marks (both opening and closing) and are fully referenced.

All ideas used from other sources include citations.

The reference entries in my bibliography/works cited/reference list corresponds with every idea/quote I have used.

I have checked my work against my notes to be sure I have correctly referenced all direct quotes or borrowed ideas.

Apart from material that is a direct quotation, everything else is in my own words.

In paraphrasing the work from others I put the complete idea into my own words and did not just change a few words.

I have checked all citations for accuracy (i.e. page numbers, dates, web page addresses).

I have asked an instructor/TA/Librarian about how to include any material I was unsure how to document.

I have used one recognized Reference Style (i.e. APA, MLA, Chicago etc.) consistently throughout my paper/work.

I have accurately and completely described any data or evidence I have collected.

I have kept my work to myself and did not share answers/content with others, unless otherwise directed by my instructor.

This is the first time I have submitted this material for a course.
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/caseintro.html
What are the Case Studies?

In the following pages, we will present three Case Studies of student writing. In each case, we will present the original source, and some writing samples using this source. Your task will be to identify which writing samples display academic integrity, which do not, and why.

What Should I Look For?

Look for these clues to tell you if a writing sample displays academic integrity (check markgood) or not (banned circle bad!):

check mark	Use of a direct quotation to indicate that the words quoted were taken from another source.
check mark	Use of a paraphrase that is clearly acknowledged. A paraphrase uses your own words to explain someone else's idea or information obtained from another source. (It is often preferable to paraphrase rather than quote directly in order to emphasize the points that are particularly relevant for your argument.)
check mark	Use of citations within the text to accompany each and every use of another source, whether directly quoted or paraphrased, including sources from the Internet. Every citation matches a full reference in the Bibliography or Works Cited page included with your paper, allowing your readers to easily find the original source.
banned circle	Copying (quoting in whole or in part without citing a reference). Anything that includes most of the words or phrases in a passage can be considered copying, even if some of the original words are omitted or changed.
banned circle	Paraphrasing without acknowledgement. Failing to acknowledge a paraphrase implies that the writing represents your own original idea.
banned circle	Using an idea or information without acknowledgement. Be careful of situations where you use another person's idea without directly quoting or paraphrasing a specific passage of their writing. It is still necessary to acknowledge that idea, or it will appear that you are misrepresenting it as your own.
banned circle	Making up references to non-existent articles– this is a violation of academic integrity for which you may be charged and, if found guilty, heavily penalized.
<92j8q9g93sajd9f8jqa9pf8j>
http://www.yorku.ca/tutorial/academic_integrity/testyourself.html
Test Yourself: An Overview

You've reached the end of the tutorial! On the next page, you will be given the link to the self-test—but first, let's review.

In this tutorial, we:

Discussed the concept of 'academic integrity' and identified five different kinds of academic dishonesty.
Identified the key points of York's Senate Policy on Academic Honesty and the procedures and penalties associated with violating York's Policy.
Differentiated between what is acceptable use of another's ideas/words and what is plagiarism.
Identified several reasons why it is essential to document/reference sources of information/ideas.
Recognized three strategies you can use to incorporate another person's ideas/words into your own work.
Identified the elements that are required for a complete reference to a source of information and be familiar with referencing styles.
Identified the usefulness of tools such as RefWorks and where you can get help at York from an expert if you have questions about whether you are using or referencing material appropriately.
Underlined the importance of seeking help if you have questions regarding any issue associated with academic integrity.
If you are unclear on any of these areas, please use the navigation menu at the left or the Site Map to visit those sections for review.
